THE Third Part Of the YOUNG CLERKS GUIDE: Or, a further COLLECTION Of Choice
English Presidents For Indentures of Settlement, of exchange, of bargains and
sales, Letters of Attorney, Declarations of Trust, Assignments, Conditions,
Presentations, and sundry others of the newest form.

Compiled by Sir R. H.

And perused by a judicious Practitioner, very useful and necessary for all.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Tuckey at the black spread-Eagle in Fleet Street
over against St. Dunstans Church. 1659.

THE TABLE.
Indentures.
AN Indenture for revoking a bargain and sale if so much money be paid, etc.
fol. 1 An Indenture of covenants to declare the trusts in a former bargain and
sale, the lands being to be sold for payment of debts. 4 A Lease of a Parsonage
impropriate for three lives upon surrender of a former Lease with extraordinary
covenants, and a Letter of attorney to deliver possession, together with the
execution indorsed. 8 An Indenture to bar an estate tail. 33 An Indenture
upon marriage for settling lands to uses, and a declaration of a fine levied to
those uses. 44 An Indenture of declaration of the uses of a fine and recovery,
they being various, with extraordinary Covenants. 48 A Lease of Ejectment to be
void on payment of 1 s with a note thereon. 50 An Indenture of Mortgage. 54 A
Conveyance of a Manor by a feoffment. 58 D. being seized of the Manor of B.
for life, with remainder to his first son, so to the tenth, sells the
Mannor-house and half the land, which to secure, settles other lands by the
deed following. 63 An Indenture or declaration of the use of a fine, wherein
several parties join. 68 A Lease taken in trust. 76 Another Lease taken in
trust. 78 An Indenture of covenants declaring a man's name used in trust in an
assurance. 86 An Indenture of Covenants between Executors. 91 A Conveyance of
land by three Co-heires and their husbands; well pend. 96 An Indenture of
bargain and sale of lands, in consideration of the surrender of other lands.
102 A Lease of lands with exception of woods. 106 A Lease of a Message and
lands for three lives to those that sold the same, it being agreed on before
sale; well pend. 115 An Indenture reciting a bargain and sale of the moity of a
Manor in trust for another, the same is hereby reconveyed to the person
trusting. 121 A declaration of a fine and recovery to variety of uses; well
pend. 125 An Indenture to settle land for natural affection. 137 An Indenture
of settlement; well pend. 147 A Grant of lands in fee, in consideration of
money and further consideration of exchange of other lands. 165 A short bargain
and sale to be enrolled. 173 An Indenture to stand seized to uses in
consideration of marriage. 189 A grant of the moity of an annuity during life.
195 A short Lease of a Message and land to be void on tender of a shilling.
213 A Lease of a Ferry. 220 An Indenture of lands in exchange. 222 A bargain
and sale of lands mortgaged made from the mortgagor, and mortgagee before
forfeiture to a third person. 228 A Defeazance on a Recognizance. 163 A Lease
of a side of a Shop and other conveniences, with a grant of goods and wares
according to a Schedule annexed. 22
Covenants.
A Covenant to give security to perform Covenants. 36 A Confirmation of a
former mortgage by the son of him that made it. 41 A Covenant to deliver
evidences by such a time. 124
Conditions.
A Condition for sealing an acquittance or release of lands by a day. 70 A
Condition for curing a disease or to pay money back. 307 A Condition not to
sell lands had in marriage. 307 A Condition to assure a sum of money in liew of
a jointure. 308 A Condition to make a good assurance of lands. 309 A Condition
that a Lessee shall not carry away the wainscot or cubbards, etc. 310 A
Condition that one shall pay for such wares as were delivered to another. 310 A
Condition to deliver writngs by a day. 311 A Condition to save one harmless
for delivery of writings. 311 A Condition to save a surety harmless from a
recognizance. 90 A Condition of a Counterbond. 139 A Condition to save
harmless, where one atturns tenant with covenant to grant a lease when the
premises are settled in the obligee. 157 A Counter-condition to save harmless
from a bond entered into for payment of money. 158 A Condition to save harmless
an executor for payment of several legacies to Orphans, with a covenant to see
the same disposed to the best advantage. 160 A Condition to pay rent reserved
in a lease according to the Covenants. 161 A Condition from a Bailiff and his
sureties to a High Sheriff. 206 A Condition to save harmless for payment of
several legacies. 209 A Counter condition to save harmless from a bond; well
pend. 211
Indorsments.
An Indorsment of livery and seisin on the Indenture, by virtue of a letter of
attorney, with a note thereon. 72 An Indorsment of atturnment of tenant. 86
Another Indorsment of atturnment of tenant. 89 Words to be used upon delivery
of possession. 96
Letters of Attorney.
A Letter of attorney to seal a lease on the ground. 53 A Letter of attorney to
two to receive possession. 72 A Letter of attorney irrevocable of a debt on a
bond with covenant, not to release. 312 A Letter of attorney from two Executors
of a bond sued to a judgment to a creditor of the Testators. 314 A Letter of
attorney of a man's estate in general, in consideration of several debts and
engagements. 315 A Letter of attorney of several sums of money due from one.
316 A Letter of attorney to demand a rent according to a Lease. 83 A Letter of
attorney to re-enter on not payment of the rent. 85 A Letter of attorney to
take possession according to the contents of a lease. 212
Licenses.
A License to let lands though prohibited by lease. 71 A License for a Buck and
Do yearly. 306 A bargain and sale upon condition made to feoffees in trust,
with indorsment of atturnment, and also that possession was given. 237 An
Indenture of bargain and sale absolute. 249 An Indenture of Covenants to the
former Indenture whereupon a recovery passed. 252 A bargain and sale of
underwood. 265 A sale of Billets wood and timber. 266 An Indenture of allotment
of several manors and parcels of land between six co-heires. 286 An Indenture
to avoid the title of survivorship. 292 Another deed of covenants to avoid
survivorship. 294 An Indenture of partition. 296 An Indenture where a Lease is
granted to three Lessees, that every one is to pay his part of the rent, and
equal part of charge for repairing, etc. 299
Provisoes.
A Proviso to be inserted in a deed, or power of revocation by way of Proviso.
7
Presentations.
A Presentation of a Minister to a living. 7 A grant of the next presentation
to a benefice. 320 A Presentation by one who had a grant thereof. 26 A
Presentation of a Minister to a living, of the newest form. 26
Releases.
A Release of money that was left in the hands of a purchaser on payment
thereof by Indenture. 5 A Release made to an Executor. 71 An acquittance for
money paid in part of purchase money. 88 A Release of interest in land. 89 A
Release of a Proviso or Condition for payment of money reserved on an Indenture
of bargain and sale. 270 A Release where three have a joint estate of
inheritance. 272 A Release of an assignment made upon condition. 273 A Release
of a Manor. 275 A Release of rent reserved in a pair of articles. 277 A
release of a condition in an Indenture with the condition recited. 279 A
Release of an annuity. 281 A Release of a condition and other covenants in a
deed of mortgage, with a confirmation from the Mortgager to the mortgagee. 281
A Lease for a year. 13 A Release and confirmation of the precedent lands. 14 A
Release from an executor to two creditors of the testator, of all debts. 19 A
Release with an exception of some bonds, etc. 19 A Release from two partners to
two debtors. 20
Obligations.
AN Obligation and condition from a Bailiff and his sureties to a High Sheriff.
204
Deeds and Declarations of trust.
ER. having bought the Manor of D. and copy-hold-lands belonging to it, takes
a surrender of the copy-hold-lands in others names, who by deed after recital
of what estate they had, make this acknowledgement. 74 A Declaration of trust,
with a declaration of uses by the Truster. 81 A disavowment of a suit. 90 A
warrant for keeping of Courts. 91 A Declaration that a man's name is used in
trust in a conveyance of land. 164 An award made between four Executors. 214
oAnther form of an award. 218 A bargain and sale of swans and swan marks. 264
A Deputation of a Bailiff or receiver. 303 The Grant of a Stewardship for
keeping of Courts. 304 A Grant of the Stewardship of a Manor during pleasure.
21 A Deed of feoffment with a letter of attorney, to give livery and seisin. 27
An agreement of creditors to take their debts by four several payments, and
abate all interest. 21 A declaration of one whose name is used in trust in an
obligation. 25
Assignments.
An assignment of a Lease in trust. 73 An assignment of several debts with a
Letter of attorney to receive them. 318 An assignment of a lease forfeited on a
mortgage. 111 An assignment of several leases of diverse messuages and lands
with several recitals and good covenants; well pend. 140 An assignment of a
bond by way of colateral security. 193
Bills.
A Bill to pay money within some short time. 70 A short Bill of debt. 318
Articles.
Articles for holding copy-hold-lands from year to year. 199 Articles of
agreement for surrendering copy-hold-lands till the surrender can be had. 189
Articles of agreement concerning lands purchased, until the assurances can be
made. 170 Articles of agreement for building. 174 Articles of agreement betwixt
two purchasers for dividing the rent and avoiding survivorship. 179
A deed for the revoking of a bargain and sale, if so much money be paid.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir I. S. of, etc. of the one part, and I.
C. etc. of the other part, whereas the said I. C. by his deed indented, under
his hand and seal, bearing date, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned,
did alien, bargain, sell, enfeoffe and confirm unto the said Sr. I. S. and his
heirs, All that the Manor and Lordship of G. in the County of, etc. with all
the rights, members and appurtenances thereunto belonging, together with all
such other things as in the said deed are expressed and contained, as thereby
does and may more fully appear: Now witnesses, this present Indenture, and the
said Sir I. S. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for
every of them, does Covenant, promise and grant, to and with the sald I. C. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them, by these
presents, that if the said I. C. his Heirs, Executors, etc. shall pay, etc.
unto the said Sir I. S. etc. the sum of, etc. that then the said deed of
bargain and sale, shall be void, frustrate, and of none effect or force in the
law, to all intents and purposes. And that then also the said Sir I. S. his
Executors, etc. immediately after the payment of the said sum of 2392 l to the
said Sir I. S. his, etc. at the day and place aforesaid, upon request to them
or any of them made, shall and will re-deliver the said I. C, his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, the said Indenture of bargain and sale, and the
counterpart of this Indenture, and one Recognizance in the nature of a statute
staple, of the sum of 4000 l wherein the said I. C stands bounden unto the
said Sir I. S. and all such deeds, evidences and writings concerning the said
mannours and premises, which the said Sir I. S. or any other to his use, or by
his appointment, shall have then had and received of and from the said I. C. or
of any other whatsoever, safe undefaced and uncancelled, and in as good plight
as he or any other to his use, or by his appointment, shall have received the
same, and that then also the said Sir I. S. his Heirs, etc. or some or one of
them, shall and will upon reasonable request made, and at the proper costs and
charges in the law of the said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns, grant, release, and
assign over the said deed or Indenture of bargain and sale; and all his, their,
and every of their rights, estates and interests therein, unto the said I. C.
his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, freed and discharged of and from all, and all
manner of charges, encumbrances and demands whatsoever, had, made, committed,
done or willingly suffered by the said Sir I. S. his Heirs, Executors, etc. or
any of them, in such manner and sort, as by the said I. C. his Heirs or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably
devised or advised and required, so as he nor they be not compelled to travel
further then the places of their abode, for the effecting thereof: and further,
it is the true intent and meaning of these presents, and the parties hereunto,
and the true intent, meaning and agreement of the said former In^^^^ure of
bargain and sale, that it shall and may be lawful, to and for the said I. C.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to have, hold and enjoy, the
said mannours and premises, with their appurtenances, and to perceive,
receive, and take the rents, issues, revenues and profits thereof, to his and
their own use and uses, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, until
default be made of payment of the said sum of 2392 l before mentioned, or of
any part thereof, at the day and place before mentioned, limited and appointed
for the payment thereof, and during such time, and until such default be made,
he the said I. C. for him, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
does covenant, grant and agree, to and with the said Sir I. S. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, that he the said I. C. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, will not do, commit, or willingly suffer
any manner of wast, spoil or destruction, of and in the premises, or any part
thereof, otherwise then for the necessary repair, building, or re-edifying of
any message, house or building upon any the messuages, houses or edifices
before specified, And the said I. C. etc. covenanteth, etc. that if he the said
I. C. his Heirs etc. do not well and truly pay unto the said Sir I. S. his
Heirs, etc. the said sum of 2392 l before mentioned, to be paid, at the day and
place of payment aforesaid, according to the true intent and meaning of these
presents, that then he the said I. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall and will
within twenty days next after default of payment of the said sum of two
thousand, three hundred ninety two pound before mentioned, to be paid, deliver,
or cause to be delivered up unto the said Sir J. S. his heirs, and assigns, the
full quiet and peaceable possession of the said Manor or Lordship of S. and
premises with the appurtenances, to the use and behoof of the said Sir J. S.
and of his heirs and assigns for ever.

A Deed of Covenants to declare the trusts in a former Bargain and Sale; the
Lands being to be sold for payment of Debts.
THis Indenture made etc. Between etc. whereas the said J. C. by his Indenture
bearing date with these presents, made between him the said J. C. of the one
part, and the said A. B. C. D: E. F. and G. H. of the other part; for the
consideration therein mentioned, has granted, bargained and sold unto the said
A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. their heirs and assigns for ever, All that Capital
Message or Tenement etc. as in the other book to the end of the Habend: As in
and by the said Indenture of bargain and sale more at large appears. Now this
Indenture witnesses and it is hereby agreed and declared by and between all
the parties to these presents, that the said grant, bargain and sale was and is
made and the said A. B. C. D. E. F. and G. H. and their heirs are and shall
stand trusted with the premises, to the intent and purpose and upon trust and
confidence that the said land and premises may be sold to the best value that
may be and the money which shall be raised thereby to be disposed of for and
toward the payment and satisfaction of such debts of the said I. C. as are
mentioned in the schedules hereunto annexed, in such order as they are therein
set down.

And lastly, It is agreed by and between all the parties to these presents and
by them declared to be their true intent and meaning, That if in case there be
any overplus remaining of the money which shall be raised by sale of the said
lands and premises after, such time as the debts mentioned in the said
schedule be paid and discharged, That then such overplus shall be employed and
disposed of for and toward the satisfaction of such other debts as the said J.
C. shall by any writing to be by him signed and sealed in the presence of two
or more witnesses declare and appoint, and no otherwise.

A Release for money that was left in the hands of a purchaser on paymint
thereof.
THis Indenture made etc. Between R. L. of S. in the County of C. Gent. and J.
C. of the Inner Temple L. Esquire of the one part, and T. G. Esquire of the City of L.
of the other part. Whereas Upon a purchase lately made by the said T. G. of and
from the said R. L. J. C. and S. his wife, daughter of the said R. L. of
certain lands in C. in the County of O. the sum of 628. l part of the purchase
money payable by the said T. G. to the said R. L. was by agreement between them
to remain in the hands of the said T. G. for such time, and upon such
conditions, and to such intents and purposes, as F. H. of and in the County of
D. should set down and appoint, which sum of 628 l was intended to remain as a
security for the said T. G. against all encumbrances whereby the said lands are
or may be charged, and for saving him harmless from all damages whatsoever,
which may, or might at any time hereafter happen to fall upon the said T. G.
his Heirs or Assigns, or upon any of the said lands and premises, or any other
the lands of the said T. G. for or by reason of any the debts of the said I. C.
and W. C. his deceased father, or either of them; and whereas the said T. G. at
the time of the ensealing of these presents, at the request of the said R. L.
has paid the said sum of 628 l to the said I. C. and R. L. or one of them, or
to such as were appointed, by them, or one of them, to receive the same. Now
that the said R. L. and I. C. have received the said sum of 628 l of and from
the said T.G. the receipt whereof they do hereby acknowledge, and that the same
is the last payment, and in full satisfaction of and for all the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments which the said I. C. had in the County of O. and
which the said T. G. purchased, and thereof and of every part and parcel
thereof, they do clearly and absolutely acquit and discharge the said T. G. his
Heirs, Executors and Administrators, for ever by these presents: And in
consideration of the premises, the said R. L. and I. C. do for themselves
jointly, and either of them for himself severally does, covenant, promise and
grant, to and with the said T. G. his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, that they
the said R. L. and I. C. shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter save, defend and keep harmless the said T. G. his Heirs, Executors
and Assigns, and also all the said lands and premises, in C. aforesaid, or
elsewhere in the said County of O. so purchased by him the said T. G. and all
other his Lands, Tenements, Goods and Chattels, of and from al loss and damage
whatsoever, which shall happen, arise or befall for or in respect of any the
debts of the said W. C. and I. C. or of either of them: In witness, etc.

A proviso to be inserted in a lease, or a power of Revocation reserved.
PRovided always, that if the said, etc. his, Executor Administrators or any of
them, shall at any time hereafter pay or tender unto the said W. W. his
Executors: etc. or to any other person or persons whatsoever, to and for the
use of the said W. W. his, etc. the sum of 12 l of lawful money of England, to
the intent to make void this present lease and demise, and shall express and
declare such his, her or their intention, either by word, or writing, that then
and from thenceforth this present lease and demise shall cease and be void: In
witness, etc.

A presentation of a Minister to a living according to the form now used.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, we A. B. and
C. D. the true and undoubted patrons of the vicaridge or parish Church of C. in
the County of S. send greeting, forasmuch as the said vicaridge or parish
Church is lately by the death of E. F. the late imcumbent, there become void,
and in our full right of presentation, we do therefore hereby present you G. H.
Clerk, Mr. of Arts, unto the Church of C. aforesaid, and to the vicaridge
thereof, to have, hold and enjoy the same, with all and every the rights,
members and appurtenances thereunto belonging, according to several former and
late acts of Parliament in this case provided; doing and performing the duties
of a Pastor belonging to the said Church: In witness whereof we have hereunto
subscribed our names, and set our seal this (...) day of (...) in the year of
our Lord God, one thousand six hundred and fifty two.

A Lease of a Parsonage impropriate for three lives, upon surrender of a former
Lease with extraordinary Covenants, and a letter of Attorney to deliver
possession, together with the execution thereof endorsed.
THis Indenture made the 5th day of March, in the year of our Lord God 1651.
Between R. S. of the City of Oxford Gent. of the one part, and W. P. of London
Esquire, of the other part witnesses, that the said W. S. for diverse good causes
and considerations, him hereunto moving, and especially in consideration of a
surrender made to the said W. G. of a lease now in being for three lives,
bearing date the 28. of March, in the 6th year of the reign of the late King
Charles, made by I.S. father of the said W. S. party to these presents,
deceased to Sir H. M. deceased of the Parsonage of Bray, and other things
hereafter in these presents mentioned, has demised, granted and to farmlet,
and set to the said W. P. the site of the Parsonage of Bray in the County of
B. and all the houses upon the said site builded, arrable Lands, Meadows,
Leasows and Pastures, Demesnes as well in several as in Common to the said
Parsonage belonging, and all the Rents of all the Tenants of the said W. S. as
well freeholders as Customary Tenants, and all the Tithings of Corn and ^ay to
the said Parsonage belonging, with all other the profits and commodities to the
said Parsonage belonging or appertaining, except and to the said W. S and his
Heirs and Assigns, always reserved all wards, marriages, reliefs, escheats,
fines, heriots, amerciaments, woods and underwoods, and the Advowson of the
parish Church of Bray, when and as often as it shall be void. To have and to
hold, the said site of the Parsonage aforesaid and all the said Houses, Lands,
Meadows, Leasow', Pastures, Tiths and other the premises, with alls and
singular the commodities and profits thereo belonging, with their appurtenances
(except before excepted) to the said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and during the lives of the said W. P. and M. P. his wife, and T.
P. son of the laid W. P. and for and during the natural life of the longer
liver of them, or any of them, yielding and paying therefore yearly, during the
said Term, unto the said W. S. his Heirs and Assigns, four pounds of good and
lawful money of England, at four Feasts or Terms of the year, That is to say,
at the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle, the annunciation, of the blessed Lady
Saint Mary the Virgin, the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, and St. Michael
the Archangel, by even and equal portions, and if it happen the said yearly
rent of four pounds or any part or parcel thereof, to be behind and unpaid,
after any of the said Feasts above limited for payment thereof, during the
said Term, by the space of one month, that then it shall be lawful to and for
the said W. S. his Heirs and Assigns into the said site, and all other the
premises to enter and distrein, and the distresses there taken to lead, drive
and carry away, and to detain the same till the said Rent, and the arrerages
thereof (if any shall be) they shall be fully satisfied and contented, and if
the same rent or any part or parcel thereof, be behind and unpaid after any of
the Feasts above limited, for payment thereof, by the space of one quarter of
a year, or if it happen the said W. P. or any of his Assigns, to make any wast
in the said site or other of the premises or any part thereof, except the
same be re-edified and builded within one whole year next after notice and
warning thereof to them given, that then it shall be lawful to and for the said
W. S. his Heirs and Assigns into the said Site, Lands, Meadows, Leasows,
Pastures, Rents, Tithings* and all and singular other the premises, to
re-enter, and the same to have again, possess and enjoy, as in his or their
former estate, and the said W. P. his Executors and Assigns thereof, and from
thence utterly to expel and amove, this Indenture, or any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And the said W. P. for himself, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does Covenant and grant, to and with the
said W. S. his Heirs and Assigns, that he the said W. P. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall find to the said W. S. and his Heirs, and his
and their Deputies and Officers, coming to the said Site or Parsonage, as well
for the Courts and Law-daies, there to be kept as for the survey of the
premises, meat, drink, house-room and beds convenient and necessary for their
degrees, and for their horses, hay, litter, and provinder sufficient, at the
costs of the said W. P. his executors and Assigns, from time to time during the
said term: And that the said W. P. and his Assigns, during the said term, shall
yearly find to the Suitors of the Court of Bray, such dinners or repasts as I.
P. and other Farmors there have used to do, taking of the said W S. 10 s yearly
during the said Term, and that the said W. P. and his Assigns, all the dung
upon the said Site and other the premises, gathered and hereafter during the
said Term, to be gathered, upon the Lands and Demeasnes of the said Parsonage,
and in none other place shall lay or spread during the said Term, and also
shall leave all the Meadows of the said Parsonage unmowed, with their grass and
vesture full growing as in the beginning of the said Term they shall be left to
him; and that the said W. P. and his Assigns, the great Barn of the said
Parsonage, and all the Houses upon the said Site builded, and all the hedges,
walls, ditches enclosures and other the premises during the said Term, shall
sufficiently repair, maintain, scour and keep at their only costs and
expenses, and so in the end of the said Term, shall leave them (the said W. P.
and his Assigns, taking sufficient great Timber for the same in Grounds of the
said W. S. at Bray aforesaid, and the said W. P. Covenanteth and grants by
these presents, for him, his Executors and Assigns, that he or one of his
Assigns, shall be continually dwelling upon the said Site with all their
household, or else shall appoint a convenient Tenant or Under tenant, to dwell
and abide thereupon by themselves and all their household, during the said term
And the said W. S. has constituted, ordained and appointed, and by these
presents, does constitute, ordain and appoint H. W. to be his true and lawful
Attorney, for him and in his name and stead, to enter into the said Site,
Parsonage and other the premises, or into some part thereof, in the name of
the whole, and possession of the same to take, and after to deliver seisin of
all the said premises, or of some part thereof, in the name of the whole, unto
the said W. P. or to his Attorney, lawfully authorized to receive the same, To
have and to hold, to him the said W. P. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, for and during the lives of the above named W. P. M. P. and T. P. and
the life of the longer liver of them, according to the purport, effect and true
meaning of this Indenture. In witness whereof the said parties to these
presents, their hands and seals enterchangeably have set the day and year first
above written.

The execution of the Letter of Attorney, for possession endorsed on the back
of the Lease aforesaid.
MEmorandum, that the (...) day of (...) in the year of our Lord God, etc. the
within named H. W. according to the power and authority to him given by the
within named W. S. did enter into the Parsonage-house of Bray, in the County of
B. in the name of the whole rectory and premises within mentioned to be
demised, and did deliver possession and seisin thereof unto the within named P.
W. To have and to hold, according to the purport and effect of the deed within
written, in the presence of, etc.

A Lease for a year.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. in the year of our Lord God
according to the account used in England 1658 between W. S. the Elder of, etc.
in the County of, etc. Esquire and Doctor in Divinity of the one part, and S. M.
and C. D. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Gent. of the other part, Witnesses,
that the said S. W. for, and in consideration of the sum of five shillings of
lawful money of England to him in hand paid by the said S. M. and C. D. whereof
he does hereby acknowledge the receipt, has bargained and sold, and does by
these presents bargain and sell unto the said S. M. and C. D. their executors,
administrators and assigns, all the lands, tenements and hereditaments with
their and every of their appurtenances, commonly called or known by the names
of, etc. (containing by estimation six hundred and thirty acres, be the same
more or less, situate, lying and being in the Towns, Parishes, Villages and
Hamlets of G. and S. in the said County of, etc. or one of them; together with
all other lands, tenements and hereditaments, heretofore of Sir S. W. deceased,
and now or late of the said S. W. that are situate, lying and being in the
Towns, Villages and Hamlets of M. and T. aforesaid or either of them) and also
the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders thereof, to have and to
hold the said lands, tenements, hereditaments and Premises; with the
appurtenances unto the said S. M. and C. D. their executors, administrators and
assigns, from the day next before the date hereof unto the end and term, and
for and during the term of one year from thence next ensuing, to the intent,
that by virtue thereof and of the statute for transferring uses into
possession, the said S. M. and C. D. may be in the actual possession of the
said lands, tenements and premises, and be enabled to take and accept of a
grant and release of the same premises to them, their heirs and assigns
forever. In witness, etc.

A release and confirmation of the precedent lands.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. in the year of our Lord God
according to the account used in England 1658. Between W. S. of, etc. in the
County of, etc. Esquire and Doctor in Divinity of the one part, and S. M. and C. D.
of, etc. in the County of, etc. Gent. of the other part. Whereas the said S. W.
by Indenture bearing date the, etc. day of this instant month of, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did bargain and sell unto the said S. M. and
C. D. all those lands, tenements and hereditaments, with their and every of
their appurtenances, commonly called or known by the name of, etc. (containing
by estimation six hundred and thirty acres, be the same more or less,
situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages and Hamlets of T. and M. in
the said County of, etc. or one of them, together with all other lands,
tenements and hereditaments heretofore of Sir S. W. deceased, and now or late
of the said S. W. that are situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages and
Hamlets of G. and S. aforesaid or either of them) and also the reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders of the said lands, tenements and premises
and every part thereof: To have and to hold the said lands, tenements and
premises, with the appurtenances unto the said S. M. and C. D. their executors,
administrators and assigns, from the day next before the date of the said
recited Indenture, unto the end and term of one year from thence next
following; To the intent, that by virtue thereof and of the statute for
transferring uses into possession, the said S. M. and C. D. might be in the
actual possession of the said lands, tenements and premises, and be enabled to
accept of, and take a grant and release of the reversion and inheritance
thereof to them and their heirs, to the use of them, their heirs and assigns
for ever, as by the said recited Indenture more at large appears. Now this
Indenture witnesses, tha^ the said S. W. as well for and in consideration of
the sum of, etc. of lawful money of England paid, and secured to be paid by
the said S. M. and C. D. to several persons by the direction and appointment of
the said S. W. and for some of his debts, wherewith the said lands and premises
stood charged and liable; That is to say, three thousand pounds, part thereof
to F. R. Esquire and C. I. Citizen and Mercer of London, in satisfaction and
discharge of the money due to them, by and upon a grant and conveyance thereof
heretofore made of the said lands and premises by the said S. W. and B. I. Esquire
to the said F. R. and C. I. and their heirs and, etc. residue of the said
sum of, etc. To Sir C. C. and Sir P. E. in satisfaction and discharge of
their right and estate which they had, of, and in the premises by a grant and
conveyance of the said S. W. before this time made to them and their heirs; As
also in consideration of a competent sum of money by the said S. M. and C. D.
to the said S. W. in hand paid, whereof he does hereby acknowledge the receipt,
has granted, remised, released and confirmed, and does by these presents
grant, remise, release and confirm unto the said S. M. and C. D. in their
actual possession now being (by virtue of the said recited Indenture of bargain
and sale made to them of a year and of the said statute) and to their heirs
and assigns, The aforesaid lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises with
the appurtenances; and all the estate, right, title, interest, claim and
demand whatsoever of the said S. W. of, in, and to the same and every part
thereof; and the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders thereof,
and of every part thereof; To have and to hold the said lands, tenements,
hereditaments and premises, with the appurtenances unto the said S. M. and C.
D. their heirs and assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the said
S. M. and C. D. their heirs and assigns for ever. And the said S. W. for
himself, his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, does covenant and
grant, to and with the said S. M. and C. D. their heirs and assigns by these
presents in manner and form following; that is to say, that the said S. M. and
C. D. their heirs and assigns, shall and may from time to time, and at all
times for ever hereafter peaceably and quietly have, hold and enjoy the
aforesaid lands, tenements and premises, with the appurtenances before herein
mentioned to be granted, without any let, trouble, molestation or interruption
of the said S. W. or of his heirs or of any other person or persons whatsoever
having or lawfully claiming to have any estate, right, title, interest, term,
claim or demand, of, in, and to the same and every or any part thereof, and
that freed, acquitted and discharged, or well and sufficiently saved and kept
harmless by the said S. W. his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns,
of, and from all former and other grants, bargains, sales, feoffments,
mortgages, joyntures, dowers, leases, estates, statutes Merchant, and of the
staple, recognizances, judgments, executions, post fines, issues,
amerciaments, rents-charge and seck, all arrerages of rents, and of, and from
all other titles, troubles, charges and encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
committed, suffered or done by the said S. W. or by any other person or persons
whatsoever (except one conditional grant of the premises heretofore made by the
said W. S. and B. I. Esquire to F. R. Esquire and C. I. Citizen and Grocer of London,
their heirs and assigns, by way of Mortgage for security for payment of a
sum of money therein mentioned. And also that the said S. W. Sir C. G. and
Dame E. his wife, and S. W. Esquire and C. his wife, the said C. and E. being
sisters and co-heires of S. C. Esquire deceased, their heirs and assigns, and all
and every other person and persons, having or lawfully claiming to have any
estate, right, title, interest, claim or demand, of, in, or to the said lands,
tenements and premises hereby granted, or any part thereof shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter at the reasonable request, and at the
costs and charges in the law of the said S. M. and C. D. their heirs or
assigns, make, do, acknowledge, levy, suffer and execute, and cause and suffer
to be made, done, acknowledged, levied, suffered and executed all and every
such other and further acts, things, devises and assurances in the law
whatsoever of the said lands, tenements and premises before herein mentioned,
to be granted with the appurtenances unto the said S. M. and C. D. their heirs
and assigns, be it by fine, feeoffment, deed or deeds, enrolled or not
enrolled, recovery with voucher or vouchers over release and confirmation, or
by all or any of them, or by any other reasonable assurance in the law, as by
the counsel learned in the law of the said M. S. and C. D. their heirs or
assigns shall be reasonably devised or advised and required, the which said
further assurance and assurances so to be had and made shall be and shall
enure, to the only use and behoof of the said S. M. and C. D. their heirs and
assigns for ever, and to no other use or uses, intents or purposes whatsoever.
In witness whereof the said parties to these presents, their hands and seals
interchangeably have set the day and year first above written.

Note, that this conveyance of lease and release is much in use, and works
without the formal act of livery and seisin.

Note also, that if you leave out the recital in the release, and put in the
word enfeeoffee in the grant, then the release works alone without the lease
with livery.

A release from an executor to two creditors of the testator of all debts.
BE it known unto all men by these presents, That I C. E. Citizen and Mercer
of, etc. executor of the last will and testament of E. G. late Citizen and
Haberdasher of, etc. deceased, have remised and released, and by these presents
for me, my heirs, executors and administrators, do remise, release, and for
ever quit claim unto C. R. of, etc. in the Province of, etc. in the parts
beyond the seas Haberdasher, and C. I. of, etc. Gent. and unto either of them
all and all manner of actions, suits, debts, debates, accounts, reckonings,
bills, bonds, writings obligatory, covenants, judgments, extents, executions,
claims, duties and all other demands whatsoever, which of or against the said
C. R. and C. I. or either of them their or either of their heirs, executors or
administrators, or any of them ever I have had, now have or hereafter shall, or
may have by force and virtue of the execution of the last will and testament
aforesaid, or by reason, force, color or means of any other act, matter,
cause, deed or thing whatsoever it be from the beginning of the world until
the day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set
my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

A release with an exception of some bonds, etc.
KNow all men by these presents, that I W. H. Citizen and Merchantaylor of,
etc. have remised, released and discharged, and by these presents do for me, my
executors and administrators remise, release and discharge unto R. C. of, etc.
Barberchirurgion all and all manner of debts, sums of money and demands,
bills and bonds whatsoever, between me the said W. H. and the said R. C. for
any matter or thing whatsoever before the day of the date hereof, excepting two
bills, bearing date the, etc. day of, etc. the one for payment of five pounds
on the, etc. day of, etc. next coming, and the other for payment of five pounds
on the, etc. day of, etc. now next coming. In witness whereof I have hereunto
set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

A release from two partners to two debtors.
KNow all men by these presents, That we P. E. and L. T. Citizens and
Merchantaylors of, etc. have remised, released and quit claim, and by these
presents for us, our heirs, executors and administrators jointly and severally
do remise, release and quit claim unto C. R. of, etc. in the Province of, etc.
in the parts beyond the seas Haberdasher, and unto C. H. brother of the said R.
and to either of them, all and all manner of actions, suits, debts, bills,
bonds, reckonings, accounts, and all other matters, causes, things and demands
whatsoever between us the said P. E. and L. T. or either of us, and the said C.
R. and C. H. or either of them, for any matter or thing whatsoever at any time
or times, before the day of the date of these presents. In witness whereof we
have hereunto set our hands and seals the, etc. day of, etc. in the year of our
Lord God, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

A grant of the Stewardship of a Manor during pleasure.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I P. I. of
the Middle Temple London Esquire, send greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Know
ye that I the said P. I. have given and granted, and by this my present
writing, do give and grant unto B. I. of, etc. in the County of, etc. Gent. the
office of Steward and Stewardship of all that the Manor of, etc. and of the
hundred of, etc. in the County of, etc. and also the custody and keeping of
Courts, Leets and other Courts, of, and within the said Manor and hundred,
together also with all fees and profits thereunto belonging, to have, hold and
enjoy the same to him the said B. I. by himself or his sufficient deputy, for,
and during my will and pleasure. Ia witness whereof I the said P. I. have
hereunto set my hand and seal, dated the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

An agreement of creditors to take their debts by four several payments and
abate all interest.
WE the creditors of C. H. whose names are hereunder subscribed, are all
content, and do every one of us severally and respectively for himself agree
and promise to take and accept of such principal debts as are due unto us from
the said C. H. at such four days of payment as is hereafter mentioned (the
said payments to be made by even and equal portions) That is to say, one fourth
part of our said several debts on or before the, etc. day of, etc. next coming;
one other fourth part thereof on the, etc. day of, etc. now next also ensuing;
one other fourth part thereof on the, etc. day of, etc. which shall be in the
year of our Lord God, etc. and the residue of our said several debts being the
last and fourth part on the, etc. day of, etc. which shall be in the year of
our Lord God, etc. in full payment and satisfaction of our said debts: and upon
the said C. H. making the first payment, and giving us respectively his bonds
or bills for the three last payments according to this agreement, we will
deliver up our old securities and discharge him thereof. Witness our hands
the, etc. day of, etc.

A Lease of a side of a Shop and other conveniences, with a grant of goods and
wares according to a schedule annexed.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of, etc. Between E. H. Citizen and Stationer
of, etc. on the one part, and H. T. of the same City Stationer on the other
part: Witnesses that the said E. H. for and in consideration of the yearly
rent hereafter in and by these presents reserved to be paid, has demised,
granted and to farm letten, and by these presents does demise, grant and to
farm let unto the said H. T. all that part of the Shop now in the occupation of
the said E. H. being the West side of the same Shop, and also the warehouse at
the end of the same Shop, which said warehouse abutteth upon the South end of
that part of the said Shop which now is in the occupation of A. R. as the same
demised part of the said Shop, and also the said demised warehouse now are in
the occupation of him the said E. H. and parcel of his dwelling house, called
or known by the name or sign of the, etc. in, etc. situate in the Parish of,
etc. And the said E. H. for the consideration aforesaid, does further grant
unto the said H. T. free liberty and passage from and out of the said Shop into
the yard belonging to the said Message, in, by, and through the entry there at
all seasonable and convenient times to draw and use water at the Cisterne
standing in the said yard and for any other convenience, and also room in the
cellar belonging to the said Message, to set Ink in pots or tubs there, and
to carry and fetch away the same as occasion shall be from time to time, doing
as little harm thereby as may be; To have and to hold the said West side of
the said Shop, and also the said Warehouse with free use of room, liberty and
passage as aforesaid unto the said H. T. his executors, administrators and
assigns, from the day of the date of these presents unto the full end and term
of seven years from thence next ensuing and fully to be complete and ended,
yiedling and paying therefore yearly during the said term unto the said E. H.
his executors, administrators and assigns, the sum of twenty pounds of
lawful money of England at the Feasts of, etc. by even and equal portions; and
if it shall happen the said yearly rent of twenty pounds to be behind or unpaid
in part or in all, by the space of fourteen days next after either of the said
Feasts, at which the same ought to be paid as aforesaid (being lawfully
demanded) That then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said E. H. his executors, administrators and assigns into the said demised
premises to reenter, and the same to have again, repossesse and reenjoy, as in
his former estate, any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding:
And the said E. H. does hereby covenant and grant, to, and with the said H. T.
That he the said E. or any other by his leave, sufferance or title shall not,
neither will during the said term, sell or cause, or procure to be sold or
vented in the said East side, or part of the said Shop now in the said A. R.
his occupation, any wares or commodities whatsoever belonging to the trade of a
Stationer, or which the said E. H. usually sells or has sold in the said now
demised part of the same Shop (excepting all manner of printed books) And the
said E. H. for, and in consideration of the sum of one hundred thirty six
pounds six shillings and eleven pence of lawful money of England to him in hand
paid by the said H. T. before the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
whereof he the said E. does hereby acknowledge the receipt, has bargained and
sold, and by these presents does bargain, sell, assign, set over and deliver
unto the said H. T. all and singular the compters, shelves, boxes, drawers,
goods, chattels and wares of him the said E. H. being and remaining in and
about the said demised premises, and which are mentioned and expressed in a
Scedule or Inventary to these presents annexed, to have, hold, enjoy, retain,
keep and dispose of the said compters, shelves, boxes, drawers, goods, chattels
and wares and every of them, and every part and parcel of the same unto the
said H. T. to the only proper use and behoof of him the said H. his executors
and administrators, without any let, denial, molestation or interruption of the
said E. H. or of any other by or through his means, consent, title or
procurement: And the said H. T. does hereby covenant and grant, to and with the
said E. H. that he the said H. his executors or assigns, shall and will at the
end of the said term, leave the said compters, shelves, drawers and boxes in
the same places where they now stand, if the said E. will then pay for the same
unto the said H. the sum of eight pounds of good and lawful English money. In
witness whereof the parties first above named, have to these presents
interchangeably set their hands and seals the day and year first above written.

A declaration of one, whose name is used in trust in an obligation.
WHereas in and by one obligation bearing date with these presents, G. H.
Citizen and Girdler of London, stands bound to me ^. K. Citizen and Girdler
of London, in the sum of one hundred pounds, conditioned for payment of one
and fifty pounds and ten shillings on the, etc. day of, etc. now next ensuing,
as thereby appears. Now I the said I. K. do hereby acknowledge and declare,
that the moneys lent upon the said obligation, was all the proper moneys of L.
M. of London Gent. and that my name is used in the said obligation only in
trust and for the benefit of him the said L. M. Witness my hand and seal the,
etc. day of, etc.

A presentation to a living by one who had the next donation granted to him by
the Patron, according to the latest form.
TO the Right Honorable the Commssioners for approbation of public Preachers,
I A. B. of C. in the County of D. Gent. present to you E. F. Clarke to the
Rectory of G. in the said County with all the profits thereunto belonging; By
the resignation (or by the death) of H. I. the last Incumbent there being now
void, and in my gift by virtue of a gift and grant thereof to me the said A. B.
made by K. L. of M. in the said County Esquire the true and undoubted Patron of the
same Rectory, by a sufficient writing under his hand and seal, bearing date
the, etc. day of, etc. last past, by which the said K. L. the first and next
advowson, nomination, donation, collation, presentation and free disposition of
the aforesaid Rectory, with all its rights, members and appurtenances
whatsoever, did to me the said A. B. give and grant, desiring you to admit the
said E. F. to the said Church and Rectory, and to institute him Rector there:
And likewise to invest him with all the rights, members and appurtenances
whatsoever thereunto belonging: and that you fully accomplish and fulfill all
other the several acts and things, which your office obliges you to perform
herein. Witness my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc. in the year of our
Lord 1658.

A presentation by a Patron of the latest form
TO the Right Honorable the Commssioners for approbation of public Preachers,
I A. B. of C. in the County of D. Esquire the true and undoubted Patron of the
Parish Church and Rectory of G. in the County of H. present unto you I. K.
Clarke to the said Rectory of G. with all the profits thereunto belonging by
the resignation or death (as the case is) of L. M. the last incumbent there
being now void, and in my gift desiring you to admit the said I. K. to the said
Church and Rectory, and to institute him Rector there; and likewise to invest
him with all the rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto
belonging: And that you fully accomplish and fulfill, all other the several
acts and things, which your office obliges you to perform herein. Witness my
hand and seal the, etc.

A deed of feoffment, with a letter of attorney to give livery and seisin.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, S. W. of, etc. sends greeting.
Know ye that the said S W for and in consideration of the sum of 5 s of lawful
money of England to them in hand paid by S M and C D of, etc. whereof the said
S W does hereby acknowledge the receipt, and of the sum of 5000 l of lawful
money paid and secured to be paid unto and for the use of the said S W his
executors or assigns, have granted, enfeoffed and confirmed, and do be these
presents grant, enfeoff and confirm unto the said S M and C D their heirs and
assigns, all those lands, tenements and hereditaments, with their and every of
their appurtenances, commonly called or known by the names of R and G containg
by estimation 600 aacres, be the same more or less, situate, lying and being
in the Towns, Parishes, Villages and Hamlets of T. and M. in the said County of
K or one of them, together with all other lands, tenements and hereditaments
heretofore of S W deceased, and late of S W and Doct. in Divinity that are
situate, lying and being in the Towns, Villages, and Hamlets of T and M
aforesaid, or either of them: and also the reversion and reversions, remainder
and remainders of the said lands, tenements and premises and every part
thereof: and also all the estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand
whatsoever of the said S W of, in, and to the same and every part thereof, to
have and to hold the said lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises, with
the appurtenances unto the said S M and C D their heirs and assigns for ever,
to the only use and behoof of them the said S M and C D their heirs and assigns
for ever: and the said S W does by these presents make, constitute, ordain,
authorize and appoint F L of, etc. in the said County of, etc. and G M of, etc.
in the said County of, etc. their true and lawful atturneys for them, and in
their names and stead jointly or severally to enter into the said lands,
tenements and premises, or into some part thereof in the name of the whole,
and possession thereof for them and their names and stead to take, and after
such possession so thereof had and taken for them and in their names and stead,
to deliver full and peaceable possession and seisin of the said lands,
tenements and premises with the appurtenances, or of some part thereof in the
name of the whole to the said S M and C D or one of them, or to their lawful
attorney according to the form of these presents, ratifying and confirming and
allowing all and whatsoever their said atturneys or either of them shall do in
the premises by virtue of these presents. In witness whereof the said S W to
these presents his hand and seal has set the, etc. day of, etc. in the year,
etc.

An Indenture to bar an estate-Tail.
THis Indenture made the seventh day of October, in the eleventh year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King defendor of the Faith, etc. Between T. B. of W. in the
County of B. Yeoman on the one part, and T. M. of H. in the said County Yeoman,
and H. H. of H. aforesaid, in the said County Yeoman, on the other part.
Whereas T. B. deceased, Recital of a Will.
Grandfather of the said T. B. party to these presents, by his last Will and
Testament in writing (amongst other things therein contained, did give and
devise unto J. B. also deceased Father of the said T. B. party to these
presents, and to the Heirs male of his body with remainders over, all that his
Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, situate and being in W. in the
said County of B. and all that his Close, adjoining to the said Message or
Tenement, and all that acre of Meadow-ground called the long Hale, lying in W.
Meade, and three yards of Meadow, called the Elboes in the said Parish of W.
and half his arrable Land, Leyes and Meadow-ground, lying and being in the
Parish and Fields of W. aforesaid, and R. or one of them with their and every
of their appurtenances in the said County of B. as by the said last will it
does and may appear, and which premises do contain a Message with the
appurtenances, and one Yard-land by estimation be it more or less; And whereas
the said T. B. the Grandfather, shortly after making the said Will dyed, the
said J. B. his son, him surviving, after which time the said J. B. having
issue, the said T. B. party to these presents, his eldest Son and Heir male,
and the said J. B. being since also dead by and after whose decease the said T.
B. party to these presents, now is in actual possession of the said Message or
Tenement, Closes, Lands, Meadows, and Premises with the Remainders over as
aforesaid. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said T. B. party to these
presents, To cut off the estate-tail.
intending as well to cut off the said estate-tail, and to bar the Remainders
thereon depending, and to settle the said Message or Tenement, Close, Lands,
Meadows, and Premises to him the said T. B. party to these presents and his
heirs, as also to bar all pretenses of right that futurely may or can be made
unto all and every, or any the said Message, Lands, Meadows and premises so
given to the said J. B. his Father, and since come unto him the said T. B.
party to these presents, for that purpose, Does hereby Covenant and Grant for
himself, Covenant to levy a Fine.
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, to and with
the said T. M. his Heirs and Assigns by these presents, That he the said T. B.
shall and will on and before the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle, now next
ensuing the date hereof, in due form of Law, acknowledge and levy one or more
Fine or Fines, Sur cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. before his Highness
Justices of his Highness Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, unto the said
T. M. of and for the said Message or Tenement, Close and all and every the
said Meadows, Lands and premises by the name or names of one Message, one
Garden, one Orchard, forty acres of Land, six acres of Meadow, six acres of
pasture and Common of pasture, for all Cattle with the appurtenances in W. and
R. or one of them in the said County of B. or by such other name or names,
quantity or number of acres, as to the said T. M. or his Council learned, shall
seem meet and expedient. To the intent that he the said T. M. shall by force
thereof, stand and be seized of the Message or Tenement, Close, Lands,
Meadows, and premises, until a good and perfect common recovery with a double
Voucher over may be duly had and executed of and for the said Message or
Tenement, Lands, To suffer a Recovery.
Meadows, and premises according to the course of common recoveries for
assurance of Lands and Tenements in such cases used. And it is hereby fully
declared and agreed by and between all the parties to these presents, That
after the said Fine or Fines so to be levied of the said Message, Lands and
premises as aforesaid, he the said T. M. shall and will permit and suffer him
the said H. H. to bring and pursue against him the said T. M. one or more Writ
or Writs of Entry sur Disseisin in le post returnable before his Highness
Justices of his Highness said Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, by which
he the said H. H. shall demand against him the said T. M. all and every the
said Message, Lands, Meadows and premises by the name or names of one
Message, one Garden, one Orchard, forty acres of Land, six acres of Meadow,
six acres of pasture and common of pasture for all Cattle, with the
appurtenances in W. and R. or one of them in the said County of B. or by
whatsoever other name or names, quantity or number of acres, as to the said H.
H. shall seem meet, To which Writ or Writs the said T. M. shall appear Gratis,
and shall enter into the Warranty, and shall vouch to Warranty the said T. B.
party to these presents, who also shall appear and enter into the Warranty, and
shall vouch over the Common Vouchee, who also shall appear and enter into the
Warranty for the said premises, and after make default, so that a good and
perfect Common Recovery with a double Voucher over, may be duly had and
executed of and for the said Message or Tenement, Close, Lands, Meadows and
premises according to the course of Common Recoveries in such cases used. And
it is hereby further declared, concluded, expressed and agreed by and between
all the parties to these presents, The declaration of the use.
And the true intent and meaning of all the parties to these presents, and of
these presents is, That after the said Recovery suffered and executed of and
for the said premises, or any of them, as well the said Recovery, as also the
said Fine, and all Fines and Recoveries suffered and levied, or to be suffered,
levied or acknowledged by or between the said parties to these presents, or any
of them, of and for the premises, or any of them shall be and enure, and
hereby, and by all the parties to these presents, are and shall be adjudged,
deemed and taken to be and enure, To the only proper use and behoof of the said
T. B. party to these presents, and of his heirs and assigns for ever, And to
none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness whereof the parties
abovesaid, etc.

A Covenant to give security to perform Covenants.
ANd lastly, that the said I. S. his Executors and Assigns, shall within one
year next following, after the beginning of the Term hereby granted, put in
good Security to the said T. S. his Heirs or Assigns by Obligation, or
otherwise for the payment of the rent, and performance of the Covenants, hereby
to be by him the said I. S. his Executors or Assigns paid or performed. In
witness whereof, etc.

A re-demise of Lands Mortgaged.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between T. L. of, etc. on the one part, and I. M.
of, etc. and G. M. of, etc. on the other part, Whereas the said I. M. and G. M.
by their Indenture of Lease, bearing date, Recital of the Mortgage.
etc. for the considerations therein expressed, did demise, grant, bargain,
set, and to farm-let unto the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, All that
the Manor of L. G. and P. with the appurtenances in the said County of M. and
also all Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Outhouses,
Yards, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Leasows,
Pastures, Feedings, Ways, Wastes, Wast-grounds, Commons, Commodities, Moors,
Marshes, Woods, Wood-grounds, Under-woods, Waters, Watercourse, Ponds,
Pooles, Liberties, Fishings, Advowson and Patronage of the Church of L. G. and
P. aforesaid, Rents, Reversions, Services, Escheats, Fines, Amerciaments,
Court-leets, Views of frank-pledge and profits of Courts, and all that to
Courts, and Leets belongs, Chattels, wayfes, estrayes, goods and chattels of
Fellons and Fugitives, Customs, Rights, Jurisdictions, Privileges, Profits,
Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their
appurtenances of whatsoever kind, nature or quality soever, or by whatsoever
name or names they are called or known by, situate, lying and being, coming,
renewing, arising or growing in L. G. and P. aforesaid, and H. Y. and Z. or
within any of them, or elsewhere in the said County of M. to the said M.
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures and other the
premises, or to every or any of them in any wise belonging or appertaining, or
Incident, or Dependant thereunto, or as part, parcel or member thereof, or at
any time then to fore known, accepted, taken, used, demised or reputed as part,
parcel or member thereof, or of any part thereof, with their and every of their
Rights, Members and Appurtenances. To have and to hold the said Manors,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Advowsons, and all other the
premises, with their and every of their Rights and Appurtenances unto the said
T. L. his Executors and Assigns for the term of 99. years next ensuing the
date of the said recited Indenture of Lease, fully to be complete and ended, by
and under the yearly Rent of a Pepper-corn at the Annunciation of our Lady St.
Mary the Virgin, if it were lawfully demanded, as by the said recited Indenture
of Lease amongst other things therein contained, it does and may appear. Now
this Indenture witnesses, The re-demise.
that the said T. L. for diverse good causes and considerations him moving, Has
demised, set and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, set and to
farm-let unto the said I. M. and G. M. their Executors and Assigns, the said
Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Advowsons, and all
other the premises, with their and every of their appurtenances in the said
recited Indenture of Lease mentioned, To have and to hold the said Manor, The
Habendum.
and all other the premises, with their and every of their appurtenances unto
the said I. M. and G. M. their Executors and Assigns for the Term of 98. and
10. months next ensuing the date hereof. Yielding and paying therefore yearly,
during the said term unto the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, one
Pepper-corn at the Feast of, etc. if it be demanded. Proviso to pay money.
Provided always, and upon Condition, that if the said I. M. and G. M. their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or some of them, shall not well
and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T. L. his Executors or
Assigns, the sum of xx. pounds of current money of England, on and upon the
twenty fifth day of M. next ensuing the date hereof, and also the sum of 500.
pounds of current money of England, on and upon the twenty fifth day of M.
which shall be in the year of our Lord God 1632. that then from and after
default of payment of the said several sums, or either of them, or of any
part of them, or either of them, this Indenture of Lease, and all and every
matter and thing herein contained, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void,
to all intents and purposes, this Indenture, or any thing herein contained to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding, the same several payments to
be made and paid at or in the now, etc. and that without any demand to be made
for the same. And the said I. M. and G. M. for themselves, Covenant to
re-deliver possession upon failing of payment.
and either of them, jointly and severally, and for their and either of their
several heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, do and does
Covenant, Promise and Grant to and with the said T. L. his Executors and
Assigns, and to and with every of them, etc. that in case the said I. M. and G.
M. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall fail to pay the said
several sums of money, or any of them, or any part of them, or either of them
at the days and times herein before mentioned and appointed for payment
thereof, that then they the said I. M. and G. M. their Heirs and Assigns, and
every and either of them, shall and will within, etc. next after default of
payment of the said sums of money, or any or either of them, or any part of
them, or either of them, leave, yield up and deliver unto the said T. L. his
Executors and Assigns, the peaceable and quiet possession of the said Manor,
Messuages, Lands and all other the premises, with their and every of their
Rights, Members and Appurtenances. And to make further assurance.
And also that they the said I. M. and G. M. their heirs and assigns, shall and
will from time to time, and at all times, during the space of 7. years, etc. as
in Covenants for further assurance. And the said T. L. for himself, That if the
said I. M. and G. M. their Heirs or Assigns, or any or either of them, do and
shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T. L. his Executors
or Assigns, the said several sums of money herein before mentioned and
expressed, at the days and times in the Proviso herein before expressed and
appointed for payment thereof, according to the true intent and meaning of the
said Proviso, That then he the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, Covenant
upon payment to assign over all the Lessors interest.
from and after full payment of the several sums of money in form aforesaid,
shall and will at the request of the said I. M. and G. M. their Heirs or
Assigns, deliver up the said recited Indenture, and also that part of these
presents, which is under the hand and seal of the said I. M. and G. M. And also
that he the said T. L. his Executors and Assigns, shall and will permit and
suffer them the said I. M. and G. M. their Heirs and Assigns, to hold and enjoy
the said Manor and premises, for and until default of payment of the said
several sums of money, or either or any part of them, shall happen to be made
by the said I. M. and G. M. their heirs or assigns, at either of the days or
times herein before mentioned and appointed for payment thereof. In witness,
etc.

A Confirmation of a Mortgage.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, R. F. of
London, son and heir of W. F. late of L. in the Parish of P. R. in the County
of B. Yeoman deceased, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Whereas
the said W. F. by his Indenture of Lease bearing date, etc. made between the
said W. F. by the name of W. F. of L. in the Parish of P. R. in the County of
B. Yeoman on the one part, and T. F. then of W. A. in the Parish of H. in the
said County of B. Husbandman on the other part, for and in consideration of the
sum of 50. l of current money of E. to him the said W. F. by the said T. F.
in hand paid, and for other considerations him moving, did demise, grant and to
farmlet unto the said T. F. his Executor, and Assigns, all that Message or
Tenement, wherein he the said W. F. did then dwell with the appurtenances,
situate, lying and being in L. aforesaid, within the Parish of P. R. in the C.
of B. and also all and singular the Cottages, Houses, Barns, Stables,
Buildings, Edifices, Yards, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens and Easments to the
same Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise appertaining. And also all
those two Closes, etc. and also all woods, underwoods, timber and trees,
quick-mounds, hedges, ditches, Fences, hades and balks whatsoever, standing,
growing or being in or upon the premises, or any part or parcel thereof, or to
the same premises, or to any part or parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, together with all Commons, Common of pasture, Commodities,
Profits and appurtenances whatsoever, and all other lands, tenements and
hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement, and other the
premises, or to any of them, belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Rent and Rents of all and singular the premises, and
of every part and parcel thereof. To have and to hold the said Message or
Tenement, Houses, Closes, arrable Lands, Woods, Under-woods, Commons,
Commodities and all other the premises, and every part and parcel thereof,
with their appurtenances unto the said T. F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. next coming after the date of the said recited
Indenture, unto the end and term, and for and during the term of 500. years
from thence next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, and without
Impeachment, of or for any manner of waste, by and under the yearly Rent of 1.
l at the Feast of, etc. only if it were lawfully demanded, Nevertheless with
Proviso in the said recited Indenture, contained and hereafter following (viz.)
Provided always, and it is Covenanted, granted, concluded and fully agreed by
and between the parties to the said Indenture, That if the said W. F. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well
and truly content, satisfy and pay, or cause to be paid unto the said T. F.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, the full sum of 50. l of lawful
money of E. on and upon the twenty sixth day of M. next coming after the date
of the said recited Indenture, at the then dwelling house of the said T. F. at,
etc. without fraud or deceit, That then at all times thenceforth, from and
after full payment made of the said sum of 50. l as aforesaid, the said
Indenture Lease, Demise and Grant, and all and every other Covenant, Grant and
Articles therein contained, should cease, determine, and be utterly void and of
none effect, to all intents and purposes, and that then, and at all times from
thenceforth, it should be lawful for the said W. F. his heirs and assigns into
the said premises to re-enter, and the same to have again, as in and by the
said recited Indenture, etc. appears. And whereas the said W. F. did not pay,
nor cause the said sum of 50. l to be paid, neither is the same yet paid unto
the said T. F. according to the Proviso or Condition in the said recited
Indenture of Lease mentioned, by reason whereof all the said Message and
premises became absolutely forfeited unto the said T. F. for all the said term
of 500. years in the said recited Indenture mentioned. Now these presents
witness, that the said R. F. being Son and Heir of the said W. F. deceased,
for and in consideration of the sum of 28. l more of current money of E. to
him in hand paid, etc. and for other good causes and considerations him moving,
has and hereby does absolutely grant, ratify and confirm the foresaid Lease,
and all the estate and term for years therein and thereby demised and granted,
or mentioned to be demised and granted, And also does hereby fully and
absolutely release the said Condition, and all and every the Condition and
Conditions whatsoever in the said recited Indenture of Lease contained. And
also the said R. F. for the Consideration aforesaid, does hereby grant, demise,
confirm and assure unto the said T. F. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, the foresaid Messuages or Tenement, Cottage, Closes, Lands, and all
other the premises, for all the foresaid term and number of 500. years by the
said recited Indenture of Lease, demised or thereby mentioned to be demised,
and does also hereby grant and release unto the said T. F. his Executors and
Assigns, the foresaid yearly rent of 1. l by the said recited Indenture
reserved, and all the arrerages thereof. To have and to hold all the said
Message or Tenement, Cottages, Closes, Lands, and all other the premises,
with their and every of their appurtenances in the said recited Indenture
mentioned, and the said yearly rent unto the said T. F. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the rest and residue of the said
term and number of 500. years in the said recited Indenture of Lease mentioned,
and now to come and unexpired, freely and absolutely without any Proviso or
Condition whatsoever. Cum Covenantis proprecata fruitione, et ab Incumbram, et
ulterior Assurand. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture upon Marriage, and for settling Lands to uses: and a Declaration
of a Fine levied to those uses.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between I. S. Esquire second son of the Right
Honorable H. E. of W. on the one part, and A. Lady D. of, etc. and Sir T. W.
of, etc. on the other part: Whereas the said E. and A. his Wife, in the County
of W. are now seized for term of their lives, Recital of being seized.
and of the life of the longer liver of them, of and in all that the Manor of
C. and the lands, tenements and hereditaments, called C. P. and of the Borough
of C. and of the advowson and free gift of the Parsonage of the Church of C.
with all and singular the rights, members and appurtenances thereof in the C.
of D. and of diverse Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Woods, Wood-grounds,
and Hereditaments to the said Manor, and premises belonging or appertaining,
without Impeachment of waste, the Reversion or Remainder thereof to the said I.
S. and the Heirs of the body of the said I. S. lawfully to be begotten. And for
want of such issue the Remainder to the right heirs of the body of the said E.
and C. And for want of Heirs issuing of the body of the said E. and C. the
Remainder then to the right and next heirs of the said C. for ever. Recital of
the Marriage.
And whereas there is a Marriage by Gods grace intended shortly to be had and
solemnized between E. Lord H. son and heir apparent of the said E. and C. and
E. D. sole daughter of the said A. Lady D. they the said E. and C. and the said
I. S. for settling of the inheritance of the said M. and premises to the uses
hereafter expressed and declared, have this present time of the holy Trinity in
the year abovesaid acknowledged and levied one Fine in due form of Law before
his Highness Justices of his Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, Recital of
the Fine.
unto the said A. Lady D. and Sir T. W. and to the Heirs of the said A. Lady D.
amongst other Manors, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the said Fine
contained, of and for all that the said Manor of C. with the appurtenances,
And of all Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons, Woods,
Wood-grounds, Wastes, Moors, Heaths, Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions,
Advowsons, Presentations, Emoluments and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said
Manor and premises, or any part or parcel thereof, belonging or appertaining,
or accepted, reputed, taken, known or demised, letten, used, occupied or
enjoyed, as part parcel or member thereof, or any part thereof. And whereas the
said E. and C. by Indenture tripartite under their hands and Seals, dated with
these presents, have expressed and declared that the said Fine so levied of and
for the said Manor of C. and premises herein contained, should be and enure
to the use and behoof of them the said E. and C. for and during the term of
their two lives, and the life of the longer liver of them, without Impeachment
of or for any manner of wast, and from and after their decease, and of the
Survivor of them, the Remainder thereof to the use of the said E. Lord H.
during the term of his natural life, and from and after his decease, the
Remainder thereof to the Heirs males of the body of the said E. Lord H. to be
begotten on the body of the said E. the Remainder thereof to the right Heirs
of the said C. as by the said Fine and recited Indenture, purporting and
declaring the use aforesaid, it does and may appear. Now this Indenture
witnesses, and it is hereby covenanted, Intention of Parties.
concluded, declared and agreed by and between all the parties to these
presents, and the true intent and meaning of the said I. S. and of all the
parties to these presents, and to the said Fine at the time of levying thereof,
for and concerning the said Manor of C. with the rights, members and
appurtenances thereof, was, and now is, that the same Fine should be and enure,
and hereby, and by all the parties to these presents, is declared and expressed
to be and enure, and the Cognizees of the said Fine, and their heirs shall
stand and be seized of the said Manor of C. with the rights, members and
appurtenances thereof: The uses.
To the uses, intents and purposes hereafter expressed, limited and declared,
that is to say; To the use and behoof of them the said E. and C. for and during
their two lives, and the life of the longer liver of them without Impeachment
of any manner of waste, And from and after their decease, and of the Survivor
of them, the Remainder thereof to the use of the said E. Lord H. Son and Heir
Apparent of the said E. for and during the term of his natural life; And from
and after his decease, the Remainder thereof to the heirs males of the body of
the said E. Lord. H. to be begotten on the said E. D. his intended Wife, and in
default of such heirs male, then to the use of the heirs of the body of the
said E. Lord H. to be begotten on the body of the said E. D. the Remainder
thereof to the right heirs of the said C. and to none other use, intent or
purpose. Provided always, Proviso to make Leases.
and the true intent and meaning of all the parties to these presents, is and
was at the time of levying the said Fine. That it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said E. and C. during their joint lives, and for the Survivor of
them at all times, and from time to time, to make any lease or leases of all or
any of the said Manor and premises, or any part or parcel thereof, to any
person or persons for 21. years in possession, or under, or for three lives in
possession or under, and not otherwise or in other manner, so as upon every
such Lease, so to be made the usual and old accustomed Rent, or more be
reserved and appointed to be payable yearly, during the said term or terms, to
such person or persons, as by force of these presents, or of the said Fine, or
recited Indenture, or any of them, shall or ought after the decease of the said
E. and C. to have the immediate Reversion or Remainder thereof. In witness
whereof, etc.

A Declaration of the use of a Fine and Recovery.
THis Indenture made, etc. between the right Honorable T. L. W. on the one
part, and the right Honorable W. L. P. Sir N. F. and T. V. on the other part,
The recital of the Fine and Recovery.
whereas, etc. reciting a Fine and Recovery suffered in the Term of, etc. of
these Manors, etc. by the name or names of, etc. Now this Indenture
witnesses, that the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord W. and of the
said Recoverer, and of all the parties to the said Recovery, and every of them,
and to these presents before and at the several and respective times of the
suffering of the said Recovery, for touching and concerning the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, and every of them, whereof the
said Recovery was suffered and had always was and now is: The intent of the
parties at the execution of such Fine and Recovery.
That the said Recovery should, and shall be, and enure, and be construed,
adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, and that the said Recoverers and
every of them, and all the parties to the same, and the party-takers thereby
and their heirs, and all and every other person and persons, and his and their
heirs who then were, or now are, or hereafter shall be seized of the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and Premises, or of any part thereof,
or any of them should and shall stand and be seized of the same Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, and every parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, to the uses, purposes and intents, and under the provisions,
Conditions and Limitations hereafter in these presents expressed, specified,
limited and declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose. The uses.
And the said T. Lord W. does hereby limit, express, declare and appoint that
all the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, shall be
and remain to the several uses, purposes and intents hereafter in these
presents expressed (that is to say) to the use and behoof of the said T. Lord
W. and his Assigns, for and during the term of his natural life without
Impeachment, of or for any manner of waste, and from and after the decease of
the said T. Lord W. then to the use of the said W. Lord P. Sir N. F. and T. V.
their Heirs and Assigns for ever, for and to this intent and purpose, that they
the said, etc. and their heirs, and the Survivor and Survivors of them, and his
and their heirs, shall and will bargain, For payment of Debts.
sell, or otherwise dispose of the same, for and toward the payment,
satisfaction and discharge of such debts and sums of money as the said T.
Lord W. does now owe, or which he shall owe at the time of his death to any
person or persons, and for the discharging of such person and persons as do now
stand, or which at the time of the death of the said T. Lord W. shall stand
bound or engaged for or with the said T. Lord W. for the same debts, or sums
of money or any of them, and also for the satisfaction, payment and discharge
of all such sum or sums which the said T. Lord W. has, or hereafter shall take
up, borrow or receive, for or in consideration of which he has heretofore
granted, or hereafter shall grant any Annuity or Annuities, Rent or
Rents-charge, issuing or to be issuing, or payable out of the same Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any of them, or out of any of
the Manors, Lands, Tenements, or hereditaments of the said T. Lord W. in the
Territories of England, whereby the same Rent or Rents charge, And Legacies.
shall and may be determined. And also for and toward the payment and
discharge of the funeral charges and expenses of the said T. Lord W. and of the
Legacies and bequests which the said T. Lord W. by his last Will and Testament
in writing, to be sealed, subscribed and published by him before three
sufficient witnesses, shall give and bequeath to any person or persons, or to
any use or uses, or so much of such sum and sums of money, debts, funeral
expenses and legacies, as the value of the said Manors, lands and tenements
(to be sold) as aforesaid shall amount unto. And that if any overplus shall be
of the value of the same Manors, The Disposal of the Overplus.
lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises, more than shall be or will be
sufficient to satisfy and discharge all the same debts, sums of money, funeral
charges, Legacies and bequests, that then the said, etc. their Heirs, Executors
or Administrators, shall and will pay and deliver the same overplus, which
shall remain of the Sale, or value of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, unto such person or persons to whom the said Lord
W. shall by his last Will in Writing in presence of two witnesses at least,
appoint the said lands and premises to come after his death. And further upon
this trust and confidence reposed in the said, etc. and their heirs, that if
the said person to whom the premises shall be limited or appointed to come
after the said Lord W. his death as aforesaid, Parties trusted to give security
to dispose of the premises accordingly.
then if such preson, his heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall
within two years next after the death of the said T. Lord W. well and truly
satisfy, pay and discharge all the foresaid debts, sums of money, funeral
charges, Legacies and bequests which by the true intent and meaning of these
presents, are limited, expressed or intended to be paid for, out of, or in
respect of the said Manors, Lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises, or
shall give or make to the said, etc. or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or
to the heirs executors or administrators of the Survivors or Survivor of them,
good and sufficient security for the payment of all the said debts, sum and
sums of money, Security to be allowed of by, etc.
funeral charges, gifts, Legacies and bequests, which by the true intent and
meaning of these presents, are before expressed to be paid, the same security
to be approved and allowed of by one of the Lords, etc. for the time being, and
any two of the Justices for the time being of the Courts of Upper Bench or
Common Pleas, that then the said W. Lord P, etc. and their heirs, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them, and his and their heirs and assigns, shall and
will at the costs and charges in the Law of such person or persons to whom the
said T. Lord W. shall as aforesaid appoint or limit the premises to come after
his death, his heirs or assigns, convey and assure the said Manors, Messuages,
Lands, tenements, hereditaments and premises with the appurtenances, to such
person or persons, his and their heirs and assigns, by such good and sufficient
Conveyance and Assurance in the Law, with several and respective Warranty, only
by every of them the said W. Lord P, etc. severally or respectively against
themselves, and their several and respective heirs, as by such person or
persons, his or their heirs or assigns, or his or their Council learned in the
Laws of this Land, shall be reasonably devised and required. Provided always,
and the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord W. and of all the parties
to the said Recovery and other Assurance, and of the parties to these presents
and every of them, before and at the time of the suffering of the said Recovery
and other Assurances, was and yet is, and is so hereby expressed, published and
declared (notwithstanding any thing herein before contained.) That it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said T. Lord W. from time to time, and at all
times, etc.

A Lease to try a Title by Ejection firm.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between T. W, etc. and H. L. of, etc. Witnesses,
that the said T. W. for diverse and sundry good causes and considerations him in
this behalf especially moving, has demised, granted and to Farm-letten, etc.
unto the said H. L. all that Shop, with the appurtenances sometime called or
known by the name or sign of, etc. and now commonly called or known by the name
or sign of, etc. late in the tenure or occupation of, etc. situate, etc.
together with all and singular Lights, Easments, Commodities and Appurtenances
to the same Shop belonging, or in any wise appertaining. To have, etc. from the
Feast of, etc. last past, etc. Yielding, etc. at, etc. Provided always, that
if the said T. W. his, etc. do and shall at any time or times, during the said
Term of, etc. tender or pay, or cause to be paid unto the said H. L. his, etc.
twelve pence of lawful English money at, etc. for and to the intent and
purpose, to make void and frustrate this present Lease and Demise, That then
this present Lease, Demise and Grant, aforesaid shall cease, determine and be
utterly void and of none effect to all intents and purposes, as though the same
had never been made, Any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. In witness, etc.

Note A Lease of Ejectment must Commence always from a Feast or a day past.

A Letter of Attorney to seal such a Lease.
BE it known to all men by these presents, that I, T. W, etc. have made,
ordained, constituted, deputed, and in my stead and place put, and by these
presents, etc. my wel-beloved, etc. S. W, etc. my true and lawful Attorney, for
me and in my stead, right, title and name, to enter into and upon all that,
etc. naming the, etc. as in the Lease, or into or upon any part or parcel of
the premises, and the same premises with the appurtenances, for me and in my
name, and to my use to claim, and possession thereof, or some part thereof in
the name of the whole, for me, and in my name to take, and after such
possession thereof so had and taken for me and in my right stead and name to
seal, and as my Deed to deliver to H. L. upon the premises or some part
thereof, a certain Writing indented, subscribed with my hand, containing or
purporting amongst other things, the form of a Demise of the premises, by or
from me the said T. W. to the said H. L. for the term of three years next
ensuing from the Feast, etc. last past, etc. holding firm and stable all and
whatsoever my said Attorney, shall do or cause to be done for me and in my
stead and name in or about the premises, or any of them by force of these
presents. In witness, etc.

A Mortgage.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between I. F. and E. F. widow on the one part, and
I. R. of, etc. on the other part, etc. Witnesses, That the said I. F. and E.
F. for and in Consideration of the sum of, etc. to them in hand before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents, well and truly paid, wherewith they
and every of them, do acknowledge themselves fully satisfied and paid, and
thereof, and of every part thereof, do clearly acquit and discharge the said I.
R. his heirs, Executors and Administrators, and every of them for ever by these
presents: Have bargained, sold, granted, aliened and confirmed; And by these
presents do, etc. unto the said I. R. his heirs and assigns for ever. All that
Message or Inn called or known by the name of the New-Inn, with the
back-sides, backyard and garden thereunto adjoining and belonging, situate,
lying and being in H. aforesaid, in the said County of O. on the West Side of a
certain street, there called the North-street, with all and singular the
Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Cellers, Sollers, Gardens, Orchards, Profits,
Commodities and Hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Message or Tenement
called the New-Inn, belonging or in any wise appertaining, or now accepted,
reputed, letten, used or known as part parcel or member of the same Message or
Inn, and now being in the holding or occupation of the said E. F. and her
Assigns, And all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession,
remainder, inheritance, claim and demand whatsoever of the said I. F. and E. F.
of, in and to the same Message or Inn, called the New-Inn, and every part and
parcel thereof: And also all and every the Deeds, Evidences, Charges, Writings,
Escripts and Minuments whatsoever, Concerning only the said bargained
premises, or any part or parcel thereof, and true Copies of all other Deeds,
Writings, Evidences and Minuments that do concern the bargained premises, or
any part or parcel thereof, jointly with any other Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, which they the said I. F. and E. F. now have, or knowing where
they are, may lawfully come by without Suit in Law, and all and every the
Copies aforesaid, to be Copyed and written forth at the costs and charges of
the said I. R. his heirs or assigns: They the said I. F. and E. F. for them,
their heirs, Executors and Administrators, do covenant, promise and grant by
these presents, to and with the said I. R. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, well and truly to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto the
said I. R. his heirs or assigns, at the now dwelling house of the said I. R.
situate, etc. with in three years next ensuing the date of these presents,
whole, safe, uncancelled and undefaced: To have and to hold the said Message
or Inn, called the New-Inn, and all other the premises, with all and singular
their appurtenances, before by these presents bargained and sold, or mentioned
or intended to be hereby bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof
unto the said I. R. his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only proper use and
behoof of the said I. R. his heirs and assigns for ever: And the said I. F.
and E. F. for them their heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every of
them, do covenant and grant by these presents, to and with the said I. R. his
heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them in form ensuing; That is
to say, That they the said I. F. and E. F. or one of them, for and
notwithstanding any act or thing by them, or either of them done, caused or
procured, or by them or either of them to be done, caused or procured to the
contrary thereof, now are, or is, and at the execution of the first estate to
be had and made of and in the premises, to the said I. R. and his heirs,
according to the true intent and meaning of these presents, shall then be
solely seized, and very true and lawful owner or owners of the said Message or
Inn, called the New-Inn, and all other the premises before by these presents
bargained and sold, or mentioned or intended to be bargained and sold, of a
good, lawful and indiffeazible estate in Fee-simple, without any manner of
Condition or Limitation of any use or uses, and have now, and at the execution
of the said estate, shall then have good right, full power, and lawful, and
absolute authority to grant, bargain, sell, etc. Cum, Covenant. pro exonerat.
ab Incumbr. et fruitione, And that he the said I. F and his heirs, and all and
every other person and persons lawfully having, or claiming to have any manner
of estate, right, title or interest, of, in or to the premises before by these
presents bargained and sold, or mentioned or intended to be bargained and sold
with the appurtenances, or of, in, or to any part or parcel thereof, by, from
or under the said I. F. and E. F. or either of them, shall from time to time,
and at all times for and during the space of five years next ensuing the date
hereof, when and as often as they or any of them shall be thereunto reasonably
required by the said I. R. his heirs or assigns, or any of them, make, do,
suffer, knowledge and execute, or cause to be made, done, suffered, knowledged
and executed at the costs and charges in the law of the said I. R. his heirs or
Assigns, or some or one of them, all and every such further lawful and
reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Device and (...) Assurance and
Assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better and more perfect
assurance, surety, sure-making and conveying of all and singular the premises,
and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances to the said I. R. his
heirs and assigns, according to the true intent and meaning of these presents.
Be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, Release, Confirmation with Warranty only
against the said I. F. and his heirs, or without Warranty, or by all or any of
the aforesaid ways or means, or by any other lawful or reasonable ways or
means in the Law whatsoever, without Warranty, or with the like Warranty as
aforesaid, as by the said I. R. his heirs or assigns, or any of them, or by
his, their, or any of their Council learned in the Laws, shall be lawfully and
reasonably devised, advised or required: Provided always, and it is
Covenanted, Concluded, Conditioned and agreed by and between the said parties
to these presents; That if they the said I. F. and E. F. or either of them,
their heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them, do well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid to the said I. R. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at the now dwelling house of, etc. the
sum of, etc. of, etc. in form ensuing, etc. without fraud or guile, That then
this present bargain and sale, and all and every Covenant, Grant, Article and
thing herein contained, shall to all effects, purposes and Constructions, be
utterly void, frustrate and of none effect, But if default of payment in any of
the days of payment aforesaid, in part or in all, contrary to the form above
declared, that then this present bargain and sale, and all and every Covenant,
Grant, Article and thing herein contained, shall to all effects and purposes
stand, remain and abide in it is full force and strength, any thing herein
before expressed to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, etc.

A Conveyance of a Manor.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between R. H. M. his Wife, and I. H. on the one
part, and Sir R. D. on the other part, Witnesses: That the said R. H. M. his
wife, and I. H. for and in consideration of the sum of, Grant of the Manor.
etc. Have granted, aliened, bargained, sold, infeoffed and confirmed, and by
these presents, do jointly and severally Grant, Alien, Bargain, sell, infeoffe,
and confirm unto the said Sir R. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, All that
the Manor or Lordship of R. in the County of O. with the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereof: And also all and singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barns, Stables, Dove-houses, Yards, Backsides, Orchards, Gardens,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Under-woods, Wood-grounds
with the soil and ground of the same, Timber and Trees, Waters, Watercourse,
Ponds, Pooles, Liberties, Fishings, Courts, Leets, Views of Frank-pledge,
Perquisites and Profits of Courts and Leets, Wayfes, Estrayes, Harriots,
Fellons, Goods and goods of Fugitives, Rents, Services, Rents seck, and all
other Rents and Services whatsoever reserved upon any Demise or Lease
heretofore made of the premises, or of any part thereof, Wastes, Wast-grounds,
Ways, Easments, Passages, Profits, Commons, Commodities, Jurisdictions,
Emoluments, Milles, Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said
Manor and Premises, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
reputed to be belonging thereto, or used therewith: And also all that the
Advowson, Presentation, and right of Patronage of the Rectory Church and
Chantrey of R. aforesaid. And all Tithes, Of an Advowson.
Oblations and Obventions whatsoever, belonging to the said Rectory Church, or
Chantreys of R. aforesaid. And all that Message, Tenement or Farm, Of a Farm.
situate and being in R. aforesaid, now or late in the Tenure or Occupation of
W. C. or his Assigns, called or known by the name of S. or by whatsoever other
name or names the same is called or known, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings,
Barns, Stables, Yards, Backsides, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Pastures, Ways, Easments, Passages, Profits, Commons, Commodities, Woods,
Wood-grounds, Timber and Trees: Waters, Watercourse, Emoluments, Herditaments
and Appurtenances whatsoever to the said Message, Tenement or Farm, and
premises, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or reputed to
be belonging thereto, or used therewith. And also all those Messuages, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, with their appurtenances called the Chantrey Lands
in R. aforesaid. And also all and singular other the Messuages, Cottages,
Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Woods, Wood-grounds, Rents,
Reversions, Services and Hereditaments whatsoever of them the said R. H. M. and
I. H. or any or either of them, in or within the Towns, Fields, Parishes,
Hamlets, Territories or Precincts of R. and B. and L. or any or either of them
in the said County of O. And also all the estate, right, title, interest, use,
possession, and the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders, rent
and rents, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said R. H. M. and I. H. and
every and either of them, of, in and to the said Manor and Premises, and of,
in and to every part and parcel thereof belonging, or in any wise appertaining.
Of Writings with a Covenant to deliver them by such a time.
And all Writings, Evidences, Deeds, Charters, Fines, Escripts, Court-Rolls,
Exemplifications and Minuments whatsoever concerning the said M. and premises,
or any part thereof, which the said R. H. now has in his possession, or can
conveniently come by without suit in Law: And true Copies of all such Writings
and Evidences, as do concern the same or any part thereof, with any other
lands, tenements or hereditaments, the same Copies and every of them to be
copyed and written out, at the costs and charges of the said Sir R. D. his
heirs and assigns: All which said Writings and Evidences the said R. H. does
hereby covenant for him, his heirs and assigns, to and with the said Sir R. D.
his heirs and assigns, to deliver unto him the said Sir R. D. his heirs or
assigns, at or before the Feast of St. J. the Apostle, next ensuing the date
hereof, safe, whole, uncancelled and undefaced: To have and to hold the said
Manor or Lordship, Advowson, Rectory, Chantrey, Messuages, Tenements, Farm,
Lands, Meadows, Pasture, hereditaments, and all other the premises, with their
and every of their appurtenances unto the said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns,
to the only, etc. And the said R. H. for himself, etc. does Covenant, etc. That
he the said R. H. now is, and at the time of the first executing of an estate
of the said Manor and premises, Seized in Fee-simple.
by force of these presents unto the said Sir R. D. shall be lawfully and
absolutely seized in his Demeasn, as of Fee-simple to him and his heirs, of and
in the said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Advowson, Hereditaments and
Premises with their Appurtenances, without any manner of Condition or
Limitation of any Use or Uses, to alter, change, determine, or make void the
same, and without any Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of any part thereof in
his Highness the Lord Protecter, his Heirs or Successors being made or limited
by the said R. H. or I. H. his Uncle deceased, whose heir the said R. H. now
is: And that he now has, and then shall have good right, full power, Power to
Alien.
and lawful, and absolute authority to grant, bargain, sell and convey the said
Manor, lands, and all other the premises, with the appurtenances unto the
said Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns, according to the true intent and meaning
of these presents, notwithstanding any Act, had, made, done or suffered by the
said R. H. or the said I. H. his said Uncle, or either of them: And that the
said Manor, Messuages, Lands, Advowson, and all other the premises, with
their and every of their appurtenances, now are, Freed from Encumbrances.
and so shall and may for ever hereafter remain, continue, and be unto the said
Sir R. D. his heirs and assigns, free and freely, and clear and clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged, of and from all and all manner of former
and other Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers, Uses, Wills, Intails,
Annuities, Statutes-Merchant and of the Staple, Recognizances, Bonds,
Judgments, Executions, Extents, Seizures, Condemnations, Rents, Arrerages of
Rents, Intrusions, Forfeitures, Mortgages, Fines for Alienation without
license, Debts of Record, Debts to his Highness Estates, Titles, Troubles,
Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered by
him the said R. H. or by his Assent, Consent, Act, means or procurement, or by
I. H. his said Uncle, or either of them: One Lease for the term of 20 years, to
be accounted from the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady St. Mary the Virgin
in the year of our Lord God, An Exception of Leases.
etc. of parcel of the premises made by the said R. H. to one I. D. wherein
the yearly Rent of nine pounds is reserved: One other Lease for the term of 22.
years, to be accounted from the Feast of St. M. in the Eighteenth year of the
Reign of our late Sovereign Lord King James over England, etc. of other parcel
of the premises made by the said R. H. to one C. O. and whereupon the yearly
Rent of 20. l is reserved: One other Lease, etc. All which said several Rents,
shall from henceforth be due and payable to the said Sir R. D. his heirs and
assigns, during the several and respective terms aforesaid. And further, the
said R. H. and I. H. for themselves, etc. Do Covenant, Covenant for quiet
enjoying.
etc. with the said Sir R. D, etc. That he the said Sir R. D. his heirs and
assigns, and every of them, shall and may for ever hereafter quietly and
peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said M. Farm, Advowson,
lands and premises, with their and every of their appurtenances, without the
let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial, molestation, interruption or eviction
of them the said R. H. and I. H. or either of them, their or either of their
heirs or assigns, or any of them, And without the lawful Let, Suit, Trouble,
Denial, Molestation, Interruption or Eviction of all and every other person and
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under them the said R. H. and
I. H. or either of them, their or either of their estate, right or title: or
by, from or under I. H. deceased, Uncle of the said R. H. (except before
excepted.) And also that they the said R. H. and I. H. parties to these
presents, and either of them, For further assurance.
their and either of their heirs and assigns, and M. now the wife of the said
R. H. and every of them, shall and will from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, etc. And it is hereby declared, concluded, etc. That all Fines,
Feoffments, Recoveries and all other assurances whatsoever, had, made, levied,
suffered or executed, or to be had, made, levied, suffered or executed by or
between the said parties to these presents, or any of them of the said M. and
premises, or of any of their shall be and enure, and hereby and by all the
parties to these presents, are agreed to be and enure, To the only proper use
and behoof of the said Sir R. D. and of his, etc. and to none other use, intent
or purpose whatsoever: In witness, etc.

Sir Alex. D. being seized of the Manor of B. in Com. O. for life, with
remainder to his first son and his heirs, with remainder to his second
son, and so to the tenth son sell the Mannor-House, and half the Lands to
Sir T. R. which to secure, settles the Manor of C. by the Collateral Deed and
Bargain and Sale, ut sequetur.
THis Indenture made the day of, etc. Between Sir A. L. on the one part, and
Sir T. R. on the other part. Whereas the said Sir T. R. at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, has paid unto the said Sir A. D. the sum of 2000.
l of current money of England, in Consideration whereof the said Sir A. D. Dame
M. his Wife, and the Heirs of the said Sir A. are to convey and assure unto the
said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, All that the Mansion House and Capital
Message of the said Sir A. D. with all Houses, Edifices, Barns, Stables,
Buildings, Yards, Orchards and Gardens, with their and every of their
appurtenances, situate, lying and being in G. B. in the County of O. And also
all Trees, Furzes, Woods and Under-woods, with their and every of their
appurtenances, standing, growing, lying and being in all or any the Closes and
parcels of ground herein after particularly expressed, and also all Waters,
Fishings and Fish Ponds, being in or between the same, and the moity of all
other Waters adjoining and next to the same, now or late in the possession of
the said Sir A. D. situate, lying and being in G. B. aforesaid, in the said
County of O. And also all that Close, etc. reciting the particulars with the
buttalls, and boundalls: And also all usual ways, easments, profits and
Commodities to all and singular the premises, and to every part and parcel
thereof, belonging or in any wise appertaining: And all and singular the
Tithes, which at any time hereafter may arise or grow due, out of all or any
the premises aforesaid: All and singular which premises are situate, lying
and being in the Parish of G. B. aforesaid, in the said County of O. Together
also with all the Ways and passages, now or at any time within the space of
three years last past, used or occupied, unto or with the premises, or any
part thereof, for the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, and for his and
their Servants, Cattle and Carriages in and through any other the Grounds of
the said Sir A. D. in G. B. aforesaid, unto the premises and every of them
intended to be conveyed and assured as aforesaid: In which conveyances and
assurances to be made of the premises, in manner and form aforesaid, there
are to be excepted, to and for the said Sir A. D. his heirs and assigns,
Lessees, Farmors and Under-tenants, and all his and their Servants, and all
others by his and their appointment, necessary and convenient ways and
passages in and through all or any the premises to be conveyed as aforesaid,
unto and from all or any the Closes and Grounds of the said Sir A. situate in
B. aforesaid, not to be conveyed unto the said Sir T. R. as aforesaid. Now this
Indenture witnesses, that for the quiet enjoying of all and singular the
before mentioned premises, with their and every of their appurtenances unto
the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, and for and in consideration of the
sum of 5. s of current money of England, in hand paid by the said Sir T. R.
unto the said Sir A. D. that the said Sir A. D. has granted, bargained, sold,
enfeoffed and confirmed, and by these presents does grant, bargain, sell,
enfeoffe and confirm unto the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns for ever,
All that his Manor of C. with the appurtenances in the Parish of P. or
elsewhere in the said County of B. And all Messuages, Closes, Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, and Hereditaments, with their and every of their appurtenances
of the said Sir A. D. situate, lying and being in the Town, Hamlets, Fields
and Precincts of C. and P. aforesaid, or in either of them in the said County
of B. And also the Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the
said Manor of C. and of all and singular the premises, with their
appurtenances hereby intended to be granted, bargained and sold: And also all
the estate, right, title, interest, claim and demand whatsoever of him the said
Sir A. D. of, in and to the said M. of C. with the appurtenances, and all other
the premises, before by these presents mentioned to be granted, bargained or
sold with the appurtenances, and of, in and to every part and parcel thereof.
And also all Deeds, Evidences and Writings, touching or concerning the before
bargained premises only, or only any part of Parcel thereof: To have and to
hold the said M. of C. with the appurtenances, and all and singular the before
by these presents bargained premises, with their appurtenances, and the
Reversion and Reversions, Remainder and Remainders of the same, and all the
estate, right, title and interest of the said Sir A. D. of, in and to the same,
and all Writings only concerning the same, or only any part of the same unto
the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns: To the only, etc. And the said Sir A.
D. for himself, his, etc. Does Covenant, etc. That for and notwithstanding any
act or thing by the said Sir A. D. or by Sir T. D. Knight deceased, late father
of the said Sir A. D. done or suffered to the contrary, he the said Sir A. D.
now at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is the true
rightful and lawful Owner of the said M. of C. and of all and singular the
before bargained premises, with the appurtenances, and of the same, and of
every part of the same is lawfully seized in his Demeasn, as of Fee-simple,
without any manner of Reversion or Remainder thereof, or of any part thereof in
his Highness the Lord Protector that now is, his Heirs or Successors, or in
any other person or persons whatsoever: And also that he the said Sir T. R. his
heirs and assigns, for and notwithstanding any act or thing by the said Sir A.
D. or by Sir T. D. Knight, deceased as aforesaid, done or suffered to the
contrary, shall and may from henceforth for ever hereafter lawfully, quietly
and peaceably have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said M. of C. and all
and singular the afore-bargained premises, with their appurtenances clearly
acquitted, exonerated and discharged of and from all and all manner of former
and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Mortgages, Leases, Feoffments,
Joyntures, Dowers, Statutes, Recognizances, Rents, Judgments, Condemnations,
Executions, Liveries, Ousterlemains' Issues, Amerciaments, Respits of Homage,
and of and from all other titles, troubles, charges, estates and encumbrances
whatsoever heretofore had, made, committed, caused or done, or hereafter to be
had, made, committed, caused or done by the said Sir A. D. and the said Sir T.
D. or by either of them, or by any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
having, or claiming to have any estate, right, title and interest, by, from or
under the said Sir T. D. and Sir A. D. or either of them, or the heirs or
assigns of them, or either of them: (The Jointure for the life of Dame M. D.
now Wife of the said Sir A. and one Lease for about six years to come,
heretofore made to I. B. at the yearly rent of 30. l per annum: And one other
Lease made to O. F. for about one year yet to come at the rent of 100. l per
annum: And one other Lease, etc. only excepted.) And further, that he the said
A. D. his heirs and assigns, and all and every other person and persons
lawfully having, or claiming to have, by, from or under them, or any of them,
any estate, right, title or interest whatsoever, of, in or to the said Manor
of C. and other the before by these presents bargained premises, or of, in or
to any part or parcel of the same, shall and will at all times hereafter, at or
upon the reasonable request, and at the only and proper costs and charges of
the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, a Covenant. pro future. Ass. So that
the said assurance or assurances contain no further or other Warranty or
Warranties than only against Sir A. D. and his heirs, and against all and every
other person and persons claiming, by, from or under them, or any of them:
Provided always, and upon Condition, that if the said Sir A. D. and such
person and persons to whom by any Conveyance or assurance heretofore made, the
Reversion or Remainder of the said Manor house and premises in B. aforesaid,
and intended to be conveyed unto the said Sir T. R. as aforesaid, should or
might, or shall remain or come immediately after the death of the said Sir A.
D. and Dame M. his Wife, shall within one year next after such person or
persons, shall attain unto the age of twenty one years at the only Costs and
Charges, and at the reasonable request of the said Sir T. R. his heirs and
assigns, or of some or one of them, Convey and assure unto the said Sir T. R.
his heirs and assigns, and only to their uses and behoofs; All that Capital
Message and M. house aforesaid, and all other the above recited premises as
aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances, situate, lying and
being in G. B. aforesaid, free and clearly discharged of all and all manner of
Estates, Titles, Troubles, Charges and Encumbrances had, made or done by the
said Sir A. D. or by Sir A. H. Knight, lately deceased, or by, from or under
the^ or either of them, or the heirs and assigns of them or either of them,
with the like Covenants for the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns in such
assurances to be made, as are contained in an Indenture, bearing date the first
day of this instant month of M. made between Sir A. D. of the one part, and Sir
T. R. in such manner and form, as by the said Sir T. R. his heirs or assigns,
or by some or one of them, or by his or their Council learned in the Law, shall
be reasonably devised or advised and required: So that the said assurance and
conveyance, assurances and conveyances, contain no further or other Covenant,
or Warranty then only against Sir A. D. and his heirs, and against Sir T. D.
and his heirs, and against all and every other person and persons claiming, by,
from or under them, or any of them: That then, from and immediately after such
assurance is made of the premises, with their appurtenances in G. B.
aforesaid, unto the said Sir T. R. in manner aforesaid. This present Indenture,
and the Grant, Bargain and Sale therein contained of the said M. of C. and
other the premises in P. aforesaid, with the appurtenances to be void and of
none effect, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding, And then the said Sir T. R. does by these presents
for himself, his, etc. Covenant, Grant and agree to and with the said Sir A. D.
his heirs and assigns; That he the said Sir T. R. his heirs and assigns, shall
and will deliver up unto the said Sir A. D. his heirs or assigns, this
Indenture to be Cancelled, together with the Evidences hereby granted, and in a
Schedule expressed hereunto annexed, and then likewise, shall and will at the
costs and charges of the said Sir A. D. make such reasonable Assurances and
Conveyances, for the better re-assuring and re-conveying of the said M. of C.
and premises by these presents bargained and sold unto the said Sir A. D. his
heirs and assigns, as by the said Sir A. D. his heirs or assigns, or by his or
their Council learned in the law, shall be reasonably devised, or advised and
required: In witness whereof, etc.

A Declaration of the use of a Fine, where several parties join.
THis Indenture Tripartite, made, etc. Between I. A. of, etc. M. his Wife, sole
daughter and heir of A. F. Gentleman deceased, T. S. of, etc. and M. his Wife,
of the first part, E. D. of, etc. on the second part, and G. D. of, etc. and M.
S. of, etc. on the third part: Whereas the said I. D. M. his Wife, T. S. and M.
his Wife, have in Micha^lmas Term, in the year of our Lord God one thousand,
etc. acknowledged and levied one Fine with Proclamation, according to the Form
of the Statute, in due form of Law before the Justices of his Highness Court
of Common Pleas at Westminster, unto the said G. D. and his heirs, of and for
all those eight Cottages, with the appurtenances, situate and being in C. W.
aforesaid, by the name or names of eight Cottages, two Gardens and one Orchard,
with the appurtenances in W. and C. W. aforesaid: As by the said Fine remaining
on Record in the said Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, it does and may
appear. These Presents witness, and it is hereby testified, expressed and
declared, by and between all the said parties to these presents, and the true
intent and meaning of all the said parties to these presents, and to the said
Fine then at the time of Levying the said Fine was and now is: That the said
Fine, and all other Fines levied, or to be levied of the premises, or any part
thereof, or of the same, or any of them, with any other Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments, by or between the parties to these presents, or any of them, and
the Uses thereof shall be and enure, and hereby, and by all the parties to
these presents, are and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, to
the uses, intents and purposes hereafter in these presents expressed, limited
and declared, viz. Of, for and concerning all that one Cottage or Tenement,
wherein one D. A. Tailor, did lately inhabit, situate in C. W. aforesaid, in a
Street there called F. with the Orchard or backside, Garden and appurtenances,
To the use and behoof of the said G. D. his heirs and assigns for ever: And of,
for and concerning all that Cottage or Tenement, wherein the said M. S. does
now inhabit in C. W. aforesaid, in a place there called N. with the backside
and Garden, and appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining, To the use
and behoof of him the said M. S. his heirs and assigns for ever. And of, for
and concerning one other Cottage, etc. to the said I. A. his heirs and assigns
for ever: And of, for and concerning all other the Cottages and premises in
the said Fine contained, the use whereof is not herein or hereby formerly
limited and declared, To the use and behoof of the said E. R. his heirs and
assigns for ever. And to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In
witness etc.

A Condition for the sealing an Acquittance or release of lands.
THe Condition, etc. that if the above bounden B. C. do cause I. M. Serjant at
the Law, and E. his Wife before the Feast of E. next coming, at the costs and
charges in the Law of the said B. C. by their sufficient deed in the law, to
release, remit and quite claim to the within named C. D his, etc. all their
right, title, dower and interest which the said I. M. and E. his Wife, or
either of them, have, had, or may have, claim or pretend to have, of, in or to
all such Lands, Tenements, etc. that then, etc.

A Bill to pay money.
MEmorandum that I, R. S. do owe unto I. M. the full sum of 10 l of, etc. to be
paid unto the said I. M. his, etc. on the, etc. next coming, for payment
whereof I the said R. S. do bind me, my, etc. in the sum of, etc. firmly by
these presents. Sealed and dated the day and year abovesaid: Let it be dated as
a general acquittance.

A Release.
BE it known, etc. That I W. B. of, etc. have remised, released; and for me, my
heirs, etc. do by these presents remise, etc. unto I. R. of, etc. all and all
manner of Actions, Suits, Quarrels, Debts, Trespasses, Accounts, Covenants and
Demands whatsoever, which I the said W. B. now have against the said I. R. or
my executors, administrators or assigns, at any time might, ought or could have
against the said I. E. his, etc. as executor of I. R. his father deceased, or
otherwise howsoever from the beginning of the world, until the day of the date
hereof. In witness, etc.

A license to let Lands, although prohibited by Lease
WHereas my Tenant W. H. holds of me one Tenement in P. in, etc. with the
appurtenances for certain years yet to come, by an Indenture of Lease dated,
etc. wherein he has expressly Covenanted with me not to set or let out any
part or parcel of the said Tenement, without my special lycense and Consent in
writing, in that behalf to be had, as by the said Indenture amongst, etc.
appears. These presents witness, that I the said H. K. have lycensed and
allowed, and do by these presents lycense and allow the said W. H. to let, set
or demise the said Tenement to one R. P. his, etc. for three years next
ensuing. Provided that he the said W. H. shall at his peril see the rent in the
said Indenture and other Covenants and payments therein mentioned to be paid on
the part and behalf of the said W. H. be duly kept and performed. Dated, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to two, to receive possession.
TO all Christian people, to whom these presents shall come, Sir R. D. of, etc.
sends greeting: Whereas G. S. of, etc. did seal unto the said Sir R. D. and
deliver an Indenture bearing date the last day of May, now last past,
purporting a Conveyance unto him the said Sir R. D. and his Heirs, of all that
Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, situate and being in B.
aforesaid, sometimes thentofore, etc. setting down the particulars; To have and
to hold the said, etc. to the said Sir R. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever,
as by the said Indenture, it does and may more fully appear: Now, know ye, that
the said Sir R. D. has, and hereby does authorize, constitute, depute, and in
his stead and place, put his wel-beloved Friends C. G. of, etc. and T. A. of,
etc. and either of them, his true and lawful Atturneys, jointly or severally to
receive and take for him, and in his name, and to his use, full and peaceable
possession, and seisin of and in all, or any part of the premises, in the name
of the whole, of and from the said G. S. to hold to the said Sir R. D. and his
Heirs, according to the Tenor, purport, form and effect of the said
Indenture. In witness, etc.

A note of an Indorsement of livery of Seizin on the Indenture by virtue of the
Letter of Attorney.
MEmorandum That full and peaceable possession and seizin was given and
delivered by the within named G. S. of the Message or Tenement, Closes and
Land within mentioned unto C. G. of, etc. by virtue of the Letter of Attorney
to this present Indenture annexed, for and in the name, and to the use of the
within named Sir R. D. and his heirs according to the true intent and meaning
of the said Indenture and Letter of Attorney the day of, etc. in the presence
of us whose names are subscribed.

Note. Let the Letter of Attorney be pinned or filed to the Indenture.

An Assignment of a Lease in trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between W. P. of, etc. on the one part, and R. P.
of, etc. on the other part. Witnesses that the said W. P. for diverse good
causes and considerations him hereunto moving; Has Demised, granted, assigned
and set over, And by these, etc. unto the said R. P. his Executors and
Assigns: All that, etc. setting down the particulars, with their and every of
the rights, members and appurtenances thereunto belonging; Together with all
and every the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, Term for years,
claim and demand whatsoever of him the said W. P. of, in and to the said, etc.
by virtue of a former Lease or Assignment thereof made to him by one W. R. of,
etc. and I. his Wife, or either of them for the residue of a Term of 1000.
years, then unexpired, or otherwise howsoever; To have and to hold the said,
etc. with the appurtenances, during all the rest and residue of the said Term
of 1000. years, which are yet to come and unexpired unto the said R. P. his
executors and assigns: Upon the trusts, and to the intents and purposes
hereafter mentioned and expressed. That is to say, That the said R. P. and his
assigns, shall permit and suffer the said W. P. to have and take to his own
proper use and benefit, all and every the Rents, Issues and profits of the
premises, for and during his natural life, without Impeachment, of or for any
manner of wast, And from and after his decease, the said R. P. or his assigns,
shall stand and be possessed, or dispose of the premises, during the residue
of the said Term, which shall be then to come to such uses, intents and
purposes, as the said W. P. shall by his last Will and Testament in Writing,
under his Hand and Seal, and Subscribed in the presence of two or more
credible Witnesses, nominate and appoint the same, and for want of such
Declaration or Limitation to be made: That then the said R. P. shall stand
possessed of the premises in Trust for the Executors or Administrators of the
said W. P. and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever. In witness,
etc.

E. R. having bought the Manor of B. and Copyhold Lands belonging to it,
takes a surrender of the Copyhold Lands in others names, who by Deed, after
recital of what estate they had: make this Acknowledgement.
WHereas E. R. of, etc. has with his own money, purchased of I. G. of, etc.
amongst other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments; The Customary, Message,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, viz. Then setting all
the particulars with the quantity and number of acres and closes names, and in
whose occupation. And also whereas W. P. of, etc. R. W. F. K. and D. G. of,
etc. being Customary Tenements of the said M. of B. did surrender into the
hands of I. G. being Lord of the said M. All and singular the Customary,
Message, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments before mentioned, To the use and
behoof of us the said W. N. and R. F. to the intent and purpose that the said
I. G. or other the Lords of the said M. or these Stewards for the time being at
the next Court, Baron to be holden for the said Manor, should admit, or cause
us the said W. N. and R. F. to be admitted Tenants unto all and singular the
said, etc. As by the said Surrender bearing date, etc. relation being thereunto
had, may more fully and at large appear. Now know ye, that we the said W. N.
and R. F. for the manifesting of the truth of the said Surrender, and for the
avoiding, and clearing of all questions and doubts, which hereafter may arise
or grow, touching or concerning the said Surrender, taken in our names as
aforesaid, Do hereby freely and voluntarily acknowledge, express and declare
that the said Surrender was made, taken and done by the special Direction and
Appointment of the said E. R. in trust, to and for the only use, benefit and
behoof of him the said E. R. his heirs and assigns for ever, and to and for no
other use, intent or purpose whatsoever; And therefore we the said W. N. and R.
F. Do by these presents freely and absolutely disclaim any other estate, right,
title or interest, claim or demand, which we or either of us now have, or
hereafter may or can have, claim or demand in or to the said Customary,
Messuages, Lands and premises, or any part thereof, but such as we have only
by the trust reposed in us by the Surrender before expressed: In witness
whereof we the said W. N. and K. F. have hereunto set our hands and seals, etc.

A Lease in Trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Sir R. D. of, etc. on the one part, and W.
D. of, etc. R. H. of, etc. and T. S. of, etc. on the other part; Witnesses
that the said Sir R. D. for diverse good causes and considerations him moving,
has demised, granted, set and to farm-letten, and by these presents does, etc.
unto the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their executors and assigns; All that the
Manor of A. with the rights, members and appurtenances thereof in the said
County of B. and all Messuages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever
of him the said Sir R. D. situate, lying and being in A. aforesaid, in the
said County of B. And also all that Close of Land, in the Parish of N. in the
said County of B. called the Warren-hill, with their and every of their
appurtenances; And all ways, easements, passages, profits, Commons and
Commodities whatsoever belonging to the said Manor and premises, and to every
or any of them (except all Timber Trees growing on the premises, or any part
thereof: To have and to hold the said Manor, and all other the premises, with
their and every of their appurtenances unto the said W. D. R. H. and T. S.
their Executors and Assigns, from the Feast of, etc. last before, etc. for and
during, and unto the full end of 24. years, etc. Yielding a Pepper-Corn, etc.
Nevertheless, upon this special trust and confidence, and to the intent and
purpose that they the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their Executors and Assigns,
shall permit and suffer him the said Sir R. D. and his assigns, during his
life, to hold and enjoy the said Manor and premises, and to receive and take
the, Rents Issues and profits thereof, to his and their own use, without
Impeachment of any manner of waste, And also that they the said W. D. R. H. and
T. S. their executors and assigns, from and after the decease of the said Sir
R. D. shall permit and suffer I. D. Esquire Son and Heir apparent of the said Sir
R. D. and his heirs to hold and enjoy, and to receive and take the Rents,
Issues and profits of the said Manor and premises, for so long time as he the
said I. D. and his heirs, shall permit and suffer M. D. and R. D. sons of the
said Sir R. D. their heirs and assigns, severally and respectively to hold and
enjoy, according to their several and respective Estates and Limitations, to
them severally and respectively made, appointed, or to be made and appointed in
Trust for them, or either of them by the said Sir R. D. their father of all
that the Manors of E. and T. in T. with their and either of their Rights,
Members and appurtenances thereof, in the said County of B. and all that the
Rectory and Parsonage impropriate of T. aforesaid, and of all that third part
of the Manor of C. with the Rights, Members and appurtenances thereof in the
said County of B. And also to the intent and purpose, that if the said I. D.
his heirs and assigns, shall at any time during the term hereby demised,
disturb, hinder or molest the said M. D. and R. D. the son, or either of them,
their, or either of their heirs or assigns, in the quiet holding or enjoying of
all or any the Manors, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments to them, or in Trust
for them, severally and respectively limited and appointed by the said Sir R.
D. their father as aforesaid, or shall cross, or hinder any the limitations or
estates, made or appointed by the said Sir R. D. to or for the said M. and R.
D. as aforesaid, whereby or by reason whereof they the said M. D. and R. D. the
son, or either of them, their heirs or assigns, shall not, or may not quietly
hold and enjoy, and take the profits of the Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments to or for them, or either of them, severally and respectively
limited and appointed by their father Sir R. D. as aforesaid; That then, and
immediately from and after such disturbance and hindrance used and done by the
said I. D. his heirs or assigns: They the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their,
etc. shall permit and suffer them the said M. D. and R. D. their heirs and
assigns, severally and respectively to take and receive the Rents, Issues and
profits of the Manor of A. and all other the premises hereby demised, for all
such time and Terms for years, as shall be to come and unexpired at the time
of such Disturbance and Hinderance made or done by the said I. D. his, etc.
Provided always, that if the said Sir R. D. at any time during his life, shall
be minded to make void these presents, and the estate hereby granted, and shall
by any writing, under his hand and Seal, Subscribed in the presence of two
Credible persons, or more, declare such his mind and intention, for the making
void thereof: That then, from and after such Declaration in writing made and
subscribed by the said Sir R. D. as aforesaid. This present Indenture, and the
estate hereby granted, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void, to all
intents and purposes, any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof, etc.

A Lease in trust.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between Sir R. D. of, etc. on the one part, and W.
D. of, etc. R. H. and T. S. etc. on the other part, Witnesses, that the said
Sir R. D. for, etc. setting down the Demise ut supra, though of other lands:
with the Habendum and reddendum ut supra: Nevertheless upon this special
trust and confidence that they the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their, etc. shall
permit and suffer him the said Sir R. D. and his Assigns during his life to
hold and enjoy the said Manor and premises and to receive and take the rents,
issues and profits thereof to his and their own use. And also upon this further
special trust and confidence that they the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their,
etc. from and after the decease of the said Sir R. D. shall employ yearly out
of the profits of the said M. and premises the sum of 50. l of, etc. for the
education and bringing up of M. D. gentleman, second son of the said Sir R.
D. for, and until he the said M. shall attain unto the age of nineteen years;
And also that they the said W. D. R. H. and T. S. their, etc. from and after
the said M. D. shall attain his said age of nineteen years, during the
residue of the said term, shall raise out of the profits of the premises the
sum of 80. l per annum, for and toward the maintenance, and for the portion
of him the said M. D. And also at the end of the term hereby demised, shall
and will yield and deliver the rest and residue of all the profits of the
premises by them received or raised unto him the said M. D. or to his issue,
if any issue of his body be then living. And if the said M. D. before his said
age shall die without issue, that then they the said W. D. R. H. T. S. their,
etc. from and after the decease of the said M. D. without issue as aforesaid,
shall yield and deliver unto I. D. Esquire, eldest son and heir apparent of the
said Sir R. D. at his age of nineteen years, or to such issue of his body as
shall be living at such time as the said I. D. shall have accomplished his said
age of nineteen years if he had lived, all such rents, sum and sums of
money as they or any of them shall have received or taken out of or for the
said Manor and premises, and every or any of them. And if the said J. D.
before his said age of nineteen years shall die without issue, that then they
the said W. D. R. H. and I. S. their, etc. from and after the decease of the
said I. D. as aforesaid, shall yield, pay and deliver unto R. D. gent. youngest
son of the said Sir R. D. at his age of nineteen years, or to such issue of
his body as shall be then living, all such rents, sum and sums of money as
they or any of them shall have received or taken out of, or for the said M. and
premises, and every or any of them. Cum eadem potentia revocat. pro ut ultim.
specificat. In witness, etc.

A Declaration of Trust, with a declaration of uses by the Trustor.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. Lady D. of etc. Widow on the one part,
and Sir I. D. Sir I. C. Sir R. L. I. C. I. C. T. L. T. I. W. M. and W. G. of,
etc. seperatim on the other part. Whereas the said, Sir I. D. I. C. and I. C.
do stand jointly seized in Fee with the said A. Lady D. of, and in all that the
Manor of L. in the County of L. with the Rights, Members, and Appurtenances
thereof, and of all that the Capital Message or Mansion house of L. aforesaid,
and of all and singular Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Tofts, Cottages, Mills,
Meadows, Closes, Pastures, Leasowes, Commons, Wastgrounds, Furze, Heath, Woods,
Underwoods, Waters, Moors, Ways, Fishings, Court-Leets, views of Frank-pledge,
Waifs, Estrayes, Royalties, Franchises, Rents, Reversions, Services, Profits,
Commodities, Liberties, Privileges, and Hereditaments whatsoever to the said
Manor, or any part thereof belonging, or appertaining, or reputed, deemed,
occupied, or taken as part, parcel, or member of the said Manor of L.
aforesaid, and of all that Message with the appurtenances in L. aforesaid, in
the possession of W. C. or his Assigns; as by the conveyance thereof to them
made by G. A. Esquire it does and may more fully appear. And whereas the said T. L.
T. I. and W. G. do also stand jointly seized to them and their heirs, of, and
in all and all manner of Tithes, of what nature, condition, or quality
whatsoever, and of all Dismes, Pensions, Portions, Oblations, Emoluments, and
profits whatsoever coming, growing, renewing, arising, increasing, issuing, or
going out of any the Lands, Meadows, Pastures, or Woods in L. in the said
County of L. or being parcel of the Demeasnes of the Manor of L. with their
and every of their rights, members, and appurtenances, and of all and singular
Gleab-lands, Tenements, Profits, Commodities, Emoluments and Hereditaments
whatsoever, to the Rectory and Parsonage of L. aforesaid belonging or
appertaining, lying or being amongst the Demeasne lands of L. aforesaid; and
also of all and all manner of Tithes, coming, growing, renewing, or increasing,
in or upon the said Gleab-lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any of them,
and of all other the tithes coming, growing, renewing, or increasing in L.
aforesaid, as by the Conveyance thereof to them made by W. C. and G A. it does
and may appear. And whereas the said Sir I. C. S. R. L. and W. M. do stand
possessed and interessed for diverse years yet enduring, of and in all that
pasture-ground, containing by estimation one hundred and twenty acres, be it
more or less, lying in L. in the Parish of S. in the said County of B. called
or known by the name of the Netherground, with the tenement, and all other the
edifices and buildings thereupon standing, as by the Lease thereof to them the
said Sir I. C. Sir R. L. and W. M. by I. J. and A. his Wife, dated the
nineteenth day of, etc. it does and may appear. Now these Presents Witness, and
it is hereby declared, testified, and expressed by all the said parties to
these presents, that all and every the several parties to these presents, do
stand so seized and interessed of all and every the premises respectively,
only in trust for the said A. Lady D. and to her use, and that they the said
Sir I. D. Sir I. C. Sir R. L. I. B. I. L. T. L. T. I. W. M. and W. G. and every
of them, and the Heirs and Executors of the Survivor and Survivors of them,
shall at the request and costs of the said A. Lady D. convey and dispose the
premises and every of them respectively, to such person and persons as the said
A. Lady D. shall in her life time under her hand, or by her last will in
writing, appoint or give consent unto. And the said A. Lady D. does hereby also
declare, that her intent is, in case she should not in her life time, as
aforesaid, or by her last Will make any declaration of her intent for the
disposing of the premises, or in case she the said A. Lady D. shall make such
Declaration for part, and not for other part, then the said parties trusted,
and every of them, shall respectively convey their several Estates in the
premises, or of so much thereof as she the said A. Lady D. shall not so make
Declaration of to W. D. Esquire second son of the said A. Lady D. and to his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, according to the intent of these presents; and shall
always permit her and her Assigns, as aforesaid, to receive and enjoy all and
every the rents and profits of the same. In witness whereof, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to demand a Rent according to a Lease.
TO all Christian people to whom, etc. E. F. of, etc. and I. P. of, etc. send
greeting in our Lord God Everlasting. Whereas the said E. F. and I. P. by their
Indenture dated the fifth day of, etc. did demise and grant unto I. B. of C. in
the said County of B. Yeoman, and his Assigns, all that woodground, with the
soil thereof, called by the name of W. wood containing by estimation 60. acres,
were the same more or less, with the appurtenances thereunto belonging, lying
in the Parish of C. aforesaid, to hold the demised premises to the said I. B.
and his assigns, from the Feast of the Birth of our Lord God then last past,
for the term of twenty one years from thence next ensuing, by and under the
yearly rent of thirty pounds six shillings and four pence, payable to the said
Edmund F. and I. P. at the Feasts of the Nativity of St. John the Baptist, and
the Birth of our Lord God, by equal portions, at the Fontstone in the
Temple-Church, London, with this special Proviso or Condition in the said
Indenture contained, That if the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof, should
be unpaid in part or in all at the place aforesaid, by the space of ten days
next after either of the said Feasts, or days of payment, the same being
lawfully demanded, that then, and at all times afterward, it should be lawful
for the said E. F. and I. P. and their assigns, to reenter upon all the
premises, and the same to have again, retain, repossess and enjoy, as in their
former estate and right, as by the said Indenture amongst other things therein
contained appears. Now know ye, that the said Edmund F. and I. P. have, and
hereby do depute, constitute, and appoint, and in their stead and place put
their well-beloved friend I. H. of L. Esquire their true and lawful Attorney, for
them, and in their names, to ask and demand, according to the Proviso in the
said Indenture contained, the half years rent that shall grow due upon the)
said Demise, by the said I. B. or his assigns, being the sum of fifteen pound
three shilling and two pence, at the Feast day of the Birth of our Lord God now
next ensuing; and also they the said Edmund F. and I. P. do hereby authorize
and appoint the said I. H. to demand the said rent and sum at the time and
place in the Proviso in the said recited Indenture, mentioned for payment
thereof, Authority to demand a rent, Toties quoties
according to the Proviso, or the intent thereof. And the said E. F. and I. P.
do hereby further authorize and appoint the said I. H. from time to time, and
at all times, during the continuance of the said Term that shall be unexpired
and to come at or after the said Feast day of the Bitth of our Lord God now
next ensuing, for them, and in their names, to ask and demand on the tenth day
next after either of the said Feasts or days of payment, according to the
Proviso in the said Indenture contained, all such rent and rents that shall
grow due to be paid upon the said Demise, at either of the said Feasts, by the
said I. B. or his assigns, at the time and place in the Proviso of the said
recited Indenture mentioned for payment thereof, according to the purport and
form of the same, ratifying and allowing all and whatsoever the said I. H.
shall do in the premises, as if they themselves were personally present, and
did demand the same. In witness, etc.

A Letter of Attorney to re enter upon the former letter of Attorney.
TO all Christian people, to whom, etc. E. F. of, etc. and I. P. of, etc. send
greeting. Whereas, etc. reciting the Indenture mentioned in the former Letter
of Attorney, and then reciting that whereas the said E. F. and I. P. by their
letter of Attorney dated, etc. did authorize and appoint I. H. of, etc. to ask
and demand in their names, and to their use the half years rent, etc. viz. the
sum of 15. l 3. s 2. d which was then to grow due and payable at the Feast
day of the Birth of our Lord God, then next ensuing, and for non-payment
whereof the said E. F. and I. P. by a Proviso in the said recited Indenture,
might lawfully re-enter, if the same should be behind by the space of ten
days, after the said Feast, according to the form and effect of the said
recited Indenture and Proviso, And whereas the said I. H. did demand the said
half years rent of 15. l 3. s 2. d due and payable by virtue of the said
Proviso, and the power to him given by the Letter of Attorney aforesaid, Yet
notwithstanding the said I. B. and his Assigns, nor either of them have not
paid the said half years rent according to the reservation and Proviso of the
said recited Indenture: Now know ye, that the said E. F. and I. P. have, and
hereby do depute, constitute, ordain and appoint their said Wel-beloved Friend
I. H. their true and lawful Attorney for them, and in their names, and to their
use, into all and every the premises, demised by the said recited Indenture
unto the said I. B. and his assigns, to re-enter, and the same to have, detain
and keep for them, and to their use, according to the Power and Condition in
the said recited Indenture mentioned, ratifying and allowing ut supra in the
former. In witness, etc.

An Indorsement of Atturnment of Tenants.
MEmorandum, that before the ensealing of these presents, the within named E.
B. did by Indenture made between him and the within named R. C. on the one
part, and N. C. of the other part, bearing date, etc. for a certain sum of
money mentioned by the said Indenture to be paid, grant, bargain, demise and
lease the premises within mentioned unto the said N. And A. D. of, etc. did
after the ensealing and delivery of these presents viz. this present fifteenth
day of, etc. atturn and agree to this conveyance in the presence of, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants, Declaring that a man's name is but only used in
Trust, in the taking of an Assurance.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. B. of the one part, and A. B. of, etc. of
the other part, witnesses; whereas T. H. by his Indenture of Bargain and Sale,
bearing date, etc. made between, etc. for the consideration therein mentioned,
did grant, bargain, Set down the consideration, and Plaint.
and sell unto the said T. B. and A. B. their heirs and assigns, all that
Message, Farm or Tenement, with the appurtenances, and all those three
Yardlands of Meadow, arable and pasture, with all and singular their
appurtenances in F. in the said County of L. now or late in the tenure of the
said T. H. or his assigns, to hold he said message or tenement, and three
Yardlands, with the appurtenances to the said T. B. and A. B. their heirs and
assigns for ever, and did covenant by the said Indenture to levy one fine, Sur
Connizance de droit come ceo, etc. of the premises to them the said T. B. and
A. B. and their heirs, as by the said Indenture, (amongst, etc.) appears. Now
this Indenture witnesses, that the said A. B. was only named in Trust by the
said T. B. to and for the use of the said T. B. his heirs and assigns, and that
the said sum of five hundred pound mentioned in the said Indenture, to be the
consideration for the said purchase, was the proper money of the said T. B. And
the said A. B. does covenant, etc. that he the said A. B. his heirs and
assigns, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, upon the request, and
at the costs and charges in the Law of the said T. B. his heirs or assigns, To
convey lands according to the Trust.
shall and will convey and assure the premises, and all his estate, title, and
interest therein, unto the said T. B. and his heirs, to the use of the said T.
B. and his heirs, or to any other person and persons, and their heirs, to the
use of them and their heirs, as the said T. B. or his heirs shall direct or
appoint, acquitted and discharged of and from all charges and encumbrances had,
made, or done by the said A. B. or by, from or under any other person or
persons whatsoever, claiming by, from or under him. And the said T. B. does
covenant, etc. That he the said T. B. his heirs, To save harmless from any
damage happening by reason of the joint Estate.
executors, or administrators, or some, or one of them, shall and will from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, save and keep harmless the said A. B.
his heirs, executors, and administrators, his and their lands and goods, of and
from all manner of damage, loss and hinderance which shall or may hereafter
happen to arise or grow, for or by reason of the said joint estate, settled and
raised by the said A. B. and T. B. in Trust for the said A. B. as aforesaid.

An Acquittance for money paid in part of a Purchase. Quinto die D. etc.
REceived by me T. H. the day and year above-written of T. B. the sum of, etc.
as part of the money agreed to be paid for the purchase of certain lands in F.
in Com. L. according to certain articles of agreement indented, bearing date,
etc. made between, etc. In witness, etc.

The manner of indorsing an Attornment of Tenants.
MEmorandum, That R. C. of, etc. assignee of H. G. etc. and the rest of the
Tenants and Farmors of the premises within mentioned, by virtue of several
Leases thereof made unto them, by the within named W. G. did severally Attorn
and become tenants of, and for their several and respective interests in the
premises to the within-named C. G. this present tenth day of, etc. and the
said several tenants, and every of them, have given unto the said C. G. one
penny in the name of Attornment, in the presence of, etc.

A Release of interest in Lands.
TO all, etc. R. E. of, etc. sends Greeting; Know ye that the said R. E. for
and in consideration of the sum of, etc. to him in hand paid by T. H. of, etc.
has given, granted, remised, released, and quite claimed, and by these
presents does, etc. unto the said T. H. all his estate, right, title, interest,
term of years, claim and demand whatsoever, which he the said now has, or may
claim to have, of, in, or to one message or tenement, with the appurtenances,
commonly called or known by the name of, etc. situate, lying, and being in,
etc. and of and in all the lands, tenements, and hereditaments whatsoever to
the said message or tenement belonging, or appertaining, or to, or with the
same now used, occupied or enjoyed. In witness, etc.

A Condition to save a Surety harmless from a Recognizance.
THe condition, etc. That whereas the said I. C. and A. G. together with the
above-bounden R. P. and for him by Recognizance acknowledged before Mr. T. G.
one of the Kings Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of, etc. the
said R. P. has acknowledged to our Sovereign Lord the King, twenty pound; and
the said A. G. twenty, and the said I. C. twenty pound. That he the said R. P.
shall from henceforth for ever keep his Majesty's peace toward one W. B. etc.
as by the said Recognizance entered into, as aforesaid, at large appears; If
therefore the said R. P. his, etc. from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, do clearly acquit, discharge, and save harmless the said I. C. his,
etc. and all his and their lands, tenements, goods and chattels, and every of
them, as well against our said Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, as against all and every other person and persons, of, for, or
concerning the said sum or penalty of, etc. and also of all other costs,
charge, and troubles that may futurely come or arise, for or concerning the
same; that then, etc.

A Disavowment of a Suit.
TO all, etc. I. L. of, etc. sends greeting, etc. Whereas a Suit has been of
late Commenced and Prosecuted for me, and in my name, in his Majesty's Court of
upper Bench at Westminster, against M. L. for, etc. (setting down for what)
which said Suit as yet depends in the said Court. Now know ye, that the said
Suit was commenced, and is prosecuted without any warrant and allowance of me,
and I therefore do hereby renounce and disavow the said Suit, and all and every
other suit or suits attempted or prosecuted against the said M. L. for me and
in my name, for or by reason of the said bond, or any other cause or matter
whatsoever. In, etc.

Warrant for the keeping of a Court.
Whereas I have received direction from the Right Honorable R. E. of D. to
hold a Court Baron for his Lordships manor of S. within, etc. These are to let
you understand that I have appointed the 9. day of, etc. next being Tuesday,
for the holding of the said Court, at or in the Hall of the said M. house, and
do therefore hereby request and require you to give notice of the said time and
place appointed for the holding of the said Court unto all and every the
Suitors and Tenants of the said Manor, and that you warn them and every of
them to be then and there present by 8. of the clock in the fore-noon to give
their attendance; And that also at the time and place aforesaid you return
before me a Jurie of the Suitors and Tenants of the said M. to enquire of such
matters as shall be by me given to them in charge, and hereof, etc. given under
my hand and Seal, etc.

An Indenture of Covenants between Executors.
THis Indenture made, etc. between E. C. of, etc. on the one part, and W. A.
of, etc. on the other part. Whereas A. W. widow late deceased, Recital of the
Will.
by her last Will and Testament in writing, named, ordained and constituted the
said E. C. and W. A. to be Executors of the same her last Will and Testament,
as by the same Will and Testament amongst other things appears; Now this
indenture witnesses, That it is mutually covenanted and agreed by and between
the said parties to these presents in manner and form following. And first the
said E. C. does covenant, To renounce executorship.
etc. That he the said E. C. shall and will before the end of Michaelmas term
next ensuing the date hereof, if he shall be thereunto required by the said W.
A. his Executors or Assigns in due form of Law, and at the costs and charges
in the Law of the said W. A. his, etc. refuse and renounce his said
Executorship. And the said E. C. does further covenant, Not to meddle with the
goods.
etc. That neither he the said E. nor his Executors, nor Administrators shall
or will intermeddle with the Administration of any part of the money, Plate,
Debts, Credits and other the goods and chattels of the Testator, without the
consent of the said W. A. his, etc. but shall and will from Time to Time and at
all Times hereafter, permit and suffer the said W. A. his, etc. to administer
all such moneys, debts, credits and other the goods and chattels of the said
Testator, without the let, trouble, interruption or disturbance of the said E.
C. his, etc. or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming
by, from or under the said E. C. or by his means, privity or procurement. And
also that neither he the said E. C. nor his, Not to release a Creditor.
etc. shall at any Time hereafter make, or cause to be made any release,
acquittance or other discharge to any persons, for or concerning any of the
debts, credits, goods or chattels of the said Testator, nor shall do or suffer,
or cause to be done and suffered, any Act or Acts, Thing or Things, in or about
the Execution of the said last Will and Testament, without the assent, consent,
and agreement of the said W. A. his, etc. And the said W. A. in consideration
of all and singular the premises, does Covenant, To save harmless.
etc. That he the said W. A. his, etc. shall and will from time to time, and at
all times hereafter, defend, discharge, and save harmless the said E. C. his,
etc. against all and every person and persons whatsoever, of, for and
concerning all and all manner of Actions, suits and demands hereafter to be
had, made or brought against the said E. C. his, etc. for or by reason of the
said Executorship, or the said last Will and Testament. And that the said W. A.
his, etc. shall and will from time to time, To pay all charges.
and at all times hereafter, pay and satisfy unto the said E. C. his, etc. all
such costs, charges, and expenses as the said E. C. his, etc. shall at any time
hereafter be put unto, for or by reason of any cause, matter or thing, touching
or concerning the said Executorship, or the said last Will and Testament of the
said A. W. And the said W. A. does further covenant, To perform the Will.
etc. That he the said W. A. his, etc. shall and will well and truly fulfill,
accomplish, and perform the said last Will and Testament of the said A. W. and
well and truly content and pay all and every the Legacies, gifts, and bequests
contained and specified in the same last Will and Testament, according to the
Tenor, Purport, and true meaning of the same. In witness, etc.

An Indenture in Consideration of Marriage in lieu of Jointure.
THis Indenture made, etc. between M. F. of the one part, and I. I. and I. F.
of the other part. Witnesses that the said M. F. for and in consideration of a
Marriage, heretofore had and solemnized between the said M. F. and C. his now
wife, and for and in full satisfaction and recompense of such Jointure or Dower
as she the said C. shall have or challenge, out of, or in, or to all or any of
the Messuages, Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments of the said M. F. in case the
said C. shall survive and overlive the said M. F. And for the continuance,
settling and establishing of the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, in the name, blood and kindred of the said
M. F. so long as it shall please Almighty God, and for diverse other good causes
and considerations him the said M. F. hereunto moving: Does covenant, etc. That
he the said M. F. and his heirs, and all and every person and persons, and
their Heirs now standing, or being seized, or which at any time hereafter shall
stand or be seized of, or in all that Capital Message, with the Appurtenances
commonly called or known by the name of H. in B. aforesaid, in the said County
of S. in the tenure or occupation of the said M. F. or his Assinges, and of and
in all and singular the Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings,
Commons, Woods, Underwoods and Hereditaments whatsoever, with their and every
of their Appurtenances to the said capital Message or Tenement, belonging or
appertaining, or to or with the same at any time heretofore used, occupied or
enjoyed, as part, parcel or member thereof, shall and will from henceforth
stand and be seized thereof, To stand seized.
and of every part and parcel thereof, to the uses, intents and purposes
hereafter mentioned; That is to say, To the use and behoof of the said M. F.
and C. his wife, and their Assigns, for and during their natural lives, and
the life of the longer liver of them without impeachment, of or for any manner
of waste, The Uses.
and from and after the decease of the Survivor of them the said M. and C. then
to the use and behoof of the Heirs of the body of the said M. F. and C.
lawfully begotten, and for default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of
the right heirs of the said M. F. for ever. And the said M. F. does further
covenant, etc. That he the said M. F. at the time of the sealing and delivery
of these presents, To have power to raise uses.
is and stands seized of a good, perfect and indiffeazible estate in
Fee-simple, of and in the said Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
and of and in every part and parcel thereof, and that he has lawful power and
authority by these presents, to raise, limit and appoint the aforesaid several
uses and estates, and that all and singular the premises, with their and every
of their Appurtenances, now are, and so at all times, and from time to time
hereafter shall be, remain and continue unto the uses, intents and purposes
before, Discharged of Encumbrances.
in and by these presents limited, expressed and declared, free and clear, and
freely and clearly acquitted and discharged of and from all and all manner of
former and other Bargains, Sales, Gifts, Grants, Leases, Joyntures, Dowers,
Wills, Intails, etc. and of and from all other Titles, Troubles, Charges and
Intumbrances whatsoever. In witness, etc.

Words to be used upon the Delivery of Possession.
I do deliver you Possession and seizin of this house, or of this parcel of
Land, in the name of all the rest contained in this Deed or Indenture; To hold
to you and your Heirs and Assigns for ever, according to the Tenor, form and
effect of this present writing or Indenture.

A Conveyance of Land by three Co-heires, and their Husbands, well pend.
THis Indenture made the Twentieth day of March, in the Tenth year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God, of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the faith, etc. Between W. S. of B. in the
County of B. Husbandman, and I. his wife, W. M. of L. R. in the parish of
Princes Risborough, in the said County husbandman, and A. his wife, and F. W.
of P. R. aforesaid, in the said County Husbandman, and A. his wife, and E. A.
of the parish of P. R. aforesaid, The Consideration.
and S. his wife on the one part, and I. M. of H. aforesaid, in the said County
husbandman, on the other part; Witnesses: That the said W. S. and I. his wife,
W. M. and A. his wife, and F. W. and A. his wife, for and in Consideration of
the sum of one hundred and Ninty pounds of current money of England, to them
the said W. S. I. his wife, W. M. and A. his wife, F. W. and A. his wife, E. A.
and S. his wife by the said I. M. in hand paid before the insealing hereof, the
receipt whereof the said W. S, etc. do hereby acknowledge, and thereof do
jointly and severally exonerate and discharge the said I. M. his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and every of them, for ever by these presents.
The Grant.
And for other good causes and considerations them moving, have granted,
aliened, bargained, fold, infeoffed, and confirmed, and by these presents for
them and their heirs, do jointly and severally Grant, Alien, Bargain, Sell,
Infeoffe and Confirm unto the said I. M. his heirs and assigns for ever, All
that Message, Tenement, or dwelling house, with the appurtenances situate,
lying and being, at or near a place called W. A. in the parish of B. alias B.
in the said County of B. wherein the said W. S. now dwells, and wherein one
W. W. deceased, Father of them the said I. A. and A. did lately dwell and
inhabit, and all those five several Closes of Arable Land, Meadow, pasture and
wood-ground belonging to, or used with the said Message, Tenement and dwelling
house, lying and being in the Parishes of B. aforesaid, W. and H. or in some or
one of them in the said County of B. And also all and singular houses,
edifices, buildings, barns, stables, yards, back-sides, Orchards, gardens,
lands, tenements, meadows, pastures, feedings, Commons, Common of Pasture,
Ways, Easments, Passages, Profits, Commodities, Advantages, Emoluments,
Hereditaments and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Message, Tenement or
dwelling house and premises, or to any of them belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, or accepted, reputed, taken, known or demised, letten, used,
occupied or enjoyed as part, parcel or member thereof. And all other the Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever of them the said W. S. and I. his wife,
W. M. F. W. E. A. and every and either of them, situate, lying and being
within the parishes of B. W. and H. aforesaid, or in any or either of them: And
also all the estate, right, title, interest, use, possession, reversion and
reversions, remainder and remainders, rent and rents, claim and demands
whatsoever of them the said W. S. and I. his wife, W. M. F. W. E. A. and every
and either of them, of, in and to the said Message, Tenement or dwelling
house, Closes, Lands, and all other the premises, and of, in, and to every
part and parcel thereof, with their and every of their Appurtenances: And all
writings, Evidences, Deeds, Charters, Fines, escripts and myniments whatsoever,
concerning the premises, or any part thereof; And true Copies of all such
writings and evidences as do concern the premises, or any part thereof, with
any other Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments which now be in the hands, custody
or possession of them the said W. S. W. M. F. W. E. A. or any or either of
them, or which they, or any of them may lawfully get or come by without suit in
the Law, the same copies, and every of them to be copied and written out at the
costs of the said I. M. his heirs or assigns; The Habendum.
To have and to hold the said Message, Tenement or dwelling house, closes,
lands, and all other the premises, with their Appurtenances unto the said I.
M. his heirs and assigns, To the only proper use and behoof of the said I. M.
his heirs and assigns for ever: And the said W. S. W. M. F. W. and E. A. for
them and their heirs severally, and not jointly, nor one for the other, the
said Message or Tenement, closes, lands, and all other the premises, Warranty.
with the appurtenances unto the said I. M. his heirs against them the said W.
S. W. M. F. W. E. A. and every of them, their and every of their heirs and
assigns, Shall and will warrant, and hereby do jointly and severally grant to
warrant, and for ever defend by these presents; And further the said W. S, etc.
for themselves severally, and not jointly, nor one for the other, and for their
and every of their several and respective heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and for every of them, do and does Covenant, promise and grant to and with the
said I. M. his heirs and assigns, and to and with every of them by these
presents, that they the said W. S, etc. for and notwithstanding any Act or
thing by them or any of them, done or suffered to the contrary, now are, or
some of them is, Seized in Fee.
and at the time of the first executing an estate of the premises, with the
appurtenances unto the said I. M. shall be lawfully and absolutely seized in
their or some of their demeasn, as of Fee-simple to them and their heirs, or to
some of them and their heirs, of and in all and every the premises with the
Appurtenances; And that for and notwithstanding any such Act or thing by them
the said W. S, etc. or by any or either of them done or suffered to the
contrary as aforesaid, they the said W. S, etc. now have, Power to alien.
or some of them now have or has, and shall have good right, full power, and
lawful Authority to grant, bargain, sell and convey the said Message and
premises, with the appurtenances unto the said I. M. his heirs and assigns,
according to the intent and meaning of these presents, And that the said
Message, Tenement or dwelling house, closes, lands, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances, Freed from Encumbrances.
now are, and so shall and may for ever hereafter remain, continue and be unto
the said I. M. his heirs and assigns, free and freely, and clear and clearly
Acquitted, Exonerated and discharged of and from all and all manner of former
and other bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, uses,
wills, intails, Annuities, Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances,
Bonds, Judgments, Executions, Extents, Condemnations, Rents, Arrerages of
Rents, Intrusions, Forfeitures, Issues, Amerciaments, and of and from all other
Estates, Titles, Troubles, Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever had, made,
committed, done or suffered by them the said W. S, etc. or by any or either of
them, or by their or any or either of their means, assent, consent or
procurement; The rents and services from henceforth to be due and payable for
the premises, to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee or Fees of the premises,
for and in respect of their Seigniories of the same, only excepted and
sore-prized. And that he the said I. M. his heirs and assigns, Quiet enjoying.
and every of them, shall and may for ever hereafter, quietly and peaceably
have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Message, Tenement or dwelling
house, closes, lands, and all other the premises with the appurtenances,
without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial, molestation interruption
or eviction of them the said W. S, etc. and every and either of them, their and
every and either of their heirs and assigns; And without the let, suit,
molestation, interruption or eviction of all and every other person or persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming, by, from or under them, or any or either of
them, their or any or either of their estate, right or title; And also that
they the said W. S, etc. their heirs and Assigns, Further assurance.
and every and either of them shall and will from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, during the space of seven whole years next ensuing the date
hereof, at the request and costs in Law of him the said I. M. his heirs and
assigns, do make, suffer, acknowledge and execute, and cause and procure to be
done, made, suffered, acknowledged and executed, all and every such further and
other lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, device and devices,
assurance and assurances in the Law whatsoever, for the further, better and
more perfect assurance, surety, sure-making, and Conveying of the said
Message, Tenement, or dwelling house, closes, lands, and all other the
premises with the appurtenances unto the said I. M. his heirs and assigns; Be
it by Fine, Feoffment, Release, Confirmation with Warranty of them the said W.
S, etc. their and every or any of their heirs and Assigns, Recovery or
Recoveries, with single or double voucher or vouchers, deed or deeds, enrolled
or not enrolled, the enrolment of these presents, or by all or any the said
ways or means, or by any other lawful or reasonable ways or means in the Law
whatsoever without warranty, or with the like warranty as aforesaid, as by him
the said I. M. his heirs or assigns, or his, their or any of their Counsel
learned in the Laws, shall be reasonably devised, or advised and required; All
which further or other assurance, by fine or otherwise shall be and enure, and
hereby are and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, To the only
proper use, and behoof of the said I. M. his, etc.

An Indenture of Bargain and Sale of a Message and Lands, in consideration of
a surrender of a Lease of other Lands with good Covenants.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. D. of T. in the County of, etc. Whereas
the said K. C. now holds by Lease for certain years yet to come, one
Message or Tenement with the appurtenances thereunto belonging, wherein the
said K. C. does now inhabit and dwell, situate and being in F. aforesaid; and
diverse closes, lands, meadows, pastures, woodgrounds, and hereditaments thereto
belonging or appertaining, lying and being in F. aforesaid, the Reversion and
Inheritance in Fee-simple of which said Message, Lands and premises now being
in, and belonging unto them the said R. D. and I. P. and their heirs; And
whereas the said K. C. has, and hereby does Surrender up, grant, bargain, and
sell all her right, title, estate, interest, term for years, claim and demand
whatsoever of her the said K. C. of, in and to the said Message or Tenement,
Closes, Lands, Wood-grounds and premises in the said Lease particularly
mentioned and expressed, and has delivered up the said Lease to be Cancelled
unto them the said R. D. and I. P. in consideration of which said Surrender and
grant, made by the said K. C. as aforesaid; the said R. D. has upon the
ensealing hereof paid unto her the said K. C. the sum of 35. pound of current
money of England, the receipt whereof the said K. C. does hereby acknowledge,
and there of does acquit him the said R. D. his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them by these presents. And whereas the said R. D.
in further Consideration of the said Surrender of the said lands and premises
made as aforesaid, has agreed to and with the said K. C. that he the said R.
together with the said I. P. should and would pass and convey unto her the
said K. C. her heirs and Assigns for ever, All that tenement or cottage with
the appurtenances, situate and being in F. wherein the said K. C. does now
inhabit, and all Houses, Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, yards,
back-sides, orchards, gardens, lands, tenements, hereditaments and
appurtenances whatsoever, thereunto belonging or appertaining, or now used
therewith. Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said R. D. and I. P. in
consideration of the said Surrender of the said lands and premises made by the
said K. C. as aforesaid, and in performance of the said Agreement made with the
said R. D. as aforesaid, have bargained, sold, aliened, infeoffed and
confirmed, and by these presents, do jointly and severally grant, bargain,
sell, alien, infeoffe and confirm unto the said K. C. her heirs and assigns,
All that the said cottage or tenement with the appurtenances, wherein the said
K. C. does now inhabit, situate and being in F. aforesaid, And all Houses,
Edifices, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens,
Ways, Easments, passages, profits, Commons, Commodities, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and appurtenances whatsoever, thereunto belonging or
appertaining, and now used therewith, and also all the estate, right, title,
interest, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said R. D. and I. P. and
either of them, of, in, and to the said cottage or tenement, lands and
premises hereby bargained and sold, or mentioned or intended to be bargained
and sold, and every of them; All which premises are in the Occupation of the
said K. C. or her assigns: To have and to hold the said cottage or tenement,
and all other the premises with their appurtenances, hereby bargained and
sold, or mentioned to be bargained and sold unto the said K. C. her heirs and
Assigns, To the only proper use and behoof of the said K. C. her Heirs and
Assigns for ever. And the said R. D. for himself, his heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and for every of them by these presents, does covenant and
grant to and with the said K. C. her, etc. That they the said R. D. and I. P.
for and notwithstanding any act or thing by them or either of them done or
suffered to the contrary, now are seized in Fee-simple to them and their heirs
of and in the said Cottage or Tenement and premises. And that notwithstanding
any such act or thing by them or either of them done or suffered to the
contrary as aforesaid, they now have, and at the time of executing an estate of
the premises by force of these presents, shall have good right, and lawful
authority to bargain, sell, and convey the said Cottage, or Tenement and
premises with the appurtenances unto the said K. C. her heirs and assigns,
according to the intent of these presents: And that the said Cottage, or
Tenement and premises, and every of them now are, and so shall for ever
hereafter remain, continue, and be unto the said K. C. her heirs and assigns,
freed and discharged from all charges and Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
committed or done by them the said R. D. and I. P. or either of them; or by
their or either of their Act, means, consent, or procurement: And that she the
said K. C. her heirs and assigns, and every of them, shall or may for ever
hereafter, quietly and peaceably, have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the
said Cottage or Tenement, and all other the premises with their appurtenances,
without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, denial, molestation, interruption
or eviction of them the said R. D. and I. P. and either of them, their and
either of their heirs and assigns, and of all and every other person and
persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under them or either of them,
their or either of their estate, right, or title; And also that they the said
R. D. and I. P. their heirs and assigns, and every of them, shall and will from
time to time and at all times during the space of three years next ensuing the
date hereof, at the request and costs of the said K. C. her heirs or assigns,
further do, make, suffer, acknowledge and execute all and every such further
and other lawful and reasonable act and thing, for the further, better, and
more perfect assuring and conveying of the said Cottage or Tenement and
premises with the appurtenances unto her the said K. C. her heirs and assigns;
Be it by Fine, Feoffment, release, or otherwise with warranty of them the said
R. D. and I. P. and their heirs, against them their heirs or assigns, or
without warranty, as by her the said K. C. her heirs or assigns, or her, their
or any of their Council learned in the Laws, shall be reasonably devised ^or
advised and required; All which further or other assurances, by fine or
otherwise shall be and enure, and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be and
enure, to the only proper use and behoof of her the said K. C. her heirs or
assigns, subject to the proviso hereafter expressed, Viz. Provided always,
and upon Condition that if the said Message or Tenement, Lands and premises,
or any of them herein before mentioned to be demised to them the said R. D. and
I. P. their heirs and assigns shall at any time hereafter be evicted from them
the said R. D. and I. P. their heirs or assigns, or any of them, for or by
reason of the said Lease made as aforesaid by the said A. or by any other
claiming under his estate, for or by reason of the said Lease or otherwise,
that then immediately upon and after such eviction, this Indenture of bargain
and sale, and all and every matter and thing herein contained, shall cease and
be utterly void to all intents and purposes; This Indenture, or any thing
herein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding. In
witness whereof, etc.

A Lease of Lands, with exception of Woods, well pend.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. L. of, etc. of the one part, and R. L.
of, etc. on the other part; Witnesses that the said T. L. for and in
consideration of the yearly rent and Covenants hereby reserved, and for other
good causes and considerations him moving: Has demised, set, The Demise.
and to farm-letten, and by these presents does demise, set, and to farmlet
unto the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns, all those Closes and grounds
called or known by the name or names of M. and B. late in the tenure of I. B.
his Assignee or Assignees, lying and being in P. aforesaid (except all Woods,
Under-woods, Timber and Trees, growing or to be growing on the premises or any
of them, with free liberty of ingresse, egresse, and regresse to and for the
said T. L. his heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them at all times to
fell, sell, cut down and carry away all or any the said woods, timber and
trees, at his and their free wills and pleasures) and also except all that
Copice or wood-ground, lying and being in P. aforesaid, now in the occupation
of the said T. L. and all woods and underwoods, growing or to be growing on the
said Copice or wood-ground, with free liberty and power to and for him the said
R. L. his Executors and Assigns, from time to time, during the term hereby
demised to fell, sell, or otherwise dispose of the same at his and their free
wills and pleasures, without impeachment of waste (except and always reserved
unto the said T. L. his heirs, Executors and Assigns, all hedges, and all such
trees as grow in any the hedges about the said Copice, or within one foot of
any the hedges about the same) and all ways, Easments, passages, profits,
Commons and Commodities, to the said Closes and premises, or any of them
belonging or appertaining (except before excepted) To have and to hold the said
Closes, Habendum.
Copice or grove, and all other the premises, with their and every of their
Appurtenances (except before excepted) unto the said R. L his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel next
ensuing the date hereof, for the term of fifteen years from thence next
ensuing, fully to be complete and ended. Reddendum.
Yielding and paying therefore to the said T. L. his heirs, Executors and
Assigns at the Feast of, etc. the Rent and sum of 13. pound of current money
of England, and one couple of good fat Capons. And also yielding and paying at
the Feast of St. etc. the Rent or sum of 15. pound and 9. shillings of
current money of England, and also from and after the said Feast of St. etc.
Yielding and paying yearly, and every year during the said term, the sum of
30. pound and 18. shillings of current money of England, at the Feasts of, etc.
by even and equal portions, and one couple of good fat Capons yearly, and every
year, or five shillings in lieu thereof at the Election of the said T. L. his
heirs, Executors and Assigns at the Font-stone in the Inner Temple Church
London. And if it shall happen the said yearly Rent or sums of money, or any of
them, to be behind and unpaid, The distress.
next after any or either of the said Feasts or days of payment, whereon the
same ought to be paid as aforesaid, that then at all times it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said T. L. his heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of
them to enter into, and upon all and every, or any the demised premises, and
to distrain for the same, and the arrerages thereof, if any happen to be, and
the distress and distresses there had and taken to lead, drive, take, and
carry away, and the same with him and them to detain and keep until the said
yearly Rents and every of them, and the arrerages thereof, if any happen to be
unto the said T. L. his heirs, Executors and assigns, shall be contented and
paid. Proviso to re-enter for non-ment of rent.
Provided always, and upon condition that if the said yearly Rents hereby
reserved, or any of them shall be behind and unpaid by the space of 30. days
next after any or either of the said Feasts or days of payment, whereon the
same ought to be paid as aforesaid; That then and at all times from thenceforth
it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. L. his heirs, Executors and
Assigns, and every of them into and upon all and every the demised premises to
re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, re-possesse and enjoy as in his
and their first and former estate and right, this Indenture or any thing
therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And the
said R. L. for himself, his heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for every
of them, does Covenant and grant to and with the said T. L. his heirs,
executors and assigns, and every of them by these presents, Not to crosse-crop.
that he the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns at any time, or in any year
during the said term, shall not, nor will Crosse-crop the demised premises, or
any part thereof; And also that he the said R. L. shall and will yearly, during
the said term in Husband-like manner lay on and bestow upon the premises, or
some part thereof, To pay Duties.
as much Compost and Dung as the Stover and Fodder growing on the premises,
will or may make, and also shall and will, during the said term, bear, pay,
and discharge all manner of payments and duties whatsoever that shall or may
any ways grow due or payable, for or by reason of the demised premises, or
any of them to the State or otherwise, and thereof, and therefrom shall and
will acquit and discharge the said T. L. his heirs, Executors and Assigns; And
also that he the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns, from time to time, and
at all times during the said term, shall and will well and sufficiently make,
amend, keep, cleanse and scour all and every the hedges, To Repair.
ditches, pales, gates, styles, fences, and mounds, upon and about the demised
premises, and every of them, and the same being well and sufficiently made,
amended, kept, cleansed and scoured in the end, or other sooner determination of
the term hereby demised, shall and will leave and yield up unto the said T. L.
his Executors and Assigns; And also shall not, Not to assign without License.
nor will demise, grant, assign, or let the premises, or any part or parcel
thereof, or depart with his estate therein, to any person or persons
whatsoever, without the License and consent of the said T. L. his heirs,
Executors and Assigns, under his or their hands in writing, therefore had and
obtained; And also shall and will pay all and every the yearly Rents and sums
of money hereby reserved, according to the Reservations aforesaid: And the said
T. L. for him, The less to enjoy performing Covenants.
his heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them, does covenant and grant
to and with the said R. L. his Executors and Assigns by these presents, That he
the said R. L. by and under the Rents, Covenants and Agreements herein
contained, and on his and their parts to be paid, done and performed, shall and
may during the said term, quietly and peaceably have, hold, occupy and enjoy
all and every the demised premises (except before excepted) without the let,
suit, trouble, molestation, Interruption or Eviction of him the said T. L. his
heirs, Executors and Assigns, and of all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said T. L. his Estate
or Title. In witness whereof, etc.

An Assignment of a Lease, forfitted upon a Mortgage.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I. S. of P. and G. E. etc. on the one part,
and T. L. of, etc. on the other part. Whereas the said I. S. by his Indenture
of Lease, Reciting of the Lease.
bearing date the 24. of May, in the twefth year of the Reign of our said
Sovereign Lord that now is, for the Consideration therein expressed, did
demise, and grant unto the said G. E. all those parcels of Land, arable,
pasture and woodground, lying and being in E. in the County of M. hereafter
particularly mentioned; (That is to say,) one parcel of Arable, containing by
estimation 4. acres, etc. together with free liberty of ingresse, egresse, and
regresse, way and passage into, and from the same several Lands and premises,
and every of them; And also all other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
whatsoever of him the said I. S. in E. aforesaid, and to him the said I. S. and
his heirs, bargained and sold by M. F. widow, by Indenture dated the, etc. and
enrolled in his Majesty's Court of Chancery, and the Reversion and Reversions,
Remainder and Remainders of all and every the demised premises, and every of
them, and all pastures, Feedings, Commons, Woods, Under-woods, Ways,
Watercourse, Easments, Commodities, Advantages, and appurtenances thereunto
belonging or appertaining, and all Writings, Deeds and Evidences concerning the
said premises or any of them: To have and to hold the said several pieces and
parcels of Land, arable, pasture, and woodground, and all other the premises,
with their and every of their appurtenances unto the said G. E. and his
assigns, from the day of the date of the said recited Indenture of Lease unto
the full end and term of two hundred years from thence next ensuing, and fully
to be complete and ended without Impeachment of any manner of waste, by and
under the yearly Rent of one Pepper Corn if it were demanded, with Conditions
therein contained, that if the said I. S. his heirs, Executors, Administrators
and Assigns, should pay unto him the said G. E. his Executors or Assigns, the
sum of 100. pound of current money of England, on, etc. according to the
Condition of a Surrender of certain Copy-hold-lands, dated the day of, etc.
that then from thenceforth the said recited Lease to be void; as by the said
recited Indenture of Lease it does and may appear. And whereas the said I. S.
did not, nor has paid the said moneys according to the said Proviso and
Condition, That the premises were forfeited.
by reason whereof the said Lands and premises are absolutely come unto and
vested in him the said G. E. for all the rest and residue of the said term of
200. years by the foresaid lease, demised and granted as aforesaid: Now this
Indenture witnesses, That the said G. E. at the request, and by the
appointment of the said I. S. and for and in consideration of the sum of 100.
pound of current money of England to him in hand paid by the said T. L. and the
said I. S. for and in Consideration of the sum of 100. pound of current money
to him by the said T. L. in hand paid by the said T. L. the receipts of which
several sums of money they the said G. E. and I. S. do hereby severally
acknowledge, and thereof do severally acquit and discharge the said T. L. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them for ever by
these presents, Have demised, granted, The Assignment.
bargained, sold, assigned and confirmed, and by these presents do jointly and
severally demise, grant, bargain, sell, assign and confirm unto the said T. L.
his Executors and Assigns, all those the foresaid several parcels of land,
pasture, and wood-ground, lately stocked up, and premises with their
appurtenances in the said recited Indenture of Lease mentioned and expressed,
and all their, and either of their estate, right, title, interest, term for
years, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said G. E. and I. S. therein and
thereunto, together with the said recited Indenture of Lease: To have and to
hold all and every the said several pieces and parcels of land, The Habendum.
pasture, and wood-ground with their appurtenances unto the said T. L. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during all the rest and residue
of the said term, and now to come and unexpired, in as full and ample manner,
to all intents and purposes as they the said G. E. and I. S. or either of them,
may or might hold or enjoy the same, by virtue of the said recited Indenture of
Lease, or otherwise howsoever; And the said G. E. A Covenant to enjoy the
Remainder of the term.
for himself, his, etc. does Covenant and grant, etc. that he the said T. L.
his Executors and Assigns, shall and may at all times during the said term or
residue of the said term and number of years now to come and unexpired, quietly
and peaceably have, hold, occupy and enjoy all and every the said parcels of
land, pasture and wood-ground with their appurtenances, without the let, suit,
trouble, Expulsion or Eviction of him the said G. E. his Executors and
Assigns, and of all and every other person and persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from or under him the said G. E. his estate or title, and
absolutely freed and discharged from all charges and encumbrances whatsoever,
done or suffered by him the said G. E. or by his means, Act or procurement. A
Covenant if the number of Acres be wanting, so much money to be re-paid.
And the said I. S. for himself, his, etc. ut supra. That in case the said
lands, wood-grounds and premises hereby mentioned to be assigned, together
with other parcels of Copyhold Lands of the said I. S. lying in E. aforesaid,
and by him the said I. S. sold to him the said T. L. and his heirs, shall fall
out and appear to be under the quantity of 24. Acres, at which quantity the
same is now sold, and estimated unto him the said T. L. That then he the said
I. S. his Executors and Assigns, shall pay and allow unto him the said T. L.
so much moneys, and after the rate of 12. pound for every acre, and after that
rate for a greater or lesser quantity, then one acre that shall want of the
said quantity and number of 24. acres. To enjoy against the Montgaiger.
And also that he the said T. L. his, etc. shall and may quietly and peaceably
have, hold, possess and enjoy all and every the said lands and premises with
their appurtenances, without the let, suit, trouble, disturbance, molestation,
interruption or eviction of him the said I. S. his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, and of all and every other person and persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from or under him the said I. S. his estate or title, and
absolutely freed and discharged from all fines, issues, amerciaments,
forfeitures, and all and all manner of charges and encumbrances whatsoever
made, done or suffered by him the said I. S. or by his act, means, neglect or
procurement, the foresaid recited Indenture of lease made to the said G. E.
only excepted, etc.

A Lease for three lives of a Message and Lands unto those that sold the same,
it being so agreed upon sale thereof. Well pend.
THis Indenture made, etc. between I. B. of, etc. on the one part, and I. L.
of, etc. and E. his wife, and I. L. his Son, on the other part. Whereas the
said I. L. and E. his wife, by their Indenture of bargain and sale, dated the
second day of October last past, Recital of the Lessees sale with agreement
that the Lessor should make a Lease.
for the Consideration therein expressed, and by other assurance in Law, have
fold and conveyed unto the said I. B. his heirs and assigns for ever, all that
Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances, wherein the said I. L. then did
and now does inhabit, situate and being in L. M. aforesaid, and all those the
Lands hereafter particularly mentioned and expressed, as by the said recited
Indenture of bargain and sale, amongst other things therein contained, it does
and may appear: And whereas it was agreed between the said I. B. and the said
I. L. at the time of the executing the said Conveyance, as in part of the
bargain for the said Message and Lands, that the said I. B. should make a
Lease of the said Messuages and Lands unto the said I. L. E. his wife, and the
said I. his Son, for their lives successively, at the yearly Rent of 4. pound
per annum. The Consideration.
Now this Indenture witnesses, That the said I. B. being about the age of 28.
years, as well in performance of the said Agreement on his part made aforesaid,
and of the yearly rent hereby reserved, and for other good causes and
Considerations him moving; Has demised, set and to farm-letten, and by these
presents does demise, The Demise.
set, and to farm-let unto the said I. L. E. his wife, and the said I. all that
the foresaid Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, wherein the said I.
L. does now inhabit and dwell, situate and being in L. M. aforesaid, and all
those the Lands hereafter particularly mentioned, (viz.) one half acre of Land,
etc. mentioning the particulars, etc. Together with all Houses, Edifices,
Buildings, Barns, Stables, Yards, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens, Commons,
Commodities, Ways, Easments, Emoluments, Hereditaments, and Appurtenances
whatsoever to the said Message or Tenement, and Premises, or any of them
belonging, or in any wise appertaining, and now used therewith (except all
woods, timber and trees growing or to be growing on the premises, or any of
them; And also except all those four Cottages or Tenements heretofore built on
part of the Orchard, belonging to the said Message or Tenement hereby demised,
now being in the several tenures or occupations of R. E. T. F. W. R. and L. D.
their Assignee or Assignees) To have and to hold the said Message or Tenement,
and all other the premises, with their aptenances, The Habendum.
(except before excepted) unto the said I. L. E. his wife, and I. L. for and
during the term of their natural lives, and the life of the longer liver of
them, successively one after another as they are herein named: Yielding and
paying therefore yearly, and every year during the said term hereby demised
unto the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, the yearly Rent or sum of 4.
pound of current money of England, The Reddendum.
at two Feasts or terms in the year most usual, viz. the Feast of, etc. to be
paid at, etc. the first payment thereof at the Feast of the Annunciation of,
etc. next ensuing; And if it happen the said yearly Rent, The Distress.
or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid by the space of eight days next
after any or either of the said Feasts or days of payment, whereon the same
ought to be paid as aforesaid; That then it shall and may be lawful to and for
the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, and every of them to enter into and upon
the said Message and Premises, and every or any of them, and to distrain for
the same, and the distress and distresses there had and taken to lead, drive,
take and carry away, and the same with him and them to detain and keep until
the said yearly Rent and the arrerages thereof, if any happen to be unto the
said I. B. his heirs and assigns, shall be contented and paid: Covenant to
repair.
And the said I. L. E. his wife, and the said I. L. for themselves jointly, and
severally, and for every and either of them, their, every and either of their
several and respective Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of
them, do and does Covenant and grant to, etc. That they the said I. L. E. his
wife, and I. L. their several Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every
of them at their own proper costs and charges, in and by all things, shall and
will well and sufficiently repair, maintain, uphold, keep, cleanse and scour
all and every the houses, buildings and edifices hereby demised, and now built
on the premises, and belonging to the same, and which at any time hereafter,
during the term hereby demised, shall be erected and built upon the demised
premises, or any part thereof, and the hedges, ditches, fences, pales and
mounds, upon and about the demised premises, and every of them, well and
sufficiently, shall make, keep, cleanse and scour, and the said Message or
Tenement, houses and buildings which are, or at any time hereafter during the
term hereby demised, shall be erected or built in or upon the same, or any part
thereof, being so well and sufficiently repaired, maintained, upholden, kept,
cleansed and scoured in the end, or other determination of the said term hereby
demised, shall and will leave and yield up unto the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns; And also that they the said I. L. E. his wife, To view the defaults
of reparations.
and the said I. L. and every of them, and their and every of their assigns,
shall and will permit and suffer him the said I. B. his heirs and assigns,
together with three or four or fewer workmen, or other persons at their or any
of their wills and pleasures, being at convenient times, twice every year
quietly to enter into or upon the said Message or Tenement, and all other the
demised premises, to view and search whether the same be well and sufficiently
repaired or not; To repair upon notice.
And of all and every the default and defaults for want of Reparations then and
there found, to give or leave notice in writing at the said Message or
Tenement unto, or for the said I. L. and E. his wife, and the said I. L. to
repair and amend the same, from time to time during the terms hereby demised,
always within the space of six months next after every such notice in writing
so given or left as aforesaid; And also that neither they the said I. L. E. his
wife, Not to Demise without license.
nor the said I. L. nor any, nor either of them, shall not at any time or times
hereafter grant, bargain, sell, assign or set over, demise, let, or depart with
the said Message and premises, or any part or parcel thereof, or his, her, or
their, or any of their right, title, interest, or estate in or to the premises
or any of them, without the special license and consent of the said I. B. his
heirs or assigns, under his or their hand in writing, therefore first had and
obtained. Provided always, Proviso upon non payment or non reparation to
re-enter.
and it is Conditioned by and between the parties to these presents; That if it
shall happen the said yearly Rent, or any part thereof to be behind and unpaid
by the space of twenty eight days next after any or either of the said Feasts
or days of payment before mentioned or set down for payment thereof, contrary
to the form aforesaid, the same being lawfully demanded, or if all and every
the said default and defaults for want of Reparations, of or in the premises,
or any of them, at the time of such view or search as is aforesaid, shall be
found, and whereof notice in writing shall be given or left to repair and amend
the same, in manner and form aforesaid, shall not from time to time be well and
sufficiently repaired and amended, all ways within the space of six months
after every such notice given or left in writing as aforesaid; That then, and
at all times after in every the cases as aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful
to and for the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, and every of them into and
upon the said Message or Tenement, Lands and premises, and every of them to
re-enter, and the same to have again, retain, re-possesse and enjoy, as in this
and their first and former estate; This Indenture, or any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding: And the said I.
B. for him, his heirs and assigns, and for every of them, The Lessee to enjoy
performing Covenants.
does Covenant, etc. by these presents, that they the said I. L. E. his wife,
and the said I. L. by and under the yearly Rent, Covenants and Conditions in
and by these presents reserved, and on their parts severally to be paid, done
and performed according to the intent of these presents, shall or may peaceably
and quietly have, hold, possess and enjoy the said Message or tenement,
lands, and all other the premises, with their appurtenances, without the let,
suit, trouble, disturbance, denial, molestation, interruption or eviction of
him the said I. B. his heirs and Assigns, and of all and every other person
and persons whatsoever, lawfully claiming by, from or under him the said I. B.
his heirs or Assigns, or his, their, or any of their estate, right or title. In
witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture reciting a Bargain and Sale of the Moity of a Manor, etc. in
trust for the use of another, the same is hereby reconveyed to the person
trusting.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir W. B. of, etc. on the one part, brother
and heir to H. B. Esquire deceased, and W. E. of H, etc. on the other part; Whereas
Sir I. W. of, etc. and I. F. of, etc. by their Indenture bearing date the
second day of, etc. in the twelfth year of, etc. did alien, bargain, and sell
unto the said H. B. and E. P. of, etc. all that Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances, situate and being in L. aforesaid, in the said County of, etc.
all those, etc. And also Common of pasture, and feeding for such and so many
horses, beasts, sheep, and other Cattle to be had and taken in and upon the
Common Fields, Meadows, Pastures, and Commonable places in L. aforesaid, at
such times and seasons of the year, and in such manner and form, as the Tenants
and occupiers of the said premises have before this time used to have and take
the same, and also all and singular houses, edifices, etc. and also the
Reversion and Reversions of all and singular the said premises, and the yearly
Rents thereupon reserved; To have and to hold the one Moity and half part of
all the said Message or Tenement, and of the said four yard-lands of arable
Land, Meadow and Pasture, and of all and singular other the said premises
whatsoever, with the appurtenances in and by the said recited Indenture
bargained and sold, and of every part and parcel thereof to the said H. B. his
heirs and Assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the said H. B. his heirs
and Assigns for ever; Which said grant, bargain and sale, for and concerning
the said Moity, of all and singular the premises before mentioned to be by the
said recited Indenture, granted, bargained and sold to the said H. B. as
aforesaid, was had and made to and in the name of the said H. B. by the
Nomination and appointment of the said W. E. and in trust to the use of the
said W. E. his heirs and Assigns. Now this Indenture further witnesses, that
the said Sir W. B. according to the said Trust, and at the request and desire
of the said W. E. and for diverse other good causes and Considerations, him
thereunto moving; Has aliened, bargained, sold, infeoffed and confirmed, and
by these presents does alien, bargain, sell, infeoffe and confirm unto the said
W. E. his heirs and Assigns; All that the said Moity and half part of all the
said Messuages, and of the said 4. yard-lands of arable Land, Meadow and
pasture with their Appurtenances, and every part and parcel thereof, and all
other the premises whatsoever, in and by the said recited Indenture, bargained
and sold unto the said H. B. or to his use as aforesaid, and also the Reversion
and Reversions of all and singular the Moity and half part of all and singular
the said premises, and every part thereof, and the yearly Rents thereupon
reserved due and payable; To have and to hold the said Moity and half part of
all the said Message or Tenement, and of the said 4. yard-lands of arable
Land, Meadow and pasture with their Appurtenances, and the Reversion and
Reversions before specified in and by the said recited Indenture, bargained and
sold to or for the use of the said H. B. as aforesaid, unto the said W. E. his
heirs and Assigns to the only use and behalf of the said W. E his heirs and
assigns for ever; And the said Sir H. B. for himself, his heirs, executors and
administrators, and for every of them does Covenant and grant to and with the
said W. E. his, etc. That he the said Sir H. B. for and notwithstanding any Act
or thing whatsoever by him, done or suffered to the contrary, now is, and at
the time of the ensealing hereof, and of the first executing an estate by force
of these presents, shall be lawfully seized in his Demeasn, as of Fee-simple to
him and his heirs, of and in the Moity, and one half of the said Message or
Tenement and premises whatsoever, with the appurtenances in and by the said
recited Indenture, bargained and sold to the said H. B. to his use as
aforesaid, and that he the said Sir H. B. for and notwithstanding any Act or
thing by him done or suffered to the contrary as aforesaid, now has, and then
shall have good right, full power, and lawful authority to bargain, sell and
convey the said Moity of the said Message or Tenement and premises, with the
appurtenances in the said recited Indenture, bargained and sold unto him the
said H. B. as aforesaid, unto the said W. E. his heirs and Assigns, according
to the intent of these presents: And that he the said W. E. his heirs and
assigns, shall or may for ever hereafter peaceably and quietly have, hold,
occupy, possess, and enjoy the said Moity of the said Message, or Tenement
and premises, with the appurtenances in the said recited Indenture mentioned
to be conveyed to the said H. B. or to his use as aforesaid, without the let,
suit, trouble, molestation, interruption or eviction of him the said Sir H. B.
his heirs or assigns, or of any other person or persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming by, from or under him, his estate or title; L. Cum Coven. pro ulter.
Assure. and Letterdel. Attorney, etc. In witness whereof, etc.

A Covenant to deliver Evidences by such a time.
ANd the said G. A. for him, etc. that he the said G. A. his heirs, Executors
or Administrators, or some of them shall and will before the first day of
March, next ensuing the date hereof, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the
said A. Lady D. and Sir I. D. or to one of them all such Deeds, Charters,
Evidences, Court-Rolls, Exemplifications of Records, transcripts of Fines,
Terrars, Escripts, Writings and Muniments, concerning only the premises, or
only any part or parcel thereof, as now be in the possession, custody or
keeping of the said G. A. or of any other person or persons by his delivery, or
to his use, or which he may obtain, get, or come by without suit in Law, whole,
uncancelled, safe and undefaced, or in as good plight as the same now are and
be, and also true Copies of all such other Deeds, Charters, Evidences and
Writings as the said G. A. has, touching and concerning the said Lands and
premises, or any part thereof, jointly, or together with any other Lands, etc.
of the said G. A. the said A. Lady D. and Sir I. D. and their heirs, or some or
one of them, paying and bearing the charge of making and writing the same
Copies. etc.

A Declaration of a Fine and Recovery to variety of uses; well pend.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between the Right Honorable T. Lord W. of the one
part, and the Right Honorable W. Lord P. Sir. M. F. of, Recital of the
Recovery.
etc. on the other part; Whereas the said M. B. and W. D. in the term of E. in
the eleventh year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lord King I. of England,
etc. by Writ of Entry, sur Disseisin in le post did recover against the said
T. Lord W. all those the Manors of M. alias M. A. L. A. R. and N. with the
appurtenances, and of 30. Messuages, 30. Tofts, 6. Water-mills, 6. Dove-houses,
30. Gardens, 1000. acres of Land, 200. acres of Meadow, 1000. acres of pasture,
2000. acres of wood, 300. acres of Furze and heath, 10. pounds Rent, free
warren and view of Frank-pledge, with the appurtenances in M. alias M. A. N.
and S. and also the Advowson of the Churches of M. alias M. and A. as in and by
the said Recovery remaining of Record in his Highness said Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, to which Relation being had more at large
appears. Of the Time.
And whereas in the term of the Holy Trinity last past before the date hereof,
(that is to say) a Die sce. Trinitatis in tres septimanas. in the said term in
the Court of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty before his Justices at
Westminster, a Fine sur Cognizance de droit come ceo, etc. with Proclamations
according to the form of the Statute, in such case made and provided, was
levied between the said W. R. and W. D. Plaintifs, and the said T. Lord W.
Deforceant of the Manors of T. alias T. and B. alias B. with the appurtenances
in the County of W. and W. and of all that Grange or Capital Message, called
H. house, and of all the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions,
services and hereditaments whatsoever, to the said Manors and Grange, or any
of them belonging or appertaining, or reputed to belong or appertain, or as
part or parcel, or member of them or any of them, or accepted, reputed, taken,
demised, used, occupied or enjoyed as part thereof in the said Counties of W.
and W. and of all other the Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rectories, Tithes and
hereditaments, with the appurtenances of the said T. Lord W. in the said
Counties of W. and W. by the names of the Manors of T. alias T. and B. alias
B. with the appurtenances, and of 40. Messuages, 20. Tofts, 4. Water-mills, 4.
Dove-houses, 40. Gardens, 1000. acres of Land, 600. acres of Meadow, 1000.
acres of pasture, 400. acres of wood, 400. acres of Furze and heath, 20 acres
of Marsh, and twenty shillings Rent, with the appurtenances in T. alias T.
Alne-Church, B. alias B. F. and Beoley, and also of the Rectories of T. alias
T. and B. alias B. with the appurtenances, and all and all manner of tithes of
Corn and Hay, growing, coming or renewing in T. alias T. and B. alias B. and of
the Advowson of the Vicaridge of the Church of T. alias T. in the County of W.
and of the Manors of T. alias T. and B. alias B. with the appurtenances, and
4. Messuages, 1. Dove-house, 4. gardens, 300. acres of land, 600. acres of
Meadow, 300. acres of pasture, 200. acres of wood, and 30. acres of Marsh, with
the appurtenances in T. alias T. Aln-church, and B. alias B. and also of the
Rectory of T. alias T. and B. alias B. with the appurtenances, and of all and
all manner of tithes of corn and hay, growing, coming, and renewing in T. alias
T. and B. alias B. and of the advowson of the Vicaridge of the Church of T.
alias T. in the County of W. as by the said Fine remaining of Record, in his
Highness said Court of Common Pleas at W. to which Relation being had, more
fully and at large appears: Now this Indenture witnesses, The intent of the
parties.
That the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord W. and of the said
Recoverors, and parties to the said Recovery, and also of the said Cognizees of
the said Fine, and parties to the same Fine, and of all and every of the
parties to these presents, before and at the several and respective time and
times of the suffering of the said Recovery and Acknowledgement, and levying of
the said Fine, for touching and concerning the said Manors, Lordships, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, whereof the said Recovery and Fine were
severally and respectively suffered, levied and had as aforesaid, always was,
and yet is, that as well the said Recovery, as the said Fine, and all and every
Fine and Fines, Recovery and Recoveries, and other Acts and Assurances of the
said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Rectories, Tithes, Advowsons,
hereditaments and premises, or of any of them, with the appurtenances at any
time heretofore suffered, levied, executed or had, wherein or whereunto the
said T. Lord W. was or is any ways a party, and all and every the executions
of the same, and every of them; should and shall be and enure, and be
construed, adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure; And were and hereby are
Covenanted, granted, concluded, agreed and declared to be and enure; to the
uses, purposes and intents, and under the Provisions, Conditions and
Limitations hereafter in these presents expressed, limited and declared, and
that the said Recoverors and either of them, and all the parties to the same
Recovery, and the parties takers thereby, and their heirs, and all other person
and persons, and his and their heirs, who then were, and now are, or hereafter
shall be seized of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
premises, with their Appurtenances comprised in the said Recovery, should, and
shall stand and be seized of the same Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments
and premises comprised in the said Recovery, and every parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, to the same uses, purposes, and intents hereafter expressed; And
that the said Cognizees of the said Fine, and either of them, and all the
parties to the same Fine, and the takers thereby, and the heirs of them, and
every of them, and all and every other person and persons, and his and their
heirs, who at the time of the levying of the said Fine then were, or now are,
or hereafter shall be seized of the foresaid Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments and premises, with the Appurtenances, Comprised in the said
Fine, and every of them, should and shall stand and be seized of the same
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and premises, Comprised in the said
Fine, and every parcel thereof, with the appurtenances to the uses, purposes
and intents hereafter in these presents expressed and declared, (that is to
say,) for touching and concerning all that the foresaid Capital Message or
House, called H. house, situate and being within the said Manor of T. in the
said Counties of W. and W. with the Orchards, Gardens, Barns, Stables, Hopyards
thereunto belonging; And also as for touching and concerning the said several
lands, tenements and hereditaments next hereafter mentioned, and in the said
several Recoveries comprised, (that is to say) two Meadows called H. Meadows,
containing by estimation 60. acres more or less, one pasture called C.
containing by estimation 40. acres, one wood called B. containing 16. acres,
etc. parcel of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises
in the said Counties of W. and W. To the only use and behoof of the said T.
Lord W. and his Assigns, The Uses.
for and during the term of his natural life without Impeachment, of or for any
wast, and with full power to commit waste, and from and after the Decease of
the said T. Lord W. then to the use and behoof of the Lady K. now Wife of the
said T. Lord W. for and during the Term of her natural life for her Jointure,
and in liew, and full recompense of her Dower, out of all the Manors, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, whereof the said T. Lord W. now is, or hereafter
shall be seized: And for and touching all the residue of all the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, with their appurtenances in the
said Counties of W. and W. And for touching and concerning all the said
Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises in the said County of G.
To the only use and behoof of the said T. Lord W. and his Assigns, for and
during the term of his natural life, without Impeachment of or for any manner
of wast; And for touching and concerning the immediate Remainder of the said
Capital Message called H. house, and of all the said lands, tenements and
premises before particularly mentioned, or meant to be limited to the use of
the said Lady K. for her Jointure as aforesaid, immediately from and after the
decease of the said T. Lord W. and of the said Lady K. and of the longer liver
of them, and the immediate Remainder of all the residue of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises in the said Counties of W. and W.
(whereof there is no use, before limited or declared to the said Lady K. for
her Jointure; And for touching and concerning the immediate Remainder of all
the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises in the said
County of G. immediately from and after the decease of the said T. Lord W. to
such uses, purposes and intents, and under such Provisions, Conditions and
Limitations as hereafter in these presents are specified, expressed, limited
and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, that is to
say. To the use and behoof of the said Right Honorable W. Lord P. N. F, etc.
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for and during the term and space
of, etc. years to commence and begin, as hereafter follows, that is to say,
for touching and concerning the said Messuages, Lands, Hereditaments and
premises before limited to the use of the said Lady K. for her Jointure,
(parcel of the said Manor, lands, tenements and hereditaments comprised in the
said Fine) to begin immediately from and after the decease of the longest liver
of them the said T. Lord W. and of the said Lady K. and for touching and
concerning all the rest and residue of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, as well in the said Counties of W. and W. as in
the said County of G. for and during the term and space of (...) years, to
commence immediately from and after the decease of the said T. Lord W. for and
to the intent and purpose that the said W. Lord P. N. F, etc. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, For payment of debts and other charges.
shall and may receive, perceive, dispose and employ the Rents, Revenews,
issues and profits of all the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and
premises respectively for and during the said term or terms of (...) years,
for and toward the payment and satisfaction of all such debts and sums of
money which the said T. Lord W. does now owe, or hereafter shall borrow or owe,
or for which any person or persons does, or hereafter shall stand engaged for
or with the said T. Lord W. and for his proper debt, and for the payment of
such Annuities, Rent or Rents, and securing such Leases as the said T. Lord W.
has granted, or hereafter shall grant or mention, or limit to be issuing or
going out of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises,
or out of any of them, or out of any parcel of them, or any of them to any
person or persons which is, or are, or have been, or hereafter shall be the
servant or servants of the said T. Lord W. for or in regard, or in respect of
his or their service or services, done or to be done to the said T. Lord W. or
to any person or persons, for any money heretofore received, borrowed or taken
up, or hereafter to be received, borrowed or taken up by the said T. Lord W. or
to his or their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and also for and toward
the payment of such Legacy or Legacies, and sums of money which the said T.
Lord W. shall by his last Will and Testament in Writing, to be signed, sealed
and published before three or more sufficient Witnesses, give, limit, ordain or
appoint. And from and after the end, expiration, surrender or other
determination of the said term, or terms of years, as they shall severally end
and determine, then to the use and behoof of such person and persons, and for
such estate and estates, and for such part and parcel as the said T. Lord W.
shall by his last Will in Writing, in presence of two credible Witnesses or
more, appoint, limit or declare. Provided always, and the true intent and
meaning of the said T. Lord W. and of all the parties to the said Recovery and
Fine, and of the parties to these presents, and every of them, before and at
the several and respective times of the suffering of the said Recovery, and the
acknowledging and levying of the said Fine, was, and yet is, and is hereby so
expressed, published and declared, that notwithstanding any thing herein before
contained, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T. Lord W. from time
to time, Power to make Leases.
and at all times for and during his natural life at his will and pleasure,
either by act or acts in writing, under his hand and seal, to be sealed and
signed before two or more Witnesses of Credit, and executed in his life time,
or by his last Will and Testament in writing by him to be sealed, subscribed
and published before two or more such witnesses, to give, grant, or make any
Lease or Leases for life, lives or years of all or any of the said Manors,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises, or any of them, other then
during the life of the said Lady K. of the said chief Mansion house called H.
house, and so much of the Demesnes, Lands, Tenements, and premises next
adjoining to the said Chief Mansion house, as shall amount to the clear yearly
value of one hundred and fifty pounds over and above all charges and Reprizes:
Or to charge the premises to secure moneys to be hereafter borrowed.
Upon which Lease or Leases, the accustomed or greatest yearly rent or value
heretofore paid for the said premises, or more shall be reserved, or to charge
the same premises, or any parcel thereof, (except before excepted, and for the
time aforesaid) with any Rent or Rents, Annuity or Annuities, Recognizance or
Recognizances in the nature of the Statute Staple or Merchant, or by or with
any other Recognizance or Recognizances, Judgment or Judgments of what nature
soever for the assurance of payment of any sum or sums of money which he
the said T. Lord W. either has taken up, or borrowed, or shall hereafter
receive, take, borrow or contract for, of or with any person or persons, for or
to his use or otherwise, or for the securing of any person or persons who now
is, or are, or stand, or that at any time hereafter shall stand or become bound
for him the said T. Lord W. or otherwise at his free will and pleasure, and
that the said Recovery, Fine and Fines, and other Acts and Assurances shall be
and enure, and the said Recoverors and parties to the foresaid Recovery, and
the Cognizees and parties to the said Fine, and the parties takers thereby and
their heirs, and all and every other person or persons, who now are or stand,
or hereafter shall be, or stand seized of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, by force or under the said Recovery and Fine, or
either of them, and his and their heirs, shall stand and be seized of all, or
so much of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and premises,
and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances which is, or shall be so given,
granted, leased, charged or disposed of, from and after such gift, grant,
lease, charge, disposition, or other Act or Acts to such uses, intents and
purposes, and to the use of such person and persons to whom such gift, grant,
lease, charge, disposition, or other Act or Acts has been, or shall be made as
aforesaid, and to the use, intent and purpose, that the party and parties to
whom any Rent or Rents, Annuity or Annuities, Recognizance or Recognizances,
Statutes, Judgments, or other charges already granted, or hereafter to be
granted, made or charged, of, upon, or out of the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any parcel thereof by the said T.
Lord W. shall and may duly have, levy, perceive, take and enjoy the fruit,
benefit and effect of the same Lease and Leases, Rent and Rents, and other
charge and charges, according to the purport, intent, and true meaning of the
said grant and grants, lease and leases, Recognizance and Recognizances,
Judgment and Judgments, charge and charges, and every or any of them, any
thing in these presents before contained to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding: Provided, and it is further hereby Covenanted, Granted,
Condescended, agreed, To make void the said uses.
published and declared by and between all and every of the foresaid parties;
That the true intent and meaning as well of the foresaid Recovery, as of the
said Fine, and of all and every of the respective parties to the same, and to
these presents always was, and is, that it should and might, and shall and may
be lawful to and for the said T. Lord W. from time or time, at any time or
times during his life, by his writing or writings, by him to be signed or
sealed in the presence of three Witnesses of Credit or more, or to be enrolled
in any of the Courts of Record, of our Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors to signify or declare that his will and pleasure is, that
all or any of the use or uses, estate or estates in possession, Reversion or
Remainder, limited, appointed, raised, created or employed in or by these
presents, shall cease, determine, be void or revoked of, for touching or
concerning all or any of the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and premises, or any of them, or concerning any part or parcel
of them or any of them; And that then, and from thenceforth all and every of
the said use and uses, estate and estates in possession, Reversion or Remainder
so signified and declared to cease, determine, be void or revoked, shall then
and from thenceforth cease, determine and be utterly void and revoked,
according to the true intent and meaning of the said T. Lord W. so as aforesaid
to be signified and declared, other then such lease or leases, estate or
estates, or charges which he the said Lord W. has or shall make, lay, or
charge of, or upon any of the premises, for satisfying debts, or for valuable
Consideration in money, or otherwise by force of the foresaid Proviso in these
presents before expressed: And also that then and from thenceforth, at all time
and times after such signification or significations, declaration or
declarations so to be made, it shall and may be lawful to and for the said T.
Lord W. at any time or times during his life, To Create new Uses.
so often as he shall think good by any other his Writing by him to be sealed,
acknowledged and enrolled, or sealed and subscribed as is aforesaid, to limit,
create, appoint, and declare of, for and concerning the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, or any of them, any new, or any other
use or uses to the same, or any other person or persons whatsoever; And that
then, and after such new limitation, the said Recovery and Fine respectively
shall be and enure, and the said Recoverors and parties takers by the said
Recovery, and the said Cognizees of the said Fine, and the parties takers
thereby and their heirs, and all and every person and persons, who then shall
be and stand seized of and in the premises, or any part thereof, whereof such
new use shall be declared, created, raised, limited or appointed, and his and
their heirs shall respectively stand and be seized of the same premises, or
such part thereof, whereof such new use or uses shall be declared, limited or
appointed to such use and uses of such person and persons, to whom such other
or new estate or estates, use or uses shall be so newly declared, created,
raised, limited or appointed, and of, and for such estate and estates, and in
such manner and form, and by and under such Limitations, Conditions and
Provisoes as shall be so newly appointed, expressed or declared, and for want
of such declaration, or new limitation so to be made after any such Revocation;
Then the said Recovery and Fine touching such of the premises, whereof no such
Declaration, Limitation or Appointment of use shall be made, shall be and enure
to the only use and behoof of the said T. Lord W. his Heirs and Assigns for
ever, any matter or thing whatsoever, herein before contained to the contrary
thereof notwithstanding. But it is, No new Declaration to hinder any estate
granted before Revocation.
and always was the intent of all the parties to these presents, that no
Revocation or new Limitation should or shall any way frustrate or make void any
lease, estate, rent or charge made, granted or charged, or to be made, granted
or charged of or upon the premises, or any parcel thereof, for valuable
Considerations of money, borrowed or received by the said Lord W. by virtue or
force of any former Proviso in these presents expressed, but that the same and
every of them, shall stand good, according to the purport and meaning of them,
and every of them, notwithstanding any such Revocation, or new Limitation
futurely to be made. In witness, etc.

A Covenant to settle Lands for natural affection.
THis Indenture made, etc. between R. D. of, etc. on the one part, and T. D.
and E. S. of, etc. on the other part: Witnesses that the said R. D. as well
for the natural love and affection which he bears toward W. D. Gentleman,
Son and Heir apparent of the said R. D. and to the intent that the Marshes,
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned, might be and remain to
the uses, intents and purposes, hereafter in these presents expressed and
declared; and for diverse other, etc. for himself, his heirs and assigns, does
Covenant and grant to and with the said T. D. and E. S. their heirs and Assigns
by these presents, That he the said R. D. and his Heirs, and all and every
other person and persons that now is or are, or that at any time hereafter
shall be seized, or estated of or in all, and every part of that the Manor of
A. with the Rights, Members and Appurtenances thereof in the said County of O.
and of or in all or any Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons,
Ways, Wastes, Wast-grounds, Hereditaments, and Appurtenances whatsoever,
belonging to the said Manor, or reputed as part, parcel or member thereof in
A. aforesaid, and whereof or wherein the said R. D. now has any estate of
Inheritance in Fee-simple, shall thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof,
immediately from and after the ensealing hereof, stand and be seized thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, to the several uses, intents and purposes
hereafter in these presents expressed, limited and declared, (that is to say:)
To the use and behoof of the said R. D. for the Term of his natural life,
without Impeachment of any manner of wast, and after his death, to the use of
the said I. D. for the Term of his natural life, without Impeachment of any
manner of wast, and after his decease, to the use of the first Son of the
body of the said I. D. lawfully to be begotten, and of the heirs males of the
body of the said first Son lawfully to be begotten; And for default of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth,
Seventh, Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Sons of the Body of the said I. D. lawfully
to be begotten, respectively as they shall be in Seniority and Age, and of the
Heirs Males of such Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eighth,
Ninth, and Tenth Sons lawfully to be begotten of his body, the eldest son and
his heirs, being always preferred before the younger son and his heirs of his
body; And for default of such Issue, to the use of every other the Sons of
the said I. D. as they shall be in Seniority and Age, and of the Heirs Males
of the Bodies of every such Sons lawfully to be begotten; And for default of
such Issue, then to the use of M. D. Gentleman, second Son of the said R. D.
for the term of his natural life, without Impeachment of any manner of wast,
and after his death, to the use of the first Son, pro ut Supra. in the first
Son, then to the third Son in manner pro ut al. primum. And for the default
of such Issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of the said R. D. for ever:
and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever, with the same clause of
Revocation, as is mentioned in the last president. In witness, etc.

A Condition of a Counter Land.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the abovenamed N. B. at the special instance
and request of the above-bounden C. D. for the proper debt of the said C. D.
and as his surety, by obligation bearing dare with these presents, stands
jointly and severally bound, together with the said C. D. unto E. F. of, etc.
in the sum of, etc. with Condition thereupon endorsed for the payment of 100
pound of, etc. to the said E. F. or to his certain Attorney, his Executors or
Assigns, at, etc. upon, etc. as in and by the said Obligation and Condition
more at large appears. If therefore the said C. D. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said E. F. or his assigns, the said sum of, etc. at the day and place
aforesaid, and also from henceforth, save and keep harmless the abovenamed A.
B. his heirs, etc. of and from the foresaid Obligation, and of and from all and
all manner of Costs, Charges, Suits, and Damages whatsoever, of, for and
concerning the said Obligation; That then, etc.

An Assignment of several Leases of diverse Messuages and Lands, with several
recitals and good Covenants. Well pend.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between I. S. of, etc. and I. G. of, etc. on the one
part, and R. G. of, etc. on the other part; Whereas I. S. of, etc. and G. P.
of, etc. Executors of the last Will and Testament of M. S. gent. deceased, and
the said I. G. by Indenture bearing date the 26. day of S. in the, etc. of his
said Majesty's Reign that now is over England, etc. made between the said I. S.
and G. P. and I. G. on the one part, and E. S. on the other part, by the name
of E. S. of, etc. Did grant, assign, and set over to the said E. S. and her
Assigns, as well an Indenture of Demise therein recited, dated the day of,
etc. made from R. E. late of, etc. unto I. G. late of B. in, etc. and I. his
wife, Father and Mother of the said I. G. party to these presents of all that
Message or Tenement, and half yard land, with the appurtenances then or late
in the Tenure or Occupation of one E. A. or his Assigns in S. sometimes W. W.
situate and being of H. W. and P. and every or either of them in the said
County of S. and of all houses, Buildings, Barns, Stables, Orchards, Gardens,
Back-sides, and grounds, with the appurtenances whatsoever, to or with the said
Message, or Tenement and premises belonging, with all and every other the
Lands, Tenements, Feedings, Hereditaments and profits whatsoever, to the said
Message or Tenement belonging, or reputed as parcel or member of the same, or
any of them (except therein excepted) for the Term of 3000. years from the
Feast of the, etc. then last past, at the yearly Rent of 7. shillings of, etc.
as also all the estate, title, interest, term of years thereby granted, then to
come and unexpired, possession, claim and demand whatsoever of the said I. S.
G. P. and I. G. of and to the same, and every part thereof on Condition therein
contained to this effect; That if the said I. G. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, did well and truly pay to the said E. S. her Executors or Assigns,
the sum of, etc. of lawful English money upon the last day of M. then next
ensuing; That then from thenceforth the said Grant and Assignment, and every
thing therein contained, to be utterly void and of none effect, as by the said
Indenture more fully appears. Which said sum of, etc. was not satisfied or
paid to the said E. S. neither on the day in the Condition of the said
Assignment mentioned, nor since, by reason whereof the premises became
absolutely forfeited to the said E. S. And whereas also the said I. G. by his
Indenture of Assignment, dated the etc. of his Majesty's Reign that now is, did
bargain, assign and set over to the said E. S. and her Assigns, as well one
other Indenture of Lease dated the 21. day of M. in the one and fortieth year
of the said late Queen Elizabeth her Reign, also made from the said R. E. to
the said I. G. (Father of the said I. G. party to these presents) and his
Assigns, of all that his, etc. setting the particulars down here at large as
they were mentioned before, within the Parishes of H. P. or W. within the said
County of S. or some or one of them, with all Woods, Under-woods, Profits,
Commodities and Advantages, to the said Message or Tenement and half-yard-land
belonging, for the Term of 3000. years, from the Feast of, etc. then next
ensuing, at the yearly Rent of, etc. as also all the estate, right, title,
interest, possession, Reversion, Term of years, claim and demand whatsoever of
the said I. G. to the said, etc. and other the premises, with the
appurtenances by the same Indenture of Lease, Demised by virtue of the same
Indenture or otherwise, as by the same Indenture, etc. appears: And whereas
the said E. S. by her Indenture dated, etc. did Covenant with the said I. G.
and his assigns; That if the said I. G. or his Assigns, did well and truly
pay to the said E. S. or her assigns, the sum of 325. pound at the dwelling
house of A. C. Scrivener, situate in B. London, at one entire payment on the
fifteenth day of October, which then should be in the year of our Lord God,
1630. That then she the said E. S. and her Assigns, would upon request of the
said I. G. re-assign and convey to him, the said two several recited Indentures
of Leases, and all her estate and interest, claim and demand in and to the said
several Messuages, Lands and premises, demised by the said several Indentures
of Lease, as by the said last recited Indenture more at large appears: And
whereas the said I. G. by his Release dated, etc. did in Consideration of a
competent sum of money, Release all his Right, Title and Interest of and in
the said Message, Lands and premises to the said E. S. and her assigns, as by
the said Release appears: And whereas the said E. S. by her Indenture of
Assignment dated, etc. Did for the Considerations therein mentioned, Assign,
and set over, all her estate, right, title and interest of, in and to both the
said recited Indentures of Lease, as also in and to the said Messuages, Lands
and premises to the said I. S. her Father (party to these presents;) To hold
to him and his Assigns, during all the residue of the said Term of years, in
the said several recited Indentures of Lease then to come and unexpired, as by
the said last recited Indenture of Assignment more fully appears: Now this
Indenture witnesses, that the said I. S. and I. G. for and in Consideration of
the sum of, etc. in hand paid, or secured by the said R. G. unto the said I.
S. as also for and in Consideration of the sum of, etc. at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents in hand paid, or secured by the said R. G. unto the
said I. G. the several receipts, of which said several sums of money they the
said I. S. and I. G. do hereby severally and respectively acknowledge, and
thereof, and of every part theroof, do severally and respectively acquit and
discharge the said R. G. his, etc. and for other good, etc. Have demised,
granted, set, and to farm-let, released, and confirmed, and by these presents,
do, etc. unto the said R. G. his, etc. all and every the said Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, with their and every of their Rights,
Members and Appurtenances in the said former recited Indentures of Lease, or
Assignments mentioned: To have and to hold all and every the said Messuages or
Tenements, Lands, and all other the premises, with their and every of their
Appurtenances unto the said R. G. his Executors and Assigns, and every of them
by these presents for and during, and unto the full end and Term of 99. years
from hence next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended; Yielding and paying
therefore yearly during the said term, to the said I. S. his, etc. a peper corn
at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel if it be lawfully demanded. And the
said I. S. for himself, his, etc. does covenant and grant to and with the said
R. G. his, etc. That he the said I. S. now has good right, full power, and
lawful and absolute authority to demise, grant, and let the said Message or
Tenement, lands and premises, with their appurtenances unto the said R. G.
his, etc. for and during the said Term and Number of years aforesaid, according
to the true intent and meaning of these presents, And also that the said
Message, etc. and every of them shall and may during the Term hereby demised,
remain and be unto the said R. G. his, etc. sufficiently saved and kept
harmless, of and from all and all manner of former and other Gifts, Grants,
Leases, Forfeitures, Surrenders, Extents, Rents, and Arrerages of Rents, and of
and from all and all manner of Charges, Titles, Troubles, and Encumbrances
whatsoever, had, made, committed, done or suffered by him the said I. S. or by
the said E. S. his said Daughter, or either of them, their or either of their
Executors or Assigns; And also that he the said R. G. his, etc. shall and may
peaceably and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said, etc. for
and during the Term hereby demised, without the Let, Suit, Molestation,
Interruption or Eviction of him the said I. S. or the said E. S. and without
the lawful Let of all and every other person and persons whatsoever, lawfully
claiming in, by, from or under him, her, or either of them, their or either of
their estate, right or title. And the said I. G. for himself, his, etc. does
Covenant and Grant to and with the said R. G. his, etc. That he the said I. G.
at no time before the date hereof, has done or suffered to be done any Act or
Thing whatsoever, which shall or may be hurtful, prejudicial, or a hindrance to
the said R. G. his, etc. or any of them in his and their having, and quiet
enjoying of the said, etc. But that he the said R. G. his, etc. may have and
enjoy the said Lands and premises, and every of them, for and during the Term
hereby demised, without the let or hindrance of him the said I. G. his, etc. or
of any other person or persons whatsoever, claiming by, from or under him,
them, or any of them. And the said I. S. and I. G. and either of them, do for
themselves jointly and severally, and not one for the other, and for their
several and respective Executors, etc. and for every of them, Covenant and
grant to and with the said R.G. his, etc. That they the said I. S. and I. G.
and either of them, their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, shall and will
from time to time, and at all times for and during the space of five years
next, etc. at the request and costs of the said R. G. his, etc. further do
make, suffer, acknowledge, and execute all and every such further and other
lawful and reasonable Act or thing whatsoever, for the further, better, and
more perfect assuring, surety, and sure making of the said, etc. unto the said
R. G. his, etc. or to such other person or persons as he the said R. G. shall
nominate and appoint, and every or any of them, for and during the said term
hereby demised, as also all other the Interest and Term for years, which he the
said I. S. now has in the said, etc. yet to come and unexpired, as by him the
said R. G. his, etc. or his, their, or any of their Council learned in the
Laws, shall be reasonably devised, or advised and required. And the said I. S.
for himself, etc. does covenant and grant to and with the said R. G. etc. That
he the said I. S. his, etc. or some of them, shall and will within six months
now next ensuing the date hereof, deliver or cause to be delivered unto the
said R. G. or his Assigns, or some of them, all the Original Leases of the
Premises herein before recited or mentioned, as also all and singular the
several mean Assignments made of the premises, from time to time, and also all
such Deeds, Evidences, Court-rolls, Writings, Escripts and Miniments
whatsoever, concerning the premises or any part or parcel thereof, which now
be in the possession, custody, or keeping of the said I. S. or of E. S. or of
any other person or persons whatsoever, by their or either of their delivery,
privity or appointment, or which he the said I. S. may obtain or come by,
whole, uncancelled, safe undefaced, and in as good plight as the same or any of
them now are, and also true Copies of all such other Deeds, Evidences, and
Writings as the said I. S. or E. S. or either of them, have or can come by
touching the said, etc. or any part thereof, jointly or together with any other
lands the said I. S. his, etc. or some of them, paying, and bearing the charge
of making, and writing, and coming by the said Deeds, Evidences or Copies, or
any of them. And the said R. G. for him, his, etc. does covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said I. S. and I. G. and either of them, their and, etc.
That he the said R. G. his, etc. shall and will during the Term hereby demised,
bear, pay, and discharge all and all manner of quit-rents, or other Rents and
Services whatsoever, which shall be due, or any ways payable, for or in
respect of the said, etc. or any of them, from the day of the date hereof, and
thereof, and of evary part thereof, shall and will sufficiently during the term
hereby demised, acquit and discharge the said I. S. and I. G. their Executors
and Assigns, and every of them by these presents. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of settlement. Well pend.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between the Right Honorable C. Lord S. Barron of H.
of the first part, W. N. of the Inner Temple London Esquire and A. T. of the said
Inner Temple London, The Parties.
Esquire of the second part; And the Right Honorable E. Lord G. Baron of D. in the
County of A. within the Realm of Ireland, and Dame I. his wife, D. L. Daughter
of her the said Dame I. G. and I. S. of M. in the C. of Y. Esquire of the third
part; Whereas a Marriage shortly hereafter by the grace of God, is intended to
be had and solemnized between the said C. L. S. and the said D. L. Witnesses
now this present Indenture, that the said C. Lord S. as well for and in
Consideration of the said marriage, The Consideration.
and of the full sum of 8000. pound, (that is to say) the sum of 7000.
pound of good and lawful money of England, in hand paid, and the sum of 1000.
pound more in Jewels, in hand delivered unto him the said L. S. by the said E.
Lord G. and Dame I. his Wife, at and before the ensealing and delivery of these
presents, whereof the sum of 2000. Marks in moneys, and the said 1000. pound
in Jewels, were and was a portion given and left unto her the said D. by the
last Will and Testament of Sir I. L. her Father deceased, and the residue of
the said 8000. pound, was and has been increased for her, by the providence,
care, and great love of the said Dame I. G. her Mother, since her said Fathers
decease, of and with which said sums of 7000. pound in money, and 1000. pound
in Jewels, he the said C. Lord S. does hereby acknowledge the receipt, and
himself to be fully satisfied; And thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof, does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, and for
every of them, fully, absolutely and clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge
the said E. Lord G. and dame I. his Wife, their heirs, Executors, and
Administrators, and every of them for ever by these presents; And for and in
consideration of a competent Jointure to be had and made unto the said D. in
case the said Marriage shall take effect, and that she the said D. shall
survive and overlive him the said Lord S. and for the better preservation and
continuance of all and every the Manors, Lordships, Messuages, Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments hereafter mentioned in the name and blood of the
said Lord S. so long as shall please Almighty God, also for diverse and sundry
other good and valuable Considerations him the said Lord S. hereunto especially
moving; Has covenanted, promised, granted, and agreed, and by these presents
does for himself, his heirs, executors, administrators, and assigns, and for
every of them, covenant, promise, grant, and agree to and with the said E. Lord
G. and I. S. their heirs and assigns, A Covenant to levy a Fine.
and to and with every of them, that he the said C. Lord S. shall and will
before the end of Michaelmas Term, next ensuing the date of these presents,
before the Justices of our Sovereign L. the King, of his Majesty's Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, or before some other competent and fit person or
persons thereunto lawfully and sufficiently authorized, acknowledge and levy
one or more Fine or Fines (Sur conusance de droit come ceo, etc.) in due form
of Law, with proclamations thereupon to be made, according to the Common course
of Fines in that case used, and the statute in that behalf made and provided
unto them the said W. N. and A. T. and their heirs, or the heirs of one of
them, of all those his Manors, The Manors.
Lordships, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called or known by the several
names of S, etc. situate, lying and being in the County of Es. with their and
every of their rights, revenews, members and appurtenances whatsoever, and of
all that the Rectory and Church of H. with the appurtenances thereof
whatsoever, General words.
and of all and singular Messuages, Houses, Edifices, Barns, Stables,
Dove-houses, Back-sides, Orchards, Gardens, Lands, Tenements, Meadows,
Feedings, Pastures, Commons, Ways, Passages, Wast-grounds, Heaths, Furze,
Moors, Marshes, Woods, Under-woods, Rents, Reversions, Services, Tithes, as
well great as small, and of all other Hereditaments whatsoever, situate, lying
and being, growing, arrising, renewing, and increasing within any the Towns,
Parishes, Hamlets, Tithings, or Fields of S, etc. in the said County of E. and
in every or any of them, or elsewhere to the said Manors, Rectory, or other
the premises, or any of them belonging, or in any wise appertaining, or
therewith used and enjoyed, by such name and names, and under such number of
Manors, Messuages, Cottages, and acres, and in such sort, manner and form as
by the said E. Lord G. and I. S. their heirs or assigns, or by their or any of
their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably advised, devised or
required. The true intent and meaning of which said Fine and Fines, so to be
acknowledged and levied of the said premises, between the said parties as
aforesaid shall be, and so shall be construed, meant, intended and adjudged to
be, to and for the use and behoof of the said W. N. and A. T. their heirs and
assigns for ever; To the only intent and purpose that they the said W. N. and
A. T. shall and may stand and be full and perfect tenements of the Freehold of
the said Manors, Lordships, and all and singular the premises, and of every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, until one or more perfect
common Recovery, or common Recoveries, may be had and executed of all and
singular the same premises, To suffer a Recovery.
against them the said W. N. and A. T. and their heirs, according to the true
intent and meaning of the said parties to these presents; And that they the
said W. N. and A. T. from and after the acknowledging and levying of the said
Fine or Fines by the said C. Lord S. to them the said W. N. and A. T. in manner
and form as aforesaid, shall and will before the end of the said Michaelmas
term next ensuing the date of these presents, permit and suffer the said E.
Lord G. and I. S. to sue and prosecute several Writs of Entry (Sur disseisin in
le post) against them the said W. N. and A. T. of the said Manors, Lordships,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and premises, and of every part and parcel
thereof, with the appurtenances by such name and names, and under such number
of Manors, Messuages, Cottages, and acres, and in such sort, manner and form,
as by the said E. Lord G. and I. S. and their heirs, or by their or any of
their Council learned in the Law, shall be advised, devised or required, into
and upon every of which said several Writs of Entry (Sur disseisin in le post)
so to be brought the said W. N. and A. T. shall personally appear: And then
immediately after their appearance and defense made, shall and will in the said
actions, vouch to Warranty the said C. Lord S. and he the said Lord S. upon
such vouchee of him to be made, shall and will in the said actions so to be
brought forth with Gratis, and without Process appear thereunto, and enter
into Warranty, and vouch over, to warranty the Common Vouchee, to the end that
the Common Vouchee may also appear and enter into Warranty, and afterward make
default, or depart in despite of the Court, so that several perfect common
Recoveries, with double vouchers may be had, prosecuted, and executed in and
upon the said several Writs of Entry (Sur disseisin in le post) in all things
according to the usual, and common order and form of Common Recoveries, for the
assurance of Lands and Tenements in such cases used, of all and singular the
said several Manors, Lordships and premises before mentioned, and of every
part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances; And that full execution and
seizin, shall be had and taken thereof accordingly; And it is hereby
covenanted, granted, concluded, and fully and absolutely agreed on, by and
between all and every the aforesaid parties to these presents, for themselves,
their heirs and assigns, and it is the true intent and meaning of these
presents, and of all and every the aforesaid parties to the same, that the said
several Recoveries, and the execution thereupon to be had, shall be, and so
shall be adjudged, deemed, esteemed, and taken to be, and the Recoverors, their
heirs and assigns, and every of them, shall and will immediately from and after
the Execution of the said Recoveries, stand and be seized, and be adjudged,
deemed, esteemed, and taken to be seized of all and singular the said Manors,
Lordships, Lands, Hereditaments and premises before mentioned, and every part
and parcel thereof, with their and every of their appurtenances to and for all
and every the several and respective uses, behoofs, intents, and purposes
hereafter in these presents mentioned, expressed, limited, and declared; And to
or for none other use, behoof, intent or purpose whatsoever, (that is to say)
to the use and behoof of the said C. Lord S. and his Assigns, for and during
the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any manner of wast,
and from and after his decease, then to the use and behoof of the said D. L.
and her assigns, for and during the term of her natural life, for and in the
name of a Jointure, of and for her the said D. And from and after her decease,
then to the use and behoof of the heirs of the body of the said C. Lord S. on
the body of the said D. lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue,
then to the use and behoof of the right heirs of the said C. Lord S. for ever.
And the said Right Honorable C. Lord S. for himself, his heirs, executors,
administrators and assigns, and for every of them, does further covenant,
promise and grant to and with the Right Honorable E. Lord G. and I. S. their
heirs and assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents* in manner
and form following (that is to say) that he the said C. Lord S. at the time of
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, is lawfully and rightfully
seized, of and in all and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rectory
and premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances of
a good, sure, perfect, lawful, and indefeasible estate in Fee-simple, or in
Fee-tail to himself, and the heirs of his body, without any Reversion or
Remainder in the Kings Majesty, and without any manner of Condition or
Conditions, Mortgage, Limitation of use or uses, or other thing or things
whatsoever, whereby to alter, change, charge, defeat, determine, or make void
the same; And that he the said Lord S. has full power, good right, and lawful
and absolute authority in his own proper right by these presents, to raise,
limit and appoint all and every the aforesaid several uses and estates before
mentioned, and that all and singular the premises, and every part and parcel
thereof, with their and every of their rights, members and appurtenances now
are and be, and so from time to time and at all times for ever hereafter, shall
and may continue, stand, remain, and be to all and every the several uses,
intents and purposes before in and by these presents limited, expressed,
appointed and declared, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted,
exonerated and discharged, or otherwise well and sufficiently saved, defended
and kept harmless of and from all and all manner of former and other gifts,
grants, bargains, sales, leases, estates, joyntures, dowers, and titles of
dower, and of and from all rents, and arrerages of rent-annuities, and
arrerages of Annuities, Statutes-Merchant, and of the Staple, Recognizances,
Judgments, Executions, Extents, Fines, Forfeitures, Issues, Amerciaments,
Intentions, Principle Seizins, Liveries, Wills, Entails, Limitations of use or
uses, and of and from all other titles, troubles, arrerages, charges, claims,
demands and encumbrances whatsoever; And the said C. Lord S. for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them, does
likewise further covenant, promise and grant to and with the said E. Lord G.
etc. their heirs and assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents,
that he the said Lord S. and his heirs, shall and will from time to time, and
at all times hereafter, within the space of seven years next ensuing the date
of these presents, at and upon every reasonable request, and at the only proper
costs and charges in the Law of the said Lord S. and his heirs, further do
make, acknowledge, execute and suffer, or cause, or procure to be done, made,
acknowledged, executed and suffered all and every such further and reasonable
act and acts, thing and things, device and devices, assurance and assurances in
the Law whatsoever, for the further, better, and more perfect assuring, surety,
and sure making, settling and conveying of the said Manors, etc. premises,
and of every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances to continue,
stand, remain, and be to a^ and every such several uses, behoofs, intents,
limitations and purposes, as are thereof in and by these presents limited,
expressed, appointed, and declared, be it by Fine or Fines, Recovery or
Recoveries, with single, double, or more voucher or vouchers, Feoffment or
Feoffments, Deed or Deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the enrolment of these
presents, or by any other ways or means whatsoever, as by the said E. Lord G.
and I. S. their heirs and assigns, or by any of them, or by their, or either
or any of their Council learned in the Law, shall be reasonably advised,
devised or required; And finally, the said C. Lord S. for and in Consideration
of the said Marriage shortly hereafter by the grace of God, to be had and
solemnized between him the said C. Lord S. and the said D. L. and for the great
love and affection which he the said Q. S. has and does bear unto the said D.
L. does for himself, his heirs and assigns, and for every of them, Covenant,
promise, grant and agree to and with the said E. Lord G. and I. S. their Heirs
and Assigns, and to and with every of them by these presents, that he the said
C. Lord S. and his Heirs, and all and every other person or persons that now
be, or which hereafter shall stand, or be seized of any estate of inheritance
of the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and premises, or any part thereof, shall
and will stand and be seized of so much, and such part and parcel of the said
Lordships, Manors and premises, as either in respect of not making and naming
the right Tenant of the Freehold, in the several Writs of Entry aforesaid, or
in respect of any other legal defect shall not be by the several, and
Recoveries aforesaid, well and sufficiently assure, and settle to the several
uses before in and by these presents expressed, to the several and respective
uses, intents and purposes hereafter in and by these presents expressed,
appointed and declared, and to none other use, intent or purpose whatsoever,
(that is to say;) To the use and behoof of the said C. Lord S. and his Assigns,
for and during the term of his natural life, without impeachment of or for any
manner of wast, and from and after the decease of the said C. Lord S. then to
the use and behoof of the said D. L. and her assigns, for and during the term
of her natural life, and from and after her decease, then to the use and behoof
of the heirs of the body of the said C. Lord S. on the body of the said D.
lawfully to be begotten, and for default of such issue, then to the use and
behoof of the right heirs of the said C. Lord S. for ever. In witness whereof
to one part of these present Indentures, remaining with the said E. Lord G.
Dame I. his wife, D. L. and I. S. The said C. Lord S. W. N. and A. T. have
interchangeably subscribed, and set their several hands and seals, and to one
other part of these present Indentures, remaining with the said W. N. and A. T.
the said C. Lord S. E. L. G. dame I. his wife, D. L. and I. S. have
interchangeably subscribed, and set their several hands and seals, and to one
other part of these present Indentures remaining with the said C. L. S. the
said W. N. A. T. E. L. G. dame I. his wife, D. L. and I. S. have
interchangeably subscribed, and set their several hands and seals the day and
year first above written. Anno Dom.

A Condition to save harmless where one Attorns Tenant, with a Covenant to
grant a Lease when the premises are settled in the Obligee.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such; That whereas the with in named I. S.
has attorned Tenant, and does and is contented to pay his rent, being eleven
pounds ten shillings per annum, unto the within bound T. S. his heirs or
assigns, for the Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, wherein the said
I. S. now dwells situate near W. London: If therefore the said T. S. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, do from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, clearly acquit, discharge, or sufficiently save harmless and
indemnified the said I. S. his executors, administrators and assigns, goods and
chattels, as well against one R. N. of the Parish of Saint G. in the Fields, in
the County of M. gent. and K. his wife, and against the heirs and assigns of
the same K. as also against all and every other person and persons whatsoever,
of, for, from touching and concerning all such and so much rent, as he the said
I. S. his executors, or assigns, has already paid, or shall hereafter pay to
the said T. S. his heirs or assigns, for the Tenement aforesaid with the
appurtenances, and also of and from all actions, suits, charges, distresses,
forfeitures, judgments, executions, and all other damages, troubles and
encumbrances whatsoever, that shall or may arise, or grow or be had, commenced
or prosecuted against the said I. S. his executors, administrators or assigns,
by reason of paying the said rent, or any part thereof unto the said T. S. his
heirs or assigns, or by reason of occupying of the said Tenement. And further,
if in case the said T. S. his heirs or assigns, do or shall quietly hold and
enjoy the possession of the Tenement aforesaid with the appurtenances (amongst
other things) as he the same T. now does for and during the space of two years
next coming, after the date within written, without any further or new suit;
Then if the said T. S. his heirs or assigns, do within one month next after the
end and expiration of the said term of two years, or after such time as the
estate of the premises shall be perfectly settled in the said T. or his heirs,
at the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the Law of the said
I. S. his executors or administrators, by good, lawful and sufficient Indenture
of Lease (in due form of Law to be had, made and executed) demise, grant, and
to farm-let unto the said I. his executors, administrators and assigns, all the
said Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, wherein the said I. now
dwells as aforesaid, for so many years as will make up the remainder of the
term of years in his former Lease, granted full twenty and one years, and under
the yearly rent of eleven pounds ten shillings, quarterly to be paid to the
said T. his heirs or assigns, or within one and twenty days next after every
quarter day by even portions, and with such other reasonable covenants therein
to be contained, as are commonly used in such like Leases: That then this
present Obligation shall be void and of none effect, or else it shall stand,
and remain in full force, strength, and virtue.

A Counter-Condition to save harmless from a bond entered into, for payment of
money.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such; That whereas the within named R. C.
at the special instance and request, and for the only debt of the within bound
I. S. by one obligation of the date hereof, is and stands jointly and
severally bounden with the said I. S. unto I. le T. of London Merchant, in the
sum or penalty of one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, with
condition thereupon endorsed, for the payment of fifty pounds of like lawful
money of England, on the last day of November, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God, according to the computation of the Church of England, one
thousand six hundred twenty and four, at the now dwelling house of H. C. of
London gent. situate in I. lane in L. as by the same Obligation and Condition
may appear: If therefore the said I. S. his executors, administrators or
assigns, or any of them, do and shall well and truly pay, or cause to be paid
to the said I. le T. his executors, administrators or assigns, or some of them
on the said last day of N. above mentioned, and at the place aforesaid the said
sum of fifty pounds, and do thereby clearly exonerate, acquit and discharge
the said R. C. his executors and adminstrators, as well of and from the same
Obligation before recited, as also of and from all actions, suits, costs,
charges, judgments, executions and demands whatsoever concerning the same;
That then this present Obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to
remain and abide in full force and virtue.

A Condition to save harmless an Executor, for payment of several Legacies to
Orphans, with a Covenant to see the same Legacies disposed to the best
advantage for the Legatees.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such; That whereas M. D. late of St. I.
street, in the County of M. widow deceased, by her last Will and Testament in
writing, bearing date the tenth day of M. in the year of our Lord God, one
thousand six hundred and fourteen, did amongst other Legacies and bequests,
give and bequeath unto M. T. and A. T. daughters of the within-bound T. T. five
shillings a piece of lawful money of E. as by the same Will more at large
appears. Which said sums of five shillings a piece, the within named I. S.
executor of the last Will and Testament of the said M. D. has at the request
of the said T. T. at and before the ensealing and delivery hereof, paid and
disbursed to the said T. T. for the use and behoof of his said daughters M. and
A. If therefore the said T. T. his executors and administrators, and every of
them, do from time to time and at all times hereafter, freely and clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise well and sufficiently save,
defend, and keep harmless the said I. S. his executors and administrators, and
every of them, and all and every of his and their Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattels, as well of, from and against the said M. and A. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, as also of, from and against all other persons
whatsoever, of, for and concerning the payment of the said sums of five
shillings apiece to the said T. T. their Father as aforesaid; And of and from
all actions, suits, costs, charges, damages, expenses and demands whatsoever,
which he the said I. S. his executors, administrators or assigns, shall
hereafter happen to encur, sustain, or be put unto, for or by reason of the
payment of the said sums of five shillings apiece, for the use of the said M.
and A. to the said T. their Father as aforesaid; That then this Obligation
shall be void, or else it shall stand in full force and virtue.

A Condition to pay the Rent reserved in a Lease, according to the Covenant
therein expressed.
THe Condition of this Obligation is such; That whereas the within named I. C.
by his Indenture of Lease of the date within Written, did demise, grant, and to
farm-let unto the within bound H. B. all that Message or Inn, called the sign
of the White horse, with all Cellers, Sollers, Chambers, Rooms, Yards, Stables
and appurtenances thereunto belonging, as it is now in the tenure or occupation
of the said I. C. set, and being in S. in the Parish of St. O. in S. in the
County of S. (except as in the same Lease is excepted;) To have and to hold the
same from the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist next coming after the
date of the same lease, unto the end and term often years, and one quarter of a
year from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yielding and
paying therefore yearly, during ten years of the said term of ten years, and
one quarter of a year to the said I. his executors or assigns, twenty and four
pounds of lawful money of England, at four Terms of the year, that is to say,
at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, the Birth of our Lord God, the
Annunciation of our Lady, and the Nativity of St. John Baptist, or within
fifteen days next after every of the said Feast-dayes by even portions. And
for the last quarter of a year, six pounds at the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel next ensuing, the said term of ten years, or within Fifteen days
then next following, as by the same Lease more at large appears: If therefore
the said H. B. his executors or assigns, do yearly, and every year during the
said term of ten years, well and truly yield and pay, or cause to be yielded or
paid to the said I. C. his executors or assigns, the said yearly Rent of twenty
and four pounds at the said four Feasts or terms of the year mentioned in the
same Lease, or within fifteen days next after every of the said Feast-dayes,
by even portions, and the said sum of Six pounds at the said Feast, of St.
Michael the Archangel, next after the end of the said ten years, or within
fifteen days then next following, according to the tenor and true meaning of
the same Lease; That then this Obligation to be void and of none effect. Or
else it to be in full force and virtue.

A Deffezance on a Recognizance, or Statute staple.
THis Indenture made the one and twentieth day of August, Anno Dom. 1634. and
in the tenth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles by the grace of
God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc.
Between I. B. Citizen and Salter of London, of the one part, and G. B. Citizen
also, and Salter of L. of the other part; Witnesses, that whereas the said G.
B. by a certain Recognizance of the nature of a statute of the staple, made and
provided for the recovery of debts, taken, Recognized, and sealed before Sir I.
C. Knight, Mayor of the staple at W. and E. L. Esquire Recorder of the City of L.
bearing date with these presents, stands and is bound unto the said I. B. in
the sum of four hundred pounds of lawful money of England payable, as by the
same Recognizance more at large appears: Nevertheless, the said I. B. is
contented and agreed, and does covenant, promise and grant for himself, his
heirs, executors and administrators, to and with the foresaid G. B. his heirs,
executors and administrators, and to and with every of them by these presents;
That if the said G. B. his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns, or any
of them do pay, or cause to be paid unto the said I. B. his executors,
administrators or assigns, or any of them, at or in the now dwelling house of
the said I. B. situate in the Parish of St. A. H. London, the sum of two
hundred and eight pounds of lawful money of E. on the three and twentieth day
of F. next coming after the date of these presents without fraud or coven; That
then the foresaid Recognizance shall be utterly void and of none effect, or
else it to remain in full force, strength, and virtue; In witness whereof the
parties first above named to these present Indentures, enter-changeably have
set to their hands and seals, dated the day and year first above written.

A Declaration that a man's name in a Conveyance of Land, was only in trust.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, I, S. V. of L. Goldsmith, sends
greeting: Whereas I. R. of, etc. in the County of S. gent. lately purchased of
Sir I. W. of, etc. all that Bain and yard, with the appurtenances, parcel of or
belonging to the late Rectory of B. S. in the County of S. now or late in the
tenure or occupation of the said I. R. his assignee or assignees, which said
premises were by the direction and appointment of the said I. R. conveyed by
the said, etc. to me the said S. V. and my heirs, as by the said Conveyance
thereof, bearing date the five and twentieth day of September last past may
appear, which said Conveyance was so made to me only in trust, to and for the
benefit of the said I. R. and his heirs; Now know ye, that I the said S. V. do
hereby acknowledge and declare that I am nominated partly in the said recited
Deed of bargain and sale, by and on the behalf of the said I. R. and that I am
therein trusted only by and for him the said I. R. and his heirs, and that I do
not claim to have any right or interest in the said barn and premises, or any
part thereof, by the said Conveyance so made to me, or otherwise to my own use
or benefit, but only to and for the sole use and benefit of the said I. R. and
his heirs; And I the said S. V. do for my self, and my heirs, covenant to and
with the said I. R. and his heirs by these presents, that I the said S. V. and
my heirs, shall and will at any time hereafter upon request, and at the costs
and charges of the said I. R. and his heirs, by good assurance and conveyance
in Law, convey the said barn and premises to the said I. R. and his heirs, or
to such other person or persons as he shall nominate, direct or appoint. In
witness whereof I the said S. V. have hereunto put my hand and seal the, etc.
day of, etc. in the year of our Lord God, one thousand six hundred fifty and
one.

A grant of Lands in Fee, in consideration of money, and in further
consideration of exchange of other Lands.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses that the said L. G. and
also for and in consideration of a certain competent sum of lawful money of
England to him in hand before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by
the said I. B. well and truly paid, and for and in consideration of other
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments by the said I. B. conveyed and assured to
the said L. G. and his heirs in exchange; Whereof and wherewith the said L. G.
acknowledges himself fully satisfied and contented, and thereof, and of every
part and parcel thereof, clearly acquitteth and discharges the said I. B. his
heirs and assigns, by these presents has bargained, sold, aliened, enfeoffed
and confirmed, and by these presents, does fully and clearly bargain, sell,
alien, enfeoffe, and confirm in exchange unto the said I. B. and his heirs; All
that Site, and capital Message or Tenement with the appurtenances situate,
etc. now being in the tenure or occupation of the said L. G. or his assigns,
and all and every the barns, stables, outhouses, orchards, gardens, and other
appurtenances to the said Message or Tenement belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, and all and every other the Lands, Meadows, Pastures and Closes
therewith occupied by the said L. G. and being in E. aforesaid; And all that
Message or Tenement, with the appurtenances situate and being in E.
aforesaid, and 30. acres of land, meadow, and pasture thereunto belonging, now
or late in the tenure, etc. And all that Message, etc. and all that Cottage,
etc. and all and every the Commons, Wastes, Grounds, Leys, and other
appurtenances to the premises or any of them belonging, or in any wise
appertaining; And all and every other the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
situate, lying and being in E. aforesaid, with all and singular the
appurtenances, whereof E. G. Esquire Father of the said L. died seized of an estate
of inheritance, and the Reversion and Reversions of the premises, and of every
part and parcel thereof, and all and every the Rents and yearly profits
whatsoever, reserved upon whatsoever lease, demise or grant, leases, demises or
grants made of the premises, or of any part thereof, except and always
reserved out of this present grant, bargain and sale to the said L. G. his
heirs and assigns, the Parsonage of C. and the Parsonage house and grounds
thereunto belonging, within, etc. now in the occupation of R. B. clerk, and
also except, etc. And also the said L. S. for the said Consideration has
bargained and sold, and by these presents does, etc. to the said I. B. and his
heirs, and all and every the Deeds, Evidences, Escripts and Muniments
whatsoever, touching or concerning only the premises, or only any part or
parcel thereof, all and every which Deeds, Evidences and Writings, or as many
of them as the said L. G. now has, or any other to his use, or by his delivery
has or have, or which he may lawfully come by without suit in Law; The said L.
G. Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, for himself, his heirs,
executors and administrators, to and with the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns, safely to deliver to the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, before the
Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, next ensuing the date hereof, whole and
uncancelled, to have, hold, and enjoy the said Capital Message or Tenement,
and all and every the said Messuages, Tenements, Lands, Meadows, Pastures,
Commons, and all and every other the premises, with the appurtenances to the
said I. B. his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof of the
said I. B. his heirs and assigns for ever; And the said L* G. for himself, his
heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them, does covenant, promise
and grant to and with the said I. B. his heirs and assigns, that he the said
L. G. is and stands at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, and so
shall be at the execution of the first estate of inheritance, of and in the
premises to the said I. B. soly, lawfully and rightfully seized of a good,
lawful, perfect and rightful estate in the Law in Fee-simple, of and in the
said Capital Message or Tenement with the appurtenances, and of and in all and
every the said Messuages, Tenements, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and all and
every other the premises with the appurtenances, and of and in every part and
parcel thereof, to the proper use of the said L. G. and his heirs for ever,
without any manner of Condition, and without any Reversion or Remainder
thereof, or of any part thereof in the Kings Majesty, his Heirs or Successors,
or of any other person or persons whatsoever, and that he has good right, just
and true title, and lawful authority to bargain, sell and assure the same to
the said I. B. and his heirs, according to the tenor and true meaning of these
presents; And also the said L. G. for himself, his heirs, executors and
administrators, and every of them, does covenant, promise, and grant to and
with the said I. B. his heirs and assigns by these presents, that the said I.
B. his heirs and assigns, shall, and lawfully may from hence for ever peaceably
and quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy the said Capital Message or Tenement,
and all and every other the premises with the appurtenances, without any
manner of let, trouble or interruption of the said L. G. his heirs or assigns,
or of any person or persons claiming, by, from or under any the Ancestors of
the said L. G. clearly discharged, or for ever hereafter sufficiently saved
harmless by the said L. G. his heirs and assigns, of and from all and every
other bargains, sales, estates, leases, statutes-merchant, and of the staple
Recognizances, Judgments, Joyntures, Dowers, Annuities, Fines, etc. and of and
from all and every other charges and encumbrances whatsoever, by the said L. G.
or any of his Ancestors, had, made, committed or done, or willingly suffered
before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, or before the execution of
an estate and seizin of and in the premises to the said I. B. his, etc. except
the rents and services to be due and done to the chief Lord or Lords of the Fee
or Fees of the premises in respect only of the Seigniory thereof, and also
except one Lease and Demise made by the said E. G. of the said Tenement now in
the occupation of the said I. R. for term of certain years, which shall expire
within 9. years now next coming, whereupon is reserved the yearly Rent of 30.
shillings; And one Lease and Demise made to, etc. for certain years, not
exceeding the term of 17. years now to come, whereupon is reserved, etc ut
predict. or for certain years, whereof there are not now to come above the
numbe of 17. years, and whereupon is reserved, etc. which said several yearly
rents, and every of them, shall continue and be payable to the said I. B. his
heirs and assigns, during the continuance of the said several Demises, And also
the said L. G. covenanteth and grants by these presents, for himself, his
heirs, executors and administrators, to and with the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns, that he the said L. G. and A. his wife, and the heirs of the said L.
and all and every other person and persons, and their heirs having, or that
shall have any right, estate or interest of or in the premises, or any part
thereof, by, from or under the said L. G. or by, from or under any of his
Ancestors, shall and will from time to time during five years now next ensuing,
at the reasonable request, costs and charges of the said I. B. his heirs and
assigns, do make, and execute, or cause, knowledge and suffer to be done, all
and every such further act and acts, thing and things, device and devices in
the Law whatsoever, be it by Deed or Deeds, enrolled, or not enrolled, Fine,
Feoffment, Recovery, with double or single Voucher or Vouchers, release,
confirmation, or otherwise with warranty against the said L. G. and his Heirs,
and the Ancestors of the said L. G. or otherwise without warranty for the
further and more better and perfect assurance, surety and sure-making of the
said Capital Message or Tenement, Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and all and every
other the premises with the appurtenances to the said I.B. his Heirs and
Assigns, as by the said I. B. his Heirs or Assigns, or his or their Council
learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised or advised: In witness, etc.

Articles concerning Lands purchased until the Covenants could be made.
Articles of agreement i^dented, made, concluded and agr^ed upon the (...) day
of Sept. between H.D. of E. in the C. of H. gent. of the one party, and F.R. of
the Parish of S. M. in the fields in the C. of M.T. of the other party, viz
IMprimis, the said H. D. (for the consideration hereafter in these presents
mentioned and expressed) for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said F.R.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, that he the said H. D. and (...) his wife, their Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, shall and will at the proper costs and charges in
the Law of the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Admin. or Assigns, by or before
the tenth day of October, now next coming after the date of these presents,
make, seal, deliver, do, execute and acknowledge all and every such Act and
Acts, Deed and Deeds, Fine and Fines, Assurance or Assurances, or other
conveyances in the Law whatsoever, as he the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors or
Assigns, or his or their Council learned in the Law shall reasonably devise,
advise or require for the sure conveying, settling, assuring and sure-making
unto the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns for ever,
All that Message or Tenement with all the Appurtenances thereunto belonging or
appertaining, as the same now is in the occupation of B. A. Pewterer his
Assignee or Assignees; And of all that Message or Tenement with all the
Appurtenances thereunto belonging or appertaining, as the same now is in the
tenure or occupation of (...) S. Chandler, his Assignee or Assignees: And of
all that room or shop with the Appurtenances, now in the occupation of W.
Cheese-Monger, all which premises are situate, lying and being on the
South Side of the High Street, commonly called Fleet Street London, over
against the Conduit at or near the corner turning into Salisbury Court there.

In consideration whereof he the said F. R. for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Administrators, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said H. D.
his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them by these
presents, that he the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, or some of them, shall and will well and truly satisfy, content and
pay, or cause to be satisfied, contented and paid unto the said H. D. his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns the full sum of five hundred and
ten pounds of lawful money of England in manner and form following; viz. Ten
pounds thereof at the ensealing and delivery of these presents, the receipt of
which said ten pounds, the said H. D. does hereby acknowledge and confess, and
thereof does clearly and absolutely exonerate, acquit and discharge the said F.
R. his Heirs, Executors and Administrators for ever by these presents; And the
other five hundred pounds residue and in full payment thereof forwith and
immediately after that he the said H. D. and A. his wife, their Heirs,
Executors or Assigns, shall have levied and acknowledged to the sole and only
proper use and behoof of the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Admin. and
Assigns, (in due form of Law) such Conveyances and Fine or Fines, of all the
premises with their Appurtenances before mentioned or intended to be sold unto
him the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, as the Council learned in
the Law of the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns shall
reasonably devise, advise or require without covin or delay.

Item, it is agreed between all parties to these presents, that all Assurances
and Conveyances, and all Fine or Fines hereafter to be had, levied and
acknowledged of all the premises before mentioned, shall be and enure, and
shall be deemed, construed and taken to be and enure to the sole and only
proper use, benefit and behoof of him the said F R. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns for ever, and to no other use, intent or purpose
whatsoever.

Lastly, it is agreed that if the said (...) D. does not travail up in person
to the Cities of London or Westminster, for to levy and acknowledge such Fine
or Fines, or other conveyances as shall be requisite for the sure settling of
the premises unto the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors and Assigns in form before
mentioned, then he the said H. D. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns shall pay and
allow unto the said F. R. his Heirs, Executors or Assigns at the acknowledging
of such Fines, the sum of ten shillings sterling, for and toward his charges
in procuring of a Writ called dedimus potestatem to enable her the said D. to
acknowledge the same Fine in the Country. In witness, etc.

Bonds to perform Covenants. A plain bargain and sale to be enrolled.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of in the seventh year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles, by the grace of God of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, Defender of the faith, etc. Between I. B. Citizen and Grocer of
London of the one part, and I. D. of H. in the County of E. Esquire I. S. of
Lincolns Inn in the County of M. Esquire I. C. of D. in the County of H. Clark,
and R. D. Gent. second son of the said I. D. of the other part, witnesses that
the said I. B. for and in consideration of the sum of five hundred and thirty
pounds of good and lawful money of England to him in hand paid by the said I.
D. the receipt whereof he acknowledges by these presents, has granted,
bargained and sold, and by these presents does clearly and absolutely grant,
bargain and sell unto the said I. D. I. S. I. C, and R. D. their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, all that Field or parcel of land, lying and being in R. in
the County of E. commonly called or known by the name of Hilly Field; And all
that little Marsh or parcel of Marsh-ground, lying and being at or near the end
of the said Field or parcel of Land; And also all that great Marsh or parcel of
Marsh-ground, and the little Marsh or parcel of Marsh-ground adjoining to the
same great Marsh in R. aforesaid; All which premises do contain together by
estimation thirty and five acres, be they more or less, and are set, lying and
being in R. aforesaid, and now or late in the tenure and occupation of T. L. of
H. in the said County of E. Esquire and the abovenamed I. D. or one of them, or of
the Assignee or Assignees of them, or one of them, and all buildings, woods and
under-woods standing and growing upon the premises, and all ways, easements,
profits, commodities and appurtenances whatsoever thereunto belonging, and all
the reversion and reversions, remainder and remainders, estate and interest of
him the said I. B. of and in all and singular the premises, with all and every
their incidents, and all evidences, writings or muniments, of or concerning the
said lands and premises, to have and to hold the said Field, Marshes,
Marsh-grounds and premises before mentioned with all and every their
appurtenances unto the said I. D. I. S. I. C. and R. D. their Heirs and Assigns
to the only use and behoof of them the said I. D, I. S. I. C. and R. D. their
Heir, Heirs and Assigns for ever: In witness, etc

Articles for building. Articles of a Covenant indented, made, concluded and
agreed upon the, etc. Between I. F. of, etc. of the one part, and T. B. of,
etc. of the other part, as follows, viz.
FIrst, the said T. B. and C. T. for themselves their Executors and
Administrators do jointly and severally covenant, promise and grant to and with
the said I. F. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents in
manner and form following, that is to say, that they the said T. B. and C. T.
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some of them for the
consideration hereafter mentioned, shall and will forthwith take down the now
dwelling house of the said I. F. situate and being in St. M. lane in the
Parish of St. M. in the Fields abovesaid, and in the room thereof shall make,
erect, build and set up one new Tenement or dwelling house to contain thirty
feet and a half in width, or near thereabouts, and in length thirty and six
feet or near thereabouts, and shall make one Celler of the same length and
breadth, and shall make two rooms upon each floor, the one forward and the
other backward, and shall make the Celler six foot and a half deep, the Story
over the same Celler nine feet deep, the Story over the same Story nine feet
deep likewise, the half Story over the same Story seven feet and a half deep,
and the Garrets over the said half Story, three feet and a half to the top of
the raising piece, and shall make one stack of Chimnies to contain ten fire
rooms of such largeness as the room will conveniently afford, and shall make
them sufficient to carry away the smoke without any annoyance; And shall pave
the Celler with good and well-burned bricks, and shall lay all the foot paces
with green and yellow tyles, saving the Cellers which is to be laid with brick,
and the dining room which is to be laid with Galley tyles, and shall make the
walls on the South side, the forefront, and the backside according to his
Majesty's Proclamation, and shall provide and set up of all manner of timber to
be used about the same building of good and sufficient scantlings, and shall
lay all the floors with good seasoned Norway deal boards well shot and plained,
and closely laid and well nailed, and shall make good and easy stairs of Elm
boards so large and spacious as the room will afford, and shall well and
sufficiently tyle all the said building with good tyles and lath the tyling
with heart laths, and shall lay all the walls, sealings and partitions with lime
and hair, and shall make a good and sufficient batten deal door toward the
street, and shop windows suitable to the same, and shall set one sufficient
lock and bolt to the street-door, one bolt to the backdoor, and one bolt to
the Celler-door, and shall make one sufficient door to every room, and hang
them with sufficient hooks and hinges, and shall make sufficient casement to
all the windows, that is to say, four in the dining room, two in the next room
over the dining room, two in the half Story and one in the Garret, one in the
room next over the Celler backward, and one in each room over the same room,
and shall make all the windows as large and convenient for light as the rooms
will afford, and shall make such lights for the Stairs in the side-walls as
shall be fi^ting and convenient, and shall make or do, or cause to be made and
done, all the Plumbers work and Glasiers work of and belonging to the said
building well and sufficiently, and shall color all the outside of the
windows, doors, shutting windows and the Posts at the doors with oil of a
stone color, and the inner side of the window of the lower room backward, and
the inner side of all the windows of every room above Stairs with size of the
same color, And shall make cresting-boards to every window, and shall make a
Pent-house covered with tyles over the street-door and shop windows the whole
breadth of the fore front, and shall set up two fair turned Posts at the
street-door with two Benches to sit on, and also shall set up one vise board in
the shop of Oak, four inches thick, two foot broad, and eight feet long, make
one brickwall of seven foot high with the Coping, one brick in length thick,
and thirty foot long or thereabouts, to sever the yard of the said I. F. from
the yard now in the occupation of L. S. I. and also shall remove the Cole-house
now standing in the yard of the said I. F. from the place where it now stands
to the upper end of the said yard, and also shall make one shop with a room or
chamber over it, which shall adjoyne up close to the said Cole-house; And the
said new brick-wall which is to be built for the dividing of the said yard,
which said shop or shed and room over it, is to contain in length thirteen
feet, in breadth nine feet, and in height up to the eves seven feet, and shall
cover it with tyles and lay all the walls with loam and lime and hare rendered
upon; And shall make one forge Chimney and a Hearth to it and a frame to hang a
pair of bellows on, and shall set up two vise boards the one below and the
other above, such as the said I. F. shall provide, and shall make two shutting
windows the one below and the other above, and hang them with hinges, and shall
make the floor of the chamber or room above of sufficient joysts and boards,
and shall make a ladder to go up thereinto with flat steps, and shall find and
provide at their costs and charges all and all manner of tyles, bricks, laths,
nails, lead, iron, sand, lime, loame, hair, scaffolding, stuff, and all other
materials whatsoever which shall be fit and needful to be used in or about the
said buildings and shall carry away all the rubbish, loam and earth whatsoever
which shall arise by reason of the said building, and also shall make one good
and sufficient gutter to carry the water out of the yard into the street, and
shall and will well and work-man-like frame, erect, set up and finish all the
said building in and by all things that belongs to the works of a Carpenter,
Brick-layer, Tyler, Plasterer, Plumber, Smith and Glasier, at or before the
four and twentieth day of August now next coming after the date hereof.

In consideration of which said building to be done and finished in manner and
form aforesaid, the said I. F. for himself, his Executors and Administrators,
does covenant and grant to and with the said T. B. and C. T. their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns by these presents in manner and form following,
that is to say, that the said I. F. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
or some of them, shall and will truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said T.
B. and C. T. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or in the now
dwelling house of A. T. shoemaker, situate and being in St. M. Lane aforesaid,
the sum of one hundred pounds of lawful money of England, at three several
payments in manner and form following, that is to say, thirty three pounds six
shillings and eight pence thereof in hand, at and before the sealing and
delivery hereof, the receipt whereof the said T. B. and C. T. do hereby
acknowledge and confess, and thereof and of every part and parcel thereof do
clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said I. F. his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, for ever by these presents; other thirty
three pounds six shillings and eight pence thereof when the whole building is
framed, the Chimneys set up, and the roof tyled, and other thirty three pounds
six shillings and eight pence thereof residue and in full payment of the said
sum of one hundred pounds when the whole building is fully set up and in every
respect finished; And further, that the said T. B. and C. T. their Executors,
Administrators or Assigns shall have and take to his and their own uses all he
timber, boards and other materials whatsoever to be pulled down in or about the
said old house, and use so much thereof in the new building as shall be good,
sound and serviceable; In witness, etc.

Articles between two Joint purchasers for dividing the rent, and avoiding
survivorship.
Articles of Agreement indented, made, concluded and agreed upon the (...) day
of August. Between P. D. of S. P. C. within the Parish of S. M. in the Fields,
in the County of M. Victualler of the one part, and L. D. of the Parish of S.
M. in the Fields aforesaid, Citizen and Merchant-Taylor of L. of the other
part, viz.
IMprimis. Whereas G. G. of the Parish of St. M. in the Fields aforesaid G. by
his Indenture of lease, bearing date the eleventh day of M. in, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did demise, grant, and to farm-let unto T. N.
then of the City of W. in the said County of M. Tailor; All that piece or
parcel of ground, parcel of the Earl of B. pasture, called Covent Garden and
Long-Acre, or one of them butted and bounded, and containing such length and
breadth, as in the said Indenture is expressed, together with all that Message
or Tenement thereon, or on part thereof, then lately erected and built by the
said G. G. containing a Kitchen, a Cellar, a Shop, and Back-room over the said
Kitchen and Cellar, and six Chambers over the said Shop and Back-room, with
Studies and other conveniences thereunto belonging; Together likewise with a
Well, a House of Office, and a Cross Partition wall then lately built on the
said ground, together also with all lights, easments, watercourse, profits,
and emoluments whatsoever to the said premises belonging, and all ways and
passages then used, or which then after should be laid forth and used, to and
for the said new erected building, all which premises are situate, lying and
being in the Parish of St. M. in the fields aforesaid; To have and to hold unto
the said T. N. his executors, administrators and assigns, from the Feast Day of
the Annunciation of our blessed Lady, St. Mary the Virgin, then next ensuing
the date of the said Indenture of Lease, unto the full end and term of twenty
and one years from thence next ensuing, fully to be complete and ended, at and
for the yearly Rent of six and twenty pounds of lawful money of England
payable; As in and by the said recited Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse
Covenants, Grants, Clauses, Conditions and Agreements therein contained, more
at large does and may appear: And whereas the said T. M. by his Indenture of
Lease bearing date the Sixteenth day of M. in the, etc. for the Consideration
therein expressed, did demise, grant, and to farm-let unto P. P. of London
gent. the several Rooms, Chambers, Easments and Commodities in the said
Indenture particularly mentioned and set down, being part and parcel of the
Messuages or Tenements wherein the said T. N. did then, or of late thentofore
inhabit and dwell together, with all Ways, Lights, Easments, Watercourse,
and amongst others those that fell in the Common Sewer at that present, through
the Tenements, that the said N. did then possess, and all profits, commodities
and appurtenances whatsoever to the said several Rooms and premises belonging
and appertaining, as the same were then severed, divided, parted and allotted
out for the use and occupation of the said P. P. To have and to hold the said
Rooms and premises unto the said P. P. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the day of the date of the said last mentioned Indenture of
Lease, unto the full end and term of Fourteen years from thence next and
immediately ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended; At and for the yearly
Rent of four and twenty pounds payable, as in and by the said last recited
Indenture of Lease, amongst diverse Covenants, Clauses, Conditions and
Agreements therein concontained, more at large also does and may appear, the
estate, right, title, interest and term of years to come of him the said T. N.
of, in, and to all the above recited premises and every part thereof is
lawfully come and vested in the abovenamed P. D. and L. D. by force and virtue
of one Indenture of Assignment bearing date the six and twentieth day of May
last past before the date of these presents made and granted by the said T. N.
unto the said P. D. and L. D. as in and by the said Indenture of Assignment
amongst other things therein also contained more at large likewise appears;
And whereas also the said P. D. and L. D. by their Indenture of Lease bearing
date the twentieth day of June last past before the date of these presents,
(for the consideration therein expressed) did demise, grant, and to farm-let
unto G. D. of the Parish of St. C. D. in the said County of M. Citizen and
Painter-stainer of London, all that Message or Tenement being part of the
premises first above recited, containing the several rooms particularly in the
said last mentioned Indenture expressed with the yard, garden-plot and house of
Office, and all lights, easements, ways, passages, profits, commodities and
appurtenances whatsoever to the said premises be longing or in any wise
appertaining, (except out of the said last demise as in the said Indenture is
excepted) to hold the said premises unto the said G. D. his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, from the Feast of the Nativity of St. John Baptist
next ensuing the date of the said last mentioned Indenture of Lease unto the
full end and term of twelve years and half a year, two months and fourteen
days from thence next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, at and for
the yearly rent of thirty pounds payable as in and by the said last recited
Indenture of Lease amongst diverse other covenants, clauses and agreements
therein also contained more at large likewise appears; and whereas further
the said P. D. and L. D. by one other Indenture of Lease bearing date the
twentieth day of July last past before the date of these presents (for the
consideration in the same Indenture) expressed, did demise, grant, and to farm
let unto W. H. Citizen and Fish-monger of London, all that Message or Tenement
with the yard behind the same, and the house of Office in the same yard
standing, being parcel likewise of the said premises first above recited, for
the term of twelve years one half a year two months and fourteen days
commencing from the Feast day of the Nativity of St. John Baptist last past
before the date of the same Indenture of Lease, for and under the yearly rent
of ten pounds and ten shillings payable likewise, as in and by the said last
mentioned Indenture of Lease amongst diverse covenants, clauses and agreements
in the same Indenture of Lease contained more at large also appears.

Now it is covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said parties to
these presents, and the true intent and meaning of either of them is, that
forasmuch as either of the parties abovenamed have disbursed and paid their
several equal shares and proportions of money for the purchase of the premises
above recited, that the several rents of thirty pounds, fourteen pounds, and
ten pounds ten shillings upon and by the said several mean Indentures of Leases
above recited reserved, (the said yearly rent of six and twenty pounds reserved
upon the said first recited original Indenture of Lease payable to the
abovenamed G. G. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, for all the before
recited premises being first paid and discharged) shall be equally divided and
shared between the said parties, parties to these presents, share and share
like; and if it shall happen either of the said parties to die before the end
and expiration of the term and terms of years in the said several Indentures of
Leases before recited, or in any or either of them now to come and unexpired,
that then and from thenceforth, it shall and may be lawful to and for the
Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the party deceasing, to have, occupy,
receive, take and enjoy the full and entire moiety or half-part of all the
rents, issues and profits of all and singular the before recited premises with
the appurtenances, in as large and ample manner and form to all intents and
purposes, as the party so dying should or ought to have done, if he had lived
and were then living, any grant, restraint, provision, statute or ordinance to
the contrary notwithstanding, and that neither of the said parties, nor the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns of them, or of either of them, shall or
will at any time or times hereafter take, demand or receive any of the rents
above reserved, or make or give any dircharge or acquittance of or for the same
or any part or parcel thereof, without the knowledge, assent or consent of the
other party, his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, first had and obtained
in writing under his, or their hand or hands.

(bona fide) for the same) or shall or will take or endeavor to take any new
Lease for years, lives or otherwise, or any other grant whatsoever of the
before recited premises, or any part or parcel thereof in reversion after the
expiration of the term of years they now have and enjoy in the said recited
premises, by force and virtue of the said first recited Indenture of Lease
made from the said G. G. to the said T. N. as aforesaid, either from the said
G. G. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, from the Right Honorable the
Earl of B. his Heirs or Assigns, or any other immediate Tennant or Farmer,
claiming from, by or under them or any of them, without the knowledge, assent,
consent or refusal likewise of the other party, his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, in writing under his or their hand or hands or before sufficient
witnesses first had and obtained.

Lastly, it is covenanted, concluded and fully agreed upon, by and between the
said parties to these presents, that all and every the several Deeds and
Writings before recited, shall be reputed, deemed and taken, to be and enure to
the joint use and uses, benefits and commodities of both the said parties,
their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever, and that the party, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, so keeping the same writings, shall and will upon the reasonable
request or requests of the other party, his Executors, Administrators or
Assigns, at all times hereafter produce and bring forth, and be ready to show
all and every, or so many of the same writings that shall be required at his or
their hands, either for the producing and getting of a further time or title,
of and in all or any part of the before recited premises, or for the
maintenance of the title of the premises, (if it should be questioned) or for
the selling and conveying away of all his or their estate or interest, of and
in, the moiety of all, or any part of the said recited premises without covin
or delay; In witness, etc.

Articles to surrender copyhold Lands, till the surrender can be had.
Articles of Agreement, indented, had, made, concluded and agreed upon the
(...) day of January. Between P. C. of B. in the County of W. gent. of the one
part; and H. H. of M. T. L. gent. of the other part; as follows.
IMprimis, whereas the abovenamed P. C. now stands lawfully seized in his
demesne, as of fee according to the custom of the Manor of B. aforesaid,
after the decease of T. C. Widow, of and in one copyhold or customary message
together with a garden, backside, out-house, and other appurtenances thereunto
belonging, situate in the upper street in B. aforesaid, and parcel of the
aforesaid Manor. And whereas the said P. C. is now possessed of the aforesaid
Message and premises with the appurtenances by demise from the said T. C. for
a certain term ending at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, next ensuing
the date above written, The said P. C. does for himself, his Heirs, Executors
and Assigns, covenant, grant and agree to and with the said H. H. his Executors
and Assigns by these presents, that he the said P. C. on this side, and before
the first day of Easter term next ensuing, shall at the costs and charges of
the said H. H. convey, assign and set over unto the said H. H. and his Assigns,
all the present estate, title and interest of the said P. of, in and to the
said Message and Premises, and every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, and shall and will put the said H. H. or his Assigns in
peaceable possession thereof, and that the same shall be then in as good plight
and repair as now they be.

England, by the said H. H. unto the said P. C. well and truly paid, whereof
the said P. does acquit and discharge the said H. by these presents, as also
for and in consideration of the sum of one hundred pounds of like money to be
paid by the said H. to the said P. as hereafter in these presents is limited,
does for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, and every of them,
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said H. H. his Executors and Assigns
by these presents, that he the said P. C. and S. his wife, shall and will
before and on this side the said first day of Easter term next ensuing, by
usual names surrender according to the custom of the said Manor, into the
hands of the Lord of the said Manor, the aforesaid Message and Premises
with the Appurtenances, and all their estate, possession, reversion, remainder,
right, title and interest therein, to the use and behoof of the said H. H. his
Heirs and Assigns for ever, and that he the said P. has now good right and
title to the said Message and Premises with the Appurtenances, and a good
estate therein in fee-simple according to the custom of the said Manor after
the decease of the said T. C. and shall make and give unto the said H.H. such
assurance and security for the quiet enjoying of the Premises, as the said P.
has had, made or given unto him by W. W. of whom the said P. lately purchased
the same, and shall and will assign over to the said H. by such ways or means
as by him or his Council learned in the Law shall be reasonably devised,
advised and required, all bonds and other callateral security, which the said
P. now has, for the safe and free enjoying of the Premises or any part
thereof.

England.



An Indenture of Covenants to stand seized to uses, in consideration of
marriage, etc.
THis Indenture made the (...) day of January, in the year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord Charles, by the graec of God of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland King, Defender of the faith, etc. the second, between I. F. of D. in
the County of D. Gent. of the one part, and N. G. of W. K. in the said County
Yeoman, I. S. of S. in the said County Yeoman, and W. B. of S. aforesaid,
Yeoman of the other part, witnesses, that for and in consideration that the
said I. F. has married A. the daughter of the said N. G. and by her issue has
one son, and to the intent to provide and establish some certainty of living
and livelihood to be had and enjoyed by or unto the said A. after his decease,
and for the establishment of some part and portion of those inheritances as is
descended unto him the said I. F. from his Ancestors, unto his said son I.
begotten on the body of the said A. and unto such other issues as it shall
please God to send him of the body of the said A. for the natural affection and
fatherly love he bears unto the said I. and other issues he may happen to
have on the body of the said A. and to the intent that she the said A. may be
the better able to bring up, educate and help the said I. his son, and such
other child or children as he shall happen to have by the said A. when it
shall please God to call the said I. F. out of this mortal life, if it shall
chance that she shall over-live the said I. F. does by these presents,
covenant, grant and agree to and with the said N. G. I. S. and W. B. and to and
with every of them, that he the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of
them, shall and will from henceforth stand and be seized of and in one Message
or Tenement, and Cottage, with all and singular the Appurtenances, set, lying
and being in S. in the Parish of B. R. now in the tenure of I. L. under the
yearly Rent of ten shillings, one other Cottage, parcel of the said Tenement,
now in the tenure of one W. D. under the yearly rent of five shillings, and of
and in one other Message or Cottage, parcel also of the said Tenement, now in
the tenure of one C. B. and the yearly Rent of four shillings, and of and in
all those several Messuages or Cottages adjoining to the Farm of D. that is to
say, one Cottage and Mault-Mill garden, and an acre and half of pasture, now in
the tenure of A. F. Widow, under the yearly Rent of four shillings, and of and
in one other Message or Cottage, and Orchard, and an acre and half of pasture,
now in the tenure of one I. D. under the yearly Rent of five shillings and
four pence, and of and in that other Message or Cottage, and garden
thereunto, now in the tenure of B. B. Widow, under the yearly Rent of four
shillings, and of and in all that other Cottage called T. now in the tenure of
(...) A. under the yearly Rent of four shillings, and of all that other
Message or Cottage now in the occupation of R. W. under the yearly Rent of
four shillings, and of and in all and singular the Reversions and Reversion,
Remainders and Remainder, Rent and Rents, of, in, to, or out of, all the Lands,
Tenements, Messuages and Hereditaments aforesaid, or any of them, and of and in
any other his profits, commodities and advantages whatsoever, to the said
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, or any of them belonging, or in any wise
appertaining, or had, used or occupied in or upon the same, to the only proper
use and behoof of the said I. F. for and during his natural life without
impeachment of any manner of wast, and from and after his decease to the only
use and behoof of the said A. during her natural life, and from and after her
decease to the only proper use and behoof of the said I. son of the said I. F.
the father, for and during his natural life, and after his decease to the use
and behoof of the said I. F. and the Heirs of the body of the said A. by the
said I. F. lawfully begotten, or to be begotten, and for default of such issue
to the use of the right Heirs of the said I. F. the father for ever, and it is
covenanted, granted and fully agreed by these presents, by and between the said
parties to these presents, and every of them, their, and every of their Heirs
and Assigns, that all and every grant, feoffment, fine, recovery and other
conveyance, assurance, assurances and conveyances whatsoever, to be had, made
or executed by the said I. F. his Heirs and Assigns, or any of them within the
space of five years next ensuing, of or concerning the said Lands, Tenements,
and other the Premises aforesaid, or of or concerning any part or parcel
thereof, at all times hereafter shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be only
to the intents, uses and purposes in these presents mentioned and expressed,
and to no other uses, intents or purposes; provided always, and it is agreed
between the said parties to these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to
and for the said N. G. I. S. and W. B. or the survivours of them, whereof the
said I. F. to be one, at all and every time and times, and from time to time,
during the life of the said I. F. at the will and pleasure of such of them
four, three or two of them which then shall be living, whereof the said I. F.
to be one by their Deed or Writing, indented of all them which then shall be
living, be it four, three or two of them, so that the said I. F. be one of
them, or such of them as shall be parties to the same sealed and subscribed, to
alter, determine, diminish, change or enlarge any or all the aforesaid use and
uses before declared of the Premises or any part thereof, the use and estate
before limited, declared or appointed to the said A. wife of the said I. F. for
the term of her life only excepted, and by the same, or any other such Writing
indented, sealed and subscribed as is aforesaid, to limit and appoint, give or
grant, the use or uses of the Prem^sses, or any part thereof to the said
persons, or any of them, or to any other person or persons in fee-simple,
fee-tail, for life, lives or years, or otherwise, and that after such
alteration, determination, enlarging, limitation or appointing of any the use
or uses aforesaid, or of any parcel thereof, the use only of such and so much
of the Premises, whereof any such alteration, determination or enlarging of
any use or uses aforesaid, shall be as is aforesaid, had or made, shall be and
shall be deemed and adjudged to be to such, and those person and persons, and
to such and those use and uses, and in such and the same manner and form, as by
such Writing subscribed and sealed as is aforesaid, shall be declared only, and
to any other or others, person and persons, use or uses, or in any other manner
or form, any thing in these presents contained to the contrary, notwithstanding
always saving and preserving the said use and estate before limited and
declared to the said A. for the term of her natural life as is aforesaid, etc.

An assignment of a Bond by way of collateral security.
KNow all men by these presents, that whereas T. M. of the Parish of Cl^ndon in
the C. of Wilt. Gent. and W. M. of the Parish of Cheredon in the said C. of
Wilts Gent. by their obligation dated the, etc. stand jointly and severally
bounden unto me H. T. Citizen and Salter of London, in the penal sum of one
hundred pounds of good and lawful money of England, with condition thereupon
endorsed for payment of fifty and two pounds of like good and lawful money on
the, etc. next ensuing the date of the said obligation, as by the same it does
and may appear. Now I the said H. T. for the better security of the like debt,
for which I have given bond, and for other good causes and considerations me
hereunto moving, do by these presents make, constitute, ordain, and in my stead
and place put and authorize D. M. of the Inner Temple London Gent. my true and
lawful Deputy and Attorney irrevocable for me and in my name, but to the sole
use and behoof of my said Attorney, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
to ask, demand, receive and take of them, the said T. M. and W. M. or either of
them, their or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns the said
sum of fifty and two pounds; and for non-payment thereof, giving, and by
these presents granting unto the said D. M. by the tennor hereof, my full,
whole and absolute power and authority in the execution of the premises, the
said T. M. and W. M. or either of them, their or either of their heirs
executors or administrators, in my name or the name of my executors or
administrators to arrest, sue, implead, imprison, and condemn, and proscure in
any Court or Courts whatsoever, and them or any, or either of them out of
prison to release as precisely as the Law will it permit for recovery of the
said debt and penalty. And upon recovery and receipt thereof to deliver up the
said obligation to be cancelled, and finally to do all and every other lawful
act whatsoever for recovery of the said debt and penalty or any part thereof,
without yielding any account thereof, or therefore, as to my said attorney
shall seem meet and expedient, as fully and effectually as I my self might or
could do, or cause to be done in or about the premises. And moreover I the
said H. T. do by these presents covenant and promise to and with the said D. M.
his executors and administrators, that at the day of the date of these presents
I have not done, or caused, or suffered to be done any act or thing whatsoever,
whereby the said recited obligation is any manner of ways released or
discharged, and that neither my self, my executors or administrators shall or
will at any time hereafter release or discharge the same, or cause, or suffer
the same to be released or discharged without the privity and consent of him
the said D. M. his executors or administrators, in that behalf first had and
obtained; provided nevertheless that if T. W. of, etc. in the C. of, etc.
Yeoman, his executors, administrators or assigns, shall and do well and truly
satisfy, pay and discharge one obligation of one hundred pounds, bearing date
the, etc. of, etc. last past, wherein and whereby the said T. W. stands
bounden unto A. W. of, etc. aforesaid Spinster, with condition for payment of
fifty one pounds and ten shillings of lawful money of England on the first day
of, etc. next ensuing; that then these presents to be revokable, and shall be
utterly void and of none effect, any thing herein contained to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding. In witness whereof I the above named H. T. have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. in the, etc.

A grant of the moity of an annuity during life.
THis Indenture made the, etc. in the year of our Lord God 1652. between A. B.
of the Parish of, etc. in the County of K. Esquire the eldest son of K. B. widow,
the late wife of Sir R. B. Knight deceased, and S. the wife of the said A. of
the one part, and Sir G. H. of C. in the said C. Knight of the other part,
Witnesses that the said A. B. and S. his wife, for and in consideration of the
sum of 300 l of lawful English money to them in hand paid by the said Sir G. H.
at and before the ensealing and delivery of these presents, the receipt whereof
and themselves therewith fully satisfied and paid, they the said A. B. and S.
his wife do hereby acknowledge and thereof do release, acquit and for ever
discharge the said Sir G. H. his heirs, executors and administrators, by these
presents have granted, bargained, sold, aliened, released and confirmed, and by
these presents do fully and absolutely grant, bargain, sell, alien, release and
confirm unto the said Sir G. H. one annuity or annual rent of 50 l by the
year, being the moity or half part of one entire annuity or annual rent of 100
l by the year, arising due or payable to the said A. B. out of the Rectory or
Parsonage impropriat of E. in the said C. of K. with the appurtenances, or out
of any part or parcel thereof, or out of all or any of the messuages, houses,
barnes, stables, buildings, yards, courts and globe lands, tithes, oblations,
obventions, emoluments, rents, corn rents reserved, or other rents, fruits,
commodities, profits or advantages whatsoever to the said Parsonage and Rectory
belonging; to have and to hold the said annuity or annual rent of 50 l herein
before mentioned to be bargained and sold unto the said Sir G. H. and his
assigns from the, etc. of, etc. last past before the date of these presents,
for and during the natural life of the said Sir G. H. or for the tenth of
fourscore years, if he the said Sir G. H. shall happen so long to live, in as
large, ample and beneficial manner to all intents and purposes, as he the said
A. B. and S. his wife or either of them, now has, ever had, or could, or
might, or can, or may in any wise grant, bargain, sell or release the same; and
to the only use and behoof of the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, and to no
other use or purpose. And the said A. B. and S. his wife, the said annual rent
of 50 l herein before mentioned, to be bargained and sold by the year, against
themselves and all other persons lawfully claiming, or to claim the same or any
part thereof, by, from, or under them or either of them unto the said Sir G. H.
and his assigns shall and will warrant and defend by these presents. And the
said A. B. and S. his wife, do for their said lives, and either of them, their,
and either of their heirs, executors and administrators, and every of them,
covenant, promise and grant, to and with the said Sir G. H. his heirs,
executors and assigns, and every of them by these presents in manner
following, that is to say, that they the said A. and S. or one of them, for and
notwithstanding any act or thing by them, or either of them heretofore done or
suffered to the contrary, have or has in themselves, or one of them, at the
time of the ensealing of these presents, good, right and lawful authority to
grant, bargain, sell and release unto the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, the
said annual rent of 50 l by the year, in such manner and form as is herein
before mentioned and expressed; and further that the said Sir G. H. and his
assigns shall or lawfully may during the natural life of the said Sir G. H. or
the term of, etc. if the said Sir G. H. shall so long live, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, enjoy and receive, retain and keep the said annual rent,
or sum of 50 l by the year before granted, without the lawful let, suit,
trouble, denial or disturbance, of or by the said A. B. and S. his wife or
either of them, or any other person or persons lawfully claiming by, from or
under them or either of them, their or either of their estate, right or title.
And further that the said bargained premises were, are, and be, and so shall
remain and continue to the said Sir G. H. and his assigns, during the natural
life of the said S. G. H. or the term of fourscore years, if the said Sir G.
shall so long live, free and clear, and freely and clearly acquitted and
discharged, or else by the said A. B. and S. his wife, or one of them, their or
one of their heirs, executors or administrators, sufficiently saved harmless
and indempnified of and from all former and other gifts, grants, bargains,
sales, estates, leases, joyntures, dowers, statutes, judgments, recognizances,
titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever at any time heretofore had, made,
committed or suffered, or hereafter to be had, made, committed or suffered by
them the said A. B. and S. his wife or either of them; and the said A. B. and
S. his wife, do for themselves, their heirs, executors and administrators and
every of them covenant and promise to and with the said, Sir G. H. his
executors, administrators and assigns and every of them by these presents, That
they the said A. B. and S. his wife, and all and every other person and persons
now having or lawfully claiming, or which shall or may hereafter have or claim
any lawful estate, right or title in or unto the said bargained premises or any
part thereof, by from, or under them, the said A. and S. or either of them
shall and will at all times during the space of five years next after the date
of these presents, if the said Sir G.H. shall so long live at and upon the
reasonable request, and at the proper costs and charges in the Law of the said
Sir G. H. and his assigns, make, acknowledge and execute to the said Sir G. H.
and his assigns all and every such further and other lawful and reasonable act
and acts, devise, conveyance and assurance in the Law whatsoever, for the
better holding and enjoying of the said 50 l per annum herein before granted,
according to the true meaning of these presents, as by the said Sir G. H. and
his assigns or any of them, his or their council learned in the Laws of this
Nation shall be in that behalf advised or devise^ and required, so that such
person and persons who are to make such further assurance as aforesaid, be not
therein compelled to travel further than to the Cities of London and
Westminster. Which said other assurance so to be had and made as aforesaid
shall be and inure, and shall be adjudged and taken to be and inure, and by the
said parties is hereby so declared to the only use and behoof of the said Sir
G. H. and of his assigns, and to none other use or purpose whatsoever, in
witness whereof, etc.

Articles of agreement for the holding copyhold lands from year to year for the
term of, etc. at a certain rent, etc.
Articles of covenants and agreements, had, made and agreed upon the, etc. day
of, etc. in the, etc. between R. C. of, etc. in the C. of, etc. husbandman, E.
his wife, P. C. their son, and I. B, of, etc. in the said C. husbandman of
the one part, and T. F. of, etc. in the said C. Yeoman of the other part, viz.
WHereas the said R. C. by certain articles of agreement indented bearing date
the, etc. in the, etc. year of, etc. made between the said R. C. and P. C. of
the one part, and the said I. B. of the other part, did for the considerations
therein mentioned, covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. B. his
executors and assigns, that he the said I. B. his executors and assigns, and
every of them should have and enjoy from the date of the said articles from
year to year every year for and during the term of twenty five years then next
and immediately following, according to the custom of the manor of, etc. all
and singular the lands, meadows, pastures, feedings, commons and appurtenances
belonging to a customary or copyhold tenement, with the backside, barnes,
stables, and stals thereunto belonging, and the West End of the dwelling house,
and the room over-head, then in the possession of one S. S. except and always
reserved unto the said R. C. and P C. and every of them, their assignee and
assigns, all the other part of the dwelling house, then in the possession of
the said R. C. and P. C. with the garden and one Cows pasture, and five acres
of arable land, whereof one acre and half lies at a place called the Quarre,
one acre by the piece in the East-field, half an acre in Rudlands in the same
field, one acre in the West-Rowden, and one acre called Cecelies, with free
ingresse, egresse and regresse thereunto at all times and seasons convenient,
without the lawful let, disturbance or interruption of him the said I. B. his
assign or assigns, if they the said R. C. and P. C. or either of them should
happen so long to live; and likewise should have and enjoy during the said term
limited as aforesaid, the use of the Eastern part of the backside as it was
then divided and appointed; all which recited premises belongs unto one
customary or copyhold tenement with the appurtenances in, etc. aforesaid,
parcel of the manor of, etc. above said, which the said R. C. then had and
enjoyed during his natural life, according to the custom of the said manor,
the remainder whereof after the decease of the said R. being expectant unto the
said P. his son by way of succession according to the said custom, as in and
by the said articles of agreement amongst other covenants and agreements
therein also contained at large it does and may appear; it is now concluded and
agreed by and between the said parties to these presents, touching and
concerning the premises in manner and form following; that is to say, first
the said I. B. for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators, and every
of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said T. P. his
executors and assigns by these presents, that he the said T P. his executors
and assigns and every of them, for and in consideration of the sum of 20 l
of lawful money of England (to be paid to the said I. B. by the said T. P. in
manner and form hereafter expressed) shall and lawfully may for and
notwithstanding any act or deed that the said I. B. has done to the contrary,
have and enjoy from and after the day of the date hereof from year to year
every year, for and during the term of ten years then next and immediately
following, according to the custom of the said Ma^^^^ of, etc. all and
singular the recited premises mentioned in the said recited articles of
agreement (except as is therein excepted) if they the said R. C. and P. C. or
either of them so long shall happen to live, without the lawful let,
disturbance or interruption of him the said I. B. his assign or assigns.

And the said T. P. for himself, his executors, administrators and assigns
does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said I. B. his executors,
administrators and assigns by these presents; that he the said T. P. his
executors, administrators and assigns shall and will well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said I. B. his executors, administrators and assigns
for the rent of the said premises for the said ten years, the sum of 20 l of
lawful money of England, that is to say 10 l thereof at the Feast day of the
birth of our Lord Christ now next ensuing the date hereof, and the other 10 l
residue of the said sum of 20 l on the Feast day of the Nativity of St. John
the Baptist now next also ensuing the date hereof; and that he the said T. P.
his executors or assigns nor any of them shall fell, cut down, top, lop, or
shroud any the trees or quick-sets growing upon the recited premises.

Item the said R. C. and P. C. for themselves, and either of them for himself,
their executors and administrators and every of them do covenant, promise and
grant to and with the said T. P. his executors and assigns by these presents,
that he the said T. P. his executors and assigns and every of them (for and in
consideration that they the said R. C. and P. C. are indebted unto the said T.
P. by obligation in the sum of 10 l with condition thereunto for payment of 20
l which obligation is become forfeited, and which is now delivered up to the
said R. C. and P. C. at the ensealing and delivery hereof to be cancelled)
shall and may likewise have and enjoy, from and after the date hereof from year
to year every year, for and during the said term of ten years then next and
immediately following according to the custom of the said manor of, etc. the
milke-house parcel of the said customary or coppyhold tenement, the chamber
over the kiching, and also the Barn, stable, and all other the outhouses
whatsoever, to the said customary or coppyhold tenement belonging, together
with the use of the kitching and backside in common with the said R. C. and P.
C. and further, that the said T. P. his executors and assigns for the
consideration aforesaid, shall and may likewise have and enjoy during the said
term, the said recited five acres of arable land so excepted and reserved unto
the said R. C. and P. C. their Assign and Assigns amongst other things out of
the said recited Articles of agreement as aforesaid (so as the said R. C. and
P. C. and their Assigns shall and may have two acres thereof yearly, the one
to be sown to Wheat, and the other to Barley; the said R. C. and P. C. finding
the seed yearly, but to be dunged with the fold, eared and sown by the said T.
P. his Executors and Assigns, in as good sort, manner and form as the said T.
P. does druge, ear and sow his own land) and together also with free ingresse,
egresse and regresse thereunto at all times and seasons convenient without the
lawful let, disturbance or interruption of the said R. C. and E. his wife, and
P. C. or any or either of them, if they the said R. C. and P. C. or either of
them shall happen so long to live; and further also that it shall and may be
lawful to and for the said T. P. his Executors and Assigns to have and enjoy
all other the premises herein mentioned according to the covenant herein made
by the said I. B. without any let, contradiction or denial of them the said R.
C. and E. his wife, P. C. or any or either of them.



and buildings in and upon the premises, as also every the hedges and fences
of the premises, during the said term.

And the said T. P. for himself, his Executors, Administrators and assigns,
and every of them, does covenant, promise and grant to and with the said R. C.
and P. C. and either of them their Executors, Administrators and Assigns by
these presents, that it shall and may be lawful notwithstanding these presents,
to and for the said R. C. and P. C. and their Assigns, to have and enjoy the
corn and grain now growing and being in and upon the premises for this
summer season at times convenient, with free ingresse, egresse and regresse, to
cut, mow, carry away, and house the same in the barn of the customary
Tenement, and to use the said barn for the thrashing out of the said corn and
grain until the Feast of, etc. next coming.



the premises the first day of May, and so leave the same unto the said J. B.
without suffering the same to be eaten with cattle or spoiled; and shall and
will spend all the straw and fodder in and upon the premises, that shall be
yearly made in and upon the premises, and not elsewhere, and shall and will
also allow unto the said R. C. and P. C. an hundred and half of reed yearly to
be laid upon the houses of the said premises; And for performance of all and
singular the Covenants and agreements aforesaid, on the part and behalf of the
said R. C. and P. C. or either of them to be performed, they the said R. C. and
P. C. do bind themselves their heirs, executors, and administrators, unto the
said T. P. his executors, and administrators, in the sum of 80 l of lawful
money of England, firmly by these presents. In witness, etc.

An obligation and Condition from a Bailiff and his Sureties to a High Sheriff.
Know all men by these presents, That we A. B. C. D. E. F. of, etc. (...) in
the County of, etc. G. H. of in the County of, etc. and I. K. of in the County
aforesaid (...) do hold our selves to be firmly bound unto L. M. high Sheriff
of the County of, etc. aforesaid in, etc. pounds of good and lawful money of
England, To be paid to the said high Sheriff, or to his certain Attorney,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns; To which payment well and truly to be
made, we bind our selves, and every one of us by our selves for the whole and
in the whole, our Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, firmly by these
presents; sealed with our seals. Dated the, etc. in the year of our Lord, etc.
THe condition of this Obligation is such, That whereas the above named, etc.
Esquire high Sheriff of the County of, etc. aforesaid, has made, assigned,
constituted, ordained and established the above bounden, etc. Bailiff of the,
etc. for and during all such time as the said, etc. shall be and continue high
Sheriff of the said County: If therefore the said, etc. during all the time
aforesaid, do well and truly execute al warrants, precepts, process, and
commandments to him hereafter to be directed from the said, etc, and, etc,
Gent. his Undersheriff, his or their deputy or deputies, and due and
sufficient returns do well and truly make, and also do give notice of the
execution thereof unto the said high Sheriff, or Undersheriff in convenient
time, before the returns of the same and the fees of them, and of and for every
other cause, matter, or thing whatsoever happening within the said, etc. due
and payable within one month next after the receipt thereof, do pay or cause
to be paid to the said high Sheriff or Undersheriff, his or their deputy or
deputies; And that the said, etc. do not ask or levy any fee or fees due to the
said high Sheriff or under Sheriff, for the executing or doing of any warrant
or precept whatsoever, but such as are warranted and justifiable by the Laws,
Statutes, and customs of this Nation; And do also well and truly execute, and
return all warrants, precepts, Distring of Levari facias, and process to him
directed from the Justices of Assize and Gaol Delivery, Justices of Oyer and
Terminer, Justices of the Peace, Coroners, Commissioners of the Sewers, Clerk
of the County, and from all other Officers, Commissioners, and Ministers of the
Commonwealth, having authority during all the time aforesaid, and further do
levy and gather all such sums of money, as the said high Sheriff shall be
charged with by reason of the said Office, and leaviable within the said, etc.
being written or extracted to the said Bailiff from the said high Sheriff or
under Sheriff, and do pay or cause to be paid to the said high Sheriff or
Undersheriff the said sums of money within one month after the receipt of the
said extract or writing; And also if the said Bailiff do well and truly pay,
or cause to be paid to the said high Sheriff or Undersheriff the sum of, etc.
of lawful money of England, for the Fee farm of his, etc. and all other rents
and fee farms at the feast of the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, and
Saint Michael the Archangel, by even and equal portions, due to the State
within the said, etc. And also if the said Bailiff do deliver or cause to be
delivered in writing unto the said high Sheriff or Undersheriff before, etc.
next coming, the names of all such freeholders within the said, etc. which
have four pounds per annum freehold or more, together with the names of the
Towns wherein they dwell, and also the names of the Towns, Villages, and
Hamlets, within the said, etc. And the Towns and Villages which ought to have
return and execution of writs; And also if the said Bailiff shall give his
personal attendance upon the high Sheriff and Undersheriff, as well at the
County Court, and such general Quarter Sessions which the Bailiff of the said,
etc. have usually in former times attended; as also at all other times when the
said high Sheriff or under-Sherieff shall require his attendance, and shall
carefully and diligently do and execute whatsoever he shall be lawfully
required to do at Assizes, Gaol Deliveries, County Court, quarter Sessions,
Coroners Enquests, and all other service to be done for the Commonwealth, and
all and every person and persons whatsoever, and at all and every time and
times, upon every reasonable request to him in that behalf to be made* And also
shall be attendant upon the said high Sheriff and Undersheriff, his or their
Deputy or Deputies, and Officers in and about conveying of prisoners to and
from the Gaol, etc. or to and from any place or prison whatsoever, to be
appointed by the said high Sheriff or Undersheriff; And also at the Execution
of prisoners aforesaid, and not to depart before Execution of the prisoners be
fully had and done, and shall well and truly execute the Office of a Bailiff in
all things during the said time: And if the said Bailiff do take any distress
upon every alias or plures Distringas, which issue and be directed to him out
of the County Court, to be holden for the said high Sheriff, and do make due
and lawful returns of the same, and do safely keep such distress so taken, for
the use of the said high Sheriff, in case the same be forfeited; And also if
the said, etc. his Executors and Administrators, do at all and every time and
times hereafter, defend, save, keep harmless and undempnified, the said high
Sheriff, and his Undersheriff, his and their Heirs, Executors, and
Administrators and every of them, and his and their lands, goods and chattels,
as well from and against the State, and all and every person and persons
whatsoever, concerning the premises, or any part of them; and also for and
concerning the escape or escapes of any prisoner or prisoners, that shall be in
the custody of him the said, etc. within the said County, by him arrested, to
him hereafter to be committed upon any warrant, precept, or commandment from
the the said high Sheriff or Undersheriff; And for and concerning every other
matter, cause, or thing whatsoever appertaining to his said Office, and the
secrets of the said high Sheriff shall keep undisclosed and unrevealed, in all
things that are lawful; and shall also within convenient time deliver, or cause
to be delivered, all precepts, warrants, and extracts to other Bailiffs of the
said County, according to the directions he shall receive from the said high
Sheriff, or Undersheriff, or any other by his or their commandment, or
appointment, Then this present Obligation shall be void and of none effect, or
else shall stand, remain, and be in full force, power, effect, and virtue.

A Condition to save harmless for payment of several Legacies.
THe condition of this obligation is such, That whereas M. D. late of Saint J.
in the County of M. widow deceased, by her last Will and Testament in writing,
bearing date the, etc. of, etc. in the year of our Lord God, etc. did amongst
other legacies and bequeasts, give and bequeath unto J. S. the son of the
within bounden W. S. etc. of lawful money of England, and to T. S. daughter of
the said W. S. one pewter platter, one pewter dish, three pewter saucers, and
five shillings of lawful money of England, and also to S. S. another of the
said daughters of the said W. S. five shillings of like money, as by the same
Will more at large appears; which said sums of five shillings a piece, pewter
platter, pewter dish, and three saucers, the within named J. S. Executor of the
last Will and Testament of the said M. D. has at the request of the said W. S.
at and before the sealing and delivery hereof, paid, delivered, and disbursed
unto the said W. S. for the use and behoof of the said J.S. his son T. and S.
his daughters: If therefore the said W. S. his Executors and Administrators and
every of them, do from time to time, and at all times hereafter freely and
clearly acquit, exonerate, and discharge, or otherwise well and sufficiently
save, defend, and keep harmeless the said J. S. his Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, and all and every of his and their Lands,
Tenements, goods and chattels, as well of, from, and against the said J. S. T.
and S. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns: as also of, from, and
against all other persons whatsoever, of, for, and concerning the payment,
delivery, and disbursement of the said sums of five shillings a piece, pewter
platter, pewter dish, and three saucers, unto the said W.S. their father as
aforesaid; And of, and from all such actions, suits, costs, charges, damages,
expenses and demands whatsoever, which he the said J. S. his Executots,
Administrators or Assigns, shall hereafter happen to incur, sustain, or be put
unto, for, or by reason of the payment, delivery, and disbursement of the said
sums of five shillings a piece, pewter platter, pewter dish, and three saucers,
for the use of the said J. S. T. and S. unto the said W. S. their father, as
aforesaid; That then this obligation shall be void; or else it shall stand in
full force and virtue.

A Counter Condition to save harmless from a bond; well pend.
THe Condition of this obligation is such, That whereas the within named R. C.
at the special instance and request, and for the only debt of the within bound
J. S. by one obligation of the date hereof, is, and stands jointly and
severally bounden with the said J. S. unto J. T. of London Merchant, in the sum
or penalty of, etc. of lawful money of England, with conditions thereupon
indorsed for the payment of, etc. of like lawful money of England, on the last
day of Feburary now next ensuing the day of the date within written, as by the
same obligation and condition may appear: If therefore the said J. S. his
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, do and shall well and
truly pay, or cause to be paid to the said J. T. his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or some of them, on the said last day of Feburary above mentioned,
at the now dwelling house of H. C. of London Gent. situate in, etc. in London,
the aforesaid sum of, etc. and do thereby clearly exonerate, acquit, and
discharge the said R. C. his executors and administrators, as well of, and from
the same obligation, as also of and from all actions, suites, costs, charges,
judgments, executions and demands whatsoever concerning the same, That then
this present obligation to be void and of none effect, or else to remain and
abide in full force and virtue.

A Letter of Attorney to take possession according to the contents of a Lease.
TO all people to whom this present writing shall come, H. T. Citizen and
Girdler of London, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting: Whereas I the
said H. T. have signed and sealed one writing indented, bearing even date with
these presents, purporting a lease to be made by me unto one, etc. of all that
message, with the appurtenances near the Hospital, in, etc. in the County of
etc. late in the tenure or occupation of R. F. deceased, and other Lands and
Hereditaments in the said Indenture mentioned, To hold from the first day of
this instant February, unto the full end and term of five years from thence
next ensuing, as by the said writing indented more plainly appears, which
writing is not yet delivered as my deed. Now know ye, That I the said H.T. have
made, constituted, appointed, and in my place and stead put and by these
presents do make, constitute, appoint, and in my place and stead put, etc. my
true and lawful Attorney, for me and in my name, place, and stead to enter into
and upon the said Message, Lands, and Hereditaments in and by the said writing
indented, mentioned to be demised, or any part thereof; And after such entry
made for me, and in my name, place and stead there upon the premises to
deliver unto the said, etc. or to his lawful Attorney in that behalf, the said
writing indented so by me signed and sealed as aforesaid, as the very act and
deed of me the said H. T. And further to do whatsoever may be necessary in that
behalf; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or cause to be done in the
premises, I the said H. T. do and shall ratify, confirm, and maintain, as if I
had done the same in my own person. In witness whereof I the said H. T. have
hereunto set my hand and seal, the, etc. day of February in the year of our
Lord, etc.

A short Lease of a Message and Lands to be void, on paying of one shilling,
it being the presedent deed.
THis Indenture made the, etc. day of February, in the year of our Lord God,
etc. Between H. T. Citizen and Girdler of London, of the one part, and R. I. of
S. in the County of W. Yeoman, etc. of the other part, Witnesses, that the
said H. T. for diverse good causes and considerations him moving, has demised,
granted, and to Farm letten, and by these presents does demise, grant, and to
Farm let unto the said, etc. all that Message, with the appurtenances near
the, etc. in, etc. in the County of G. late in the tenure or occupation of R.
F. deceased, and all the Barns, Outhouses, Orchard and Garden thereunto
belonging; And all that Close of Meadow or Pasture-ground thereunto adjoining,
containing by estimation five acres, be it more or less; and one little ground,
called or known by the name of Redcraf, adjoining to certain grounds there
called Flankers closes; And one other close of arable land, called the wood
Furlong, adjoining to the lane there leading toward S. on the West; And all
those arable lands to the said message, belonging or reputed, or taken to
belong thereunto, or which were therewith used, occupied, or enjoyed by the
said R. F. deceased, lying and being in the fields of, etc. aforesaid, That is
to say, five and forty acres by estimation, be the same more or less, lying in
the Northfield; and two and twenty acres by estimation, be the same more or
less, lying in the South of, etc. aforesaid, To have and to hold the said
Message or Tenement, Lands and premises, with the appurtenances unto the
said, etc. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from the first day of
this instant February, unto the full end and term of five years from thence
next ensuing, and fully to be complete and ended, yiedling and paying therefore
yearly, during the said term, one Pepper corn, at the feast of Saint Michael
the Archangel, if it shall be demanded. Provided always, That if the said H. T.
his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall at any time hereafter pay, or
tender unto the said, etc. his executors or administrators, or to any other
person or persons, to his or their or any of their use or uses, the sum of
twelve pence in money, for the making void of this present Indenture, and the
demise and lease herein contained, That then and from thenceforth this present
Indenture, and the demise and lease herein contained, shall cease and be void,
any thing herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding; In witness whereof
the said parties to these presents, their hands and seals interchangeably have
set the day and year first above written.

An Award made between four executors.
TO all Christian people, to whom this present writing quadripartite indented
of Award shall come, S. W. Ceazer Knight, Master of the ^olis, sends greeting
in our Lord God everlasting, This Indenture quadripartite also made the second
day of A. in the fifth year of, etc. between Sir W. S. etc. one of the
Executors of the last Will and Testament of R. C. etc. of the first party S T.
Offley, etc. one other of the, etc. of the last Will and Testament aforesaid of
the second part, Sir T. L. etc. one other of the executors of the said last
Will and Testament of the third part, and Sir H. C. etc. one other Executor of
the same last Will and Testament of the said R. of the fourth part witnesses;
That whereas the said R. by his said Testament and last Will bearing date, etc.
amongst diverse and many gifts and legacies therein limited bequeathed and
appointed to sundry persons therein named, as by the same it may appear, has
given and bequeathed all the residue of all and singular his goods, cattels,
leases and other things whatsoever (his debts, funerals and legacies being paid
and performed) unto the said W. S. T. O. and T. L. whom together with the said
H. C. his brother he made and ordained his said Executors of his last Will and
Testament aforesaid; and of the same he has also made and ordained the said W.
C. his Supervisor and Overseer, as by the same his last Will also at large it
does and may appear; and whereas for the avoiding of all doubts, variances,
controversies, suits and strifes, that may and might ensue and grow between the
foresaid parties, touching the said last Will and Testament, and the true
execution of the same: And for and concerning the said residue, surplusage and
remainder of the said goods, cattels and other things (after the said debts,
funerals and legaces discharged) every of the said parties have compromitted
and faithfully promised, and further do severally covenant and grant, to and
with others by these presents, to stand to, obey, abide, perform and fulfill
the award and judgment of the said W. C. Knight, arbitrator between them,
indifferently named and chosen of and upon the premises. Whereupon the same W.
C. taking upon him the charge and business of the said award, and willing, and
minding, as much as in him is, the true execution of the said Testament, and
that a final peace, unity and concord shall be had and continued for ever
between the same parties, for and concerning the premises, has and does by
these presents, by and with the full assent and consent of all and every the
foresaid parties, make, publish and declare this his present award, arbitrament
and judgment between the same parties, touching the premises in manner and
form as follows, that is to say: First, the said Sir W. C. by these presents
does award, judge, and deem, and every of the parties before named, covenanteth
and grants severally for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
to and with the other of them, his and their Executors and Administrators, and
every of them by these presents in manner and form following; that is to say,
That the same Executors, That any of the Executors shall not concel any of the
Testators goods from the other Executors.
or any of them, shall not at any time or times hereafter, willingly or
wittingly conceal, withdraw, or keep close, or cause to be concealed,
withdrawn, or kept close from the said other Executors or any of them, or the
survivors or survivor of them, any such goods, cattels, leases, debts, credits
or other things whatsoever, as has come, or shall happen to come to his, or
their, or any of their hands, custody, possession or knowledge, that were, or
did, or ought to appertain or belong to the said R. C. the Testator, or his
Executors, to the intent the same or any part thereof should not be recovered,
used, ordered, enjoyed or disposed by the same executors, to their and every of
their own proper use, most benefit, commodity and advantage, by equal portions
in manner and form aforesaid.

And it is further ordered and judged by the said Sir W. C. and also fully
condescended and agreed between the said parties; To execute the Testators will
and trust reposed in them.
and every of them severally does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators to and with the others by these presents; That all
the same Executors and every of them shall from henceforth both in name and
deed, take upon him the full and due execution of the foresaid last Will and
Testament, so far as only to the duty, trust and office of executors
appertains or ought to appertain. And furthermore it is ordered, judged and
awarded by the said arbitrator, and also covenanted, That the Executors shall
bear all costs and charges of suits in executing the Testators will equally.
granted and fully agreed between the said parties, and the same parties and
every of them do severally covenant and grant, to and with other of them by
these presents; That if at any time or times hereafter it shall be found and
approved, that the foresaid Testator is and ought to be charged either by law
or conscience, with any other debt or debts, sum or sums of money, or other
duties or things whatsoever, then at this present is well known and does appear
unto the said Executors, or if they or any of them, or the Executors of the
survivor of them, shall at any time or times hereafter happen, to be charged
with any manner of suit or suits, or other charge or charges whatsoever, for or
by reason of the said last Will and Testament, or the due execution thereof
either in law or otherwise; That then all and every the said Executors, and the
survivor and survivors of them, and the Executors or Administrators of such of
them which then shall be dead, shall at their equal and indifferent costs,
bear, support, pay and allow the same charges, and every of them, any thing
herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Another form of an Award.
TO all Christian people, etc. I. S. Sergeant at Law, send greeting, etc.
Whereas diverse variances, suits, controversies, debates and demands have been
heretofore had, moved, stirred and depending between A. B. etc. and C. D. etc.
of, for and concerning, reciting the matter in controversy. For the appeasing
and pacifying of all which suits, debates, variances, controversies and
demands, either of the said parties by their mutual assent and consent have
submitted themselves, and stand bounden each to other by their several
obligations bearing date, etc. in the sum of, etc. a piece with several
conditions endorsed upon either of the same several obligations, to stand to,
obey, observe, perform, fulfill and keep the award, arbitrament, ordinance and
judgment of me the said I. S. arbitrator indifferently elected, named and
chosen between the said parties, as well, of, for, and upon all and all manner
of actions, as well real as personal, suits, quarrels, debts, debates,
trespasses and demands whatsoever, had, moved, stirred or depending in
controversy, between the said parties in any wise before the date of the said
obligations: So that the same award, arbitrament, ordinance and judgment of
the said arbitrator, of and upon the premises were made, declared and yielded
up in writing on this side the tenth day of, etc. as by the same several
obligations and endorsements thereupon made, more at large appears: whereupon
I the said I. S. Arbitrator aforesaid, taking upon me the charge of the said
award, and willing to set the said parties at a final end, peace, unity and
concord, of, for, and concerning the premises: have called both the said
parties before me, and by good advice and deliberation, have seen, heard,
examined and perfectly understood, and perceived their both rights, titles,
estates, interests, demands, evidences and proofs in and to the premises, and
weighing, and pondering the effects and grounds of all the said matters in
controversy; do now make, publish, give up and declare this my present award
indented between the said parties, by and with their both mutual consents and
agreement, of, for, and concerning the premises in manner and form following,
that is to say: First, I the said Arbitrator do by these presents, award,
order, judge and deem, and the said A. B. for his part does covenant and grant
for him, his Executors and Administrators, to and with the said C. D. his
Executors and Administrators by these presents, that, etc. as in other awards,
reciting the matter in varience.

A lease of a Ferry.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. witnesses, that the said I. L. for
and in consideration of, etc. has demised, granted and to farm letten, and by
these presents does, etc. unto the said I. H. his Executors and Assigns, the
moity of the passage Ferry, standage and battalage of P. in the C. of, etc.
together with all easments and commodities thereunto belonging, in as large and
ample manner and form as T. H. or his Assigns has heretofore had or enjoyed
the same, or might, or ought to have had and enjoyed the same, to have and to
hold the said moity of the said passage and Ferry, and all other the premises
by these presents mentioned to be demised, and every parcel thereof with the
appurtenances unto him the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators and
Assigns from the Feast of, etc. unto the end and term of, etc. yielding and
paying, etc. with a clause to make the Lease void for non-payment of the rent.
And the said I. H. does covenant, etc. that he the said I. H. his Executors,
Administrators or Assigns at his and their own proper costs and charges, shall
from time to time during the said term, maintain and keep such boat or boats,
and all other things meet and convenient for the moity of the foresaid passage
and other the premises, as has been heretofore commonly accustomed, and
thereof shall from time to time during the said term, acquit, discharge or
sufficiently save harmless the said I. L. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns.

And that he the said I. H. his Executors or assigns, shall from time to time
during the said term, carry over or cause to be carried over the ferry place
aforesaid from P. to F. the said I. L. and his wife and their heirs, servants,
children, horses and stuff, when and so often as the said I. L. his wife and
their heirs, children, or any other of his family shall require to have
themselves, their servants, horses, or stuff to be carried over the said ferry
from P. to F. aforesaid, without demanding, taking or asking any thing
therefore of the said I.L. his heirs, children or family.

And the said I. L. does covenant, etc. that he the said I. L. his Heirs,
Executors, Discharged of quitrent.
Administrators or Assigns, shall at all times hereafter, and from time to
time during the said term, acquit and discharge, or sufficiently save and keep
harmless, as well the said moity of the said passage or ferry, and all and
singular the before letten premises and every part thereof, as also the said I.
H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, of, for, and from all and all
manner of quitrents whatsoever, which in respect of the said demised premises
during the said term, shall grow due and payable to his Highness the Lord
Protector, his Heirs, Successors or Assigns, or to any other person or
persons whatsoever, excepting the said yearly rent of 3 l before by these
presents assigned; and that he the said I. L. and his heirs the said moity of
the said passage and ferry, and all other the before letten premises with the
appurtenances unto the said I. H. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns,
for the rent above recited to be paid in manner and form above said shall
warrant and defend, during all the said term of twenty one years. In witness.

A release of land in Exchange.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. C. of, etc. and W. L of, etc. and A. now
wife of the said W. L. and late wife of R. B. late of, etc. of the other party,
that whereas on or about the seventeenth day of, etc. now last past, there was
certain agreements had and made between the parties to this present Indenture,
for and concerning the exchange of diverse parts and parcels of their Lands,
Lays, meadows, pastures and hereditaments, with their appurtenances lying and
being in S. and W. and in either or one of them in the said County of Y. as
hereafter is expressed. That is to say, first, that whereas the said W. L. had
and was seized in the right of the said A. his wife, for and during the term of
the natural life of the same A. of diverse arable lands, lays, meadows,
pastures, haddes, flats and hereditaments lying and being dispersed in the town
and fields of S. and W. aforesaid, or in one of them, commonly accounted to be
and contain two hundred acres, be they more or less, now or late in the
tenure or occupation of the said W. L. or of his assigns; it was agreed between
the said parties by the agreements aforesaid, that the said T. C. his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns should have and enjoy, for and during
the term of sixty years, it the said W. L. and A. now wife of the said W. L.
should so long live together all those and every the said Lands, Meadows,
Pastures, Lays and Hereditaments before mentioned of them the said W. L. and
A. his wife lying in S. fields and W. aforesaid, or in either or any of them in
the said County of Y. (except as hereafter is excepted) and that in
consideration thereof the said W. L. and A. his wife, and their Heirs,
Assigns, should have and enjoy, for and during the term of sixty years, if the
said W. L. and A. his wife should so long live together, all the arable Lands,
Lays, Meadows, Pastures and Hereditaments, with the appurtenances, containing
by estimation two hundred acres, be they more or less, lying and being in the
North-field of S. aforesaid, in the said County of Y. as the same was then
measured, dowled and staked out by F. M. Gent. and I. B. then appointed by the
said T. C. only Surveyors of the said Manor. And also all those nine acres of
meadow, etc. by estimation lying and being in S. aforesaid, etc. It is now
therefore fully concluded and agreed, by and between all the said parties to
this present Indenture, that the same premises shall be demised, and letten in
exchange in manner and form hereafter following, that is to say.

The said W. L. and A. now his wife have demised, granted and to farm let in
exchange, Exchange.
and by these presents do demise, grant and to farm let in exchange unto the
said T. C. all those, their and either of their arable lands, lays, meadows,
pastures, hadds, flats and hereditaments with the appurtenances, set, lying and
being within the three several fields of S. aforesaid, called, etc. or in any
of them in the said County of Y. containing by estimation two hundred acres, be
there more or less, now or late in the tenure or occupation of the said W. L.
or of his assigns, which late were the inheritance of R. B. now deceased, and
the inheritance whereof after his death descended and came unto I. B. as son
and Heir of the said R. B. Except and out of this present demise and grant
always reserved unto the said W. L. and A. his wife, etc. as heretofore he or
they have usually had and enjoyed, for and in respect of all the premises, or
as appurtenant to the same; To have and to hold the said arable lands, lays,
meadows, pastures, hads, flats and hereditaments, and all other the premises
before mentioned, to be demised and granted by the said W. L. and A. now his
wife as aforesaid, with their and every of their appurtenances (except before
excepted) unto the said T. C. his executors, administrators and assigns from
the Feast of M. next coming after the date hereof, for, during and until the
full end and term of sixty years, thence next, etc. if the said W. L. and A.
now wife of the said W. L. do or shall so long live together, yielding and
paying therefore yearly during the said term by these presents granted unto the
said W. L. and A his wife and their assigns 1 d of good, etc. at the Feast of
M. only if it be lawfully demanded. In consideration whereof the said T. C.
has demised, granted and to farm-letten in exchange, and by these presents
does demise, grant and to farm let in exchange unto the said W. L. and A. his
wife, all and every the said arable lands, lays, meadows, pastures and
hereditaments, with their appurtenances of him the said T. C. containing by
estimation two hundred acres, be they more or less, lying and being in the N.
field of S. aforesaid, as the same is now measured, dowled and staked out by
the said F. M. and I. B. and also all those nine acres, etc. in a place there
allotted and set out amongst other, for the cottages there as aforesaid, to
have and to hold all the said arable lands, lays, meadows, pastures and
hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises before mentioned, to be
demised and granted in exchange by the said T. C. aforesaid, with their and
every of their appurtenances unto the said W. L. and A. his wife and their
assigns, etc. for, during, and until the full end and term of sixty years
from thence, etc. if the said W. L. and the said A. now wife of the said W. L.
do or shall so long live together, yielding and paying, etc. ut antea.

And the said W. L. does by these presents covenant, etc. in manner and form
following, that is to say, Discharged of former estates and encumbrances.
That they the said W. L. and A. now his wife, their Executors, Administrators
and Assigns or some of them shall and will from time to time and at all times
from henceforth, for, and during the said term of sixty years, if the said W.
and A. now wife of the said W. L. do or shall so long live together, clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise save and keep harmless, and
indemnified as well the said T. C. his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns, and every of them, as also the said premises before mentioned, to be
demised and leased in exchange by the said W. L. and A. his wife, to the said
T. C. and every part and parcel thereof, of, and from all and all manner of
former and other estates, charges, encumbrances, chief rents, troubles and
demands whatsoever, had, made, committed or done by him the said W. L. and A.
his wife, or either of them, or by any other person or persons lawfully
claiming by, from, or under them or either of them; whereby or wherewith the
same premises or any part thereof, shall or may be charged or encumbered, or
whereby the said T. C. his executors, administrators or assigns shall or may
be charged, encumbered or damnified, of, or by reason of the same premises or
any part thereof, except before excepted.

And likewise that he the said T. C. his heirs, executors, administrators and
assigns shall and may at all times hereafter, For quiet enjoying.
and from time to time during the said term of sixty years, if the said W. and
A. now wife of the said W. L. do or shall so long live together, peaceably and
quietly have, hold, occupy, and enjoy all and every the premises to him the
said T. C. demised and granted in exchange as aforesaid, and every part and
parcel thereof with the appurtenances, except before excepted, without any
manner of lawful let, trouble, interruption or disturbance of them the said W.
L. and A. his wife or either of them, or of any other person or persons
lawfully claiming, by, from, or under them or any of them.

And the said C. T. does covenant for himself, ut W. L. antea mutat. mutand.
And whereas it was intended and meant, by, and between all the parties to
these presents, That the said I. B. to whom the right of inheritance of the
premises mentioned to be demised to the said T. C. as aforesaid, does belong
and appertain, (being now in his minority) should have made and granted a
lease in exchange unto the said T. C. of all the said lands and premises to
him the said T. demised as aforesaid, (by the said W. L. and A. his wife) for
the term of eighty nine years, and for the yearly rent of etc. And that
likewise in recompense, satisfaction and exchange thereof, the said T. C.
should have granted in exchange unto the said I. B. a like lease for the like
term of eighty nine years, and for the yearly rent of 1 d of the said lands and
premises demised and granted to the said W. L. and A. his wife in exchange as
aforesaid; and for that neither of the same leases can be now perfectly made
and finished; Therefore it is now further covenanted, concluded and fully
agreed upon, by, and between all the said parties to these presents in form
following, viz.

And the said W. L. does by these presents covenant, etc. that he the said W.
L. shall do his best endeavor, That an Infant shall seal a lease at his full
age of 21 years:
that he may or can to procure and get the said I. B. by his deed indented to
make, seal and deliver as his deed to the said T. C. his heirs or assigns
within three months next after that he the said I. B. shall accomplish his full
age of twenty one years, a sufficient demise, lease and grant in exchange of
all and every the said lands, lays, meadows, pastures, hereditaments and
premises, with their appurtenances to him the said T. C. as aforesaid demised
for the term of eighty nine years, and for the yearly rent of 1 d and with and
under such like and the same covenants, clauses and agreements as before in
these presents are limited, expressed and set down on the part and behalf of
the said W. L. to be performed and done.

And in consideration thereof, the said T. C. does covenant, etc. that if the
said I. B. or his heirs do, and shall make, seal and deliver as his deed unto
the said T. C. his heirs or assigns, the said demise, lease and grant in
manner and form as is aforesaid, by the said I. B. to be signed, sealed and
delivered to the use of the said T. C. his heirs or assigns in the presence of
three credible persons, whose names shall be subscribed or endorsed upon the
same, that then he the said T. C. or his heirs, at, and upon the receiving of
the said lease and grant, shall and will (being thereunto required) make, seal
and deliver in exchange unto the said I. B. or his assigns a like lease of all
and every the premises to the said W. L. and A. his wife granted as aforesaid
for such like term and number of years, and with and under such rent and
covenants, as shall be contained and specified in the said lease so to be made
by the said I. B. to the said T. C. as aforesaid. In witness, etc.

A bargain and sale of lands mortgaged, made from the mortgagee and Mortgager,
before the day for redemption to an other.
THis Indenture made, etc. between H. B. R. H. of, etc. and M. C. of, etc. of
the one party, and R. S. of, etc. of the other party, witnesses, that whereas
Francis Beamont of the Parish of Saint Martins in the fields, in the County of,
etc by his deed indented bearing date, etc. for the considerations therein
mentioned and expressed, has betaken, granted and to farm letten unto the said
M. C. all that the Site and capital Message or Manor house of Hardwich, with
the rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever, situate, lying and, being
within the Lordship of Chertsey, in the County of Berks, etc. and all, etc. the
words verbatim in the Original with the Habendum and Reddendum recited, as by
the same Indenture amongst diverse covenants, clauses and agreements therein
contained more at large it does and may appear: And whereas also the said M. C.
by her Indenture of Assignment, bearing date, etc. for the considerations
therein mentioned and expressed, Has granted, bargained, sold, aliened,
assigned and set over unto the said H. B. and R. H. as well the said recited or
mentioned Indenture, to her the said M. C. granted as aforesaid, and the said
site and capital message of the said Manor of H. Lands, Meadows, Feedings,
Pastures, Demeasn lands, stock, and all and singular other the premises
thereby mentioned to be demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof
with the appurtenances: as also all the estate, right, title, interest, term of
years then to come, and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and
demand whatsoever, which she the said M. C. has, or had, or may, might,
should, or ought to have, or can, or may claim, challenge or demand, of, in, or
to the said site and capital Messuages, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Demeasn
lands, Stock, and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances,
and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the
same Indenture to her the said M. C. made and granted as aforesaid, or any
thing therein contained, or otherwise howsoever; To have and to hold the said
site and capital message, etc. ut in Indent. de mortgage, unto the said H. B.
and R. H. their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, to the only proper use
and behoof of them the said H. B. and R. H. their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, from the ensealing and delivery of the same Indenture of Assignment,
for, during, and until the full end and accomplishment of all the rest and
residue then to come, and unexpired of the said term of twenty one years by the
said first recited Indenture to her the said M. C. granted as aforesaid,
together with the same Indenture: In which said Indenture of Assignment, there
is a certain Proviso or Condition contained in these words or to this effect
following, that is to say:

Provided always, that if the said M. C. her Heirs, Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or any of them do well and truly content and pay or cause, etc.
verbatim as in the assignement, as by the same Indenture of assignment amongst
diverse other covenants, grants, articles, clauses and agreements therein
contained, more at large also it does and may appear. Now this Indenture
further witnesses, that for, and inconsideration of the sum of 650 l of good,
etc. to her the said M. C. in hand, at, and before the ensealing and delivery
of these presents by the said R. S. well and truly paid, whereof and wherewith,
she the said M. C. and the said H. B. and R. H. acknowledge themselves fully
satisfied and paid, and thereof, etc. they the said H. B. and R. H. have
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and by these presents do, etc. unto the
said R. S. the said first recited Indenture, and all the said site and capital
message of the said Manor of H. lands, meadows, feedings, pastures, demeasn
lands, stock, and all and singular other the premises, with the appurtenances
thereby mentioned to be demised and granted to the said M. C. and every part
and parcel thereof, as also all the estate, right, title, interest, term of
years yet to come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and
demand whatsoever, which they the said H. B. and R. H. or either of them, have,
or has, or may, might, should, or ought to have, of, in, or to the said site
or capital messuages, and other the premises with the appurtenances; and of,
in, and to every part and parcel thereof, by force and virtue of the said
Indenture of Assignment before mentioned, or anything therein contained,
together with the same Indenture of Assignment; to have and to hold, the said
first recited, and the said site and capital message of the said Manner of H.
lands, meadows, feedings, pastures, demeasn lands, stock, and all and singular
other the premises by the said Indenture demised, and every part and parcel
thereof with the appurtenances (except before excepted) and all the said
estate, right, title, interest, term of years yet to come and unexpired,
reversion, possession, property, claim and demand whatsoever of them the said
H. B. and R. H. and of either of them, of, in, and to the same premises, and
of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances unto the
said R. S. his executors, administrators and assigns in such like, and in as
large and ample manner and form to all intents and purposes as they the said
H. B. and R. H. or either of them have, or has, or may, or ought to have and
enjoy the same premises by force and virtue of the same Indenture of
assignment to them the said H. B. and R. H. made and granted as aforesaid, or
any thing therein contained, together with the same Indenture of assignment:
and also the said M. C. for the consideration aforesaid has granted,
bargained, sold, aliened, assigned and set over, and by these presents does
fully, clearly and absolutely grant, etc. unto the said R. S. the said first
recited Indenture to her the said M. C. made and granted as aforesaid, and the
said site and capital message of the said Manor of H. lands, meadows,
feedings, pastures, demeasn lands, stock, and all and singular other the
premises by the same Indenture mentioned to be demised and granted, and every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances. And further the said M. C. for
the consideration aforesaid does by these presents for her, Confirmation.
her heirs, executors and administrators, ratify and confirm the said
bargain, sale and assignment hereby made of the premises by the said H. B. and
R. H. to the said R. S. as aforesaid, and the estate and interest of the said
R. S. in, and to the same, and every parcel thereof: Release.
and also remise, release and quit claim unto the said R. S. his executors and
assigns the said Proviso or condition before mentioned in the said Indenture
of assignment, contained concerning the redemption of the premises from the
said H. B. and R. H. as aforesaid, and all and every covenant, clause, article
and agreement touching the same. And also all the estate, right, title,
interest, term of years yet to come, and unexpired, reversion, possession,
property, claim, condition, entry, benefit and demand whatsoever which she the
said M. C. has, or had, or may, might, should, or of right ought to have, or
can, or may claim, of, in, or to the said site and capital message of the
Manor of H. lands, meadows, feedings, pastures, demeasn lands, stock, and all
and singular other the premises by the said Indenture, mentioned to be demised
and granted, and in, and to every or any part or parcel thereof with their
appurtenances whatsoever, by force and virtue of the same Indenture, or of the
said Indenture of assignment, or the said proviso or condition therein
contained, or either or any of them, or by any other ways or means whatsoever
or otherwise howsoever; To have and to hold, the said site and capital
message of the said Manor of H. lands, etc. and all and singular other the
premises, in, and by the said Indenture to her the said M. C. mentioned to be
demised and granted, and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances
(except before excepted) and all the said estate, right, title, interest, term
of years yet to come and unexpired, reversion, possession, property, claim and
demand whatsoever of her the said M. C. of, in, and to the same premises, and
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances unto the said R. S. his
executors, administrators and assigns, to the only use and behoof of him the
said R. S. his executors, administrators and assigns, from the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, for, during and until the full end and
accomplishment of all the rest and residue yet to come and unexpired of the
said term of twenty one years by the said recited Indenture, granted absolutely
without any manner of condition, proviso or redemption, or other claim or
demand whatsoever.

And the said H. B. for himself, his heirs, executors and administrators, does
covenant, promise and grant, to, For quiet enjoying discharged of encumbrances.
and with the said R. S. etc. and to, and with every of them by these presents,
in manner and form following: that is to say, that he the said R S. his
executors, administrators and assigns and every of them, for, and under the
rent, covenants, clauses and agreements, in, and by the said first recited
lease of the premises reserved and mentioned on the part and behalf of the
said M. C. her executors and assigns, to be paid, done and performed, shall or
may at all times hereafter, and from time to time, for, and during all the rest
and residue yet to come and unexpired of the said term of twenty one years by
the said letters pattents granted, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use,
occupy, possess and enjoy the said site and capital messuages, etc. and all
and singular other the premises herein before mentioned, to be granted,
bargained, sold, assigned and set over, and every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances, without the let, interruption or disturbance of him the said
H. B. or of any other person or persons by his means or procurement: and that
the same premises and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances,
now are, and be, and so at all times hereafter, and from time to time shall be,
remain, and continue unto the said R. S. his executors and assigns free and
clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise upon lawful and
reasonable request sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, and from all and
all manner of former bargains, etc. had, made, committed or done by him the
said H. B. or by any other person or persons by his assent, means or
procurement: the rent, covenants, clauses and agreements, in, and by the said
before recited Indenture, reserved or mentioned, which on the part and behalf
of the said M. C. her executors and assigns from henceforth, for, or in
respect of the premises, are, or ought to be paid, done, and performed, and
the covenants, clauses and agreements in the said recited Indenture of
assignment expressed and contained, which on the part and behalf of the said H.
B. and R. H. their executor^ administrators and assigns, or either or any of
them, are, or ought to be d^served, performed, fulfilled, and kept, only except
and fore prised. The like for R. H.

And the said R. S. does covenant, etc. to and with the said H. B. and R. H.
their executors, For discharging the rent to the Protector.
administrators and assigns and every of them, at all times hereafter, and from
time to time clearly to acquit, exonerate and discharge, or otherwise
sufficiently to save and keep harmless the said H. B. and R. H. their
executors, administrators and assigns and every of them, as well against his
Highness the Lord Protector his heirs and successors, as against all and
every other person and persons whatsoever, of, for, and concerning the said
rent, covenants, clauses and agreements before mentioned and excepted, and of,
and from all manner of suits, charges, troubles, encumbrances and demands
whatsoever, which, for, or by reason thereof at any time or times hereafter,
can, or may come, grow, or be, to, or against the said H. B. and R. H. their
executors, administrators or assigns or any of them.

A covenant for quiet enjoying, discharged of encumbrances from M. C. as from
H. B.
Another covenant from R. S. to M. C for discharging the rent to the Protector,
as is last before to H. B. and R. H.
And lastly, For further assurance, etc.
the said M. C. does covenant, etc. to and with the said R. S. etc. that she
the said M. C. her executors and administrators shall and will at all time and
times hereafter, for, and during the space of two years next ensuing the date
hereof, at the reasonable request, and at the costs and charges in the law of
the said R. S. his executors or assigns, do, make and execute or cause to be
done, made, and executed all and every such further, lawful and reasonable
acts, things and devises in the law whatsoever, for the discharge of any
covenant, clause or agreement in the said recited Indenture of assignment
mentioned and contained, wherewith the said R. S. his executors or
administrators as assignee or assigns, of, or to the said H. B. and R. H. or
either of them can or may be charged or chargeable, and for the extinguishing
of the said proviso or condition in the said Indenture of assignment contained,
and of all such estate and interest as she the said M. C. her executors or
administrators now has or shall, can or may by any means, have, claim or
pretend to have in or to the premises or any parcel thereof. And for the
further, better and more perfect assurance, surety, sure making and conveying
of the said site and capital message and other the premises, and of every
part and parcel thereof unto the said R. S. his executors and assigns, for, and
during all the rest and residue of the said term of twenty one years, which at
the time of the making of any such further assurance, or doing any such act
shall be to come and unexpired, as by the said R. S. his executors or assigns,
or his or their council learned shall be reasonably devised, advised or
required.

A bargain and sale upon condition made to feoffees in trust.
THis Indenture tripartite made, etc. between, Sir H. H. etc. of the first
part; R. L. and G. L. of the second party; and E. T. and G. B. of the third
party: witnesses, that the said Sir H. H. R. L. and G. L. for the
considerations herein after mentioned, have granted, enfeoffed and confirmed,
and by these presents do fully, clearly and absolutely grant, enfeoffe,
confirm and deliver unto the said E. T. and G. B. all that the Manor or
Lordship of E. in the County of L. with all and singular the rights, members
and appurtenances of the same. And also all and singular the messuages,
cottages, lands, tenements, meadows, pastures, feedings, rents, reversions,
services, heathes, mores, commons, closes, woods, underwoods, wastes, waifes,
straies, escheats, wards, courts, leets, perquisits of courts, royalties
profits and hereditaments, with the appurtenances to the same Manor or
Lordship belonging or in any wise appertaining, or which now be, or at any time
heretofore within the space of thirty years now last past, have been used,
reputed, accepted, known, occupied, let or set as part, parcel, right or member
of the said Manor or Lordship: and also all and singular other the manors,
messuages, lands, tenements, rents, reversions, services and hereditaments,
situate, lying and being in E. and E. in the County of L. or in either of
them, which at any time heretofore were the possession or inheritance of Sir I.
H. deceased father of the said Sir H. And also all that the advowson and
Patronage of the Parish Church of E. aforesaid; and all and singular the rents
and yearly profits whatsoever reserved upon any demise or grant heretofore made
or granted of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof: and the
reversion and reversions whatsoever, of all and singular the same premises and
of every parcel thereof: and also the said H. H. R. L. and G. L. for the
considerations herein after mentioned, have granted, assigned and confirmed,
and by these presents do, etc. unto the said E. T. and G. B. all the estate,
right, title, interest, use and possession whatsoever, which they the said Sir
H. R. and G. and every or any of them have, or has, or may, might, should, or
of right ought to have, or claim, of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship,
and all other the premises herein before mentioned to be granted, enfeoffed,
assigned or confirmed, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances: together with all and all manner of deeds, evidences,
charters, writings, escripts and minuments, which they and every or any of them
have or has, touching or concerning only the premises or only any part or
parcel thereof: to have and to hold the said Manor or Lordship of E. manors,
messuages, lands, tenements, rents, reversions, services, hereditaments and all
and singular other the premises herein before mentioned, to be hereby granted
or conveyed, and every parcel thereof with the appurtenances unto the said E.
T. and G. B. and their heirs, to the only uses, intents, provisoes, conditions
and limitations hereafter specified and declared, and to none other use, intent
or purpose; that is to say, to the only use and behoof of the said R. L. and G.
L. and of their heirs and assigns for ever, with and upon the condition
hereafter specified and declared, that is to say.

Provided always, that if the said Sir H. H. etc. do well and truly satisfy,
content and pay, or cause to be contented, satisfied or paid unto the said R.
L. and G. L. etc. the full sum of 4800 l of good, etc. at or within, etc. at
or upon the second day of M. 1641. without fraud or covin: That then from and
after the said payment so had and made, the use and uses, in, or by these
present Indentures, had, made, or limited to the said R. L. and G. L. their and
either of their heirs and assigns: and also all and every estate which
hereupon or by reason hereof or any thing herein mentioned, is, or shall be
limited, vested or executed, in, or to the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs or
assigns or any of them, shall cease, determine, and be utterly void and of none
effect: any thing in these presents contained to the contrary thereof in any
wise notwithstanding: and that then and immediately from and after the said
payment had or made to the said R. L. and G. L. their or either of their
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns or any of them, of the said sum
of 4800 l of, etc. in manner and form as is before expressed, declared and
appointed; the said grant, feoffment, conveyance and assurance, and all and
every other act or thing which after the date of these presents, and before the
said second day of J. 1641 shall be had or made, by or between any of the said
parties, or by their or any of their means or privity, or whereunto they or any
of them shall be party or parties shall be, and shall be deemed and taken to
be: and the said E. T. and G. B. and their heirs, and all and every other
person and persons, and their heirs, that then shall stand and be seized of the
said manor and other the premises, or any of them, shall stand and be seized
thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof to the only proper use and behoof
of the said Sir H. H. and of his heirs and assigns for ever, and to none other
use, behoof, intent, or purpose whatsoever.

And it is further agreed by and between the said parties to these presents,
and the said Sir H. H. does covenant, The Indenture and use therein limited to
be void for not payment of the money mentioned in the proviso.
etc. to and with, etc. that if the said Sir H. H. his heirs, executors,
administrators nor assigns nor any of them do pay nor cause to be paid to the
said R. L. and G. L. their nor either of their executors, administrators or
assigns, nor to any of them, the said sum of 4800 l and every part thereof
in manner and form abovesaid, but shall make default in payment of the same or
of any part thereof: that then and from thenceforth this present grant,
feoffment and conveyance of the premises, and the said use before herein and
hereby limited to the said R. L. and G. L. and their heirs, shall stand,
remain and be, and that then also and at all times from thenceforth all the
said manors, lands, tenements, hereditaments and all other the premises with
all and singular their appurtenances, shall be and remain for ever to them the
said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, absolutely without any condition
or other limitation.

And the said R. L. and G. L. for themselves, their and either of their heirs,
executors and administrators, Not to do any act to hinder the rising of the use
limited in the Covenants for quiet enjoying and making further assurance upon
payment of the money mentioned in the proviso.
and for every of them do covenant, promise and grant by these presents to and
with, etc. in manner and form following, that is to say: that neither they the
said R. L. and G. L. nor any of them, nor their nor any of their heirs or any
of them, nor any other person or persons by their or any of their procurement,
means or assent, shall or will do, commit, or wittingly or wilfully suffer any
act or thing, whereby or by means whereof there shall or may ensue or happen
any let or hinderance to the rising or vesting of the said use herein limited
to the said Sir H. H. and his heirs, by the payment of the said 4800 l
according to the intent, purport and true meaning of the said condition or
proviso; and that in case the said Sir H. H. his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do well and truly satisfy, content
and pay, or cause to be satisfied, contented and paid unto the said R. L. and
G. L. or either of them, or the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns
of them or either of them, the said sum of 4800 l of, etc. at or upon the
second day of J. etc. according to the true intent and meaning of the said
proviso or condition, that then the said Sir H. H. his Heirs and Assigns and
every of them shall or may from thenceforth for ever have, hold and enjoy all
the said Manor or Lordship, Lands and Tenements with all and singular their
appurtenances to his and their own proper use and behoof, without any let,
trouble, encumbrance or interruption, of, or by the said R. L. and G. L. or
either of them, their or either of their heirs or assigns or any of them, or
of any other person or persons, by, or with their or any of their means, act,
assent or procurement.

And that then also they the said R. L. and G. L. their and either of their
Heirs and Assigns, For fuuther assurance.
and all others which then or at any time then after shall have, or rightfully
claim to have any lawful estate, right, title or interest, of, in, or to the
said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, or any part or
parcel thereof, by, from, or under the said R. L. and G. L. or either of them,
shall and will at all and every time and times, from, and after such payment
had and made to the said R. and G. or either of them, or the Executors,
Administrators or Assigns of them, or of either of them of the said sum of
4800 l of, etc. in manner and form as aforesaid, for, and during the space of
three years then next ensuing, at, and upon reasonable request to them or
either of them to be made, and at the only costs and charges in the Law of the
said Sir H. H. his Heirs or Assigns, or some of them, make, do, knowledge,
suffer and execute, or cause to be made, knowledged, suffered, etc. unto the
said Sir H. H. his Heirs and Assigns for ever, all and every such further
lawful and reasonable act and acts, thing and things, assurance and assurances,
conveyance and conveyances in the law whatsoever, with warranty only against
themselves and their Heirs, or else without warranty for the better, more
perfect, sure and absolute making and assuring of all and singular the said
Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the premises
with the appurtenances unto the said Sir H. H. his Heirs and Assigns: be it
by fine, feoffment, recovery or recoveries, deed or deeds, enrolled or not
enrolled, the enrolement of these presents, release, confirmation, or by all,
or any of them, or otherwise by any other lawful and reasonable act or devise,
as shall be reasonably devised or advised by the Council learned of the said
Sir H. H. his heirs or assigns. And also that he the said Sir H. H. his
executors administrators and assigns and every of them, not doing, That the
Morgager shall enjoy the issues and profits of the lands until the day of
payment.
nor committing any voluntary wast above the value of 10 l of, etc. shall or
may at all times from henceforth until the third day of J. etc. without the
let, trouble, interruption, or disturbance of, or by them the said R. L. and G.
L. or either of them, their or either of their heirs or assigns, or of any of
them, or of any other rightfully claiming, from, by, or under them or any of
them, peaceably and quietly have, take, receive, perceive and enjoy the rents,
issues and profits of all and singular the said Manor or Lordship, lands and
tenements and other the premises before herein mentioned to be hereby granted
and conveyed, and every part and parcel thereof, without any account to be made
or yielded unto the said R. L. and G. L. or either of them, their or either of
their heirs, executors or assigns of, or for the same, this Indenture or any
thing therein contained to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding;
and that neither the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs or assigns, nor any of
them shall nor will take any of the rents, issues, revenews or profits of any
the premises or of any part thereof, which shall grow, arise, or come in or
out of the premises or any part or parcel thereof before the said third day of
J. etc.

And it is further covenanted, concluded and agreed by and between the said
parties to these presents, That the morgagee shall pay more for the clear
purchase of the land so morgaged, and being forfeited.
and the true intent and meaning of the same parties to these presents is: and
the said R. L. and G. L. do by these presents further covenant, etc. to and
with, etc. that if neither the said Sir H. H. his heirs nor assigns nor any
of them do pay nor cause to be paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns, nor to any of them the said sum of
4800 l of, etc. in manner and form as is before limited and appointed for the
payment of the same, whereby the said estate of the said R. L. and G. L. shall
become absolute; that then they the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns, or some of them shall and will well and
truly content and pay or cause to be paid unto the said Sir H. H. his execu.
admi. or assigns or some of them at or in, etc. the sum of 1000 l of, etc. at
or upon the third day of M. 1642 as the residue, and in full satisfaction of the
clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor or Lordship, lands, tenements
and other the premises without fraud, covin or further delay, unto them the
said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns to the only proper use and
behoof of them the said R. and G. their heirs and assigns forever.

And the said Sir H. H. does covenant, etc. to and with the said ^. L. and G.
L. etc. that if the said Sir H. H. his heirs, To relinquish possession after
default of payment of the sum contained in the Proviso.
executors, administrators nor assigns, nor any of them do well and truly pay
nor cause to be paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. nor to the heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns of them nor any of them, the said sum of
4800 l of, etc. before mentioned in manner and form as aforesaid, according to
the intent and true meaning of the said proviso or condition before herein
expressed: that then he the said Sir H. H. his Tenants, Farmours and Assigns
and every of them (other then such as be hereafter excepted) shall and will
deliver, yield up and relinquish unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs or
assigns, or the survivor or survivors of them, the peaceable and quiet
possession of the said Manor or Lordship, and of all other the premises with
the appurtenances, without, any let, trouble, contradiction or interruption.
And that then also he the said Sir H. H. his heirs and assigns and Dame R.
his wife, Further assurance.
and all and every other person or persons now having or rightfully claiming,
or which at any time or times hereafter shall or may lawfully have, claim or
pretend to have any manner of estate, right, title, use, interest, condition or
possession, of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship and other the premises,
or any part thereof, other then such person and persons, whose estates,
interests and terms are excepted in one former Indenture bearing date, etc.
made between the said Sir H. of the one party, and the said R. L. and G. L. on
the other party, for, and in respect only of their leases and terms, by, and
in the said last mentioned Indenture excepted, shall and will at all and every
time and times, from, and after such default of payment, had, or made of the
said sum of 4800 l for and during the space of seven years then next ensuing,
at and upon reasonable request to him, her or them to be made, and at the only
costs and charges in the law of the said R. L. and G. L. or any of them, or the
heirs or assigns of them, or of one of them, make, do, etc. as in other like
Covenants, etc. And that the said R. L. and G. L. their and either of their
heirs and assigns and every of them, For quiet enjoying.
and all and every person and persons which at any time and times after the
said default of payment of the said sum of 4800 l of, etc. had and made as
aforesaid, shall have any estate, right, title or interest, of, in, or to the
said Manor or Lordship, manors, lands, tenements and other the premises or
any part thereof, by, from, or under the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs or
assigns or any of them, shall or may at all times from, and after the said
default of payment of the said sum of, etc. had or made, for ever peaceably and
quietly have, hold, occupy and enjoy all the said Manor or Lordship, manors,
lands, tenements and other the premises without any let, trouble, vexation or
interruption of, or by the said Sir H. H. his heirs or assigns or any of
them, or of, or by any other person or persons whatsoever (except as in and by
the said Indenture of bargain and sale bearing date the said, etc. made between
the said Sir H. H. of the one party, and the said R. L. and G. L. of the other
party, for and in respect only of the estates and interests, in and by the same
Indenture excepted.)

To deliver up a Statute upon payment of the money mentioned in the proviso.
And lastly the said R. L. and G. L. do by these presents further covenant, etc.
to and with the said Sir H. H. etc. that in case the said Sir H his heirs,
executors, administrators or assigns, or any of them do well and truly pay or
cause to be paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. or one of them, or to the
heirs, executors, administrators or assigns of them, or of one of them, the
said sum of 4800 l of, etc. on the said second day of J. etc. at or, etc.
according to the purport, intent and true meaning of the said proviso or
condition, without fraud or covin: that then they the said R. L. and G. L. or
one of them, their or either of their heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, or some or one of them, shall and will within convenient time after
the said payment so had and made, deliver or cause to be delivered to the said
Sir H. H. his executors, administrators or assigns, at, or, etc. one writing
obligatory or recognizance in the nature of a statute staple bearing date, etc.
taken, sealed and acknowledged before, etc. wherein the said Sir H. H. is and
stands bound unto the said R. L. in the sum of, etc. to be cancelled and made
void.

And further the said Sir H. H. R. L. and G. L. have made, ordained,
constituted, A letter of Attorney to deliver possession.
and in their stead and place by these presents have put and authorized A. B.
etc. their true and lawful Atturnies, jointly and severally for them and in
their names to enter into the said Manor or Lordship and other the premises,
and into every or any part thereof in the name of the whole, and possession and
seisen thereof or of any part or parcel thereof in the name of the whole, in
their names and to their use to take: and after such possession and seizen
thereof, and of every or any part or parcel thereof so had and taken, to
deliver full and peaceable possession and seisen thereof to the said R. T. and
G. B. or to their Atturey in that behalf appointed, to have and to hold to the
said R. T. and G. B. according to the limitations, uses, provisoes and
conditions before herein expressed, and according to the tenor, purport,
effect and true meaning of this present Indenture tripartite, holding firm and
stable all and whatsoever their said Atturneys or either of them shall do or
cause to be done in or about the premises by these presents. Forster.
In witness.

Memorandum, that the fourth day of M. in the, etc. peaceable and quiet
possession and seisin of the manors, Delivery of possession.
messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments in E. and F. within specified,
was taken had and delivered by the Atturnies within named, to the within named
E. T. and G. B. according to the tenor and true meaning of this present
Indenture to the uses, provisoes, conditions and limitations mentioned in the
same Indenture, in the presence of those whose names be subscribed.

Memorandum likewise, that the day and year above said A. B. C. D. E. F. etc.
did agree to this present grant within written, Attornment.
and did severally Atturne tenants to the said E. T. and G. B. according to
this present grant, in the presence of those whose names are subscribed; and in
witness thereof the said A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. have hereunto set their hands.
Forster.


An Indenture of bargain and sat absolute.
THis Indenture made, etc. between Sir R. M. of, etc. of the one party, and R.
H. and G. H. etc. of the other party, Witnesses, that the said Sir R. M. for
and in consideration of the sum of 600 l etc. to him in hand, at, and before
the ensealing and delivery of these presents, by the said R. L. and G. L. well
and truly paid, whereof, and wherewith he acknowledges himself fully satisfied
and paid, and thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof does clearly
acquit, exonerate and discharge the said R. L. and G. L. their and either of
their heirs, Forster concilium.
executors and administrators and every of them for ever by these presents,
has given, granted, bargained, sold and confirmed, and by these presents does
fully, clearly and absolutely give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the
said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, all that the Manor
and Lordship of C. in the County of, etc. with all and singular the rights,
members, liberties, privileges, royalties and appurtenances thereof
whatsoever: and all that the rectory and parsonage of C. aforesaid, with all
glebe lands, tithes of corn, grain and hay, oblations, obventions, fruits,
profits and commodities whatsoever, of what nature, kind or quality soever they
be, or by whatsoever name or names they are called or known to the said rectory
and personage incident, belonging or appertaining, or reputed or known to be
part, parcel or member thereof, or to or with the same now, or at any time
heretofore usually occupied or enjoyed, coming, growing, renewing and
increasing within C. and S. in the County of, etc and the advowson, gift, free
disposition, and right of patronage of the Vicaridge and Church of C.
aforesaid, with the appurtenances in the said County of, etc. And also all and
singular messuages, mills, houses, edifices, buildings, barnes, stables,
dove-houses, yards, orchards, gardens, lands, tenements, meadows, feeddings,
pastures, leasows, commons, wast-grounds, heaths, furzes, mores, marshes,
woods, underwoods, ways, waters, fishings, fishing places, streams, rivers,
banks, ponds, rents, reversions, services, courts, leets, view of frank pledge,
perquisits and profits of courts and leets, and all that to courts, leets and
view of frank pledge does belong or appertain, goods and chattels wayved, and
estrayed, goods and chattels of fellons and fugitives, fellons of themselves,
and of persons our-lawed, fees, wards, marriages, escheats, reliefs, herriots,
fines, amerciaments, liberties, privileges and all other profits, commodities,
advantages, emoluments and hereditaments whatsoever to the said Manor and
Lordship, rectory and other the premises herein before mentioned, meant or
intended to be hereby given, granted, bargained and sold, and to every or any
of them by any means belonging or appertaining, or with the same or any of them
as part, parcel or member thereof, now or at any time heretofore demised, let,
used, occupied, reputed or enjoyed with all and singular their appurtenances;
and also all and singular messuages, lands, tenements, rents, reversions,
services and hereditaments whatsoever of him the said R. M. in C. and S.
aforesaid, and in H. and S. in the said County of, etc. and in every or any of
them; and also all and singular rents and yearly profits whatsoever, reserved
upon any demise, lease or grant, demises, leases or grants heretofore made or
granted of the premises or of any part or parcel thereof; and the reversion
and reversions, remainder, and remainders of all and singular the premises,
and of every part and parcel thereof: and also the said R. M. for the
consideration aforesaid, has granted, bargained and sold, and by these
presents does fully and clearly grant, bargain and sell unto the said R. L. and
G. L. their heirs" and assigns for ever, all the estate, right, title,
interest, use, possession, reversion, remainder, property, condition, claim
and demand whatsoever, which he the said R. M. has, or had, or shall, should,
may, might, or of right ought to have or claim, of, in, or to the said Manor
and Lordship of C. rectory, advowson, messuages, lands, tenements,
hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises with the appurtenances
before, in, and by these presents granted, bargained and sold, or of, in, or to
any part or parcel thereof, to have and to hold all the said Manor and
Lordship, Habendum.
rectory, advowson, messuages, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures,
commons, rents, reversions, services, hereditaments, and all and singular other
the premises herein before mentioned, meant or intended to be hereby given,
granted, bargained and sold, and every part and parcel thereof, with all and
singular their rights, members and appurtenances unto the said R. L. and G. L.
their heirs and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of them the said
R. L. and G. L. and of their heirs and assigns for ever. And the said R. M.
and his heirs the said Manor, etc. Warranty.
Vt in all. warran. etc. In cujus rei, etc.

An Indenture of covenants to the former Indenture: Whereupon a recovery is
passed.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between Sir R. M. of, etc. of the one party, and
R. L. etc. and G L of the other party; Whereas the said R M by an Indenture of
bargain and sale bearing the date hereof, and sealed and delivered with these
presents for the causes in the same Indenture mentioned and expressed, does
give, grant, bargain, sell and confirm unto the said R. L. and G. L. their
heirs and assigns for ever, all that the Manor and Lordship of C. etc. and
diverse other lands and tenements, as by the same Indenture of bargain and sale
amongst other covenants, grants and agreements therein mentioned more at large
it does and may appear. Now this Indenture witnesses, that the said R. M. for
the consideration in the said Indenture of bargain and sale mentioned, has
bargained and sold, and by these presents does bargain and sell unto the said
R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, All and all manner of
deeds, evidences, charters, For delivery of evidences.
writings, escripts, Court rolls, books of survey, books of account, rentals,
counterparts of leases, terrors, boundaries and miniments whatsoever, any way
touching or concerning the said Manor and Lordship, rectory, advowson,
messuages, lands, tenements and other the premises with the appurtenances or
any part or parcel thereof: All which said deeds, evidences, charters,
writings, escripts, Court rolls, books of survey, books of account, rentals,
counterparts of leases, terrors, Forster.
boundaries and miniments before mentioned, or so many of them as now be in the
hands, custody or possession of the said R. M. or of any other person or
persons to his use or by his delivery, or which he knowing where they are may
lawfully get or come by without suit in the law, together with true copies of
all deeds, evidences, writings and miniments as do touch or concern the
premises or any part or parcel thereof jointly with any other lands or
tenements, the same copies to be written and copied out at the costs and
charges of the said R. L. and G.L. their heirs and assigns: and the said R.M.
for for himself his heirs, executors and administrators does covenant, etc to
and with the said R. L. and and G. L. their and either of their heirs and
assigns, and every of them by these presents to deliver or cause to be
delivered unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns, or to some of
them on this side and before the feast of, etc. whole, For being seized.
safe, uncancelled and undefaced.

And the said R M. does covenant, etc. in manner and form following, viz. That
he the said R. M. at the time of the ensealing and delivery of these presents,
is and stands, and so until a good and lawful estate shall be vested and
executed in the said R. L. and G. L. and their heirs, according to the intent
and true meaning of these presents, shall be, and stand, and be the very true,
sole, lawful and perfect owner, and rightfully and absolutely seized of the
said Manor and Lordship, and of all and singular other the premises with the
appurtenances in the said Indenture mentioned, meant or intended to be thereby
given, granted, bargained and sold in his demeasn, as of see simple or fee tail
general to his own proper use and behoof, without any manner of condition or
limitation of any use or uses to atler, change or determine the same: and that
there is not, No reversion in the Protector.
nor before the execution or vesting of the said estate there, shall be any
reversion or remainder thereof, or of any part or parcel thereof, etc. or in
any other person or persons: And also that he the said R. M. now has, and
until the executing and vesting of the said estate, shall have full power,
lawful and rightful authority to convey and assure the said Manor and
Lordship, rectory, advowson, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments and all
and singular other the above mentioned, bargained premises, with the
appurtenances unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever
in form aforesaid.

And the said R. M. does covenant, etc. that the said Manor and Lordship,
rectory, Discharged of encumbrances.
advowson, messuages, lands, tenements, and all and singular other the
premises before, by the said Indenture given, granted, bargained and sold, or
meant, mentioned or intended to be thereby given, granted, bargained and sold,
and every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, at the ensealing and
delivery of these presents, are, and be, and so at all times hereafter for ever
shall be, remain, and continue unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and
assigns, free and clearly acquitted, exonerated and discharged, or otherwise
well and sufficiently saved and kept harmless, of, and from all and all manner
of bargains, sales, gifts, grants, leases, joyntures, dowers, annuities,
statutes merchant, and of the staple, recognizances, uses, wills, intailes,
fines for alienation without license, post fines, rents, charge rents, seck
arrerages of rents, amerciaments, intrusions, primer seizens, condemnations,
judgments, extents, executions, claims, duties, debts of record, debts to the,
etc. and of, and from all other charges, estates, titles, troubles,
encumbrances and demands whatsoever, had, made, committed, suffered or done, or
hereafter to be had, made, committed, suffered or done by Sir I. M. deceased,
great grandfather of the said R. M. his heirs or assigns, or by W. M.
arbitrator deceased, grandfather of the said R. M. his heirs or assigns, or
by the said R. M. his heirs or assigns or any of them, or by any other person
or persons whatsoever, having, or rightfully claiming or pretending to have, or
which at any time or times hereafter shall have or rightfully claim or pretend
to have any lawful estate, right, title, interrest or demand, of, in, and to
the said Manor and Lordship and other the premises, or of, in, or to any part
or parcel thereof, in, by, from, or under them or any of them, or by their or
any of their assent, means, consent, title, interest, act, sufferance or
procurement: the chief rent and services from henceforth to grow due to the
chief Lord or Lords of the fee or fees of the premises, for, and in respect
only of his or their seiginory and seiginories only except and foreprised; and
also except, etc. and also except one lease, etc. whereupon the yearly rent of
10 l is reserved, which shall or may be yearly, from and after the fifteenth
day of, etc. be due and payable unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and
assigns during the continuance of the same excepted lease: Provided always
that if the said R. M. his heirs, executors, administrators or assigns or any
of them do well and truly pay or cause to be contented and paid unto the said
R. L. and G. L. their or either of their executors, administrators or assigns
the full sum of 800 l of, etc. on the, etc. at or, etc. that then as well
this present Indenture, as the said recited Indenture of bargain and sale and
every of them, and every covenant, grant, article, clause and agreement in them
and every of them contained, on the part and behalf of the said R. M. his
heirs, executors or administrators to be performed and kept, shall immediately
from thenceforth cease, determine and be utterly void, frustrate and of none
effect; and that then also, and from thenceforth it shall and may be lawful,
to, and for the said R. M. his heirs and assigns into the said Manor and
Lordship, rectory, messuages, lands, tenements, hereditaments and other the
premises with the appurtenances, and into every or any part or parcel thereof
to reenter, and the same to have again, enjoy and repossesse, as in his and
their first and former estate, any thing in these presents contained to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And furthermore the said R. M. does covenant, etc. For quiet enjoying after
default of payment
that if default shall be made of the payment of the said sum of 800 l upon
the said fifteenth day of, etc. at the place of payment aforesaid: that then
and from and after such default of payment so thereof, or of any part or parcel
thereof had or made, they the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns
and every of them shall and may from time to time and at all times for ever
according to the tenor, purport and true meaning of these presents, peaceably
and quietly have, hold, occupy, possess and enjoy the said Manor and
Lordship, Rectory, Advowsen, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and
all and singular other the Premises with the appurtenances and every part and
parcel thereof, without any manner of let, trouble, interruption, eviction,
expulsion or disturbance of him the said R. M. his heirs or assigns, or of
any other person or persons whatsoever lawfully claiming, by, from, or under
him the said R. M. or by, from, or under the said I. M. Great-Grand-Father of
the said R. M. or by, from, or under the said I. M. or by, from, or under the
said R. M. Father of the said R. M. except before ^^cepted.

And the said R. L. and G. L. do covenant, etc. that he the said R. M. his
Heirs, Executors, That the Morgager may receave the profits of his lands
until the day of redemption.
Administrators and Assigns and every of them shall or may without the let,
trouble, molestation or interruption of the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs or
Assigns, or of any other rightfully claiming, from, by, or under them, either
or any of them, peaceably and quietly have, hold, perceive, receive, take and
enjoy the rents, issues and profits of all and singular the said Manor and
Lordship, Rectory, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and all and
singular other the Premises before mentioned to be given, granted, bargained
and sold by the said recited Indenture, and of every part and parcel thereof
with the appurtenances, until the sixteenth day of, etc. without any account
to be made or yielded unto the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs, Executors or
Assigns, of, or for the same, the said recited Indenture or any thing therein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding: and that neither the said R. L. and
G. L. their Heirs or Assigns, nor any of them shall or will take any of the
rents, issues, revenues or profits of any of the Premises, or of any part
thereof, or which shall grow, arise, or come in or our of the Premises, or any
part or parcel thereof, before the said fifteenth day of, etc.

And furthermore, the said R. M. does covenant, etc. that if he the said R. M.
his Heirs, For further assurance after default of payment.
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or some or one of them do not well and
truly pay or cause to be contented or paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. their
or either of their Executors, Administrators or Assigns the said sum of 824
l before mentioned, according to the true intent and meaning of the Proviso or
condition before herein expressed: that then he the said R. M. and Dame W. his
wife and their Heirs, and all and every other person and persons now having or
claiming, or which at any time or times hereafter shall or may lawfully have,
claim or pretend to have any estate, right, title, use, interest, condition or
possession, of, in, and to the said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson,
Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and other the Premises or any part
or parcel thereof, other than the persons before excepted, for, and in respect
only of the said Annuities, Leases and Terms before excepted, shall and will
from time to time and at all times, from, and after default of payment made as
aforesaid, for, and during the space of seven years next ensuing, at and upon
reasonable request, and at the only costs and charges in the law of the said R.
L. and G. L. their Heirs and Assigns, or of some of them, do make, knowledge,
execute and suffer, or cause to be done, made, knowledged, executed and
suffered unto the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs and Assigns; A further and
all and every such other act and acts, thing and things, assurance and
assurances, conveyance and conveyances in the Law whatsoever, for the better,
more perfect, sure and absolute conveying and assuring of all and singular the
said Manor and Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all other the premises with the appurtenances, by the said
recited Indenture mentioned, or intended to be granted, bargained and sold unto
the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs and Assigns, for ever, absolutely
without any manner of Condition, Mortgage or Redemption, be it by fine, or
fines feoffment, recovery or recoveries, with single or double voucher or
vouchers, deed or deeds, enrolled or not enrolled, the inrolment of these
presents, release, confirmation, or by all or any of them, or otherwise by any
other lawful and reasonable act and devise, with warranty of him the said R. M.
and his Heirs against all men, or otherwise without warranty, if it be so
required; as shall be reasonably devised or advised by the learned Counsel of
the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs or Assigns, or some or one of them.

And it is covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed, by, and between all the
said parties to these presents, For passing of a Recovery.
that T. H. and W. B. by writ of entry, sur disseisin en le post, to be by them
sued forth, at the costs and charges of the said R. L. and G. L. out of the
high Court of Chancery, and to be returned into the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, before the Justices there, against them the said R. L. and G. L.
then in possession of the said premises, shall recover the said Manor and
Lordship, Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and
other the premises mentioned, meant or intended, in, or by the said recited
Indenture, to be bargained and sold with their rights, members and
appurtenances, in due form of Law, against the said R. L. and G. L. then being
Tenants of the said Premises with the appurtenances, by some name or names in
the said writ and recovery to be contained, and upon the said writ and
proceeding thereupon, the said R. L. and G. L. after appearance, shall vouch
over to warrant the said R. M. and that the said R. M. shall thereunto appear,
and vouch over to warrant the common vouchee, and that each of them the said R.
L. and G. L. and the said R. M. shall do, and suffer all, and whatsoever to
them and either of them in that behalf shall belong and appertain, for the
suffering of a good and perfect recovery of all the said Manors, Lordships,
Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises mentioned in the said Indenture, to
be thereby given, granted, bargained and sold unto the said R. L. and G. L.
according to the course of common recoveries and assurances of Lands, in such
cases used, and that the said recovery shall in due form of law be executed by
the writ of habere fac. seisin. accordingly.

And it it is by these presents likewise fully concluded, agreed and declared,
by, To lead the use of the recovery.
and between all the parties unto these presents; that the said recovery and
all other recoveries whatsoever had, made, knowledged, levied, executed or
suffered, or to be had, made, knowledged, executed or suffered of the
Premises, or of any parcel thereof, by, or betwixt the said parties or any of
them, and the full force and execution of the same and every of them, shall be,
and inure, and shall be had, taken, construed, esteemed and adjudged to be, and
to inure to the only uses, provisoes, conditions and limitations before herein
mentioned, according the true intent and meaning of the said Indenture and of
these presents, and to no other use, behoof, intent or purpose whatsoever.

And it is further covenanted, conditioned, concluded and fully agreed, by, and
between the said parties to these presents, For paym. of a further sum of money
for the the absolute purchase of the land mortgaged
and the true intent and meaning of the said parties, to these presents is; and
the said R. L. and G. L. do covenant, etc. that if the said R. M. his Heirs,
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them do not pay or cause to be
paid unto the said R. L. and G. L. their Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
nor to any of them the said sum of 800 l etc. at the day, and place of payment
thereof above mentioned, but shall make default of payment thereof, or of any
part or parce thereof, according to the true meaning of the said proviso or
condition, whereby, or by reason whereof the Premises and every parcel
thereof, shall become absolute to the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs and
Assigns, according to the true intent and plain meaning of these presents;
that then they the said R. L. and G. L. their Heirs, Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, or some of them, shall and will pay, or cause to be paid unto the
said R. M. his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, at or, etc. the
full sum of, etc. in manner and form following, that is to say, on the, etc.
day of, etc. the sum of 120 l and within one whole year next ensuing the day
of the death of the said R. M. the Father, the sum of 100 l at the end of one
other whole year then next following, one other 100 l and at the end of one
other whole year also then next ensuing, one other 100 l in full satisfaction,
of, and for the clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor and Lordship,
Rectory, Advowson, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and of all and
singular other the Premises in the said Indenture mentioned, to be thereby
given, granted, bargained and sold, and of every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances. In, etc.

Covenants for surrendering of Copyhold lands.
And the said D. S. for the consideration before in these presents expressed,
does further covenant, For making a Surrender.
promise and grant, for her self, her Heirs, Executors and Administrators,
and for every of them, to, and with the said I. P. his Heirs and Assigns by
these presents, that she the said Dame S. S. or her Heirs, shall and will on
this side and before the Feast of, etc. at the charges in the law of the said
I. P. his Heirs or Assigns, make and suffer, or cause to be made and suffered
a good and sufficient surrender in law, to the use of the said I. P. his Heirs
and Assigns for ever, according to the custom of the Manor of C. of one
field or close of pasture, etc. and so recite the land verbatim, and of every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, being parcels of the said
Manor of C. and which late were the Copyhold inheritance of T. C. deceased,
according to the custom of the said Manor.

And the said Dame S. does covenant, etc. that the said Copyhold lands,
Discharged of encumbrances.
at the time of the making and perfecting of the said surrender, shall be, and
so at all times for ever hereafter, shall continue unto the said I. P. his
Heirs and Assigns clearly discharged, or otherwise sufficiently saved and
kept harmless, of, and from all former charges, estates, titles, troubles,
surrenders, forfeitures and encumbrances whatsoever made, committed, suffered
or done by the said T, C. deceased, his Heirs or Assigns, or by the said E.
S. his Heirs or Assigns, or by the said Dame S. S. or by any other person or
persons, by, or with their, every, or any of their means, assent, title,
interest, act, sufferance or procurements.

And the said Dame S. does covenant, etc. that the said Copyhold-lands and
Premises before mentioned, That the lands are of a certain value p. an.
to be granted and assigned as aforesaid now are of the clear yearly worth and
value of 20 l by the year, above all rents, charges and reprises, and so are,
and be now well worth to be let or set; and that the same close shall from time
to time hereafter, so remain, be, and continue of the yearly value aforesaid
unto the said I. P. his, etc. during the terms and continuance of the said
several mentioned or recited leases and either of them.

A bargain and sale of Swans and Swan mark.
TO all Christian people, to whom this present writing shall come, A. B. of,
etc. sends greeting, etc. know ye that I the said A. B. for diverse good
causes and considerations me in this behalf specially moving, have given and
granted, and by this my present writing, do give, grant and confirm unto C. D.
of, etc. all those my Swannes and Signets, and game of Swannes and Signets
white and gray, marked with the ragged-staffe, swiming, remaining and being,
in, upon, or about the River of W. in the County of, etc. or in, upon, or about
any other Rivers, Brooks, waters or places within the same County of, etc. or
elsewhere wheresoever. And all rights, royalties, privileges, preheminences,
profits and commodities whatsoever, to the same Swannes and Signets, and game
of Swannes and Signets, or any of them in any wise belonging, incident or
appertaining; together with the Swanne mark aforesaid: to have and to hold, the
said Swannes and Signets, and game of Swannes and Signets and Swanne mark
aforesaid, with their rights and appurtenances whatsoever unto the said C. D.
his Heirs and Assigns for ever, in as large, ample and beneficial manner and
form, as I the said A. B. or any my ancestors ever have had, held or enjoyed,
or might or ought to have had, held or enjoyed the same. In witness, etc.

A bargain and sale of underwood.
THis Indenture made, etc. between, etc. Witnesses, that the said A. B. for,
and in consideration of the sum of, etc. whereof, etc. has bargained and
sold, and by these presents does bargain and sell unto the said C. D. all and
singular woods and underwoods, growing and being within the grove called W.
gro^^^ and the hedge of the same, containing by estimation sixteen acres, be it
more or less, lying and being in the Parish of D. in the County of H. and also
all the lops and shreds of all such trees, being within the said grove called
W. as have been usually lopped at the felling of the underwood growing within
the said grove; except, and always out of this present sale reserved unto the
said A. B. his Heirs and Assigns, all manner of trees whatsoever, other than
underwood now growing, or being in or upon the same grove or any parcel
thereof; To have and to hold the said underwoods, lops and shreds, before by
these presents bargained and sold (except before excepted) unto the said C. D.
his Executors and Assigns, to his and their only proper use and behoof. And
the said A. B. does covenant, etc. that he the said C. D. his Executors and
Assigns, at his and their liberty and pleasure, shall or may peaceably and
quietly, have, hold, take, and enjoy the said underwoods, and enter into the
said grove and every part and parcel thereof, there to fell, hew, and cut down
all and singular the said woods, and underwoods, and hedgerows at all
seasonable times in the year, from the day of the date hereof, until the, etc.
and the same so felled, hewed and cut down, with his and their, or any of their
horses, carts and carriages, to bear, lead, carry and convey from thence, to
any other place or places, at his and their liberty and pleasure at all time
and times, during the space of three years, by all convenient ways thereunto
now used and accustomed, without any lawful let, contradiction, etc. And the
said C. D. does covenant, etc. that he the said C. D. his Executors or
Assigns, shall and will at every felling which he or they shall make of the
said woods, ^nderwoods and trees, leave standing and growing in, and upon the
premises, so many competent and sufficient standards, staddels and storiers,
as by the laws and statutes in that case provided, is, or ought to be left; and
also shall and will, at his and their own proper costs and charges, make good
all the hedges and fences about the young springs of the said Wood, for the safe
keeping thereof from hurt and spoil of beasts and cattle, according to the
custom of the Country there. In witness, etc.

A sale of Billets and Wood or Timber.
THis Indenture made, etc. between T. C. R. W. and G. M of the one part, etc.
and I. B. and R W etc. on the other party witnesses, that the said, etc. for
the considerations here under mentioned, have bargained and sold, and by these
presents do fully and clearly bargain and sell unto the said, etc. ten thousand
load of good merchantable and lawful Western Billets, at, and after the rate
and price of three shillings and six pence the load; and also five hundred
loads of good, merchantable, sound and well squared Oken Timber, accompting
fifty foot to every load, at, and after the rate and price of ten shillings the
load, with such deductions and defalcations out of the same several prises, as
is here under expressed, and the same billets and timber to be delivered, at
such places and times, and in such manner and form as hereunder is mentioned;
and the said, etc. to and with, etc. That they the said T. W. and G. or some of
them, their, etc. shall and will well and truly deliver or cause to be
delivered to the said, etc. all and every the said ten thousand loads of
Billets, and five hundred loads of Timber of the kind and goodness aforesaid,
to the proper use of them the said, etc. free and discharged of all manner of
charges encumbrances whatsoever, and allowances (water carriage only excepted)
at, and upon some wharfe or wharfes in Henly upon Thames, and Shiplack in the
County of O. and at, and upon some wharfe or wharfes in S. and R. and the
wharfe nearest Rent wood in the County of Barks, in manner and form following,
that is to say, three hundred loads of the same Billets, and one hundred loads
of the same Timber, at, or before, etc. and between that and the day of, etc.
three thousand more of the same Billits, and two hundred loads of the same wood
or timber, at or before, etc. and between the same day of, etc. and the day,
etc. four thousand loads more of the same Billets, and two hundred loads more
of the same Timber residue, and in full delivery and satisfaction of the said
ten thousand loads of Billets, and five hundred loads of Timber, at or on, etc.
and also that they the said T. R. and G. their, etc. shall not only deliver or
cause to be delivered, all and every the said Billets and Timber at the water
side, or some wharfe or wharfes, in some, or any the towns and places above
mentioned, for, and to the use of, etc. and in form aforesaid, clear of all
charges and encumbrances whatsoever, but shall also from time to time, and at
all times from henceforth save and keep harmless, the said Billets and Timber,
and every parcel thereof to the said, etc. from and against the purveying to
his Highnesses use, and against all and every the Purveyors and Takers, of, or
for his Highnesses woodyard, and of his Heirs and Successors, or else shall
deliver or cause to be delivered to the use aforesaid, to the said, etc. at the
place of delivery aforesaid, or at some of them in recompense, of, and for such
of the said Billets and Timber, as shall be so taken so much more in stead
thereof, at the rates and prices aforesaid before the, etc. In part of payment,
of, and for all which Billets and Timber to be delivered as aforesaid, the said
I. B. and R. W. have truly paid to the said T. C. R. W. and G. M. before the
ensealing hereof the sum of, etc. of which said sum, etc. the said T. C. R.
W. and G. M. acknowledge themselves fully satisfied and paid, and thereof, etc.
And as for the other part of the money for the said Billets and Timber,
amounting to the sum of, etc. the said, etc. covenanteth and grants, to and
with, etc. well and truly to pay, or cause to be paid to the said, etc. upon
the day of, etc. next after reasonable request thereof to be made, and given in
writing to the said, etc. or at or within, etc. after the delivery of so much
of the said Billets and Timber, as after the rates aforesaid, shall amount to
the sum of, 700 l or more, the said 700 l to be paid, at, or within, etc. and
it is agreed between the said parties, that whereas the rate of the said
Billets and Timber as aforesaid to be delivered, do amount to the sum of,
etc. over and above the said sum of, etc. already paid; and the said sum
of, etc. in form aforesaid, covenanted to be paid: It is agreed between the
said parties, in respect of the carriage by water of the said Billets and
Timber, in form following, that is to say, for so many thereof as shall not be
delivered at H.S. aforesaid, so much money as the carriage by water of the same
not delivered at H. S. aforesaid shall amount unto, from any other place
appointed by these presents for delivery thereof, unto any one of the said
places of H. and S. aforesaid, or either of them, the said, etc. shall have
allowance and defalcations out of the said sum of, etc. for every load of
Billits as aforesaid, to be delivered at S. 8 d and for every load of Timber,
etc. and for every load of Billets to be delivered at R. 4 d and for every load
of Timber 16 d and for every load of Billets, to be delivered at the Wharfe
nearest Kentishwood 12 d and for every load of Timber 2 s And the said, etc.
for them, etc. to and with, etc. to pay and satisfy to the said, etc. upon
reasonable request, so much of the said sum of, etc. as shall amount and
remain over and above the allowance and defalcations, in respect of the
water-charges aforesaid: and in like manner the said T. C. R. W. and G. M. for
them, etc. to and with, etc. that if the said allowance for carriage as
aforesaid, shall amount to more than 325 l that then they the said, etc. shall
well and truly pay or cause to be paid to the said I. B. and R. their, etc.
upon reasonable request so much money as the same allowance shall surmount the
said sum of, etc. In witness.

A release of a Proviso, or condition for payment of money, reserved upon an
Indenture of bargain and sale.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come A. B.
greeting, etc. know ye that I the said A. B. have the day of the date of this
present writing received and had of C. D. etc. at or in, etc. the full sum
of, etc. lawful money, etc. to me due and payable on this present, etc. in
the, etc. by force and virtue of one proviso or condition contained in one
Indenture of bargain and sale bearing date, etc. made between me the said A. B.
of the one party, and the said C. D. of the other party, for touching and
concerning certain messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, lying in,
etc. in the County of, etc. which said sum of, etc. so by me received as
aforesaid, is in full discharge, satisfaction and payment of 500 l of, etc. and
is for the full and absolute bargain and sale of all that message, etc. by me
the said A. B. mentioned to be bargained and sold in and by the same Indenture,
as by the same Indenture more at large appears, of which said sum of 200 l
so by me the said A. B. received as aforesaid, I acknowledge my self fully
satisfied, contented and paid, and thereof and of every part and parcel
thereof, do clearly acquit, exonerate and discharge the said C.D. his
Executors, and Administrators, and every of them for ever by these presents.
Release of all his estate.
And further know ye, that I the said A. B. have remised, released and for ever
quit claimed, and by these presents do remise, release and for ever quit claim
unto the said C. D. being in his full and peaceable possession and seizen
being, and to his Heirs and Assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of the
said C. D. his Heirs and Assigns for ever all the estate, right, title,
interest, claim, conditi^^^ entry, benefit and demand whatsoever, which I the
said A. B. have or had, or may, might or ought to have or claim, of, in, or to
the said message, etc. reciting the land: and of, in, and to all and singular
other the Premises, with all and singular their appurtenances, in, and by the
said recited Indenture mentioned to be bargained and sold, and of, in, and to
every part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances; so that neither I the
said A. B. my Heirs or Assigns, nor any of us, nor any other person or
persons for us, or in our names, or in the name of any of us, shall or will at
any time or times hereafter ask, claim, challenge or demand to have any manner
of estate, right, title, interest or demand, of, in, or to the said Premises,
or any part or parcel thereof: but that we and every of us shall be thereof,
and of every part and parcel thereof, from henceforth utterly barred and
excluded for ever by these presents.

And I the said A. B. and my Heirs, all and singular the said Premises with
the appurtenances, against me, Warranty.
my Heirs and Assigns and every of us unto the said C. D. his Heirs and
Assigns for ever shall and will warrant, and for ever defend by these presents.

A release, where three have a joint estate of inheritance.
THis Indenture made, etc. between G. M. T. C. and H. L. of the one party, and
Sir G. M. of the other party, witnesses, that whereas the said G. M. T. C. and
H. L. are and stand jointly seized to them and their heirs, of an absolute
estate of inheritance in fee-simple of the Manor and Lordship of E. etc.
reciting the land at large: which the said G. M. T. C. and H. L. have by virtue
of a conveyance or assurance, by, or from R. V. of, etc. as by the conveyance
and assurance thereof, made by the said R. V. unto the said G. M. T. C. and H.
L. more at large it does and may appear; and whereas the said T. C. and H. L.
have by sufficient conveyance and assurance in law, conveyed assured and
confirmed all their and either of their estate, right, title and interest, in,
and to the same Manor and Premises, with the appurtenances unto the said G.
M. and his heirs for ever, whereby he the said G. M. is thereof now soly and
absolutely seized in his demeasn as of fee, and whereas also the conveyance and
estate of the Premises, so as aforesaid made unto the said G. M. T. C. and H.
L. and their heirs, was to them made by the direction and appointment of the
said G. M. and at his only charge and costs every kind of way, as well for the
assurance thereof as otherwise, and was meant and intended for the good of the
said G. M. and his heirs, and to be at his and their only disposition. Now
therefore the said T. C. and H. L. as much as in them is or lies, have
remised, released, quit claimed and confirmed, and by these presents, for, and
from them and either of them, their and either of their heirs, etc. do remise,
release, quit claim and confirm unto the said G. M. now being in his full and
peaceable possession of the premises, and to his heirs, all the estate,
right, title, interest, possession, joint tenure claim and demand, which they
the said T. C. and H. L. have by any manner of conveyance or assurance, of, in*
or to the premises or any part or parcel thereof, and do by these presents
further deliver and confirm the premises with the appurtenances, and all
their and either of their said estate, right, title, interest, possession,
claim or demand, of, in, and to the same premises with the appurtenances, and
every part and parcel thereof unto the said Sir G. M. his heirs and assigns,
to have and to hold the said manor, messuages, lands, tenements,
hereditaments, and all and singular the premises with the appurtenances unto
the said Sir G. M. his heirs and assigns for ever, to the only use and behoof
of the said G. M. his heirs and assigns for ever, to hold of the chief Lords
of the fee, by the rents and services for the same heretofore due and
accustomed, etc. with warranty as in others. Blunden.


A release of an Assignment made upon condition.
TO all Christian people to whom, etc. I. O. greeting, etc. whereas M. C. by
his Indenture bearing date, etc. did for the consideration therein mentioned,
bargain, sell, assign and set over to me the said I. O. my Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, all his estate, right, title, interest, term of
years and demand, of, and in all that capital message, etc. and diverse other
lands and hereditaments in L. in the said County of E. in the said Indenture
mentioned; upon condition nevertheless, that if T. R. etc. his Executors or
Assigns, or any of them, did well and truly pay or cause to be paid to me the
said I. O. my Executors or Assigns, the sum of 2000 pound of, etc. at or,
etc. on the Feast day of, etc. without fraud or coven; that then and at all
times from thenceforth the said Indenture of assignment made by the said M. C.
and every covenant, grant, article and thing therein contained, should
determine and be utterly void, and of none effect, and then also, etc. reciting
the covenant verbatim as in the assignment, as in, and by the said Indenture of
assignment to me made by the said M. C. amongst diverse other covenants,
clauses, articles and agreements therein contained more at large it does and
may appear. Now know ye that I the said I. O. have had and received, and by
these presents do testify, acknowledge and declare, to have received and had
of the said T. R. at and upon the said Feast day of, etc. in the said proviso
or condition in the said recited Indenture of assignment mentioned, the sum
of 2000 l etc. according to the tenor and purport of the said proviso or
condition in the said recited Indenture contained, of which said sum of 2000
so by me received as is aforesaid, and of every part and parcel thereof, I the
said I. O. do acknowledge my self fully satisfied and paid, and thereof and of
every part and parcel thereof, and of all and all manner of interest, title and
demand, in, or to the premises or any of them, do clearly exonerate, acquit
and for ever discharge the said M. C. and T. R. and either of them, their and
eitheir of their heirs, executors and administrators, Blunden.
and every of them by these presents. In witness, etc.

A release of a Manor.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I. R.
greeting, etc. Know ye that I the said I. R. for diverse good causes and
considerations me in this behalf specially moving, have remised, released and
quit claimed, and by these presents do for me and my heirs remise, release and
for ever quit claim unto T. C. and M. his wife, in their full and peaceable
possession and sesin being and to the heirs and assigns of the said T. C. to
the only proper use and behoof of them the said T. C. and M. and of the heirs
and assigns of the said T. C. for ever, all the estate, right, title,
interest, use, possession, reversion, remainder, property, claim and demand
whatsoever, which I the said I. R. have or had, or that I, my heirs or
assigns, or any of us at any time or times hereafter shall have, or may,
might, should or ought to have or claim, of, in, and to all that the site of,
etc. recite the land as in the Indenture of bargain and sale: and of, in, and
to every part and parcel thereof, and of, in, and to the reversion and
reversions whatsoever, of all and singular the premises herein before
mentioned to be remised and released, and of every part and parcel thereof with
the appurtenances: and of, in, and to all and singular woods, underwoods and
trees growing or being, of, in, or upon the premises, or any part or parcel
thereof: and of, in, and to the ground and soil of the same woods, underwoods
and trees: and of, in, and to all and singular the rents and yearly profits
whatsoever, reserved upon any demise, lease or grant heretofore made or granted
of the premises, or of any part or parcel thereof; to have and to hold the said
site, etc. and the said message or tenement called the B. the said tenement
called the C. and all and every other the said messuages, lands, tenements,
meadows, feedings, pastures, commons, hereditaments, and all and singular other
the premises herein before mentioned, to be remised and released, and every
part and parcel thereof with the appurtenances, together with the said estate,
right, title, interest, use, possession, reversion, remainder, property, claim
and demand whatsoever of me the said I. R. and my heirs, of, in, and to the
same premises, and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances unto the said T. C. and M. his wife, and to the heirs and
assigns of the said T. C. to the only proper use and behoof of them the said
T. C. and M. and of the heirs and assigns of the said T. C. for ever: So that
neither I the said I. R. nor my heirs nor any of us, nor any other person or
persons for us, or any of us, or in the name or names of us or any of us, shall
or will at any time or times hereafter, ask, claim, challenge or demand to
have any manner of estate, right, title, interest or demand, of, in, or to the
said site, etc. lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, hereditaments
and other the premises, or any part or parcel thereof with the appurtenances;
but that we and every of us shall be thereof, and of, and from every part and
parcel thereof from henceforth utterly barred and excluded for ever by these
presents, with warranty against I. R. and his heirs.

A release of a rent reserved in a pair of articles of agreement.
TO all Christian people to whom, etc. W. F. greeting, etc. whereas I. H. of,
etc. being possessed and interessed for diverse years yet to come of, and in
diverse messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, mentioned and contained
in one pair of Indentures dated, etc. had and made between him the said I. H.
of the one party, and H. A. of the other party, did by Indenture bearing date,
etc. assign and set over unto the said H. A. the said original lease, and all
and singular the lands, tenements and hereditaments therein contained, all
which the said H. A. has sithence by his several grants or assignments,
granted, assigned and set over unto G. R. of, etc. to have to him, his
executors and assigns, for, and during all his estate, title, term, interest
and number of years which he had, of, in, or to the premises, as by his
several grants or assignments most at large appears, to this intent, meaning
and purpose; nevertheless, and upon trust and confidence that the same should
be to the use, benefit and behoof of D. N. W. F. and R. M. equally amongst
them. And whereas by a certain pair of Articles of agreement indented, bearing
date the, etc. made between the aforesaid W. F. on the one party, and the said
D. N. of the other party, it was agreed between them the said D. N. and W. F.
and the said W. F. did for him, his executors, administrators and assigns,
covenant, grant and agree, to, and with the said D. N. his executors and
assigns, that he the said D. N. his executors or assigns, should or might, at
all time and times from thenceforth during the said term, have and enjoy to his
only use and behoof, all the estate, title, term, interest, number of years,
use and commodity whatsoever, which he the said W. F. his executors,
administrators or assigns, had, should or might have, of, in, or to one full
third part, in three parts to be divided of all and singular the premises, and
all the estate, title, term, interest, use, benefit number of years and
commodity, which he the said W. F. has, of, in, or to the premises or any
part thereof: in consideration whereof the said D. N. his executors,
administrators or assigns, should yearly pay or cause to be paid unto the said
W. F. his executors, administrators or assigns 200 l during the said term: the
same to be paid, etc. as in the articles of agreement: as by the same articles
of agreement may appear. Now know ye, that the said W. F. for and in
consideration of the sum of 2000 l etc. to him in hand, at and before the
ensealing and delivery of these presents by the said D. N. well and truly paid,
does by these presents for him, his heirs, executors and administrators,
freely, clearly and absolutely acquit, discharge, grant, remise, release and
for ever quit claim unto the said D. N. his heirs, executors, and
administrators, the said yearly rent or sum of 200 of, etc. so as aforesaid
mentioned, reserved or covenanted to be paid in and by the said articles of
agreement as aforesaid, and all and every the covenants, conditions and
agreements touching the same rent, and also all and all manner of actions,
suits, cause and causes of actions and suits, trespasses, reckonings, rents,
arrerages of rents, accounts, executions, sum and sums of money and demands
whatsoever, which at any time heretofore ever he the said W. F. ^a^h or had, or
that he, his heirs, executors or administrators or any of them at any time or
tithes hereafter can or may have, claim or challenge to have, to, for, or
against the said D. N. his heirs, executors or administrators or any of them,
for, or by reason of the said yearly rent of 200 l or any of the articles or
agreements concerning the same or any of them, or any other the covenants in
the said several writings contained, or either of them: And further know ye,
that the said W. F. does by these presents remise and release unto the said D.
N. his executors and administrators all and all manner of other actions, suits
and demands whatsoever, which at any time heretofore he has had, or at any
time hereafter shall or may have, to, or against the said D. N. his executors
or administrators, for, or by reason of any other matter, cause or thing
whatsoever, from the beginning of the world until the, etc. day of, etc. In
witness, etc.

A release of a condition in an Indenture of bargain and sale, with the
proviso recited.
TO all Christian people to whom, etc. T. C. and R. W. etc. greeting, etc.
whereas the said T. C. and R. W. by their Indenture of bargain and sale bearing
date, etc. as well for, and in consideration of the sum of 1000 l etc. then in
hand paid to E. E. by M. B. as for twenty shillings of, etc. paid unto the said
T. C. and R. W. and for diverse other good causes and considerations them
thereunto especially moving, did bargain, sell, enfeoffe, and confirm unto the
said M. B. his heirs and assigns for ever, all that their park of N. etc.
verbatim, as in the Indenture of bargain and sale, as by the same recited
Indenture, amongst diverse other grants, covenants, provisoes, clauses and
agreements therein contained, more plainly and at large it does and may appear:
in, and by which said Indenture before recited, there is a condition or proviso
contained in these words or to this effect following, that is to say; provided
always, that if the said M. B. etc. reciting the proviso or covenant truly.
Now know ye, that we the said T. C. and R. W. for diverse good and reasonable
causes and considerations, us in this behalf specially moving; have remised,
released and quit claimed, and by these presents do for us and our heirs,
remise, release, and for ever quit claim unto the said M. B. being in his full
and peaceable possession and seisin of the premises, and to his heirs and
assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of him the said M. B. his heirs
and assigns for ever, the said proviso and condition, and all and every
article, matter and clause concerning the same; and all the estate, right,
title, interest, claim, condition, entry, benefit and demand, and every of
them whatsoever, which we the said T. C. and R. W. or either of us, have or
has, or may or ought to have or claim, of, in, or to the said Park called N.
lodges, lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, woods, underwoods,
waters, fishes, fishings, waste grounds, hereditaments, and all and singular
other liberties, profits and commodities whatsoever mentioned, or expressed or
intended to be granted, bargained or sold, in, or by the said recited Indenture
dated, etc. and of, in, and to every part and parcel thereof with the
appurtenances, so that neither we, etc. as in other before with warranty as
aforesaid.

A release of an annuity.
TO all Christian people to whom, etc. A. B. greeting, etc. whereas the said A.
B. by his deed, etc. reciting the grant of annuity. Now the said A. B. in
consideration, etc. has granted, remised, released and quit claimed, and by
these presents does grant, remise, release and for ever quit claim unto the
said R. O. being the true and lawful owner of the said Manor of R. and in
possession of the same at the sealing and delivery hereof, the said annuity or
yearly rent of thirteen pounds, etc. and all the arrerages thereof if any be,
and all the estate, right, title, interest, benefit, claim and demand
whatsoever of him the said A. B. in and to the said annuity or yearly rent of
13 l or any arrerages, distress or distresses, entry or forfeiture had or
taken, or which may or can be had, taken or claimed, for, concerning, or by
reason of the said annuity or yearly rent, or arrerages thereof, if any be. In
witness, etc.

A release of the condition and other covenants in an Indenture of mortgage,
with a confirmation from the morgager to the morgagee.
THis Indenture made the, etc. between Sir H. H. etc. of the one party, and R.
H. and G. L. of the other party. Whereas the said Sir H. H. by one Indenture
bearing date, etc. as well for, and in consideration of the sum of 400 l then
already paid unto the said H. H. before the ensealing and delivery of the said
Indenture, as also for, and in consideration of the sum of 1000 l etc. to be
paid unto the said H. his executors or assigns, at such day, time and place,
and in such manner and form as in the said recited Indenture dated, etc. were
set down and expressed, has given, granted, bargained, sold, confirmed and
delivered unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, all
that the Manor or Lordship of E. in the County of L. etc. as in the Indenture:
And sithence the said Sir H. H. and R. his wife, have levied a fine of the said
Manor or Lordship, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and of other the premises or
of the greatest part thereof, unto the said R. L. and G. L. and to the heirs
of one of them: and sithence a recovery in and by a writ of entry sur disseisin
en le post has been had of the premises or of the most part thereof against
the said R. L. and G. L. who vouched therein to warranty the said H. H. who
thereupon entered into the warranty and vouched over to warranty the common
vouchee, in, and by all things according to the usual order and form of common
recoveries with double voucher for assurance of lands and tenements, which
recovery has been executed by writ of habere facias seisin* accordingly which
said fine and recovery, and all other fines and recoveries whatsoever sithence
the date of the said Indenture, had, levied or suffered, by, or between any of
the said parties to the same Indenture or any of them of the premises, or of
any part or parcel thereof, were had, levied, and suffered to the only use of
the said R. L. and G. L. and their heirs, upon the condition contained in the
same Indenture, and according to the intent and true meaning of the same
Indenture, dated the said first day of, etc. and to no other use, intent or
purpose. In which said Indenture dated the said first of, etc. there is a
proviso or condition contained in these words, or to this effect following,
that is to say, Provided always, etc. reciting the proviso. And in which said
recited Indenture dated the said first day of, etc. there is a covenant
contained in these words, or to this effect following, that is to say, and the
said R. L. and G. L. do covenant and grant, etc. reciting the covenant, that
the morgager may have and receive the issues of the lands morgaged till the day
of payment, etc. And in which said recited Indenture dated the said first day
of, etc. there is also contained a covenant in these words or to this effect
following, viz. in consideration whereof the said R. L. and G. L. for
themselves, their heirs, executors and assigns, and every of them, do
covenant and grant, to and with, etc. by these presents: That if neither the
said H. H. his heirs or assigns, nor any of them do pay the said sum of
4000 l etc. to the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs, executors, administrators
and assigns, nor to any of them according to the intent and true meaning of
the said proviso or condition before herein mentioned; that then they the said
R. L. and G. L. their executors, administrators or assigns, or some of them
shall and will well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said H. H. his
executors, administrators or assigns, or some of them at the said, etc. the
sum of 1000 l etc. at or upon the second day of, etc. as the residue, and in
full satisfaction of the clear and absolute purchase of the said Manor or
Lordship, Lands, Tenements and other the Premises, without fraud, covin or
further delay as in and by the said recited ^ndenture, dated the said first day
of, etc. amongst diverse other covenants, grants, articles and agreements
therein contained, more plainly at large does and may appear. Now this
Indenture witnesses, that the said H. H. for diverse good and sufficient causes
and considerations him the said H. H. especially moving, has remised, released
and quit claimed, and by these presents does for him and his heirs, remise,
release and for ever quit claim unto the said R. L. and G. L. in their full
and peaceable possession and seisin being of the premises, and to their heirs
and assigns, to the only proper use and behoof of them the said R. L. and G.
L. their heirs and assigns for ever, the said proviso and condition, and all
and every article, matter and clause concerning the same, and all and every the
said covenants before herein recited, and every article, sentence and clause
concerning the same and every or any of them, and all the estate, right, title,
interest, claim, condition, entry, benefit and demand whatsoever, which he the
said H. H. has, or may, might, should, or ought to have or claim, of, in, or
to the said Manor or Lordship of E. manors, messuages, lands, tenements,
rents, reversions, services, etc. and all other profits, liberties,
commodities, hereditaments, and other the premises, with their and every of
their rights, members and appurtenances whatsoever, mentioned, or expressed or
intended to be given, granted, bargained and sold, in, or by the said recited
Indenture dated the said first day of, etc. and of, in, and to every part and
parcel thereof with the appurtenances, and all manner of conditions, covenants,
articles for conditions broken and demands whatsoever, of touching or in any
wise concerning the said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements and other the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof; so that neither he the said, H. H.
nor his heirs or any of them, nor any other person or persons, for him, them,
or any of them, or in his or any of their name or names, or in the name or
names of them or of any of them, shall or will at any time or times hereafter
ask, claim, challenge or demand, to have any manner of estate, right, title,
interest or demand, of, in, or to the said Manor or Lordship and other the
Premises, or any part or parcel thereof, other than such estates, terms and
interests, as are in the former recited Indenture excepted. But that he, they,
and every of them (except before excepted) shall be thereof, and of, and from
every part and parcel thereof, from henceforth utterly barred and excluded for
ever by these presents: And further the said H. H. does for him and his heirs
confirm the estate of the said R. L. and G. L. of, and in the said Manor or
Lordship, Messuages, Lands, Tenements and other the Premises, To have and to
hold all the said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements and other the Premises,
to the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever, absolutely,
without any manner of condition whatsoever, to the only proper use and behoof
of them the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns for ever. And the
said H. H. and his heirs, the said Manor or Lordship, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, and all and singular other the premises with their and every of
their appurtenances, unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns,
to the only pro^er use and behoof of them the said R. and L. their heirs and
assigns for ever, against all men, shall and will warrant and for ever defend
by these presents: And the said H. H. does also by these presents, remise,
release and quit claim unto the said R. L. and G. L. their heirs and assigns
all manner of errors, Foster.
writs of error and personal demands whatsoever. In witness whereof, etc.

An Indenture of allotment of several parts of lands.
THis Indenture sextipartite made, etc. Between W. C. on the one part, E. D.
and D. his wife on the second part, P. H. and F. his wife on the third part, R.
P. and M. his wife on the fourth part, W. C. and P. his wife on the fifth part,
and T. L. and E. his wife on the sixth part: Witnesses, That whereas diverse
and sundry Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments with their appurtenances, late the inheritance of the late Lady
I. B. deceased, sometimes wife of the Right Honorable Sir E. B. Knight,
likewise decased; set lying and being in diverse and sundry Countries, Shires
and places within the territories of England, by, and after the death of the
said Lady I. B. did lawfully descend and come, and of right ought to descend
and come unto the said W. C. E. D. and D. his wife, P. H. and F. his wife, R.
P. and M. his wife, W. C. and E. his wife, T. L. and F. his wife; that is to
say, to the said W. C. as Cosen, and one of the co-heires of the said Lady I.
B. that is to say, son of the Lady A. C. deceased, daughter of the said Lady
I. B. by G. C. Knight, Lord C. late husband of the said Lady A. now likewise
deceased, lawfully begotten, to the said D. C. and D. his wife, in the right of
the said D. one other of the daughters and co-heires of the said Lady I. B. To
the said P. H. and F. his wife, in the right of the said F. one other of the
daughters and co-heires of the said Lady I. B. To the said R. P. and M. his
wife, etc. one other of the daughters, and co-heires of the said Lady I. B. To
the said W. C. and E. his wife, as in the right of the said E. one other of the
daughters and co-heires of the said Lady I. B. And to the said T. L. and F. his
wife, as in the right of the said F. one other of the daughters and co-heires
of the said Lady I. B. by reason whereof the said W. C. E. C. etc. into the
said manors, messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments with their
appurtenances entered, and were thereof seized in Coparcionari: That is to say,
the said W. C. in his own right, and the said E. C. R. P. etc. and their said
wives in the right of their said wives, and they being thereof so seized Of
their wills, and mutual assents and agreements the seventh day of, etc. last
past before the date hereof, did make partition thereof in manner and form
following, that is to say, they did grant, and indifferently divide and sever
all the manors, messuages, lands, tenements and hereditaments, with their
appurtenances to them descended and come as is aforesaid, and which be
hereafter expressed into six several parts or shares, and agreed that every of
the said six several parts should be severally written and mentioned in a
scroule of paper by it self, and that afterward every of the said six several
scroules of paper, should be by an indifferent man thereunto appointed by their
mutual assents, severally enclosed and covered, in, and with wax, made like
little balls of like bigness and weight, so as no man may see any of the
scrouls, and that then the said little balls of wax should be put in a bonnet,
to be kept in the hands of an indifferent man thereunto appointed by their
mutual assents, and that the said W. C. being heir unto the eldest daughter of
the said Lady I. B. or his deputy thereunto sufficiently authorized, should
first put in his hand into the said bonnet, and should first take and choose out
of the same bonnet one of the said balls, and that he should have and hold to
him and to his heirs for ever, for his part, portion and purpart of the
premises, only those of the said manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments,
that should be mentioned and written in the scruole enclosed and covered in and
with the ball of wax, that he or his said deputy for him shall take and choose:
and that the said W. C. having married the said E. being the second daughter of
the said Lady I. B. or his deputy thereto sufficiently authorized, should for
him the said W. and the said E. his wife, being the second daughter of the said
Lady B. secondly put in his hand, etc. and should secondly take and choose, etc.
one other of the said balls; And that the said W. C. and E. his wife, should
have, hold and enjoy to them and to the heirs of the same E. for ever, as in
the right of the said E. of the premises only those, etc. and that the said P.
H. etc. as Mr. C. mutat, mutand. and so the other, all which was done
accordingly, And the said W. C. putting in his hand first into the said bonnet,
and taking and choosing out of the said bonnet one of the said six balls,
wherein was one of the said six scroules, in which was written and mentioned
the manor of W. with the appurtenances, late the said Lady I. B. and all the
lands, tenements, meadows, feedings, pastures, rents, reversions, services and
hereditaments with their appurtenances, which were of the said Lady B. in W. M.
and W. H. in the County of, etc. the manor of T. etc. And the said W. C.
putting in his hand second into the said, etc. the said P. H. etc. the said R.
P. etc. the said E. C. by his deputy, etc. the said T. L. etc. Know ye that the
said parties and every of them do and does by these presents, for him, her, and
them, and his and their heirs assent to the said partition of the premises,
so between them hereof made and had as aforesaid; And that every of them does
and do for him, her and them, and his and their heirs accept and take the
part, portion and purpart to him, her and them, happened and allotted as is
aforesaid, in full recompense of his, her and their part, portion and purpart
of all the manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments to him, her and them,
and any of them descended or come from the said Lady B. And that every of the
said parties does and do for him, her and them, and his and their heirs,
ratify and confirm the said partition, and also that every of the said
parties does and do for him, her and them, and for his, her and their heirs
ratify and confirm to the other of them and their heirs, the manors, lands,
tenements and hereditaments, to the other of them allotted and happened, by
virtue of the partition as is aforesaid, as also all the estates and interests
which the other of them has therein; and to the intent that no dissension or
variance should hereafter happen or arise betwixt the said parties to these
presents, their heirs or assigns or any of them, for touching or concerning
the said manors, lands, tenements and hereditaments with their appurtenances,
or any part or parcel thereof: it is covenanted, granted, condiscended,
concluded and fully agreed between the said parties to these presents, their
heirs and assigns in manner and form following, That is to say, first, the
said W. C. covenanteth and grants for him, his heirs, executors and
administrators by these presents, to, and with the said C. D. and D. his wife
and the heirs and assigns of the said D. and to and with the said P. H. and
F. his wife, and the heirs and Assigns of the said F. and to, and with the
said R. P. etc. and the Heirs and Assigns of the said, etc. and to, and with
the said W. C. and the said, etc. and to and with the said T. L. and the said,
etc. severally for their parts, portions and purparts of the Premises; that he
the said W. C. his Heirs and Assigns, and every of them at all times
hereafter, and from time to time whenever he the said W. C. his Heirs or
Assigns or any of them, shall be thereunto reasonably required by the said E.
D. or D. his wife or either of them, or the Heirs or Assigns of the said D.
for the said part, portion and purpart of the said D. of, and in the Premises,
and by the said P. H. etc. and by the said R. P. etc. and by the said W. C.
etc. and by the said T. L. etc. To make, do, acknowledge, and suffer or cause
to be made, done, acknowledged and suffered all and every act and acts, thing
and things, for the further and more better assurance and sure making in the
Law unto the said E. D. and D. his wife, and to the Heirs and Assigns of the
said D. the said part, portion and purpart of the Premises allotted and fallen
unto the said E. C and D. his wife as is aforesaid; and unto the said P.H. etc.
and unto the said R. P. etc. and unto the said W. C. etc. and unto the said T.
L. As by the said E. C. and D. his wife, and the Heirs and Assigns of the
said D. or by their or any of their Council learned in the Law, and at their or
any of their costs and charges in the Law, for their said part, portion and
purpart of the Premises, and by the said P.H. and by the said R.P. etc. and by
the said W.C. etc. and by the said T.L. etc. shall be reasonably advised,
devised and required; be it by Fine, Feoffment, Recovery, with Voucher or
Vouchers, Deed or Deeds enrolled, the inrolment of these presents, release,
confirmation, and by all these ways and means, or by any of them, or otherwise
with warranty or warranties against the said W. C. his Heirs and Assigns only
or without warranty, at the election and pleasure of such as shall require the
same, as is aforesaid. And that the said W. C. his Heirs and Assigns, shall
at all times hereafter from time to time exonerate, acquit, discharge, or
otherwise save harmless as well the said E. C. and D. his wife, and the Heirs
and Assigns of the said D. The said P. H. etc. the said R. P. etc. the said W.
C. etc. and the said T. L. etc. as also their said parts, portions and purparts
of the Premises, of, and from all and all manner of former bargains, sales,
joyntures, dowers, uses, wills, statutes Merchant, and of the staple,
recognizances, judgments, executions, issues, fines, amerciaments, intrusions,
alienations, without license, rents charges, rents seck, arrerages of rents,
and of, and from all other charges, encumbrances and demands whatsoever they
be, had, made or done by the said W C the like several Covenants for all the
rest, one after another, Mutat. mutand. And the said W. C. and E. his wife, P.
H. and D. his wife, T. L. and F. his wife, covenant and grant for them, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns by these presents, to, and with
the said W. L. C. his Heirs and Assigns: That if the said Manor of W. M.
shall happen at any time hereafter to be charged, chargeable or extendable, by
reason of any Statute, recognizance, or otherwise for any sum or sums of
money before the said seventh day of, etc. last past, due or payable by any act
done, or acknowledged by any other than the said W. L. C. That then the said E.
L. C. and D. his wife, etc. P. H. etc. R.P. and, etc. W. C. and, etc. T.L. and,
etc. their Heirs, Executors and Administrators, shall equally at their
indifferent charges bear and pay five parts in six parts to be divided of such
sum and sums of money, for which the said Manor of W. M. shall be so
charged, chargeable or extendable. In witness, etc.

An Indenture to avoid the title of Survivorship: where lands are granted to
two by lease.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. Whereas the said A. B. and C. D. in
and by one Indenture of Lease made, etc. do stand and are jointly interessed
and possessed, of, and in all that the Manor, Lands, etc. for and during, etc.
as by the said Indenture at large appears. And forasmuch as both the said
parties are willing and desirous, that the survivor or overliver of them, shall
not at any time hereafter take any commodity or advantage of the Premises or
any parcel of them by way of survivor or overliver, according to the course and
order of the Common Laws of this Nation, by reason of the joint title, estate
and interest, which they have in, and to the Premises, by virtue of the
Indenture of lease aforesaid; Therefore it is fully covenanted, concluded,
condiscended and agreed upon, between the said parties in manner and form
following, viz. first, the said A. B. does, etc. to and with, etc. that if it
do fortune or happen the said A. B. to survive and overlive the said C. D. for
avoiding the said title of survivor in and to the Premises: That he the said
A. his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall and will peaceably and
quietly permit and suffer the Executors, Administrators and Assigns of the
said C. D. being then deceased, to have, occupy and enjoy to their own proper
use and uses, and to the proper use of any of them in common or in severalty
immediately after the death of the said C. at his or their will and pleasure,
all that the moity, part and purpart of the said C. in and to the Premises and
every of them into two equal parts to be divided, during the residue and
remainder of years of the term of years above mentioned, which then at the
death of the said C. shall be to come and unexpired without let or disturbance
of the said A. his Executors or Assigns; the title of Survivor, of, and in the
Premises in any wise notwithstanding: and also the said C. D. does covenant,
etc. to, and with A. B. etc. for avoiding of the said title of Survivor in the
Premises; that if it do fortune or happen the said C. to survive and overlive
the said A. B. that he the said C. D. ut sup a mutat. mutand. And the said A.
B. does covenant, etc. to and with, etc. in manner and form following, viz.
That he the said A. his Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or one of them
shall pay the moity and one half of the said yearly rent of, etc. unto the
said T. B. his Heirs and Assigns in the Indenture of Lease forementioned, and
also shall bear and discharge half of all the covenants, reparations and
charges therein contained, which on the part of the said A. B. and C. D. are to
be observed and done in the said Indenture of Lease comprised. And further that
the said A. B. his Executors or Assigns, shall well, truly and safely keep the
said Indenture of lease unsurrendered, uncancelled, undefaced and whole to the
defense, saving and preservation as well of the interest, title and term of
the said C B as also of the title, interest and term of the said C D in, and to
the Premises, during the term aforesaid, the like covenant for C D mutat.
imitand.

An Indenture where two have a joint estate upon Covenant, that either of them
may have an equal part in the land or money lent, taking no benefit by
survivorship.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A B on the one part, and C D on the other
part, witnesses, that whereas E F by a certain Indenture dated, etc. for the
consideration therein expressed, did fully and clearly bargain, sell, give and
grant unto the said A B and C D their Heirs and Assigns for ever, All that
Manor, etc. as it is recited in the sale unto the habendum (then say with
diverse other covenants, grants and articles therein contained, amongst which
there is a certain proviso contained, and by the same proviso it is provided
and agreed, that if the said E F (recite the proviso) as by the same Indenture
it does and may appear; And for as much as by the order of the Common Laws of
this Nation, if either of the said A B or C D should fortune to decease before
payment of the said sum, or if default be made in payment of the said sum
of, etc. Then as well the said sum of, etc. should wholly remain to the
Survivor, etc. and for default of payment thereof, the Survivor and his Heirs
should wholly possess the said Manor, etc. according to the tenure of the
said Indenture, to the only use of the said Survivor and his Heirs, contrary
to the true meaning of the said parties; for avoiding of which inconvenience,
and to the intent, that either of the said parties, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators shall be duly answered of the Premises accordingly, it is
therefore covenanted and agreed between the said parties to these presents, and
the said A B does covenant and grant for him, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators by these presents, to, and with the said C D his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators in form following, that is to say, that if the
said E F his Executors, Administrators or Assigns do pay, or cause to be paid
to the said A B or his Heirs the said sum of 200 l at the day and place
limited for payment thereof in the said Indenture: That then the said A B his
Executors or Assigns, shall not only pay or cause to be paid to the said C D
his Heirs, Executors or Assigns within one month next after the day of
payment of the said sum, the sum of one hundred pound, being the moity of
the said two hundred pound, but also shall deliver or cause to be delivered
unto the said E F his Heirs or Assigns all such evidences, as he or his
Assigns shall have received by force of the said former Indenture, and thereof
shall acquit and discharge the said C D his Heirs, Executors or Assigns. And
further that the same A B his Executors or Assigns, shall not at any time
hereafter do, knowledge, cause, procure or suffer to be done any act or acts,
deed or thing whatsoever, which shall or may in any wise debar, avoid, delay
or hinder the tenor, strength, form or effect of the same Indenture, or any
covenant, grant or article contained in the said Indenture, or of any
assurance, estate or conveyance to be made of the Premises or any parcel
thereof to the said A B and C D or either of them, their Heirs or Assigns, or
of any bond made or to be made for the performance of any of them, without the
consent and agreement of the said C his Heirs or Assigns, first obtained in
writing for the same. And further, the said A B covenanteth and grants, etc.
that if default be made in payment of the said sum of two hundred pound by
the said E F his Executors and Assigns, in part or in all contrary to the form
aforesaid: That then the same A B and C D and their heirs shall stand and be
seized of, and in the moity and one half of the premises to the use of the
said C D and of his Heirs and Assigns for ever; and that he the same A B and
his Heirs, and all other claiming by him at all times after, shall do and
suffer to be done all such act and acts, thing and things in the Law as shall
be advised, devised and required by the said C D his Heirs or Assigns, or the
learned council, etc. for the better assurance of the same, etc. to the said C
D etc. with warranty against A B and his Heirs, discharged of encumbrances
done by him or any claiming by him, etc. And the said C D does covenant and
grant, ut supra mutat. mutand. and tunc. In witness, etc.

An Indenture of Partition.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between, etc. Witnesses, that whereas the said R P
and T B hold jointly for term of certain years yet enduring the Parsonage of F
in the County of Y and all houses, stables, etc. Take the words of the Lease,
thereto in any wise belonging or appertaining of the demise and grant of one W
C etc. yiedling therefore yearly unto R W etc. or his Assigns fifty five pound
of, etc. at two terms of the year equally during the said tenure, as by the
Indenture thereof bearing date, etc. more plainly may appear. Now the said
parties by the advice of honest friends, and with their full and whole consent
and agreement, have made division and partition between them of the said
Parsonage tithes, and other the Premises in manner and form following, viz.
that the said R. P. shall have the one equal moity or half part of all the
said Parsonage house, glebe lands, tithes and other the Premises in full
recompense of his due part and portion of, and in the same. And that the said
T. B. shall likewise have the other moity or half part of the said Parsonage,
and of all and singular the Premises in full recompense of his due part and
portion of and in the same, To have and to hold, to either of the said parties,
their Executors and Assigns severally, as is above said from the day of the
date hereof, unto the end of the said term of years yet to come. And also it
is agreed, covenanted and granted between the said parties; that the said
yearly rent of fifty five pound, to be due to the said R. W. or his Assigns,
and other charges shall be equally paid and borne between the said R. P. and T.
B. their Executors or Assigns, tenants of the said Parsonage, and other the
Premises from time to time during the said term, viz. either of them their
part and portion allotted as is aforesaid: And for the true meaning,
performance, and keeping of all and singular the said partitions, covenants,
conditions, payments, agreements and articles, either party binds himself,
his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to the other by these presents, in
the sum of 20 l of, etc. In witness, etc.

An Indenture where three have purchased land jointly, that upon sale thereof
all sums of money shall be equally divided between them.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between T. B. of the first part, and A. K. of London
on the second part, and E. D. of London Gent. on the third part, whereas the
said parties before the date hereof, jointly together at their equal costs and
charges have paid, disbursed and laid out diverse sums of money for the full,
clear and absolute purchase of, etc. Recite the land, the estate whereof
remains in the said E. and one M. D. Gent. at the day of the date hereof, to
be assured to such person or persons as the said, etc. shall name or appoint.
Now this Indenture witnesses, that it is fully covenanted, granted,
condiscended and agreed between the said, etc. and every of them covenanteth
and grants for himself, his Heirs, Executors and Administrators, to, and
with the other his Heirs, Executors, and Assigns; That the whole benefit,
commodity and profit, and the sum and sums of money, which at any time
hereafter shall be had or received, arising, coming, growing and renewing, of,
for or concerning the said lands before expressed and specified, and every part
and parcel thereof by the said, etc. or any of them, or any of their Heirs,
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, or any of them, or any other person or
persons, by their or any of their means or procurement, shall be equally and
indifferently distributed between every of them the said, etc. in such sort; as
every of them, their and every of their Heirs, Executors, Administrators and
Assigns shall have their equal part and portion without any manner of fraud or
covin; And also it is further agreed between the same parties, that in case any
of them happen to decease at any time hereafter, that then the benefit and
profit of the Premises, shall be to the use of the Heirs, Executors and
Assigns of him or them so deceased, in such and the like manner, as if he or
they had been alive, and that no advantage or benefit shall be received or
taken by any of the parties, for or by reason of any survivorship; And moreover
it is fully agreed between the said, etc. that they nor any of them, shall at
any time hereafter bargain, sell, grant, convey, assure or alien, nor suffer to
be conveyed or aliened, by, or from them or any of them the said Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and premises or any part or parcel thereof,
or his or their estate, right, title or interest, of, in, or to the same or any
of them, to any person or persons whatsoever, unless it be, by, and with the
consent, privity, knowledge or agreement, of such of the said other parties to
these presents, as then shall be living, under his or their hands and seals in
writing first had and obtained. In witness, etc.

An Indenture, where a lease is granted to three joint lessees, that every of
them is to pay his part of the rent, and equal parts in the charges of
repairing and other charges.
THis Indenture tripartite made, etc. Witnesses, that whereas the said parties
are and stand possessed, of, and in the Message, Tenement or Inn called the
Ship, set, lying and beng in the Parish of, etc. and of one field, etc. and of,
in, and all and singular houses, buildings, barnes, stables, shops, sellers,
sollers, wast-grounds, entries, issues, ways and all other commodities, rents
and profits to the same belonging or appertaining, that is to say, every of
them a full third part of all and singular the Premises into three equal and
even parts to be divided, for, and during the several terms hereafter
mentioned, that is to say, for, and during the term of fourteen years
mentioned and granted, in, and by a certain Indenture of lease bearing date,
etc. made by one M. N. etc. to the said A. B. of, and touching the Premises,
which term did commence at the Feast of, etc. then last past before the date
of the same Indenture: And for, and during the term of thirty years mentioned
and granted, in, and by the letters pattents of our, etc. under the great seal
of England bearing date, etc. granted by our said, etc. unto, etc. of and in
the Premises; as by the said Indenture of lease and letters pattent aforesaid
more at large appears. It is now covenanted, granted, concluded and agreed,
by and between the said parties to these presents and every of them; and every
of them does severally covenant and grant, to and with the other of them
severally by these presents, that they and every of them, and the Executors,
Administrators and Assigns of every of them, for his, her and their and every
of their parts, shall not only well and truly content and pay, or cause to be
contented or paid, the full third part and portion of all and singular such
yearly rents as are reserved, in, and by the said Indenture of lease and
letters pattents aforesaid, and either of them at the days, times and place
limited and appointed for the payment thereof, and that from time to time, for,
and during the said several estates and terms of years before mentioned; but
also shall at all times hereafter, and from time to time, for, and during the
terms aforesaid, pay, bear, allow and disburse the full third part and
portion of all such sum and sums of money, and other charges whatsoever as
shall grow due or payable, or be convenient or necessary to be borne or paid
for the reparations of the Premises, or for the recovery or defense of the
title thereof, or of any parcel thereof: and shall also condescend and agree to
all and every such account, suit, and other act and acts, which shall be
necessary or convenient to be attempted, prosecuted or done for touching and
concerning the Premises, or any parcel thereof tending to the profit or
benefit of the said parties, and shall not do, procure, or cause to be done,
any act or acts, thing or things, whereby or by reason whereof the estate,
interest or title of the said parties, or any of them, shall, or in any wise
may be impaired, hindered determined or avoided, except it be by, and with the
assent, consent and agreement of the other of them in that behalf first had
and obtained. And further the said A. B. does covenant, etc. that the said C.
D. his executors and assigns, and every of them shall have, occupy, use and
enjoy all such easements, ways, liberties and passages, and shall quietly have
free egresse, ingresse and regresse into and from the said Inn, tenement,
field and other the Premises, for the using and occupying of a full third part
of the Premises, without let or disturbance of the said A. B. his executors,
administrators and assigns, in such manner and form as the said M. N. has
heretofore had, occupied, used and enjoyed the same Premises: The like
covenant to E. F. and the like from C. D. to A. B. and E. F. and the like from
E. F. to A. B. and C. D. mutat. mutand. and tunc. In witness, etc.

The grant of a Keepership of a Park.
TO all Christian people to whom this present writing shall come, I A. B. etc.
send greeting, etc. Know ye, I the said A. B. for, and in consideration of the
good and faithful service by my servant E. R. to me heretofore done and
hereafter to be done, have given and granted, and by these presents do give
and grant unto the said E. R. the office of Keeper of my Park at Y. called B.
Park in the County of C. and also his habitation and dwelling in the lodge
belonging to the same Park, with the going and pasturing of one gelding, and
six kine yearly within the same Park: and further know ye that I the said A.
B. have given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant to the said
E. R. allowance of meat and drink for himself within my house at Y. aforesaid,
daily and yearly at all times, and by so long space as any hospitality or
household shall be kept there; To have and to hold, occupy, exercise and enjoy
the said office of keeper, and other the Premises unto the said E. R. for
term, and during the life natural of the same E. R. together with all manner
of fees, rewards, vailes and advantages, to the same office belonging, incident
or appertaining: And furthermore, know ye that I the said A. B. have given and
granted, and by these presents do give and grant unto the said E. R. for the
exercising of the said office of keeper, so long as he shall truly and
faithfully exercise the same, one annuity or annual rent of four pound of,
etc. to have, hold, perceive and enjoy the said annuity or yearly rent to the
said E. R. and his assigns, from the, etc. during the life natural of the said
E. R. at two terms of the year, etc. viz. etc. by even portions yearly to be
paid, by the receiver of my rents and revenews, the Steward of my house or such
other officer for the time being, as I shall appoint for the payment of the
rest of my servants their wages yearly. In witness, etc.

A Deputation of a Bailiff or Receiver.
TO all Christian people, etc. A. B. Bailiff and Collector of the rents, farms
and revenews of etc. Manors of G. and E. and of all and singular lands,
tenements, court leets, liberties, fines, issues, amerciaments, reliefes,
heriots, waifes, estrayes, and other possessions and hereditaments whatsoever
to the said manors belonging, with their members and appurtenances in the
County of, etc. parcel of the lands and possessions of W. late M. of, etc.
sends greeting, etc. Know ye that I the said A. B. have constituted, deputed
and appointed, and by these presents do, etc. C. D. of, etc. to be my lawful
and sufficient deputy, for me and in my behalf to occupy and exercise the said
office of Bailiff and Collector, and to exercise, execute, accomplish, receive
and do, and cause to be exercised, executed, accomplished, received and done
all and every such act and acts, thing and things, as in, about, touching or
concerning the said office, shall be necessary or requisite to be done, to
have, hold, exercise and enjoy the said office unto the said C. D. as deputy of
me the said A. B. for, and during the will and pleasure of me the said A. B. in
as ample manner and form, as I the said A. B. ought or might exercise,
execute, receive, accomplish, and do in the same if I the said A. B. were,
might or should be present at the exercising, executing, accomplishment,
receiving or doing thereof. In witness, etc.

The grant of a Stewardship or keeping of Courts.
THis Indenture made, etc. Between A. S. of S. in the County of S. Gent. of the
one party, and R. K. of L. in the County of B. Gent. of the other party:
Witnesses, that whereas our said, etc. that now is, by, etc. letters pattents
under the seal of, etc. Court of Exchequer, bearing date at Westminster the,
etc. day of, etc. in the, etc. year of, etc. has amongst diverse oeher things
therein contained, assigned and appointed the said A. S. to the office and
offices of Steward, and keeper of courts and leets of the Manor of L. and also
of the Manor of B. in the County of S. during, etc. pleasure, as by the same
letters pattents amongst diverse other things therein contained more plainly
appears. Now the said A. S. for diverse good causes and considerations him in
this behalf specially moving, has made, ordained, constituted and appointed,
and by these presents does make, ordain, constitute and appoint the said R. K.
to be his deputy, to exercise and execute the said office and offices of
Stewardship and keeper of courts and leets of the said Manors, and to seize
and take all heriors, and to take and receive all profits of courts and leets
which are or shall grow due within the said Manors or any of them, to have,
enjoy, hold, exercise and occupy the same office and offices, to the foresaid
R. K. during the will and pleasure of the said A. S. and to receive, perceive
and take the wages, fees, allowances, profits and commodities therefore of
right, due, accustomed, belonging and appertaining: and the said R. K. does
covenant, promise and grant for himself, his executors and administrators by
these presents, to and with the said A. S. his executors, administrators and
assigns, and every of them, in manner and form following, viz. that he the
said R. K. his executors and assigns, shall and will from time to time, well
and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. S. his executors or
assigns, all such wages, fees, allowances, sum and sums of money, heriots,
profits of courts and leets, and other profits and commodities, as for or in
respect, or by reason of the said office and offices of Stewardship or keeping
of courts, and leets within the said Manor, as every or any of them shall grow
due or payable, or as he the said R. K. by reason or in respect of the
exercising or executing thereof, shall from time to time receive, perceive,
take or make; and also that he the said R. K. shall not nor will not at any
time or times hereafter do, commit or suffer to be done any manner of act or
thing whatsoever, which shall or may be in any wise prejudicial or hurtful to
the said letters pattents before mentioned, or to the said A. S. his deputy or
deputies, in exercising or executing the said Pattent, or any the office or
offices of Stewardship, or keeping of courts or leets, or any power or
authority thereby given or granted, or any thing therein contained. In
witness, etc.

A License for a Buck and Do, during the life of the Grantee.
WE E. D. etc. for diverse good causes and respects us moving, have given and
granted, and by these presents for us and our heirs, do give and grant unto
our well-beloved servant C. D. our Secretary, during his life one Buck of
season in Summer, and one Do of season in Winter, to be had, taken, hunted and
killed at, and within our Park of B. in the County of W. either with dog or
bows by the same C. D. or his assigns, at his or their free liberty, choice
and pleasure, during his said life; wherefore we will and command you and every
of you, our keeper or keepers there, or your deputy or deputies for the time
being, upon the sight hereof, or of the true copy hereof signed by the proper
hand of the said C. D. that you and every of you, do peaceably and quietly
permit and suffer the same C. D. and his assigns, during his said life, yearly
from henceforth to have, kill, and take at, or within our said Park, the said
Buck in Summer, and the said Do in Winter, according to the tenor of this our
gift and warrant dormant, any restraint or commandment heretofore had, made or
given to the contrary hereof notwithstanding; and this our warrant signed and
sealed with our proper hand, shall be unto you and every of you a sufficient
warrant and discharge against us and our heirs at all times in this behalf.
Given under our seal and sign manuel, etc.

A Condition to cure a disease or to repay the money.
THe condition of this obligation is such, That whereas the within named A. B.
the day of the date within written, has delivered and given the within bounden
C. D. the sum of eight pound in consideration, that the said C. D. should on
this side and before the third day of, etc. next coming after the date within
written, cure and make whole the said A. B. of the disease or diseases
wherewith the said A. B. is now grieved. If therefore the said C. D. do before
the said third day of, etc. next, well and sufficiently, and safely cure and
make whole the said A. B. of the said diseases; and also in case the said A. at
any time after, and before the fourth day of, etc. next following, be grieved
or vexed with the said diseases or any part thereof, or that the said disease
or any part thereof, do before the said fourth day of, etc. issue or grieve
upon any part of the body of the said A. B. then if the said C. D. his
executors or assigns within twenty days next after the said fourth day of,
etc. do well and truly repay or cause to be repaid unto the said A. B. his
executors, administrators or assigns, the said sum of eight pound without
fraud or covin, then, etc.

Not to sell lands had by marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That if neither the within bounden A. B. his heirs,
executors, administrators nor assigns, nor any of them, do at any time or
times hereafter, give, grant, bargain, sell, demise, let, set, or otherwise do
away all or any of the lands, tenements, woods, underwoods, possessions or
hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, which he the said A. B. now has
and enjoys, or is possessed of at this present day, by reason of a marriage
late had and solemnized between him the said A. B. and I. now his wife, etc.
lying and being in the Towns, Parishes, Hamlets and Fields of S. and H. in the
County of C. or elsewhere within the Nation of England, to any manner of person
or persons, without the special license, will, consent and agreement of the
within named C. D. his executors or assigns first had and obtained in writing
for the same: That then, etc.

To assure a sum of money in consideration of a Marriage.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within bounden A. B. intends by Gods
grace shortly to marry, and take to his wife one C. D. sister of the within
named E. F. if the said A. B. do by his last Will and Testament, or otherwise
without any fraud or covin, in case the said C. D. shall after marriage had
between them survive the said A. B. lawfully give and assure to the said C. D.
the sum of five hundred pound, etc. or else goods and chattels to the value
or worth of, etc. over and besides such chains, bracelets, jewels and apparel,
which the said C. D. shall fortune to have at the day of the death of the said
A. B. which said sum of five hundred pound, or else the said goods and
chattles, which then shall be worth the said sum of five hundred pound, and
the said chains, bracelets, jewels and apparel, the said C. D. her executors,
administrators and assigns, shall and may at all times from the day of the
death of the said A. B. peaceably, quietly and lawfully have, use, give, set
and enjoy at her and their pleasure, without any let or interruption of the
said C. B. his executors, administrators or assigns, or of any other person or
persons by his or their means, assent or procurement: That then, etc.

To assure an estate.
THe Condition, etc. That if the within bounden A. B. and C. D his wife, and
either of them and their heirs (at the proper costs and charges in the Law of
the said E. F. his heirs and assigns, at all times within the space of two
whole years next ensuing the date hereof, do make, assure and convey, or cause
to be made and conveyed unto the said E. F. and his heirs, or to such other
person or persons and their heirs, as the said E. F. and his heirs shall name
and appoint to his and their proper uses and behoofes, such a good, lawful,
sufficient and perfect estate or estates, assurance or assurances in the Law,
of, and in all the lands, tenements and hereditaments whatsoever, with the
appurtenances both free and copy, which late were G. F. deceased father of the
said E. F. set, lying and being in B. in the County of C. be it by deed or
deeds enrolled, fine, feoffment, recovery, surrender or surrenders, release
with warranty against the said A. B. and C. his wife and either of them and
their heirs, as by the learned counsel of the said E. F. his heirs or
assigns shall be reasonably advised or devised, the same premises then to be
clearly discharged, of, and from all former bargains, sales, gifts, grants and
all other charges, titles, troubles and encumbrances whatsoever they be, had,
made or done by the said A. B. and G. his wife or either of them in the mean
time. That then, etc.

That the Lessee shall not carry away any wainscot or windows at the end of his
lease.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A. B. by his Indenture of
lease bearing date, etc. has demised and to farm letten unto the within
bounden C. D. all that tenement with the appurtenances, etc. now in the
occupation of the said C. D. for the term of certain years yet enduring, as by
the same Indenture more plainly may appear. If therefore the said C. D. etc. do
not at the end of the term of years mentioned in the said Indenture of lease
before recited, carry away any of the wainscot, settles and cubbords standing
and being in the, etc. or the keys and locks being upon the doors and
cubbords of wainscot aforesaid of and within the said tenement, nor take away
any of the windows now standing, appending or appertaining to the said
tenement, but do permit and suffer them there to remain at his departure in as
good case as now they are, reasonable, wearing only excepted. That then, etc.

The obligee to pay money for wares delivered in trust, to another that shall
make default of payment.
THe Condition, etc. That whereas the within named A. B. has delivered upon
trust to one C. D. certain wines amounting to the sum of, etc. and given him
day of payment for the same, etc. until the Feast of, etc. if in case the said
A. B. his executors, administrators or assigns, do not before or at the said
Feast of, etc. pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. his executors, etc.
the said sum of, etc. but shall make default of payment thereof or of any part
thereof: Then if the within bounden E. F. and G. H. or either of them, or the
executors, administrators or assigns of them or of either of them, do well and
truly content and pay or cause to be paid unto the said A. B. his executors,
etc. the said sum of, etc. or so much thereof, as at the said Feast of, etc.
shall happen to be behind unpaid; That, etc.

To deliver writings to be cancelled at a day certain and place.
THe condition of this, etc. That if the within bounden A. B. his executors,
administrators or assigns, do before the second day of, etc. next coming after
the date within written, deliver or cause to be delivered to the within named
C. D. his executors, administrators or assigns, at or within, etc. all such
Indentures, Leases, Counterparts of Indentures and Writings, as he the said A.
B. or any other by his delivery has or have, touching the Manors of, etc.
which were made and written before the eleventh day of, etc. last past without
fraud or collusion: That then, etc.

To save one harmless for delivery of an Indenture.
THe condition, etc. That whereas the within named A. B. has the day of the
date within written delivered unto the within bound C.D. one deed indented
bearing date, etc. made from E. F. to G. H. of, etc. of certain lands in, etc.
If therefore the said C. D. his heirs, etc. do at all times hereafter, and
from time to time discharge, save and keep harmless the said A. B. his heirs,
etc. against G. S. of, etc. and all and every other person and persons
whatsoever, of, for, or concerning the delivery of the said deed, and of, for,
and concerning all manner of matters and indemnities, which may by any means
accrue or be unto or against the said A. B. etc. for, or by reason of the same:
That then, etc.

A Letter of Attorney irrecoverable to receive a debt on a bond with covenant
not to release, etc.
TO all Christian people to whom these presents shall come, E. A. of, etc. in
the County of, etc. Shoo-maker, sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting:
Whereas I. D. of, etc. in the said County of, etc. widow, and N. D. son of
the said I. of, etc. in the said County Shoo-maker, by their bill obligatory
bearing date the, etc. day of, etc. do stand bounden to me the said E. in the
sum of, etc. for the payment of the sum of, etc. upon the, etc. day of,
etc. next ensuing the date of the said bill obligatory, at, or in the then
dwelling house of the said E. A. situate in, etc. aforesaid, which said bill
obligatory is become forfeited: know ye therefore that I the said E. do by
these presents authorize, constitute and appoint my well-beloved friend I. E.
of, etc. aforesaid Butcher, my lawful Attorney irrevokable for me, and in my
name to sue, arrest, attach, prosecute, condemn and imprison the said I. D.
and N. D. or either of them, and her, his or their bodies, goods and cattles in
execution to take, and out of execution to deliver, either upon satisfaction by
composition or otherwise, at the will and pleasure of my said Attorney;
acquittances or any other discharges to seal and deliver, Attorney or
Atturneys, to make Councellor or Counselors to retain, and the same again to
revoke, and generally and particularly all and every other matter and thing
requisite, necessary or behoofeful to execute, prosecute, do and perform, or
cause to be so done and performed as fully and largely, as I my self might or
could do, being personally present without any account thereof to be yielded
unto me mine executors or assigns; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall do or
cause to be done in, about or concerning the premises, I do by these presents
ratify, confirm and allow the same; and also do covenant with and by my self
to my said Attorney not to revoke, disallow, discontinue, deny or be nonsuited,
in, or otherwise to do anything that may be hurtful, prejudicial, or any bar
or let therein or thereunto by any means whatsoever. In witness whereof I the
said E. A. have hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

A Letter of Attorney from two Executors of a bond sued to a judgment to a
Creditor of the Testator.
ALL men shall know by these presents, that we T.D. Gent. and R.M. Gent.
Executors of the last Will and Testament of T. H. late of, etc. in the County
of, etc. Esquire deceased, have made, constituted, ordained, and in our place and
steads have put, and by these presents do, make, constitute, ordain, and in our
place and steads, do put our trusty and well-beloved in Christ M. F. widow,
late the wife of T. F. late of, etc. Gent. deceased, our true and lawful
Attorney, for us and in our names and steads, but to her own use to ask,
demand, receive and take of Sir H. I. late of, etc. in the County of, etc. the
debt due and payable unto the said T. H. in his lifetime, by virtue, force or
reason of one obligation or writing obligatory, bearing date the, etc. day of,
etc. of the penal sum of two hundred pounds conditioned for the payment of
one hundred seven pounds and ten shillings upon the Feast of, etc. then next
following, as in and by the said obligation and condition thereof may appear:
and whereas the said T. H. obtained a judgment against the said Sir H. for two
hundred pounds debt upon the said bond, besides damages or costs of suit: know
ye further, that we the said T. D. and R. M. have authorized and given power,
and by these presents do authorize and give power unto the said M. for and in
our names, but to her own use to take execution or any other process upon or
by reason of the said judgment against the said Sir H. his heirs, executors
or administrators or any of them, or against his, their or any of their lands,
tenements, goods, cattels and chattels or any of them, and with him, them or
any of them to compound or agree at her will and pleasure for the same, and the
benefit and profit thereof to her own use, to receive and take; and him the
said Sir H. to sue, arrest, implead and imprison, and out of prison to set at
large, discharge and release at her will and pleasure, and all and every other
thing and things, which in or about the obtaining or getting of the said debt
and damages, or any part or parcel thereof shall be needful or necessary to be
done, to execute and do in as large, ample and beneficial manner and form to
all intents and purposes, as we the said T. D. and R. M. may, can, might,
could, should or ought to do by virtue, force or reason of the said recited
obligation or writing obligatory or the condition thereof, or by virtue, force
or reason of the said judgment thereupon had. In witness whereof we have
hereunto set our hands and seals the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of, etc.

A Letter of Attorney of a man's estate in general, in consideration of several
debts and engagements.
TO all to whom these presents shall come, I F. G. of, etc. in the County of,
etc. in Ireland Merchant send greeting. Whereas I am indebted unto R. G. my
brother in the sum of five and fifty pounds, and he and B. G. one other of my
brothers stand engaged for several sums of money, the proper debts of me the
said F. G. and have already paid for me the sum of thirty pounds. Now know ye
that I the said F. G. for and toward the payment and satisfaction of the said
moneys, and for diverse other good considerations me thereunto moving, have
granted, assigned, bargained and sold, and by these presents do freely and
absolutely grant, assign, bargain and sell unto the said R. G. and B. G. all
and all manner my goods and chattels, debts, moneys and all other things of
mine whatsoever, as well real as personal, of what kind, nature or quality the
same are, be or shall be found, or otherwise, wheresoever within the Nation of
Ireland or teritories, to have and to hold the same and every part and parcel
thereof, unto the said B. G. and F. G. their executors, administrators and
assigns for ever, to the only proper use of them, their executors,
administrators and assigns for ever. In witness whereof I have hereunto set
my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

A Letter of Attorney of several sums of money due from one person.
KNow all men by these presents, that I F. G. of, etc. in the County of, etc.
Merchant, for diverse good and valuable considerations me thereunto especially
moving, have made, assigned, constituted and ordained, and by these presents do
make, assign, constitute and ordain W. L. of London Tailor, my true and lawful
Attorney, in my name, but to the only proper use of him the said W. L. his
executors and administrators, to demand and receive all such sum and sums
of money as are due or owing to me from E. K. of, etc. in the County of, etc.
clothier, any manner of ways howsoever, and for default of payment to sue,
arrest, attach, implead, condemn and imprison the said E. K. and his body,
goods and chattels in execution to take, and out of execution to deliver,
either upon satisfaction, composition or otherwise at the will and pleasure of
my said Attorney; acquittances or any other discharges in my name to seal and
deliver; Attorney or Atturneys one or more under him the said W. L. to make,
and substitute and revoke: and generally to do, and execute, prosecute and
determine all and every other act and acts, thing and things whatsoever, which
in or about the premises shall be needful or expedient, as fully and
effectually and in as large and ample manner, to all intents and purposes, as I
the said F. G. might or could do personally, without any account thereof to be
yielded to me, my executors or assigns; and whatsoever my said Attorney shall
do or cause to be done, in, about or concerning the premises, I do by these
presents ratify, confirm and allow the same. In witness whereof I have
hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

A short bill of debt from one to one.
KNow all men by these presents, That I B.G. of, etc. Barber-Chirurgion, do owe
unto M. R. of, etc. Gent. the sum of four and twenty pounds of lawful money
of England to be paid to the said M. his executors, administrators or assigns,
on the, etc. day of, etc. now next ensuing the date hereof; to the which
payment well and truly to be made at the time aforesaid, I bind me, my heirs,
executors and administrators unto the said M.R. his executors and
administrators in the sum of forty pounds of lawful money of England firmly
by these presents. In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand and seal
the, etc. day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

An assignment of certain debts with a Letter of Attorney to receive them.
KNow all men by these presents, that I F.G. of, etc. in the County of, etc. in
Ireland Merchant, for diverse good and valuable considerations me thereunto
especially moving, have granted, assigned and set over unto my Brothers B. G.
and R. G. all such debts and sums of money, bills, bonds and specialties
which are owing from, or remain in the hands of L. T. of, etc. aforesaid
Yeoman, and all such other debts and sums of money which are due and owing to
me from any person or persons inhabiting within the Nation of Ireland or
elsewhere: and I the said F. G. have likewise assigned, constituted and
ordained, and by these presents do assign, constitute and ordain the said
R.G. and B. G. and either of them, jointly and severally my true and lawful
Attorney and Atturneys in my name, but to the only proper use of them the said
R. and B.G. their executors and administrators, to demand and receive the said
debts and sums of money, and for default of payment to sue, arrest, attach,
condemn and imprison the said debtors, and their bodies, goods and chattels in
execution to take, and out of execution to deliver, either upon satisfaction by
composition or otherwise at the will and pleasure of my said atturneys;
acquittances or any other discharges in my name to seal and deliver; attorney
or atturneys one or more under them the said R. and B. G. to make, substitute
and revoke; and to do and execute whatsoever act or thing shall be needful or
expedient in or about the premises as fully and in as large manner to all
intents and purposes, as I the said F. G. might or could do personally, without
any account thereof to be yielded to me, my executors or assigns: and
whatsoever my said Atturneys shall do or cause to be done, in, about or
concerning the premises, I do by these presents ratify, confirm and allow
the same. In witness whereof* I have hereunto set my hand and seal the, etc.
day of, etc.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of,

A Grant of the next donation of Benefice.
TO all to whom this present writing shall come, I A. B. of C. in the County of
D. Gent. send greeting. Know ye that I the said A. B. the undoubted Patron of
the Parish Church of E. in the County of F. for good considerations me
thereunto moving, have given and granted, and by these presents do give and
grant unto G. F. of I. in the County of K. Gent. the first and next advowson,
nomination, donation, collation, presentation and free disposition of the
aforesaid Rectory of E. in the said County of F. with all its rights, members
and appurtenances whatsoever, when it shall be void either by death or
resignation, or otherwise. In witness whereof, etc.

FINIS.

