A SERMON PREACHED At St. Bartholomevvs the less in LONDON, on the xxvii. day
of March 1642; Being the day of the Inauguration of our Sovereign Lord King
CHARLES.

By WILLIAM HALL. Minister of that Parish, and now thought fit to be published.

LONDON, Printed by T. Badger, for Samuel Brown, 1642.

To the Right Honorable Sr. JOHN BANKS Knight, Lord chief Justice of the
Court of Common pleas, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Counsel.
My Lord,
THis Sermon being delivered by a son of mine, whom it has pleased God to call
to his special service in the Ministry of his Gospel, upon the anniversary
day of the Inauguration of our gracious Sovereign, the 27 of March last. In
the passing of it, not only thorough my ears (for I may well be deemed
partial) but of diverse others of the then Auditors (who surely could not be
partial) it found such approbation, as we did not think fit it should be
confined within those narrow limits of a small Parish but that it should be
communicated to others, by this diffusive way of silent speaking by these dumb
Characters, to the eyes, ears and hearts of all who please. My Lord, I have
long studied to find out some way or other, wherely I might return some
acknowledgement of those many undeserved favors, which I have received from
your Lordship, and having the free tender of this Sermon, from the Deliverer of
it as a pledge of his duty to me: I could not but think fit (I having nothing
else so worthy) to present it to your Lordship, the rather; First because the
subject of it is touching Rulers and Magistrates, amongst which your Lordship
sits in none of the lowest ranks. Secondly, because it teaches the duty of
the people to their Rulers and Magistrates, and how they ought to deport
themselves toward them in words and actions. A thing very necessary in this
licencious age of ours where every man conceives he may not only think what
he list, but utter what he thinks, be it of the greatest or highest: I shall
humbly desire your Lordship, to set apart one vacant hour for the perusal of
it, and consider it comes from a higher Spirit than from the spirit of the
Speaker; Wherefore it cannot be altogether unworthy Your Lordships sparing so
much time for contemplation of it: We shall wish it may prove acceptable to
Your Lordship; And for us, both the Author and the Presenter, We shall ever
(as exceedingly obliged) rest desirous to take hold of all occasions to offer
to Your Lordship all fit testimonies of our duties and respects and shall ever
remain

Your Lordships most humble and affectionate servants in all we can perform,
NATHANIEL HALL, WILLIAM HALL.

EXODUS 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy
people.
THe Pulpit is not to be made the theater to vent politic Discourses: Nor is
it the task of the Preacher of the Gospel to busy the minds of the people
with Civil matters, who are more easily fixed upon them than upon Divine. It
has been one of the diseases of our age, not only for Laick preachers, but
some of the lawful Ministers of Christ, to make the matters of the times the
subjects of their Sermons, more than matters more necessary to Salvation, they
have taught (...), the course of the World more than the Cross of Christ. My
Text (though it concern Politic Government) will not, I hope, engage me to
such an error, to unprofitable discourses of Policy, or intermedling with the
times which is not for edification: yet you see it is fitted to the day. The
day is both Gods and the Kings, and therefore challenges the remembrance of
those duties, which God requires toward Kings and Governors. Neither indeed
is such Doctrine more seasonable in respect of the day (the anniversary of our
Princes inauguration) than for those days wherein we live. The (...), or
liberty of the tongue extends so far that every man or woman make themselves the
Censurers of Magistracy; one disrelishing and taxing the actions of the sacred
Senate of our Commonwealth; another throwing his private imputations upon the
person of Gods anointed. One undertaking (that which only is peculiar to the
highest) to stand in the Congregation of Princes and be Judge among the Gods;
another using such language as that of Shimei to David, or as innocent Naboth
was falsely charged to have used against King Ahab. The propounded Scripture will
meet with both kinds of presumption; for God forbid we should so reprehend one
sort of presumers as to countenance the other. All sorts of Governors are here
united in my Text, both the supreme and subordinate: and may they never be
disunited among us; censorious or bitter speeches against both kinds are
severely prohibited, Thou shall not, etc.

God himself had now made known the Moral Law in ten precepts, upon Mount
Horeb, and Moses having a Legislative power derived to him from God himself,
propounds Ceremonial and judicial precepts to the people: The one sort to
prescribe those formalities wherewith God would be worshipped, the other, to
order their political government, for the better maintaining humane society in
that populous Commonwealth of Israel. This latter sort of judicial Laws, we
shall find to begin in the first verse of the former chapter, where we shall
find them entitled judgments, which God commanded Moses to set before them.
Judgments quia sunt leges secundum quas judicandum est, because they were
Laws according to which judgment in judicial trials, was to proceed in
Israel. Many particular Laws there are to prevent private injuries betwixt man
and man, and here in this precept the Law giver adds a peremptory precept, for
deportment toward public persons, Thou shall not, etc.

It is indeed, a Moral precept in its own nature: a stream derived from the
fountain of the fifth Commandment (as those are the strongest and most obliging
judicial Laws, which have nearest dependence on the Moral Law) and therefore
is of perpetual efficacy, and obliges all to perpetual observation, but is
here placed among the judicial or politicque Laws for double reason.

First, Because it concerned the policy or government of the Commonwealth, the
duty of men toward their Magistrates.

Secondly, Because upon breach of this precept the Delinquents should be
proceeded against by the Civil Magistrate, and in a judicial course,
punishment be inflicted. This was now made a penal statute to Israel, as well
as it was a branch of a moral Commandment, and though we find not the nature
or degree of the punishment expressed (because God leaves that arbitrary to
Magistrates, who would be forward enough to punish indignities to themselves)
yet is it most probably conjectured to be no less than death it self, for
notorious open railing upon the highest Magistrate. He that railed on his
Father or Mother, was to be put to death, Chap. 21.17. and surely no less was
he to suffer, who should curse and revile them who were publici parents, the
public parents of the Country: Neither was it more for blasphemy against God,
than blasphemy against the King, that Naboth was stoned, though he was guilty
of neither. What ever their judicial punishments were in that Hebrew
Commonwealth, that indeed obliges not other nations to inflict the same, for
punishments were only national, and the indulgence of our Christian Laws, may
perhaps not exact such rigor; but still the sin must needs be as heinous as
ever it was then. There is still the same stamp or impression upon Magistracy,
by the same Almighty hand, and the precept is no less pressing upon Christians
than upon Jews. Thou shall not revile, etc.

The Command you see is double: but the latter part is either exegeticall, of
the former, by way of explication, or else it is emphaticall, to urge it on
with vehemence by double repetition: yet may we justly find some advantage from
the variety or duplicity of the words, and therefore thus distribute them.

First, Here is dignitas Magistratuum, the Magistrates dignity, and that first,
of Magistrates in general, they are all Dii Gods. Secondly of one Superior
above the rest: he is Princeps populi sui the ruler of etc.

Secondly, Here is officium privatorum, the duty of private men expressed in a
double negative precept. First, for regulating their carriage toward
Magistrates in general; they must not revile nor rail upon them. Secondly,
For their behavior toward the principal Ruler, they must not curse him, Thou
shall not, etc.

First, the dignity of Magistrates in general, the Rulers they are Elohims
Gods. There were a kind of nominall Gods, which Saint Paul mentions, 1 Cor.
8.5. there are Gods many, and Lords many, which some would understand in the
same sense (Saint Austin for one) with these in my Text, of Rulers and
Governors, but the Apostle alludes there to none other but the vain Idols of
the Heathen, who in the blockish imagination of the people were esteemed Gods,
and so were Dii nominales, nominall Gods though not digni nomine, worthy of
that title, being indeed nothing at all, as Saint Paul, in that 4 verse of that
8 to the Cor. nothing but by mere fancy, and supposition. Besides these even
Satan himself is entitled not only a Prince, but Deus mundi hujus, the God
of this world, 2 Cor. 4.4. because he is so reputed by the men of this world:
the wicked make Satan to be their God, they obey his dictates, and so do serve
and worship him, in stead of him that is God essentially. But these are Gods
(...), only abusively, so called by the opinion of foolish and sinful men: But
such there are who are dignified with this title by him, in whose only power it
is to communicate so high an appellation, Ego dixi quod vos Dii estis, I have
said ye are Gods. Psa. 82.6. It is not the idolization by men's vain opinion,
that defies Judges and Rulers nor such an (...), or ridiculous deification as
the Romans used to their dead Emperors, nor their own arrogant assuming the
title of God to themselves (as did Alexander, and also many of the Roman
Tyrants) that makes them to be called Gods; but Gods own appellation in his
Word, he honors some of the sons of men with that title which is his own, and
calls them Gods who are but mortal men.

Many significant Epethits we find ascribed to Magistrates, which speak some of
them their eminency, some their duty by profane Writers they are called
sometimes (...) Leaders, because they ought to lead others by their virtuous
example, sometimes (...), adorners, they should beautify the world with Order
and Government; sometimes (...), Keepers, for they are for the safety of their
charge* some time (...), Benefactors, as our Savior intitles them, Luke 22.25.
because they are set up for the good of men, not for the hurt. The Scripture
adds to them many other expressive attributes, they are (...), Saviors,
because of deliverances wrought, by their means, Judge 3.15. Nutricij, Nurses
by the Prophet Esaias, because they are to tender, and educate the Church of God;
in Ezekiels language they are (...) Shepherds, to feed and rule over the
people; in S. Paul's (...) the Ministers of God, Romans 13.6 but this in my Text
transcends them all, they are Elohim, Gods themselves. All lawful Rulers then
be they supreme or subordinate, Judges or Magistrates are in some manner
mortal Gods, sublimes and sapientes viri, as Gregory understands it, Elevati,
as the Hebrew word signifies, those whom God has exalted and set over others,
such as was Moses and Aaron, and the Rulers of the great Sauhedcim among the
Jews, these are Gods in Scripture language; and that not with impropriety.

For first, they are Imagines Dei, Images of him who is the Universal Ruler
and Judge of all; there is a representation and resemblance of the Deity in
Magistrates, more than in Common men; judgment is committed to them, which
belongs ultimately and properly to him; some rays and beams of his Majesty,
he has made to shine in them, though not in all alike, for one Star may differ
from another in glory: shadows and pictures may be made in several
proportions, one piece may represent the person only to the shoulders, another
to the middle, some at full length; still all are Images, and have a
resemblance: Inferior and supreme Rulers there may be, but all have (more or
less) some of his likeness: to have a power of Judging and ordering others,
to have some splendour and honor above others, is a Character of Divinity; Gods
they are as by their office and dignity they resemble him.

Secondly, Gods they are quia Dei locum sustinent tanquam legati and vicarii,
they sustain the place and person of God to men, as his deputies and
vicegerents; God judges mediately by and through them, and executes those
things, which (were they not) he would immediately do himself; they do the
works which God himself would do: thus Moses is said to be (loco Dei) instead
of God to Aaron, Exodus 4.15. thou shall be to him in stead of God, that is,
thou shall give him council, and direct him as my Oracle: and the same Moses
is called Pharaoh's God, Exodus 7.1 I have made thee Pharaoh's God, because he
should execute Gods judgments upon him; God would execute judgment upon
Pharaoh by Moses. Those who do those actions, which belong to the Highest, as
his Ministers and Substitutes are Dii minorum gentium, they may be called petty
inferior Gods, he has so honored them.

Thirdly, Gods, all Magistrates are, quia a Deo ordinati, because they are
ordained of God, as S. Paul in express terms, Romans 13.1. ordained they are,
not only permitted, but established by providence, by precept; it is the same
reason which our Savior himself gives of this title, Joh. 10.34. he calls
them Gods (says he) to whom the Word of God came, that is, cui speciale venit
dominandi mandatum, to whom the special Word of God came to give them power to
rule; there is no authority but is from God, he is not only the permitter but
the author of it: All Magistracy is Gods Ordinance. Should we seek to the
fountain and original of all power, we shall find God Almighty investing man
with a threefold power at the first.

First, with that which is called liberum arbitrium, free will: he erected in
Man a Magistracy and power over himself, ut (...), pre esset (...), the
leading rational part of the Soul he made the Leader and Commander over the
inferior appetite; he made man Master and Governor of himself till his fall
overthrew that internal Magistracy.

Secondly, he gave a second power, of man over the creatures, that he should be
Lord of them Dominamini animalibus terrae, rule ye over the beasts of the
earth, Genesis 2.8.

Thirdly, he at that time gave a power of man over man, which when there were
but two persons could only be potestas maritalis in uxorem, the power of the
husband over the wife; the Magistracy could only appear in that, and in that
it did, Genesis 3.^6. But as the World increased, so did this power extend it
self.

First, in potestatem Patriam, into the paternall power of parents over their
children.

Then secondly, in potestatem herilem, into the power of Masters over Families,
and as humane society multiplied, so did God by the light of nature imprint in
man a knowledge of the necessity of Order and Government, he taught them by
their own bodies, that some members must be superior to others; and from the
Bees and Cranes, Men learned to choose a Ruler over them. Indeed we find
Magistracy implicitly instituted by that peremptory Law, Genesis 9.6. That
whosoever shed man's blood by man should his blood be shed; Now that any man
should promiscuously at his own pleasure execute the Law upon a murderer
without warrant, would make him still a murderer, and introduce confusion. It
must therefore suppose a Magistrate, who should have power to execute this Law
upon offenders.

Rulers then are all of Gods appointment, they stand by virtue of his
Ordinance; be there different ways of administration of Power, different States
and forms of Government, yet are they still from the same author:
Ecclesiastical and Civil governements, Monarchies and Democra^ies, hereditary
Crowns and Magistrates chosen by suffrage of the People, Kings and Parliaments,
all are ordained by him; For his providence does variously call the sons of men
to authority, and orders several forms of exercising Magistracy. Thus in that
people Which he had taken into his own special immediate care, he ordained
various ways of Government; by Captains, as Moses and Joshua, by assistance of
a Counsel of 70 Elders; by Judges, and then by Kings, and so mediatly in
several Commonwealths he ordaines several Magistracies, though not by his
own immediate appointment yet by the agreement of men, such as shall best
consist with the constitution of the People: and upon all those he has stamped
the character of his authority, they are not rashly to be disobeyed or altered,
they are Gods by his ordination Yet there are scruples raised against this
third reason (that all Magistrates are called Gods, because ordained by him)
for some would take away the foundation of it: Surely, say some Objectors, all
Magistrates and their power cannot be from God.

1 Object. For first, they are his own words, by his Prophet Hosea 8.4. They
have set up Princes, but not by me, they have made Princes, but I knew it not.

Solu. It is true indeed, God speaking there of the rending of the Kingdom from
the son of Solomon by Jeroboam, says, that they have set up Princes but not by
him, and yet himself tells Jeroboam by his Prophet Ahijah, Behold, I will rend
the Kingdom out of the hands of Solomon, and will give the ten Tribes to thee,
1 King. 11.31. In one place God says the people had done it, in another,
himself had done it; surely then the rending of the Kingdom was from God as a
just revenger for the sins of Solomon; the rebellion of the people without
consulting with him, was not from him: Jeroboam's power was from him, though
not the peoples rebellion and revolt; still all authority finds him for the
author, and therefore they are called Gods.

2 Object. But secondly, they cannot all be ordained of God and so be styled
Gods for that reason, for then would all the worst and most tyrannical
governments claim God for their Patron: has he ordained Tyrants, and made
them Gods on earth? Did he appoint Nimrod and Pharaoh? Did he set up the
Babylonian and Persian Tyrants? Did he authorize the Mahumetane Sultuns? and
set up Governements that prove scourges to the sons of men?

Solu* To answer this, we must first know that all tyranny is the corruption of
Government; it is not that sound and lawful authority of which God is the
author. Government and Governors have all their degenerations and corruptions,
as Politic Writers describe them, and these are not from God, but from the
vices and wickedness of men permitted by him for their punishment.

There are three things which must be considered in all Governments, in every
Ruler.

There is first, ipsa potestas, the power it self, and this is by the Will and
Ordinance of God, in whose hands soever it is, for by him Kings reign, and
though in anger he gives a King, yet still he gives him Hosea 13.11.

Secondly, there is acquisitio potestatis, the obteining of this power, this
may often be by usurpation, by corrupt unlawful means, and of this God is not
the author, he may permit evil Governors, by forceable or unjust means, to
get that power into their hands unlawfully, which himself has lawfully
constituted.

Thirdly, there is Executio potestatis, the execution and use of that power,
which if it be abusive, exceeding the limits of Justice, can no way be ascribed
to him, but to the wickedness of men: Tyrannical oppression, establishment of
superstition and error, by a lawful, though an abused power, have no relation
to Gods ordinance, they find no support or authorization from him: Yet those
who execute them still quoad potestatem, in respect of their power are from
him, they are ordained by him, and in that respect are called Gods in Scripture.

We must yet add a fourth reason, why Magistrates are called Gods, and that
the best and most proper quia Deum imitari debent, because they are, or should
be like God himself in their actions and qualities. They should be well
acquainted with his attributes; of Wisdom, to discern betwixt good and evil;
of Justice to distribute to every one with an unpartiall hand; of Mercy in
mitigating the utmost rigor of severity. God has in Scripture assumed the
same titles which he has given to Rulers: he is Pastor Israelis, the
Shepherd of Irael, and they are (or should be) (...), the Sheepheards of the
people. he is Salvator Israelis, the Savior of Israel, they should be (...),
deliverers of them (like him) in times of danger. He is (...), the great
Watchman over his people, and they are (...), watchmen also subordinate to him:
They should be like God in all their actions, but especially in these two,
first, in protegenda Ecclesia, in protecting Religion, and the Church of God;
it is that whereof the highest takes the principal care, he by ordinary
providence cares for the just and unjust, affords them all life, and air, and
rain, and sunshine, but his special eye is over his Church, how to preserve
his truth, and his servants; so should earthly Magistrates show themselves
similes Deo, like Gods in this; Their care and their endeavor should be
principally fixed upon the establishment of Religion, the advancement of the
Church; they can never be more like God, than when they do his work, defend
his truth, advance his glory. Secondly, like him they ought to be in faciendo
justitiam, in doing justice and judgment: God is known by this, that he is
the great executer of justice and judgment, relieving the injured, vindicating
the oppressed, punishing the wicked, rewarding the righteous; then are Rulers
truly like him when they do that which is correspondent to these: thus did the
Queen of Sheba tell Solomon, that the Lord his God set him upon the Throne for
that end to do justice and judgment; It is the great end of Magistracy, and
they properly deserve the title of Gods, no longer than they resemble him in
that. Unjust Magistrates have more of Satan in them than of God, more of the
God of this world, than of the true God of heaven. Their power makes them like
the highest, but their injustice like the father of wrongs: Properly and truly
are they called Gods, when their ways are like his. It is the general title
of Magistrates to be called Gods; here is another added, which seems to be
singular. The Ruler of thy people. etc.

Moses was at this time constituted by God the principal Ruler of Israel, and
so himself particularly might be thought to be designed by this expression,
The Ruler of the people: yet Saint Paul applying this expression to the high
Priest, when he was charged to have reviled him, Act. 13.4. calling him the
Ruler of the people, implys that it is not wholly to be restrained to one, but
to any ruler; yet certainly it may include an (...) upon the supreme Ruler,
where such there is; if there be one Ruler of the people, whom God has placed
in more eminency than the rest, (as Kings or Monarchs) the Command is
principally given concerning him: such as was Moses at this time, such as was
the High Priest in Saint Paul's time, for he was then (excepting those
governors which the Romans set over the Jews) the chief ruler in Israel. It
is not indeed of absolute necessity, that in every nation there should be one
person honored, with the title of (...) the sole ruler of the people: for God
has not expressly imposed it on all Nations: were the Question to be discussed
in general, what Government were best, it were not rashly to be concluded for
any one, Universally to be the best: But that were best for every Nation, which
would best consist with the disposition, and manners, and frame of the people.
The mixture and contemperation of them, is without question the most
Universally profitable and of longest duration; where there is one supreme
Ruler, and yet supported with and strengthened by representative Counselors,
where there is (...), one Chief, and yet plures Consiliarii, a multitude of
Counselors. When only one would rule without subordination of other
Magistrates, the burden must needs prove unsupportable: and where each member
would rule, there must needs be Ataxy and confusion; where there is one
superior Ruler, and he standing in Congregatione Principum, in coetu Deorum, in
the congregation of Princes, amongst the inferior Gods, there surely is the
happiest commixture, there may be expected with Gods blessing, the fruits of a
happy temper. It is (beloved) the happiness, wherewith God has blessed our
sinful Nation, that we have both parts of the subject of this precept in my
Text. We have those who are called Gods without flattery, wise, and just, and
provident Rulers. We have one (...) a Ruler of the people, a gracious King,
appointed by God over us, to do Justice and Judgment, established in the
Throne by long succession, from many Ancestors: May we therefore join them
together; and proceed to see what it is God Commands us concerning them, which
is the second Part of my Text, Thou shall not, etc.

The command is not in terms affirmative and proportionable to the
appellation.

For first, it is not said Deos adorabis, thou shall adore the Gods.

Nor secondly is it said, thou shall flatter them. Non jussi sunt sacrificiis
adorari, says S. Austin, they are not commanded to be honored with
sacrifices, though they are called Gods. It was the foolish presumption of the
Heathens, that they would indeed be styled Gods, and have the people offer them
sacrifice, forgetting they should dye like men. Though God give Rulers his own
title, he would not have them arrogate it, so as to forget they are men: though
he call them Gods, that men may honor them; yet he would not have them call
themselves so in the pride of their hearts: It was Lucifer's sin to say similis
ero Altissimo, I will be like the Highest. Neither would he have private men
suppose them to be God essentially, and to forget him in respect of them, nor
to ascribe that honor to them, which is only due to himself. It was the
madness of the ignorant Heathen to account Paul and Barnabas Gods in the
likeness of men, and to be ready to offer sacrifice to them; may such idolatry
never be found in knowing Christians. There have been no greater enemies to
the happiness of Princes than flatterers: Nor is there any way speedier to
bring judgments upon Rulers and Nations, then when the due honor shall be
taken from God, and ascribed to men, which are but secondary subordinate
instruments to convey them. For God is a jealous God, and though he give the
title of Elohim, yet he will not give his glory to the sons of men: While the
people cry out to Herod, that it is the voice of God and not of man, they draw
down a sudden vengeance upon him; for immediately the Angel of God smote him,
and he is eaten with worms, Acts 12.23. There contrary to the old verse,
deliraat Achivi Rex plectitur, the people flatter and the King is smitten.

It was the frequent affirmation of the late Heroic and Victorious King of
Sweden, that he feared the peoples ascribing too much of that glory to him,
which was due to God, would be a cause that God would remove him before the
work was finished; and perhaps it was a speech too Prophetical. We must not
ascribe,

First, Gods Power, his Omnipotency to Princes and Rulers, as Flatterers have
made weak Princes believe that they had power to do any thing, that their will
was a Law, that Quicquid libet licet, that they should be able to bring any
design to pass, be it never so impossible or unjust; this was Jesabell to
Ahab: do thou now govern Israel, and can not do this? Whereas the power of
earthly Gods is circumscribed both by Law, and by the short limits of humane
power; they neither may nor can do all things; they are Dii, but non
Omnipotentes, they are Gods, but not Almighty.

Secondly, we must take heed we do not ascribe to them Gods glory, that is, not
make them the utmost objects of our thankfulness, or the first and prime
causes of any happiness that betides us; we must look beyond them in our
deliverances, give glory to God on High, above those on earth.

Many eminent and unparalelled blessings God Almighty has conveyed (Beloved)
upon this Nation, by means of those who are called Gods amongst us, our
gracious King and Parliament, and more we expect by their means* he is not
worthy of a tongue or a heart, that will not acknowledge them; but take we heed
we do not forfeit them all, by ascribing too much to the second causes, and too
little to the first, by looking more to them for safety, than to him from
whence it comes. As I am confident, none of those Worthies will arrogate it,
but take up that of David, Non nobis Domine, Not unto us o Lord, etc. So let us
also ascribe the honor of all ultimately and principally to God, for thine is
the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory. Surely it is the Lord's doing, if
our liberties be asserted, our Religion settled, our selves secured: Blessed and
renowned for ever be the sedulous Procurors, and the Royal ratifier of it: But
let not our thankfulness to them, make us forget God above. Gods they be
called, but not Dii, imprimis glorificandi, Gods principally to be glorified,
here is neither an injunction of adoration, nor of flattery.

But a negative command it is, either because negatives are more peremptory and
general, they bind ad semper, For it is never lawful to do evil, in no
place, by no person; or because the first work of Reformation must be by not
doing evil; But as in the Decalogue or Moral Law affirmative precepts do
include negative, and negative the affirmative, so here we may conceive this
negative precept to comprehend also affirmative duties to Magistrates; and so
shall consider it both ways, negatively and affirmatively. And first as it is
a prohibition: (Thou shall not rail, or revile, or curse) so it includes three
sins to be avoided.

First, it is Contra resistentiam in factis, it is against resistance in
actions; for the Argument is good in Logique, a minore ad majus, we must not
revile, or curse in words, therefore we must not resist in actions.

There is a threefold distinction of resistance observed by some, One is
Precepta negligendo, by neglecting commands; For this is a kind of resistance.

A second Peter Martyr observes, Fraud by deceiving or mis-informing Princes
or Rulers, for such abuse is indeed no better than an unfriendly opposition,
and may come in (rightly understood) under the title of resistance.

A third is, aperta vi, by open violence, and this is surely prohibited
inclusively by Gods Commandment, Thou shall not revile the Gods, as it is
expressly by S. Paul, whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of
God, Romans 13.12. Rebellion against authority, which God has set over men is
contrary to his precept, to the practice of all his Servants. If indeed such
earthly gods and rulers there shall be, who shall impose impious or dishonest
commands, contradictory to the Laws of God, it is then no breach of this
Commandment to disobey him; for then they cease to be called Gods properly,
they are rather Diabolical; the Immortal God is rather to be obeyed than
they, according to the determination of the Apostles, It is better to obey God
than man, Acts 4.19. Yet even then find we not resistance countenanced against
them in private men: Much difference and many restrictions there are amongst
the Casuists, how far the whole Civil State united in it self, may oppose the
supreme Ruler; but all agree upon such cases only as can hardly be imagined,
to fall out in Christian Commonwealths.

If there be any such resistance tolerable it must be say they First, where
there is direct and absolute Tyranny executed upon Lives and Consciences.

Secondly, where there is flat Idolatry introduced by force.

Thirdly, where there is none other refuge left, but resistance; neither flight
nor suffering, and in these cases (which God forbid should ever go further than
supposition) there are so many cautions added for moderation, and against
revenge, that they who maintain resistance lawful, yet might as well conclude
it impossible to be merited, unfit to be executed. But as for us who are but
private persons, there is no difficulty but that we may resolve against all
resistance, without an extraordinary perscription. The Lacedemonian resolution,
becomes Christians to their Rulers. Si duriora morte imperetis, potius
moriemur, if ye command things harder than death we will rather dye: There is
no allowance of offense, or opposition against those whom God has set over us:
the Primitive Christians have no arms but preces and lachrymae against their
furious persecuting Magistrates. Saint Ambrose uses no other force but of his
strongest Petitions, Rogamus Auguste non pugnamus: Surely there is no resisting
the Ordinance of God: that is the first thing included in the prohibition.

Secondly, as it is a negative precept, so it forbids maledicentiam in verbis,
railing or reviling in words, God has not allowed man a liberty of reviling
his neighbor, his equal; nor are men's tongues at their own command so
absolutely as to vent that which their malice or virulency shall dictate
against any man: for did not the Law of man take cognizance of their slanders,
yet if they shall give account of every idle word, much more of every malignant
and slanderous word against their brethren. The cursed speaker is a greater
enemy to himself, than those he curses. But needs must it be more blameable
against public Magistracy, then particular persons; for there the Magistrates
resemblance to God, makes the injury reflect on him. He that speaks evil of
Rulers, speaks not evil of man but God, and therefore it is called no less
than (...) plasphemy in Scripture. Those whom God has set in Authority, he
would not have subjected to the scurrilous tongues of railours, no more than he
would have his own name blasphemed: Saint Jude therefore makes those (...)
(those filthy dreamers as we translate it) the worst of men who speak evil of
dignities: Michael the Archangell (says he) durst not bring a railing
accusation against the Devil. We never find the Saints of God, though never so
highly provoked, uttering bitter words against the higher powers, not Moses
against Pharaoh, not the three Children against Nabuchadnezzar, when the
Furnace is prepared, but O King live for ever. We hear not our Savior
exclaiming against Herod, or Pilate condemning him; not Paul speaking to Festus
in other terms when he says he is mad, then in that mild reply, I am not mad
most noble Festus: Once when he seemed to the standers by to forget himself,
he recollecteth himself with this Text of mine, I wot not brethren that he was
the high Priest, for it is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of
thy people Acts 23 4. a great difference there is amongst Expositors, upon
those words of Paul, which are partly quoted from my Text, and therefore I
shall shortly endeavor to clear them. He had called Ananias the High Priest
whited wall, because he had commanded him to be smitten, and being rebuked by
the standers by for reviling Gods High Priest (for so they called Ananias) he
answers, I knew not, brethren, that he was the High Priest, for it is, etc.
Some say his meaning was, that he did not regard or consider him as the High
Priest: others, that he did not account him worthy to be the High Priest:
others, that he plainly meant he did not know him to be the High Priest, for it
was possible he might mistake: The chief Captain sitting there also in
judicature, and the High Priest not in his Priestly habit, which should
distinguish him from others; so that Paul's answer to them consists of two
parts. First, an acknowledgement of his ignorance, that he knew him not.

Secondly, a denial that he did rail at all, for he knew that there was a law
against that: as if he should say, I did not (I confess brethren) know that he
was so great a Magistrate as the High Priest, yet be he so, as I know him to be
a Judge I did not rail upon him, though I sharply reprehended his injustice
toward me, for I know very well I should not revile the Ruler of the people.

Reprehensions there may be of Rulers, but no reviling, just charges or
accusations against them, but without railing or cursing; All manner of railing
against them is here prohibited, be it in secret murmured amongst friends, by
still detraction: or secondly, be it openly before many, and that either by
traducing them before others, or impudent reviling them to their own faces, as
Shimeis was to David, all these are here forbidden, Thou shall not, etc.

How can we then but from hence tax and condemn three sorts of breakers of
this Law?

First, even those of the Ministry, who take too free a liberty of traducing,
if not the highest Magistrate, yet at least inferior rulers, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, in rude and homely language. It was never the
lesson their Master taught them to mix their own virulency with preaching the
Gospel. It is true the Minister of the Gospel, who will be faithful, must
admonish the blamable Magistrate, he must boldly exhort, rebuke, convince him;
Elias may reprove Ahab to his face, and John Baptist does well to tell Herod
plainly it is not lawful for him to have his brothers wife; Nathan may come
and tell David, Thou art the man; and Ambrose boldly tax the Emperor
Theodosius. But much caution there is necessary in such reprehensions of
Princes and Rulers, they must not be for suspicions or jealousies, or supposed
faults or slighter error, but for enormous and apparent sins, for such there
were in all those we instanced: Open Idolatry and oppression in Ahab; Incest in
Herod, Adultery and Murder in David; Injust tyranny in executing many Innocents
in Theodosius: The sins of Rulers must be very evident, ere the pulpit tax
them.

Secondly, there must be distinction made betwixt the persons and their faults,
the persons of Magistrates must be spared (for they are called Gods) while their
sins are taxed.

Thirdly, there must be discretion used, no bitterness or unmannerly terms,
no railing or reviling.

Fourthly, it should be coram too before them, as all those reprehensions were.
Ministerial reprehensions must not degenerate in tribunitios clamores, be
turned into popular clamors; the people not be rated for the sins of their
Governors, and the Magistrates faults be aggravated before those who are not to
redress them To exceed these limits, is an unhappy breach of this Law, with
which our Churches have lately rung too loud, so that we had need have it the
Mottoe of our Pulpits, Thou shall not, etc.

Secondly, this must also condemn the scurrilous generation of Libellers, who
taking advantage of the freedom of our times (of which we should make better
use) have vented their railing invective Pamphlets against many sorts of
Magistrates; were the accusations never so just, the crimes never so odious,
yet could not these men be justified in their bitterness; which exceeds the
bounds of Christianity, of Common humanity it self; the Devil that great
accuser durst not have brought such railing accusations against Michael. These
must needs stand guilty of the breach of this injunction.

Thirdly, It must also reprehend those who in their Common discourses make
themselves too eager Censurers of the actions of the Higher Powers; tongues are
not left at liberty to accuse and Censure as they please, the proceedings of
the Superiors.

It was indeed a noble and generous speech of that Roman Emperor August. In
libera Civitate liberas linguas esse oportere, That in a free State tongues
should be at liberty, and a happiness truly accounted by the Historian of his
Times; Vbi sentire quicquid velis, and quicquid sentis dicere licet; When men
may think wLat they please, and speak what they think: nor can we but admire
the lenity of those Christian Emperors, Theodosius and Honorius, and Arcadius,
who would have no man punished for speaking evil of them, for Si ex levitate
profectum, est contemnendum; Si ex insania, miseratione dignissimum; si ab
injuria, remittendum: if it proceed from lightness, or vanity, it is to be
despised; if from madness, it is to be pittyed; if from malice, to be
forgiven: But notwithstanding such indulgence (whereof our times have had a
share) Christians must know not to abuse their liberty: if they stretch it to
traduce and censure those who are set over them, they use it for a cloak of
maliciousness, and break that peremptory Law, which expressly says, Thou
shall not revile, etc.

There is yet more in this Precept: for as it forbids resistance in act and
railing in words; so thirdly, execrationes in men^e, cursing in the thought of
those who are called Gods; malignant conceits of their actions in our breasts
must not be entertained, nor evil wishes imagined and contrived against them;
for even the soul must be subject to powers that are ordained of God. Romans
13.1. They are little beholding to him for restraining his tongue, who harbors
and frames curses in his heart: It is the advice of the wisest of men, Eccl.
10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: and curse not the rich in thy
bedchamber, for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which has
wings shall tell the matter: that is, thy guilty thoughts may betray thee
before thou art aware: for Kings and Magistrates have quick eyes and ears; or
at the least thou may be sure thy thoughts are known to him to whom thou
must give account of them, and he can never approve them, when there is cursing
of his Ordinance.

For us therefore (Beloved) let not our impatience or misunderstanding drive
us to such intemperance: let us not harbor any cursing or malignant thought,
either against him whom God has made our gracious Sovereign, or those who
under him, he has designed to be the instruments of our establishment. The
meek and patient Spirit, must look upon the actions of both, as them whom God
has ordained for his good, and in stead of these requitalls, which are flately
forbidden in my Text, railing and cursing (which neither become our mouths,
nor hearts) let us frame our selves to the contrary affirmative duties, which
are here virtually included, But I must but name them.

In opposition then to reviling and cursing, there must be used toward them
who are called Gods. First, Subjection, we must heartily submit our selves to
them, 1 Pet. 2.13. Secondly, honor and reverence, we must honor the King, and
consequently all who derive power from him. Thirdly, fidelity, as I^tai to
David, 2 Samuel 15.21. Wheresoever my Lord the King shall be, whether in life or
death; even there will thy servant be: and while we are faithful to him, we
cannot, we must not be unfaithful to his Counselors, as our own late
protestation will remember us. Fourthly, We owe them obedience, for this is due
to the Commands and Laws of Kings and Rulers, while they are consonant to those
of God. Fifthly, Let us allow them paying of tribute, for this both our Savior,
and Saint Paul tells us is due to Kings, and Rulers, and never let that be
denied, which must purchase public security. Lastly, in stead of this
forbidden cursing, let us allow them prayer; for if Saint Paul enjoyne
supplication for Kings, and all that are in authority in general; much more
does it oblige us to pray for a gracious King, for the authority we have most
desired and prayed for; and this duty is the most necessary, and highest we can
allow them. May we therefore never cease to pray, that God would unite the
hearts more and more, of our King and Parliament: That he will direct and
assist them with his Spirit of wisdom. That he will prosper them in their
designs, against enemies abroad, in their Reformations at home. That he will
protect them against all oppositions foreign, or domestique. That he will give
us a blessing upon all their determinations. These things we most humbly
beseech thee (oh most gracious Father) to grant unto us, and that for the
merits of Jesus Christ, etc.

FINIS.

