Chiliasto-mastix redivivus, Sive Homesus enervatus. A confutation of the
MILLENARIAN OPINION, Plainly demonstrating that Christ will not Reign Visibly
and Personally on earth with the Saints for a thousand years either before the
day of Judgment, in the day of Judgment, or after it: Where you also have
many Texts of Scripture Vindicated from the vain Glosses of one Dr. Homes, a
great Millenarian, and all his Cavils (of any consequence) refelled and
answered. With a word to our Fifth Monarch-men, whose dangerous practices of
late, clearly show that this opinion leads to Schism, and Sedition in Church
and State. By Tho. Hall, B. D. and Pastor of Kingsnorton.

Jonah 2. 8. They that wait on lying Vanities forsake their own mercy.. John
18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this world. LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at
the Miter, at the West end of Paul's, 1697.

TO THE CANDID READER.
HAving finished my Exposition on 2 Timothy 3. by way of Supplement to Mr. Barlow,
when I came to the 2 Timothy 4. 1. I perceived that Dr. Homes was tampering with
it, forcing it to plead his Millenarian cause; upon this I encountered him, and
have Vindicated the Text from the Vain Glosses which he put upon it. Afterward
perusing his whole book, I found it so jejune and empty, and his proofs so
grossly wrested, and impertinent, that I conceived it might be time well spent
to Vindicate the Text which he abuses, especially such as have any seeming
weight in them (as to his purpose) which here thou have now presented to thy
view. I thought it good to give it thee single by it self, and the rather that
such as cannot buy the Exposition of those two Chapters, yet may have this
little Antidote at hand against this Epidemical error which spreads so
strangely, and has already brought forth the malignant fruit of Schism in the
Church, and Sedition in the State, to the hazarding of both; as appears in that
Seditious Declaration of the Fifth Monarch men, who cry down Magistracy and
Ministry as that Beast (so do these Bruits call them) which hinders the
coming of their King Jesus.

The Apostle tells us of some that despise Government, and among the the rest
he gives them this Character (2 Pet. 2. 10.) that they are self-conceived
persons, (...) sibi placentes and proprio addicti judicio.
such as love to sing their own song, and to get a name they will go a strain of
their own beyond the Ordinary, even to the contradicting and out-facing of the
clearest evidence of Scripture and Reason; they are so wedded to their own
Fancies that they think every thing makes for them, and every one pleads their
cause; Scriptures, Fathers, Astronomers, Sybils, Poets, Turks, Talmuds,
Targums, etc. and this is Dr. Homes his case, as the ensuing Treatise will
show: where you have the Question debated Polemically (...), Negative and
Positive. 1. I show the Weakness and Invalidity of the Drs. Thesis and his
proofs. 2. I have set down the Truth in an Antithesis, proving it by Scripture
and Reason, with as much brevity as may be. And herein I shall be directly
opposite to the Doctor, for I have used all means to contract my self, and have
compacted as much matter in as little a compass as possibly I could; whereas he
does de Industria use all means to swel his book into a Folio, and therefore
he has put a great part of it into Latin and English, for the credit of the
Cause, that all the world may see he Lies in Folio: in the mean time forgetting
the Proverb, (...), that a great book (especially when stuffed with such a cramb
bis cocta, as the Doctor has stuffed his book withal, is a great burden,
especially to an Ingenious Reader, who delights in Laconick brevity, and must
have much in a little.

Neither can this displease any sober man, if I in the Spirit of Love and
Meekness (tendering the good of the Land of my Nativity) publish a Tract in
Octavo, in defense of the Ancient common received Truths of Gods Church; since
Doctor Homes has published a Treatise in Folio against them. He must be a man
of singular patience that can endure to read over the Doctors book, his proofs
are so impertinent and ridiculous, that the bare rehearsal of most of them is
confutation sufficient. Surely should the Doctor write a Folium Plaustrale, a
Volumn big enough to load a Cart, yet if he bring no better proofs to maintain
his Tenet, then I have yet seen, I Question who will believe him?

For my own particular, in this thing, I have done nothing out of any spirit of
opposition to the Person, or parts of any, nay I could heartily wish that the
Doctor had spent his Operam and Oleum, his Time and Talents, on some better
Subject, which might have furthered his Account in the Day of the Lord, when we
must all give an Account of our Stewardships; and not to have fed men's fancies
with lying Vanities, and that in a time when the World surfets with them
already. I find the Builders of this Babel strangely divided amongst
themselves, both about the Place, where this Reign shall be, whether in Heaven,
or on Earth, whether in Jerusalem* or in the whole World?

2. About the Persons, whether the Martyrs only shall Reign this thousand
years, or whether all the Saints shall not Reign with them, or whether there
shall be no wicked ones mixed amongst them?

3. About the manner of their Reign, whether it shall be in carnal delight, or
spiritual, or both?

4. That they may be sure to disagree in all the principal points they differ
in the time, when this Reign shall begin; some say, before the day of judgment;
others say, in the day of judgment, others say, after it. Scarce any of the
Chiliasts but has his peculiar conceits in these points. Truth is but one,
error is manifold.

Obj. Whereas some may think this a small and harmless error, not worth
confuting.

Answ. I answer, 1. As no sin simply considered in it self is little, because
there is no little God that we sin against, so no error in it self is litile,
because it is against the same glorious and infinite Majesty.

2. As little sins, so little errors (like little wedges) make way for
greater; and he that makes Qui minima sperint, paulatim decidit. Aug.
no conscience of little errors, will (when a Temptation comes) make no
conscience of greater.

3. This Tenet is not so harmless and small as some imagine. Is that a small
matter which overthrows the fundamentals of Religion? making two bodily
distinct Resurrections, two days of judgment, three Ascentions and Descentions
of Christ? Is that a harmless opinion which breeds Security, Sensuality,
Anarchy? Is that a harmless opinion which overthrows Ordinances, Magistracy,
Ministry? Is that a little error which perverts the Creed, and wrests the
Lords Prayer, wracking that Peti ion, Thy Kingdom come, to a desire of the
coming of their Millenarian Kingdom: when the Kingdom we pray for in the Lords
Prayer. 1. It Is the Fathers Kingdom, and Secondly, It Is purely Spiritual: when
theirs is the Sons Kingdom (as themselves confess) and is mixed, being partly
spiritual, and partly consisting of corporal delights.

It Is my judgment, that if these Opinionists be a little longer tolerated,
they will Practically convince those of the danger of this Tenets who will not
Nationally believe it. That the Peace and Prosperity of this Church and State
may be preserved, that the Lord at last would bring us, not to a Millenarian,
Utopian, Imaginary, Terrestrial Kingdom; but to a Real, Caelestial and
Everlasting Kingdom, is and shall be the Prayer, of

Thy Servant in Christ, for Christ and His Kingdom* THO: HALL.

A TREATISE against the MILLENARIES.
WHen I considered how strangely this opinion of the Millenaries spread and got
ground every where, to the great disturbance of Magistracy and Ministry, of
Church and State; I conceived that I might do very good service to undeceive
people in this particular. Thereupon (having but lightly touched the point
before) I fell more closely to study it, and finding that Dr* Homes his Book in
Folio was universally cried up (by such as were tickled with this fancy) as the
Chiliastorum Achilles, the one and only Book in this kind; I took some pains
to read his Book more exactly.

I must confess I have read Dr. Homes his book in Folio usque ad nauseam, till
I was a weary of it, yea I do seriously profess that I am more fully convinced
of the vanity of that fancy since I read the Drs. Book, then ever I was before;
I may say of it as 'twas said of Dr. Heylins Book in defense of St. George,
some doubted whether ever there were such a St. but since they read this book
they believe there never was such a Saint in being; so some have doubted
whether there might not be a Personal Reign of Christ on earth, but since they
have read Dr. Homes his Book they are fully satisfied that there is no such
thing. It Is One said of a Verbal Dr. that he spoke nothing in as many Languages
as ever he heard one. V. Mr. Ley Sunday a Sabbath cap. 8. p. 57.
true, the Dr. has said more for it then any man I know (for whereas others lie
in Quarto, his in Folio) but how little to the purpose I come now briefly to
examine. True, there is none that ever yet I saw which has answered the Dr. as
judging his Book (I suppose) unworthy of an answer* yet since it is so highly
cried up as an invincible piece by the Favorers of that Tenet, (for when they
can say nothing, they send us to Dr. Homes.) I shall therefore 1. show them how
he states the Question.

2. How he proves it.

3. I shall answer his most material proofs. And fourthly for brevity sake, I
shall refer them to such as clear any Text more fully.

The Doctors Tenet upon search (for he has not stated the Question
Methodically and Scholastickly as he should have done) I find to be this, viz.
That all the Saints departed shall Rise and Reign with Christ a thousand years
on earth (but the wicked shall not Behold two Resurrections! whereof one is
Homestical, it rises out of the Drs. fancy.
Rise till the end of the thousand years) in a wonderful, both Spirits are not
very visible, nor do they use to eat and drink.
visible, yet spiritual glorious manner, drinking Wine, eating Dainties, and
enjoying all the lawful This will please a Turk well.
pleasures which all the Creatures then redeemed from their ancient slavery can
afford. All this shall be before the time of the It seems there are two days
of judgment.
ultimate and general Resurrection and day of Judgment; Then shall the Jews be
raised, and all Antichristian and Good news for Levellers, and fifth Monarch
men.
secular powers that do not love the members of Christ, submit unto his Laws and
advance his interest in this design, be ruined. Then shall the Saints on In
Heaven he should say.
earth be Sin-less, Sorrowless, Temptation-less, Deathless; having a confluence
of all comforts, a perfection of all qualities, and Surely this Reign is not
yet begun.
union amongst themselves on earth. Then shall there be no Magistrates, no
coercive Oh happy Leyelling-age! oh golden licentious times.
Superiorities, no Church Censures, no Fears, Wants, Weaknesses, Desertions or
Labors, etc.

All this happiness (says Dr. Homes) you must expect on earth; but take heed
you be not so unhappy as to believe it, least you be deluded by it* for Dr.
Alsteed for the Millen. p. 79. English.
Alsteed can tell Dr. Homes that Godly men for the whole space of those
thousand years (excepting Martyrs) shall be subject both to sin and death* and
shall have the wicked intermixed with them. Habemus confitentum reum. One of
these Doctors must needs be in an error, I leave them to reconcile themselves,
whilst I go on.

Here you see is much said, but how is it proved? Why, the Dr. proves is very
Learnedly.

See what rotten Pillars he has to uphold his tottering buildings.
1. By Heathens, l. 4. c. 2.

2. By Mahumetans, l. 4. c. 3.

3. By the Jewish Rabbis (l. 4. c. 4.) he has picked it out of their Taxgum's
and their Talmuds, and the Turks Flectere si neque seperos Acheronta* movebo.
Alcoran, yet William Burton (the Translator of Alsteed) takes upon him to
prove it out of Tieho Brahe, who Lactant. Instit. l. 7. proves this Prophecy*
by Virgils Verses, and tells us that the Poets fables of the golden age shall
now come to pass: forgetting that Miranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae.
tells you of a fiery Trigon, which prognosticats great peace to the world to
come: yea the Sibils prophesies are brought for proof of this point; and the
Apochrypha 2 Esd. 13. 39. 40. yea and Alsteed tells us of Phenomenon or
Apparitions in the Heavens, which portend (I know not what) strange and
extraordinary things.

Qui amant ipsi sibi somnia fingunt.
When men be enamoured with an opinion, then they dream that every thing makes
for them, though it be never so much against them. How Heathens, Mahumetans,
and Rabbis, (which abound with lies and fables) should come to the knowledge
of such a Spiritual, Sinless, Sanctified and Glorious Kingdom, is a Paradox to
me.

-- Hae manus Trojam erigent?
Nullas habet spes Troja si tales habet.
Sen. Trag. If Millenaries have no better Prophesies then these, no wonder if
their Fabric totter.

The Dr. therefore suspecting these goes farther to the Greek and Latin
Fathers, and to Modern writers. The Drs. Quotations I shall answer as the Dr.
does Dr. Prideaux his Argument Testimonio Humano. His Argument (says he) from
mere Authorities of men is inconsiderable and not worth answering. Most true of
Dr. Homes his Argument in this kind, and whereas the Dr. pleads Antiquity, Dr.
Homes shall answer Dr. H. out of Tertullian, Antiquitas sine Veritate vetustas
est erroris. Antiquity without Verity is of no Validity. See how smartly Mr. In
his Arrow against separation (an elaborate piece) p. 340.
John Paget (Schismaticorum ille malleus) reproves Mr. Ainsworth for his so
frequent alleging of Talmudick and Rabbinical testimonies. It Is an offensive
thing (says he) so abundantly to allege such Authors for our guids unto the
Mysteries of Religion, as do abound with innumerable dotages, Presumptions and
vain Traditions, lying Visions, fained Miracles, prodigious and monstrous
Fables; such are the Thalmudists and Cabalists, there is almost no work nor
Word of God which they do not defile with their Elesies. And then goes on in
giving many instances to the end of the book: yet these are one of Dr. Homes
his Pillars.

Q. But does the Dr. bring no Scripture for what he holds?

A. O yes, he cites Scripture in abundance; what Heretic is there, that has
not his Verbum Domini for what he holds? Even the Devil himself when he
disputed with our Savior had his Scriptum est, he cited Scripture though
corruptly.

The Dr. cites 51. proofs out of the Old Testament, almost all borrowed from
Doctor His Treatise for the Millenaries. p. 38. to 56. where he cites 65. Texts
for this opinion.
Alsteed, or Dr. Gouge his Treatise of the calling of the Jews, p. 9. to 83. I
shall set them down in order as the Dr. recites them, the bare rehearsal will
be confutation to the most of them: for either they prophecy of Christ's first
coming in the flesh. 2. Or of the Jews deliverance from Babylonish captivity.
3. Or of the calling of the Jews when there shall be a spiritual restoration
of the Church, or the like.

To prove that Christ shall reign with the Saints on earth a thousand years,
the Dr. Quotes.

1. Genesis 1. 26, 27, 28. collated with Psalm. 8. 2. Genesis 12. 1, 2, 3, 6. and 17.
1. to 9. 3. Genesis 18. 78. and 22. 15, 16. 4. Genesis 26. 4. 5. Genesis 48. 19. and 49.
26. 6. Balaams Prophecy Numb. 24. 7. Deuteronomy. 30. 1. to 10. 8. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. to
19. 9. Neh. 1* 8. 10. Psalm. 8. and 110. yea the whole Book of Psalms in Three
Heads. 11. Isay 2. 1. etc. 12. Isay 9. 6. 13. Isay 11. per totum. Behold a well
grown Orchard, and a Nursery of Truth! says Mr. Sterry.
14. Isay 14. 1. etc. 15. Isay 24. 23. 16. Isay 25* per totum. 17. Isay 33. 20.
21* 18. Isay 34. 1. etc. 19. Isay 45. 14. etc. 20. Isay 49. per totum. 21. Isay
54. 11. etc. 22. Isay 59. 23. Isay 60. per totum. 24. Isay 63. 1. etc. 25. Isay
65. 17. etc. 26. Isay 66. 5. etc. 27. Jer. 16. 14, 15. collat. with 23. 3. 28.
Jer. 30. and 31. 29. Jer. 32. 37. 30. Jer. 50. 17. 31. Ezekiel. 28. 24* 25, 26.
32. Ezekiel. 34. 11. etc. 33. Ezekiel. 37. total. 34. Ezekiel. 37. total. 35. Dan. 2.
31. etc. 36. Dan. 7. total. 37. Dan. 11. and 12. 38. Hos. 1. 10. 11. 39. Hos.
3. 4. 5. 40. Joel 2. 28. etc. 41. Joel 3. 1. etc. 42. Amos 9. 11. collated with
Obad* 17. 43. Micah 4. total. 44. Zoph. 3. 9. etc. 45. Zach. 2. 6. etc. 46.
Zach. 6. 12. 47. Zach. 8. 20. etc. 48. Zach. 10. 3. etc. 49. Zach. 12. total.
50. Zach. 14. 3. etc. 51. Mal. 4. total.
If you count these proofs, they are many; but if you seriously Si numeres,
multd; Si ponderes, pauca.
weigh them, you will not find one to the purpose.

Obj. Though none of these Scriptures apart prove the point, yet says the Dr.
lay them all together, and then they will do it.

Answ. Lay them and 51. more such proofs together (for it is easy gathering
proofs to prove Christ's Incarnation, the Though this also is controverted by
the Learned V. Paraeum in Romans 11. 25. Dub. 18. in Pryn in his Demurrer against
the Jews admission into England.
calling of the Jews, Isreal's deliverance from Babylonish captivity, and the
Spiritual Glory of Gospel Times) and they will never satisfy any sober Reader
as to the proof of this point; I must confess I seldom smile at my Study, yet
when I observed the Drs, Learned-nonsense, and his gross non-sequitors, I could
not forbear: and let any Ingenious Reader take any one of these 51. proofs
apart, or altogether (as the Dr. directs him) and put but ergo Christ shall
Reign with the Saints on earth a 1000. years, and he cannot forbear smiling at
least, to see how the Drs. proofs hang together like ropes of sand, and come as
near together as St. Germans lips which were nine miles asunder. The Drs.
Arguments for the Millenary fancy, are like the Papists for the Popes
Supremacy. E. g. Peter healed the sick with his See more in Willets Synops.
Tetrastyl. Pillar 3. p. 1296. fol.
shadow, ergo he was head of the Church. Paul's calls him Cephas, ergo he was
chief of the Apostles; Christ bid him put up his sword, ergo the Pope has
right to both swords. Or like the Quakers consequences; flesh and blood shall
not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, ergo there shall be no Resurrection. The
Saints shall judge the world here, ergo there shall be no other* Judgment.
(this is Naylers Logic.)

Obj. The Scripture holds forth that the last days shall be glorious days,
ergo Christ shall then Reign personally on earth a thousand years.

Sol. It follows not, for allthough the last days shall be glorious in respect
of the great light of the Gospel, and the glorious Privileges and Liberty
which the Church shall then enjoy, yet in respect of the abuse of that Liberty
and those Privileges, so the last days will be Perilous times, See more in my
Comment. on that Text.
2 Timothy 3. 1. True, in Gospel times the bounds of the Church shall be enlarged,
Antichrists Kingdom shall decrease, and Christ's Kingdom will increase, the
mountain of the Lord shall be exalted in the top of the mountains, Isay. 2. 2.
and the Churches Privileges will be advanced: but that ever the Church should
come to that height of happiness on earth, as to be free from troubles internal
and external, and to Reign with Christ here for a thousand years in a sin-less,
sorrow-less, temptation-less condition (as D. H.) phraseth it; is a mere dream,
and has no ground in Scripture.

Obj. Though many of these 51 proofs may be impertinent, yet some may be
pertinent.

Answ. I shall therefore call out the most pertinent, for the bare reading of
most of those Texts, is confutation sufficient. The first great place is Psalm.
8. compared with Genesis 2. 26, 27, 28. which speaks of Adams dominion over the
Creature in the state of innocence; but the 8. Psalm. speaks directly,
literally and properly of Christ the second Adam if we will believe the
Apostle See 6 Reas. to prove that Adam is not the man here meant. In Dr. Gouge
his comment. on that place p. 154.
Heb* 2. 6, 7, 8. So that the Drs. collating of these places is invalid* It Is
true what is here spoken of Christ is proper to the Saints by virtue of their
union with Christ, the dignities belonging to Christ the head, appertain to his
mystical body the Church, which ^s called Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. All is theirs,
because they are Christ's. Now what do Millenaries gather hence? Why it is this,
that since Christ is thus exalted, and the Saints in him to have dominion over
the creatures, etc. Ergo, they shall reign with Christ a thousand years on
earth. Who sees not the vanity of such Logic?

So Dr. Tho. Goodwin in his Ser. on Ephesians. 1. 21, 22. styled, the to come.
Obj. Heb. 2. 5. The Apostle speaks of a world to come, ergo he speaks of this
thousand years reign to come.

Answ. What a sad thing is to father our vain fancies on the Prophets and
Aposties, and to make them speak what never so much as came into their Ecclesia
Dei orbis futurus. q*in eae futuri erant novi homines, nova lex novus Rex* nova
Sacramenta, novum Christi regnum, non temporale sed Spirituale per fidem and
gratiam qu^ous inchoamus regnum caeleste. Ribera.
thoughts. By the world to come is meant the Church of Christ under the Gospel,
which is called the world to come; 1. In relation to the Church that lived
before and under the Law, who longed to see this world, John 8. 56. 1 Pet. 1.
10, 11. 2. Because of the restoration of all things by Christ begun already, 2
Cor. 5. 17. and shall be finished hereafter at the Resurrection, This new world
of the Gospel began wi^h Christ first coming in the flesh, and its
accomplishment is at the l^st day. See M^. Baylys. Disswas. 11. p. 246.
which is called the time of the restitution of all things* ^phes. 1. 10. Q. D.
O ye Hebrews you are the beginning of th s world to come, and of this new
Christian age, God has made you subject not to Angels, but to Christ;
wherefore you must not obey them, or Moses, or the Ceremonial Law, but you must
now obey Christ your Head and King; for in submitting to him, and taking him
upon his own terms, you become Lords of all, and have interest in all that
Christ has. Dr. Homes then is miserably out, when he affirms (p. 134.) that
this 8. Psalm. was never fulfilled to the Saints since Adams fall. They were
never thus crowned with glory and honor, their enemies were never thus
stilled, they could never yet sing this 8. Psalm. as a praise for things done,
but only in hope it shall be done. What gross ignorance (to say no more) is
here! Are not the Saints already Crowned in Christ? Does not the Spouse partake
of the glory of her Husband? Do not they Triumph in Christ over Death and Hell,
and Sin and Satan, and all their enemies? Romans 8. 33. ad finem. How then are
these things not done? This Dr. should clear Texts, and he does all he can to
darken them, and wrest them to maintain his dreams: insomuch that he confesses
that some of his proofs seem to some men to say little to his purpose. Had he
said all his proofs, he had spoken but truth.

2. Another grand proof is Ezekiel. 37. (I pass by many of his proofs as
Ridiculous, not Ponderous; though the Dr. is pleased often times to tell us how
weighty they be) In this chapter we find Israel lying in Babylonish captivity,
like dry bones without any hope or likelihood of deliverance; yet the Lord
promises by his Almighty Power to bring them out of it. What is this to the
purpose?

Obj. But says the Dr. the chapt. speaks of the calling of the Jews.

Ans. The whole chapt. does not, but admit the latter part do prophecy that in
Gospel times Jews and Gentiles shall be united and make one visible Church
under Christ, and that he will be spiritually present with them in his Word and
Ordinances; yet how will it follow, that because the Jews shall be called, ergo
Christ shall reign with them personally on earth a thousand years. I am even
weary of this stuff, and therefore shall make haste.

3. The next Text is Dan. 2. 31. to 36. and 7. 14. This Text had been plainer
if the Dr. had never meddled with it. He has an excellent faculty in mangling
Scripture.

Answ. 1. These places are very Mystical and Prophetical, and are often times by
Sectaries strained beyond their scope and meaning. 2. That this Kingdom which
Daniel speaks of, can not be their Utopia and imaginary Kingdom, is plain from
the Text it self, for it tells us that the Lord shall set up a Kingdom, which
shall destroy the Kingdoms of the earth, and this Kingdom shall last for ever
and ever. So that Daniel speaks of Christ's Kingdom as everlasting, but these
men's Kingdom shall last but a thousand years, and therefore it is not this
Kingdom mentioned in Daniel.

See more in Mr. Loves Ser. on Colos. 3. 4. p. 70. 71. and Mr. Bayly's
Disswasive, p. 248. 249*
Obj. Dan. 12. 2. Speak of the Resurrection of all to judgment. See Mr.
Bayly's answer to that Text in his Disswasive. 1. Part. p. 238. etc.

Quest. But has the Dr. no New Testament proofs?

Answ. O yes, he cites no less then 24. Texts, yet (Pace canti viri dixerim)
not one to the purpose. 1. He cites John 19. 37. they shall look on him whom
they have pierced; ergo, they shall look on him with bodily eyes, and shall
reign with him a thousand years.

2. Rev. 1. 7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him. Ergo,
Christ shall reign visibly on earth a thousand years.

3. Matthew. 24. 30* Then shall appear the sign of the Son of Man. ergo.

4. 2 These. 2. 1. I beseech you by the coming of Christ. ergo, Christ shall
come and reign a thousand years.

5. Matthew. 26. 29. I will not drink of the fruit of the Vine, till I drink it
with you new in my Fathers Kingdom. Ergo, Christ shall Lactantius Instit. l. 7.
speaking of this golden age, tells us that the Cliffs of the Mountains shall
sweat out honey, and the Springs and Rivers shall flow with wine and milk.

This would be good news for Epicures.


reign with the Saints on earth a thousand years, and they shall drink wine
together. This Text has been often urged to me by the Millenaries, and
therefore I shall clear it. 1. By the Kingdom of the Father is not here meant
any Kingdom or Reign here on earth, but the Kingdom of Heaven, as appears,
Matthew. 13. 43. Then shall the Righteous shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of the
Father. (i. e.) in the Kingdom of Heaven; which is called the Fathers Kingdom.

1. Because there he more especially manifests his glory.

2. Because the Presidency and chief Government of this Kingdom rests in him.

3. The Kingdom which the Millenaries expect, is called Christ's Kingdom and not
the Fathers, but the Kingdom here spoken of, is called the Fathers Kingdom, not
Christ's.

4. By wine here is not meant any corporal drinking, for glorified,
spiritualized bodies which are made like unto Christ's glorious body, need no
such low things as eating and drinking Scriptura solet (...) ^^^^orum
spi^itu^^ia per corporalia (...) and (...) exprim^re, p^r Ca^ach^esin.
are. But Metaphorically and Mystically it notes that sweet joy and eternal
comfort which the Saints shall have with Christ their Lord and Head in his
Heavenly Kingdom. This Celestial glory and happiness Christ's calls New Wine (i.
e.) Wine of another kind, Spiritual, Intellectual Wine. 2. Or New Wine, because
more Excellent, for so the Hebrews are wont to call a thing that is Excellent,
New; as Psalm. 96. 1. and 98. 1. Sing a new Song, (i. e.) an Excellent song: so
Heb. 8. 8. 1 John 2. 7, 8.

Obj. But did not Christ eat and drink with his Apostles after his
Resurrection; and if so, why may not the Saints also?

Answ. Suppose Christ did eat and drink with his Apostles, yet he did it not
now more humano and consueto, so as formerly Bibit and comedit sed obiter and
tantum ad probandum se resurrexisse. ^ Lap.
he had done. He did not now eat or drink for any bodily nourishment or
refreshment, having no need of meats or drinks, nor yet in a social communion;
only for the confirming of the Faith of his Apostles in the certainty of his
Resurrection, he showed them what he could do. This was not in him now any
natural action, and therefore he over-looks it as a thing by the by, telling
his Apostles that he would no more thus drink with them.

His other proofs are to very little purpose, as Math. 23. 38. Luke 19. 11. to
28. Abundance of Old and New Testament proofs are brought for this Tenet by
those who little regard either Testament further then it suits with their own
fancies.
Act. 3. 19. 20, 21. Philip. 2. 9, 10. Math. 24. 13. Luke 1. 31, 32. Luke 21.
24. Luke 22. 28. etc. Acts 1. 6. Romans 11. 25. etc. 1 Cor. 15. 21. 2 Cor. 3. 15.
Revel. 2. 25. etc. Revel. 3. 21. etc. Rev. 5. 10. Revel. 18. 19. and 21. 2 Pet.
3. 13.


To all these proofs, put Ergo, The Saints shall Reign on earth a thousand
years, and forbear smiling if you can.

Indeed the Dr. from first to last does Petere Principium, he begs the
Question, and takes that for granted which he never proves. The (...) and thing
in controversy is, whether Christ shall personally Reign on earth with the
Saints for a thousand years? Now instead of bringing places to prove this, he
brings Texts to prove the calling of the Jews, which no body doubts of, or that
Christ shall come in the flesh, or that he shall come to Judge the world; which
no sober men once question.

Quest. But has the Dr. no other places to help him at a dead lift?

Answ. O yes, he has two strong holds (in his own conceit) and therefore when
he is at a loss, hither he runs for shelter, to as much purpose as Colliar
(that black Sectary) runs to 1 Cor. 14. and 1 Pet. 4. 10. to prove the
lawfulness of Lay men's preaching, which yet he recites twenty times over in his
Pamphlet, as the Dr. does these two Texts, the This Text he cites four ^^^es in
two pages together, p. 94. 95. such weight he lays upon it.
1 Cor. 15. 24. to 29. and Revel. 20. 4. 5. 6. when these two Texts are cleared,
all the Drs. building lies in the dust, for these are the two primary Pillars*
which seem to uphold this point, and two of the hardest Texts in all the Bible:
I shall therefore take some pains to unfold them, and shall sift them to the
bran, that if it be possible we may not lose one grain of truth.

To begin with the first. 1 Cor. 15. 24. etc. Then comes the end when he shall
have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the Father, when he shall have put
down all Rule, and all Authority and Power, etc.

This Text is one of those (...), which are hard to be understood; which
Arians, Arminians, Anabaptists and Millenaries have wrested to their own
destruction. The Millenaries fondly gather from hence, That the Church shall
enjoy such a flourishing time on earth, that they shall have no enemies, no
sin, no sorrow, no Rulers or Powers to molest us. Whereas the Apostles drift is
only this; he had before proved by many irrefragable Arguments the
Resurrection of the body, but some might desire to know in what condition the
world should be after the Resurrection; whether they should not need
Magistrates and Ministers then? No says the Apostle, we shall not need them,
Why so? For then comes the end, viz. of the world (of which end Christ speaks,
Matthew. 24. 3. 14. and the Apostle 1 Pet. 4. 7.) Magistracy then shall cease, and
the Ministry shall cease, the Churches Warfare shall cease, for her enemies
shall then be totally destroyed, and she shall enjoy perfect and immediate
communion with God in Heaven, who will be all in all to her, so that she shall
have no need of Sun, Moon, or Stars, for the Lord himself will be her light.

Quest. But what will Christ then do?

Answ. He will do two things. 1. He will deliver up the Kingdom to God the
Father. Q. D. Non regnabit per media in medio hostium ut nunc, sed omnibus
abolitis tenebit Imperium immediatum solus cum Patr^ and Spiritu Sanct^ ut
Deus. Paraeus.
He will Reign no longer as now he Raigns; for now he Reigns in the midst of
enemies, now he Rules mediately by Magistrates, by Ministers, by Ordinances,
and by supplies of the Spirit. But then viz. at the end of the world, before
the day of Judgment and not after (as some would have it) this present manner
of administration shall cease, Christ will govern no more by Officers, but that
Power and Kingdom which he has received from his Father, he (having finished
the work which he gave him to do) surrenders it up unto him again, that so God
may be (i. e.) Ut pleno imperio suos gubernot sine Ministerio creatur^rum. Hic
nos servat mediis* ibi his non erit opus, q. Deus erit omnia (i e) pro quo* is
medio conservatio* is quo nunc utitur in hac vita vario. Aretius.
All in all, and we may enjoy him no longer in the use of means, but
immediately in full degrees of glory.

Ob. But if Christ deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, then he will have no
Kingdom (as Dr. Homes affirms) and therefore lest he should lack one, the Dr.
has framed one (in his Utopian brain) that shall last him a thousand years on
earth. Curasti probe!

Answ. Could the Dr. but have distinguished, he might have saved that labor.
Christ has a double Kingdon. Regnum natural
A Natural and Essential Kingdom, due to Christ as he is God coessential and
coequal with his father, and this Christ possesses with his Father and the
Spirit for ever.

Regnum Oeconomicum.
Christ has an Oeconomical and Ministerial Dispensatory Kingdom, as he is
Mediator between God and Man, and this Kingdom which he has received from his
Father, he shall surrender up again unto his Father, after he has subdued sin
and death, and put all his enemies Dicitur Christus tradere regnum Deo Patri,
non respectu Divinitatis, it a enim regnum habet aeternum cum Patre. neque
regnum Potentiae quod in omnes creaturas habet, illud enim nunquam deficiet;
sed Regnum Gratiae in Ecclesia. Baldwin in locum.
under his feet. Not that upon this surrender he cease to be a King, for when
he has delivered up this his Mediatory Kingdom, yet is he a King still, his
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, it has no end. (Dan. 2. 44. and 7. 14. 27.
Micah 4. 7. Luke 1. 33. Heb. 1. 8. John. 17. 5. 1 Pet. 1. 11. Revel. 11. 15.)
Christ has no Kingdom that is but of a thousand years continuance, the
Scripture plainly tells us that his Kingdom is V D. Reynolds in Psalm. 110. 1.
p. 7. and p. 78, 79.
everlasting. So that this delivering up of Christ's dispensatory Kingdom is not
a renouncing Non separantur Pater and Filius, regnat Pater in Filio, regnabit
Filius in Patre. Qualit as tantum regni mutabitur. Muscul.
of his power, but a changing of the present manner of administration; it is not
simply a ceasing to Reign, but a ceasing to Reign in that Mediatory manner as
formerly. He is still the Head and King of his Spouse, only he will not now
govern her as formerly with Ordinance and Discipline, for the Church then will
have no more need of them, being glorified and fully freed from sin and Satan.
Then* shall Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in Unity of Essence and Glory, begin to
Reign immediately over his Church in a new manner, viz. by himself without the
use of Angels, men, or any helps of natural or spiritual life.

2. The Apostle tells us when Christ will deliver up this Kingdom, viz. when he
shall have put down all Rule, and all Power and Authority. These must now
cease, Christ will no longer exercise his Power and Government by others. So
that the words may be taken two ways. 1. Largely, for the putting down of all
Authority (i. e.) all lawful powers and Governors which were ordained by God
for the good of the world. Though Angels shall still remain, yet the Church now
will have no need of them.

2. Restrictively, for the subduing of all these adversary Powers and Potentats
which oppose the Kingdom of Christ. The context seems to carry it this way, v.
25. 26* though the former sense may not be excluded, for the words are general,
All Rule, and all Authority be it good or bad. The Church will then have no
need of good ones; and bad ones shall no longer molest her, for the time of her
warfare is accomplished.

3. The Apostle having told us what shall be the future condition of Christ
Kingdom, now he tells us what shall be the condition of Christ himself, V. 28.
When all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son himself also be
subject to him that put all things under him. Hence the Arrians subtly cavil
thus.

Obj. If Christ deliver up the Kingdom to his Father, then he is inferior to
his Father, and his Kingdom is not everlasting, and by consequence the Deity of
Christ is over thrown.

Est fellacia a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter.
Answ. This does not follow, for though Christ do resign his Mediatory and
Dispensatory Kingdom, so that he rules not Christus enim dicitur tra^iturus
regnum Patri non simpliciter, sed (...) and respectu formae administrationis.
by external Organs and Instruments, yet he Raigns still as God in his Essential
Kingdom with his Father, for his Kingdom is eternal, Isay 9. 7.

2. Obj. They cavil thus. He that is subject to his Father is inferior to him,
but Christ is so, ergo.

Answ. Christ must be considered according to his twofold nature, viz. his
Humanity and his Deity. As he is God, so he is Gods equal, Phil. 2* 6. as man,
so he tells us the Father is greater then he, John 14. 28. As he is God, so all
Creatures are subject to him; but as he is our Mediator, so he is subject to
Subjicitur Patri non abdicatione naturae aut Potentiae divinae, sed depositione
officii Mediatoris and Legationis commissae. Paraeus.
his Father together with his Mystical body the Church. Not as if he were not
subject to his Father before, but because then he shall in the sight of men and
Angels publicly deliver up the Kingdom, and so declare his subjection more
openly: for then things in Scripture are said to be, when they are publicly
manifested to be, Psalm. 2. 7.

Now let us see what Dr. Homes his Aquiline eyes can spy in this Text for this
1000. years Reign on earth.

1. His first profound Observation from hence is this. That after the Ultimate
day of Judgment Christ shall have no Kingdom nor Power, but how does he prove
this? Why, from 1 Cor. 15. 28. and how else? Why the same again and again usque
ad ravim till he dote again; like a Cuckoo, Eandem cantilenum canit, he tells
you the same story over and over, that he might boast and say, He is now become
a Fool in Folio. Only he desires you to observe according to his wonted
Elegancy, That it is Page 166.
Has put all things in subjection. Mark (says he) it is the time past. 2.
Shall be I mention these things the rather that they may see their folly, who
have cried up this book as unanswerable.
subdued, mark again, It Is the Future time. With such Learned Observations (as
if he were reading a Lecture to some School-boyes) is the Drs. Folio stuffed.

2. The Drs. Observation has two parts. 1. That there shall be two days of
Judgment, and therefore he tells you here of an ultimate day of judgment. But
how does he prove it? Why (...), Dr. Homes says it, ergo, it is true. 2. Christ
has no Kingdom and Power. How? whence that I pray you? Why, the Dr. tells you
it is after the ultimate day of Judgment. New Light indeed! if the Dr. vent
this ignorantly, he is to be pitied; if wilfully to be punished, that goes
about to deceive people in the Fundamentals of Religion.

But how does he proves this? Why, by a witless, worthless reason (p. 89.) viz.
Christ must have his Kingdom before the ultimate day of Judgment, or else he will
have no Kingdom: Why so? For then it is the Fathers Kingdom. As if the Father
and the Son (though they be two persons) yet were not one God, and the Father
had a Kingdom without the Son.

Quest. But what says the Text?

Answ. Why, Then comes the end, etc. Every word a Dagger (Quot verba, tot
verber a) and stabs the Drs. cause at the heart.

1. The Apostle tells us, Then comes the end viz. of the world, (i. e,)
immediately after the Resurrection. He does not say then comes the Reign of
Christ for a thousand years on earth, But, then comes the end of the World.

2. When he shall deliver up the Kingdom, viz. his Mediatory, not his absolute
Kingdom. And therefore the Drs. Logic is very faulty in arguing from a A
particular^ ad universale non val^t consequentia.
particular to a general, ergo, because Christ has no Oeconomical Kingdom,
ergo, he has no Kingdom. Non sequitur, ergo, because one Dr. is Episcopal,
ergo, all are Episcopal. Or because one Dr. observes the times, ergo, all do
so. Is but sorry Logic.

3. The Apostle tells us, Christ must Reign in his Mediatory K^ngdom till the
last enemy (which is death) be destroyed; but this will not be till the day of
Judgment, where then is the Drs. thousand years?

4. Then Christ has no power. What more folly yet? Cannot Christ lay down his
Mediary Kingdom, but he must loose his power with it? Cannot he change the
manner of Administration, but he must cease to be a King? Is he not God and Man
still? Is he not King and Head of his Church still? Is he not as High and
Mighty as ever? And is it not he that even in the Text puts down all power, by
his divine Almighty power? How then comes it to pass that Christ has no power,
as the Dr. blasphemously, at least very ignorantly affirms?

5. He tells us of the Saints living on earth for a thousand years without
Ordinances.

Answ. This is as true as the rest. But the Dr. does very ill to harden
Atheistical Sectaries in such conceits. For it is not to be expected whilst the
Saints live on earth that they should live without, or above Ordinances. In
Heaven indeed when the Saints shall enjoy God immediately they shall not need
them, for God will be all in all, (as it is in the Text) but that is not in this
world, but at the end of the world. Then comes the end, viz. immediately after
the Resurrection, as the context shows) when the Saints shall be received to
bliss, then God will be all in all immediately, and not till then.

Obj. Revel. 21. 22. It Is said of the New Jerusalem (i. e) of the glorious
estate of the Church near the end of the world, that there shall be no Temple
there.

Answ. These words, yea, and the whole chapter may be considered two ways. 1.
Literally and properly for the Churches glory in Heaven, for there it is that
all tears shall be wiped from our eyes, there shall be no Sun or Moon, no
Temple there, we shall not need Preaching, Sacraments, Ordinances, for God will
be all in all. To expect an immediate enjoyment of God in this world without
Ordinances is a Satanical delusion. True, in the Church Triumphant Prophesies
shall cease, 1 Cor. 13. 8. But in the Church militant we must not despise
Prophesying and Preaching of the word. To expound this chapter Literally of any
Church either in Heaven or Earth, will not hold: for there is no Gold, Silver,
Precious Stones, Rivers, etc. in Heaven.

2. If we consider the words Allusively and Allegorically, for the Mr.
Brightman, M^. Forbes, and Mr. Stevens go this way.
glorious estate of the Church upon earth, after the calling of the Jews, then
there shall be no Temple there. q. d. Locus hic Spiritual^ter est intelligendus
(ut aliqui volunt) pro pulchritudine and dignitate Ecclesiae; vel, ut plurimi
interpretantur, pro gloria caelestis mansionis, ubi nec Sol nec Luna, nec
Templnm erit. Walaeus Loc. com. p. 558.
the Worship of God shall be more Pure, Spiritual and Heavenly then ever before.
So that the words must not be taken simply, for then they would contradict
other places of Scripture, which tell us that the Church on earth will always
have need of the Ministry, both to convert such as are not yet converted, and
to confirm such as are converte Ephesians. 4. 11, 12. 2 Pet. 1. 12. Matt. 28. 20. 1
These. 3. 2. Romans 10. 14, 15. Jer. 3. 15. the best know but in part, and have
need of teaching here.

But 2. The words must be taken comparatively, as those places are See more in
the L rge Annotat. of the Bible.
Jer. 31. 34. and 1 John 2. 17. they shall no more teach every man his
neigbour, (i. e) God will so abundantly power out the gifts and graces of his
Spirit in those days, that there shall be almost as much difference between
those that lived under the Law, and those that live under the Gospel, as there
is between those that need a Teacher, and those that have no Teacher. Now the
most Commentators do expound this chapter of the Kingdom of Glory; yet if any
shall take them in this second sense, there is no danger.

Quest. But has the Dr. no other Texts to uphold his opinion?

Answ. Yes, he builds much on 2 Timothy 4. 1. I charge thee before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearance and
his Kingdom. I must confess this deep-sighted Dr. has better eyes then must
men, I know if he can spy his Millenarian Kingdom here. But the Dr. is wise,
(in his own conceit) and thus he begins.

V. D. Homes. p. 95.
The Kingdom of Christ here mentioned, cannot be referred to his past
government of the Church.

Answ. Very true, who ever questioned it that was well in his wits? Yet least
this Dr. should be mad without reason, he gives you a School-boyes reason to
confirm it, viz. because it is in the Future Tense, shall come to judgment: and
so he does frequently in his Book, bid you observe, it is do, did, have, had,
shall or will (as if he were teaching School-boyes) and then tells you (out of
the Rabbis of a time when the universe shall be red with the blood of the
slain, and the hills white with the fat of their mighty men. But these things
the Dr. Learnedly observes, are not yet fulfilled [nor ever will be without a
grand Hyperbole] with such Learned Nothings is the Drs. Book stuffed.

2. He tells us how Christ shall have no Kingdom, and of two days of
judgment, of a particular day at the beginning of the thousand years, when
Christ shall appear to reward the living and dead Saints, and to destroy the
then living incorrigible wicked man: this is but the Praeludium, after (says
the Dr. comes the ultimate judgment, Christ all that while (says he) being
busied in executing the first Sentence of Judicature. Here is much said* but
how is it proved? Why, from 2 Timothy 4. 1. he would make all this appear from the
word Appear. Christ shall judge the quick and the dead at his Appearing. Ergo,
he shall have two days of judgment wherein to appear. 2. He tells us that
from the particular to the general day of Judgment shall be a thousand years.
But how does he prove this? Why, from Matthew. 25. Come ye blessed of my Father
inherit the Kingdom, (i. e.) on earth where you shall Reign with Christ a
thousand years.

How else does he prove it? why, Rev. 11. 15. 17, 18. where the Church
rejoices in the destruction of bloody persecutors, (for the destruction of
Rome it self follows. chapt. 18. and of Antichrist chapt. 19. Now see the Drs.
Illogical Logic. Because the Church rejoices in the enlargement of Christ's
Kingdom, and the downfall of his enemies, ergo, Christ shall Reign with the
Saints on earth a thousand years.

Obj. The Apostle sets Christ's appearing first, and his Kingdom* after,
therefore, this, his Kingdom is not to begin till his appearing.

Answ. It Is ignorant and weak arguing from the placing of words in Scripture,
for that is often times placed first, which in order of Nature is last. ergo.
Mark. 1. 4. Repentance is put before faith, Mark. 1. 4. and glory before grace,
2 Pet. 1. 3.

Lastly, he tells us how Christ is gone into a far country, and that he must be
a fifth Monarch, and for this he quotes, Dan. 2. 38, 39, 40. 45. and 7. 13, 14.
we read of 4. Monarchies in Daniel, viz. the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and
Roman Monarchies; but our fifth Monarch men expect King Jesus to be a fifth
Monarch, who shall destroy all Magistrates and Ministers, that he and the
Saints may Reign on earth alone. I see now whence our fifth Monarch men have
their Newlight, viz. from this Tenet of the Millenaries, which opens a gap to
Anarchy and confusion, for under this pretense Libertines may arise and kill
Magistrates, Ministers, and all the ungodly, (i. e) all save themselves, and
their own party, that they may Reign alone in the earth; of this God has
given us a remarkable instance of late in those fifth Monarch men, who are now
in prison. To make way for this their imaginary Kingdom, they give out in their
Pamphlet called the Standard, That the Beast and the false Prophet, (i. e.)
Magistrates and Ministers, and all earthly Governments must be destroyed by the
hands of the Saints, and that all yoaks upon the inward and outward man must be
destroyed, because of the anointing, since the Saints are the Lords Freeman:
yea, they tell us that the Wicked, Bloody, Antichristian Magistracy, Ministry,
Lawyers, etc. must be destroyed. They be their own words, where we see it is not
Magistrates and Ministers, but Magistracy and Ministry, the very Office it
self which these men strike at, and that with a profound, etc. which how far it
may extend, to what Persons, Places, Callings, and Officers, let others judge.

Quest. But when shall this destruction be?

Answ. They tell you it must be at the time of the restitution of all things,
(i. e) when Christ shall reign a thousand years; and to make way for that day
Magistrates and Ministers must be destroyed. Now the better to effect this,
they animate men to seditions, and proclaim a Jubilee and year of Liberty from
Tithes and Taxes and Imprisonment, after: have at Rents, and Debts, and a
community of all things. Yea, the better to encourage men to come in to them
(like their master the Devil) they make large promises (but sorry performances)
of Health, Wealth, Peace, Protection; yea, they invite you to a Royal Feast,
where you shall have no worse fare then the flesh of Kings, Captains and mighty
men. Yea they tell you this Kingdom of theirs shall break in pieces all other
Kingdoms, and eat out all the Monarchies and Glory of the world. Yea, Rogers,
one of the Speakers in London, to this fifth Monarch crew, Preached it openly,
that the cause of these fifth Monarch men was good, but they did not time it
well; however they would not desist till they had the Tyrants head from his
shoulders, and more words to the like purpose. This I had from an honest and
understanding ear-witness in London.

Haec opinio fanatica potius Magistratuum edictis and armis, quam Argumentis
est refutanda. Walaeus. Loc. com. p. 538.
It Is time the Magistrate should awake, and restrain these Babel-builders,
least they bring not only confusion on themselves, but also on them that
tolerate them.

As for that Text in 2 Timothy 4. 1. it is so plain that any man, except such as
are wilfully blind, and are wedded to their fancies (like the Donatists, Quod
volumus Sanctum est, all is holy that they hold, be it never so unholy) may see
that it speaks not of any coming of Christ to reign on earth, but of his
coming to judge the quick and the dead in great power and glory. And we shall
often find in Scripture that the appearing of Christ in glory, and his coming to
judgment are joined together, as being one and the self same thing at the same
time. Matthew. 24. 30. 2 Timothy 4. 8. Colos. 3. 4. So that this appearance of
Christ in his Kingdom is nothing elss but a more full and clear manifestation
of his glory when he shall come to judge the world. We read but of two signal
comings of Christ, viz. one in the flesh, 1 Timothy 2. 16. and his second
appearing to judgment, Heb. 9. 28. He shall appear the second time for the
salvation of his Elect. But if Christ should come to Reign a thousand years,
then it should have been said, he will come the third time for your salvation.
But the Scripture never mentions but two comings of Christ corporally, viz.
once to merit salvation, and at the last day to perfect it for ever.

Thus we have seen the Drs. vanity. We have a saying, as the Fool thinks, so
the Bell clinks. As Dr. Homes thinks, so the Scripture clinks. Does he read of
an appearance of Christ? Oh it is his appearance to reign a thousand years:
Does he read of a Kingdom? Oh it is an earthly, visible Kingdom, etc.

Haec ipsissima seeds est hujus controversiae e qua primum ^rta est. Wendelin.
The last and chiefest place which this Millenarian Dr. cites, is Revel. 20. 1.
to 7. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years; but the rest of the
dead lived not again till the thousand years were finished, this is the first
Resurrection. This Text is the master prop in this building, overthrow this and
you overthrow all. Vindicate this Text from their vain glosses, and you
vindicate all. There is no Text that seemingly speaks more for them; yet upon
due search we shall find that the Text has much against them. It Is true, the
Dr. the better to insinuate himself and make way for this his beloved Tenet,
highly extols the 20. chapter of the Revelations, calling it a Golden Key to
unlock the Bible [we had need of a better hand then the Drs. to turn it.]
especially the Old Testament. It Is true, one place of Scripture helps to
illustrate another, but how this 20. of the Revelation should be such a Key as
to make us understand the whole Bible the better, and especially the Old
Testament shows plainly that the Dr. is led (as his whole book shows him to be)
by Fancy, and not by judgment. Yet the Dr. having some skill (as it seems) in
the Mathematics, tells us that he will pitch the foot of his Compass on Revel.
20. and so draw a right circle about it (as if he meant to conjure us into his
opinion. I have but little skill in the Mathematics, yet I shall endeavor to
get the Dr. out of his circle, and doubt not but to make it appear to any
unprejudiced Reader, that his Clavis Valde lubrica est Tropica Locutio ad
incertum dogma stabilendum. D. Prideaux. Locus omnium totius Scripturae
Propheticae abstrusissimus, maximeque admirandus. Mede.
aurea (as to his intent and purpose) est plane plumbea.

The Dr. is hard put to it, when his best refuge is an allegorical, mistical
Text, one of the darkest and difficultest Texts in all the Bible, containing in
it almost as many Mysteries, as Words; and has almost as many interpretations,
as there be Interpreters. 1. Therefore I shall forgive you the plain and genuin
sense of the place.

2. I shall show you the vanity of the Drs. glosses, and how inconsistent they
be with the very letter and meaning of the Text.

Whereas I John in my former Vision had seen the Dragon persecuting the Church
under the Tyrannical rule of the Heathen Emperors, now I saw an (a) Angel Vidi
Christum Angeli specie de^ coelo descendentem ut Satanam ligaret (i. e.) ut
opera Diaboli destrueret, praecipue Idolomaniam and cultus Diabolicas. Paraeus.
come down from Heaven, having power and commission from God to chain up and
imprison the Dragon that old Serpent the Devil, and to restrain his power for
the space of a thousand years after Constantines restoring Peace to the Church;
which Angel did restrain him from his open rage and slaughtering of the Saints,
(as he had done before by the Heathen Emperors) and from his prevalent
seducing and deceiving of the Nations by his Sorceries and Oracles, until the
thousand years be finished; for then he must be let loose for a Comparatively,
for Popery stood not in its height above 500. years, and then vanished
graduelly. So Christ is said to come quickly (comparatively) yet it is 1600.
years ago since.

Rev. 22. 20.


short time, for some further exercise of Gods children, and the harding of the
wicked.

Verse. 4. And now I saw such Glory and Majesty put upon the Faithful, in the
time that Satan was shut up, as that they sat upon Thrones, and the power of
Judgment was committed to them, to manage the affairs of Gods Church, and to
execute due censures upon offenders. And I saw those Faithful and Holy Martyrs
which were ready to lay down their lives for the Testimony of Jesus and his
Gospel; and abhorred the Idolatry of the times; these lived and reigned They
were not the same individual persons that had formerly been slain, no more then
the dead Apostatizing Christians can be thought to live again numerically after
the end of the thousand years, when they are said to be revived. V. 5. But it is
meant only of a succession of such as those were. The Church being considered
as a Transient body, such as a River which always runs in a succession of
parts, one following the other in a perpetual motion and mutation.

D. Hammon^


successively with Christ in a spiritual, sanctified and comfortable estate
here upon earth all this time of the thousand years of Satan's restraint. In
which time some truth remained in the Churches as touching the main points of
Christian Doctrine.

Verse. 5. But the rest which lay dead in their sins did not at all recover this
spiritual life, nor attain to the saving knowledge of the truth, nor did they
witness against Antichrist. This which we now speak off, viz. the abandoning of
the corruptions of the times, and attaining to the saving knowledge of the
Truth, is the first Resurrection.

Verse. 6. Blessed and Holy is he that has part in it, for on such the second
death which is eternal destruction shall have no power. But they shall be
wholly consecrated to the service of God and his Christ, and shall Regnabant
cum Christo sed non dicit regnabunt in terra nec terreno more, imo animarum
solum meminit, and earum solarum beatitudinem prae^icat. Walaeus.
reign with him here on earth So the witnesses that were slain are said to live
again, not in their own persons, but in their Successors, Rev. 11. 11. as John
Baptist came in the Spirit of Elijah.
successively in their several ages for the space of a thousand years, when they
shall rejoice in God, and in the peace of a good conscience, whilst the rest
of the world lies in spiritual slavery and misery.

V. 7. 8. But when these thousand years are expired, Satan shall be let loose
again, and suffered to raise great troubles in the Church, raising up secret
and open enemies to molest it; as he did about the year 1000. after Christ (as
the Histories of those times do testify) when Pope Sylvester the 2. arose, who
gave his soul to the Devil for the Popedom, and not long after him succeeded
Pope Hildebrand (that brand of Hell) about the year 1070. Homo multorum nominum
non boni nominis.

Annus Millesimus praecise incidit in scelerati illius Hildebrandi tempora, qui
Gregorius 7. dictus est, Necromantae and Magi perditissimi; quo instrumento
usus est Diabolus cum e vinculis esset solutus ut sanctos atrocissimis
persecutionibus, mundum vero totum dis^idiis and bellis ^ruentissimis deinceps
infestaret. Junius in Apocalyp.


alias Pope Gregory the 7. he was notoriously vile, a Monster of men, a
Socerer, and dealt with the divil, he was the first that excommunicated the
Emperor, and assumed to himself the power of placing and displacing the
Emperor. He condemned Ministers marriages, which yet St. Paul allows off Now
follows Transubstantiation, Sacrifices, Ceremonies, Jubilees, Indulgences and
Idols in abundance. Now the Turk (that open and professed enemy of Christ comes
in, and acts his part, destroying many flourishing Churches. It Is true, the
Pope and Turk did molest the Church some ages past, but they were restrained,
and they broke not forth in that outrageous manner as now they did.

Quest. The question then will be, Whether these thousand years of Christ's
reign here mentioned, be yet to come, or be already past?

Ego a Christi incarnatione mill annos ordine simplicissimum esse duco.

That these 1000 years are already past, M. Hayne has sufficiently proved in a
set Treatise against the Millenaries.


Answ. They are already past, for when Christ came into the world, he bound the
strong man, and made his Kingdom fall like lightning from heaven, before the
preaching of his Apostles, which was spread over all the world, Romans 15. 19.
Col. 1. 6. Acts 1. 8. Christ is that Angel that descended from heaven, who by
his death destroyed him who had power over death, and by his almighty power
bound him; so that he could not deceive the Nations as formerly: Insomuch that
for the space of a thousand years after Christ's time, many were called and
converted, many lived and reigned with Christ, and sealed the Truth (which was
held forth in some good measure, until near the end of the thousand years,
about which time there began to be a declining with their dearest blood.

Object. You should tell us the express day and year when those thousand years
began, and when they ended.

Answ. It Is a vain curiosity to desire such a thing; it is sufficient that we
make it out in general, that this reign began about the time of Christ's
incarnation, when the Divel's Oracles were cast down, and himself cast out by
Christ, and the Gospel was published to the world, and ended about a thousand
years after Christ. It Is true there is variety of opinions amongst the learned
touching this, but no contrariety; for all the Orthodox do unanimously agree
and conclude, that those thousand years are already past and gone: Some begin
these thousand years at the destruction of the Temple, Anno 73. and then it
ends in Pope Hildebrand, (so Paraeus and Mr Dent) who came to the Popedom 1073.
See more in B. Halls Revel. unrevealed, p. 44, 45 and D. Prideaux Lect. 13.
page 202. and Mr Hayne against the Millen page 86. etc. D. Al^ted himself
confesses that Satan was bound anno 70. but not in that manner and measure as
he shall be bound for the 1000 years.
Others begin it at the birth of Christ, and then it ends in Pope Sylvester a
Sorcerer. 2. Others begin at Constantine, Anno 300. and end in Boniface the
eighth, who is said to have entered like a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died
like a Dog. So that you see all agree that about 1000. years after Christ this
reign began, and now is past: So says Marlirate; Christus natus est (uti
prohibent Beda, cum aliis) Anno a Mundo condito 5199. rostabant igitur de sexto
illi Millenario anni 801. atque illos per Synecdochen hic dici mill annos in
quibus Ecclesia legato Satana, sub Apostolicis viris and sanctis Patribus ad
justum promoverit incrementum. So that this opinion is grounded on a false
Hypothesis; for they suppose those thousand years are yet to come, when it is
clear they are already past: so that by this we see where we are to fetch the
Epoch or beginning of this account of the thousand years.

Object. But Christ never yet personally appeared on earth to reign with the
Saints; nor was Satan ever yet so bound, but that he seduced many from Christ.

Answ. We have no promise of any personal appearing of Christ till he come to
judgment Acts 3. 22.

2. It Is true, Satan is never Non tam arcte and praecise ligationem Satanae hic
esse sumendam ac si pro toto isto captivitatis suae millenario, nil potuit
moliri aut tentare. Non sic restringit contextus, ubi v. 3. ita tantum
clauditur non ut nihil ageret, vel nullo modo no eret, sed non ut seduceret
amplius (sicut antea fecisset) Gentes, i. e. Paganos and Hosts Ecclesiae vel
dementando Idololatriae and prodigiosae superstitionis philtris, vel irritando
immissis aestris ut Tyranni^e vi aperta (sicut in decimis primis
persecutionibus) exprimerent Ecclesiam. D. Paideaux.
so bound, but that he does, and will deceive many, and therefore this binding
must not be understood absolutely, as if he should not hurt the Church at all;
but restrictively, to the cause expressed in the Text (Rev. 20. 3.) So that he
should not deceive the Nations with his Oracles and Delusions as formerly; but
the Gospel should spread, and as it prevailed, so Satan should be bound faster
and faster.

The Millenaries will not have these thousand years to begin till Antichrist be
totally destroyed, of whom St John had treated in the precedent chapter.

But it is more probable that Antichrists utter downfall will Non seducet, viz.
seductione illa publicaatque violenta qua tentaverat supra cap. 12. and quam
post hos mill annos (Proh dolor!) in Christiano orb potentissime procuravit.
Junius in loc.
not be till the last day, for then it is that the Beast and false Prophet are
cast into the Lake, Rev. 19. And Christ is said to destroy that son of
perdition with his glorious coming, viz. to judgment, 2 These. 2. 8,

Quest. But when (says Dr. Homes) shall this golden age begin?

Answ. The Doctor here leaves you with a lubricus est hic locus, this is a
ticklish point; and therefore the better to avoid the carps of a Momus, and the
censures of a Cato, and to stave off blows (it seems the Doctor was afraid his
Plush might be cudgelled) he is resolved to shelter himself under the shield of
some learned Achilles, telling you what they say, that if they err, you may
cudgel them instead of him.

V. D. Homes, l. 7. c. 1, 2, 3, etc.
Quest. But what do these learned men say?

Answ. Why they write doubtfully, they cannot agree of the place of this
reign; one says it shall be in heaven, another on earth, another in Jerusalem,
a corner of the earth. 2. They differ about the persons, whether the Martyrs
only shall rise, or all the Saints. 3. They differ about the time when this
Reign shall be, whether Before the day of Judgment, In the day of Judgment,
or After it; they are divided amongst themselves, yet the Dr. will tell you
what some men say. 1. Some say these thousand year shall begin 1617. so
Cotterius, then it would follow that Satan is now bound, which we have little
reason to believe, if we consider the blasphemies and heresies that abound. 2.
The Doctor tells you that in the year 1655. we must expect the calling of the
Jews, yea, and before their Call, the Fall of Antichrist (p. 562) To this
opinion you see the Doctor inclines, his book was printed 1653. and he
conceited that two years after both Rome should down, and the Jews be called,
which is as true as all the rest of his book. If I were worthy to be of the
Drs. Counsel, the next time that I Prophesied I would be sure to set the time
far enough off, that so people might laugh at me (as they have done at some
others) when I were dead, and not whilst I lived. And therefore others, a
little wiser then their fellows, tells us that it shall begin about 27. years
hence. Others say, about 41. years hence. Others about 83. years hence. Alsteed
puts the beginning of these thousand years to 1694. Others put it to the year
1859. about 200 years hence. But the Dr. thinks this time too long to be kept
out of his Mahumetan Paradise, and therefore he will temper this, and some
other accounts which remove their Periods so far off, and this he does by
tampering with the Chronologers, telling Page 562.
you that it is conceived the computation from the Creation to this day,
ordinarily received, is not right, but far longer then it ought to be. How true
this is, I leave it to the Chronologers, and the Dr. to dispute, whilst I
proceed to more profitable matter.

Quest. But before I proceed any further, will you have the Cream and
Quintessence, the Sinews and Mary*bones of all Dr. Homes his Arguments (from
the forecited places) in one Demonstrative Syllogism?

Answ. Yes, by any means, the briefer, the better; for we have been tired out*
hitherto with his empty nothings. In brief the Drs. Argument is this, (p. 115.)
This is Dr. Alsteeds Argument, p. 37.


Those things which are prophesied in the Word of God and are not yet come to
pass, must be fulfilled, [very true.] But the great It Is well if it be not
sensual.
sensible and visible happiness of the Church on earth, before the Lo, two days
of Judgment* So Matton makes Christ to appear twice to Judge the quick and the
dead, viz. a former and inchoate Judgment when the Saints shall rise to Reign
with Christ. 2. The Ultimate day when all shall arise.
Ultimate Day of Judgment is prophesied in the Word of God, which is the Old
and New Testament. [Very true,] ergo, it shall come to pass; who ever denied
it? But what is this to the point in hand? Or what Logic is this? Because in
the last days the Jews shall be called, and because the Glorious Spiritual
Privileges of the Church shall then be advanced. Ergo, Christ and the Saints
alone shall Reign on earth a thousand years. This is the Drs Logic you see
from first to last.

Theologia Symbolica non est argumentativa. Aquinas.

See my Schools Guard. rule 17. Quot verba, tot misteria.


I come now to answer more punctually to Revel. 20. 4. 5* etc. 1. The Text is
Allegorical, and so is no fit ground to build Arguments upon. The book of the
Revelation is the most mystical book in all the Bible, full of deep Allegories,
and this Text is one of the darkest and deepest in all the book. It Is
Prophetical, and Prophesies are best understood, when Chiliastae hanc
prophetiam corrupt ad literam non ad analogiam fidei intelligentes, Judaicam
inde fabulam commenti sunt. Paraeus.
fulfilled. Yet such is the folly of the Papists and Anabaptists, that they take
the Letter, and neglect the meaning of the Scripture; whereas the Scripture
lies not in the Words and Letters, but in the sense and meaning.

2. The Reigning here meant is purely spiritual, and so is the first
Resurrection. St* John says he saw the Souls, and not the Bodies of the Martyrs
Reigning with Christ. 2. He saw the Souls, not of all the Saints, but only of
those that were beheaded for the Testimony of Christ. By beheading, by a
Synecdoche, (says Dr. H.) all manner of persecution is meant. Now if you stick
to the Letter of the Text, none but Martyrs shall Martiribus data est
praerogativa quaedam resurrectionis, nec dilata est illorum gloria ad judicium
usque universale. Grotius in locum.
reign this thousand year (as Piscator Alsteed and Grotius affirm, and if this
be so, then the Martyrs will be in a worse condition then ordinary Saints, for
whilst they are enjoying the beatifical Vision of God in Heaven, the Martyrs
must be upon earth, feeding on the Quintessence of the Creatures, drinking
wine, for which Dr. H. cites Matthew. 26. 29. yea the Dr. tells us he does not
see any grand inconveniency that would follow, if he should affirm (but that he
dares not, elss he has a good mind to it, as the dog has to the Mutton, but
that he fears the cudgel) that men should beget Cum ratione insanit. Ter.
children at that time. His Reason is, (for he is not mad without Reason) Adam
might Quid aliud est hoc nisi (...), and incunda potius quam vera loqui? Page
470.
once have done it without sin or carnality of mind, and the Apostle (says he)
implies that our State then Heb. 2. shall be as innocent as Adams was: and then
that promise shall be fullfilled. Matthew. 19. 29. he that has forsaken Father,
Mother, Wife, etc. shall have a hundredsold. To the like purpose speaks Mr.
Buroughs Page 185.
Hos. 1. 11. Lect. 7. he tells us that in that glorious time, there will be
building of houses and inhabiting them, planting of Vineyards, and eating the
fruits of them. But the Scripture is clear against this, it tells us that the
Kingdom of God is within us, and that it consists not in meat or drink* Romans
14. 17. that in the Resurrection there shall be no carnal, but spiritual
delights only. Matthew. 22. 30. In the Resurrection they marry not, but are as
the Angels of God. Christ's Kingdom comes not to us with exnernal pomp, or
worldly observation. Luke 17. 20. but it is spiritual, and is maintained by
spiritual delights.

3. The Text does not say that Christ shall come down to them on earth, for the
Saints may and do R*aign with Christ already on earth, though he be now in
Heaven. As we are said to suffer with Christ though he be in Heaven and we on
Earth* Romans 8. 17. So we are said to Reign with him. Hence believers are called
Kings, because even now they reign with him in in a spiritual manner, Revel. 1.
6. and 5. 10. and the Church is now called the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew* 13.
47. and 5. Regnaturus est per verbum in Sanctis, and Spiritus Sancti internum
ductum, non in Jerusalem, sed in cordibus Sanctorum. Nec somnianda est alia
Martyrum Resurrectio ante ultimum judicium quam in successoribus and ^emine
Spirituali. D. Prideaux.
19. 25. So that the Text does not speak of earth or any earthly reign, but
they shall be with Christ, (i. e.) they shall be free from their former
persecutions, as living now under Christ, not under Antichrist* rising from sin
to newness of life.

4. This first Resurrection is not a bodily, but a spiritual Resurrection of
the soul from the death of sin to the Life of Grace. The Text clears it, for of
such the second death has no power. As the second death is not corporal but
spiritual, so is the Resurrection: Else this absurdity would follow that we
Prima Resurrectio est inchoata Sanctificatio. Paraeus. Dicitur Prima, q.
debetpraecedere Resurrectionem secundam, qu ae erit resurrectio corporum ad
gloriam. Idem.
should have two bodily resurrections, viz. one of the Saints to reign a
thousand years before the Day of Judgment, and another of the wicked at the
Day of the General Judgment. Bnt the Scripture makes but one Resurrection of
good and bad, of Martyrs as well as others, Matthew. 25. 31. and 24. 15. John 5.
28. 29* Holy Job knew nothing of such a reign or rising, Job 19. 25. he tells
us of his Resurrection only at the last day; and Paul tells us of the rising of
all in the twinkling of an eye to Jugdment. 1 Cor. 15. 22. 41. 52. and that
the Saints shall be caught up suddenly in the air to meet Christ, and be for
ever with him, 1 These. 4. 16. and Daniel joins the Resurrection of all, and
the day of judgment together, Dan. 12* 2. So does John, Revel. 20. 12.

5. If none but perfect Saints shall reign with Christ this thousand years, (as
Dr. Homes says) and no wicked men shall be mixed with them (as the Millenaries
affirm) the Dr. may do well in his next book in Folio, (printed at his own
charge) to tell us from whence that persecuting Gog, and Magog (i. e.) those
open and secret enemies of Gods Church shall arise, which shall make such
havoc of the Church of God? Revel* 20. 7, 8, 9. when the thousand years are
exquired Satan shall then be loosed (says the Text) out of prison, and shall
go out and deceive the Nations which are in the 4. Quarters of the Earth, Magog
accipio pro Turcica Tyrannide and aperto host. Gog est Pontificia carnificina,
and opertus hostis. Aretius.
Gog and Magog, to gather them against the beloved City. q. d. Satan shall then
be suffered to raise great troubles and tumults in the world, and shall stir up
all the enemies of Gods Church which are in all the Regions of the Earth, both
Scythians, Turks, and unbelieving Christians, and shall gather them to battle
against the Church of Christ. Here we see the people of God are in a worse
condition then they were before, now it cannot be imagined that Christ should
come down for a thousand years amongst us, and then leave us in a worse
condition then he found us; and after the Church had been sinless and
sorrowless (as Dr. Homes affirms) then that it should be again deceived by
Satan, and See more in B. Hals Revelat. Unrev. p. 145.
besieged by his Instruments, who can believe this? So that this Text makes much
against the Millenarian opinion. I shall therefore shut up all with this
Argument: That Exposition of a Text which contradicts the whole current of
Scripture, is contrary to all Analogy of Faith, to the Scope of the Text, to
Piety of Life, to the comfort of the Saints, and to the concurrent Judgment of
Gods Church; that Exposition is not right. But such is the Millenarian
Exposition of this Text, (as will appear in the following Arguments) ergo.

Let us now sum up all, and then we shall easily see the folly of these men's
arguing from this Mystical Text. 1. St. John speaks of the Saints living with
Christ, ergo, it is a corporal living.

2. He speaks of their reigning with Christ; ergo, it is a corporal and visible
reigning.

3. He mentions a Resurrection, ergo, *it is a corporal Resurrection.

4. He speaks of the first Resurrection, ergo, there shall be two bodily
Resurrections.

5. The Saints shall Reign a thousand years on earth. ergo, it shall be the
same numerical Saints, and not a succession of Holy men in their several ages.
Est fallacia consequentis. The very repetition of those things is confutation
sufficient.

Against the Doctors Thesis I shall set down this Antithesis.
THat Christ shall not Reign personally with the Saints or Martyrs here on
earth for a thousand years, neither before the Day of Judgment, in the Day of
Judgment, nor after it. If ever there be such a Reign, it must be in one of
those times. But it is in neither.

1. It cannot be before the Day of Judgment for these reasons. 1. Because the
last days will be perilous, not pleasant days, See more in my Comment. on
that Text.
2 Timothy 3. 1, 2, 3. they will be full of security, sensuality and iniquity,
insomuch that when Christ comes he shall scarce find any faith on earth, Luke
18. 8. Matthew. 24. 37, 38. wickedness will most abound toward the end of the
world.

2. If the Church of Christ on earth be a mixed Society consisting of good and
bad to the end of the world, then it cannot subsist for a thousand years only
of good men. But the Churh of Christ on earth to the end of the world, is a
mixed society consisting of tares and wheat, good and bad, a Gog and Magog to
molest the Saints to the end of the world, Matthew. 13. 40. Rev. 20. 7, 8.

2. If Christ remain in heaven till the day of judgment, then he cannot reign
corporally a thousand years on earth before that day: But the antecedent is
true, and therefore the consequent, Acts 3. 21. John 14. 3. Whom the heaven
must Usque in diem judicii, quo Deus hominem lapsum in peccatum, aerumnas and
mortem, Deo, Gloriae, and immortalitate restituet a Lap.
contain till the time that all things be restored; i. e. until the time of his
coming to judgment, when he shall appear again for the full consummation of the
glory of his elect, and perfect accomplishment of his Kingdom; then all shall
be repaired which sin has disordered, and the creature be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the sons of God, Romans 8.
21. it is from heaven, and not from earth (says our Creed, that Christ shall
come to judge the quick and the dead.

3. If Gods Church (whilst in this world) must look for afflictions,
tentations, persecutions; then this imaginary reign without sin or sorrow
cannot be expected here. But Gods Church (whilst on earth) must look for
afflictions, tentations, and persecutions here, 2 Timothy See my observations on
that Text.
3. 12. All Christ's disciples must take up their cross daily, though they be
righteous, yet must they look for many troubles, Psalm. 34. 19. Acts 14. 22.

4. Christ's kingdom is not of this world, John 18. 36. And therefore when the
Jews would have made him a King, he conveyed himself from amongst them, John
6. 15. His Kingdom in this world is spiritual, not carnal; it is without any
worldly pomp, neither does it consist in meat, drink, or marriage, Matthew. 22.
30. 1 Cor. 6. 13. Romans 14. 17. A woe is denounced against those that have their
carnal delights, and their portion of pleasures here, Luke 6. 25. James 5. 5.

5. That tenet which is contrary to the judgment of all the Churches of
Christ, ought to be suspected by us; for the judgment and practice of the
Churches of God ought to have great weight with us, as you may see 1 Cor. 11.
16. 22. and we should fear to offend them, 1 Cor. 10. 22. especially by
broaching such tenets as are contrary to the analogy of faith, as this is:
true Churches may err, but not so soon as a particular person; two are better
then one, and in the multitude of counselors there is safety: Solitary birds
are birds of prey: Affectation of singularity is the high way to heresy: it
savours of pride for a particular person to broach new tenets; which are
directly contrary to the old received Truths of the Churches of Christ.

6. Ab absurdo, many absurdities follow this fancy, I shall produce twelve.

1. It derogates much from the honor of Christ; for him who is head of his
Church, and has all power given to him, to come down from heaven, the place of
happiness, where all is in subjection to him, to come live in a corner of the
earth, in the new Jerusalem of the Millenaries inventing; it is a debafing of
Christ. The wiser sort of Millenaries foreseeing this folly, labor to avoid
it, by de^ying (in a sort) any personal reign of Christ on earth; yea Dr Homes
boggles at it, and therefore he comes in with his peradventure Christ will
appear to the Saints at the beginning and ending of this thousand What an high
presumption is it in flesh and blood to send the Son of God from heaven to
earth, and from earth to heaven, upon an errand of their own making? B. Hall.
years. But how does the Doctor prove this? Why, Ipse dixit, Dr Homes says so;
Ergo it is so. Christ must come and go, ascend and descend, as Doctor Homes
would have him.

2. As there is no necessity of such a reign on Christ's part, so neither on
the Saints part; they are Denizens of heaven, their birth is from above, and
thither they aspire; the Church ascends out of this wilderness like pillars of
smoke. Paul (though a martyr) yet desires to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ in heaven (he knew nothing of this 1000. years reign on earth) Phil. 1
23. and 3. 20. and tells us that he looks for a dwelling in heaven, and not on
earth, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 6. and that when Christ appears, they shall appear with him
in eternal glory, Colos. 3. 4. One hour in heaven will be better then all the
pleasures of earth, and if the sight of Christ's transfiguration in the mount
made Peter and John to forget wives, children, meat, drink, houses, and all,
desiring to rest there; how much more will the sight of Christ in perfect glory
ravish our hearts with far greater joy then any we can have on earth, unless
God should leave heaven to come dwell on earth, which we have not the least
ground to believe.

2. What good or comfort can acrew to the Saints by coming from Heaven to reign
a thousand years on earth? Is not the glory of Heaven better then all the
delights on Earth?

3. Or what should glorified Saints do in this new world, after they are come
from Heaven? How should spiritualized bodies delight in earthly pleasures? The
Apostle tells us that our bodies at the Resurrection shall be incorruptible,
immortal, spiritual, powerful and glorious like to Christ's body, Philip. 3.
ult. 1 Cor. 15. 42. Now such bodies cannot live a natural, low, sensual life,
in eating, drinking, Nugae hae sunt vere Mahumeticae, siquidem Regunm Christi
non est esca, potus, etc.
marrying, Matthew. 22. 30. These things may please a Turk and adorn his Paradise,
but the thoughts of such things are loathsome to a glorified Saint, who has
enjoyed immediate communion with Christ in glory.

And those that confine this their supposed Privilege to the Martyrs, do here
by put them into a worse condition then the ordinary Saints; for whilst these
are beholding the face of God in glory, those must be brought down to earth to
eat and drink, build houses and plant Vineyards, etc. Thus you see there is no
necessity nor comfort in fancying such a reign.

2. Then the day of judgment might be known if Christ should come and reign on
earth just a thousand years in a visible manner before the day of judgment,
then that day thousand years (after this reign begins) would be the day of
judgment. But the Scripture expressly tells us, that of that day knows no man,
Mark 13. 32. and Christ will come as a thief in the night, when men least
expect him, 2 Pet. 3. 10. A late writer tells us that Rome shall fall 1666. and
Romae ruin^^
the world shall have and end 45. years after. If this be true, where then is
the thousand years reign?

3. It opens a gap to Anarchy, Sedition and Murder, for under this pretense
Libertines may arise and kill Magistrates and Ministers, and all the ungodly
(i. e.) all but themselve and their party, that they may reign alone in the
Earth. D. Homes tells us that all secular powers, which love not the members of
Christ, shall then be destroyed. And with him the late fifth Monarch men concur*

4. This fancy makes 3. comings of Christ, but we read but of two in all the
Scripture. 1 His coming in the flesh in a state of Humiliation. 2. His coming
to judgment in a state of Glorification, Matthew. 25. 31. 2 Cor. 15. 22. 1
Thessal. 4. 16. 2 Timothy 4* 1. Revel. 1. 7. We read of his appearing a second,
but never of a third time, Heb. 9. 28.

5. It makes two bodily Resurrections, one of the godly to reign with Christ a
thousand years, and another of the ungodly at the end of those thousand years.
But the Scripture expressly joins the Resurrection of the good and bad
together, Dan. 12. 2. John 5. 28. Acts 24. 15. Rev. 20. 12. John 6. 39.

6. It makes Christ to have 3. Ascentions, when the Scripture never mentions
but two, viz. 40* days after his Resurrection, and the other after the General
Judgment of the World.

7. It makes a double day of judgment, the one inchoate, a thousand years
before the other; and the other the Ultimate and General Day of Judgment*

8. Whereas the Scripture makes man's age upon earth to be threescore years and
ten, these have enlarged the date, they tell us of some that shall live a
thousand years on earth.

9. It makes the ruin of Antichrist to be a thousand years or more before the
Day of judgment, when the Scripture joins them together, 2 These. 2. 8. Revel.
20. 8, 9, 10.

10. It makes the Church triumphant when Christ comes, contrary to the tenor
of the Scripture, Matthew. 37, 38. 2 Timothy 3. 1.

11. It Is a means to breed security in men when they shall hear that it is yet
above a thousand years to the Day of Judgment; whereas the Learned conceive the
end of the world to be much nearer. And the Apostles thought 'twas not far off
in their time.

12. Then the Saints and Martyrs should have their reward on earth, but the
Scripture tells us expressly that their reward is great in Heaven, not on Earth,
Matthew. 5. 10. 2 Cor* 5. 1. 2 Pet. 4. 8. 1 Pet. 1* 4. and Paul (a Martyr) looked
If any list to see more absurdities, let him peruse that elaborate Treatise of
B. Hall his Revelation Unrevealed. Sect. 12. p. 109* to 188.
for his reward there, 2 Timothy 4. 8. 18. Thus you see if you grant the Devil but
one absurdity, how many he will infer upon you, the Devil desires but a little at
first, he desires you would but taste of his broth, for then he will quickly bring
you to eat of his beef. Count no error small; many thought this Millinarian
opinion to be a very harmless one, yet we see what Carnality, Heresy, Sedition
and Schism it has brought forth in Church and State.

Obj* If the Reign of Christ on earth be not before the day of judgment, yet it
may be in, and during, the day of judgment. So says Mr. Mede, this 1000. years
reign, shall be In and durante die Judicii: to this opinion D. Tho. Goodwin
inclines, in his New World to come, p. 37.

Chimaera chimaerissima.
Answ. That the day of judgment shall last a 1000. years, is great is dictum,
it is said, but it can never be proved; it is a very bold and groundless
assertion.

The Text which the Millenaries bring to prove this, is 2 Pet. 3. 8. one day
with the Lord is* AS a thousand years, and a thousand years is AS one day.

Answ. What is here to prove their Assertion? I see very weak grounds will
satisfy some men to uphold what pleases their fancy. The meaning of the
Apostle is no more but this, whereas some scoft at Christ's delay, and thought
that he would never come to judgment, the Apostle tells them they had no
reason so to do; for Numerus certus and rotundus ponitur pro incerto and
infinito.
one day with the Lord is As a thousand years, and a thousand years As one day.
God measures not time as we do, what seems long to us, is short to him, Job.
10. 5. Psalm. 90. 4. He does not simply say one day is a thousand years, but is
As a thousand years, it is only a comparison, q. d. although a thousand years
seem a long time to you, (and so the world seems to have continued long) yet
it is not so with the Lord, to whom all time is short, and with whom ten
thousand years are but as yesterday when compared with his eternity.

3. Dr. Alsteed with his Newlight goes further then all the rest, and tells in
that this thousand years reign shall be After Figmentum Chiliasticum.
the day of judgment. This is like the rest, has no foundation, but near
fancy, and is directly contrary to the Tenor of Scripture, which expressly
tells us that at that day of judegment every man shall receive his final
sentence, and everlasting doom of, Come ye blessed, and Go ye cursed: So says
Mr Mede, after the da y of judgment all is finished, the wicked are sent to
hell, and the Saints inherit glory.

As for our selves, let us abandon Vid. Grotius in Apocal. 20. 4.
and detest this Jewish Rabbinical fancy, and Cerinthian Fable, look upon it as
an old error new vamped, or an old harlot new painted. Men have strained their
wits of late to set a new gloss upon it, but all in vain; bring it to the fire
of Gods word, and all their painting vanishes, and their old wrinkled
absurdities are presently discerned.

What we say of vicious, is also true of erroneous persons, The Scholars
oft-times exceed their masters: Arminius his followers out-went him, and our
late Millenaries and fifth Monarch men have exceeded their predecessors in
heresies and blasphemies: Such carnal flesh-pleasing conceits, breed carnal
practices. It Is well observed by a learned man, That D. Owen in his sermon. on
Dan. 7. 15. page 13, 14.
those who degenerate from the spirituality of the rule of Christ, and delight
therein, have degenerated into carnal apprehensions of the glory and beauty of
it, such have for the most part been given up to carnal actings, suitable to
such apprehensions, and have been so dazzled with gazing after temporal glory,
that the Kingdom which comes not by observation, has been vile in their eyes:
so he. As the gross and carnal Millenaries are led by their lusts, so it is
observed, that the most spiritual of that way have their errors. Our natures
are very apt in times of prosperity, to think our mountain so strong, that it
will never be moved. In Episcopal times, when such men prospered and carried
the day, they began to sing, Datur body Ecclesia triumphans; but presently
after, they found they were mistaken, for it was Ecclesia militans. In a fair
day we are apt to think the clouds are gone to bed, and we shall see them again
no more; when experience tells us, the hotter the gleam is, the sooner the
storm comes; even the Apostles when they had but a little rest, began to dream
of some such earthly Reign; and therefore they ask Christ whether he would not
now restore the Kingdom to Israel? Acts 1. 6, 7. But let not us so dream of
reigning here, that we miss of reigning hereafter, but in our greatest peace
and prosperity, let us remember the days of adversity, for they may be many.
Let Us get our part in the first resurrection, let Christ reign in us, and over
us; let him subdue our lusts, and set up his Kingdom in our hearts here, and
then we shall reign with him for ever.

It Is the fault of many, they are so taken up with the thoughts of reigning
here with Christ, that they forget they must shortly be judged by him: They
study prophesies more then precepts, and enquire more after future events; then
their present duty. But let no man deceive you with vain words, nor beguile you
with empty, new notions, but enquire for the good old way of Truth and
Holiness, and walk therein, so shall you find rest for your souls. Jer. 6. 16.

If any desire further satisfaction, he may peruse M. Petry, M. Hayne, D.
Prideaux Lect. 13. and Fasciculus, cap. 7. q. 4. Mr Bayly's Disswasive, 1. p.
c. 11. Mr Love, Ser. 5. on Colos. 3, 4. Ross his View of all Religions, Sect.
12. Q. 8. p. 370. Edit. 2. and above all, B. Hall's little Tract, called The
Revelation unrevealed.

FINIS.

