News from the North: OR, A TRVE RELATION OF THE Affairs in those Parts, And
in SCOTLAND.

Being a LETTER Sent to a Friend from Penrith in Cumberland, the 23. of JUNE,
1648.

AND Published for the satisfaction of those that desire to be truly informed
of the present condition of those PLACES.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Cotes, 1648.

News from the North; OR A TRVE RELATION Of the Affairs in those parts, and in
SCOTLAND.
Honored Sir,
ALthough I have but little to acquaint you with since my last, yet because I
would omit no opportunity of letting you understand our condition, I have
directed these to your hands; providence has so ordered it, that through
exceeding unseasonablenes of the weather in these parts, and the continued
expectation of assistance out of Lancashire, we have done little but secured
our own quarters at this Town, which are now eaten up; to morrow or next day
we advance toward Carlisle: the Lancashire* Foot and Horse (so they are called
here) coming up to us as we expect, they are now but 16. miles from us, their
number 2000. Horse and Foot; our Head*quarters I presume will be about Berwick
bridge three miles from Carlisle, it being judged the best place to enforce the
enemy without the Town to an engagement or a flight, whose numbers are not
above half so many as reported, all not exceeding 3000. in the field in these
parts; some part of their Horse are advanced into Northumberland to Marpeth,
between Anwicke and Newcastle; if our advance to Berwicke bridge do not cause
their retreat, ours settled there we intend to send after them. Many daily come
out of Scotland to us, both English and Scottish, but few Olive branches
brought by either; the tidings sad relating to honesty, or honest men, some
Ministers already executed, more imprisoned, all that endeavor to oppose or
obstruct the present furious proceedings of the now prevalent party, are by
power given to a Committee for that purpose to be secured, their goods to be
confiscated. Their oath is framed and urged already upon the Nobility and
Peers, but none other; upon it Lowden the Chancellor, and Louthian, Warriston,
and several other Lords and Gentlemen are fled, but not known whether. Orders
are issued out to all Ports to make stop of them; there was a purpose of the
honest Gentlemen, and others well affected to honesty, in the West part of that
Kingdom, to have embodyed to the number of 10000. but prevented by the advance
of Leivtenant General Middleton thither, so as not above the number of 1500.
got together, those he summoned and willed to return to their homes; this drew
off most, yet fearing it was but a design to catch their persons, resolved to
outbid all adventures, and would ot stir, 300. of these Leivtenant Middleton
forced to a water side, that they must either yield or fight, the latter of
which they chose and did it with much courage, that they beat off his Horse, and
put them to a rout and flight, thereby got opportunity to secure themselves in
Galloway a garrison of Argiles, 500. more being all that stayed of the 1500.
which had been old Soldiers, got into a Bog for their own preservation, which
was after beset by the Horse, but as yet we know not what is become of them.
Argile has been sent to by the now late Committee of Estates, to know the
reason why his two Regiments now with him yield not obedience to the commands
of the present officers of the Army; he replied he would examine it, and
shortly return them an account or a reason of it. Middleton, Bartlett, Vrry,
(not Colonel Vrry) Gibbs of Essex, these all have accepted of Commands under
the General Hamilton. Old Leven, David Lish^y, Holbourne, Carr a Colonel at
Plymouth; Leivtenant Colonel Carr Leivtenant Colonel to Middleton, and
several, yea most of the Officers formerly employed by themselves, and we in
England have refused. Honest men say, never was there such a sad persecu^ion in
that Kingdom, yet God has exceedingly emboldened the spirits of the Ministry
and others to withstand them, as if deliverance were behind the Curtain for
them; all confess, no visible help to them but by this Army, or part of its
sudden advance into that Kingdom, which how God may please in his wise
providence to order I cannot tell; much has God been pleased to teach them of
a spirit of forbearance toward such as they deemed Brethren, confessing their
error in their rigid pressing to a conformity. I am almost persuaded in my own
heart, God has a design in this to unite the spirirs of the Saints in both
Nations each to other, by making them see a need of one another. It made my
heart almost to bleed, to hear some of them confess it was a wise dispensation
of the Almighty, that they who had it in purpose, and endeavor to persecute
others, should first taste of that cup, yea from the hands of such which they
thought to have made isntrumental for the other, and that God should so order
it, that those whom they judged could not upon prudentiall grounds be suffered
to cohabit with them, or be so much as their neighbors, should now become the
only visible safety, or hopes of such under God to them. I have done with
this; I have no further to acquaint you with, but the increase of the enemy
about Pomfret, and their late endeavors to surprise Nottingham, York,
Hempsley, and Bolton Castles.

Sir, I am your most affectionate Kinsman, H. H.

FINIS.

