THE SERMON AND PROPHECY OF Mr. JAMES HVNT of the County of Kent.

Who professes himself a Prophet, Which he has endeavored to deliver in
most Churches in and about London, but since delivered in the Old Bailey. October.
9. 1641.

Written with his own hand.

Prophet Hunt.
James Hunt talks to a crowd from a lectern

Printed for Thomas Bates, 1641.

A plain and brief exhortation to show unto all people the true and perfect
way how they may be delivered from the bondage of Hell and Corruption, into the
glorious liberty of the children of God.
Wherefore Christian Reader, I Prophet Hunt, do beseech you for the mercies of
God and the true love that is in Jesus Christ, that you will read this Book
thorough with observation, which I hope will be to your everlasting joy and
glory.
St. Paul said unto Timothy in the 2. Epist. Chap. 2. verse. 5. Study to show
thy self approved unto God, a workman that needs not to be ashamed, rightly
dividing the word of Truth, so all those places of Scripture in the new
Testament which does belong to the glorious body of Christ, I gather into one
body to the praise and glory of God, and to the edifying of the hearers, but on
the other side all those places of Scripture which does concern the old Law
which Christ has redeemed us from, and false doctrine of carnal men, I gather
that into another Body and do prove that belongs to the body of corruption,
and bears image of the earthy.

Now J come to my text in the 4. Galath. verse. 4.
WHen the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman
made under the law to redeem them that were under the Law, that we might
receive the adopt^on of Sons, but the Divines that are under the authority of
the Bishops, they say that Christ has redeemed us but from the Ceremony of the
old Law, but the Morality thereof shall abide for ever, which they say is the
10. Commandments, so they keep the Old Testimony still in use, because of the
10, Commandments, but I can by the help and power of God plainly prove, that
the Ministration of the new Testament does make mention of a twofold Law and
Commandments, one to be unto death and condemnation, the other to be unto
everlasting life and justification, for Christ Jesus is the Law and the
Commandments in the Doctrine of the New Testament, which is the book of life,
for God gave him to be head over all things to the Church which is his body,
the fullness of him that fills all in all, for the Priesthood being changed,
there is made of necessity a change also of the Law, H^b. 7.^.12. for he of
whom those things are spoken pertains to another tribe of which no man gave
attendance at the Altar, for it is evident that our Lord sprung out of Judah,
of which tribe Moses speak nothing concerning Priesthood, and it is yet far
more evident for that after the similitude of Melchezadeck, there arises
another Priest who is made not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but
after the power of an endless life, for the Lord swears and will not repent,
thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizadeck, by so much as Jesus
made a surety of a better Testament, ver. 21. for in that he says, a new
Covenant, a new Testament, he has made the first old, now that which decays
and waxes old is ready to vanish away, Heb. 8. v. 13. for there is verily a
disanulling of the Commandment going before, Heb. 7. v. 18. A disanulling
signifies a putting away, and to make void, for the Commandment which was
ordained to life, I found that to be unto death, Romans 7. v. 10. for Christ has
abolished death, and has brought Mortality into light, as I prove, Ephe. 2. v.
15. having abolished in his flesh the emnity, even the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances for to make in himself of twain, one in man so making
peace, and that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Cross,
having slain the emnity thereby that is Sin and death, thereby he says he
has abolished in his flesh the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances,
which I shall plainly prove to be the Ministration of the old Testament, which
St. Paul calls the Ministration of death, for he says in the second Epistle
to the Cor. ver. 7. if the Ministration of death, written and engraven in
stones was glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly behold
the face of Moses, or the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done
away, J understand the 10 Commandments was delivered to Moses on Tables of
stone, and a Ministration was raised thereby, and circumcision and those
Ordinances which are named in the 9. chap. Heb. ver. 19. did belong to the old
Testament, for when Moses had spoken every precept to all the people, according
to the Law he took the blood of Calves and of Goats, with water and scarlet
Wool and Isope, and sprinkled both the book and all the people, he says
plainly, he sprinkled both the book and all the people; saying, this is the
blood of the Testament which God has enjoined unto you, thus I have plainly
proved that Circumcision and those Ordinances which here I have named, did
belong to the Old Testament, which is the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances, which Christ has abolished by his Passion on the Cross, which is
the Antichristian flesh and blood which gendereth to the body of corruption,
and bears Image of the Earthy, but on the other side, I understand and prove
that Baptism and the Sacrament of Bread and Wine they are two holy Ordinances
which does belong to the glorious body of Jesus Christ, which is the true
Christian flesh and blood which lives and abides forever, again I can prove
the whole Doctrine of the New Testament is all the Commanding power of God to
teach and instruct his people how they should endeavor themselves what to
follow, and what they should fly, my first prove is in the 28. of Matthew. ver.
18. Jesus came and spoke unto his Disciples, saying all power is given unto me
in Heaven and in Earth, go ye therefore and teach all Nation, Baptising them
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, teaching
them to observe all those things whatsoever I have commanded you; again in the
1 of the Cor. 14. chap. ver. 29. Then the Apostle speaks unto the Church,
saying; Let the Prophet speak two or three, and let the other judge, for ye
all may Prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted.

Again, in the 37. verse, he says, if any man think himself to be a
Prophet or Spiritual, Let him acknowledge that the things that I write unto
you, are the Commandments of the Lord, now in all this Chapter he does not
make mention of any one of those Commandments which was delivered to Moses on
Tables of Stone, yet he says plainly, the things that I write unto you, are
the Commandments of the Lord which does prove and justify as I said before,
the whole Doctrine of the New Testament is all the commanding power of God, for
to admonish his people what to follow, what they should fly.

Again, in the fifteen Chapter of St. John, verse 14. Christ said, ye are my
friends, if you do those things whatsoever I have commanded you, and Christ is
the Mediator of the New Testament, Heb^. 9. and Saint Paul says, God has
made us able Ministers of the New Testament, 2. Cor. 3. chap. verse 6. not of
the Letter but of the Spirit, for the Letter kills, but the Spirit gives
life, that is, the Law kills, but the Gospel gives life, for Christ says
plainly, John 5. ver. 24. Verily verily, I say unto you, he that hears my
word and believes on him that sent me has everlasting life, and shall not
come into condemnation, but he is passing from death to life, that is, from
the death and bondage of sin and Satan, by the virtue and Divine power of the
word of God in the new Testament which is the life of grace. Again in the 13.
chap. Romans ver. 6. for this thou shall not commit Adultery, thou shall not
kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false witness, thou shall
not cover, and if there be any other Commandments, it is briefly comprehended
in this saying, namely; thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, that is,
God would have every man as he would his neighbor should do unto him, so he
should endeavor himself for to do unto his neighbor, love works no ill to
his neighbor, therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law of the Spirit of
life, for God is love, and he that dwells in love dwells in God, and in
him, herein is our love made perfect, that we have bo^dnesse in the day of
Judgment, because as he is, so are we in this world, general of John. 4. so I
praise God am I in this world, for God does not desire that any should perish,
but rather all should come to the knowledge of his Truth and be saved, even so
it is now with me, for he that is joined ^o the Lord is one Spirit, and the
Spirit of God draws but one way that is unto Jesus Christ, and to the
obedience of his glorious Gospel.

Wherefore now by the help and power of God, I will say with St. Paul as it is
written in the 1 of Cor. 1. chap. v. 20. Where is the wise? Where is the
Disputer of this world? I pray where now is the Devil and the Pope and all his
carnal Ministers, with all their dead Doctrines of darkness which are always
teaching and preaching upon the Law and the Commandments, and yet alas for
pity, they are so blinded in their Doctrine and in their Judgment, that they
do not discern betwixt the Law and the Commandments which are unto death and
condemnation from the Law and the Commandments which God has ordained to
everlasting life and justification, for I have plainly proved that the
Ministration of the Old Testament is the Law of Commandments contained in
Ordinances which Christ has abolished by his Passion on the Cross, which is
unto death and condemnation, but on the other side I have proved that Christ
Jesus is the Law and Commandments in the New Testament, which is unto
everlasting life and justification the fullness of him that fills all in all,
It is written in the 13 Revel. ver. 10. and I heard a loud voice saying in
Heaven, now is come Salvation, and strength, and the Kingdom of our God and
the power of his Christ, which is the powerful preaching of his word in his
Gospel and the accuser of the Brethren is cast down, which accused the
Brethren before our God day and night, the accuser of our Brethren plainly
signifies for to be the Devil and all his carnal Ministers, which by that
authority that is given unto them, they keep the Children of God under the old
Law and false Doctrine of carnal men, which I have proved, and shall prove to
be the strength of sin and death to condemnation, but now I make no doubt but
the Children of God which shall be reconciled unto Christ and to his glorious
Gospel, they will rise so powerfully against the Devil and all his carnal
Ministers, that their Hellish power will be broken quite down, and now that
saying will be brought to ^asse that is written in the 1 Cor. 15. chap. v. 54.
death shall be swallowed up into victory, death shall be swallowed up of life:
Oh Death where is thy sting, on Grave where is thy victory, Satan where is thy
Victory, the sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but
thanks be unto God which has given us the Victory through Jesus Christ our
Lord, so I thank God he has given me the Victory by the virtue and Divine
power of his word in his Gospel, which is by Jesus Christ our Lord, for the
^^rength of sin is the Law, wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, Ro^. 5. v. 12. sin entered into Adam, and death by sin, and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned again by the offense of one man,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation, ver. 18. Moreover the Law entered
that the offense might abound, but where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound by one Jesus Christ, ver. 20. for he was delivered for our offenses, and
was raised again for our Justification, therefore being justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. v. 1. wherefore then
serves the Law the Apostle says plainly, Gallath. 3. chap. v. 19. It was
added because of transgression till the seed should come, till Christ should
come, wherefore St. John says plainly in his 1. chap. Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the world, which takes away the sins of his
people by his Passion on the Cross, for the strength of sin is the Law, and
the Devil and all his carnal Ministers, they are yet the strength of sin,
for by that authority that is given to them, they keep the Children of God
under unbelief, for Christ Jesus in the end of the Law, for Righteousness to
every one that believes, Romans 10. chap. ver. 4. for God has made him to be
sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the Righteousness of God
in him, and we in him, and he in us, by the virtue and Divine power of his word
in his Gospel, which lives in us, 2 Cor. chap. 5. ver. 21. for the word of
God is quick and powerful, and sharper then any two edged Sword, Heb. 4.
First, it is quick in apprehension for to divide betwixt the Law and the
Gospel. Secondly, it is powerful for to draw the people from the bondage of
Hell and corruption into the glorious liberty of the Children of God, for God
will finish the work and cut it short in Righteousness, because a short work
will the Lord make upon the Earth, Romans 9. chap. v. 28. for Christ must reign,
but he has put down all Rule, and all authority, and power, and Dominion
under his feet, that is, all false Doctrine and false worships which belongs
to the Devil and the power of his Kingdom, the last enemy that shall be
destroyed is death, and then comes the end, hereby I plainly understand when
the Ministration of the blood of the New Testament, which is the power of God
everlasting life and justification, shall overthrow the old Law, and all false
Doctrine of carnal men, which I have plainly proved to be the strength of
sin and death to condemnation, then there shall be an end of the outward man
in the flesh; for all the Children of God shall be gathered into the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, by the powerful preaching
of his word in the Doctrine of the New Testament, which is the inward man in
the Spirit, therefore being saved and justified freely by grace, we all have
peace with God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Now the God of love and peace who
has brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus that great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. chap. He says,
the great Shepherd of the Sheep: wherefore I acknowledge there is but one
God, and there must and shall be but one Religion, one Shepherd, and one
Sheepfold, and this is the means which God has ordained for to gather the
Sheep into one fold, is by the powerful preaching of his word in the Doctrine
of the New Testament, and we know that the Son of God is come and has given
us an understanding that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that
is true even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and eternal life,
unto whom be all praise, honor, glory, power, might, Dominion, and Majesty,
both now and evermore, Amen.

I acknowledge that David's Psalms shall abide for ever, those which are in
proose for to be read for Divine service, and those which are in meeter for the
people to sing to the praise and glory of God.

Christian Brethren, I have written a book here in brief upon many principal
points of Scripture concerning the overthrow of the Devil and the false
Church, but by the help of God, I have another book which will come out very
shortly to declare these things unto you more at large.

FINIS,

