A Famous VICTORY Obtained before the City of Exeter, on Sunday January 1. by
Captain PYM, Against Sir Ralph Hopton, and the Cornish CAVALIERS Where after
four hours fight, he obtained a glorious Victory, and slew above a thousand
of the Cavaliers, and took 38. Prisoners, and 7. pieces of Ordnance, with the
loss of a hundred men at the most.

Being the Copy of a Letter, sent from Lieutenant HYWORD, To his worthy
Friend, inhabiting in the City of London.

Bearing date January 2. 1643.

January 6. Printed for I. H. and T. Finch, 1643.

A Famous VICTORY: Obtained by Captain Pym, before the City of EXETER. Against
Sir Ralph Hopton; And the rest of the Cornish Cavaliers.
Sir,
MY Love to you, having so fit an opportunity (by reason my Captain had
occasion to send a Post to London, J did esteem it a tie of Friendship, to
salute you with this short Scedule, wherein is contained a general of our
Proceedings since my last Letter.

On Christmas day we had a falce allarum, by reason that some three Hundred of
Sir Ralph Hoptons Troopers had scouted out, and were pillaging the Country
Vilages thereabouts, by which means the Country rose, and we were commanded to
leave the Church, and Arm our selves, the City being all in an uprore, but
before we could quit the City, and arrive at the place where the Cavaliers
were, (notwithstanding though the inhabitants had made some opposition, to the
loss of six men,) yet they were escaped, and got into Kings-bridge, where Sir
Ralph Hopton himself is quartered, so that for that time we retreated to the
City, which at our return we found pretty well appeased.

All the week after we did little, only we sent out parties to discover
whether the Cavaliers made any attempt upon any part of the County, but they
lay very close not making the least attempt, only we were informed that Sir
Ralph Hopton called a general Muster, but how many he mustered we can by no
means get certain knowledge of, but the report is that he is about five
thousand strong.

Thus we continued till Sunday morning (being Newyeares-day) about three of the
clock in the morning, J being riding the Round, to discover whether my
Centries did their duty carefully, on a sudden J discovered near forty
Horsemen stealing upon my Centries, and one of their Pistols immediately went
off by an accident, (as was confessed by one that was afterward taken prisoner)
which the Centries hearing, discharged their Carbines, and retreated to the
Court of Guard, and in a quarter of an Hour the City was in a posture of
defense, only the cries of women and Chilldren did so trouble us, that J
profess J had rather oppose an Enemy in the field, though with some
disadvantage. then to endure that torment in a City most strongly fortefied.

During this hurly-burly the day aproched and then we might discover a mighty
strength which had begirt the City on each side, and planted Ordnance against
our Bulworkes, at which they fired nere thirty times endeavoring to dismount
our Ordnance, but did us little hurt, only killed five of our metroses, and one
Caunonier.

During this time our Cannons played at them, doing indifferent good execution,
for they lay open to us upon the side of a hill which lies on the south side of
the City.

Thus they held us play on every side for the space of three houers, insomuch
that we were almost spent and tired out. especially on that part of the City
which lies North-east, for by the violence of the Enemy our men was beaten from
the works, and they began to draw so nigh the wall that they began to cast
Grenades over the wall into the City.

And one remarkable token of Gods mercy to us J cannot omit, one Thomas Smith
with a bull-hide fell upon six Grenades, at several times and put them out
before they broke, and came off unhurt, which other wise would have done great
mischeife.

The enemy finding that that part of the City began to give way to them drew up
their maine forces, to that place leaving their Ordnance playing against us,
guarded with some small number of men, which my Captain espying, drew up part
of his men to the number of eight hundred and sallied out upon them, and with
the loss of five and twenty men he ceized their Ordnance, and took seventeene
Cannoniers Prisoners.

By this time the Contry came in and fell upon Sir Ralph Hoptons Rear, and Cap
taine Pym upon his flancke with his own Ordnance so mauled him that presently
he retreated, and having got clear of our forces betook himself to flight, in
this battle we slew above a thousand of his men, and lost not above
fourscore, or a hundred at the most, besides we took^ seven pieces of
Artillery. and eigth and thirty prisoners, but none of any Note, and now we are
in greater hope then ever, that we shall put Sir Ralph Hopton to a Nonplus,
fot my Captain is resolved to pursue him, and use all means to prevent his
making Head again.

This is all that for this time J have to write, only as occasion shall offer
it self I shall give you information of our suture proceedings.

Your Friend and Servant, Abell Hyword.
Exeter, January. 2. 1643.
FINIS

