To the Right Honorable, the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament.
RIght Honorable, I have ever thought it the duty of us Ministers to debate
matters of doctrine, which is jus divinum, amongst our selves, so as that we
might all agree in the things that should be taught among the people; which
blessing of unity, would certainly in a great measure be granted to us of God,
if we were set in such a station that we might use the means (which were
Schools of Divinity:) were we set into Classes, and from our youth kept in the
exercise of Divinity disputation, before we were swaied with ambitious ends,
truth would in a great measure appear to us, which is now hid: truth is but
one, the Gospel is the Gospel of peace: it is our ignorance of truth and of
the Gospel, that makes us at such distance in opinions: now there is no such
means in all the world to acquire knowledge, as disputation: therefore is that
art which has truth for its end, studied, and gotten in Schools of
Disputation: I mean Logic, Rhetoric is ornatus, the beauty or ornament of
speech. Now though persons of greatest quality do usually wear the richest
garments, yet garments of greatest value may be borrowed, and put upon the
poorest slave and vilest beggar: the falsest and least probable matter is
capable of curious ornament of words, where it is a matter of the greatest
skill in the world to find out the truth, among these colors of Rhetoric:
and those things that ought not to be taught, will most forcibly draw disciples
after their teachers. At this time, ye may here the Pulpits filled with eager
and earnest persuasions to accept of the government of Christ, set up in the
word of God, without any argument out of Gods word, to prove that Christ set
up any such government as they aim at.

If any argument can be produced, it is fit we all should know it: and if so
the word of God, and the authority of Christ, must not be bounded by any
authority on earth; no power among the sons of men may limit the Holy One of
Israel.

If Christ has set officers in his Church, Kings and Nobles and Senators must
stoop to them: this intermixing of the Parliament authority, with divine, is
but dawbing, if it be any other then an acknowledgement of duty of submission,
if Christ has set up any government in his Church to be executed by Church
officers.

As for giving leave to execute discipline, as to preach the word, that is but
a fraud; you may indeed, nay you ought to receive the word of God not for your
selves alone, but for the whole Nation, as being the Representative Body
thereof: you may require a Covenant over all the Kingdom to wait on the means
not by pieces and parcells, but the whole word which ought to have a free
passage, not by plurality of votes, but by an unanimous consent of the
Preachers.

That the word ought to be so preached, is plain by these arguments.

First, Christ gave a Commission to preach the Gospel unto his disciples,
which was to last unto the end of the world, in which there was no Quorum,
duobus tribus vel pluribus vestrum, by which they might not preach but by an
universal consent.

If any shall object, that the Apostles walked by an higher principle even by
the ducture of an infallible spirit.

I answer, first the Commission was penned in words that must last to the end
of the world by which we must walk.

2. The infallibility of the Spirit by which the Apostles walked, did imply an
impossibility of dissent.

3. Though the Apostles did know that it was impossible for them to disagree in
their doctrine, yet St. Paul went up by the Spirit to communicate his doctrine
to other of the Apostles James and Peter, lest in regard of the people he had
run in vain; he knew the unity of the Preachers would prevail much among the
people. Gal. 2.2.

2. Secondly, St. Paul wrote to Timothy to charge those that taught any other
doctrine that they should not, whereby it appears that he had a care that no
other doctrine might be taught but one. 1 Timothy 1.3.

3. Christ promised his presence among two or three that are gathered together
in his name, he promised nothing to the major part of such an assembly: this
gathering together cannot be understood of a local, but a gathering by the
Spirit into an unity of mind and judgment: Christ's promises attend on the
performance of our duties, when we do our duties we may expect a blessing. St.
Paul to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.10. beseeches them by the name of our Lord
Jesus, that they all speak the same thing, that there be no divisions among
them, but that they be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the
same judgment; where you see he urges them by the name, by the reverence and
honor that they bear to the name of Christ, that they be of one mind: those
that are gathered together in the name of Christ are of one mind; I do not
say, that all those to the number of two or three that are of one mind are
gathered in the name of Christ: nay the gathering in the name is differenced
from other ambitious and heretical gatherings, cumulo accidentium, whereof
this being of one mind is one; such a gathering together is worthy the
presence of Christ, seldom can many agree in one judgment that Christ does
not unite in any thing that tends to the glory of God.

Ob. Some may say that it is impossible that men should be all of one mind so
much division is found among us.

Resp. I answer, that this unity has not been sought after, means have not
been used for the obtaining it: all things have been carried by vote, and the
dissenting party kept under by censure, accompained with fire and sword under
Antichristian Tyranny: the truth was kept under by the vote of the ambitious,
and Schools wholly, neglected, or used only more imperato; questions not
stated by Scripture, but the Scripture overswayed by humane authority.

I confess I conceive it necessary for Classes and Assemblies to meet, but
their business is only about matters of their Commission, about preaching the
word, to communicate their doctrine, and by dispute to find out the truth:
their disputes ought to end in a brotherly accord, as in Act. 15. much
disputing, but all ended in accord, no putting to the vote.

Votes have too great an influence upon the will to decide matters of doctrine
by them: men may vote what they have an interest to dispose of, I may vote my
estate and liberty, but willworship is unlawful: I mean the matters that are
essential to Gods worship which are matters of duty, as for circumstantialls
of time and place (except the Sabbath) which are matters of liberty; in these
things the Commonwealth may vote, and the Ministers must by the duty of their
place preach the Gospel when and where they can get any to hear in season and
out of season; and this is your Christian liberty that in matters of liberty,
ye make rules and laws to your selves, not crossing the ends that you are tied
to in duty: but if Assemblies of Ministers might make Canons, and bind men to
obedience under penalty of excommunication; what were this other then to Lord
it over the flock? or what were this, if not teaching for doctrines the
precepts of men? but this is endeavored to be amended by intermixing of
Lay Elders what ground they have for that, will, I hope, appear if the whole
matter come into just concertation by dint of argument.

In the mean time, if the State think fit to suffer the Assembly to vote what
they do is but humane, one good reason is better then many votes in matters of
doctrine, and matters of government, it wholly belongs to the Civil
Magistrate, this should be rightly considered on; what is Christ's cannot be
remitted to you if by him placed in other hands; if he has set up government
in the Church, it must be far above all government in a Christian Commonwealth:
and it were sacrilege of the highest nature for you to restrain Christ's
officers by any power; if you put the matter to vote in the Assembly, they will
hereafter tell you of it in both ears. But if ye desire to know the truth, by
that time Schools of Divinity be up but half the time the Assembly have sat,
ye shall find more the present condition of things, require your present
action.

You may, you ought to covenant for the whole Kingdom, for time, place, and
maintenance of Gods worship: you have (as the great Sanhedrim of the Kingdom)
power to judge of false worship: you may make use of the sword to drive out
Idolatry and will worship, and accordingly may require all men in the Kingdom,
to come to the several Parish Churches of their abode, and require such as you
receive for the Preachers of truth, to send able men to supply the places, and
that without any regard to the allowance and disallowance of the people. I know
these be the great questions of the times, and high time it is the truth were
known concerning them.

It is time some course were taken to bring men to Church, which Independent
principles make scruple, whether the Magistrate ought to do, unless they like
their Minister: but upon this ground, let the Minister be who he will, the
Drunkard will like the Alehouse better then the Church: and this liberty that
men take to absent themselves from their Parish Churches, give men opportunity
to meet and raise tumults, plots, seditions; and how dangerous these things may
speedily be, if not prevented, let wise men judge. Oh that this Honorable
Court would hasten to set up Classes consisting only of Ministers, whose work
should be only to preach the word, and weekly meet in Schools of Divinity,
where they might not spend their times in examining of Whores and Knaves, ye
may take another course with them: but let them dispute, and nurse up young
Scholars, who being first made artists in the Universities, they may be
acquainted with, and not lay hands rashly upon a testimony, and so send them
out to places that want: and as for government, you know sure, that to come to
Church is a duty neglect, a sin and punishable; and what else the Ministers
know censurable, you know as well as they, and you ought to punish: but having
first set down the sin and punishment, not at the discretion of the Minister
and his two Elders, which yet ought to be according to the Presbyterian
principles.

Only for matter of knowledge, that of all things principally belongs to the
care of the Minister: and I could wish before this Assembly were dissolved, a
clear and full Catechism were agreed on, short and pithy, that might be
required of all communicants in the Kingdom, old and young, high and low, and
all compelled to it by your authority, that so the same thing might be taught
throughout the whole Kingdom.

As for Independents and Anabaptists, let them be admitted, nay condemned to
spend their times in Schools, and not permitted to seduce the people, that so
at last all things may be carried with strength of argument, and unanimous
consent of the whole Clergy, which would soon come amongst them, if they did
not rely on their parties and drawing disciples, and deciding matters by votes.

Again, votes are of no other use, but to gather parties, and ought no where
to be used but by those that have power of the sword, to compel the dissenting
parties, and therefore are penalties to terrify and keep under the dissenting
part annexed to such laws as pass by vote. I pray God it be not in the mind
of some of our times to get parties, and put the carrying on their ends by the
determination of the sword. A learned and pious Ministry do not desire to
carry all by vote, but a lazy, ambitious, proud Clergy: an industrious,
learned, wait with patience on them that are contrary minded for the day of
Gods visitation, in the mean time use all means: the proud man will take no
pains to use means but vote him down, away with him to the devil; it is
fault enough to cross them, such as stand in their ways are fools and knaves
not fit to be heard or consulted with; let it be considered whether parties in
General Counsels, have not made parties for the sword: I am a stranger to the
State whether they do not make parties among Lords and Commons, if they do
not, I pray God they may not, I know it is very far from the duties of their
places that ought to be peacemakers.

Learning is low, and pride is high among the Clergy, I speak not this with
reference to what any man's particular diligence has made him; yet I dare say,
every honest man will confess, had all the Kingdom been exercised in
Schools of Divinity since the Reformation, where ipse dixit had been the word
of God, a great difference would have been in Ministers from what they are.

I know men use to say, Learning is not so needful as holiness: I answer, it is
not an holy thing for a Minister not to use all means to be learned; holiness
and learning will do well together.

But an holy Minister ought not administer the Sacrament to a wicked person: I
confess there was a time in my youth that I thought so, and being pressed to
do it, did use all means to make them as knowing as I could, which I conceive
still to be my duty, but not able sufficiently to satisfy my self in point
of manner: I found Vrsine and others, say, that if I were careful to present
notorious offenders to them that had power, I had done my duty, yet still me
thought I was not clean handed, if the duty lay upon me to examine and try the
due preparation of the receiver.

But upon further consideration, I found the Minister charged only with
preaching and baptizing, which being performed with such zeal and diligence as
is needful, is abundantly a sufficient employment.

Objection: ought not the Minister to have regard to the holiness of his
flock? may all come without respect, though never so wicked and unholy, and be
partaker of Sacraments?

R. I answer, they may not, it is a very great and dangerous sin if they come
without repentance, faith and charity, wherein the Minister must instruct his
people publicly and privately, and that with answerable zeal to the
ignorance and stubbornness of the people; he must preach the duty of the
Magistrate to him: first, to make laws that may compel all men to a reverent
attendance on the means if he be a Christian Magistrate, if he be not a
Christian Magistrate, he must endeavor his conversion: when wholesome and holy
laws are made, he must instantly call upon that Magistrate that is put in trust
to punish sin, that he put wholesome laws in execution to put sin to shame;
that as sin is a work of darkness, so no man may presume to commit it in the
sight of the Sun: if this were done, what scandal could be given to the Church
if any should be found guilty before and after receiving Sacraments, the Law
may appoint that a double punishment, as being a double offense? in some cases
restrain him of his liberty to come to Sacraments as the Law shall be agreed
on: in the mean time, let the Minister plye both the Magistrate and offender
with the mighty operative word of God, private Christians using their private
interest to reclaim the sinner. If this be not the way of God, I am mistaken,
if any further power can be proved out of Gods word to be in the hand of the
Minister, I shall be content to use it: In the mean time, let no man that has
voted himself high, or has gotten a great opinion among men, despise
arguments that come from an obscurer person: I conceive the Minister may use,
nay must, any sharpness the word uses against sin, and then betake himself
to his prayers to God to make his doctrine fruitful: what more is in the duty
of his place, I know not, unless using of means to make him able to do that:
if this be not a means to shame and cudgel sin to corners, I know not what
can. But suppose the Magistrate does not do his duty, then let the Minister
bend the power of the word upon him, and no doubt if Ministers could agree in
their doctrine, much would be the power of the word: We see the Magistrate come
and sit before us, and we hope without an Idol in their hearts. Oh that the
Lord would put a word in due season into the mouth of his Ministers, that might
be the word of peace unto them!

Oh that Ministers, would lay down the rigor of their opinions in point of
Discipline, and set themselves to attend on the means to increase their
knowledge, and to acquaint themselves with one another studies in an
industrious way, that they would unbend their thought of government a while,
and think on ways to get knowledge; I am not worthy to censure others, I know
my own defects, and do complain of the times and want of means to know more:
I wish that all men of skill would examine what Logic may be found in many of
those Rethoricall Sermons which the world so much run after, how well the
Divinity of many of them is taught that are so finely worded; how right they
hit the argument of their text, which if they miss, they preach themselves and
not Christ, their own minds and not the mind of God: nay let men of piety
examine whether Mr. Gillespie, though a man of excellent parts, proved his
reformation by his Ecclesiastical discipline out of the words of his text,
whether that refiners fire and fullers soap does not point at another and a
nearer operation upon the souls and spirits of men by the blood of Christ,
then his Reformation that he so eagerly presses, and then see whether we want
not Schools; if men of his parts want them, Sanctius, hoc vero Christi
doctrina facit: and cites Jer. 23.29. to prove the purgation by doctrine and
operation of the word, Is not my word an hammer: And Clement Alexandirnus,
(...). Theodoret, divina gratia, tanqua^ herba peceatorum sordes ^luit. Let it
be further examined whether the choice of a similitude for a text which is but
illustrative, and draw what men fancy out of the similitude, and passing by
the argumentative part, be to preach the mind of God, or men's own fancy,
whether this Rethoricall liberty do fill all the world with such diversities of
opinions. Ornament of words call weak judgment to admiration, but incumber
the truth, if not imbezell and steal it quite away, whereas strength of
argument does inform the judgment; men talk much of having their affections
wrought upon; these cannot be wrought upon to salvation, but by the still voice
of the Spirit: I deny not, but fine words and smooth cadencies of sentences,
may work naturally upon the affections, but the effect of it is but as the
blade that sprang up in stony ground, such Religion unto which men are led by
the eloquence of the Preacher when it shall be charged with greater trial
then nature will bear, their affection that were led with natural delight
will sink under the disquietnesse of nature: I condemn not Rethoricke, but
suspect it and wish it may be well cemented with judgment, and not used to
such that have no skill to deceive themselves, and them that hear them; let
the Parliament set us to our work, punish us for our idleness, and afford
such encouragement by public laws that men of choicest parts may be induced
to the work of the Ministry: those that would persuade you that public
provision ought not to be made for preaching the Gospel by tithes or
otherwise, would make all Nations, heathen and Idolaters, not to have any
public interest in the Gospel; those would have the State always to stand
at defiance with Religion. The Lord grant Assemblies, Parliaments to be at one
among themselves, and one with another. Those therefore that cannot agree among
themselves cannot be said to bring the Gospel; those that allow diversities of
opinions, and claim a liberty to preach what they list: I wish that the
Parliament would set up but one learned School of Divinty, and condemn the
principal patrons of that Independent opinion into those Schools, where they
should do exercise among others, I make no question they would be soon
converted or confounded, and left without any word to say in defense of that
groundless doctrine. I had good hope that they would have agreed in the
Assembly, after two years dispute; I could have been content with small faults
if piety and peace might have been settled. I hope there be witnesses enough
that I set them not at odds, I shall endeavor to make them friends, if reason
will do it.

Your servant, W. Hussy.

To the Right Worshipful Sir Thomas Walsingham, Knight.
Right Worshipful,
I Am bold to Dedicate the first fruits of my Labors in this kind unto your
view and patronage, unto whom I know the intention is not unwelcome, as aiming
at the conjunction of the State and Ministers of the Word in peace and unity,
that hitherto have been kept at distance by these dividing principles, arising
from a twofold distinct government, which being agreed on to be but one (and I
hope to make appear they ought not to be diverse) would for ever silence those
implacable differences that have long time been between them, and remain a
hard matter to reconcile at this time. Sir, I have ever observed your aim to
be at peace, and justice to keep of violence and oppression from all men, so
far as your trust and employment (which has been great, in and for your
Country) would enable you; I aim at the same ends, both to make the Parliament
and Ministers all agree, and all aim at Gods glory, and the Countries safety,
wherein I know no man would more rejoice then your self. I confess the first
sound of this my opinion out of the mouth of Master Coleman, was very unwelcome
to our brethren, and I look for no better entertaynment. I have some
encouragement, that a man so eminent is gone before me, and do hope that upon
some pause they may receive better satisfactions, and that at they were
forwards but Bishops might be plucked up root and branch, so they will at last
be (...) to pluck up this root of their spiritual censure, upon which the
state and ambition of the Bishops was first planted, I shall not desire to
engage you in defense of the cause; but if any good come by it to the Kingdom,
that you should enjoy the benefit: unto whose happiness here, and eternal, my
duty does engage me to bostow my self, and all the abilities God has given
me.

Yours in the Lord, VVIL. HUSSY.

To the Reverend Commissioner of Scotland, Mr. George Gillespie.
SIR, The eminency of your employment, and my obscurity, may make the
congresse between us seem unequal: my calling is the same with yours: my
education has been the education of a Scholar, though with less proficiencie
then I could wish: you profess candor in attending to, and answering
arguments: It may be some of my arguments may seem weak unto you, I fear
they may some of them be weaker then I could wish: I confess I cannot urge an
argument as it ought to be urged, the want of Divinity Schools has been the
cause of it: join with me in your petition for Divinity Schools, then you and
I shall know better how to handle an argument at 7 years end then now we do,
if we live so long: In the mean time, if you show me the weakness of my
argument, I shall not endeavor to maintain it against light of truth, no not
so far as any strain of wit will bear me; if your answers show any thing I did
not consider of, I will acknowledge it: he that knows nothing of an argument
is too ignorant to be a Minister, he that will not submit to an argument out of
Gods word and principles of nature, is to proud to be a Minister; unity among
our selves would be an happy thing, and an indissoluble amity between us and
the Gentry were of great concernment: in these times, we have need of them, and
they of us, let us endeavor to make use of our friends, and not make them our
foes; I persuade not any man to depart from truth to please men; but let us not
wrestle with our friends for that which is not, while our enemies destroy us;
though our judgeme^ts differ, yet let us dispute as friends and agree as soon as
may be. If any bitterness come from me I shall be sorry and amend it; if any from
you, I have been bred under Bishops, I have been used to it, and can the better
bear it, I shall overcome it with goodness, if I can prevail with my
corruptions to give way: The Lord grant that we may speak the same thing, that
there be no divisions among us, that we be perfectly joined in the same mind,
and the same judgment: let there be no dissension among us, we are brethren.

You say we have leave from the Civil Magistrate to preach the Gospel: that
was a Canterburian tenet to put doctrine and discipline into the same
condition, and hold all under him, but we preach the word with all authority
from Christ derived to us by those of our brethren that were in commission
before us: Magistrates may drive away false teachers, but not the Preachers of
the Gospel, but at their uttermost perils.

Let us stand to our commission, and attend on reading, exhortation and
doctrine, and we may obtain from the Magistrates in a fair way as a testimony
of their love, honor and obedience to Christ, more honor, more maintenance,
and sin will be more shamed, discountenanced and punished; Ordinances kept more
pure in your sense then ever you shall be able to procure by your scaring,
affrighting censure of excommunication.

What will your censure do? it will shame a few whores and knaves; a great
matter to shame them, the law of Nature shameth: a boy in the streets can do
as much. But if your censure work upon heretics, or men differing from you in
opinion; can you fetch in Antinomians, Anabaptists, Independents, if ye could
send out Satan and fetch them in, or by delivering them to Satan, reclaim
them, some reverence might be given to the censure? sure in the day of our
Lord, there will be as good a return of the word preached, as of the censure.

But all this is nothing, if Christ has set up any such government, prove
that, I yield: My desire is, that you would draw your arguments from the words
of Scripture, and not from the interpretation, that you or any Authors shall
put upon them, nor counter argue my arguments, without giving answers; in
answering arguments you have liberty to interpret Scriptures as you please, so
as your interpretation will stand out against all arguments that shall be
brought against it: the strength of arguments is in mediums consisting of
terms and words of Scripture: where divine authority is pleaded, keep rules,
and truth will sooner be found.

Your loving Brother, Will. Hussy.

THe replies Mr. Gillespie touching this point in controversy are public.
That which is personal in them (as a great part is) has already, and shall
presently further be cleared. The argumentative part was purposely referred
hither, which calmely and mildly, without any personal reflections is
prosecuted. A like candor and ingenuity is requested from all, that omitting
accidental slips (for such possibly in acursory reading may be ever looked)
they would address themselves to the maine, and clearly confute these
assertions, or by Scripturall arguments confirm the contrary positions; for if
otherwise, and as heretofore, the argument be forsaken, and personal charges
of Covenant-breaking-dissenting from the Assembly, not dissenting in the
Assembly, and such like, be taken up: It is here declared before hand, all such
replications shall be esteemed by us a Nihil Respondes: In the mean space,
read and judge, having no other by as upon thy heart, but that of the Prophet,
an engagement to follow truth and peace.

Th. Coleman.

Errata.
Page 3. line 21. read mutation. p. 7. l. 3. r. these. p. 12. l. 14. add to.
l. 34. r. sew.

A Plea for Christian Magistracy.
MAster Gillespie seems in his Sermon to be much offended at Mr. Coleman: and
tells the Lords, the ignorant and scandalous must be kept from the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, and with a flood of words, lays on them as a very great
sin if they do it not by adding discipline to this Doctrine that is already
taught in the Directory, That scandalous and ignorant ought not to receive the
Sacrament, and therefore the Minister in the name of Christ must warn such
that they presume not to come: That the power of discipline may be added to the
power of Doctrine: For my part I think it very derogatory to the word of God,
and the commission of Christ, to think that any censure of man, should be of
more power and efficacy then the word of God: The authority of the Word is
divine, the operation of it is mighty, the effect of it is perfection, it
works upon the conscience, and if the word be able to make the man of God
perfect, then nothing is wanting to him. Perfectum cui nihil deest: and it is a
wonder how that conscience should be wrought upon by humane authority, with
whom divine cannot prevail; his arguments are, the scandalous perfons have
profaned the Lords Table, and the Church of God shall be disabled to keep
themselves pure, if discipline be not set up to keep the scandalous from the
Lords Table, implying that wicked men by coming to the Sacrament do pollute
the Sacrament, and pollute the holy; which he does not prove, but some others
do endeavor to do out of 1 Samuel 2.17. because the sinful carriage of Elies
sons caused men to abhor the offering of the Lord: but note the reason that
the offering became abominable, was because they offered not the sacrifice
according to the command of God, they would not have sodden flesh, but raw; if
the doctrine of the Sacrament be corrupted, if it be celebrated under one
kind, if water be mingled with wine, if transubstantiation be taught, or if
adoration of the elements, this is to pollute the Ordinance: and therefore Ephesians.
5.11. S. Paul does command not to have fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, not workers of darkness: I may not go to Mass with the Papist, nor
run with the ungodly unto the same excess of riot, I may not be drunk with the
drunkard, nor swear with the swearer, but if these come and hear, or receive
Sacraments with the believers they pollute not the Sacrament to them, he that
believes eats of this bread of life, Joh. 6.33. and this shall be made good
to the believer, though there were but one in the world; and this Beza himself
is enforced to confess in his tract against Erastus, his words are, Bonis
manner bona Sacramenta etiamsi qui mali aa eadem accedunt ab sit ut inficiemur:
The Sacraments remain effectual to the good, though evil men come to them,
far be it from us to deny it. So that the Sacrament remains holy to the
believer, and they are pure notwithstanding the unpreparednesse of the wicked:
Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, 1 Cor. 11.28. But the Author
would fix guilt of sin upon the Minister, if any come and receive that is
scandalous: a necessity is laid upon us, and woe be to us if we do it: this he
proves not presently, but after many rethoricall passages to the Lords, which
deserve no answer: he cites the Story, and notes the sin of Ely, 1 Samuel 3.13.
in that he restrained not his sons, and thereupon tells us out of Thomas
Aquinas, that we may consent to other men's sins; first directly counselling
or approving. Secondly, indirectly by not hindering when we can; but note; when
we can must receive this limitation, that is, when of duty we ought and can;
otherwise a man should be compelled to forsake his own calling, and watch him
that he suspected to be a thief, or a drunkard, and get company and seize on
them; and imprison them to keep them from offending, but this were to deny a
freeman his liberty, and become a transgressour; all that is said to this
point is, That if it were the duty of the Minister and Elder to hinder a
scandalous sinner from the Sacrament, he were guilty of his sin if he let him
come: when that is proved, it will require some further answer; in the mean
time, what is said is fallacious.

But then a particular application against Mr. Coleman: he will neither be
active nor passive in establishing sin censuring government: I dare promise for
him that if any means be used for the suppressing sin, he shall endeavor the
furtherance thereof; and if the State think fit to trust him, he will be as
faithful as he that pleads most stoutly for the Jus Divinum of Presbyteriall
government; but here be high words, great offense and scandal is given; and
the Author is confident every other godly Minister will say, Let my tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth before I say the like. Mr. Coleman scapeth very
hardly being called knave, and in a rethoricall imitation of persons cursed for
his pains, let his tongue cleave, and in the beginning of his Tract, every
man's hand is against Mr. Coleman, and his against every man; the world is made
believe a Monster is come abroad, if it be for his opinion only that all godly
Ministers will leave him they must leave others, whom Mr. Gillespie will not
deny the estimation of godly Ministers in their times. I shall be bold to name
them because Mr. Coleman shall not stand alone to be gazed at in these
malicious times: they are Bullenger, Gualter, Musculus, Zuinglius, Aretius,
Erastus. Bullenger and Gualter, in their letters to Erastus testify as much,
but because those letters were put forth by some favourer of Erastus, and
therefore may seem to be without credit, I shall be bold to cite what Beza in
his Preface to his Tract against Erastus, concerning Bullenger, and Gualter
does confess, of whom he says: I do not at all deny the opinion of those
famous men, as also of Wolfgangus Musculus, Minime tamen nego maxims illos
viros ut and Dominum Wolfgangum Musculu^ existimasse excommunicationem penes
Presbyterium fuisse and ad exclusionem usque a Coena Domini Presbyteros ideo
fuisse progressos. Quod Christianum tunc Magistratum non haberet Ecclesiacujus
authoritate capitalia judicia exercerenter (quod si Corinthi factum fuisset
nulla fuisset opus Pauli de illo, Sathanae tradendo denuntiatione) tum alii,
(...) levioribus offendiculis peccantes citra exclusionem a coena satis
coercerentur: quod cum utrumque prastare Christianus Magistratus, nunc possit
ac debeat carere nunc posse Christianas ecclesias hae disciplinae severitate.
to be thus, excommunication is in the power of Presbytery, and that the
Presbyters did proceed even to suspension from the Lords Supper, because the
Church at that time had no Christian Magistrate by whose authority capital
censures might be exercised (which if it had been used, there had been no need
of Paul's delivery of the man to Satan) and also other disorderly men
transgressing in smaller matters, might well enough be restrained without
suspension from the Sacrament: both which, because the Christian Magistrate now
may and ought to do, The Christian Churches may well be without this sharp
discipline; thus much he confesses, Sed it a ut neque Scripturae locos novis
and ad hanc suam sententiam accommodatis interpretationibus applicarent. But
so, as that they did not wrest Scripture texts with interpretations new, and
fitted to their opinion whereby it appears that these men's opinions were,
that the words of S. Paul 1 Cor. 5 were a denunciation of the sentence of
excommunication, but occasional and particular; no universal precept, nor
imitable by us, Nisi rebus omnimodo sic stantibus, but in the like condition,
and this is enough to dash all contentions about the sentence of
excommunication, this makes all further dispute merely speculative, we have a
Christian Civil Magistrate though the present differences have taken away much
of our comfort we might enjoy in them, and these disputes render them of less
use to us, and us to them; whatsoever they shall speak concerning the sentence
of excommunication upon the several places of Scripture, if they may stand
with these words here acknowledged by Beza, let these men without more
contention stand on Mr Colemans part, if otherwise they must be understood upon
after thoughts to be bent about by Erastus his arguments, as Beza further
confesses, Illos aliquantum in excommunicationis usu and Presbyterii
authoritate, non quod ista per se damnarent, sed quod little abusum vererentur,
ad Erasti sententiam de flexisse. That they did incline to the opinion of
Erastus in the use of excommunication and authority of the Presbytery, not
because they simply condemned them, but because they feared their abuse. You
see these men did fear the abuse, and though Beza will not acknowledge Erastus
reason to be of any weight, yet with reason, or without he confesses (take him
in the mildest sense) that they bent or leaned a little toward Erastus; at
least so far that in their Churches where they had to do they would not trust
the Geneva discipline; Beza himself cites these words out of an Epistle which
he acknowledges to be Bullengers to Erastus, Neque putes nos ita esse
dementes, ut hic omnia ad rigerem Genevensis Ecclesiae exigere, aut revocare
velimus. Neither do thou think us to be so mad that we would reduce all
things to, and exact them according to the strict discipline of Geneva: and
this not in Bullingers own name, but of the Tigurine Churches. I hope these
men shall have Mr. Colemans favor, every other godly Minister will say, etc. I
shall say nothing to Mr. Gillespies Preamble.

He excepteth against Mr. Colemans first rule, and seems to oppose a contrary
rule, whereas indeed Mr. Colemans as little as may be, and his as much as may
be, are both one: Mr. Colemans meaning is, that no more should be established
then what was in the word, and his meaning is as much should be established as
is in the word of God: this being doubtless both your meanings, ye need not
fall out about that, greater difference will arise.

For my part, I think Mr. Gillespie understands Mr. Coleman aright, that he
thinks that no Church censures in the hand of Church officers are found in
the word of God: but I am nor or his mind, ex supposito that they are jure
divine, and in the word of God, that he, or any Minister ought to be satisfied
with any thing the Parliament can do, until they have received it as the word
of God, if it be jut divinum, it ought to be asserted, not by many, but by all.

As for Mr. Gillespies exception against Mr. Colemans word bias, and asserting
they came biased for the truth, that is petitio principii, and deserves no
answer. The second rule: let precepts, held out as divine institutions, have
clear Scriptures: that is the rule, against which Mr. Gillespie would not
adventure to say any thing: a phrase upon the by; a thing named; are too weak
grounds etc. when men may probably conclude different ways. Mr. Coleman does
not deny that which by necessary consequence is drawn from Scripture, to be a
divine truth, but ambiguous Scriptures, decided by a vote, if truth, (for they
may possibly be errors) are but humano jure; let it be prooved, that the major
part of an Assembly have an infallible gift of finding out ambiguous truth, and
putting the stamp of divine authority upon their determinations. For my part,
I wish much fearching the Scriptures were put in practice, which cannot be done
but in Schools of Divinity: men trust more to the opinion of piety, they can
purchase by their Oratory, their places of trust, their votes in assemblies,
then the strength of argument, but of that hereafter. He finds these words,
let the Scriptures speak expressly, in Mr. Colemans second rule, not so, it was
out of his rule; he explaneth his rule sufficiently, to take into it necessary
consequences: and for ought I know, the word expressly, if extended, after a
Rhetorical liberty, to signify plainly, apparently, may include what is
apparently in praemissis, though in a most critical sense, that may not be
said to be express, that is not found in terminis: but grant, that the word
had been too strait to put into the rule, he put it not in there; but by way
of amplification, if express in Scripture, all must bow, he says not till
then, how necessarily soever it may be collected out of the Scripture, they
shall not bow.

He reprehendeth Mr. Coleman for supercilious passing over in a Sermon, 1. Cor.
5. Mat. 18. without answering the arguments of the Learned, upon those places:
and in a tract of purpose, cites none of those learned arguments: for my part,
I say with Mr. Coleman, and if such learned arguments, such plenty, it behoved
Mr. Gillespie to have cited them; Mr. Coleman might have taken more pains,
then he should have thanks, in finding out ten or twenty arguments, and yet be
told at last, that he had concealed the weightiest, he had confuted the
arguments in urging them: you ought to have the urging your own arguments your
selves, and you can demand no more, but answers for your arguments when you
bring them. I am of Mr. Colemans mind, that one good argument to prove a
Church censure, or officer, either from the Scriptures, or elsewhere, would do
me more good, then all I have ever seen. If Mr. Gillespie will afford us any
that be good, I shall return him thanks for the benefits I receive, or
otherwise, in a brotherly way, return such answers as his arguments shall
require. In the mean time he confuteth Mr. Colemans ignorance, that he does
not find any coordinate governments, but he means supreme; he does not
mean the coordinate government of an Admiral and General, both under a
superior: parents and masters, all governed by superiors, and no way
coordinate: the masters government superior to the fathers, in his own house:
as for the master and captain in a ship, the one he says, governs the
mariners, the other the soldiers: and so the King of France and Spain are
coordinate over their several subjects.

He says the Minister is punishable by the Law of the Land: here is the
difficulty: if the Minister and Elder have power given of Christ, to censure
all Christians, and they use this power, according as Christ has committed it
to them; what is the magistrate above these officers? and can he make laws to
bound and limit the laws of Christ? or if they have power to bind, may the
magistrate loose? if they use this power, may the Christian magistrate punish
them? this were to allow Christ a very mean kingdom; that his own subjects
should control him: but you will say, if he commit any thing worthy
confiscation of goods, or life, or liberty, the magistrate may inflict it upon
him; but if he attempt to do it unjustly, he is ungodly, and the Minister and
Elders will excommunicate him, and their coordination makes them their own
judges. As soon as the magistrate shall but distaste any of their actions,
presently he is ungodly, and send him to Satan, and then what party the
eloquence of the Clergy may find against the magistrate, if he should go about
to restrain them, let wise men judge.

It is the thing it self he speaks against it is true: but he comes to the
third rule, and Mr. Coleman says, Lay no more burden of government then Christ
has laid upon them, which is none at all: and his reason is, because they have
other work to do, and such as will take up the whole man; to this argument Mr.
Gillespie makes no answer at all, though Saint Paul uses the very self same
argument, to discharge the Preachers from oversight of the poor, Act. 6.2. God
forbid we should leave the care of the word of God, and serve at tables; though
the government of the Church, and examination of crimes, both in private
congregations, and in the classes, must either be slighted, or it must take up
ten times as much time, as the care of the poor; and if government does belong
to them, the care of the poor must likewise belong to them: but he tells us,
neither the Minister can keep himself, nor the Ordinances pure without
Ecclesiastical government, and proves it not: he excludes Elders from
government, he told you before he found no institution, of the Elder a Church
officer: you should have proved the institution, The Elder that rules well is
worthy of double honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. proves not institution of an officer in
the Church, which appears by this reason: the word Elder is either prima, or
secunda notio; if prima notio, then ye must be content with his own natural
signification, and in that sense it is apparently taken in the 1 and 2 verses
of the same Chapter, where he opposes the elder to the younger, and reckons
elder women and younger women; so that if the elder men be officers, I know not
why the elder women should not be officers likewise: but if this elder be
secunda notio, or vox artis or scientiae Theologicae, ye must find out his
definition in the Scripture, how should man know what genius and species were
in Logic? what perpendiculum, centrum, diameter, were in Mathematics without
their definitions? if therefore an Elder must signify an officer, he must
have definition in Theology that must be demonstrative in Scripture: the word
Rule is too general if it be not referred to known principles of nature, as a
Father, a Master, a Civil Magistrate; the first is a governor by nature, the
second by private contract, 3 by public consent of the people: and such ye
make the Church officer, for ought I know, arising out of the consent of the
people; and such governors were called Elders of the Tribes, and our
Parliament men and governors are such Elders arising out of the public
consent of the people; yea Kings and all Civil governors arise out of the
same principle of public consent: which power does still remain in mankind,
to make choice of their company, and to erect private arbiters at pleasure, to
determine the differences that arise amongst them, with consent; remaining
still sponsable to public Laws, if they should call one another to account,
as 1 Cor. 6. where Saint Paul blames them, for going to Law, and wills them
to set up a wise man to judge their differences, and that in Civil, not in
Ecclesiastical matters, which is a difference no man understands: I
challenge the Assembly; nay, all the World, to bound causas Ecclesiasticas a
civilibus: for my part I have gazed on that distinction this 30 years, and
never find any thing of plain dealing in it, but nonsense, and fraud, the
only difference that I could find, that the proceeding of the Civil
Magistrate did pretend to be legal and regular; the Ecclesiastical as far as
they durst, to be illegal, irregular and arbitrary, all the government is in
the officers that bind, and loose whom they list. I dare not leave this, lest I
should be challenged for not dealing reverently with Scripture; binding and
loosing must have a sense; I say, binding and loosing is meant by preaching of
the Gospel, which none yet durst deny to be one of the keys: and the other
let him prove that can: though these keys were never given to any of the
Apostles, but to Peter; and he opened the door of Gods Church to the Gentiles,
which was never shut since, but shall stand open day and night continually,
Esaias 60.11. Therefore thy gates shall be open continually, they shall not be
shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the Gentiles,
and that their Kings may be brought.

And may not these exhortations be still seasonable? have familiarity and keep
company with none but good, and such as ye may be ^^^ered by: and do not go
to Law one with another, but ^^^er your differences to some honest, wise men,
to determine; and that without setting up any new government; an arbitrator is
no magistrate: but such as by force can put his judgments in execution, he
only is a magistrate. Mr. Coleman says, Church government distinct from
civil, makes an irreconcilable difference between the Minister and the
Magistrate, as two governments must needs do. Mr. Gillespie supposes two
governments must needs be, and then chideth with the argument, and with Mr.
Coleman; but lets it alone without an answer.

But Mr. Gillespie falls upon an argument against government, committed to
Ministers taken from fear of ambition, and here he spends many words, about
the words which Mr. Coleman alludeth only unto; which I will not trouble my
Reader withal: that Mr. Coleman in plain terms aims at is; ambition is to
be feared in Ministers, and shows what great contestation has been for this
censure of the Church, that some have preferred it before all acts of piety;
and have ambitiously endeavored, that all should pass through their fingers;
and that this censure has plunged the world in blood this many hundred years.
Mr. Gillespies answer to the matter of ambition, is only by involving the
Civil Magistrate in the same danger of ambition: Now is this a good argument,
government is necessary, but he that is employed therein has great temptations
to ambition, therefore the Ministers of the word must be ensnared in the like
temptation? that they may both contest one with another, and so imbroile the
world in blood, as the Popes have done, or else both join together to enthrall
the people, as the Bishops in the Courts of Princes? and not rather in regard
that government does naturally lift up the heart of man, and therefore
Ministers have the name of servants, and Lordship, and Dominion over the slocke
denied them in Scripture, to keep them from the like temptation, that they may
the more freely from God warn them that are in authority, that they take heed
of that temptation: I am confident if this Assembly had stooke close to their
commission, which they received from Christ, which was to preach the Gospel,
and spent themselves wholly in matters of doctrine, and told the Lords of the
duty of their place, to do justice in Parliament without respect of persons,
and put the Commons in mind of all their wholesome Ordinances, that they look
to careful performance of them, without turning their thoughts after
government; the Reformation had gone on much faster, and more comfortable then
it has.

Mr. Coleman says, That Church government has disquieted all the world in the
hand of the Pope, and his Clergy, in the hand of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Mr. Gillespie tells him, That these stories are not a little beside the
warke: he should have told what hurt is had done in France, in Holland, in
Scotland, in Reformed Churches. I answer, it was the same censure that raised
the Pope so high, but it grew not to that height in one age: a young Lion will
not bite; and you boast that your Churches are according to Primitive times;
well what they will come to, after times will see: we are beholding to the
Presbytery for throwing down the Bishops, if they cast away their ambition
with them, and take Mr. Colemans advice, and set up Schools of Divinity, and
move the Parliament for due encouragement; you shall then appear to be men
seeking the things of Christ, and not your own: but of this more by and by.

A word or two about that place, 1 Timothy 5.17. the Elder that rules well, is
worthy double honor: from hence two sorts of Elders are proved, an Elder that
rules well, and he that labors in word and doctrine: here two Elders are
mentioned; but the difference whether official or personal, is very
doubtful; one office may comprehend both these duties, and the comparison may
lie in their personal excellencies, one may excel in the governing part of
the office, and the other person in the doctrinall part; one may hear the
causes and differences of his brethren well, and yet be but a dull preacher:
another may preach excellent well, and yet be an unpatient and peevish judge:
or not to countenance your Ecclesiastical government so far: the Scripture
has these effects, it is profitable for doctrine, reproof, correction,
instruction; one Ministers excellency may lie in laboring in doctrine and
instruction, and this may be his that labored in word and doctrine: he that
reproves and corrects may be said to rule, and then there is no place for
your Lay Elders: but if this place do set up your Lay-elder, and the
difference is in two distinct offices, that here is an Elder that does govern,
and does not preach; then preaching and governing be the differences, and
differences be convertable with their subjects: so that if one do govern, and
not preach; the other must preach and not govern: and this agrees plainly
with the 1 Pet. 5.3. not as governing the flock, (...), nique ut dominautes,
not as Lords: for my part I know not how Lordship and government does differ
one from another, dominus and dominari, (...) and (...), be denominatives: he
that governs is a Lord, and he that is a Lord governs: to imagine that
ambition and pride, injury and oppression, or any such vice, did necessarily
belong to a Lord, is very injurious unto the very title and honor of a Lord.

That more reckoning has been made of this dominion, then acts of piety: to
this Mr. Gillespie seems to adhere, that all the rest is worth nothing
without this: further occasion will be given to speak of these things.

Mr. Coleman does desire doctrine, and wishes the Civil Magistrate to take
Government: Doctrine is committed to the Ministers of the word, by Commission
from Christ, Mat. 28. and that Commission is to last to the end of the world:
this Mr. Coleman had reason to challenge as due from Christ, not the Church:
but to the Ministers of the word, the Church has no where power to preach the
Gospel, but the Apostles and their successors unto the end of the world: and
therefore, as before he had implied, that the preaching of the Gospel would
take up the whole man, especially in our time: our knowledge of the Scriptures
is to be acquired by ordinary means, tongues for the language, exercise and art
for the argument, that the word might be preached in the demonstration, and
argument of the Scripture, and not in the enticing words of men's wisdom: well
might Mr. Coleman call for Schools of Divinity, that there might be unity found
among the Preachers of the Gospel; nothing more conducing to unity, then the
continual exercise in Schools: the very people complain, women, and such as
are well minded: why do not you Ministers meet, and dispute it out among your
selves, one teaches one thing, and another another thing, and we are much
troubled and disquieted by it: there is use of Schools, or otherwise it would
never be set up in Universities: Paul disputed daily in the School of one
Tyrannus: Mr. Coleman tells the Parliament that this would advance Religion,
more in sewer years, then since the Reformation. Mr. Gillespie cannot but
confess, that this would be a means to make a learned Clergy, but it seems
more good will come by discipline, than by all that: and to let us know that
learning and maintenance may be without purity of Religion, he instanceth in
the Jesuits: it is true, when men have their judgments forest^^led by corrupt
education, and they employed, as the Popes vassals to be serviceable to his,
and their own ambitious ends, they have all their learning and endeavors
poisoned: but yet it may be said for the Jesuits, that we have our Comments
from them, and our books are very mean, and not savouring of that industry
which theirs do; if we had taken the same course to maintain the truth, that
they have to maintain their errors, their mouths had long ere this been
stopped, and the world had been as full of good books in defense of truth, as
now it is with their poisoned labors: but they shail rise up in judgment
against us in the day of the Lord.

Had learning flourished amongst us as it might have done, such heresies and
divisions as we now languish under, had never appeared amongst us: our Sermons
had not been so full of words and empty of argument as now they are: all men
venting their own private opinions, scarce two men found that state any
Question in Divinity alike, all because Ministers are not acquainted with one
another arguments and opinions, until they vent them among the people, 1.
Cor. 14.29. Let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge:
where ye see the Prophets must vent their opinions, first among the Prophets,
and not among the people: what they preach among the people, ought to be
digested among themselves, by argument from the word, not carried by vote;
where major pars s^pe vincat meliorem: for Christ Jesus gave his Commission to
all the eleven jointly, and their successors, unto the end of the world; and
therefore though they were guided by an infallible spirit, yet Gal. 2.2. Paul
came up by the spirit to Jerusalem, with Barnabas and Titus, and communicated
the Gospel that he preached among the Gentiles, lest he had run in vain: much
more are we bound to use all means to preserve the unity of the spirit: nay,
we have no authority to preach, without the approbation of all that are in the
commission, by authority of Christ: if any shall object that it is unpossible
Ministers at this day are of so many minds, I answer, it is a judgment fallen
upon us, for that we have not used the means, nor do know one another mind,
and every man takes upon him to make himself a Prophet, and be judge of his
own gifts; or which is worse, make the people judge, and give them power to
make or choose their Pastor: from which principle, the Independents build all
their Indepency: yet the Presbyters many, nay for ought I can learn, upon
debate in the Assembly, the Independents have gained, that the people have
right to choose their Minister: I am sure Mr. Herle for want of skill, and
Theological disputations, has granted it them: and then no reason can deny
them Independent Church government, if any such thing be as Church government:
as long as there be no Schools, nor men, and matters, are not ripened there,
the granting of a false principle is not very dangerous: few men can find the
fallacy; a Rhetorical Sermon, and an Assembly vote will mend all; but a false
principle is most ready to seduce the most discussive and knowing people.

I am confident this one principle has made all men of parts, and honesty,
Independents, that are so; and were I satisfied that the people might elect
their Minister, I should be Independent my self, though as I now stand
affected, I think it the most destructive opinion, both to humane society, and
sound religion; most contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, the mind and
authority of Christ, as was ever broached since the Sun shone: as I am
confident, if Schools of Divinity were set up over all the Kingdom, in the
Classes, and nothing but doctrine meddled with, or such things as are in
Scripture handled in a School way, would be made appear unto the greatest
defendents of that opinion; they would find their quaint epithets, and fine
figures, their apt similitudes and dainty allusions, would make no syllogismes:
your plausible Preachers, that fill the world with these stirs, cannot endure
the Schools; they will tell you that Schools will spoil Preachers, best
Schoolmen, worst Preachers: Schools will fill the world with controversies
and fallacies: they will tell you of Jesuits and Papists, and what not, to
keep off Schools. But truth is, nothing but ignorance brings in diversities
of opinions, and men may be very near and plausible Preachers, yet very
ignorant: and his opnion and applause he has gotten with the people, makes
him bold to vent some new opinion, and then defend it who can, for he cannot:
he can preach it, and Print something for it, but for a concluding argument, he
knows not what to make of any such thing.

As for those arguments against Schools, that many Schoolmen are bad
Preachers, it is fallacia accidentis, non causa pro causa: so few men have
skill of argument, so little used in preaching, that the Schooleman will not
take pains to preach: I mind such few men as are noted for famous Schoolmen,
whereas if all men were both exercised in Schools and Pulpits, Controversies
would be silenced, and Pulpits filled, with such strength of argument out of
Scripture, that tradesmen would keep their shops, and cobblers their stalles,
and not adventure to get up into the Pulpit: whereas now they see that the
using of allusions, and phrasing Scriptures, no otherwise then men may do with
natural wit, and a little diligence will perform, and this has caused them
to turn Preachers: and if they should be silensed by force, they would think
themselves wronged; but call them to their exercise, they will leave of
themselves, and fall to their old employments.

But Mr. Gillespie is very zealous for keeping ordinances pure, though he has
not, nor ever will be able to prove, that any man by his sin, can pollute
the Sacrament to any other, but himself. But if they might, cannot men of any
ordinary education, if honest, be competent judges of such offenses? but the
Minister must be called from his Study to examine Drunkards, and Whores, and
such notorious offenses as these, as if none were fit to meddle with such
matters but he. He advises the Parliament to give Christ his due; I hope they
will be commanded that, but what that is, he cannot, or will not prove; we
must content our selves with a little sauce of Rhetoric; Abraham said Genesis
14.23. That I will not take from a thread to ash^^e latchet, and that I will
not take any thing that is thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abraham
rich. But no Logic to prove government to be established by Christ in the
Church different from civil.

The argument of the covenant is too low to be thought on in this Discourse: we
are now in an higher region, then the words of the covenant; we are about Gods
word, we hope there is nothing in the covenant contrary to Gods word; if there
be, that must be thought on in another consideration: we may not leave
enquiring into the word of God, for fear of the oath: this were a point equal
to the highest of Popish tyranny.

The fourth rule, A Christian Magistrate is a Governor in the Church. Mr.
Gillespie denies not this. I know not if the Christian Magistrate governs in
the Church, what use there should be of any Governor beside him. I thought
that the Church having no officers in it, but such as Christ had set up, had
elected elders, by the appointment of Jesus Christ: and that by your opinion
Christ had been the King of the Church, and had set up his kingdom, and set
officers in his Church, and those had been officers in the Church, which Christ
had appointed in it, and none other: if the Church be Christ's Kingdom, surely
such as govern in it, must receive commission from him, under the same
apprehension, as he is King, which is as he is Mediator: their commission to
govern in the Church, must be in this form: Christ the Mediator, King of his
Church, does appoint Kings, and civil Magistrates to govern under him, or
otherwise they cannot govern in the Church, if the Church be the Kingdom of
Christ, for it cannot be imagined, that Christ's Kingdom is capable of any
mixture, as humane governments are; if Christ be a King, he has Laws, not out
of the consent of the people, but he can and does dare leges, unto which all
the world is subject, Romans 2.16. Judge all the world according to my Gospel. 2.
These. 7.8. Jesus Christ shall come with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
rendering vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ; the Gospel is the Gospel of Christ, and the law by which
Christ will judge all the world: if all the world be under the law of Christ,
then the Kingdom of Christ must needs reach over all the world.

2. Christ at his resurrection declared mightily to be the Son of God, Romans 14.
Act. 2.36. Let the house of Israel confess, that God has made the same Jesus,
whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.

Mr. Gillespie confesses, That this day have I begotten thee, in the 2 Psalm
is to be understood of the stating him in his Kingdom, which he prooveth out
of Act. 13.33. If so, see, in the 2. Psalm. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost part of the earth for thy
possession. Where ye see, God gives unto Christ, all the earth for his
inheritance: and further commands Kings to serve him: and therefore is called
under the appellation of the Lamb, tha^ can agree to Christ but only as a
Mediator, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and in 1 Timothy 6.15. our Lord Jesus
Christ is said to be the only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords;
Jesus Christ be names that agree to him only Mediator.

3. The Kingdom of Christ is as ample as his Prophecy; but the Prophecy of
Christ is extended to all Nations, as may appear by the Commission, Go teach
all Nations: the doctrine which they must teach commands: now commands have
always power and authority annexed to compel obedience; or otherwise they are
but vain commands, verbal, and frustrate.

4. No calling can admit the appellation of pious, and godly which is not under
Christ; and this is that enrichment of which St. Paul speaks of 1 Cor. 1.5.
where he tells them they were enriched in all things in Christ, and v.30.
Christ is said to be made unto us wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption: no holiness without Christ; all our holiness does consist in our
obedience to Christ: if therefore Kings may be called holy, if their offices
may be accounted holy offices, or not sinful, they must be held off, and under
Christ, without whom they cannot be pleasing to God, Ps. 72.11. All Kings shall
fall down before him, all Nations shall do him service: upon which Calvin
has these words, In ecclesia and grege Christi esse regibus locum ques hic
David non exarmat gladio, nec diademate spoliat, ut admittat in ecclesiam: sed
cum sua dignitate venturos esse dicit, ut se coram Christo prosternant: Kings
have place in the Church and flock of Christ, whom David here does neither
disarme of their sword, nor spoil of their crown to admit them into the
Church: but says that they shall come with their dignity, and cast themselves
down before Christ.

5. That office which Christ has declared to be of God, and bounded and
limited in his Gospel, that office is held under Christ as mediator; but the
Civil Magistrate is so, Romans 13.4. he is the Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath on them that do evil; thus far Christ has to do with the
Civil Magistrate, to declare the mind of God concerning him, and to command
every soul to be subject to him; here is as much, and more from Christ, then
Mr. Gillespie will ever find out for his Church officers for all the Scripture
of the New Testament came from the Prophetical office of Christ; and he was
promised at the giving of the Law, Deuteronomy. 18.15. and thus Peter Act. 3. and
Stephen Acts 7. preached: and John 4.25. the woman of Samaria knew that the
Messia should teach all things: what Paul preached was in the name of Christ,
for he was a vessel to carry the name of Christ before the Gentiles, and
Kings, Acts 9.15. if Kings are not beholding to Christ for their offices, they
are for the obedience of their subjects, without which the office of a Civil
Magistrate is little worth.

6. The Civil Magistrates office, and Christ's office, both Kingdoms over the
same subjects: either the office of the Mediators Kingdom is superiors
inferior, or coordinate, I leave to any Christian to determine; but it may be
it will be answered that the Civil Magistrate and Christ are conversant about
diverse kinds of objects, though they be the same persons that are under
Christ, and the King; yet it is in diverse considerations, to diverse ends, and
by diverse means, for the ends, Christ's ends and the Kings ends are both one, 1 Timothy 2.2. that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty, as for diverse means that the officers of the Church use when that
censure or Church government which is talked of, is proved out of 1 Cor. 5.
Mat. 18. or any place of Scripture, it shall be answered God willing.

I pass by Mr. Gillespies business of the little ewe lamb, that he would
have kept, I say let the ewe lamb alone. It argues nothing, and therefore I
answer nothing: But Mr. Coleman can find no other government instituted, but
Civil, and this is laid to him as a great carelessenesse, that sought no
better into the Scriptures then so: Mr. Gillespie has found in many places the
institution of the Church officers, he finds that more subjection and
obedience is commanded as due, not only to civil, but spiritual governors,
to those that are over us in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5.12. Mr. Gillespie sees more
then the text yields, here is no mention made of obedience at all, here is
know them, and esteem them highly: but there is (...), which is translated
over you: but Passor tells us that (...), with a genitive case signifies
pracedo, and then it signifies no more but them that go before you, either by
doctrine or example, here is nothing of institution: whatsoever this person
that is to be beloved, he is supposed, not instituted in this place, the
subject is supposed, not handled in any science: love and honor is due to the
Preacher of the Word, who is said to go before them they teach: but what is
this to government? Heb. 13.7. Remember them that rule over you, there is
(...), which is ducum, them that lead you, here is not obedience, nor
subjection, but remember, and imitate their faith: yea but in the 17 verse,
there is obey and rule over you, but that is (as before) them that lead you,
the word is (...), which is no more but be persuaded: I deny not but it is
often translated obey, but it comes from (...), which is persuadeo to
persuade. Passor tells us, it is verbum forense, a word whereby the advocates
persuade the Judges; I hope ye will not say when an advocate by pleading Law,
does persuade the Judges, that the Judges do obey the advocate: but let the
word stand as it is translated (yet when it is so rigorously wrought upon, it
cannot be enforced, interpretation belongs not to the disputant) Obey: yet is
it not always correllative to the command of a superior: obedience is sometimes
founded on the authority of the superior, sometimes on the good and benefit of
him that does obey, without any color or claim of superiority or government:
so the patient obeys the Physician, so that master that imployeth a cunning
workman, must be ruled by his workman; yet neither the one, nor the other
claim government over his patient or workmaster: and upon this ground the Holy
Ghost requires obedience here, not by an argument from the authority of him
that leads them, but from the benefit that comes to themselves, for that is
unprofitable for you, Romans 12.8. The argument that Mr. Gillespie draws hence
is not out of the place, but the interpretation of the place, and therefore
nothing in confutation of Mr. Coleman; for he did not say he found no
institution in Gualter and Bullenger, but in Scripture, though Gualter and
Bullenger are for Mr. Coleman, as Beza confesses, whatsoever they say upon the
place, Mr. Gillespie should prove institution of Church government out of
Scripture, the disputant may not interpret that is the answerers part, as
before.

Mr. Coleman says, Christ has placed Magistrates in his Church, for which he
cites 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 1.3 last verses, to prove all government given to
Christ, and Christ as Mediator: I have proved this a truth: though I have left
out those arguments that Mr. Gillespie does confute in answer to Mr. Coleman,
because I shall have occasion to speak in his just vindication of them.

Having recited Mr. Colemans words, he argues against them ab incommodo, He
cannot upon these grounds assert the authority of either Heathen or Christian
Magistrate. For the Heathen Magistrate, I say let Baall plead for himself: but
it will be easier for Mr. Coleman to prove the Heathen Magistrate unlawful,
then for Mr. Gillespie to vindicate him.

First, it is sin for a man to be an Heathen, and such for which Christ will
come, rendering vengeance in flaming fire, because they do not know God, nor
obey the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. If any man shall say that
Heathen do know God, let Christ confute him: No man knows the Father, but
the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal him, Matt. 11.27.

And for his government, if sin be lawful, it is lawful: for whatsoever is
not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. If ye speak of jus humanum, and usurpation
in humane estimation: this is out of the question. But I wonder a Christian
should doubt, whether it be the duty of all men to be Christians, and that it
is sin in them that are not, which yet it were not, if it were lawful for
them to enjoy their Heathen condition. Joh. 16.9. The Holy Ghost when he is
come, will convince the world of sin, because they believe not in me, says our
Savior: Quod malum in so non potest esse modaliter bonum: That which is evil
in it self, cannot be circumstantially good. If to be a Heathen be sin, to
govern as a Heathen cannot be good.

Next, is a blow given to a Christian Magistrate, because the brother must
prove a Deputyship, or Vicegerentship by commission from Christ; I conceive he
has commission from Christ to be Gods instrument to punish the evil doer, and
do good to him that does well: again, has any Magistrate commission to be
Christian, or may they be Christians, and not obey Christ? I conceive the
Prophets are good Expositors of the condition of Christ's Kingdom. Ps. 72.11.
All Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him. Esaias 60.12.
That Nation and Kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish.

But I follow Mr. Gillespie, God and Nature has made Magistrates, and given
them great authority, but of Christ, as mediator, they have it not. There is
the affirmation; see the proof.

Church officers, says Mr. Gillespie, have their power from Christ, as
mediator, and they are to manage their offices under, and for Christ. And this
he proves, for that they do the duties of their offices, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ. And the duties of Church officers he cites, four: 1. come
together: 2. Preach: 3. baptize: 4. excommunicate: and all these are done in
the name of Jesus, but the Magistrate is not to perform any part of his duty
in the name of Jesus. And for all these he brings places of Scripture, to
prove the affirmative, which I shall endeavor to examine according to laws of
disputation.

The first is, in his name we meet together, Matt. 18.20. We, says Mr.
Gillespie, meet: and urges it to prove the institution of Church officers; he
makes short work of it, but weak, no argument. The Text says, when two or
three are gathered together in my name, I am in the midst: It says not they
are Church officers, neither does it say, none shall gather together in my
name, but Church officers, or I am in the midst of none but Church officers.
Well, I excuse Mr. Coleman, if he see no institution of the Church officers out
of that place, and I hope so will all men, even Mr. Gillespie himself, upon
due consideration.

2. In his name we do preach; that is out of the question: of other
governments, I find no institution, says Mr. Coleman: he speaks not of the
commission to preach, and therefore let that go.

3. In his name we baptize, Act. 2.38. be baptized in the name of Jesus, Act.
19.5. These places he cites, to prove we baptize in the name of Jesus, as
mediator, as exclusively to Father, and Holy Ghost, (leaving out the words of
the commission Matt. 28. baptize in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost) for so the state of his question does require; for he distinguishes
acutely, and accurately, between Christ as Mediator, and second person in
Trinity, in all this argument: and so abuses these places to prove, that we
must baptize in the name of Christ, exclusive to the other persons of the
Trinity, which is contrary to the words of the commission, and the practice of
all Churches: but this is quite out of Mr. Gillespies business, which is to
prove other government instituted besides civil.

4. In his name we excommunicate; this is to the purpose: prove that Mr.
Gillespie 1. Cor. 5.5. to deliver such a one to Satan: he makes great haste,
no more ado, but we excommunicate: here is no argument; deliver to Satan is
not to excommunicate, at least they be different terms; which rules of
disputation will not allow. But grant that it were excommunication, and that
Paul did excommunicate, as in plain terms he did deliver to Satan Hymineus
and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. so in this place being well viewed it will appear,
that St. Paul says, I have decreed in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, with
the power of the Lord Jesus Christ, to deliver such a one to Satan. The decree
was Paul's, and not the Corinthians, though it might possible have been an act
of the Corinthians, yet no way appertaining unto you, I mean under the notion
of a Church, and yet officers of the Church is a term somewhat more remote;
and yet still farthest of all from institution: for grant Paul had in terms
said, let the Elders of the Church excommunicate, yet he had not instituted,
but supposed an institution, this might have proved an esse, not the
institution nisi remote. Thus have I examined his argument by rule. Give us
Schools of divinity, that we may no more be troubled with such arguments.

But let us further examine what these mediums (or some of them) will yield
being closer put: Mr. Gillespie does appropriate the meeting in the name of
Christ, to the officers of the Church, and that is his medium to prove their
institution from Christ, as Mediator: we must come for the clearing of this
point, to consider what it is to do a thing in the name of Christ: it is true,
much use is made of this coming together in the name of Christ, in the
argument of general Counsels; but this privilege of coming together in the
name of Christ appropriate to Bishops in a general Council, our Learned will
not allow. Mr. Whittaker, Quis ferat cos sic loquentes, dum quae communiae sunt
omnibus Christianis ad paucos restringunt, who can endure them to speak so
while they restrain those things to a few, that belong to all Christians?
where you see he will not endure these two or three to be understood of Church
officers, but of any Christians. But let us see what he says, it is to be
gathered in the name of Christ: he says,

To be gathered in Christ's name, In Christi nomine congregari due significat:
Primum eos qui convenient esse veros and sinceres Dei cultores, and sanae
Religionis professores, quam non aliunde nisi Scripturae didiscerunt, nam qui
alio modo Deum colunt quam quo ille coli vult, quantumvis maxinsi praesules
fuerint in ecclesia, non tamen in Christi nomine congregantur: secundum ut eo
animo conveniant, ut Christi mandato per omnia obediant, ut que eas secum
affectiones afferant, ea studia eas voluntates, quae pios Christi ministres
deceant ut nihil propter Dei gloriam quaerant, aut sibi proponant, ut veritatem
ex Scripturis inquirant, inventam aliis commendent, non ut suum regnum
stabiliant, etc.
signifies two things: 1. That those that come together are true and sincere
worshippers of God, and professors of the true Religion, which they have not
learned elsewhere but from Scripture: For who so worship God any other way then
as he will be worshipped, though they be great Prelates in the Church, yet
are not gathered together in Christ's name. 2. That they come together with that
mind, that they may obey the command of Christ, that they bring with them those
affections, those desires, those intentions, which become godly Ministers of
Christ. That they seek or propound nothing to themselves besides Gods glory,
that they search for truth in Scripture, and having fonnd it, commend it to
others, not for the establishing of their own Kingdom.

Thus far I hope ye will agree that others besides Church officers, may be
qualified to meet in the name of Christ: first, that they may be the true
worshippers of God, that they may learn to worship God according to his will
out of the Scriptures, they may have good affections to obey Christ, they may
seek Gods glory, and not the setting up their own Kingdom: I hope the
Parliament is so gathered, and Christ is amongst them.

Bishop Mourton says, to be duly gathered in the name of Christ, is with
sincere hearts to invocate him, and to subscribe to his revealed truth; this
may be done by others beside Church officers; and I hope our Parliament does
so.

But see clearly out of the Scripture, that a thing may be said to be done in
the name of Christ, or of God, when men do any thing in confidence that God
will assist us: so Psalm. 20.5. In the name of our God will we set up our
banners, in confidence God will assist us: thus I hope the Parliament, and
other Christians may undertake the business in the name of Christ, in
confidence of Christ's assistance, as mediator, for whose sake the work they
are employed about, shall be acceptable to God.

Secondly, in the name of Christ, a thing is said to be done, that is done in
the authority, room, and place of Christ, as if Christ should do it himself:
and thus officers of the Church, Mr. Gillespie would have act, under Christ,
and none but they. And this, if granted, will not prove a Church government,
seeing a man may preach in the name of Christ, and yet not govern in the name
of Christ; for preaching is the work of Christ as well as government.

But as mediator, Christ has given no such power and commission to the
Magistrate: and this he prooveth, because Christ has none to give, as
Mediator he would not judge, therefore he had no civil power, Luke 12.14. To
this so far as the argument: it does not follow that because Christ was not a
judge, actu exercito, therefore the original right of government was not in
him: and this objection may be answered thus; Christ did not say, he was not a
judge, but who made me a judge? how do thou know that I am a judge? and thus
Christ in the time of his humiliation did often hide the manifestation of his
power: and as for Joh. 18.36. My kingdom is not of this world, I know not how
it argues more for Church government then for civil: as if those governments
that should be executed by Church officers should favor less of the world
then the civil government: but he falls to an admiration, as if the thing
were unpossible, that the power which Christ has received of his father,
should be derived to the civil Magistrate, but no reason to show the wonder.

He confesses that Christ as he is eternal God, does with the Father and Holy
Ghost, reign over the Kingdoms of the earth: he that is the mediator, being
God, has of God all power in heaven and earth, and this power was given, Matt.
28.18. both by eternal generation, and declaration at his resurrection. These
be phrases that do astonish me, that any thing should be given to Christ, as
God, if given it had been robbery to have taken without leave; but any thing
should be given him that should concern his Godhead at the time of his
resurrection, is more monstrous: but let be, if this place be understood of
the power that Christ has as second Person in Trinity, and not as Mediator,
then he had no authority as Mediator to send his Apostles: for by this
authority, he sent forth his, Apostles to preach the Gospel; and if that were
not the authority that was given him as Mediator, than ye have lost your
commission, which ye so much boast of, and had not so much as the right to
preach under Christ as Mediator: All authority is given me in heaven and earth,
go ye therefore and preach: from this authority here spoken of, i^ the
authority to preach the Gospel; now it is most clear that he had authority to
preach the Gospel as Mediator, as I have formerly proved.

Mr. Gillespie says, That he that is the Mediator being God, has power to
subdue his Churches enemies but as Mediator, he has no other Kingdom, but
his Church, as God and as Mediator, those be terms strangely opposed the
Mediator cannot be conceived but as God and man; and that Kingdom which
belongs to the second Person in Trinity, cannot be said to be given to
Christ's, but is the Kingdom of God, because opera Trinitat^ ad extra sunt
indivisae: but the Kingdom of Christ is administered by him, whilst he is at
the right hand of the Father by the power of his Godhead: Christ the Mediator
does many things as God, which could not be performed by man, and many things
performed by the humane nature, which were not agreeable to the divine: it
became us to have a Mediator perfect God, and perfect man, and accordingly in
the state of humiliation Christ, did work as God and man, he wrought his
miracles, healed diseases, commanded winds and sea, and did manifest his
divine power by knowing the hearts of men, and now in the state of glory: shall
he have one Kingdom as Mediator, and another as God? as Mediator is used in an
ambiguous sense, let it be spoken plain, as Mediator he works as God and as
man* both which actions are actions of his person, per communication^^
^^^matu^^, Mediator is not a third nature, either he does what Mr. Gillespie
entendeth as God, or as man, the natures are not confounded, he does nothing
as Mediator, which he does not as God, or as man, or as man assisted by God in
more then an ordinary manner; shall the Mediator be spoiled of his Godhead to
set up a supposed Kingdom in the Church, different from the civil? He that is
the Mediator being God, has power to subdue his, and his Churches enemies, and
to make his foes his footstool; but as Mediator he is only the Churches King,
head and governor: why does Mr. Gillespie shuffle thus? why does he not
speak plainly, and make his oppositions clear, ad idem? and say, as Mediator
he has no such power, as Mediator he is God, but it seems God without power
to subdue his enemies.

But when he had affirmed that Christ is King, head and governor of his Church
only (where is couched fallacia plurium interrogationum, the word head in a
more peculiar sense, may be ascribed to the Church, then King, and governor)
he proves that it is so, by branding those that deny it with Pho^inianisme;
but if that be erroneous, here Deodate upon Ezekiel. 1.26 speaking of the
likeness of a man, says it was the Son of God, head of the Church, and King
of the universe: and Romans 10.12. by his death and resurrection, has gotten him
a title to be Lord over all men. And Calvin upon the Ephesians. 1.20. Sedere fecit in
dextrae; dextra non locum, sed potestatem significat; quam pater Christo
contulit, ut ejus nomine Coeli, and terrae imperium administret; he made him
sit on his right hand, right hand does not signify place but power, which the
Father bestowed on Christ, that in his name he might rule heaven and earth: and
after, Cum dextrae Dei coelum, and terr^^ impleat, sequitur regnum Christi
ubique diffusum, for as much as the right hand of God does fill heaven and
earth, it follows that the Kingdom of Christ is spread all over. If therefore
Christ as mediator sits at the right hand of God, his Kingdom as mediator
is extended over heaven and earth.

Again, all mankind lost not only dominion, but all right to the use of the
creatures, and Christ as mediator is made heir of all things. Heb. 1.2. where
the state of Christ's mediation, his Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly office,
are at large set out, his humiliation to a lower condition then the condition
of Angels by death: and after is exalted: and in the chap. 2.8. thou have put
all things in subjection under his feet, in that he put all things under him,
he left nothing that is not put under him. I hope no man dare say, that he was
made lower then the Angels as the second person in Trinity: now if he had
spoken of Christ as mediator, that in that respect he had been humbled, and
exalted in another respect, to wit, as the second Person in Trinity, all things
had been put under him, the antythesis had not been ad idem. Again God is
said to put all things under him, whereby it is implied that all things were
not under him, before they were put under him, but as the second Person in
Trinity; so nothing could be said to be put under him, because they were in
that respect always under him: And lastly, nothing is excepted from this
subjection, 1 Cor. 15.28. the Son also himself shall be subject to him that
put all things under him, so Christ has dominion over all things, they are put
under his feet in such a condition, in such a consideration, as he himself is
subject to God, but in the consideration that Christ is the second person of
Trinity, so he is not inferior to God the Father, therefore he has not all
things put under his feet as second Person in Trinity.

Phil. 2.8.9.10. being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and
became obedient to death, even the death of the cross; wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name, that in the name of Jesus every knee
should bow; you see he that was in the form of a servant, was exalted under
that description, and so high that every knee should bow to him: but as second
Person in Trinity, he was not found in the form of a servant, but as
mediator, so he was God in the form of a servant.

But Mr. Gillespie has a distinction between, dignity, power, and kingdom,
but proves only a posse, that such a distinction is conceiveable, and may be
found in earthly Kings, but a posse ad esse in Christ^, non valet consequentia:
but here I further note that Mr. Gillespie in the close of his brotherly
examination, when he comes to apply this his distinction to the mediator; he
says, as mediator he exercises acts of divine power, and omnipotency over
all creatures in the behalf, and for the good of his Church, and restrains
or diverteth, or destroys all his Churches enemies, notwithstanding in the 43
page, he denies any such working to belong to Christ as mediator; but as God,
whereby ye may see how weak these grounds are; and how small a matter it is
for a Rhetorician to forget himself in the following of an argument.

There remains now that something be said in vindication of Mr. Coleman from
the charge of mis-application of two Scriptures.

The first is the 1 Cor. 12.28. he cites to prove civil governments in the
Church; unto which Mr. Gillespie says, first if by governments in that plate,
Civil Magistrates were understood, yet that place says not, that Christ has
placed them, then a foreiori, you disclaim by that means any government in
this place as officers under Christ. I thought Mr. Gillespie: would not have
let go the hold he has under Christ, for his Church governments from this
place so easy: Mr. Coleman need not trouble him false about proving that they
were put in the Church under Christ: I hope if in the Church they will be
content to be Christ's Vicars, or else if Mr. Coleman will be ruled by me, so as
Mr. Gillespie will not urge this for constitution of Church governments, he
shall let it go. God has placed governments in his Church, and if they be
meant civil governments, he has gotten thus much, that civil governors are
in the Church by Gods appointment; and then I hope Mr. Gillespie will not deny
the room that God has given them in the Church, upon this ground that God
has nothing to do to place them there, they should have come in by Christ.

He brings an argument out of Calvin, because the Apostle spoke of such
governments as the Church had at that time, but the Church had no civil
Christian Magistrates at that time; only the major of that argument wants
proof, that the Apostle speaks of such officers as were in the Church in his
time only: that cannot be proved; I shall urge some few arguments to the
contrary: the word (...) will not enforce is, seeing that word will signify
proposuit or decre^^^, as well as posuit, he has appointed: and that may take
in, not only such officers, the present state of the Church did afford, but
also hose as should hear caster, by Gods appointment, come to the Church: and
this is plain that in sundry places the word does so signify, as Joh. 15.16. I
have ordained you, that you shall go and bring forth fruit, Act. 19.21. Paul
purposed, both made by (...) and (...), yet both are referred to time to come:
and then that which you translate placed, may be rendered, he has appointed to
his Church the execution referred to the providence of God, when he shall be
pleased to afford his Church the enjoyment of these several endowments and
gifts: for it is plain, there is in that catalogue, some such as the Church
shall not always have; and why not some also, which at that time the Church
had not? This cannot be a catalogue of such officers as are at all times
necessary to the Church; for then Apostles, might not be mentioned; because the
Church is, and long time has been without them, as workers of miracles.

2. At that time there were workers of miracles, which did supply the defect of
civil Magistrates, which is to workt upon naturalls, to induce men to attend
upon the means, Act. 8.6. And the people with one accord gave heed unto those
things which Philip spoke, hearing, and seeing the miracles which he did.

Thus much a national covenant, and civil Magistrate, may require of the
people, that they will attend upon the means, out of natural principles, Deum
esse, and (...): in the manner of which worship, so far as concerns the
external education: from youth, and tradition, instruction of parents, and
humane laws, are the foundations and the bounds of national and public
worship: and upon this ground the Israelites were commanded to reach their
children the Law of God; and God entered into covenant with the father, for the
child, as with Abraham: and the same obligation lies upon Christian parents to
instruct their children, Ephesians. 6.4. And you fathers, provoke not your children
to wrath: but bring them up in the ^urture and admonition of the Lord. Which
yet they might not, if the doctrine of the Gospel might not be received of the
father, for the son, and the father might not require of his son the form of
doctrine.

Saint Paul calls the doctrine of the Gospel, Romans 6.7. a form: God be
thanked ye have obeyed the form of doctrine, that was delivered unto you, 2.
Tim. 1.13. Hold fast the so me of sound words which thou have heard of me: this
is called fides quo^ cr^dimus, and this may be the obligation of humans
society: and God, and Christ, and Scripture, may be agreed on by natural men,
even as Idolaters set up their worship; yet if the Scripture be received for
the rule, there is a sound form of words, and he that hears and beleaveth,
and obayeth from the heart, shall be saved, though the Magistrate and Minister
should drive on to politic and ambitious ends, yet the believer shall be
saved; and this is the assistance and help the Church can have from a civil
Magistrate: and how great a mercy is this to Gods people when all encouragement
shall be given to the preaching of the Gospel? when the lust and riot of a
people shall be restrained by the civil Magistrate: men that refuse to hear
the word punished in their persons and estates, and thereby for fear of the
Magistrate be brought to the means, God must judge of the success, as
likewise give it. Compare this with the contrary motions of authority, by fire
and sword to suppress the Gospel, and then see whether this be not indeed
helps to the Church, which though those times wanted, yet God appointed that
after ages should have; and in the mean time did cause men to attend to the
means by miracles. I have proved that the people were inclined to hearken to
doctrine by miracles, which moves natural men to flock together to see
strange things: if a mount chancke come and tell people be both medicines of
strange operations, to cure and kill, to wound and heal, how will people
flocks together to hear and see some strange thing? est natura heminum
novimtis avids: I have likewise showed you that people may and ought to receive
God, and Christ; and Scripture, by public consent: and whatsoever it received
by public consent is an act of humane law, and to be acted by the civil
Magistrate.

Now God does not work miracles, but to supply defect of natural means, when
they are wanting: Christ cured, when Physicians could not: makes wine of water
when they had no wine: provided Manna, when they were in the wilderness, and
wanted provision, which coased when they enjoyed the provision of the Land.
When the Gospel was first, and nations were not converted, then miracles were
necessary to cause attention: but after, when nations were converted, which
Christ sent out his Disciples to do, with all speed, then there will be no use
of miracles: attention and use of means may be agreed upon, the effect of them
every man is concerned to look to for his own salvation: and happy are we if
we can enjoy the means without Inquisitions, and faggots, and blood.

And to look nearer into the Text, to see that this was but an appointment,
and not a present execution: lie have not here a continued catalogue, but ye
have these interruptions, (...), then (...), then (...), all these might be
present, and liable to view: then ye have (...), and to that ye have annexed
miracles: they lasted somewhat longer then the Apostles and Prophets: and last
ye have (...), and these may be ordinary gift: healing, if distinguished from
miracles, is an ordinary gift: so are diverse tongues; and there remains no
more but helps, governments, and what these helps are, Calvin confesses he
cannot tell: he thinks they were some officers the Church has lost: men are
mightily troubled for want of officers, but being put both in one case without
any conjunction copulative, why they may not belong both to one thing, and this
(...) may not have some influence upon the times and after age; seeing this
catalogue is superadditum ecclesia, and the gifts mentioned, not limited by
their ends, but only noted as different gifts, to note that all have not the
like qualifications: but in Ephesians. 4.11. there when the Apostle sets down
officers, as means to the ends which in actions and moralls have a great
influence upon the nature of the thing: he leaves out helps and governments,
and reckons only fowr: Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, and Teachers; all but
Teachers employed about the word it self, the foundation, penmen of the word,
no more left to us but the Teacher, and he alone with the help of the labors,
of the Apostles, Prophets, and Evangelists; for without them they can do
nothing: yet there this poor teacher is left alone to perfect the Saints, to
perform the work of the Ministry, to edify the body of Christ: here is
neither help, nor government, yet all these things done without them.

Besides in that very place where S. Paul by an induction does demonstrate that
God has appointed diversities of gifts, reckons all the rest, and skippeth
over helps, governments, and leaves them wholly out, which of necessity he
must do where he was in his induction to deal with their experience, if none
such were to be found at that time, they might tell him you ask us whether all
be helps and governments, we see no such thing; we are so far from thinking all
governments, that we find none at all, but why otherwise they should be left
out I know not seeing they did cleerest set forth the difference that one
member has from another (especially to natural men) which was S. Paul's
argument, and therefore I think there were none then.

He has two other arguments to show the mis-application of this text, but are
trifles not worth answer.

The first is the catalogue of Church officers.

The Magistrate is behind the Minister.

Next he cites Ephesians. 1.21, 22, 23. to prove that all government is given to
Christ, and to him as mediator, and Christ as head of these, is given to the
Church: Mr. Gillespie says this place makes more against him then for him;
something for him by your confession, is the Scripture contrary to it self, in
the same place pro and con, The Apostle says not that Christ is given to the
Church a head of all principalities and powers: The brother says so, and in so
saying, he makes Christ a head to those that are not his body. 1 Is This a
very nice exception, the text says plainly that the power of God showed it
self in Christ; 1 in raising him from the dead. 2 In setting him at the right
hand of God, which Calvin expounds to signify the power which the Father
bestowed upon Christ: and further says that these words of the 21 ver^e far
above principality is an exegesis, explaining the right hand of God, the words
are, he set him at his own right hand far above principalities, etc. but in
22, he gave him to be head over all things to his Church; he says not head
over principalities, but all things; here is great cause of exception, here is
far above principalities, but not head; here is head of all things, but not
principalities: may not he that is far above be called the chief or head;
or may not he that is head of all things, be well called head of
Principalities: it is true, disputations do require men to keep close to
terms; but in Col. 2.10. ye have the very words, head of all principalities
and powers; the brother is to blame for saying so: why may not the brother
speak, as St. Paul speaks; but it seems the Commissioner will confute St.
Paul inso saying, he shall make Christ head of them that are not his body.
Well the Commissioner will not have Christ head of any but his body, then I
trust he is not head of your Presbytery, for then he must be head of many that
are not of his body; for howsoever men may by rules of charity have the
estimation of members of Christ, yet certainly Christ is head of none but his
elect; no visible Church can challenge the privilege of being the members of
Christ, every faithful man may, but the visible Church cannot; I desire this
may be proved, that unbeleevers and hypocrites are members of Christ. If in the
visible Church if Christ be considered as head of the Church, which does by his
mediation convey the graces of justification and sanctification upon the
faithful; so the visible Church is not the body of Christ, as having many
members that have no life of grace, nor any such growth as is mentioned, Ephesians.
4.15. in that argument, that government that Christ has over the faithful, is
truly spiritual, and not of this world, and of this Kingdom he has indeed no
officers, but his Spirit; all these members have immediate union with Christ by
faith. As for applying that distinction of the exaltation of Christ in respect
of honor and dignity; but not his Kingly office to the interpretation of this
text, that Christ is in more honor then any creature; but he executes his
Kingly office as mediator over the Church only; and the Apostle says only he
is far above them: he says not he is head or King of them. I hope the
Commissioner will have the Holy Ghost speak sense, and make the comparison to
be made in all these things that he is preferred in, he sits nearer the
right hand of God, then any principality: you will allow that Christ is here
spoken of as mediator, as raised from the dead, and set at the right hand of
God the Father: See what the Apostle says; he says, he is above principality,
in principality; power, in power; might, in might; dominion, in dominion; power
and might are (...) and (...), the first is right, the other is power to
maintain that right; thus the words must be understood if the comparison be
artificial, and a due comparison. I hope you cannot deny that all these in any
acception, are under the right hand of God, and there Christ as mediator
sits, and is nearer the right hand of God; in all these respects, he is
above them, but not head: but if this had been to be understood above in
dignity only, that is in estimation: only this must have been limited to
estimation with God, for we all know that he has no such estimation among
many names on earth, which yet he is above even in their own greatness,
whenever he is pleased to make use of that right hand of God, where he is set.

For that his illustration as he called it, it is rather an aberration from the
matter in hand, then any thing toward the manifestation of it; our
excellencies, dignities and powers are so derivative, and in estimation only,
that they yield us no government at all; no man can so far exceed another as to
obtain government by his excellency, without some law or consent of others to
bestow it; this is nothing to the interpreter of the place: if all this had no
more but expressed the dignity of Christ; what need all this accumulation of
words, when all might have been expressed in this word, He is far above all
dignities? for though here is a preferring of Christ before rights, and powers,
and dominions, yet he has none of all these but dignities, and these are all
in this world, and that which is to come: if ye understand the word World as
many do to make room for the Church, he has no dignity there neither: so all
this majesty of words comes to nothing in this world, and in the end of the
world he lays down all to his Father. But volens, nolens, at last the
Commissioner must come to it, Christ is head of principalities: in the place
before cited, Col. 2.10. but that is in another sense, not as he is mediator,
but only as he is God: and the Apostles meaning is nothing but this, that
Christ is true God, does he not mean also that he is true Christ, as well as
that he is true God? and if Christ, does he not mean that he is mediator? but
the Commissioner says, that in that place the Apostle shows is true God;
does that follow that speaks not of Christ as mediator, because he speaks
of him as true God: is not Christ true God as mediator? he teaches the
Collossians not to worship Angels, because servants: but may they not worship
Christ as Mediator? yes doubtless they may. Now it is plain that he speaks
of Christ as mediator, as may clearly appear both in the 9 verse and beginning
of 10 verse, in him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily; that in Christ
the mediator ye are complete in him, that is as mediator: the text says, that
he is head of principality and power, that proves that Christ is God, says
Mr. Gillespie, God not mediator? that is no consequence; ye ought not to
worship Angels, who are but creatures, because ye are complete in him that is
God; and in him that is better then Angels, and is head over them, therefore
not as mediator, but as second Person in Trinity? I see no consequence in this
collection.

But it is plainly interpreted in the Colloss. 1.15.16.17. how Christ is head
of principality and power: It is plain in that place the Apostle speaks of
Christ in whom we have redemption through his blood; that is, as mediator, the
image of the invisible God: that is, we have the knowledge of God made known
to us in him, Joh. 1.18. that is as mediator, if by communication of properties
the creation were attributed to Christ as God; is it therefore denied to him as
mediator? well let the Commissioner, acute Philosophari do Deo, and say as God
and not as mediator, he did create the world, and together with other things
did create principalities and powers: well, if it be not the office of the
mediator to create the world: shall it not therefore be in the compass of the
mediators office to govern any thing that was created? now here is a new
distinction between the person and office of Christ, what kind of division
shall this be? shall this be a lawful distribution of Christ's actions? some
personal, some official, those things that prove Christ to be God, do by no
means belong to the office of Christ: he says all this is to be understood
not of his governing and Kingly office, but to prove that he is true God: I
formerly showed that what does belong to the second Person in Trinity, together
with Father, and Holy Ghost, and is denied to belong to God man, does in no
sense belong to Christ: the person of Christ is God and man, no consideration
of Christ but as God man; nothing can be said of Christ as second Person in
Trinity in opposition to mediator, but in opposition to man, there may, as
before.

But here something has the show of an argument, that Christ has two
Kingdoms, one as God, other as Mediator, and that is taken from the
continuation; he has a Kingdom that he shall lay down unto God his Father:
there is another that he shall retain together with God the Father, the first,
he has over the Church only; the second, over all the world: here is something
said, but does it appear that the Kingdom that he shall lay down to God his
Father is not over all the world? The laying open of this business will solve
the whole knot, and lay the vanity thereof to the view of all the world.

Christ has a Kingdom which he will lay down to God his Father, which
Kingdom is also called eternal, 2 Pet. 1.11. which is understood of the
Kingdom of grace; for he said, they should make their calling and election
sure; then they should never fall, for so an entrance shall be made into the
everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus: in this Kingdom he is
sovereigne Lord, to none but those unto whom he is also a Savior: now the word
Kingdom is taken diverse ways, sometimes for the subjects of the Kingdom, and
in that sense, those that are the elect of God shall evermore be made subject
to the government of Christ; sometime for the manner of administration, and so
Christ in the day of judgment shall lay down all the office of mediatorship;
and that government by which now, and in the last day, not the Church only, but
all the world shall be judged, Romans 2.16. God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, and this is called the Kingdom of Christ, because by his
mediation has obtained from the Father that he shall not judge any man
according to rigor, but as they are in, or out of Christ, all deferring of
judgment from the wicked, is in and for Christ, which otherwise the justice of
God would not allow; all the admission of us into the presence of God, is by
the humanity of Christ, all conveying of grace to us is by Christ, he is to us
wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption: but when he has overcome
all his enemies, and presented all his elect to God his Father, and judged all
that are out of him to eternal condemnation; then shall all that dispensation
of justice cease, which is therefore called the Kingdom of Christ because by
his Gospel all shall be judged, and by him, and for him, all that reign for
ever with God, shall be presented to him.

Now this is not so to be understood, as says Calvin, as if God the Father
were idle while Christ reigned: that Majesty which God bestowed on Christ, was
not convenient for bare man, but in the nature that he was humbled he was
exalted by the Father, and he gave him a name before whom every knee should
bow, Phil. 2.9.10. in the government of the world, he is as it were the Vicar
of his Father; it cannot be that the Father should be idle, while he is
employed, seeing he is the wisdom of the Father, and of the same essence with
him; but the Scripture does tell us, that Christ has the government of heaven
and earth instead of the Father, that we should not think of any other Lord
and governor but him, that we should look for salvation only in him; we
acknowledge God to be governor but in the face of the man Christ: but then
when Christ shall give up the Kingdom which he has received, he shall not
spoil himself of his Kingdom, but transfer it from his humane nature, to
his divine; because we shall then have access to God, whither our infirmity
will not now permit us to come; then the veil being removed we shall see God
reigning in glory, without the mediation of the manhood of Christ.

Now it is true, none are in pace Domini Regis, but the Church, nor all them
neither, if ye speak of the visible Church: but shall not men be judged by
Christ, for not knowing God, and for disobedience to the Gospel? it is plain,
z. These. they shall; and the thieves, and disobedient transgressors, are
under government, as well as more legal, and better subjects.

But grant, that the Kingdom of Christ were in, and over his Church only,
which will never be prooved, nor dare I ever grant, but rethorice, yet what is
this for your different government, from the civil? Christ's Kingdom is
administered in dextra Dei; and you said Mr. Coleman must prove if the civil
Magistrate will be but King under Christ his deputation, may not the like be
required of you, Mr. Gillespie? I pray prove any commission issuing out from
the Kingly office of Christ: Christ had three offices, his Priestly office
finished in offering himself: his Kingly office we read how it came to him,
sitting at the right hand of his Father, but any commission for any man to
govern under him in that Kingdom, we read none: Tanta Majestas non convenit
Christo homini, says Calvin upon 1. Cor. 15. And therefore, if the kingdom be
such, as man cannot enjoy, it is such, as man cannot execute: and when Christ
said, His kingdom was not of this world, be says, he had other manner of
creatures then men: he could procure many Angels, though one were enough to
vindicate that kingdom.

It is plain Christ did delegate officers, to execute his prophetical office,
and granted a commission to his Apostles to last to the end of the world; but
his Kingly office he executes, by the right hand of his Father, where he
sits at the right hand of the Majesty on high: his prophecy he executed
himself on earth, as a man, and when he left the earth, deputed officers to
execute that office in his absence, till he return to judge in the last day:
obedience is due as well to a Prophet, as to a King, nay Kings themselves ought
to obey the voice of Prophets. Our Savior tells the Disciples sent but to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Matthew. 10. That he that despises them,
despises him: if he will bear it, let us content our selves. Paul was an
elect vessel to carry the name of Christ before Kings, accordingly he does in
the name of Christ direct Kings, to do their offices, as the instruments of
God, and commands their subjects to obey them: the very word instrument does
implie, that they are in the hand of God, and therefore though instrumenta
animalia, nay rationalia, and so capable of an instruction, yet if they work
not according to the mind of God, the right hand of God will rule them where
Christ also sits in majesty.

If Christ had three offices, let us take heed how we confound them: the office
of his prophecy, is to teach: he that will not hear the voice of that
Prophet, shall die the death: but the passing that sentence of death belongs
to another office, namely the Kingly office, for which Christ has appointed an
assize, which is called the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor. 1.8. that ye
may be blameles in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ: all transgressors are
every where bound over, to answer their offenses before Christ at his coming:
but summons is the act of the Prophetical office of Christ committed unto us
his Ministers: now what reason is it that we preach the necessity of their
appeareance to answer all their sins, infidelity, impenitency, before Christ,
that we should without any commission of Oyer and Determiner, take upon us to
censure these that the Gospel summoneth before the time come?

Or if we grant further, that Christ has granted the execution of his Kingly
office, to his Church, what is that to the Ministers? That is nothing to the
Ministers, their work is not dominion, but by the prophecy, and teaching to
help says, which the holy Ghost has separated, 2. Cor. 1.24. not that we
have dominion of your faith, but are helpers of your joy. Let any man prove
that a Minister has any more to do from Christ, then to teach and baptize,
which of necessity you must if you employ him jure divino, about government.
God forbid we should leave the word of God, and serve at Tables: the Bishops
heretofore did except counsel tables, and you must except consistory tables:
or certainly, whether they have tables or no, your consistory employment: for
there is as much impediment in that, as in other employments to preaching the
word.

If then I say, this dominion be derived from Christ, though you must make as
hard shifts to prove it, as the Pope to derive his authority from Peter: why
should those that are the Ministers intermeddle? why should we endeavor to
persuade men to make use of this sentence of excommunication, to set the people
of God one against another? me thinks our aim should be to preach unity. St.
Paul did every where preach this unity: and in the same Epistle wherein, upon
occasion, he preaches this excommunication, as you will have it, he begins
his Epistle with an exhortation to unity, among the people, and among the
teachers, 1. Cor. 1.10.13. Now I beseech you brethren by the Name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions
among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in
the same judgment. For ought I see, here is nothing preached that may bind
up the breaches, but as though nothing were intended but division,
excommunication is the only subject: let us preach unity, a good while, that so
they may get footing, to excommunicate hereafter, if any such thing do
appear out of the word of God. If means were made for this unity first, when
we can all agree about excommunication, we may have piety and peace in the
injoiment of it: but blessed be God, now they be the same persons, the same
qualifications requisite to acting in Church and common wealth: why should the
same man in the field electing a Knight of the Shire, be divided against
himself, as a Church man, and common wealths man? why should this man choosing
a Knight, act, by other principles then in choosing an elder? should he make
choice of an holy man to be an elder, a wicked man for the Parliament? how much
better were it for all men, to comfort themselves in this, that they do enjoy
this Christian liberty, that nothing is laid upon them but by their own
consent (so as the consent of any humane society can be procured) we are as
free in our estates, as in our consciences? and thus Christian liberty is to be
understood: you are free, 1. Pet. 2.16. is not so to be understood, that they
ought not to subject themselves to the necessary rules of humane society, that
Christians might make covenants of subjection, as in the election of a member
of the Parliament, and then break that covenant by Christian liberty, or to
imagine your selves not borne under the laws of your Country, because
Christians.

Thus far you are free by Christian liberty to obey parents in the Lord only:
when your natural parents, or parents of your country commands any thing
against God, you are the Lords freee-men, God is above them.

Blessed be Almighty God, our Magistrates profess it is their duty to be
guided by the word of God; and happy are we that we have such Magistrates: let
not us have our liberty as a cloak of malice; why should a Commonwealth be
denied the appellation and privilege of a Church? did Christ principally aim
at Nations, and put their names only into the Commission? Teach all Nations,
under that word comprehending all men, and refuse any Nation the admittance
into the covenant of the Church: what must words of a Commission admit of a
Rhetorical sense, and have no literal truth, some of all Nations, not the
representative body of a Nation? But if the Parliament will give me leave and
such encouragement that I may make it my work, I shall endeavor to make
appear the great mistake, the name and nature of the Church.

But now at last, Mr. Gillespie has gotten ground, and adventureth more boldly
upon these words, before they made more against him, then for him: now not one
word in the text for him, before there was something for him, and something
against him; now not one word for him.

Verse the 21 affords this argument against him: The honor and dignity that
Christ there speaks of, has place not only in this world, but that which is
to come: but the government that is given to Christ as Mediator, shall not
continue in the world to come: therefore the government given to Christ as he
is Mediator cannot be meant in that place: This is ignoratio Elenchi, a plain
and obvious fallacy, here is government given to Christ in this world, and
that which is to come; that which belongs to him in reference to the world to
come, belongs not to him as Mediator, therefore that government that is given
to him in reference to this world, is not given to him as Mediator; seeing the
words do yield this argument, I am glad they yield no better. I have already
showed the sense of Christ laying down his Kingdom to God his Father.

Verse 22. He has put all things under his feet; that is, says Zanchius, all
things but his Church which is his body; and why must the Church be excepted?
Mr. Gillespie could see that all things yet were not put under in Heb. 2.8. the
latter part of the verse, but could not see the words immediately going before,
he has left nothing that is not put under him: but the Church is not under
Christ, then Christ does not govern his Church: he has so troubled the sense
of these words, that truly I cannot understand what he means: he cites 1
Cor. 15.25. he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet; and
in Act. 2.34.35. Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thy foes thy footstool.
Now, says Mr. Gillespie, When Christ bath put down all rule, and all
authority, and power, and put all his enemies under his feet: then he shall
cease to reign as Mediator, but till that be done, he shall reign as
Mediator: so that it can never be proved, that the meaning of these words, he
has put all things under his feet, is that, all government is given to Christ
as Mediator. Here is great struggling to find out a Kingdom for Christ, as
Mediator over the Church only: and this putting all things under his feet, must
signify Christ's Kingdom, after the Mediators Kingdom is given up to the
Father; because as soon as Christ has put all things under his feet he
reigns as Mediator no longer.

For answer to this argument, I say, that until he has put all his enemies
under his feet in 1 Cor. 15.25. and he that has put all things under, 27. have
not the same antecedent; the former, he is God man, the Mediator: the latter,
is God the Father; in the former the subject of this subjection is his enemies;
this latter, all things: the former is an actual putting them under; this
latter, as Mr. Gillespie does allow out of Jerome, is but in decree: put under
his feet in the former, is final destruction of death, a putting down of all
rule, authority and power, a confusion and destruction of all his enemies: in
the latter, God put Christ's enemies, under his feet; but under the common
condition of all things, friends and foes are put under the government of
Christ by God his Father; here he is set above principalities, but lets them
alone in their inferior condition; there he puts them down, here they are
under him, but there he ^^keth them quite away; here he receives the
government of the Mediator, there he finisheth it: here God puts all things
under Christ, Church and all, whatsoever Zanchius says to the contrary: there
Christ, according to the power that is here given him, puts his enemies
only under his feet: here God gives the right in recompense of his suffering,
as Phil. 2. wherefore God has exalted him, etc. There he executes his wrath
upon his enemies: in the mean time he governs as mediator, and keeps off
the destruction from the wicked, and confirms his people, that they may be
blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The next words furnish Mr. Gillespie with another argument against Mr.
Coleman: gave him to be head over all things to his Church. I know not how Mr.
Gillespie does find out his arguments; the words stand for Mr. Coleman still:
the gift is given to his Church, or for the help and benefit of his Church:
but he was given to be head over all: he is head over none, says Mr.
Gillespie, but his Church. Is this to argue out of Scripture, or rather to
deny, and outface the Scripture? the Scripture, says he, is over all, for the
good and benefit of his Church: what good can he do his Church, by an empty
dignity, without any government or authority? but if he that has power over
all things be given to his Church, this is a gift indeed full of comfort to
his Church, that he that is head in respect of influence and life, is head of
all things, or at least over them in government.

The last verse does further confirm what I say, says Mr. Gillespie, for the
Apostle continuing his speech says, which is his body, the fulness of him that
fills all in all: he calls the Church Christ's fulness, in reference to his
headship: That seems tolerably to come from the Text: but see the fallacy
coming after: that which makes him complete, so far as he is head or King:
how comes this word King in here? Having his Church fully gathered, he has
his complete Kingdom, his perfect body. Then as soon as he has gotten his
Kingdom, he presently lays down; such a Kingdom scarce worth the name of a
Kingdom, that exceeds not the bounds of his own body, and continues no
longer then he has got the crown; for Christ's body not complete till the last
day. This is very great liberty, that Mr. Gillespie takes in arguing more then
poetica licentia, to put in King, when it is not in the Text, whence he will
ground his argument: Does not Christ, as mediator, fill heaven and earth? sure
as mediator he is God, what is he God as mediator, without the properties of
God; I never heard of such argumentation: but in the question of
transubstantiation, there is accidens, sine subjecto, and subjectum, fine
accidentibus propriis: here is Deus sine Deo: as for his (...), and (...),
glory, power, and kingdom: glory, not derived from a Kingdom, I know none; a
kingdom, without power and glory, a nominall empty thing; kingdom, power and
glory, is nothing but a complete Kingdom. He tells us, that Christ as
Mediator executes acts of divine power over all creatures in behalf of his
Church, if he has right to do it then he is King, I think: I desire Mr.
Gillespie to give us some descriptions of the terms of his division, of
kingdom, power and glory; and see how by Scripture he can prove how they do
agree or not, to Christ as Mediator, under his description; and see further how
these terms may serve for interpreting of Scripture, and setting up of his
opinion. But Mr. Gillespie is very angry with this opinion, that Christ as
Mediator is King of Kings, and all do govern under him, and ought to govern
for him, I wonder he is so much offended, sure it is not because he would not
have Christ have so much power; nay he is afraid that Ministers shall be
deprived of some part of the office that Christ has committed to them: by my
consent if Mr. Gillespie can prove that any part of government was given to the
Ministers, by Christ; no man shall question Christ's title; and I hope our
Magistrates will not take any thing from us, Christ has given us: I wish that
men would look impartially upon the word of God, and see how it can be proved
that Christ has given any government to Ministers immediately, or whether any
to the Church: to give all disputants and godly men opportunity to deal
clearly in these points, I wish these points might be decided among our selves
in a candid dispute, rather then to fill the world with our differences.

Let these be the questions.

1. Whether Christ gave any more government to Ministers then is contained in
preaching and baptizing? Neg.

2. Whether he gave any government to the Church at all? Neg.

3. Whether Ministers have any right to those privileges that are given to the
Church more then another Christian? Neg.

4. Whether a Commonwealth professing the Gospel be a visible Church? Aff.

5. Whether any member of such a Commonwealth rightly ordered where he has his
consent to making of Civil Laws, may hold himself free from such Laws in
matters of conscience? Neg.

6. Whether Ministers have commission from Christ to preach? Aff.

7. Whether the people have any power to choose their Ministers? Neg.

These things being heartily discussed, and we being all of one mind in them,
I hope peace may be expected amongst all the members of the Kingdom,

Which God grant.

FINIS.

