THE SEVERAL SPEECHES OF Duke Hamilton Earl of Cambridg, Henry Earl of Holland,
and Arthur Lord Capel, Upon the SCAFFOLD Immediately before their EXECUTION, On
Friday the 9. of March.

Also the several Exhortations, and Conferences with them, upon the SCAFFOLD,
by Dr Sibbald, Mr Bolton, and Mr Hodges.

Published by special Authority.

LONDON, Printed for Peter Cole, Francis Tyton, and John Playford. 164^.

The several Speeches of Earl of Cambridg, the Earl of Holland, and the Lord
Capel, upon the Scaffold, etc.
UPon Friday the ninth of this instant, being the day appointed for the
Execution of the sentence of Death upon the Earl of Cambridg, the Earl of
Holland, and the Lord Capel, about ten of the Clock that morning L.Col. Beecher
came with his Order to the several Prisoners at St James's, requiring them to
come away; According to which Order they were carried in Sedans, with a Guard,
to Sir Thomas Cottons house at Westminster, where they continued about the
space of two hours, passing away most of that time in religious and seasonable
Conferences with the Ministers there present with them. After which, being
called away to the Scaffold, it was desired, that before they went they might
have the opportunity of commending their Souls to God by prayer, which being
readily granted, and the room voyded, Mr Bolton was desired by the Lord of
Holland to take that pains with them, which was accordingly done with great
appearance of solemn Affections among them. Prayer being concluded, and hearty
Thanks returned by them all to the Minister who performed, as also to the rest
who were their Assistants in this sad time of trouble; the Earl of Cambridge
prepared first to go toward the place of Execution; and after mutual embraces,
and some short ejaculatory expressions, to and for his fellow sufferers, he
took his leave of them all, and went along with the Officers, attended upon by
Dr Sibbald, whom he had chosen for his Comforter in this his sad condition.

The Scaffold being erected in the new Palace-yard at Westminster, over against
the great Hal-Gate, in the sight of the place where the High Court of Justice
formerly sat (the Hal-doors being open,) there was his Excellencies Regiment
of Horse commanded by Capt. Disher, and several Companies of Col. Hewsons and
Col. Prides Regiments of Foot drawn up in the place: When the Earl came from
Westminster Hall near the Scaffold, he was met by the Undersheriff of
Middlesex, and a Guard of his men, who took the charge of him from Lieut. Col.
Beecher and the Partisans that were his Guard; The Sheriff of London being
also, according to Command from the High Court of Justice, present, to see the
Execution performed.

The Earl of Cambridg being come upon the Scaffold, and two of his own servants
waiting upon him, he first spoke to the Doctor as follows:

Earl of Cambridg. Whether shall I pray first?


Dr Sibbald. As Your Lordship pleases.


Earl of Cambridg. My Lord of Denbigh has sent to speak with me.

I know not the fashion, I may ask you Sir; Do these Gentlemen expect I should
say any thing to them, or no, they cannot hear?


Dr Sibbald. There will be a greater silence by and by. It will not be amiss,
if Your Lordship defer Your speaking till You hear from his Lordship.


Cambridg. There is something in it. He was with the House.


Dr Sibbald. I suppose he would give no interruption to Your Lordship, at this
time, were there not something of concernment in it.


Cambridg. He is my Brother, and has been a very faithful Servant to this
State, and he was in great esteem and reputation with them.

He is in the Hall, and sent to speak with a Servant of mine to send something
to me.


Dr Sibbald. It will not lengthen the time much if you stay while you have a
Return from him. My Lord, you should do well to bestow your time now in
meditating upon, and imploring of the free mercy of God in Christ for your
eternal Salvation, and look upon that ever-streaming Fountain of his precious
Blood, that purges us from all our sins, even the sins of the deepest dye; the
Blood of Jesus Christ washes away all our sins, and that Blood of Christ is
poured forth upon all such as by a lively Faith lay hold upon him: God so loved
the World that he gave his only begotten Son, to the end, that whosoever
believed in him should not perish, but have everlasting life; that is now, my
Lord, the Rock upon which you must chiefly rest, and labor to fix your self in
the free mercy of God through Christ Jesus, whose mercies are from everlasting
to everlasting, unto all such as with the eye of Faith behold him; behold Jesus
the Author and Finisher of your Salvation, who has satisfied the Justice of
God by that Al-sufficiency of his Sacrifice, which once for all he offered upon
the Cross for the sins of the whole world, so that the sting of death is taken
away from all Believers, and he has sanctified it as a passage to everlasting
blessedness: It is true, the waters of Jordan run somewhat rough and surly,
betwixt the Wilderness and our passage into Canaan; but let us rest upon the
Ark (my Lord) the Ark Christ Jesus, that will carry us through, and above all
those waves to that Rock of ages, which no flood nor waves can reach unto, and
to him who is yesterday, to day, and the same for ever, against whom the Powers
and Principalities, the gates of Hell, shall never be able to prevail; lift up
and fasten your eyes now upon Christ crucified; and labor to behold Jesus
standing at the right hand of his Father, (as the Protomartyr Stephen) ready to
receive your soul, when it shall be separated from this frail and mortal body:
Alas, no man would desire life, if he knew beforehand what it were to live, it
is nothing but sorrow, vexation and trouble, grief and discontent that waits
upon every condition, whether public or private; in every station and calling
there are several miseries and troubles that are inseparable from them;
therefore what a blessed thing it is to have a speedy and comfortable passage
out of this raging Sea, into the Port of everlasting Happiness; We must pass
through a Sea, but it is the Sea of Christ's Blood, in which never soul suffered
shipwreck, in which we must be blown with winds and tempests, but they are the
Gales of Gods Spirit upon us, which blow away all contrary winds of diffidence
in his Mercy.

Here one acquainting the Earl, his servant was coming, he answered, So Sir;
And turning to the under Sheriffs son, said.


Cambridg. Sir, have you your Warrant here?


Sheriff. Yes, my Lord, we have a Command.


Cambridg. A Command.

I take this time, Sir, of staying, in regard of the Earl of Denbighs sending
to speak with me, I know not for what it is he desires me to stay.


Dr Sibbald. I presume Mr Sheriff will not grudg your Lordship a few minutes
time, when so great a work as this is in hand.

His Lordships servant being returned, and having delivered his Message to the
Earl of Cambridg privately, he said. So, it is done now; and then turning to
the front of the Scaffold, before which (as in all the rest of the palace)
there was a great concourse of people, he said;


Earl of Cambridg. I think it is truly not very necessary for me to speak much,
there are many Gentlemen and Soldiers there that sees me, but my voice truly
is so weak, so low, that they cannot hear me, neither truly was I ever at any
time so much in love with speaking, or with any thing I had to express, that I
took delight in it; yet this being the last time that I am to do so, by a
divine Providence of Almighty God, who has brought me to this end justly for
my sins. I shall to you Sir, Mr Sheriff, declare thus much, as to the matter
that I am now to suffer for, which is as being a Traitor to the Kingdom of
England: Truly Sir, it was a Country that I equally loved with my own, I made
no difference, I never intended either the generality of its prejudice, or any
particular man's in it; what I did was by the Command of the Parliament of the
Country where I was born, whose Commands I could not disobey, without running
into the same hazard there, of that condition that I am now in: The ends, Sir,
of that Engagement is public, they are in Print, and so I shall not need to
specify them.


Dr Sibbald. The Sun perhaps will be too much in Your Lordships face, as You
speak.


Cambridg. No Sir, it will not burn it. I hope I shall see a brighter Sun then
this, Sir, very speedily.


Dr. Sibbald. The Sun of Righteousness my Lord.


Cambridg. (But to that which I was saying Sir.) It pleased God so to dispose
that Army under my Command, as it was ruined; and I, as their General, clothed
with a Commission, stand here, now ready to dye; I shall not trouble you with
repeating of my Plea, what I said in my own Defense at the Court of JUSTICE, my
self being satisfied with the commands that is laid upon me, and they satisfied
with the Justness of their procedure, according to the Laws of this Land. God
is just, and howsoever I shall not say any thing as to the matter of the
sentence, but that I do willingly submit to his divine Providence, and
acknowledge that very many ways I deserve even a worldly punishment, as well
as hereafter, for we are all sinful, Sir, and I a great one; yet for my
comfort I know there is a God in heaven that is exceeding merciful; I know my
Redeemer sits at his right hand, and am confident, (clapping his hand to his
breast) is mediating for me at this instant, I am hopeful through his free
grace and all-sufficient merits, to be pardoned of my sins, and to be received
into his mercy, upon that I rely, trusting to nothing but the free grace of God
through Jesus Christ, I have not been tainted with my Religion I thank God for
it, since my infancy it has been such as has been professed in the Land, and
established, and now it is not this Religion or that Religion, nor this or that
fancy of men that is to be built upon, it is but one that is right, one that is
sure, and that comes from God. Sir, and in the free grace of our Savior. Sir,
there is truly something that Observing the Writers.
(had I thought my speech would have been thus taken,) I would have digested it
into some better method then now I can, and shall desire these Gentlemen that
does write it, that they will not wrong me in it, and that it may not in this
manner be published to my disadvantage, for truly I did not intend to have
spoken thus when I came here.

There is, sirs, terrible aspersions has been laid upon my self; truly such as,
I thank God, I am very free from; as if my actions and intentions had not been
such as they were pretended for; but that notwithstanding what I pretended it
was for the King, there was nothing less intended then to serve him in it. I
was bred with him for many years, I was his domestique servant, and there was
nothing declared by the Parliament that was not really intended by me; and
truly in it I ventured my life one way, and now I lose it another way: and that
was one of the ends, as to the King; I speak only of that, because the rest has
many particulars; and to clear my self from so horrid an aspersion as is laid
upon me: neither was there any other design known to me by the incoming of that
Army, then what is really in the Declaration published. His person, I do
profess, I had reason to love, as he was my King, and as he had been my
Master: it has pleased God now to dispose of him, so as it cannot be thought
flatery to have said this, or any end in me for the saying of it, but to free
my self from that calumny which lay upon me: I cannot gain by it; yet Truth
is that which we shall gain by for ever.

There has been much spoken, Sir, of an invitation into this Kingdom: it is
mentioned in that Declaration, and truly to that I did and do remit my self:
and I have been very much labored for discoveries of these inviters. It Is no
time to dissemble. How willing I was to have served this Nation in any thing
that was in my power, is known to very many honest, pious and religious men;
and how ready I would have been to have done what I could to have served them,
if it had pleased them to have preserved my life, in whose hands there was a
power: They have not thought it fit, and so I am become unusefull in that which
willingly I would have done. As I said at first (Sir) so I say now concerning
that point; I wish the Kingdoms happiness, I wish its peace; and truly Sir, I
wish that this blood of mine may be the last that is drawn: and howsoever I may
perhaps have some reluctancie with my self as to the matter of my suffering,
for my fact, yet I freely forgive all; Sir, I carry no rancour along with me to
my grave: His will be done that has created both heaven and earth, and me a
poor miserable sinful creature now speaking before him. For me to speak, Sir,
to you of State-businesse, and the Government of the Kingdom, or my opinion in
that, or for any thing in that nature, Truly it is to no end, it contributes
nothing: My own inclination has been to Peace, from the beginning; and it is
known to many, that I never was an ill instrument betwixt the King and his
people; I never acted to the prejudice of the Parliament; I bore no Arms, I
meddled not with it; I was not wanting by my prayers to God almighty for the
happiness of the King; and truly I shall pray still, that God may so direct
him as that may be done which shall tend to his glory, and the peace and
happiness of the kingdom.

I have not much more to say, that I remember of; I think I have spoken of my
Religion.


Dr. Sibbald. Your Lordship his not so fully said it.


Camb. Truly I do believe I did say something.


Dr, Sibbald. I know you did, it is pleasing to hear it from your Lordship
again.


Cambr. Truly Sir, for the profession of my Religigion, that which I said was
the established Religion, and that which I have practiced in my own Kingdom
where I was borne and bred; my Tenants they need not to be expressed, they are
known to all, and I am not of a rigid opinion; many godly men there is that
may have scruples which do not concern me at all at no time; they may differ
in Opinion, and more now then at any time; differing in Opjnion does not move
me (not any man's) my own is clear: Sir, The Lord forgive me my sins, and I
forgive freely all those that even I might as a worldly man, have the greatest
animosity against; We are bidden to forgive; Sir, T is a command laid upon us
(and there mentioned) Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us.


Dr. Sibbald. It Is our Saviors rule, love your enemies, bless them that curse
you, pray for them that persecute you, do good to them which despightfully use
you.


Cambr. Sir, it is high time for me to make an end of this, and truly I
remember no more that I have to say, but to pray to God Almighty a few words,
and then I have done.


Then kneeling down, with Doctor Sibbald, he Prayed thus.

Most Blessed Lord, I thy poor and most unworthy servant come unto thee,
presuming in thy infinite mercy and the merits of Jesus Christ, who sits upon
the Throne, I come flying from that of Justice, to that of Mercy, and
tenderness for his sake which shed his blood for sinners, that he would take
compassion upon me, that he will look upon me as one that graciously hears me,
that he would look upon me as one that has redeemed me, that he would look
upon me as one that has shed his blood for me; that he would look upon me as
one who now calls and hopes to be saved by his all-sufficient merits; for his
sake, Glorious God, have compassion upon me in the freeness of thy infinite
mercy, that when this sinful soul of mine shall depart out of this frail
carcass of clay, I may be carried into thy everlasting glory; O Lord by thy
free grace, and out of thy infinite mercy hear me, and look down, and have
compassion upon me; and thou Lord Jesus, thou my Lord, and thou my God, and
thou my Redeemer, hear me, take pity upon me, take pity upon me gracious
God, and so deal with my soul, that by thy precious merits I may attain to
thy joy and bliss; O Lord remember me so miserable and sinful a creature; now
thou O Lord, thou O Lord that died for me, receive me, and receive me into thy
own bound of mercy; O Lord I trust in thee, suffer me not now to be
confounded, Satan has had too long possession of this soul, O let him not now
prevail against it, but let me O Lord from henceforth dwell with thee for
evermore. Now Lord it is thy time to hear me, hear me gracious Jesus, even
for thy own goodness, mercy, and truth; O glorious God, O blessed Father, O
holy Redeemer, O gracious Comforter, O holy and blessed Trinity, I do render up
my soul into thy hands, and commit it with the mediation of my Redeemer,
praising thee for all thy dispensations that it has pleased thee to confer
upon me, and even for this, praise and honor and thanks of this time forth for
ever more.

Dr. Sibbald. My, Lord, I trust you now behold with the eye of Faith the Son of
righteousness shining upon your soul, and will cheerfully submit unto him who
has redeemed us through his blood, even the blood of Jesus Christ, that you
may appear at the Tribunal of God, clothed with the white robe of his
unspotted righteousness; the Lord grant that with the eye of faith you may now
see the heavens opened, and Jesus Christ standing at the right hand of God,
ready to receive you into his arms of mercy.


Cambr. Then the Earl turning to the Executioner, said, shall J put on another
Cap, must this hair be turned up from my neck, there are three of my servants
to give satisfaction.


D. Sib. My Lord, I hope you are able to give all that are about you
satisfaction, you are assured that God is reconciled unto you through the blood
of Christ Jesus, and the Spirit of the Lord witnesses to you that Christ is
become now a Jesus unto you; My Lord, fasten the eyes of your faith upon Jesus
the Author and finisher of your salvation, who himself was brought to a violent
death for the redemption of mankind, he cheerfully submitted to his Fathers
good pleasure in it, and for us, blessed and holy is he that has part (my Lord)
in the first resurrection; that is, in the first riser Jesus Christ who is both
the resurrection and the life, over him, the second death shall have no power,
it is the unspeakable joy of a believer, that at the hour of death his soul
has an immediate passage from this earthly Tabernacle to that Region of
endless glory, yea to the presence of God himself, in whose presence there is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore.


Then the E, of Cambridge turning to the Executiooner, said, which way is it
that you would have me lie, Sir.

Execut. The Executioner pointing to the front of the Scaffold, the Earl
replied what, my Head this way; then the Under Sheriffs son said, my Lord, the
Order is that you should lay your Head toward the High-Court of Justice.


The Earl of Cambr. after a little discourse in private with some of his
servants, kneeled down on the side of the Scaffold, and prayed a while to
himself.

When he had finished his prayers, Dr. Sibbald spoke to him thus:

My Lord, I humbly beseech God, that you may now with a holy and Christian
courage give up your soul to the hand of your faithful Creator and gracious
Redeemer; and not be dismayed with any sad apprehension of the terrors of this
death. And what a blessed and glorious Exchange you shall make within a very
few minutes!

Then with a cheerful and smiling countenance, the Earl embracing the Doctor
in his Arms, said,

Camb. Truly Sir, I do take you in mine arms, and truly I bless God for it, I
do not fear, I have an assurance that is grounded here; (laying his hand upon
his heart.) Now that gives me more true joy then ever J had, J pass out of a
miserable world to go into an eternal and glorious Kingdom; and Sir, though J
have been a most sinful creature, yet Gods mercy J know is infinite, and J
bless my God for it, J go with so clear a conscience, that J know not the man
that J have personally injured.


D. Sib. My Lord, it is a marveilous great satisfaction that at this last hour
you can say so, I beseech the Lord for his eternal mercy strengthen your
faith, that in the very moment of your dissolution, you may see the arms of
the Lord Jesus stretched out ready to receive your soul.


Then the Earl of Cambridge embracing those his servants which were there
present, said to each of them, You have been very faithful to me, and the Lord
bless you.

Camb. Then turning to the Executioner, said, I shall say a very short prayer
to my God, while I lie down there: and when I stretch out my hand (my right
hand) then sir, do your duty; and I do freely forgive you, and so I do all the
world.


Dr. Sibbald. The Lord in great mercy go along with you, and bring you to the
possession of everlasting life, strengthening your faith in Jesus Christ. This
is a passage, my Lord, a short passage unto eternal glory. J hope, through the
free grace of your gracious God, you are now able to say, O Death where is thy
sting? O grave where is thy victory? and to make this comfortable answer,
Blessed be God, blessed be God, who has given me an assurance of victory
through Christ Jesus.


Then the E. of Cambridge said to the Executioner, Must J lie all along?

Execut. Yes, and't please your Lordship.


Camb. When I stretch out my hands -- but J will fit my Head, first tell me if
I be right, and how you would have me lie.


Ex. Your shirt must be pind back, for it lies too high upon your shoulders (
which was done accordingly.


Doctor Sibbald. My Lord, now, now lift up your eyes unto Jesus Christ, and
cast your self now into the everlasting arms of your most gracious Redeemer.


Then the Earl having laid his head over the block, said, Is this right?

Doctor Sibbald. Jesus the Son of David, have mercy upon you.


Execut. Lie a little lower Sir.


Camb. Well, stay then till I give you the sign.


And so having lain a short space devoutly praying to himself, he stretched
out his right hand, whereupon the Executioner at one blow severed his head from
his body, which was received by two of his servants then kneeling by him, into
a Crimson Taffety Scarf, and that with the body immediately put into a Coffin
brought upon the Scaffold for that purpose, and from thence conveyed to the
house that was Sir John Hamiltons at the Mewes, where it now remains.

This execution being done, the Sheriffs Guard went immediately to meet the
Earl of Holland, which they did in the mid way between the Scaffold and
Westminster Hall, and the Under-Sheriffes son having received him into his
charge, conducted him to the Scaffold, he taking M. Boulton all the way in his
hand, passed all along to the Scaffold discoursing together; upon which being
come, observing his voice would not reach to the people, in regard the Guard
compassed the Scaffold, he said;

Holland. It is to no purpose (I think) to speak any thing here. Which way must
I speak? And then being directed to the front of the Scaffold, he (leaning over
the railes) said, I think it is fit to say something, since God has called me
to this place. The first thing which I must profess, is, what concerns my
Religion, and my breeding, which has been in a good Family, that has ever
been faithful to the true Protestant Religion, in the which I have been bred,
in the which I have lived, and in the which by Gods grace and mercy I shall
die. I have not lived according to that education I had in that Family where I
was born and bred: I hope God will forgive me my sins, since I conceive that it
is very much his pleasure to bring me to this place for the sins that I have
committed. The cause that has brought me hither, I believe by many has been
much mistaken. They have conceived that I have had ill designs to the State,
and to the Kingdom: Truly I look upon it as a Judgment, and a just Judgment
of God; not but I have offended so much the State, and the Kingdom, and the
Parliament, as that I have had an extreme vanity in serving them very
extraordinarily. For those actions that I have done, I think it is known they
have been ever very faithful to the public, and very particularly to
Parliaments. My affections have been ever expressed truly and clearly to them.
The dispositions of affairs now have put things in another posture then they
were when I was engaged with the Parliament. I have never gone off from those
Principles that ever I have professed: I have lived in them, and by Gods grace
will die in them. There may be alterations and changes that may carry them
further then I thought reasonable, and truly there I left them: but there has
been nothing that I have said, or done, or professed, either by Covenant, or
Declaration, which has not been very constant, and very clear upon the
principles that I ever have gone upon, which was to serve the King, the
Parliament, Religion (I should have said in the first place) the Commonwealth,
and to seek the Peace of the Kingdom. That made me think it no improper time,
being pressed out by accidents and circumstances, to seek the Peace of the
Kingdom, which I thought was proper, since there was something then in
agitation, but nothing agreed on for seeding Propositions to the King; that was
the furthest aim that I had, and truly beyond that I had no intention, none at
all. And God be praised, although my blood comes to be shed here, there was I
think scarcely a drop of blood shed in that action that I was engaged in. For
the present affairs as they are, I cannot tell how to judge of them: and truly
they are in such a condition, as (I conceive) no body can make a judgment of
them: and therefore I must make use of my Prayers, rather then of my opinion,
which are, that God would bless this Kingdom, this Nation, this State; that
he would settle it in a way agreeable to what this Kingdom has been happily
governed under; by a King, by the Lords, by the Commons: a Government that (I
conceive) it has flourished much under, and I pray God the change of it bring
not rather a prejudice, a disorder, and a confusion, then the contrary. I look
upon the Posterity of the King, and truly my Conscience directs me to it, to
desire, that if God be pleased that these people may look upon them with that
affection that they owe, that they may be called in again, and they may be, not
through blood, nor through disorder, admitted again into that power, and to
that glory that God in their birth intended to them. I shall pray with all my
soul for the happiness of this State, of this Nation, that the blood which is
here spilt, may be even the last which may fall among us and truly I should lay
down mylife with as much cheerfulness as ever person did, if I conceived that
there would no more blood follow us: for a State, or Affairs that are built
upon blood, is a foundation for the most part that does not prosper.


After the blessing that I give to the Nation, to the Kingdom, and truly to the
Parliament, I do wish with all my heart, happiness, and a blessing to all
those that have been authors in this business; and truly that have been
authors in this very work that brings us hither: I do not only forgive them,
but I pray heartily and really for them, as God will forgive my sins, so I
desire God may forgive them.

I have a particular relation, as I am Chancellor of Cambridge, and truly I
must here, since it is the last of my prayers, pray to God that that University
may go on in that happy way which it is in, that God may make it a Nursery to
plant those persons that may be distributed to the Kingdom, that the souls of
the people may receive a great benefit, and a great advantage by them, and (I
hope) God will reward them for their kindness, and their affections that I
have found from them. Looking toward M. Bolton.
I have said what Religion I have been bred in, what Religion I have been borne
in, what Religion I have practiced; I began with it, and I must end with it. I
told you that my actions and my life have not been agreeable to my breeding, I
have told you likewise that the family where I was bred has been an exemplary
family (I may say so I hope, without vanity) of much affection to Religion, and
of much faithfulness to this Kingdom, and to this State. I have endeavored
to do those actions that have become an honest man, and which became a good
Englishman, and which became a good Christian. I have been willing to oblige
those that have been in trouble, those that have been in persecution, and truly
I find a great reward of it; for I have found their prayers and their kindness
now in this distress, and in this condition I am in, and I think it a great
reward, and I pray God reward them for it.

I am a great sinner, and I hope God will be pleased to hear my prayers, to
give me faith to trust in him, that as he has called me to death at this
place, he will make it but a passage to an eternal life through Jesus Christ,
which I trust to, which I rely upon, and which I expect by the mercy of God.
And so I pray God bless you all, and send that you may see this to be the last
execution, and the last blood that is likely to be spilt among you. And then
turning to the side-raile, he prayed for a good space of time; after which M.
Bolton said:

My Lord, Now look upon him whom you have trusted.

My Lord, I hope that here is your last prayer: there will no more prayers
remain, but praises: And I hope that after this day is over, there will a day
begin that shall never have end: And I look upon this (my Lord) the morning of
it, the morning of that day. My Lord, you know where your fullness lies, where
your riches lie, where is your only rock to anchor on. You know there is
fullness in Christ: If the Lord comes not in with fullness of comfort to you,
yet resolve to wait upon him while you live, and to trust in him when you die;
and then say, I will die here, I will perish at thy feet, I will be found dead
at the feet of Jesus Christ. Certainly, he that came to seek and save lost
sinners, will not reject lost sinners when they come to seek him: He that
entreats us to come, will not slight us when we come to entreat him. My
Lord, there is enough there, and fix your heart there, and fix your eyes there,
that eye of Faith, and that eye of hope, exercise these graces now, there will
be no exercise hereafter. As your Lordship said, here take an end of Faith, and
take an end of Hope, and take a farewell of Repentance: and all these, and
welcome God, and welcome Christ, and welcome Glory and welcome Happiness to
all Eternity; and so it will be a happy passage then, if it be a passage here
from misery to happiness. And though it be but a sad way, yet if it will bring
you into the presence of joy, although it be a valley of tears, although it be
a shadow of death, yet if God will please to bring you, and make it a passage
to that happiness, welcome Lord. And I doubt not but God will give you a heart
to taste some sweetness and love in this bitter potion, and to see something of
mercy and goodness to you, and show you some sign and token of good, so that
your soul may see that which we have had already experience of (blessed be God
for it) many experiences, many expressions, not only in words, but tears; God
has not left us without much comfort nor evidence, and I hope (my Lord) you
that have given so many evidences to us, I hope you want none your self: but
that the Lord will be pleased to uphold and support you, and bear up your
spirit, and if there want evidence, there is reliance; my security lies not in
my knowing that I shall come to heaven, and come to glory, but in my resting
and relying upon him: When the Anchor of Faith is thrown out, there may be
shakings and tossings, but there is safety; nothing shall interrupt safety,
although something may interrupt security, my safety is sure, although I
apprehend it not: and what if I go to God in the dark? what if I come to him,
as Nicodemus did, staggering in the night? It is a night of trouble, a night of
darkness, though I come trembling and staggering in this night, yet I shall be
sure to find comfort and fixednesse in him. And the Lord of heaven be the
strength, stay, and the support of your soul, and the Lord furnish you with all
those graces which may carry you into the bosom of the Lord Jesus, that when
you expire this life, you may be able to expire it into him, in whom you may
begin to live to all eternity; and that is my humble prayer. --

Holland. M. Bolton, God has given me long time in this world; he has carried
me through many great accidents of Fortune; he has at last brought me down
into a condition, where I find my self brought to an end, for a disaffection to
this State, to this Parliament, that (as I said before) I did believe no body
in the world more unlikely to have expected to suffer for that Cause: I look
upon it as a great judgment of God for my sins. And truly Sir, since that the
death is violent, I am the less troubled with it, because of those violent
deaths that I have seen before; principally my Savior that has showed us the
way, how and in what manner he has done it, and for what cause, I am the more
comforted, I am the more rejoiced. It is not long since the King my Master
passed in the same manner; and truly I hope that his purposes and intentions
were such, as a man may not be ashamed, not only to follow him, in the way that
was taken with him, but likewise not ashamed of his purposes, if God had given
him life. I have often disputed with him concerning many things of this kind,
and I conceive his sufferings, and his better knowledge and better understanding
(if God had spared him life) might have made him a Prince very happy toward
himself, and very happy toward this Kingdom. I have seen and known, that those
blessed Souls in heaven have passed thither by the gate of sorrow, and many by
the gate of violence: and since it is Gods pleasure to dispose me this way, I
submit my soul to him, with all comfort, and with all hope, that he has made
this my end, and this my conclusion, that though I be low in death, yet
nevertheless this lowness shall raise me to the highest glory for ever.

Truly, I have not said much in public to the People, concerning the
particular actions that I conceive I have done by my counsels in this Kingdom;
I conceive they are well known; it were something of vanity (me thinks) to take
notice of them here; He rather die with them, with the comfort of them in my
own bosom; and that I never intended in this action, or any action that ever I
did in my life, either malice, or bloodshed, or prejudice to any creature that
lives. For that which concerns my Religion, I made my profession before of it,
how I was bred, and in what manner I was bred, in a Family that was looked upon
to be no little notorious, in opposition to some liberties, that they conceived
then to be taken; and truly, there was some mark upon me, as if I had some
taint of it, even throughout my whole ways, that I have taken: every body
knows what my affections have been, to many that have suffered, to many that
have been in troubles in this Kingdom, I endeavored to relieve them, I
endeavored to oblige them, I thought I was tied so by my Conscience, I thought
it by my charity, and truly very much by my breeding; God has now brought me
to the last instant of my time, all that I can say, and all that I can adhere
unto is this; That as I am a great sinner, so I have a great Savior, that as
he has given me here a fortune, to come publicly in a show of shame in
the way of this suffering (truly I understand it not to be so) I understand it
to be a glory, a glory when I consider who has gone before me, and a glory
when I consider I had no end in it, but what I conceive to be the service of
God, the King, and the Kingdom, and therefore my Heart is not charged much
with any thing in that particular, since I conceive God will accept of the
intention, whatsoever the action seem to be. I am going to die, and the Lord
receive my Soul: I have no reliance but upon Christ, for my self I do
acknowledge that I am the unworthiest of sinners; my life has been a vanity,
and a continued sin, and God may justly bring me to this end, for the finnes
I have committed against him, and were there nothing else, but the iniquities,
that I have committed in the way of my Life, I look upon this as a great
justice of God to bring me to this suffering, and to bring me to this
punishment, and those Hands that have been most Active in it, if any such
there has been, I pray God forgive them, I pray God that there may not be
many such Trophies of their Victories, but that this may be as I said before
the last show, that this people shall see, of the blood of persons of
Condition, of persons of Honor; I might say something of the way of our Trial,
which certainly has been as extraordinary, as any thing I think has ever
been seen in this Kingdom; but because that I would not seem as if I made
some complaint I will not so much, as mention it, because no body shall believe
I repine at their actions, that I repine at my fortune: It is the Will of God,
it is the Hand of God under whom I fall, I take it entirely from him I submit
my self to Him, I shall desire to roll my self into the Arms of my blessed
Savior, and when I come to this Pointing to the Block.
place, when I bow down my self there, I hope God will raise me up, and when
I bid farewell, as I must now to Hope and to Faith, that love will abide, I
know nothing to accompany the soul out of this World but love, and I hope that
love will bring me to the fountain of glory in Heaven, through the Arms,
Mediation, and the Mercy of my Savior Jesus Christ, in whom I believe, O Lord
help my unbelief.


Hodges, The Lord make over unto you the righteousness of his own Son, it is
that treasury that he has bestowed upon you, and the Lord show you the light
of his countenance, and fill youful with his joy and kindness, O my dear Lord,
the Lord of Heaven and Earth be with you, and the Lord of Heaven and Earth
bring you to that safety.


Holl. I shall make as much have as I can to come to that glory, and the Lord
of Heaven and Earth take my soul: I look upon my self entirely in Him, and
hope to find mercy through Him, I expect it, and through that fountain that
is opened for sin, and for uncleanness my soul must receive it, for did I
rest in any thing else, I have nothing but sin and corruption in me; I have
nothing but that, which in stead of being carried up into the Arms of God and
Glory, I have nothing but may throw me down into Hell.


Bolton, But my Lord, when you are clothed with the righteousness of another
you will appear glorious, though now sinful in yourselfe; The Apostle says,
I desire not to be found in my own Righteousness, and when you are clothed
with another, the Lord will own you, and I shall say but thus much: doubt not
that ever God will deny salvation to sinners, that come to him, when the end of
all his death and sufferings was the salvation of sinners, when as I say the
whole end, and the whole design, and the great Work, that God had to do in
the world, by the death of Christ, wherein he laid out all his Councels, and
infinite wisdom, and mercy, and goodness, beyond which there was a Non
ultra, in Gods thoughts, when this was the great design, and great end, the
salvation of sinners, that poor sooles should come over to him and live;
certainly when sinners come, he will not reject, be will not refuse. And my
Lord, do but think of this, the greatest work that ever was done in the World,
was the blood of Christ that was shed, never any thing like it: and this blood
of Christ that was shed, was shed for them that come, if not for them, for
none, it was in vain else: you see the Devils they are out of capacity of
good by it, the Angels they have no need of it, wicked men will not come, and
there are but a few that come over, and should he deny them, there were no
end nor fruit of the blood and sufferings of the Lord Jesus; and had your
Lordship been with Christ in that bloody agony, when he was in that bloody
sweat, sweating drops of blood, if you had asked him. Lord what art thou now a
doing, art thou not now reconciling an angry God and me together? art thou not
pacifying the wrath of God? art thou not interposing thy self between the
Justice of God and my soul? Would he not have said, yea: and surely then he
will not deny it now. My Lord his passions are over, his compassions still
remain, and the larger and greater, because he is gone up into a higher
place, that ^ee may throw down more abundance of his mercy and grace upon you;
and my Lord, think of that infinite love, that abundance of riches in Christ: I
am lost, I am empty, I have nothing, I am poor, I am sinful: be it so, as bad
as God will make me, and as vile as I possibly can conceive my self, I am
willing to be: but when I have said all, the more I advance that riches, and
honor that grace of God. And why should I doubt when by this he puts me into a
capacity into a disposition for him to show me mercy, that by this I may the
better advance the riches of his grace, and say grace, grace, to the Lord, to
all eternity, that God should own such a Creature, that deserves nothing; and
the less I deserve, the more conspicuous is his Grace: and this is certain,
the riches of his Grace he throws amongst men, that the glory of his Grace
might be given to himself, If we can give him but the glory of his Grace, we
shall never doubt to partake of the riches of it, and that fullness, My Lord,
that fullness be your comfort, that fullness of mercy, that fullness of love,
that fullness of righteousness and power be now your riches, and your only
stay, and the Lord interpose himself between God and you, as your Faith bath
endeavored to interpose him between God and your soul; so I doubt not but
there he stands (my Lord) to plead for you, and when you are not able to do any
thing your self, yet lie down at the feet of him that is a merciful Savior
and knows what you would desire, and wait upon him while you live, trust in
him when you die, there is riches enough and mercy enough, if he open not, yet
die at his door, say their I Will die, there is mercy enough.


Holland. And here is the place where I lie down before him, from whence I hope
he will raise me to an eternal Glory through my Savior, upon whom I rely,
from whom only I can expect mercy: into his Arms I commend my spirit, into his
bleeding Arms that when I leave this bleeding body that must lie upon this
place, he will receive that soul that arises out of it, and receive it into
his eternal mercy, through the merits, through the worthiness, through the
mediation of Christ that has purchased it with his own most precious blood.


Bolton. My Lord, Though you conclude here, I hope you begin above, and though
you put an end here, I hope there will never be an end of the mercy and
goodness of God: and if this be the morning of Eternity, if this be the rise
of Glory, if God pleases to throw you down here, to raise you up for ever:
say, Welcome Lord! welcome that death that shall make way for life, and welcome
any condition that shall throw me down here, to bring me into the possession of
Jesus Christ.


Hodges. My Lord, If you have made a Deed of Gift of your self to Jesus
Christ, to be found only in him; I am confident you shall stand at the day of
Christ, My dear Lord, we shall meet in happiness.


Holland. Christ Jesus receive my soul, my soul hungers and thirsts after
him; cloud, are gathering, and I trust in God through all my heaviness, and I
hope through all impediments, he will settle my Interest in him, and throw off
all the claim that Satan can make unto it, and that he will carry my soul in
dispight of all the calumnies, and all that the Devi'l, and Satan can invent,
will carry it into eternal mercy there to receive the blessedness of his
presence to all Eternity.


Hodges. My Lord, it was his own by Creation, it is his own now by Redemption,
and purchase; and it is likewise his own by resignation: O my Lord, look
therefore up to the Lamb of God, that sits at the right hand of God, to take
away the sins of the World, O that Lamb of God!


Holland. That Lamb of God, into his hands I commit my soul: and that Lamb of
God that sits upon the Throne to Judge those 24 that fall down before him, I
hope he will be pleased to look downward, and judge me with mercy that fall
down before him, and that worship him, and that adore him, that only ttusts
upon his mercy, for his compassion; and that as he has purchased me, he would
lay his claim unto me now, and receive me.


Bolton. My Lord, think of this, there is no condemnation to them who are in
Christ, who is it that can condemn, it is Christ that justifies; and therefore
look now upon this, (My Lord,) upon this Christ, upon this Christ that
justifies: Hell, Death, Sin, Satan; nothing shall be able to condemn, it is
Christ that justifies you.


Holland, Indeed if Christ justify, no body can condemn, and I trust in God,
in his justification, though there is confusion here without us, and though
there are wonders and staring that now disquiet, yet I trust that I shall be
carried into that mercy, that God will receive my soul.


Bolton, I doubt not my Lord but as you are a Spectacle and of pity here, so
you are an object of Gods mercy above.


Holland, Then the Farle of Holland looking over among the people, pointing to
a Soldier, said, This honest man took me prisoner, you little thought I should
have been brought to this, when I delivered my self to you upon conditions:
and espying Captain Watson on horse back putting off his hat said to him, God
be with you Sir, God reward you Sir.


Bolton, My Lord, throw your self into the Arms of mercy, and say, there I
will Anchor, and there J will die, he is a Savior for us in all conditions,
whither should we go, he has the words of eternal life, and upou him do
you rest, wait while you live, and even trust in Death.


Holland. Here must now be my Anchor, a great Storm makes me find my anchor;
and but in storms no body trust to their anchor, and therefore I must trust
upon my anchor ( Upon that God, said Mr. Bolton, upon whom your Anchor trusts)
yea, God, I hope, will anchor my Soul fast upon Christ Jesus: and if I dye not
with that clearness and that heartiness that you speak of, truly, I will trust
in God, though he kill me, I will rely upon him, and in the Mercy of my Savior.


Bolton. There is Mercy enough, my Lord, and to spare, you shall not need to
doubt; they shall never go begging to another door (my Lord) that come to him.
Then the Earl of Holland speaking to Mr. Hodges, said, I pray God reward you
for all your kindeness; and pray as you have done, instruct my Family, that
they may serve God with faithfulness, with holiness, with more diligence, then
truly I have been careful to press them unto: You have the charge of the same
place, you may do much for them, and I recommend them to your kindeness, and
the goodness of your Conscience.


Dr. Sybald standing by upon the Scaffold, in his passage to Col: Beecher,
expressed himself thus to his Lordship:

Dr. Sybald. The Lord lift up the light of his countenance upon you, and you
shall be safe.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland embraced Lieut: Col: Beecher, and took his
leave of him: After which, he came to Mr. Bolton, and having embraced him, and
returned him many thanks for his great pains and affections to his soul,
desiring God to reward him, and return his love into his bosom. Mr. Bolton said
to him, The Lord God support you, and be seen in this great extremity; The Lord
reveal and discover himself to you, and make your death the passage unto
eternal life --.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Here, my
friend, let my Clothes and my Body alone, there is Ten pounds for thee, that is
better then my Clothes, I am sure of it.


Executioner. Will your Lordship please to give me a Sign when I shall strike?
And then his Lordship said, You have room enough here, have you not? and the
Executioner said, Yes.


Bolton. The Lord be your strength, there is riches in him; The Lord of Heaven
impart himself to you, he is able to save to the uttermost: We cannot fall so
low, as to fall below the everlasting Arms of God; and therefore the Lord be a
support and stay to you in your low condition, that he will be pleased to make
this an advantage to that Life and glory that will make amends for all.


Holland. Then the Earl of Holland turning to the Executioner, said, Friend, do
you hear me, if you take up my Head, do not take off my Cap. Then turning to
his Servants, he said to one, Fare you well, thou art an honest fellow; and to
another, God be with thee, thou art honest man: and then said, Stay, I will
kneel down, and ask God forgiveness; and then prayed for a pretty space, with
seeming earnestness.


Bolton. The Lord grant you may find life in death.


Holland. Which is the way of lying? (which they showed him) And then going to
the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People, God bless you all, and God
deliver you from any such accident as may bring you to any such death as is
violent, either by War, or by these accidents, but that there may be Peace
among you, and you may find that these accidents that have happened to us, may
be the last that may happen in this Kingdom; it is that I desire, it is that I
beg of God, next the saving of my Soul: I pray God give all happiness to this
Kingdom, to this People, and this Nation: and then turning to the Executioner,
said, How must I lie? I know not.


Executioner. Lie down flat upon your belly: and then having laid himself down,
he said, Must I lie closer?


Executioner. Yes, and backwarder.


Holland. I will tell you when you shall strike; and then as he lay, seemed to
pray with much affection for a short space, and then lifting up his head, said,
Where is the man? and seeing the Executioner by him, he said, Stay while I give
the Sign; and presently after stretching out his hand, and the Executioner
being not fully ready, he said, Now, now, and just as the words were coming out
of his mouth, the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body.


The execution of the Lord of Holland being thus performed, the Lord Capel was
brought to the Scaffold as the former, and in the way to the Scaffold, he put
off his Hat to the people on both sides, looking very austerely about him: And
being come upon the Scaffold, Lieut: Col: Beecher said to him, Is your Chaplain
here?

Capel. No, I have taken my leave of him; and perceiving some of his servants
to weep, he said, Gentlemen, refrain your selves, refrain your selves; and
turning to Lieut: Col: Beecher, he said, What, did the Lords speak with their
Hats off or on?


Lieut: Col: Beecher. With their Hats off: And then coming to the front of the
Scaffold, he said, I shall hardly be understood here, I think, and then began
his Speech as follows.


Capel. THe conclusion that I made with those that sent me hither, and are the
cause of this violent death of mine, shall be the beginning of what I shall say
to you: When I made an Address to them (which was the last) I told them with
much sincerity, That I would pray to the God of all mercies, that they might be
partakers of his inestimable and boundless mercies in Jesus Christ, and truly,
I still pray that Prayer; and I beseech the God of Heaven, forgive any injury
they have done to me, from my soul I wish it. And truly, this I tell you, as a
Christian, to let you see I am a Christian; but it is necessary I should tell
you somewhat more, That I am a Protestant: And truly, I am a Protestant, and
very much in love with the profession of it, after the manner as it was
established in England by the Thirty nine Articles; a blessed way of
profession, and such a one, as truly, I never knew none so good: I am so far
from being a Papist, which some body have (truly) very unworthily at some time
charged me withal, that truly, I profess to you, that though I love good works,
and commend good works, yet I hold, They have nothing at all to do in the
matter of Salvation; my Anchor-hold is this, That Christ loved me, and gave
himself for me, that is that that I rest upon. And truly, something I shall say
to you as a Citizen of the whole world, and in that consideration I am here
condemned to dye: Truly, contrary to the Law that governs all the world; that
is, The Law of the Sword: I had the protection of that for my life, and the
honor of it; but truly, I will not trouble you much with that, because in
another place I have spoken very largely and liberally about it, I believe you
will hear by other means, what Arguments I used in that case: But truly, that
that is stranger, you that are English men, behold here an English man now
before you, and acknowledged a Peer, not condemned to dye by any Law of
England, not by any Law of England; Nay, shall I tell you more (which is
strangest of all) contrary to all the Laws of England that I know of. And
truly, I will tell you, in the matter of the Civil part of my death, and the
cause that I have maintained, I dye (I take it) for maintaining the fifth
Commandment, enjoined by God himself, which injoyns reverence and obedience to
Parents: All Divines on all hands, though they contradict one another in many
several Opinions, yet all Divines on all hands, do acknowledge, that here is
intended Magistracy and Order; and certainly I have obeyed that Magistracy and
that Order under which I have lived, which I was bound to obey; and truly, I do
say very confidently, that I do dye here for keeping, for obeying that fifth
Commandment given by God himself, and written with his own finger. And now
Gentlemen, I will take this opportunity to tell you, That I cannot imitate a
better nor a greater ingenuity then his, that said of himself, For suffering an
unjust judgment upon another, himself was brought to suffer by an unjust
judgment. Truly Gentlemen, that God may be glorified, that all men that are
concerned in it may take the occasion of it, of humble repentance to God
Almighty for it, I do here profess to you, that truly I did give my Vote to
that Bill of the E. of Strafford, I doubt not but God Almighty has washed that
away with a more precious blood, and that is, with the blood of his own Son,
and my dear Savior Jesus Christ, and I hope he will wash it away from all those
that are guilty of it; truly, this I may say, I had not the least part nor the
least degree of malice in the doing of it; but I must confess again to Gods
glory, and the accusation of mine own frailty, and the frailty of my Nature,
that truly it was an unworthy Cowardice, not to resist so great a torrent as
carried that business at that time. And truly, this I think I am most guilty
of, of not courage enough in it, but malice I had none; but whatsoever it was,
God I am sure has pardoned it, has given me the assurance of it, that Christ
Jesus his blood has washed it away; and truly, I do from my soul wish, That
all men that have any stain by it, may seriously repent, and receive a
remission and pardon from God for it. And now Gentlemen, we have had an
occasion by this intimation to remember his Majesty, our King that last was;
and I cannot speak of him, nor think of it, but truly, I must needs say, That
in my Opinion, that have had time to consider all the Images of all the
greatest and vertuousest Princes in the world; and truly, in my Opinion, there
was not a more virtuous, and more sufficient Prince known in the world, then
our gracious King Charles that dyed last: God Almighty preserve our King that
now is, his Son; God send him more fortunate and longer days; God Almighty so
assist him, that he may exceed both the virtues and sufficiencies of his
Father: For certainly, I that have been a Counselor to him, and have lived
long with him, and in a time when discovery is easily enough made, for he was
young (he was about thirteen, fourteen, fifteen or sixteen years of age) those
years I was with him, truly, I never saw greater hopes of virtue in any young
person then in him; great Judgment, great Understanding, great Apprehension,
much Honor in his Nature, and truly, a very perfect English man in his
inclination; and I pray God restore him to this Kingdom, and Unite the Kingdoms
one unto another, and send a great happiness both to you and to him, that he
may long live and Reign among you, and that that Family may Reign till thy
Kingdom come, that is, while all Temporal Power is consummated: I beseech God
of his mercy, give much happiness to this your King, and to you that in it
shall be his Subjects, by the grace of Jesus Christ.

Truly, I like my beginning so well, that I will make my conclusion with it,
that is, That God Almighty would confer of his infinite and inestimable grace
and mercy, to those that are the causers of my coming hither, I pray God give
them as much mercy as their own hearts can wish; and truly, for my part, I will
not accuse any one of them of malice, truly I will not, nay, I will not think
there was any malice in them; what other ends there is, I know not, nor I will
not examine, but let it be what it will, from my very soul I forgive them every
one: And so, the Lord of Heaven bless you all, God Almighty be infinite in
goodness and mercy to you, and direct you in those ways of obedience to his
commands to his Majesty, that this Kingdom may be a happy and glorious Nation
again, and that your King may be a happy King in so good and so obedient
people; God Almighty keep you all, God Almighty preserve this Kingdom, God
Almighty preserve you all.

Then turning about, and looking for the Executioner (who was gone off the
Scaffold) said, Which is the Gentleman? which is the man? Answer was made, He
is a coming; He then said, Stay, I must pull off my Dublet first, and my
Wastcoat: And then the Executioner being come upon the Scaffold, the Lord Capel
said, O friend, prithee come hither: Then the Executioner kneeling down, the
Lord Capel said, I forgive thee from my soul, and not only forgive thee, but I
shall pray to God to give thee all grace for a better life: There is Five
pounds for thee; and truly, for my clothes and those things, if there be any
thing due to you for it, you shall be very fully recompensed; but I desire my
body may not be stripped here, and no body to take notice of my body but my own
servants: Look you friend, this I shall desire of you, that when I lie down,
that you would give me a time for a particular short prayer.


Lieut. Col: Beecher. Make your own sign, my Lord.


Capel. Stay a little, Which side do you stand upon? (speaking to the
Executioner) Stay, I think I should lay my hands forward that way (pointing
foreright) and answer being made, Yes; he stood still a little while, and then
said, GOD Almighty bless all this People, God Almighty stench this blood, God
Almighty stench, stench, stench this issue of blood; this will not do the
business, God Almighty find out another way to do it. And then turning to one
of his Servants, said, Baldwin, I cannot see any thing that belongs to my wife;
but I must desire thee to beseech her to rest wholly upon Jesus Christ, and be
contented and fully satisfied: and then speaking to his Servants, he said, God
keep you; and Gentlemen, let me now do a business quickly, privately, and pray
let me have your Prayers at the moment of death, that God would receive my soul.


Lieut. Col. Beecher. I wish it.


Capel. Pray at the moment of striking, join your prayers, but make no noise
(turning to his Servants) that is inconvenient at this time.


Servant. My Lord, put on your Cap.


Capel. Should I, what will that do me good? Stay a little, is it well as it is
now? As he was putting up his hair.



And then turning to the Executioner, he said, Honest man, I have forgiven
thee, therefore strike boldly; from my soul I do it.

Then a Gentleman speaking to him, he said, Nay, prithee be contented, be quiet
good Mr. ___ be quiet.

Then turning to the Executioner, he said, Well, you are ready when I am ready,
are you not? and stretching out his hands, he said, Then pray stand off
Gentlemen. Then going to the front of the Scaffold, he said to the People,
Gentlemen, though I doubt not of it, yet I think it convenient to ask it of
you; That you would all join in Prayers with me, That God would mercifully
receive my soul, and that for his alone Mercies in Christ Jesus. God Almighty
keep you all.

Executioner. My Lord, shall I put up your hair?


Capel. I, I, prithee do; and then as he stood, lifting up his hands and eyes,
he said, O God, I do with a perfect and a willing heart submit to thy will: O
God, I do most willingly humble my self: and then kneeling down, said, I will
try first how I can lie; and laying his head over the Block, said, Am I well
now?


Executioner. Yes.


And then as he lay with both his hands stretched out, he said to the
Executioner, Here lies both my hands out, when I lift up my hand thus, Lifting
up his right hand.
then you may strike.

And then after he had said a short prayer, he lifted up his right hand, and
the Executioner at one blow severed his head from his body, which was taken up
by his servants and put (with his body) into a Coffin, as the former.

FINIS.

