A VINDICATION OF THE Treatise of Monarchy, CONTAINING An Answer to Dr Fernes
Reply; ALSO, A more full Discovery of Three maine Points; 1. The Ordinance of
God in Supremacy. 2. The Nature and Kinds of Limitation. 3. The Causes and
Means of Limitation in Governments.


Done by the Author of the former Treatise.

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for John Bellamy, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Sign of the three Golden-Lyons in Cornehill near the Royall-Exchange,
M.DC.XLIV.

A VINDICATION OF THE Treatise of Monarchy.
The Preface.
PErusing with a sad heart and conscience, desirous of Information the Papers
made public by the Defenders of both sides in this woeful division; I found
diverse of them running out into irreconcilable extremes: among which this
Resolver, the Author of the fuller Answer, and the Divines pleading for
Defensive Arms were the chief. In which I conceived there were passages
contrary to all true policy, and the particular Frame of this State. Hereon a
desire of allaying men's spirits, and reducing them to a moderate compliance in
one Truth induced me to a composing of that Treatise, In which how far I have
attained my aim, I leave it to the world to judge.

But it falls out with me, as it did with Moses endeavoring to set at one his
contentious Brethren, I have hard words and censures laid on me for my labor.
This Doctor tells me, I have sown seeds of sedition, opened a way to
Rebellion, and terms me an engaged man. But to whom I am engaged, unless to
Truth, I know not: Engaged indeed I am to defend the Kings Supremacy against
one part by my Oath of Allegiance; and engaged to defend the Privileges of
Parliament, and lawful Liberties of the Subject, against the other part, by my
Protestation: beyond these I know none, and perhaps if this censurer knew my
condition, he would acknowledge as much. No, those men are rather engaged,
whom, aiming at Miters and a dominion over their fellow-Presbyters, it much
concerns to prove the Power of Kings unlimited, that so they may be able to
satisfy their unlimited desires, and uphold them in a boundless jurisdiction
over the consciences of men; but for this Doctor, I know him not, I judge him
not.

Then, for Sedition and Rebellion, The searcher of all hearts knows how far
they were from being the scope of that discourse, rather it was an utmost assay
of appeasment, by showing the way to a discreet moderation. These Masters of
controversy take a right course to subvert the Kingdom by disputing men into a
degree of Opposition beyond all Atonement, for as I am persuaded the high
spirit of Kings will rather incur the worst hazard then submit to such
terms, as to be Vniversis minores, that is, subject to their Subjects, common
servants and Officers of their Kingdoms, tied up to an absolute necessity of
assenting to the Determinations and Votes of the States: So I am as confident,
that these two British Nations, yea very many now being in his Majesty's
Armies, will spend their last blood rather then come down to this Doctors
terms, sc. a mere passive non resistance of subversive instruments of
Arbitrarie commands, a simple moral liberty, which the basest slaves in the
Turks galleys enjoy, because it cannot be taken from them.

For my part, I do not reckon my life and liberty worth so much pleading for;
but the liberty of my Country is dear to me: The established Government is
dear to me, because in it is bound up Religion, the public Good, yea the
very Title of the King to this Crown. These I plead for against a man, who by
his unconscionable resolves of Conscience, has done what by a pen can be done,
to dissolve them: who in three whole books has undertaken the Patronage of
Subverters of Religion, Laws and Government: and thinks it worth his pains if
he can procure them an irresistibilitie.

I thought I had weighed out Truth to both sorts with so even a balance in
that Treatise, that none had any cause to complain. But, I see, this man must
have all go his own way: He has a high design, no less then a full
conquest of all States; To bind the Consciences and hands of Nations, and
deliver them up to the Executioner to inflict on them the capital doom of
subversion, if at any time the supreme Magistrate please to give the word. To
this purpose having made some animadversions on scattered passages of my Book.
He is pleased to publish them under the style of a Reply; I may well call it a
negative Reply. He denies what I have asserted; and lays down his own
contradictorie Notions, and that is all; no Scripture nor Reason, but what is
fully answered in my former: It is so hollow a discourse, that an ordinary eye
may see through it, without the light of any further Answer; yet because he
gives me occasion of fuller illustration, and justifying my supposals; and
discovering the vanity of his, I have made him this Return, in which I have to
my knowledge, left unanswered no passage of moment which concerns me, in his
Reply; other parts of it have I left untouched for them to whom they belong.

And now with prostrate humility I beseech that sacred Authority, which here
again, is made the matter of this dispute, not to impute iniquity unto me
presuming, for Truth and Conscience sake, to make inquiries into it. The
Sunbeams strike not dead the poor Mathematician, who standing on this
molehill, assaies by his instruments to take the dimensions of that glorious
body. Yea the great God of Power permits men without the guilt of sin, to
search into his Perfections, and to set, not positive, yet negative bounds to
Omnipotence it self. Let not then his Vicegerent be incensed to disdain, if we
search into the limits of his Power. I envy not it is extent, let it be as
large as Truth and Law can stretch it: And my duty binds me to believe that he
would not have it larger. Princes require a reasonable subjection, and that is
best performed where the nature and measure of Power is best known: which to
find out is all the drift of my former and this Treatise, unto which now we
will pass over.

The Contents of the several Chapters and Sections.
CHAP. I. THE Case mis-proposed by the Doctor in his Resolution, Sect. 1. His
uncharitable rash Censures. His Intents in this Reply come not home to the Case
in question, Sect. 2. How far Scripture proof is to be expected in these
Cases, Sect. 3. Chap. 2. In the Question of Resistance the Doctors Distinction
of Times and Persons is vain. How far Resistance is asserted by me in this
and the former Treatise. Chap. 3. The Doctor and other of his sort abuse
Scripture in this Question, Sect. 1. Scripture warranting this resistance: but
having not a word against it. The Doctor in words professing against
Absoluteness, but indeed pleading for it, Sect. 2. Government not only from
God: but subordinately from the people, Sect. 3. Irresistibleness a Consequent
of Absoluteness. Limited Monarchy is in the very Power, Sect. 4. Mixture must
be in the very Power. The Doctors strange and senseless conceit of Mixture,
Sect. 5. Conquest gives no moral title before consent, Sect. 6. Chap. 4. The
Doctors vain and false supposals about Gods Ordinance in Sovereignty. It does
not exclude Limitation of Power, Sect. 1. His false supposals about the Nature
and Quality of Limitation, Sect. 2. His false supposals about the Causes and
Means of Limitation, Sect. 3. Chap. 5. The Sovereignty of this Kingdom
Limited in the very Power, and from its first Original. The vanity of the
Doctors three Titles by Conquest, Sect. 1. Arguments for Limitation and Mixture
vindicated, Sect. 2. Seven Queries concerning this Government; Sect. 3. Chap.
6. The stating of the Question of Resistance asserted. The Appeal ad
conscientiam generis humani, in the utmost contention vindicated, Sect. 1. His
arguments against Reservation of Power of Resistance, are answered, Sect. 2.
Chap. 7. The vanity of his conceit about jus Regis. His deceitful citing of
Calvin. The Government of the Kingdom of Israel proved absolute, Sect. 1.
Instances for Resistance out of the Old Testament justified, Sect. 2. Chap. 8.
The Text, Romans 13. nothing concerns this Resistance. His unjust charging of me
in this Question. His slighting of Doctor Bilson, and other Divines. Resistance
of exceeding Acts, no Resistance of the Power, Sect. 1. Emperors of Rome in S.
Paul's time proved absolute, Sect. 2. Chap. 9. His nine Reasons against
Resistance answered, Sect. 1. The five reasons for Resistance made good, Sect.
2. The Doctor recedes from his first Assertions, And yields us the Question. No
evils follow this Resistance; but many its denial, Sect. 2. The Conclusion of
the whole, Sect. 3.
A VINDICATION OF THE Treatise of Monarchy. OR, An Answer to Dr FERNES Reply.
CHAP. I. An Answer to the first Section of his Reply.
THE first Section contains his Preface, where p. 2. He that I look not with
a single eye on what he has written, misconstruing it many times: but whether
I have so done or no, it will be manifest in the sequel. Then more then once,
he censures me for being engaged. What engagements I have, appears before in
my Preface: But, I set up my rest upon a groundless fancy of such a mixture
and constitution of this Monarchy, etc. Whose supposals are groundless
fancies, his or mine, I doubt not will fully appear in this ensuing discourse.
Neither had I any other purpose to which I have fitted that Treatise then the
simple finding out of truth, God knows how ever the Doctor pleases to censure
the purposes of my heart, Viewing this Resolvers discourse, for the
satisfaction of my conscience, I found it confused, and not approaching the
Case which now troubles the world: Men enquire about the Lawfulness of
Resistance of Instruments: He answers concerning Resistance of the King: Men
demand, Whether Resistance of subversive Instruments be the Resistance of Gods
Ordidinance forbidden, Romans 13. He supposes that which is the Question; and
makes that the ground of his Resolve which is the sole thing at which the
conscience scruples. This put me on a Discourse of Monarchy, that so by a
distinct considering of the grounds of true Policy, I might both satisfy my
self and others: and not suffer men's consciences, seriously desiring found
information to be either puzzled or misled by so confuse and indirect a
Resolution. Yet something there is which he likes in me, that is, as much as
serves his own turn. I do with much ingenuity disclaim, and with no less
reason confute several Assertions of other writers, etc. in p. 2. Would he
could as well have seen my confutation of his, as of other errors: What I have
said against him, as it proceeds from the same impartial spirit, so it
contains the same truth; as, I doubt not, the judicious Reader will discern.
But yet I hold the ground on which their Absurd assertions are raised, sc. that
the Mixture is in the Supremacy of Power, only I give the King, apicem
potestatis, the top or excellency of Power, that is, the King is the crown or
top of the head, etc. Thus is he pleased to jeere me, but how justly, it will
hereafter appear. And whereas I place the Authority of determining the last
controversies in a mixed Government, not in the two Houses, this he commends in
me: but that I do not ascribe it to the King; This he exclaimes against, as a
ready way to confusion, but why, and how it is so, he tells us not; only
promises to speak of it more below, but where that below is, I cannot find.

p. 4. to show us what his intent was of first undertaking and now proceeding
in this Argument. Well: let us hear what it was. The intent of his first
Treatise was to resolve the Consciences of misled people, touching the
unlawfulness of Arms now taken up against the King. He erres in his proposing
of the very Case. I believe he knows no conscience misled touching this
matter: The Case which he should have resolved, if he had done any thing, was
touching the unlawfulness of Arms now taken up against subverting instruments
of the Government of the Kingdom; and that the resisting of these is a
Resisting of the King; No wonder if he who shootes at a wrong mark loses all
his arrows. This wrong proposing and prosecuting of so weighty a case (which I
doubt was purposely done) set me first on work in this business. Hear then
the case more simply proposed: and I refer me to the consciences of men,
whether I come not nearer the truth of it, then this proponent has done. The
Houses declare Religion and established Government to be in apparent danger, by
means of some subversive Counselors and Instruments about the King. This
being supposed, they proceed according to Vote to the Ordinance and execution
of the Militia, so to resist and apprehend those Counselors and Instruments
from whom they had declared the danger to spring. This put on the Doctor to his
first book, to resolve the consciences of men, that it was unlawful: Now see
what course he tells us he took to resolve men in this case. He undertakes to
make good two Assertions. 1. Were the King so seduced, it were not safe to
bear part in the resistance of Arms now used against him. 2. That the case is
not so, as they suppose, but rather apparently contrary. In the proof of these
two, he spends his whole book. Concerning the latter I intend no controversy
with the Doctor: Would he could make it clear to the satisfaction of the
consciences of all men; that were the way indeed not only to satisfy men's
consciences, but to calm the Kingdom into a blessed peace. But the Doctor is
but slight in that part; and says nothing, but what, as appears in the Debate
in the end of my Treatise, may soon be answered out of the Declarations of the
Houses, and the fresh memory of past occurrents: And in this reply he has not
so much as touched upon that Chapt. of my book: But that which in his first
Tract he mainely, and in this Reply he solely labors to make good is the first
Assertion, which is a universal one, and worthy to be examined in all Ages and
Governments, whatsoever becomes of this present contention in this Kingdom.
Now concerning that Thesis, in my Treatise of Monarchy I have affirmed and
confirmed two things. 1. That if he could make it good, yet it were nothing to
the business he has undertook; which is to satisfy the conscience concerning
the Unlawfulness of Resisting Instruments, not the King, of which he has
spoken very little or nothing at all. 2. That if he could prove that in some
Kingdoms where the will of the King is the peoples Law, Resistance of
Instruments were unlawful, if actuated by the Sovereigns will: Yet in Legal
and Limited Governments, it does not follow to be true: yet this he must make
good, if in our present case he satisfy men's consciences as he undertakes.
These two are the sum of my Answer to the Doctor in that Treatise, and if in
this Reply he does any thing, he must speak to these points. Something he has
here spoken concerning the Ordinance of God in Supremacy, Of Cases of
Resistance; of Kinds of Monarchy, of the Constitution of this Monarchy; but how
truly and satisfactorily, it is my part to examine, and let the world judge.

But as if he had already cleared the matter, he proceeds to give sentence
before the cause be heard: And doubts not to call the contrary Resolution a
Blaspheming of God and the King, p 4. I answer, If there be any which will
defend the lawfulness of taking Arms against the King, and in any case to
resist the Powers, They cross the evident truth of Scripture, and I condemn
them: Yet me thinks the Doctor deals somewhat severely with them, to call them
Blasphemers of God, for every error about the word is not Blasphemy; but a
wilful and obstinate speaking evil of the things of God. Likewise concerning
a King, if it be true that he be seduced; then it is no blasphemy, which
always is a falsehood. If it be false, yet it is inhumane to call it a
blaspheming, when it imputes nothing to him, but to be seduced, which the best
and most innocent Prince may be; sure, if it be a blaspheming, it is of the
Counselors and seducers, for to them the evil is imputed.

Then p. 6. He comes to speak of what he intends in this present book: sc.
that he will clear this point, That the Doctrine teaching that subjects may
take Arms against their Sovereign for the defense of Religion and Liberties,
when in danger of subversion, is destitute of Scripture and true reason. As I
said, still he drives at a vain scope; to prove that which none denies: Let
him prove, that in our Kingdom, Resistance of subversive instruments is a
taking Arms against their Sovereign, and he does the work; else he proves in
vain. But let us see how in the process of this book, that will be cleared
which none does deny. First upon examination of places of Scripture it will
appear, that Gods people were continually under Kings which they might not
resist, etc. What then? must it needs follow, that all other people must too?
But whether the word contains any thing against Resistance, and how far, we
shall enquire in the process of this dispute. Secondly, Upon the examination
of Reason, it will appear how inconsistent such a Power of Resistance in
subjects is with Government, etc. Indeed he will make appear a great matter;
would he would speak something to the Question, and not proceed so
indistinctly; I hope in the process of his book he will come nearer to the
business then here he promises, or else all our labor will be to little
purpose.

After he has told us what great matters we are to expect in his appearance of
Reason raised on Aristotle's grounds or principles; so that at first sight it
seemed unreasonable that subjects should be left without this remedy. If he
speak all this of Resistance of their sovereign, sure it seems not at all
unreasonable, but agreeable to all reason that subjects should be without this
remedy: It is directly against the word and all sound reason, that a people
lifting up a Person above themselves, and by sacred Covenant giving him a Power
above themselves, should afterward on any pretense assume a power of Resisting
that Person and power, and violate their own Covenant and Oath of due
subjection. But if that Person be invested with a limited Power: and he proceed
to acts of mere arbitrarinesse without the limits of that Power conferred on
him: Then it is all the reason in the world, that the Limiting States should
exercise an effectual restraining Power by resisting instruments of such
arbitrary and subversive acts, and we have not a syllable of Scripture
contradicting it. But if it seemed so unreasonable to the Doctor, that subjects
should be without this remedy; why does he contradict Reason in a business
within its compass? He tells you, He found Reason presently checked with that
saying of our Savior, Mat. 10.25. It is enough for the Disciple that he be as
his Master. And was this all the check. your Reason had? It is a very weak
Reason which would yield to such a check. What? is every Christian bound for
his outward state to be in no better case then Christ was? If he were pleased
to be borne under an absolute Government, to be of low and poor condition,
does this impose a necessity on all to be no freer, no richer then he was? A
man would think his Reason were not only checked, but broken, which should so
argue. Let it be proved that by the providence of God we are brought forth
under such a Government as our Master was, then will we hold our selves bound
by his example, to abide quietly in that condition we are borne to; but if God,
as he has dispensed to many a richer estate then Christ was pleased to have,
so has to us a freer Government; then the Apostle advises us to use it
rather, and not to be trifled out of it, by a show of our Masters example, in a
case in which it binds no man.

But in what has his Adversaries so much deceived his expectation? He expected
express Scripture, but he finds them altogether failing; only their faith aad
persuasion is resolved into an appearance of reason raised upon Aristotle's
grounds and principles, p. 6. Mr Hooker might have taught him that the intent
of the Scripture is to deliver us credenda; but in matters within the compass
of Reason, it is enough if we have evident reason for it, Scriptura non
contradicente: and I am confident the Scripture has not a tittle against such
a Resistance as I do maintain; and we have reason enough for it. The
Scripture was not given to prescribe frames of Policy, which are various
according to the disposition of people; General Rules there are for
Government, which being observed, Particulars, which fall under no settled Rule,
are left to reason and the positive Laws of Nations to determine. Yet we are
not wholly destitute of warrant from Scripture, as the Doctor affirms, but are
better furnished then he, as it will appear in the sequel. If Buchanan, and
Junius Brutus, or any else have raised any doctrines on Aristotle's grounds
which will not consist with Gods Ordinance set down in Scripture concerning
Authority, I am not bound to make good other men's excesses: This Replier
knows, that as I repudiate his Assertions tending to the ruin of all
Liberties of States: So I hold it unlawful to use any force against the
person, or Authority of the Supreme, even in the most Legal and limited
Monarchy. Therefore he does me exceeding wrong in the close of his first
Section, to say, that, I agree with the rest to use what force they can against
such a Monarch for suppressing of his tyranny, etc. All I say is, that Force
may be used; but neither against the Person nor Authority of the Monarch, which
in all Governments of that nature are to be held sacred and inviolate.

CHAP. II. An answer to the second Section concerning Cases of Resistance.
I Could have wished, that if it had pleased this Doctor to reply any thing, he
would have followed the steps of my Treatise; but since he intends no full
return, but does only catch at here and there a passage, without observing any
order, I will frame my Answer to the course of his Reply; and clear the
parcels of my book as I find them assaulted in my reading of his. The Title of
this Section being Cases of Resistance, the first part of it is spent about
such Cases as are put by the Divines who plead for Defensive arms. At length,
p. 9, 10. He comes to the alone Case in which I defend Resistance, in the p.
51. of my Tract, where I put the Question of Persons misimployed to serve the
illegal destructive commands of the Prince. And I affirm in such case, and of
such Persons Forceable Resistance to be lawful by the two Estates of
Parliament. This I prove by five Arguments, which here the Doctor does not
touch, but referres them to the p. 93. of this Reply. Only here he gives us a
Magisteriall determination without any proof at all. But let us hear his
Resolution upon the case. He dares not openly to pronounce it unlawful: but
distinguishes of Persons and Times, as if he would yield it lawful in some,
but not in others; Certes, if for any, then for the two Estates; if any, then
Instruments of subversion: if simply none, why does he with so great cautele
distinguish. Well, audiamus distinguentem: If by those misimployed persons be
understood the Commanders and Soldiers of the Kings Armies, I cannot see (nor
any man else, I think) but that the resisting of them by a contrary Militia, is
a resisting of the King, and unlawful, p. 9. I answer, I cannot see, nor any
man else, I think, why Commanders and Soldiers should have a privilege of
subverting States and Governments more then other men: Can the Royal Power
extend to give them an irresistibility, and not to others? Certes, if others
may be resisted, much rather Commanders and Soldiers, because there is greater
danger of subversion from them then from others: Their being Commanders and
Soldiers makes them more dangerous, but not more privileged: But, he nor none
else can see, how such can be resisted, but it must be a resisting of the King,
and unlawful. Perhaps he is mistaken in others, they may have clearer eyes
then he has: In the p. 52. of my Treatise, I have made it luce clarius, that
in a Legal Monarchy it is not a Resisting of the King. Then he proceeds to
another sort of men which I hope may be resisted. But if by those misimployed
persons be understood other instruments of oppression in times of peace, before
it come to Arms. What of these, may such be resisted? Here he resolves very
cautelously and timorously, after many words, p. 10. without prejudice to other
assertions of his of other resistance, He conceives it not unreasonable to say,
First, if private men be suddenly assaulted, and life imminently endangered,
and no means of avoiding by flight, then is personal defense lawful, for
such sudden assault carries no pretense of authority with it. What is this to
the matter? we enquire not of resisting assailants carrying no pretense of
authority with them; but of subverters of Government warranted by the Kings
will; and carrying pretense of Authority, though they have none. Secondly, If
they come with pretense of Authority, there may be seeking redressement above
from Authority, but if that may not be had, yet no resistance. And who then
minding to kill or rob, may not make a pretense of Authority, that so he may
effect his mischief without repugnance? But yet the Doctor will give us a
little more, The Ministers of Power in each County, and the Houses of
Parliament also (for with him they be equal) may at first stay, restrain, and
commit such misimployed instruments, and so represent the matter again to the
King. But is not this to resist them? No; he tells us, this is not to resist.
No? if misimployed instruments may be staid, restrained, and imprisoned, sure
they may be resisted: Else what if they should choose, and will not be
committed; The Parliament must not lay hands on them to compel them; for so
there may chance to be fight, and slaughter in the apprehension; and then the
Doctor would call it Resistance I think. But suppose the Houses of Parliament
do commit such persons and represent the matter to the King, and a King should
be so obstinate as to persist in the maintenance of those illegal courses, and
to that end employ the Militia, it is neither Legal nor Reasonable, they
should pursue the opposition to the setting up of a contrary Militia or Power,
p. 11. Here we see the upshot of the English freedom, and privilege of
Parliament. This is that which I said; Those men overturne all liberties, The
result of their doctrine destroys all policies, reducing them all to that
which is arbitrary: If the King should set Soldiers to destroy Laws and
Parliaments, They may (if they be able) stay their hands till they go to the
King, and know whether it be indeed his will and pleasure to have them
destroyed or no; If he say, Yea; then they must return and submit to the
vilest instruments of subversion, and not lift up a hand to resist them. But
let us see, on what weighty reason the Doctor builds this fatal Resolution.
This were a contestation of Power with him whose Ministers they are, a levying
of war, an opposing of Armies against Armies. Sure this man does much abhor
a Civil War: I cannot blame him: but yet we may buy an immunity too dear,
at the prize of a subversion of Religion, Laws and Government, which is the
case in dispute. This were to choose to be killed, rather then to sight: To
have a State subverted, rather then disturbed by a war to prevent it. I
grant, There must be no contestation of Power with him whose Ministers they
are: But this is the point to be proved, that in this case, it is so: I utterly
deny the Royal Power in our State can be communicated to subverting
Instruments: And I do in vain expect, while the Doctor prooves that, which
every where he supposes: For he builds all on this foundation, sc. That Gods
Ordinance is an Absolute unlimited Power, investing the whole will of the
Supreme, and cannot be determined in the exercise, but only morally; the
vanity of which conceit will appear hereafter, yet note here in the close,
that while he pretends a detestation of Civil War, he could do nothing more
to foment it, then by defending such Positions of intolerable servitude: Did
not such rigid Counselors of the King of Israel cause the greatest Rent and
Civil War that ever was made in any Kingdom?

CHAP. III. An Answer to the third Section which concerns several kinds of
Monarchy.
IN my opinion it had been fitter to have treated first of several kinds and
then of Cases of Resistance; for the subject in which should precede the
Question whereof, in all methodicall proceeding. Here again in the first
place, this Replier would make his Reader believe that penury of
Scripture-proofe put me upon distinguishing of several kinds of Monarchy, That
so I might lay all the defense of Resistance upon Reason drawn from the
several condition of Monarchies, p. 11. I have sufficiently before discovered
my intention in that Treatise. The Resistance which I defend has as much
proof from Scripture, as a matter of that nature need to have. Then he abuses
me, as finding fault with Divines, that pleading for absoluteness of
Monarchical Power in this Kingdom bring proofs from places of Scripture, p.
12. I complain not of all Divines, but some, such as this Resolver is: Some,
and that but of late years; and that but in this kingdom, where such
doctrines are the rode to preferments: nor do I blame them for bringing
proofs for subjection, and against Resistance from places of Scripture, as he
calumniates me; but I blame their gross perverting of Scripture; bringing
prohibitions of Resistance of Powers against them who condemn it as much as
themselves; And of violating the Lords anointed against them who hold them as
sacred and inviolate, yea on more solid grounds then themselves do. And their
fraudulent reasoning from one kind of government to another, as if all
Political provisions of States for their Liberties did make no variation in
the case; but that still they were in the same State, as the people subject to
the most absolute vassallage.

settling men's Consciences on warrant from Scripture, that he expects command or
allowance of Resistance from Scripture, p. 6. That his Adversaries resolve all
their faith and persuasion on an appearance of Reason drawn from Aristotle's
grounds, ib. and here that I observe there is but little pretense from
Scripture for Resistance; and thus would persuade men, as if he had all
Scripture for him; we nothing but a few husks of reason for us: Let him not
think to carry it thus away with vaunts and big words: I will profess here
once for all. He has not a syllable of Scripture or right reason to satisfy
the conscience with in this controversy: If it please this Doctor, let us
join issue upon it, and put the whole case on this point. The Question
between us is, Whether in a limited Monarchy, Resistance of subversive
Instruments be unlawful. He affirms, I deny. He undertakes to satisfy men's
consciences that it is unlawful: bringing not one Text of Scripture, which
speaks to the point: Something he brings to prove it unlawful to resist the
Ordinance of God: that the Magistrate which is supreme under God is above all
Resistance, p. 84. He does great matters; who doubts of these things: Then p.
84. he accumulates nine Arguments, but all so non concluding, that ninescore of
them will not make one sound proving Reason of the point in question, as it
will appear when we come to consider them. On the other side we have both to
settle men's consciences on. 1. Examples of Scripture, sc. The peoples rescue of
Jonathan: David's army against the cutthroats of Saul, that is, subversive
Instruments: These being particular men, and in an absolute Monarchy prove
the point the more strongly, so strongly that the Doctor is feign to fly to
that ordinary evasion, of an extraordinary privilege. Besides all those
places which prove it lawful to resist private men, seeking to subvert Laws
and Religion, and the public good; since in a limited State they are but
private men, though backed with a Commission from the Kings will and pleasure.
2. Then for Reason; I have set down five, p. 53. all unanswerably concluding
the point in Question, as I doubt not the considerate Reader will acknowledge.

He professes, p. 12. That it was never his intent to plead for absoluteness
of Power in the King, if by absoluteness of Power be meant a Power of
Arbitrary Command. What his intent is I know not, but he has fully done the
thing, or I have no understanding to see when a thing is done. In the precedent
Section, he resolves all cases into the Arbitrium Regis, the mere pleasure of
the King: allowing the Houses of Parliament only a power of staying the hands
of destroyers, till it be expressly known whether it be the Kings pleasure
they shall be destroyed: And I am confident the meanest apprehension will
discern, that they who make the Monarchs sole Will the last judge of all
controversies: and simply deny in the last case of subversion, all Power of
Resistance of Instruments, even to the supreme Courts of Law and justice, do
without any controversy, resolve all government into an Arbitrarie
Absoluteness. He adds, We allow a distinction of Monarchies and admit the
Government of Kingdoms to be of diverse kinds, and acknowledge a legal
restraint upon the Power of the Monarch in this Kingdom. Verba datis, rem
negatis; you allow indeed a kind of distinction of Monarchies, but all within
the compass of Absolute: A legal restraint you seem to acknowledge; but such
an one as resolves into the Arbitrary Will of the Monarch, as I have made it
appear in my former Treatise; and you will never be able to wipe off by this,
or any other Reply. Then he promises that in this Book certain points will
appear to be truth, agreeable to Scripture and Reason: sc. That Government is
not the invention of man, but the institution of God: That Governors have
their Power not from the people, but from God: That Governing Power is one and
the same in all supreames, and can only be limited in the exercise. And that
where a Prince stands supreme, and next to God above all the people, there the
Subjects may not take arms and make forceable resistance for any exorbitances.
These several Propositions how far they contain Truth, and how far not, I
shall in the sequel make appear.

After these great promises, he proceeds, p. 13. to speak somewhat of the
Original of Governing Power: and accuses me as if I seemed to I perceiving
two contrary opinions concerning the Original of Government, did in that
Treatise endeavor to reconcile them, and to show in what sense both are true.
To that end, as there is manifest, p 4. I distinguished 3 things. 1 It Is
constitution; 2 It Is Limitation to one kind. 3 It Is determination to one
individual Person and Family. The first of these I did affirm to be from God:
The two latter from Men, and then concluded, In these things we have Doctor
Fernes consent. Let us see what exceptions he can take at this peaceable assay
of Reconcilement. In the process of my Discourse he finds me deriving it from
the people. What then? Do I deny it thereby to be from God? as if
Subordinates did exclude one another. God has ordained that Powers should be:
People by virtue of that Ordinance give them existence in this or that kind and
subject. The Doctor acknowledges all this, but not in my sense, p. 14. He
grants the Designation of the Person, and the Limitation of the Power to
several kinds to be from the consent of the People. I say no more; why do we
not then agree? The plain truth is, The Doctor will not have Limitation of
Power to be at all from the people, what ever he pretends: How then the
Limitation of the Power to several kinds is from the people, as the Doctor
yields, I cannot tell. Is not Limitation of it into kinds, Limitation of the
Power it self? But he is possessed that my sound sense is another sense from
his; what other he does not show: but it is another which he likes not. Why?
Because sometimes I say, the people reserve a Power to oppose or displace the
Magistrate: Sometime they divest themselves of all superiority. It Is true, I
say so, but withal I say, that when they reserve such a Power, they constitute
no Monarchy. Is it not so, in the highest Ministers of Power in Aristocracies
and Democracies? What can he say against so apparent a Truth? 2. I call them,
p. 63. Architectonicall Powers. This he derides and says, This is the riddle
of this Governing Power originally in the people. They are Architectonicall
Powers, but build upon foundations laid in the air, p. 14, Then he gives his
reason, For before Government established they have not any politic Power,
whereby a Command may be laid upon others, but only a natural power of private
resistance. This is false, that they have only a natural power of private
Resistance. They have indeed no formal politic power, for we speak of a
people free from all government; but they have a virtuall radical power, by
public consent and contract to constitute this or that form of Government,
and resign up themselves to a condition of subjection on Terms and after a
form of their own constitution; so the Athenians, Lacedaemonians and Romans of
old having expelled their Kings: and the United Provinces, with others of
latter times have done: This is that which I called Architectonicall Power; and
the Replier vainly carpes at the name, when he cannot deny the thing. But I
know what he aims at in all this, sc. That Gods Ordinance is an absolute
boundless Power in all Supremes, incapable of any limitation, but in the
exercise. Of which fully afterward.

At length He takes a nearer view of the Forms of Monarchy, spoken of by me,
and makes a few observations upon such particulars at him pleases, p. 14. Let
us follow his steps. First, for Absolute Monarchy, whereas I say it is, when
Sovereignty is so fully in one, that it has no limitation under God, but the
Monarchs own will. He approoves my description; but threatens to remember it
below, p. 15. Let him do so; and make his best advantage of it, only here he
cannot forbear one note, that then it is not the denial of resistance which
makes a Monarch absolute; but the denial of a law to bound his Will. I do
grant it; but with all I say, that it is necessario consequutivum, though it be
not constitutivum: for since a Monarch which is obsolute has no Law to bound
his Will; but his very Will is the Subjects Law, then every act of his Will is
Gods Ordinance, and so by consequence it is unresistible. Also, p. 15. He
allows it, when I say, A limited Monarch is he who has a Law besides his own
Will for the measure of his power. But yet he dislikes that I say, He must be
limited in the Power it self, and not only in the exercise; and I added a
reason, for an Absolute Monarch may stint himself in the exercise of his
Power, and yet remain absolute. What says he to this? True, if such a Monarch
limit himself and reserve a Power to vary, -- but if he fix a Law with promise
not to vary, then in those cases he is limited. Note the fraud of this
Replier, he alters his terms and puts things as opposite which are not so: He
should say, if be limit himself, and reserve a power to vary; then he is
absolute; but if he limit himself and reserve no Power to vary (for then the
opposition is direct) then he is limited. But in stead of saying (and reserve
no power to vary) he says, but [if he promise not to vary] I say that promise
not to vary, if it be a simple promise of not varying, it does not make him
limited in his Power, any more then morally, and so every Absolute Monarch is
limited. I affirm still, it is Limitation of the Power it self, not barely of
the exercise, which constitutes a Limited Monarch: for Monarchy is a state of
Power, and therefore it is specificative distinction must be from something
which distinguishes Powers, and not the exercise of Powers; but this is enough
proved in the 5t page of that Treatise.

Secondly, he blames me for that I suppose a Limited Monarch must be radically,
that is, originally invested with such a measure of limited Power, and that
limited, ab externo, and not from the free determination of his own Will. Here
he adds originally of his own; that so he might seem to find a
contradiction, when I afterward say, that it may be done by original
constitution, or by after condescent; but yet he confesses, I have a salve,
when I make it such a condescent, as is equivalent to an Original
Constitution, because amounting to a change of Title, and a resolution in the
Monarch to be subjected to, no other way. I make no salve, nor do I need any;
he who weighes the Uniformity of Truth in that Treatise will see it needs no
salves: Only I distinguish those things which are in their natures distinct,
which if the Doctor had done, this Contention either had not been begun, or
would soon have an end: Who sees not that a Promise, whereby a Monarch may bind
himself may either be with a limitation of the bond of subjection, or without:
And that this makes a real difference: for in this the Government remains the
same, because the Duty of subjection received no variation; but in that there
is for so much a Transitus into a limited condition. But these things cannot be
more fully and clearly expressed then they are in the page 13. of that
Treatise. But he answers, Where there is such a change of Title, it is done at
once, and by express and notorious resignation of former Power; but it is not
necessary that an absolute Monarch should come to a limited Condition after
that manner. I say, if he will pass into a limited condition, it is necessary
there be a limitation of his Power, else he is not truly limited: But that all
such limitation be done at once and by notorious resignation, it is not
necessary, as will appear afterward where this matter of Limitation is more
distinctly handled.

sc. That in a mixed Government (if it be of three) the Sovereign Power must be
in all three originally, and from fundamental constitution. He judges this not
necessary, p. 17. and he gives a wonderful Reason: For as Limitation may be
only of the exercise of the Power, and not of the Power it self; so mixture is
in regard of Persons joined to the Monarch for certain acts and purposes; but
that they should have any share in the Sovereign power, the nature of Monarchy
will not admit. 1. Just so; for as a Monarchy is not limited unless there be a
limitation of Power, for Monarchy is a Power; so a Monarchy cannot be mixed,
unless there be a mixture of Powers, for Monarchy is a Power; and to say a
mixed Monarchy, and yet the Power not mixed, is to speak contradictories. 2. If
the mixture be not of diverse concurrent Powers; whereof is it? He tells us, of
the Monarch and certain other Persons joined with him for certain acts and
purposes. These joined Persons, have they any concurring Power to do those
acts for which they are joined? If not; then the adjoining is futulous and
vain, and the Power of Monarchy is mixed of a Person having Power, and of
others having no Power to do that for which they are joined. You will say,
They have Power, but not distinct from that of the Monarch: that is, they have
none; for in mixture, if it be not distinct, it is none at all. Again if they
have any, it must be distinct, for subordinate it cannot be; if the Acts to
which they concur be supreme Acts, unless we should be so absurd as to say,
They may concur to supreme Acts, by a subordinate Power. But let us see, what
a maine Reason he has for averring a conceit subject to such absurdities. Such
a mixture would make several independent powers in the same State or Kingdom,
which is most absurd. I grant it is absurd, if he speak of several complete
independent powers; but to affirm several incomplete independent powers
concurring to make up one integrall mixed power, it is no absurdity at all for
so it is, in all Aristocracies and Democracies, and must be acknowledged in all
mixed States, where the supremacy is not wholly in the hands of one person. Yet
here we do not so make them independent, but that we give a large
predominancie to One, as, in nature, in all mixed bodies there is, as I have at
large explained my self in the next Section, if the Doctor had been at leisure
to have taken notice of it. I yield to that which he says, p. 17. that it is
not necessary the Mixture should be so Original, but that it may also come
afterward by condescent: It matters not, so it be original, that is,
radical: of Powers, and not of mere Acts: And indeed, there cannot be a
mixture of Acts, unless it be also of Powers: for Acts are from Powers: and
where Powers are subordinate, there can be no mixture in their Acts; the Acts
of causes subordinate, are also subordinate, and not coordinate and mixed. But
I there brought two Arguments to prove that in a Mixed Government, the
Concurrents must have independent and distinct Powers. Let us see how he
answers them. 1. Because else it would be no mixture, but a derivation of
Power, which is seen in the most simple Monarchy. He answers, that derivation
of Power is either upon substitute Officers supplying the absence of the
Monarch in the execution of Power: and this is in the most simple Monarchy. Or
else upon Persons whose concurrence and consent is required to certain Acts of
Monarchical Power; and this makes a mixture, though they have no share in the
Power it self, p. 17. I answer, 1. Absence or presence of the Monarch; whether
they Act for him, or with him, varies not the case, If the Power they work by
be derived from him, then it is his Power, and so constitutes no Mixture. 2. As
if in the most simple Monarchy, the Sovereign does manage the ardua imperij,
the weightiest matters of State alone; and not by consent of his Counsel;
without whom he is morally bound, (that is, on the sin of rashness) not to
transact them, and that is all, which the Doctor yields to the Houses of
Parliament, sc. that the King is morally bound to their concurrence and consent
in certain Acts. This is nothing but the shadow of a Mixture; If the Power of
Acting be so in one, that, if he please, he may do those Acts without the
concurrence of those adjunct Persons, though he ought not, it is no Mixture,
because the Power is simple and One; and mixed Acts cannot flow from one simple
Power. This the Doctor sees, and therefore says, If this Author will not call
this a Mixture, we cannot help it, p. 18. We do not enquire of Names, but of
things; nor whether it make a difference in Government or no; We treat of a
Mixed Government: and, I think, no man of common sense will affirm, that a
Government can be really mixed, and yet the Power be simple. 2. Because the End
of Mixture (which is Effectual Limitation) cannot be had by a derivate Power.
He answers; Though a Derivate Power cannot set new bounds to the Sovereign
Power, yet may it stand to keep in a legal way those bounds which the
sovereign Power has set to it self. Observe, He dares not to say, They may
keep: but only stand to keep; nor stand neither, but by advice; that is
morally: If he will exceed those bounds, the Act is valid, and has all its
Authority without them: Only he sins, if he do so; because he has promised he
would not do it without them: Here Is excellent Limitation and Confinement from
exorbitancies: A bare promise, without such ado, in constituting States and
Mixtures, would be altogether as good a bounds; but of this we shall have more
occasion to speak afterward.

In the close of this Section he turns back to the p. 21. of my book, If the
invasion be made upon pretense of Title, and the pretender does prevail, it is
not Conquest properly, but a Vindication of a Title: and then the Government is
such as the Title is by which he claimed. He tells us, He sees no injustice in
it, if such a one having prevailed should use such a people as a Conqueror, p.
19. The Lord keep us from this man's justice. What; No injustice? If the
Pretenders Title allowed by a great part of the people, he by their aid
subdues the rest, shall he for their labor crush them into servitude, and use
the power of a Conqueror, without injustice? 2. Suppose the people not
convinced of the right of his Title make at first some opposition; but yet the
pretense of his Title, and apprehension that he seeks no more power then his
Title imports, work a yiedling disposition in them, so that they withstand not
so universally, nor so long as they might have done; but at length submit to
him on his pretended terms: were it not high injustice to take advantage on
such a people, and having them under hatches to desert those terms on which
they yielded, and use the full right of a Conqueror: This was Englands case
with Duke William. But the maine thing which sticks by him is something I have
delivered, p. 23. It is an uncontrolable truth in policy, that the consent of
the people, either by themselves or their Ancestors, is the only mean in
ordinary providence, by which sovereignty is conferred upon any person or
family. Against this he is very angry; and opposes it in many words; but to my
Argument from the Moral bond of subjection, he says nothing at all. He terms
it good policy, but bad divinity, p. 20. And sets up an Antiposition, that
when the invading Prince has perfectly subdued a people (there being no heir
to whom they are bound) and has settled and constituted a frame of Government,
then providence does sufficiently discover it self, and such a people ought to
submit and take this Prince as set over them by the hand of providence. As if
these two were contrary: I say, They are not bound until they consent: He
says, in such a case they are bound to consent, because then providence
discovers it self: And he brings Calvin at large to prove that which none
denies: I grant a people (not preobliged,) fully overcome should much sin
against Gods providence by obstinacy, if on a mere will, they consent not to
reasonable terms of subjection: But this I say, There is no moral obligation
to Authority, before that consent bind them: Conquest may be an Antecedent
cause; but the immediate and formal cause is only the consent of the people;
which he cannot say against; for that must be moral, and not merely violent.
The call of providence challenges a contented submission, if there be no
reason hindering it; but if a precedent Oath or some other sound reason
intervene, then it is no call requiring submission: Neither can the fullest
conquest make a people debtors, but they remain free from any moral bond; for
the providence of God being of it self external, can induce no moral state;
but that providence which on one discovery calls to a submission: on a like
discovery may free them again, if nothing else come between, to render them
morally bound: A Travellour, by the providence of God shut up into the hands of
a Robber, has his life and protection promised him in his journey, if he will
promise to pay him so much money: I say, this Travailor should sin against his
own life, and the providence of God, offering him those terms, if obstinately
he refuse submission: Yet no man will say he owes the robber so much money,
because he has him at his mercy, until he by promise make himself a debtor:
Thus have I made good that maxim of mine to be an uncontrouleable Truth, good
Policy, and good Divinity too; maugre all the Doctor has or can say against
it.

CHAP. IV. Wherein the vanity and falsehood of the supposals whereon the Doctor
has built all his discourses is made appear.
Constitution of this Monarchy, in his Sect. 4. 2. Of Resistance, in the
remainder of his book. Which two, we should now immediately pursue; but that
another work more conducent to the ending of this contention will for a while
divert me.

Error in the search of controverted truths does more often arise from the
judgment, then from the reason: Men do more offend in laying false grounds;
then in deducing false inferences from true grounds; This I have observed in
the Doctors books: He truly argues, but from false principles; and then the
superstructure must needs be answerable, so that, overthrow his foundations,
and then all his building will of it self ruin into apparent falsehood. I
confess he every where says the same of my Grounds, on which I have built
that Treatise: He calls them false and groundless supposals, and fancies, and
what else he pleases: I will therefore make him a fair offer: Let us make a
short work of it: let us join issue upon our supposals, on which both our
discourses are built.

This Doctors supposals which he scarce ever makes show to prove and on which
he has built his Resolves and Discourses I doubt not to call unsound and
false: and do profess the contrary to be my grounds whose truth I will
maintain. His may be reduced to four heads. 1. Concerning the Ordinance of
God in Sovereignty. 2. Concerning the Nature and Quality of Limitation. 3. The
Means and causes of Limitation. 4. The Constitution of this Monarchy. And
according to this order we will take them into examination.

First, Of the Ordinance of God in Magistracy, Of Gods ordinance in supremacy.
He proceeds on two false principles. 1. That the Governing power is one and
the same which God gives and settles upon the person that is supreme, p. 13.
that is, it is absolute and unlimited in the power it self; and may be limited
only in the exercise thereof, p. 17. 2. Which follows from the former, that
Consent of people may be the mean of designing the person, and yiedling
subjection to him, who else could not challenge it more then an other man; also
a mean of limiting that power in the exercise of it; but not the measure of
the power it self, which in such a measure is given of God to all Sovereigns,
p. 41. so then; Question proposed.
let this be the Question, Whether it be Gods Ordinance that Governing power in
all Sovereigns be one unlimited thing; and can receive no measure from the
people? The Doctor affirms it; and p. 84, tells us he has often insinuated
it; but he should once directly prove it, if he be able, so he might have
prescribed to the whole controversy; for if he can make this good, in vain
do we enquire about the constitution of this Monarchy; or the lawfulness of
resistance of subversive instruments of the Princes will. Does he think a
covert insinuation would serve the turn to impose such an Assertion, which
frustrates the intent of mankind in framing limitations of Governing power; and
captives all into an absolute passive subjection to the vilest instruments of
the will of him who is supreme. In all his reply I find but two places which
have any show of proof of this overbold Assertion. One is p. 14. Before
Government established the people have not any power of a community or politic
power whereby a command may be laid upon others; but only a natural power of
private resistance. The other is p. 42. The people have not of themselves out
of Government, the maine power, the power of life and death, how then can they
give it either for Government, or reserve it for Resistance? Here be weak
foundations to build such an Assertion, and three such insulting books on. What
a nothing this is, I shall make appear anon.

Question stated.
Now I hold the Negative of this Question; and doubt not to approve it firm
truth: To that end, first I will premise such things as we agree in, that so
the point in question may the more distinctly appear. Which I apprehend are or
may be these. 1. That Governing power is originally from Gods Ordinance. 2.
That it being so, is unresistible in its whole latitude, in all the acts which
flow from it. This the Apostle is clear for, Romans 13. and for no more, that I
know. Also that this is true as well in Limited as Absolute Governments; v. g.
In absolute Monarchy, where Authority does invest the whole will; the Monarch
is unresistible in all the acts of his reasonable will; because all are acts
flowing from Gods Ordinance. So in limited Monarchy, where Authority does not
simply invest the will of a Monarch, but so far forth as it is regulated by
such a law, the Monarch is unresistible in all the acts of his will which are
according to that law; because they are acts flowing from Gods Ordinance: Yea
though either of these do limit himself in the exercise of his power, no way
thereby diminishing the fullness of his power; and afterward exceed those
limits, yet he is unresistible, and to be subjected to actively in lawful
things, and passively in unlawful: my reason is, because even those acts,
notwithstanding limitation, flow from Gods Ordinance of Authority, which
remains the same, and not lessened by such limitation. 3. This governing power
is ordinarily conveyed to persons by public consent, which is a point made
good in my former Treatise, and in the former chapter hereof. 4. That this
public consent is not only a mean, but has a causall influence in conveying
Authority to persons. 5. That men working by such consent as second causes, do
necessarily convey such Authority, as God has ordained; so that, if it can be
proved either by Scripture or sound reason, that it is Gods ordinance, that
supremacy should be unlimited, and as large as all the acts of his will which
has it, then whatever men capitulate about limitation of it, is vain, so that
the Doctor need prove only that point; and for my part I will give him the
cause. 6. Limitation of Power may be either of Acts, when Power is conveyed to
Persons to do certain Acts of Power; but not all. Or else of Manner of
working; when Power is conveyed to do all Acts of Authority, but according to
such a prescribed Rule. Now I grant the former cannot be in the conveyance of
Sovereign Power, an inferior Officer may be limited by commission to certain
acts of Power; and have no Authority to do other Acts of power; but when
Sovereignty is conveyed, and the Person is set up next to God, above all the
people, as the Doctor says. He must have an unlimited Power in respect of
Acts of Government: for Gods Ordinance is not only that there should be Power
for such an end; sc. a Peaceable life in godliness and honesty; but
sufficiency of Power for the attainment of that end: So that all Power of
doing any Act needful for that end, must be in him who is supreme, and the
comprehensive Head of Power to inferior Magistrates. So that all the Question
truly stated is about the other sort of Limitation, sc. Whether Sovereign
Power be so unlimited in its Rule of Acting, that it investeth the whole
Reasonable Will of him who has it: So that all the acts which proceed from him
who has it according to the rule of his own Reason, be potestative, and from
Gods Ordinance.

Secondly, having thus punctually stated the Question, Question determined.
the Determination must proceed in a double way, sc. 1. In simple Governments.
2. In mixed Governments. I do maintain the Negative in both: and my proof shall
be formed accordingly.

First then, In simple Government, Power is not one Unlimited thing But may be
limited in the very being and root of it. 1. The cause or mean by which alone
it is conveyed, if it bestow or Being of it. For there can be no more then is
conveyed: Now we know, the people by their public act of consent and compact,
may either bind themselves to a full subjection to the Monarchs Will guided by
his own Reason; or by some constituted rule or law set him to govern by;
which latter if they do, then is his Authority radically limited: For they
owing no more subjection; He can have no farther Power. 2. If sovereignty may
be so limited, that Active Obedience is not p. 16.) Then it may be limited in
the Power it self: For in such case the Power exceeds not the limitation; for
if the exceeding Acts were potestative, we owe Active subjection to them, in as
much as they are the Ordinance of God, to which in omnibus non prohibitis,
Active subjection Gods Ordinance; or else because it is supreme: but its being
Gods Ordinance hinders not; for we see, Romans 13. All Powers as well supreme, as
subordinate are Gods Ordinance, yet subordinate Powers may be limited, not only
in the Rule of Acting, but in the kind of Acts; as none can deny. Neither its
being supreme does hinder its limitablenesse; indeed, as before it hinders it
from being capable of confinement, in the kind of Acts: but in the measure or
rule of working, it does not hinder, in as much as a Sovereign Power may as
well attain its end, by being confined to another Law from without, as by the
Law of its own Reason, if not much better; also we no where find Gods Word
making any difference or giving power to confine subordinate Powers; but
forbidding it of Sovereigns. moral bounds, for then none were or could be
arbitrary; but when Power is so fully in Arbitrium or Will is Potestative and
sovereign. 5. I have the judgment of all the Reformed Churches and Divines in
Germany, France, Belgia, Scotland, on my part; who have both allowed and
actually used forceable Resistance against subversive Instruments of their
Sovereigns Will; yea our own famous Princes Elizabeth, James, and our present
Sovereign, both by edicts, and Assistance have justified the same: which they
would not have done, had they been persuaded of such an unlimited Ordinance of
God investing all the Acts of the Will of him who is supreme. So that by all
this it appears that the Doctors conceit of such an unlimited Ordinance of God,
which he brings not a tittle of Gods word to prove, is a mere chimera and
groundless conceit.

Object.
Now the only difficulty, which I can think on, is this. Gods Ordinance in
sovereignty, as before, is not only Power to such an end; but sufficiency of
Power to the assecution of that end: now a limited Power seems not to be
sufficient for the end of Government, because there are two Powers necessary to
the end of Government, sc. Power of making and authentic Interpreting of
Laws, which are not consistent with a Limitation of Power.

I answer: It is true of Limitation in respect of Acts; Sol.
and therefore I aver, that such a Limitation cannot be where Power is
supreme: but for Limitation to a Rule and defined way of Working, I cannot see
how it with-stands the end of Government: So that supposing Power of making and
Interpreting Laws be necessary to the end of Government, yet that they be
Absolutely resident in him who is supreme, sc. To make Laws and Interpret
Laws authoritatively without being bound to follow any Light or Rule therein,
but his own Reason is not necessary to the end of Government: In these Acts a
regulated Power is enough in the most simple State, sc. a Power to make new
Laws, if any be needful; and Interpreting the old, if ambiguous, according to
the Rule of the former established Laws; and by the advice of his learned
Counsel and Judges of his supreme Courts of Justice. We see in matters
spiritual, there is no Legislative Power resident, to ordain or give
authentic sense in matters de fide, yet the Church stands well enough; one
standing Rule of Scripture being sufficient with a ministerial Interpretation:
So it is probable a State might, by a complete standing Rule of Law, and a
Ministerial Power of Interpretation, were there no Legislative Power resident
in any Supreme Magistrate thereof.

But the matter is far more clear in a mixed Government; so that simple
Government, that the Supreme should be unlimited in his Power, yet in a Mixed
(which is enough for us in this Kingdom) evidently it is not so: And to make
this appear, I will lay down three grounds. 1. Such a Government may be
established that the supreme Power may be placed in many persons, either of the
same, or diverse condition, that is, in a mixed Subject: else all forms were
unlawful except simple Monarchy. 2. If this supreme Power be inequally
placed in these Persons or States of men; so that a real sublimity and
Principality be given to one, then the denomination may be taken from that
Principal: and so it is a Monarchy, or Aristocracy, or Democracy mixed in the
Power it self; however it pleases this Replier to deride it, with the top, or
Crown of the head: of which more hereafter. 3. Where the Supremacy of power is
thus in many, although all taken together have an unlimited Power, as in ours,
yet neither of them several by himself has, or can have; for it is a
contradiction, that it be resident in many, and yet unlimitedly in One.

Now to those two shows of Argument, which in the beginning I produced out of
this Reply, I say, before Government be established it is true the people have
no formal Politic Power of Life and Death; yet they have a seminall; that
is, every one for himself, his family and posterity has a power of resigning
up their natural liberty, to be governed by One, or many; after this or that
form as they shall judge fittest. God ordaining that Powers should be to such
an end, has thereby legitimated and ratified any Consent or Contract which
people may make of parting with their liberty and giving Magistrates a common
Power over them to that end. And Gods not prescribing any Rule or Measure of
Power by his Ordinance of Authority, has left it in the peoples liberty, to
resign up themselves according to such Rule and Terms, as they judge fittest,
so it be such as the end of his Ordinance may be attained thereby. Thus
although by it self, and excluding Gods Ordinance they have no immediate Power
to lay a command on others, nor Power of life and death, yet in virtue of Gods
Ordinance their common consent and contract is sufficient to set up such a
Power which is endowed with a sufficiency of Command for Government and the end
of Government over those which have, each man for himself and his, set it up.
So although second Causes have no Power by themselves to produce their effects,
yet working in virtue of the first Cause they have Power to produce effects,
sometimes far beyond their own Measure. Therefore I desire this Doctor
either to bring some Ordinance of God expressly forbidding to set any bounds
or Rule of Power upon the Will of the Magistrate; or else let him suffer
Mankind to use their Right in resigning up that liberty which God and nature
has given them upon such terms and conditions as they apprehend best for
their own good: and the due end of Government.

Sum.
In the close of this Question, I will lay down three Conclusions concerning
the Ordinance of God, and the Nature of Soveraigntie.

God has ordained that in Societies of Men there should be a Politic Power,
for a peaceable and godly life: This Ordinance has put a Seminall Power in all
the Societies of Men, sc. a Liberty and Power by common Consent to resign up
themselves and theirs to one Supreme; thereby constituting a common Politic
Power.

2. God in his Ordinance for Government having not determined any kind either
to a supreme regulated in the Acts of his Will by his own Reason, as in
absolute Government; or to one regulated by a Common Reason or Law constituted
by public consent, as in Limited.

3. God in his Ordinance for Government having not determined the subject
Whence arise simple or mixed Governments, and this is the Architectonicall
Power left in societies before they are engaged in a Government, which the
Doctor does so causlesly deride: Here is the sum of what I do aver
concerning Gods Ordinance in Soveraigntie, which I challenge the Doctor or any
else to gainsay.

The second sort of the Doctors false supposals respect the Nature and Quality
of Limitation, Of nature and Quality of Limitation.
where also I observe that he proceeds on two false and fallacious Principles,
sc. 1. He every where confounds Moral and Civil or Legal Limitation, so p.
18. 93. 39. 2. That Sovereignty is capable only of a moral Limitation, p. 39,
42., So that if any other be in any State ordained, He cannot believe but such
a condition is unlawful, and unreasonable against the Order of Government. p.
39. If the nature of Limitation be well known, it will appear that the Doctor
has done very inconsiderately, or rather very fraudulently (for he has
obscured the Truth much by it) in confounding moral and Civil Limitation. We
will therefore consider the nature of Limitation something more accurately then
I have done in my former Treatise; for it will be a great light to the whole
controversy.

First, We must consider a distinction of Power, which is either, A or Doing,
which is in every Moral Agent. 2. A Power of Authoritative and obligatorie
Willing or Doing; so that an act of it, whether a Will of Command or Censure
expressed, has in it a binding power to subjection, this is that which we call
Magistracy, of whose Limitation now we treat.

Secondly, concerning Limitation; we must know that it induces necessity of
not producing any Act beyond those Limits. For a Power having bounds beyond
which it can exceed, if it please, though with difficulty, it is not properly
limited, but hindered.

necessity of not exceeding those bounds is such as the bounds themselves are;
so that it is ever true, That a Power in what way it is limited cannot exceed
those limits.

Of Moral limits.
Fourthly, There are of this Power but two sorts of Limits, sc. 1. Moral, and
2. Civil or Politic. Of which two we must distinctly consider. 1. Moral
Limits is the Moral Will or Law of God; and a Power is said to be limited by
this, not when it cannot produce any Act at all: but when it cannot morally
produce it, that is, without sin. For the supervening of a moral bond, does
not take away the Power of doing, but of right or sinlesse doing: v. g. in
Natural Powers. Gods prohibition of eating Swines flesh, did not take away
from the Jew the natural Power of eating it; but the power of sinlesse eating
it. So in Civil power a prohibition of God coming upon it, does not take away
the Power of Civil and Authoritative Doing; but of lawful, or sinlesse doing.
And hence it follows, 1. That Moral Limitation is only of the Exercise of
Power; not of the power it self: for the power is not thereby taken away, but
remains equally extense and able to all its acts, as it was before; only now
it cannot put forth it self unto certain Acts without sin, which it could
before: Thus an Absolute Monarch who has a power of doing, as extense as his
Reasonable Will, promises to do but this, or in this manner: now he is morally
bound, by virtue of this promise; and cannot without sin do otherwise: yet
if he do, his Commanding Power is the same, and its act binding to the
Subject. And so it is proportionably in Legal Governments. Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage has by the Canons a power of judging Ecclesiastical causes committed
to him: He resolves and promises to do nothing of moment herein, but by the
consent of his Clergy, now he is morally bound: and if afterward he do a
thing by himself without their consent, he sins: yet no man will say his
Episcopal power is lessened; or the act he so does, is canonically invalid,
and not obligatorie. 2. Yea it follows also that it is not properly a
Limitation of the Exercise of power neither: for by a moral bond, the Power is
not so bound up, but that it can exercise it self, and that validly too,
though not without sin, as appears before. 3. Also that it is no detraction
from Absoluteness of Power; nor is it sufficient to make a distinction of it
into Absolute and Limited. For, 1. It causes no real Limitation of power,
either in the nature, or exercise of it. 2. It is not distinctive, being to be
found in the most absolute power under heaven, Legal Limits.
all being bounded by Gods Law, the Law of Equity, and many promises by
themselves made.

2. Civil or Legal Limits cause a Civil and Legal definement of Authority,
so that, its exceeding acts are not Legal and binding, that is, are non
Authoritative: for as a Moral bond induces a necessity of confinement in esse
morali; so a Civil and Legal bond does in esse legali and obligatorio. Hence
follows, 1. It is these Legal and civil bounds which constitute a Government
in a limited condition, not those moral; for this is distinctive and is never
found in an absolute Government, for there the Sovereign by promise or Oath
binding himself to a stated course does put no Law civil upon his power, or
the exercise of it; for though he sin in exceeding afterward, yet his acts
are truly Legal and Authoritative. 2. This induces a real Limitation of
power, neither can it be only of exercise; for since it brings an illegality and
unauthoritativenesse on acts exceeding, that is, makes them none in esse civili
and politico, it is a limitation of Power it self; for when a Power can
produce no potentiall acts beyond such limits, then it is limited in the very
being. 3. Acts exceeding politic and legal Limitation, being not Legal nor
authoritative in that State can give no authority to the Instruments, and
therefore they may be resisted without resistance or violation of Authority.
Whereas it is otherwise in Acts exceeding moral Limitation; for being
authoritative, they authorize the Instrument, and give him an unresistance.

In sum: Limitation moral and civil or legal do differ in three main
particulars.

1. Moral, since it is no politic or Authoritative Act, Legal, being a
politic and authoritative Act makes a real diminution; and so is the ratio
formalis, or distinctive conceit constituting Limited government; nor can be
found in absolute.

2. Hence, Exceeding Acts notwithstanding moral limitation are exceed a legal
limitation.

3. Exceeding Acts in moral limitation being authoritative have the Sword or
compelling power annexed to them, which may not be resisted: but in Legal,
being not authoritative, they have not the sword or compelling power annexed,
and therefore may be resisted in their Instruments: I will illustrate all this
by a familiar instance. In our Government, a Judge has a Commission to hear
and determine Causes according to the Verdict of twelve men. Here is a Power
limited in the very being, that is Legally and Civilly. This Judge uses
indirect means to corrupt the Jury to bring in an unjust Verdict; but judges
as his Commission binds him according to their Verdict: Here is a moral
exceeding, yet the Act of judgment is Authoritative, because according to his
Commission, and must not be resisted. Again, He passes sentence in another
cause expressly against the Verdict of the Jury, in an arbitrary way. Here is
a Legal exceeding, and the sentence is non authoritative. He having no such
Power committed to him, the sentence can have no binding power in it. Hereby it
appears how without any ground of Truth, the former supposals are.

Causes and Means of Limitation the Doctors supposals are, Causes and means
of Limitation.
1. That Radical Limitation, that is, of the Power it self requires an
express and notorious act, it must be done in the beginning and at once. p.
15. 24. 39. 2. That a Prince may so limit himself, as not to require to be
actively subjected to, and yet be limited only in the exercise, not in the
power it self, p. 16. 3. That no Limitation by after condescent, is of the
Power it self, p. 28. this being a consequent from the first. Now that the
falsehood of these and the like grounds every where scattered in his books may
appear; Let us a little more diligently handle the Causes and Means of
Limitation, which, as before, Causes of Moral Limitation.
being twofold, Moral and Civil; We will begin with Moral. 1. Now the
Formal cause of a mere Moral Limitation, is that which morally bounds or
makes sinful any act of Power. We are therefore to enquire what it is which
can do that. And this is, 1. Principally the Moral Law of God forbidding such
an exercise of Power. This is an universal, perpetual and invincible
Limitation of all power of Government, either absolute or legal, yea of all
Active Power of reasonable creatures. 2. There is another mean of Limitation
moral, sc. a Promise, Oath or positive constitution, whereby a Prince puts a
bond upon himself, making that now sinful to be done, which before was not
so. This also induces a moral Limitation, as well in absolute as legal
Governments; as if an Absolute Monarch promise to follow such a Rule, which
has a Power to use any which his reason shall dictate. Or if a Legal promise
to abridge himself in a course, in which the Law has left him indeterminate:
in this respect, they come under a moral limitation. But concerning this
positive mean we must note. 1. This promise, how solemn soever it be, must be
a simple bond: It must extend to no diminution of power, or discharge from duty
of subjection; for then it is not merely moral, it makes the exceeding act
not only sinful, but non obliging: whereas it is the note of a mere moral
bond, that it extends not to any lessening of Authority, or discharge of duty:
as if a Captain take his enemy prisoner; he to save his life swears him a
full vassalage afterward, his Master promises to command him only such
services, never absolving him from his former bond of absolute slavery: here is
a moral bond; yet still a full debt of subjection in case the Master should
break his word, and put him on other employment. 2. If the matter be more
thoroughly looked into, this positive mean of limitation is either none at all;
or else adds nothing to the former, of the moral law of God: For in such
promise or Oath whereby a Governor limits himself there is an express or
tacit condition, if it conduce to the end of Government, the glory of God, and
public good: For if such Oath or bond hinder the end of Government, it is eo
nomine, unlawful and invalid; but if conduce to it, then it was no more, then
was virtually required of him before by the moral Law; this promise or Oath
being but a more solemn profession and protestation to do that which before
implicitly he was bound morally unto. Thus we see all that Doctor speaks of
Moral and irrevocable limitation by promise and oath comes to nothing in the
issue: so that this being granted that the Monarchs power in this State were
only Morally limited in the Doctors sense; We are as much under and owe as much
subjection as the captive slave to his Master; and all our Laws and Statutes
being but moral limitations of this second sort, are not so much as moral
limitations any farther then the Prince sees them conduce to the end of
Government, if any seem to stand in his way, and hinder him therein, he is no
longer bound to it; but may account it an ill made promise or Oath which is
better broke then kept. 2. Causes of Legal limitation.
Of the Causes and Means of Civil and legal limitation, whereby not only the
exercise, but the power it self is confined. 1. The formal cause hereof is
the limitation of the duty of subjection in the people: The duty of subjection
is the original of the power of Authority. People by becoming debtors of
subjection do set up Authority; and by stinting and terminating the duty of
subjection do put bounds and terms to the power of commanding. 2. Let us see
then by what means the duty of subjection may be terminated. I conceive it may
be done two ways. 1. At first, when a people resigning up themselves to a
state of subjection do it not absolutely, but impose only a limited bond on
themselves; for if they impose no more duty: the Governor can assume no more
power. Now this may be done, not only by positive, express and notorious act,
as the Doctor speaks; but also by a negative; a mere not imposing of an
absolute bond of duty on themselves is enough: so that if it cannot be proved
either by records of the first institution, or present obligation that a people
have put themselves into a state of absolute subjection, then it is to be held
but limited: For whatsoever is ours by the law of nature, cannot be taken from
us but by some positive act done by our selves or Ancestors: Thus in private
men; Liberty which is mine by nature, none can take from me, unless he can
bring a title or right whereby it became his, and I his servant. Nor am I any
farther his servant, then he can bring proof of his right. The same is true of
a society of men. In this case it belongs to the challenger, and not to the
defendent to bring his positive notorious act for proof of his title, and
measure of his title: So that the Doctors demand is unreasonable, who standing
for a full right in our Government, puts on the peoples part to bring evidence
that they have not. Rather it is just, that he should bring some positive and
notorious act wherein it appears that this people have fully resigned up their
liberty to an absolute Government; or make it appear that it is Gods ordinance
that where ever a people do constitute a sovereign power, they must make an
absolute resignation of their liberty. 2. By after-condescent, for this may be
a mean of civil limitation, unless any will imagine that a people once
putting themselves into absolute subjection, are irrevocably so. And thus a
Monarch becomes limited, when the promise or Oath he limits himself by, is not
simple, but amounts either expressly or equivalently to a relaxation of the
bond of subjection: whether it proceed from mere grace, or conscience of
equity, or by Petition, or importunity of the people, it matters not what was
the ground of it, if it carry with it a relaxation of the duty of subjection,
it is a mean of civil limitation, in the very root of power; for power can be
no larger in the Prince, then duty of subjection is in the people; for these
two have a necessary dependence, and relation of equality either to other. Thus
if a Monarch, taking advantage of force of arms, impose a new Oath of full
subjection on his people, who before were but legally bound; and prevail so
far, that the whole or major part of his people do take it for themselves
and theirs, here is a chang of Government from Legal into Absolute, an
enlargement of power: so on the contrary. And for this matter we need look no
farther, then the National Oath, or Established Laws; for if they bind the
people to an absolute subjection; such is the power; and though it have moral,
yet it has no legal limitation: And so on the contrary if they bind only to a
subjection according to the Law; the Government is limited in the very power of
it. Hence it appears to be false which the Doctor has, p. 16. that a Monarch
may so tie himself as to require not to be subjected to but according to such
Laws, and yet not be civilly limited, in his very power; for if he so far
require not to be subjected to, that he untye the bond of subjection beyond
those Laws; then is his Authority limited, and can proceed no farther; neither
are the instruments of his will exceeding those laws, authorized, but private
persons, and resistible: And also false, which he says, p. 28. That limitation
by condescent cannot be radical. Now if enquiry be made concerning the
simplicity of ancient forms of assuming into sovereignty, as when the people
are said to make one King; to endue him indefinitely with Kingly power; not
confining his Government by any express limitations. Ans. I conceive in such
case to know how far a people are bound by such an indefinite contract, these
things are to be looked into. 1. If the intent of the people can be discovered
in such a constitution, for if it can, doubtless the contract binds so far,
and no farther. Thus Lyra concludes concerning the request of the people of
Israel for a King, that it is to be understood of an Absolute King, by that
clause in the petition, 1 Samuel 8.5. a King to judge us like all the Nations,
for all those Eastern Nations having Absolute Monarchs, they desiring to be
governed like them; must be conceived to intend such a government. 2. If there
be no expression of their intention: then a light concerning it must be
borrowed for circumstances; sc. the kind of government whereunto they have been
formerly accustomed; or that of the Nation from which they proceeded: And thus
the Saxons giving Kingly state to their Captains in this Land, cannot in
reason be interpreted to intend any other, then that whereunto they were
accustomed, and which was the form of the Nation whence they came. This Rule
is ever to be kept as well in public, as in private contracts of that simple
indefinite form, that they are to be construed, as far as may be, in fovour of
the granter.

CHAP. V. An Answer to the Sect. 4. concerning the Constitution of this
Monarchy.
supposals are concerning the Constitution of this Monarchy, which in words he
grants to be limited and mixed, but coming to explain himself, he makes
such a limitation of it and such a mixture as is indeed none at all, being to
be found in the most Absolute and simple governments in the world: for he every
where supposes it limited only morally in the exercise, not in the power: And
so mixed, that there is but one simple power; a mixture made of one simple
principle, such a one as never was heard of in the world before. And this he
delivers on his bare word, never bringing any proof of it, thinking it enough
if he can except against that which I have set down concerning these things in
my Treatise. Among other Assertions which I have there about the state of this
Government: there are two which this Replyer does oppose. One is p. 31. That
the sovereignty of our Kings is radically and fundamentally limited: which I
have made good by five Arguments, and added a solution to the two chief which
may be made against it. The other is, p. 39. That the Authority of this Land is
of a compounded and mixed nature in the very root and constitution of it. This
I have confirmed by three Reasons; and have answered three Objections which may
be made against it. Now I desire the Reader impartially to weigh what I have
there said; and to compare it with this Doctors Reply; and then judge whether
those truths stand not firm against all that is brought to infringe them. But
let us see what he opposes. He proceeds not in any orderly course, to set
down his Antitheses and prove them; and to give Answer to what I have brought
on the contrary; but first spends some time in considering what this Government
was in its Original; as if it must needs remain still such as it was at
first; and could not receive any alterations, and graduall accomplishment in
process of time. And then he sets on my Arguments, but how feebly we shall
easily discover.

Here the first thing I did tax in the Doctors book, was that he affirmed
things contradictory: for he tells us he is against Absolute power in our
Kings; and arbitrary Government: And yet he also affirms, that our Kings hold
by right of conquest, yea of three conquests. And that the Houses of Parliament
are more subject to our Kings, then the Senate of Rome was to their Emperors.
Also that the final judgment is in One. Now how these so openly
contradictorie Assertions can stand together he does not show us. Only he
challenges my ingenuity, if either he proposed this as a conclusion to be
proved, that our Kings are absolute, p. 21. Neither do I affirm that he did:
Only I say, he holds things contradictory; that he holds such grounds which
make all Kings absolute, sc. that no supreme is or can be more then morally
limited. Indeed he speaks much of limitation moral; of limitation in the
exercise of power; this makes a great noise of limitation, but indeed are but
mere vailes to cover over Absoluteness, and make it the more passable, which
he is ashamed to propose to the world in express terms. Suppose he did not
mention those conquests to win an arbitrary power to the King. Yet sure in
affirming more then once, that he has such a right, he does as much as if he
said he may use an arbitrary power if he will; for if he has a right of
Conquest, he has an Arbitrary right, by the Doctors own confession, p. 22. and
if he has a right of Arbitrarinesse, it is his lenity he does not use it. In
the Answer to the first Argument which I brought for the Absoluteness of our
Kings (which was that They hold by conquest, and therefore are Absolute.) I do
not say, the Doctor draws such a conclusion: No; but he lays down the
Antecedent; and then any body else may draw out the conclusion.

I fetch not the root of succession, so far back as the Saxons, Original of
this Monarchy.
as this Replier traduces, to cut off advantages which may be made from the
Normans entrance, p. 22. But because himself began there to make up a Trinity
of Conquests: This drew me on that discourse of the Original of this Monarchy;
nor that the cause had any need of it; for it is his work to prove the
Government absolute, if he will have it so; also suppose it were as absolute as
the Norman Conquest, by him improved can make it; yet that hinders not, but
that it may become really and radically limited afterward, by condescent, as
appears in the former chapter. Concerning the Saxon entrance, I said it was
not a conquest, sc. properly and simply, but an expulsion. He answers, This is
neither true, nor greatly material, p. 22. I say, it is both true and
material: It is true; for all the Britains which retained their name and
Nation, were they many or few, were expelled into Wales: All the rest in
gentem, leges, nomen, linquamque, vincentium concesserunt; as himself cites
for me out of Mr Cambden. And it is very material; for if they which only
remained here in gentem and leges vincentium concesserunt; Then the Conquerers,
as I said, kept their old form of Government; the Saxons came not into the
condition of the conquered Britains; but they into the old liberty of the
Saxons. Hereupon grew there a necessity of inquiry into the Government of the
Nation, before they came hither; that so we might know what a one they
established here; and brought the remaining Britains into. And a record of
more unquestionable authority then Tacitus I could not imagine; nor a more
express testimony for a limited form in the very potestas of it; of which
sort he affirms the Government of all the Germane Nations was. How ever the
Doctor is pleased to call it a conjecture, a dream and uncertainty; No, the
express testimony of such an Author is not so: Rather that probability of
these Saxons not being then a people of Germany, but did afterward break out
of the Cimbrica chersonesus, is so; which himself dares call no more then a
probability. I say, 1. It is a greater probability, that they were a people of
Germany before they came in hither; for the Angli which accompanied them in
that invasion, were questionles Germans, and reckoned by Tacitus among that
people, doubtless they were neighbors in habitation which were joined in that
voyage and conquest. 2. Suppose the matter were not clear of the Saxons, yet
is it of the Angli which gave denomination to the Land and people, who no doubt
retained their Laws and Government, says Cambden; which was limited in the
very royal power says Tacitus. But this Doctor would make men believe, as if
I endeavored to deduce the very Model of our present Government from that
Saxon ingresse: Whereas all that I aim at, is to make it appear that in
semine, in the rude beginnings it is so ancient; and shall affirm the limited
power of the English Kings, and liberty of the subjects to have been from
thence continued till now, unless he can bring some better proofs of its
interruption, and induction of an unlimited power, then as yet he has. Also to
show that the Doctors Tenure by Conquest is vain in the first of the Three,
for the Saxons gave none such to their Princes, but kept their Laws, and came
not under the Title of a conquered people. Next, the Doctor censures my
delineation of the present platform of our Government, p. 44. (for it is
nothing with him for advantage to skip over 9. or 10. Pages) that so he might
make a show as if I set down that model as derived from the Saxons out of
Germany; and so spends near two pages in this unreasonable way of traducing
me; Whereas he cannot be ignorant, that in many places, yea at present is
forced to confess, p. 24. that I acknowledge our Government came up to this
exactness and full height by degrees and in continuance of time; but indeed he
had nothing else to say against that Description of this platform or any one
of those 6. Supposals of which it consists; and therefore when he had fained as
if I had derived it from the beginning of the Saxon Government in this Land, he
calls it a fancy, against the credit of all Histories and Chronicles, p. 24.
and so lets it go. Let the Reader judge, whether I do not there apparently
set it down as a description of our now existent Frame of Government: And
whether any thing therein is not according to past history, and present
experience: Yea I challenge the Doctor to except against the least part of it,
as not so: if he cannot, he does wrong so to miscall and deride it. After this
Excursion, he returns back to the 36. page of my Book, and the proper
business of that Chapt. which was his three Titles by Conquest. I looked that
after his first, he should have made good his second Conquest, sc. the Danish,
and made good what he had said, that our Kings hold by that too, as one of the
three. But not a word of that for shame: He passes p. 26. to the Norman
entrance: And to prove that William held this Land by conquest, he cites out of
Mr Cambden that in victory quasi Tropheum, he disposed of the Lands of the
Conquered, changed their Tenure, abrogated what English Laws and customs he
pleased, etc. Indeed when he had gotten full possession, he did what he
pleased; but sactum non probat jus. I have proved, and the Doctor has not
gainsaid, 1. That his Title by which he claimed was a successive and Legal
Title. 2. That this Title got the favor of a great party, and was a maine
Mean facilitating his acquirie. 3. That he was inaugurated by virtue of that
Title. 4. After he had gotten the Kingdom, though he did many things
arbitrarily, yet he settled himself and his successors in the state of Legal
Monarchs, as the Doctor confesses, p. 27. What then is become of his Triple
Tenure by Conquest; when here is not one can be made good; when it comes to a due
scanning? That of Mr Cambden, that the Kings of this Land have Potestatem
supremam, and merum imperium, is no more then that of the Statute which the
Doctor speaks of, p. 47. that it is an Empire governed by one supreme head,
which we acknowledge; for that merum imperium must be understood in a moderate
sense; else it says more then the Doctor himself professes to own: Though Mr
Cambdens judgment in this case is not of the authority of a proof.

p. 28. But, by the way, let me tell him, My Arguments for Limitation and
Mixture vindicated.
I brought 5. Arguments to prove this Government limited, and 3. to prove it
mixed: and it had been meet he should have brought somewhat, beside his bare
word, to prove it limited only in the exercise, that is, Absolute in the power;
but he brings no proof, because he had none: Yet perhaps though he had not
wherwithall to confirm his own, yet he has to demolish my Assertions: Let us
see therefore his solutions of my Arguments. But before we come to weigh them,
because he tells us p. 28. it were an Argument fit for a skillful Lawyer to
labor in, and slights my endeavor because I bring not History and Antiquity,
but do go about to reason him into a belief of those Assertions, Let me
premise something concerning that course of proving them. 1. The work of
bringing History and Antiquity does belong to him who affirms such a Title of
Power in our Kings; Let him show how and when it was conveyed to them: He which
challenges a right to that which was once undoubtedly mine, must prove his
right and he can have no more then he can bring evidence for. 2. On his defaut,
if I undertake a needless office to prove my Negative, there are but two ways
imaginable to do it, one is by records of histories setting out the first
constitution of a state, and the Terms on which (...) people resigned up their
liberty to a subjection. So in the Ancient Roman State, the Venetian, the late
Belgik Union, and others which have at once, visibly and lately been composed,
it is likely that way might be taken. The other is by demonstrative collections
drawn from the institution of the present composure of a State. Thus alone is
it possible to discern and prove the constitution of a Government which
springs not up at once, but by unseen degrees and moments, whose fundamental
constitutive acts stand upon no record. This is the condition of most
Governments in the world which have sprung from small, rude and unknown
beginnings. And of this in particular. For 1. A limitation of Royal Power was
brought hither by the Saxons and Angli our Ancestors, has been proved. This
was, as those times were, very rude and unpolished, it is likely such as
Captains in Armies have, who can do nothing of moment without the advice and
consent of the Counsel of war. 2. This Limitation of Power and Liberty
received some more formal and settled bounds afterward by customs and Laws
before the Conquest, as appears by the Common Laws, which are, as it were,
the basis and foundation of this Government, the Statute Laws being but after
superstructives; These Common Laws did not grow up at once, but by degrees,
and were unwritten Customs and Vsages gaining authority by unknown
prescription, above all written Laws; and were afterward committed to writing
by men skillful in the Laws. 3. At length, and after the Conquest it was
perfected to this Parliamentarie Form; and even this being at first but rude,
grew to this exactness by length of Time, and infinite Contentions. This
latter way only being left us; that I took, and the Doctor has no cause to
despise it. For when a thing of present State is made evident by Reason drawn
for palpable experience of it is present composure, it is madness to deny it
to be so, because I cannot tell when it began to be so: Yea when the Question
is of present state, it is a surer way to find out the Truth, then by records
of its Original constitution: For in time the Frame of a State may receive
real variations from what it was at first, as the Roman State, and most
others have done; for the contracts of men are at pleasure alterable; and an
argument drawn from Monuments of first coalition, would then be fallacious.

Well; be the way never so justifiable, which I have taken, yet the Doctor
dares pronounce my Arguments insufficient to clear what I have undertaken. It Is
easy to pronounce it; let us see how he makes good his sentence. I proceeded
distinctly first to lay down my Arguments proving Limitation, p. 31. Then those
which prove Mixture, p. 40. He mingles them together: And to my first, third,
fourth and fifth proving Limitation, Answers that They prove only limitation in
the exercise of power, p. 28. Why so? Neither the Denomination of Liege, nor
any prescription can make us believe, that the Limitations of power had any
other beginning then voluntary condescent. As if a Government by voluntary
condescent might not receive a radical Limitation. But it lies on him to
prove, it was by such condescent; if he can bring no record for it, it must in
justice be held original, and ab initio. Those two denominations of Liege
Sovereign: And Liege people do prove the very Sovereignty and Subjection
Legal; but that is not so which has only a moral Limitation; the
denominations argue the bond 'twixt them to be Legal: And when Subjects have
such a Liberty by custom and Law, that they owe no farther subjection, then
(when, or how ever they came by it) yet the very power of the Monarch is
limited, as we heard in the former Chapter, unless any will put a vain power
in the Prince, to which no Subjection is due; but of this enough there. Then he
passes to my Reasons proving mixture, which are three, p. 40. of my Treatise.
The first is, That it is confessedly mixed of a Monarchy, Aristocracie and
Democracie, therefore radically, and in the very Power. He answers, It is not
necessary the mixture should be in the Power: but it is sufficient if there be
a concurrence of Persons whose consent is required to the exercise of Power, p.
39. Thus he answers to the conclusion; but says nothing to the Antecedent. 1.
And indeed if it be mixed of these three, his answer is against common-sense;
that a mixture of Monarchy, Aristocracie and Democracie should be satisfied by
annexion of persons to the Monarch, having mere consent: for these are names
of Power of Government; for Aristocracie and Democracie are Powers not Persons,
as well as Monarchy: therefore a composition of these three must be all of
Powers. 2. And indeed this chimera of a mixture in the exercise of Power, is
plain nonsense. For a mixture in the Acts or Exercise supposes a mixture in
the principles of Action, that is in the very Powers: A mixed Act proceeding
from a simple Power is such stuff that I never heard before. Now if a mixture
in Acts argues a mixture in Powers: These Powers must be coordinate and
supreme: for subordinates make no mixture; also Powers concurrent to supreme
Acts, such as Legislation is confessed to be, cannot be but supreme Powers.
Neither can any man living clear that passage which he speaks of p. 45. from
pure nonsense, sc. This coordination is but to some Act or Exercise of the
Supreme Power, not in the power it self: For Concurse to an Act, im^lies a
Power of Concurrence: and Concurse to a supreme Act, argues a supreme Power;
for an inferior Power cannot afford a coordinate concurrence to a supreme Act.
So that his Overseers were not mistaken when they checked him for that
passage, and said, He granted a coordination of Subjects with his Majesty in
the supreme Power. But here he brings a ponderous Reason, so often before
urged. If the mixture be in the Supremacy of Power, how can the King be the
Only supreme and Head. He cannot salve it with his Apex potestatis, unless the
King must be the Crown or Top of the Head only; for they also must be our
Head and our Sovereigns, if they be mixed in the Supremacy of Power, p. 29.
Here I answer once for all to this so frequent an injection. 1. That the Titles
of Head and Supreme are fully satisfied by this, that he is the sole Principle
and fountain from whence the execution of all Law and Justice flows to his
people by inferior Officers and Courts, all whose Authority is derivatively
from him as its head. 2. That these Titles in proper construction import only
Utmost chiefty, nor do they agree to any kind of right in the fundamental and
radical Powers of a Kingdom; but to the principal and transcendent Interest:
Another may have a right in the supreme Power, yet not be supreme, nor Head:
because not having a supremacy in that Power: So it is in the Colleges, the
Fellows have a fundamental interest in the power of Government, yet that
hinders not, but that the Title of Head and Chief is given to him who is
Governor; will the Doctor jest at it, and say they be Heads and Supremes too,
and the Warden or Master is but the crown or top of the head. Also in the
natural body, from whence the Metaphor of Head is borrowed, are three
Fundamental and radical powers situate in the three Principal parts: yet
none will say, the Heart and Liver are Heads too, because they partake the
supreme Powers of nature. Let not the Doctor therefore strain a Metaphor so
far as to make himself merry with it. Let him really answer my Arguments by
which I prove a radical Limitation and mixture. Let him answer; is not the
Legislative Power the supreme? Have not the Houses an Authoritative
concurrence and Influx into that business? If he avoid a punctual answer
hereto by carping at words, he will prove himself a ridiculous Argumentatour
while he seeks to make others seem so.

My second Argument for radical mixture, is from the Legislative Power being
in all three. He answers, That Phrase is satisfied and explained by that
concurrence and consent in the exercise of supreme Power. It seems that
invention of his must serve all turns. Is a Legislative Power satisfied by a
bare powerless consent? I demand: is that Consent causall and Authoritative;
or merely Consiliarie and unauthoritative? And whereas I prove that they have
an enacting Authority by that received and set clause in the beginning of Acts;
Be it enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the Authority of the
Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament. He tells us a Vote and Power of
assenting is a great Authority, p. 29. I enquire not how great it is: I ask
whether that be all; whether that clause, which as expressly as words can,
ascribes an enacting Authority to them, be satisfied by such a Power of
Assenting? He sees it does not, and therefore tells us of a former phrase which
ran thus: The King by the advice and assent of the Prelates, Earls and Barons,
and at the instance and request of the Commonaltie has ordained, etc. Suppose
anciently some statutes run under that form: that advise and instance, must
be understood of an Authoritative and enacting advice and instance; as the
latter forms explain it: for it is equal that the latter expound the former;
and not the contrary, as the Doctor would perversely have it, especially
considering the Doctors Exposition cannot stand with the latter; but mine
agrees very well with the former. But how bold is this man, when during so many
years and Parliaments, both Kings and States by this received Form, have
acknowledged and established a concurrent enacting Authority in all three, yet
he dares argue and oppose so express and confessed a truth? But in this
answer, he discovers a great deal of superficialnes, in granting the Houses a
Power of consenting to the establishment of laws; and yet deny them a
Legislative, enacting Power: for such a Power of consenting (if it be
necessary) is indeed a Power of enacting; for though in transeunt Acts one may
stand by and consent to the doing, and yet not be Efficient; yet in immanent
Acts which are done, per immediatam volitionem, by a mere expression of the
Will, A concurrence in consenting, and a concurrence in doing is one and the
same thing: Now Legislation is an imminent Act, consisting in a mere expression
of an Authoritative Will.

My third Argument for Mixture, was from it is end, which was Restraint from
excess. 1. He grants such a Restraint, but moral and legal, not forceable,
p. 30. I answer, He deceitfully confounds moral and legal, as I showed
before. 2. The End of Mixture in a State, is that there may be a power of
restreyning more then sufficient (as his Majesty expresses it) but the Doctors
mere moral power, is very insufficient; It limits not the Power at all; nor
the Exercise properly, no more then an Oath, or Promise without it, would do:
that is, makes it sin to exceed. But of this before. But here, which is very
rare, He does not only deny, but give a reason of it. If the fundamental
Constitution had intended them such a Power, it would not have left a power in
the Monarch to call, or dissolve them, which would make this power of theirs
altogether ineffectuall, p. 30. This Reason seems to have some weight in it, I
will therefore, the more seriously consider it. 1. Whatever strength it has
had in it; now it has none, because that power of dissolving is now by Law
suspended, for this Parliament; and after it, a necessity by Law imposed of
reducing that Power of Calling Parliaments, into Act, every Three years. 2.
Neither was it true before these Acts, that such a Power was left in the
Monarch at pleasure to use or not; for it was by ancient Law determined how
often they should be convocated. 3. But being granted that this Power is simply
and fully in the Monarch, yet I deny, that hence it follows, that it would
make that Power of the Houses altogether ineffectuall; because that de facto,
though it has been in the Monarch so long, yet it never has made it void; but
they have exercised a limiting Power, as Histories relate, enough yea and
sometimes too much, over the Monarch, notwithstanding his Power of calling and
dissolving them. Thus in the Colleges, the Fellows have an effectual, and
more then moral limiting Power, though the Governor has the Power of calling
and dissolving their meetings. And anciently the prime Patriarch had the power
of Calling and dissolving general Councels, yet they had a Power of limiting,
yea of Censuring him for exorbitances for all that. The Reason is, because many
things fall out often in a Government, inducing such necessities on the Monarch,
that he for their supply will choose to reduce such power into act of Calling,
and suspend such power of dissolving, although he know those States will use
their Limiting Power in reducing such exorbitances, and punishing those dearest
instruments which have been used in them. This the Constitutors of this Frame
preconsidering might put in the Monarch this Power, and yet intend to the other
States a Legal and effectual power of restraining his exorbitancies, by using
Force, not against him, but it is procurers and Instruments. Thus we see, there
is no need of entering on that dispute, Whether this Power of calling and
dissolving the Houses be placed in the Monarch, as all his other are, not
absolutely, but with limitation of necessary reducing it into act, on the last
exigencies of the Kingdom.

After this he returns to my other Arguments for limitation; One of which,
drawn from radical Mixture, he fully omits; but now having showed the
invalidity of his exceptions against my arguments for it, I have given force to
this argument for Limitation, drawn therefrom. That which he sets on last is
my first for Limitation in the very Power: sc. the Kings own express
confession: That the Law is the measure of his power: That the Powers which he
has are vested in him by Law, p. 31. of my Tract. And, as if this were not
more then he could answer, the Doctor adds a third for us, in which he
ascribes to the Houses a power more then sufficient to restrain his Excesses,
p. 30. Here are Authorities as punctual and express as can be imagined. Yet
the Doctor resolving not to be reasoned into a belief of these things, out
faces all this evidence; and to that end frames three Answers such as they are.
1. He says, His Majesty had few of his learned Counsel about him. 2. His
gracious expressions ought not to be drawn out to his disadvantage. 3. All
that can be gathered from them does not come up to these Conclusions, p. 31. In
the two first he openly enough taxes his Majesty of unadvised expressions,
excusing it from absence of his learned Counselors (you may soon imagine
whom he means) Thus disparaging the Kings judgment and all then about him;
and tells us we must not be unjust to set those sayings on the rack; that is,
we must not take them in their plain meaning; but on this man's wrested and
senseless interpretation: What do not these men dare do and say? Before we
heard him correcting the expressions of all Modern Parliaments, teaching us to
reform them by the old. Here the King and his Counsel setting out in such a
time Declarations to all his Subjects to inform them about the nature and
extent of his Royal Power: He compares those serious expresses to Trajans
sudden and excessive speech: He will correct Kings, Counsels, Parliaments and
all, but he will have his way: To him they must come to learn how to speak,
and what powers they have. But let us hear his Doctorall Exposition of his
Majesty's expresses. He says, The Law is the measure of his Power: We must
understand his meaning to be that his power is bounded by Law: but it does not
follow, that his power wherein it is not limited by Law is not absolute and
full, p. 31. Here is profound interpreting: If his Power be limited by Law? is
there any part of it not limited by Law? If the Law be the measure of it, sure
it is even with it; for the measure is equal in extent with the thing
measured: Thus he papally interprets against the direct meaning of the Text:
But he does not show us how that can be understood, when he says, His powers
are vested in him by Law, if the Law be a limitation only of exercise: Nor how
their Restraining power is more then sufficient, if it be only moral; which,
how unsufficient a restraint for exorbitance it is, every ones experience can
enough testify. I admire a man who pretends to conscience and judgment should
take such liberty of interpreting. Certain if those Reasons and Testimonies
do not clearly prove a radically limited and mixed Constitution of this
Monarchy I shall despair of ever proving any thing by way of Argument any more.

I had an intent to have subnexed other Arguments to make good 7 Queries
concerning this Government.
for he is resolved not to be reasoned into them: He can deny all as failing
either in the Antecedent or Consequent, p. 32. The Power of this Kingdom he
must have unlimited: He will give no Reason for it; nor hear no Reason against
it. Yet, since he professes himself a Resolver of Conscience, Let me therefore
be so bold as to propose certain Cases to him. 1. Why in the late Oath
proposed to be taken by all his Majesty's Subjects the Power of enacting
Statutes is sworn to be jointly in the Kings Majesty, Lords and Commons in
Parliament. Certes the Doctor writ this Reply before that Oath was printed in
Oxford, or else he did not consider of it. He cannot say, I hope there were but
few of his counsel about him when that was framed: if the Doctor has taken
it, He has forsworn this passage of his Reply; and sworn them a joint
enacting power. 2. Why we are enjoined to swear that we do believe that the
Subjects of England are not obliged by any Act made either by the Kings
Majesty solely, or the Houses solely, etc. Sure the Doctor has abjured his
other Assertion of the unlimited Power of the King, if he has taken this Oath;
for if Power be solely his, then an Act made by him solely is obliging: If they
be not obligatorie, they are not Authoritative; and so the mixture and
limitation is in the Authority it self. Here is no place left for his
distinction of Active and Passion subjection. For, 1. Will any think that the
intent is to swear men to be bound not to do, but to suffer? 2. The Belief
of a non-Obligation proceeds indifferently and as fully concerning the sole
Acts of the King, us the Houses but I believe the Doctor will not say we are
obliged to passive subjection to the sole Acts of the Houses. 3. I would know
if the States do limit only morally, what they do, which is not done without
them? A Promise and Oath do limit morally without them. He will say they may
admonish him; and deny their consent, and so judge his Acts invalid: He means
still morally invalid; and so would they be without them. 4. Suppose the
Monarch minded to establish a Law, which he judges needful; and the States
being averse, he enacts it without them; Is it not a Law? It has all the
Legislative authority in it. He will say it is not duly made. 1. I grant it:
but yet it is a Law, for it has all the Power of a Law. 2. But is it not duly
made? Why, the power of last decision is in the King alone: Suppose he define
that the Intent of his Predecessors in granting this consenting power to the
Houses had no intent to hinder, but further themselves in establishing good
laws; and therefore now they not concurring by assent to this needful Act, He
ought not to be hindered, but may lawfully do it without them. He is the last
Judge in this case; and it must be held ever lawfully enacted. So that in the
result here is left to these States by the Doctors grounds neither Civil nor
Moral Limitation, but at pleasure. 5. If Limitation in our Government exempt
Subjects from a necessity of active Subjection; but not from passive; How is it
that our Laws do not only determine what the Monarch shall command, but also
what he shall inflict: what shall be accounted Rebellion, what Felony, etc.
and what not; also what he shall inflict for this crime, and that crime, and
what not? Since the Laws limiting what he shall command, do limit our
necessity of active Subjection; it will follow, that the Laws limiting what he
shall inflict, do limit our necessity of passive Subjection. Here Is no evasion
by saying the Laws do limit him morally what he shall inflict, and if he
inflict beyond Law, he sins in it; but we must suffer: for the Doctor
acknowledges, that the Laws defining what he shall command do so limit our
active subjection, that we have a simple exemption from any necessity of Doing;
and therefore also the Laws defining what he shall inflict, do so limit our
passive subjection, that we have a simple exemption from any necessity of
suffering, beyond those Limitations; for also, if they did not free us from
passive subjection, it were unlawful not only to resist, but also to avoid
suffering even by flight. 6. When the liberties of magna Charta, and other
grants have been gotten and preserved, and recovered at the rate of so much
trouble, suit, expense and blood, whither by all that ado was intended only a
moral liberty, definement in the Monarch, and not also of the power it self;
only that he might not lawfully exorbitate from established Laws, and not also
that he might have no Authority or Power to exorbitate at all? Sure this was
their aim, for the former he could not do before. 7. The Law granting a writ
of Rebellion against him who refuses to obey the sentence of the Judge, though
he have an express Act of the Kings will to warrant him: does it not suppose
those exceeding and extrajudiciall Acts of the Kings will to be
unauthoritative, and unable to privilege a man from Resistance?

If the Doctor by his faculty can resolve these Cases, He will do much in way
of satisfaction of my conscience; but if he cannot they will prove so many
convincing arguments that the Power of the Monarch in this Frame is not
unlimited.

Now having made good my Assertions, I expected another work; sc. an
Examination of his Reasons for unlimitednesse, and simplicity of Monarchical
Power, but he is not guilty of my fault, he does not go so much as to reason
us into a belief of it. He does in vain express a desire he has that some
skillful Lawyers or Divines would help him at this dead lift; yet he is like
to go alone in this wild untroden path of defending an unresistiblenesse on
such supposals: shall we think any Divine will second him, in justifying his
unwritten fancy about Gods Ordinance necessarily investing all the acts of his
will, who is supreme? Or any sound Lawyer will overthrow the grounds of his
Profession, that the Royal Right, Authority and Government of this Realm is
both founded on, and measured by the Laws thereof. Yea it is very remarkable,
that his Majesty in all the Declarations and Expresses which I have seen, does
not once touch upon this way, sc. a challenge of such a latitude of Authority
as can preserve destructive instruments from force; but condemns the now
Resistance, by solemn protestations of innocence, and intention of governing
by the known Laws.

CHAP. VI. An Answer to his 5. Sect. of Resistance in Relation to several
kinds of Monarchy.
THE residue of his Book is spent about the Question of Resistance; That
sovereignty may be limited in the very power. 2. That de facto, it is so in
this Government, every one may discern the necessary truth of these
inferences, 1. That in this Government, the exceeding Acts of the Princes will,
being out of the compass of his Authority, can not authorize their
Instruments. 2. That hereon Resistance of them is no other then of private men,
not of Authority, or Gods Ordinance. But because the Doctors chief confidence
is in this part of his discourse, and he is large in it, I will therefore go
on in my work, and will briefly make appear that his Reasons are infirm, and
his Authorities impertinent, and his Answers very insufficient: for having been
so large in making good my supposals, and overthrowing his, I may the more
contract my self in this remaining business. In this Section he proposes two
things. 1. To consider how I state the point of Resistance in the kinds of
Governments. 2. To prove that Limitation and Mixture in government do not
imply a forceable constraining Power in subjects, p. 39. I will follow him in
both.

My stating the Question vindicated.
He begins with a charitable censure of my stating the Question, and says he
finds it to be in a way that lies very open to Rebellion, p. 33. Let the Reader
judge: I am sure, his Resolves and Determinations are not in a way to destroy
all liberty, and make all Governments Arbitrary, but directly do it. Then for
my maintaining the Person of the Monarch in all Forms to be above the reach of
Force, he approves it; yet says I allow subjects to raise Armies, to give
battle to those that are about him as his guard. He wrongs me, I say not his
guard but subversive seducers and instruments: Those which he called
cut-throates in his first book; now he repents he gave that hard name to his
clients, whom he pleades so hard to save harmless, and makes them amends with
the style of a Guard. A guard which bring him into greater danger then all his
enemies; who bring him into battle to save themselves, where Ordnance and
Musket can put no difference: No; They use him as their guard. If harm befall
him, which God avert, the guilt and punishment will fall on them who are so
prodigal of hazarding his sacred Person, not on those who could desire nothing
more then his security, by absence from a multitude, who by undertaking the
subversion of Religion and Laws (for that is the Doctors supposition) bring
themselves in danger of condign destruction.

Then he proceeds to Resistance in an Absolute State. Where I affirm, If such
a Monarch should seek the destruction of the whole Community, his instruments
of such inhumanity may be resisted. He dares not deny it; but would know what I
do mean by the whole community. I mean the whole simely, or the whole
interpretatively; that is, the greater part; and therefore his exception of the
Jews in the Kingdom of Ahasuerus, or the Templers in the Western Kingdoms,
is not to the purpose: but the instance which I bring of the Law-Countries,
comes home: for they were the whole community; but the Replier corrupts it,
when he says the Spanish King intended the extirpation of the Protestants
only, p. 34. For he intended not only theirs, but of all, Papists and else,
which would not admit the introduction of an Arbitrary Government, and the
subversion of their liberties, as the histories thereof make plain. Here in
this 34. page, the Doctor shows a bad mind: Taking occasion to excuse the
Rebels in Ireland, as if they might justify themselves on these grounds; and
intimating a falsehood, as if the Parliament did intend their extirpation,
hereby declaring how ill he likes any effectual course for the rooting out of
Popery out of the Kingdoms. Indeed, he says, he pleads not for them, but yet
he does it. He finds out arguments for them; and shows them a way, both how to
excuse themselves, and accuse the Parliament; and to call a resolution of
cleansing that Island from Popery, an extirpation of their Nation. He says, the
example of David proves not this, being but a particular Man. I say, it proves
it the more strongly, as shall appear. Then if a particular man's life be
invaded without any plea of reason, I suppose it hard to deny him the liberty
of positive resistance of agents; and prove it by the instance of the peoples
rescue of Jonathan; and David's of himself; where the peoples Oath; and David's
Army, with his enquiry at Keilah do prove a serious and real purpose of
Resistance, let the Doctor say what he please to the contrary; so that these
examples come home to justify resistance in such case, even in an Absolute
Monarchy; for here are particular men, in an absolute Monarchy, assaulted
without plea of reason; for that Jonathan, who had wrought such a deliverance,
should die, for tasting in his ignorance a little honey, there was no color of
reason; the Kings rash oath was none. And that David should be put to death,
whom Saul himself often with his own mouth professed innocent, and absolved, was
as much without plea of reason: so that here I need not fly to the Doctors
shift of an extraordinary case, as he tells me I must, p. 35. I acknowledge no
extraordinary case in these examples: Take them in their due extent, and they
justify no more then I have asserted; and so much they do. In my 5.
Assertion, p. 11. Of submitting States, Liberties and Persons to the will of an
Absolute Monarch carrying any plea of reason; He faults my Order, and tells me,
it should have been first. It seems this man's eye can spy small faults; but
why first, he does not say. I think in stating of the question of resistance I
may as well begin with the Affirmative, and show first when it may be used, and
then when it ought not; as on the contrary; but he will make a fault, where he
finds none. But what says he to the Assertion? He grants it; but dislikes the
limitation, so it carry plea or show of reason: and says here the way is open
enough to rebellion, p. 36. No opener then himself makes it, p. 10. This is
usual with him, when he dislikes a thing: He can speak no less words then
Rebellion. But why says he so? Every man will be ready to think there is no
reason nor equity in the will of the Monarch when he is oppressed by him. He
may well enough, if he be oppressed: but yet there may be a plea and color of
equity even for an Act of Oppression; and in an Absolute Monarchy it will
little avail a man though he think there is no reason for it: for he must not
be his own judge; nor has he any outward judge to appeal to; but the
Reasonable will of the Monarch himself; if he submit to its determination,
there is no fear of Rebellion; if not, I have done with him, in such a
Government. Of Saules censure of Jonathan and David I have spoken already and
made it appear it had no plea of reason, was not the act of a reasonable will;
and therefore I may hold their examples ordinary, without impeachment of this
Assertion.

Then he proceeds to Resistance in limited and mixed Rules, p. 36. Concerning
which I said, p. 17. If the exorbitances be of less moment they ought to be
borne, and p. 18. If mortal and destructive neither can be otherwise
redressed, then prevention by Resistance may be used. Here first he challenges
my ingenuity, for words spoken in my 49. page. He said Sect. 1. of his first
book, We may and ought to deny obedience to such commands of the Prince as are
unlawful by the Law of God; yea by the established laws of the Land. I
censured this speech, that it is more then should be said, sure, a heinous
fault in me: I say more; he has said more then should be said, by all these
three books, in which he says that which dissolves all frames of Government
into arbitrary, overthrowes all effectual limitation of Power; and sure that
is more then should be said. And for that particular clause; Is it not more? He
speaks without restriction: Does join things unlawful by the law of God, and
things unlawful by the laws of the Land: And puts the same may and ought to
both; if the affirmation must be understood universally of one, how can it be
understood otherwise of the other: It cannot be excused from the censure of a
confused and unwary speech. He passes, p. 37. to the Question, Who shall be
the ultime judge of subversive exorbitancies. He would know who? I have told
him my opinion hereof at large in that Tract: Here I would feign know his; but
he would rather carp at mine, then give his own. When I say there can be no
Authoritative judge to determine it. He commends my ingenuity, p. 37. but I do
not only say it, but at large do prove it, there p. 67. as well against him,
as against those others; why does he not undertake that Question against me, if
he has any mind to it. He much dislikes when I say, p. 18. The fundament all
Laws must judge in every man's conscience. This is, says he, a ready way to
anarchy and confusion, p. 37. I refer not this case to the consciences of men
as to an Authoritative Judge, but a moral principle of discerning Right: And
who can deny unto man such a liberty to conceive of right according to the
light he has from the fundamentals of a State? Let the judicious read what I
have said here-about, p. 67. of that Tract; and let him then tell how that
Question can be otherwise determined, unless he overthrow. Monarchy, by giving
a final judgment to the States; or all Liberty, if he give it to the Monarch;
and supposing the Aim at subversion be evident to men's consciences, can we
deny them a natural power of judging according to that evidence; or liberty of
assisting the wronged? So when I say the wronged side must make it evident to
every man's conscience: also the appeal must be to the Community, as if there
were no Government; and as every man is convinced in conscience he is bound to
give assistance, p. 29. of my Tract: He calls this good stuff, p. 37. Why?
because I say, the people are at liberty as if there were no Government; and
this appeal is disadvantagious to the Monarch; for they will be more ready to
believe their representative: This would in the consequence be dangerous, the
high way to confusion, p. 38. Answ. 1. I say, not simply, that people are at
liberty, as if there were no Government; but in this particular Question; bound
still, as before, in all besides. 2. He takes me as if by Community I meant
only the Commons; when I express it by genus humanum, especially of that
Kingdom. 3. He censures the Reason of Mankind of partiality toward their
Representatives. Not so; for in so great a Question Wise men cannot be blinded:
Honest men will go according to their conscience, and Reasonoble men according
to evidence, and will see it concerns them as well to avoid Anarchy by aiding
a wronged Monarch; as Tyranny by aiding an oppressed State. But since this
Replicant is so bitter an enveigher against an Appeal ad conscientiom generis
humani, in this last case so uncapeable of an Authoritative decision: 1. Let
him consider on what foundation God has built Monarchy and all other powers,
but on the consciences of men, Romans 13. 2. Let him weigh whether, when he has
said all he can say, such an appeal be avoidable. For, 1. If a controversy
arise between the King and a particular person or place; the King shall Judge
it in his Courts by his Judges, and the sentence shall be executed by the force
and arms of his other subjects. 2. If it be between Him and the
Representatives of his whole Kingdom, and supreme Court of Judicature in which
the Acts and Persons of all other Courts and Judges are to be judged. The King
cannot judge this in his other Courts and by his Judges; nor yet by himself;
for a King out of his Courts cannot judge in a Legal Government, especially
the acts of his supreme Court. But be it so: suppose the Doctor and I should
agree in this, that the King by himself is the ultime Judge of Controversies:
Yet it is very like those States with whom the Contention is, will not yield
him so, to judge against them, in his own cause. But suppose they do not
submit to his determination: He will say, then they sin, and rebel against
him. Well, let it be granted; yet submit they do not: I demand in this case,
what course the King has to make effectual his sentence? It must be by force
of arms, by the sword: but of whom? Either the peoples whose representatives
they are; or other men's: but what shall bind them to afford their Force to make
good his sentence? It must be their conscience of his right: Thus when all is
done and said, To the consciences of Men must his appeall be; and to them must
he make evident his right, in this extreme contention. Yea this man in a
controversy of the like nature, is compelled to acknowledge as much: For the
Pleaders put the case; If a King be distracted, I may add, if his Title be
dubious, etc. The Doctors answer is, if it be clear that a King is so, etc. p.
8. but who shall determine this If? must not self-evidence in the consciences
of Men? This is all the judicial power the Doctor can refer us to in these
cases. Lastly, He would know what power there is in a Community to make
resistance; and answers himself, A Parliamentary and Legal; not Military and
Forcible, p. 38. Thus he speaks of these as contradistinct, when they are
subordinate, Forcible being subservient to Legal to make it valid and
effectual, which else were merely moral and ineffectuall; but this is one of
his supposals whose vanity I have before discovered: And p. 51. of my Treatise,
in a full dispute have I proved the Parliaments power in resisting destructive
instruments; which I doubt not, will appear clear, notwithstanding any thing
said in this Reply. But that is very strange which he affirms, p. 39. That if
they use a Legal restraining power, the Monarch cannot alter the established
frame. Sure, by cannot, he understands fallaciously, as he uses to do, a
moral cannot, that is, not without sin; which is a poor small cannot now
adays: if he mean indeed cannot, that is, is not able, it is against reason, by
his grounds; for what is not he able to do, whose lowest, most desperate
instrument of pleasure is unresistible? Let him remember where he said, p. 19.
A forcible consent cannot be wanting to a Conqueror, and a Conquerours power
is no more then unresistible. Nay; I am senseless on the Doctors grounds, if
he cannot lawfully; for suppose he be pleased to make it a Question, whether he
were not better govern by the Civill-Law, as more conducent to Gods glory, and
the end of Government. He is by Law the last judge of this Question, if he
determine it best: then he may lawfully do it.

Now we are come to the second part of this Section: in which he Assertion, His
Arguments against power of resistance reserved. answered.
that Limitations and Mixtures in Monarchy do not imply a forcible
constraining power in subjects for the preventing of dissolution, but only a
Legal, p. 39. Answ. He fails in the very proposal of his Assertion in three
points. 1. He proposes it of Limitation in general; whereas I grant it of
that which is only in exercise; affirming it only of that which is of the power
it self. 2. He says, Forcible constraining power in subjects, when he should
have specified against subversive instruments, for I grant it of the Monarch
himself. 3. He opposes forcible to Legal, when it should be opposed only to
mere Moral, not to Legal, as before. Now let us weigh his Arguments. First,
Such a power must be in them by reservation, and then it must be express in
the constitution of the Government and Covenant, or else by implication. I will
answer distinctly concerning this Reservation of power of forcible Resistance.
1. There is a Reservation of liberty, or power of not being subject neither
actively nor passively to the exceeding Acts of the Monarchs will: This is by
implication, for what they did not resign up, they did reserve. 2. A power of
Authoritative judging and resisting the Monarch thus exceeding. This neither
expressly nor implicitly is reserved; not because it is unlawful, as the
Doctor imagins, but contradictory to the very institution of a Monarchy, and
so, under that intention, impossible. 3. A power of forcible resistance of
subversive instruments. This by the Authority of the Law, is, not reserved, but
expressly committed, not only to the Houses of Parliament, but all inferior
Courts; for the Law, whose execution the King commits unto them, commands
them not only to resist, but punish its violaters, much more its subverters,
without exceptions of Persons, or respect of their number, or ground and reason
why they do it, whether with or against the Kings private and absolute will or
Warrant: supposing such men to be without warrant. And this power of judging
all violators and subverters of Laws being committed to them, includes a power
of employing the force or Arms of the County, or whole Kingdom, if need be,
to make good the sentence of the Law against them: This power being a necessary
attendant to the former. And they who have the power of judging by Commission,
have the power of force by implication. To his five Arguments therefore by
which he proves this power not reserved by implication; I briefly Answer. 1.
Limitation cannot infer it, etc. Answer, Limitation in exercise only does not:
but in the power it self does infer it, as I have often showed. 2. The
inconveniences of exorbitancie cannot infer it. Answer, They do not infer it
of themselves, for they are the same in absolute Rule: but supposing a people
mind in their Frame effectually to prevent those inconveniences, that does
infer it. 3. The consent and intention of the people, choosing a Monarch cannot
infer it, because it is not the measure of the power it self. Answer, I have
before proved the contrary, and made the Doctors supposall appear a
groundless falsehood concerning unlimited power by Gods ordinance. 4. The
intention of the people in procuring Limitations of power cannot infer it.
Answer, If the peoples intention in it, be a greater security from oppression
then in an absolute Government they can have, or a mere moral limitation can
give them; then it does infer it. 5. If the Architects did intend such a
forceable power to these States, they would not have best it in his power to
dissolve them, p. 42. This has had its full satisfaction before. These are
poor infirm arguments, as the reader cannot but see, yet he ends in a
triumph. Therefore I conclude here as I promised in the second Section, where
the Prince stands supreme, etc. there Subjects may not by force of arms
resist, though he be exorbitant, etc. p. 43. It Is true he concludes as he
promised, but he has not proved, as he promised; nor as we expected; for here
is nothing, but that which falls to the ground with his supposals on which they
are built; and which I have demolished in the 4th Chapter.

CHAP. VII. An Answer to the 7th Section of his Reply, of places of Scripture
out of the old Testament.
HIs sixth Section does wholly concern the Author of the fuller which I pass
over, because I am chargeable for no more then is my own. And come to his
seventh which contains an Examination of places alleged in this Question out
of the old Testament. Where he begins confidently that there is no warrant for
Resistance, p. 56. and he yields two Reasons why. 1. Because the Institution of
that Kingdom was such as does plainly exclude Resistance. 2. Because the
Prophets never call for it. Ans. I grant it does exclude it, as far as in an
absolute Monarchy it may be excluded; and therefore there is no need of
answering his Arguments. But yet let us consider them since he is so large in
them.

To show us the Institution of that Kingdom he brings, 1 Samuel 8.11. Where he
says we have it. For Samuel is commanded, v. 9. To tell the people (Jus
Regis:) Now this jus Regis he makes a great matter of, and tells us it implies
not a Right of doing such unjust Acts, but a security from Resistance and
force, if he does them. p. 56.

Ans. 1. It is no prejudice to the cause I defend, if I should grant all he
would work out of this Text; for it prooves no farther then of that particular
Kingdom, inducing no necessity that all others must have the same
Institution. Also that which he concludes is but a security for the Person of
the Prince from force if he do such unjust Acts: which we grant him not only
in that, but all Monarchies, even the most limited.

2. If he have any further reach, and would conclude out of it a general
binding Ordinance of security from Resistance entending even to subversive
Instruments of Will. The world will wonder at him for such an audacious
conclusion from such premises. And we will look a little nearer to what he
says. All is grounded on his Interpretation of Jus Regis. Which he seeks to
confirm by Calvin's Authority.

First, for his Interpretation. I say the Original words in this place are not
to be translated jus Regis, the Right of the King. Because 1. There is another
more fit signification of them: the words are (...) now the word (...) being
applied to unjust Acts, as here it is ought not to be rendered jus, but mos, not
Right, but manner, as appears by another place answerable to this, 1 Samuel
27.11. (...) speaking of David's roving, This will be his manner, 'twere
ridiculous to render it, this will be his right or privilege. This out last
Interpreters knowing, did willingly depart from the Vulgar Latin; whose
Author either ignorantly or inconsiderately did render it jus Regis; which
this Doctor for his advantage does here make so much of. 2. That rendering of
it, cannot be justified by any other Text of Scripture; for whersoever it is
rendered Jus, it imports a moral Right; not a privilege or security in ill
doing. I challenge any skillful in that tongue to bring one place where it is
or can be so rendered.

Then for Calvin's Authority. I answer. 1. What if Calvin or any other deceived
by the vulgar Latin, or ignorance of the extent of the Original word, have
rendered it ill; must that be a prescription to others who know a better? 2.
Neither does Calvin, though he follow the Latin and render it jus, mean such
a jus as the Doctor does, sc. An absolute immunity, or security from
Resistance: but only from private men. For after he has in all those
passages, which the Doctor cites, exempted Kings from violence, truly and
piously urging patience in Subjects under the injuries of their Princes, at
length Instit. l. 4. c. 10. (the same out of the which the Doctor brings his
proofs) number. 31. He explaines himself, De privatis hominibus semper loquor,
that all is to be taken of private men; not of the States of a Kingdom, in
their public meetings: never discerning of such a universal immunitie, as the
Doctor would put upon him to maintain. And here I challenge not the
Ingenuity, but the Conscience of this Replier, who cites Calvin at large in the
former place, as agreeing with him in this case of Resistance, when he cannot
be ignorant of the contrary, and therefore conceales his following words in the
31. number. Where he expressly teaches the same Truth which I have asserted in my
Treatise. Hear him speaking his judgment, De privatis hominibus semper
loquor: Nam si qui nunc sunt populares magistratus ad moderandum Regum
libidinem constituti (quales olim erant, qui Lacedemonijs regibus oppositi
erant, Ephori, aut Romany Consulibus, Tribuni plebis; aut Atheniensium
Senatui, Demarchi; and qua etiam forte potestate (ut nunc res habent) funguntur
in singulis regnis tres ordines, cum primarios conventus peragunt) adeo illos
fenocienti Regum licentiae pro officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus
impotenter grassantibus, and humili plebeculae insultantibus conniveant, eorum
dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non carere affirmem, quia populi libertatem
cui se, Dei ordinatione, Tutores positos norunt, fraudulenter produnt. He is
clear, that the Estates in Parliament, not only may, but are Gods ordinance
for it, and are bound to resist, and not suffer the destruction of liberties,
by exorbitating Princes; so that I may justly retort the Doctors words, p. 57.
There can be nothing spoken more plainly for the power of resistance in the
Houses of Parliament then this.

Then for his other reason from the 18. verse, Ye shall cry out in that day,
and the Lord will not hear you. As in my Treatise I called it inconsequent; so
also now: He is a good Logician which can draw his conclusion out of those
premises. But he blames me, p. 58. for saying it was an absolute Monarchy, and
cannot see how it can be so, according to my description of absoluteness. Why
not? In Absolute Monarchy, there are no limits but the Monarchs own will; but
these had a fixed judicial Law, p. 59. I answer, That judicial Law was no
limits of their power; but of the exercise only; for the non observance of it
by the King did not amount to an untying of the bond of subjection in the
people. The Judicial Laws being from God, not from any contract of the people,
were in the same nature to that people, and for the time, with the Moral Laws;
and in the same manner did limit their Kings, and no otherwise. But for the
Absoluteness of that Monarchy, here Lyra (more faithfully cited, Lyra, in 1 Samuel 8.
then he did Calvin above) Constitutio Regis juxta potestatem sibi concessum
est duplex.) 1. Plena and legibus absoluta, prout legiste de Imperatore dicere
solent. 2. Cum potestate limitata. Now says he, the people sinned, not simply
in asking a King; but in asking a King of the first sort, to judge them as the
Nations, that is, absolutely. He is express. 1. That limitation of power makes
a limited Monarch. 2. That Israel desiring such a Government as the adjacent
Nations, desired an absolute Monarch. And indeed as the definement of the
moral Law does not disparage the Absoluteness of the Monarch, because it is
from God, not the people; so did not their judicial, for the same reason.

Jonathan, p. 60. He may give their resolute Oath what names pleases him, a
loving importunate violence, a souldierly boldness, or the like; it was a
peremptory expression of no less then an intent of resistance, in case there
had been need. Then for David's purpose in having armed men about him; He says
it was only to secure his person against the cut-throates of Saul, that is,
against his private Emissaries. But who sees not a large difference between
securing a man's self from private Emissaries, and appearing in the field with
Armies against the Armies of the Prince, p. 61. Answer, 1. It is against
reason, that he should retain an Army of 600. valiant Soldiers, yea a great
Army, like the Host of God, 1 Chronicles. 12.22. to secure himself merely against
private Emissaries. 2. Let us grant him that there is a difference between
securing against private Emissaries, and the open Army: yet if he grant it
lawful to use force against one, he grants the cause by it, of all; for a
warrant from an act of the Kings will is as valid to secure a few Emissaries,
as a whole Army: and Gods Ordinance in one man, is no more resistible, then in
a multitude. Then for David's intent to keep Keylah against Saul, it is so
evident, by the history, that I will say no more about it; but do refer him to
that which the Pleaders for defensive Arms say about it. The Doctor seeks
diverse evasions, to get out of the reach of this example; but does not satisfy
himself, much less others, and therefore adds the fourth on which he must
rest when all is said, That David's example was extraordinary: Hereon he brings
some things in him which were extraordinary; We grant it in many things; but we
deny it in this. If the Doctor will prove him to have a special privilege to
resist Gods ordinance in his Sovereign, more then other men; he must bring the
grant and warrant for it: otherwise David must come under the common condition
for this matter: He himself acknowledges he had none for violating the person
of his Prince; and sure then he had none for violating the Authority of his
Prince, conferred on private Emissaries, if they had any. But in his p. 65. He
lays hard at me, and challenges not only my Reason for calling this a
shufling Answer, but also my ingenuity, who confess the people in that
Government might not resist; and yet do urge these examples for Resistance.
Answer, 1. For my Reason: I have made it appear I have reason to call it so;
is it not a mere evasion, to affirm in him an extraordinary privilege, and
can bring no word, nor warrant for it? 2. For my ingenuity it is without cause
challenged by him; for from the lawfullnesse of Resistance of unreasonable Acts
of will, in an absolute Monarchy, where Reason is the Princes law; I may a
fortiori conclude the lawfulness of resisting of instruments of illegal Acts
in a limited Monarchy, where the Law of the Land is the Princes Law and bounds.

CHAP. VIII. The 8. Section concerning Resistance forbidden, Romans 13. answered.
NOw we are come to his principal strength against Resistance out Romans 13.
From whence nothing can be collected against any Resistance, but that which is
of the Powers, of the Ordinance: but that which I defend is of neither of them,
therefore I have no cause to fear his inferences from that Text. Now supposing
the truth which I have made good, that in a limited State the limitation is of
the Power it self, and not only of the exercise; it follows evidently that in
such a State resistance of destructive instruments, is neither of Power nor
Gods Ordinance. I might therefore well omit that which at large here he speaks
of Resistance of the Powers. The first part of the Section is spent in replying
to the Exceptions of the Reverend Divines. The first thing I find which
concerns me is, p. 77. I will therefore begin with him there. Where he
accuses me that in my 59, 64, and 66. page of that Treatise, I grant they
might not resist in that Monarchy; but affirm that subjects may in this; and
he brings me in giving two Reasons for it. 1. Because Religion was then no part
of the Laws, but here it is. 2. Because that was an Absolute Monarchy, this a
Limited and mixed, p. 77. But may I not here challenge both the ingenuity and
conscience of this Replyer. Did I ever grant that Gods Ordinance of Power might
be resisted here; or give any Reasons for so unreasonable an Assertion? It
would be tedious to repeat here, what I have said there. Let the Reader see;
if he please. I will recite the sum. 1. The Doctor affirmed, that in the
Apostles time the Senate of Rome might challenge more then our Parliaments can
now, I denied it, and gave my reason, sc. That State was then devolved into a
Monarchy by Conquest, etc. of this the Doctor speaks not a word, perhaps he is
now ashamed of that comparison. 2. He said, there was greater cause of
Resistance then, than now. I answered. There was then no cause at all: Not for
Religion, being then, no part of the Law: Not Liberties; because then that was
past, the Government changed; and an Oath taken of absolute subjection. Have I
by these things granted a liberty of Resistance of Gods Ordinance to this
people; and deny it to those? No; Neither They, nor We; not that enslaved
Senate; nor our free Parliaments, no cause, no privilege can justify this.
Yea I ascribe more to Gods Ordinance of Power, then He: He says that in a
limited state we owe only passive subjection to exceeding commands of a Prince
by promise limiting himself in the use of his power. I say; though he sin in
exceeding such promise; yet we owe him also Active obedience in such commands
which Gods Law forbids us not to be Active in. Neither do I bring Doctor
Bilsons testimony to prove that Religion was then no part of the Law, as he
affirms I do, p. 77. but sure he neither heeded what I had written, nor what
himself wrote. I laid down an Assertion that Gods Ordinance of which St Paul
speaks, is the Power and the Person of him which is supremely invested with
that Power; and for this did I bring Dr Bilson; who, explaining the Power there
forbidden to be resisted, says it is the Princes will not against his Laws;
but agreeing to his Laws. Here he serves Dr Bilson and other Divines, as
before the King, and the Parliaments, teaches them a meaning contrary to their
words: They mean such states as may by the known Laws use forceable
restraint: No such meaning of his words: He makes no distinction of states; but
expounds the Text in question, speaking of Gods Ordinance in general, in all
Rulers: He knows it well enough; and therefore adds, They were willing to
excuse as much as might be those motions of the Protestants in France and the
Low Countries; but had they lived now, they would have spoken more cautelously.
That is, They spoke rashly, wronged the truth, and reached their consciences to
excuse the commotions and rebellions of those days. This is like a Doctor. But
he likes the Homily better then them all, that speaks home, he says; but
what, he speaks not, nor do I answer. But he will try the force of this
exception, because I profess, with Mr Burrowes, against Resisting of Authority
though abused: And with Dr Bilson, admit of resisting the Princes will against
the Laws: This is fast and loose, says he. How so? In limited Monarchies,
where the Prince has no Authority beyond the Law: there an act beyond the Law
is unauthoritative and merely private; so that it is no abusing of Authority;
but an exceeding of Authority. Authority abused to undue acting of matters
within its compass, Mr Burrowes speaks of, and that must not be resisted. But
the Princes will acting against his Law, that is matters without the compass
of Authority is not Gods ordinance, says Dr Bilson, and so may be rested in
its instruments. I still say, let him prove such acts to proceed from
Authority, I will disclaim Resistance of their instruments, either the meanest
Constable in the Land, or Soldier in the army. But how clouds he this truth
which is clear as the day? 1. In that Government under which the Apostle
lived, men might not resist, though the Powers commanded contrary to Law, as
often they did: Not under the Arrian Emperors, though religion was then a part
of the law, p. 78. Answer, 1. Dr Abbot that learned Bishop of Sarum was of
another judgment; Demonstrat. Antichrist, c. 7. In that Government he does
distinguish the Christians carriage according to the distinction of times. At
first before Religion was established by Law, caedebantur, non caedebant, but
after Constantines time when it was established by Law. Caedebant, non
caedebantur. 2. We may grant it in that Government, because it was absolute,
and the Laws were to the Prince but moral limitations of exercise: And, as I
have often acknowledged, Acts of the Princes will, exceeding such limitation,
are potestative, and must not be resisted: but it will not follow that
therefore they are so, in governments where the Laws are limitations of the
power it self, and exceeding acts are not potestative. Sure in those times, as
patient as the Christians were, under their persecutours, if their Religion and
persons had been assaulted without Authority, they would have made Resistance:
And this is all we affirm. 2. He makes two inquiries, 1. Whether the first
Parliament in Qu. Elizabeth's reign might have resisted her endeavors to
change the established Religion? Answer, They had sinned in withstanding the
introduction of truth, and the Abolition of Falsehood; yet civilly and legally
they might have done it: and abrogate a Law without the States she could not.
But, blessed be God there was no such opposition; but a joint consent of all
three Legislative Powers. 2. How can the putting down of Episcopal Government,
be now justified which stands by Law? Answer; It cannot, unless there be a
confluence of the consent of all three; nor do I believe it is intended
without the Kings consent, Unless their constant doctrine and practice to
overthrow the liberties and Government of this Kingdom into Arbitrarines do
prove them in all their sort subversive, and inconsistent with its safe being:
Let therefore the Doctor and the rest of them look how they continue to
maintain such destructive Doctrins: for they will sooner remove themselves out
of this Church, then the Subjects out of their ancient and just Liberties.

Roman Emperors. His other exception is, they were absolute Monarchs, and
therefore not to be resisted, p. 79. Ans. He does me manifest injury: See my
Treatise, I no where so argue; nor have I any need; for I equally affirm it of
limited, as of absolute power, that they ought not to be resisted; for they are
equally Gods Ordinance, which extends to the powers that are: Neither have I any
need of that distinction to satisfy the Apostles Text: I asserted not the
absoluteness of the Imperial authority for any such reason: but against his
false affirmation, That that Senate in St Paul's time, might challenge more then
our great Council can now. Here is apparent il dealing. But what can he oppose
to what I said about the absolutenes of those Roman Emperors? 1. It cannot be
cleared that they were de jure absolute. An. Yes, it can; according to the
Doctors own grounds; for, 1. There was a full Conquest made by Julius Caesar in
that fatal battle against Pompey not only of him; Seneca. co^sol ad Marciam.
but in and with him, of the whole Senate, for in eo prima acies senatus fuit,
says Seneca. And the struggling remainders of the free Senate were again
vanquished in that battle of Octavius against Cassius and Brutus. From that
time all being prostrate to his Will. 2. There was a submission to an Absolute
yoke. Romae ruere in servitium Consules, Annal. l. 1. s ^.
Patres, Eques, says Tacitus: yea the Senate was so forward to it, that
Tiberius was wont to say, as often as he went out of the Court, Ib. l. 3 s 11
O homines ad servitutem natos! 3. There was also an establishment of this
subjection by an Oath: for the Senate and Armies were brought under the same
bond; and all this before St Paul's conversion. That which he brings out of
latter Authors, p. 80. of the Lex regia, qua populus principi omne suum
imperium and potestatem contulit: and his conjectures of it is not being before
Vespasians time, is not worth a looking into: It was a formal complement of
flattery to give that to him in words, which he had in power and Use so many
years before. Also that of their forbearing the Diadem and Title of King,
being contented only with that of Prince, was but the putting on a silken veil
upon a rough government. Under that smooth Title the people and Senate were
held as much under, as the grand seigneur or Persian now hold their Vassals.
But they did perquam aiu magnam potestatis partem cum senatu communicare, p.
80. They did so; 'Twas their indulgence, or rather policy to impart it. It is
affirmed, not by uncertain Collections of late Authors; but by Tacitus, who
is instar omneum in this business; Annal. l. 1. s. 1. l. 3. s. 10.
of Augustus the first and best of them all, Posito Triumviri nomine, consulem
se ferens, insurgere paulatim, munia Magistratuum, senatus, Legum inse trahere;
and of Tiberius, that imaginem antiquitatis senatui praebebat. They conveyed
their will through the old channel of the Senate, that it might relish the
better with the people; yet at pleasure did what they listed, by them, and
against them. 2. He says, The Apostle in his reason against Resistance has no
respect to the absolute or limited condition of those Roman Emperors. Nor do
I say, he has: the Reason he urges is the Ordinance of God, which is true
without distinction of the whole latitude of Power. 3. A limited condition does
no more infer a lawfullnesse of resistance for exorbitances, then an
Absolute, p. 82. I say not, that it does; no condition can infer a
lawfulness of Resistance of the Power, though abused; but here is the
privilege of a people under a limited Monarch, his exceeding Acts are not
abuses of Power; but simply non potestative; and therefore their Agents may be
resisted, without resisting the power; which is not so in an absolute Rule; if
there were no privilege, why did men trouble themselves in constituting
Limitations, and Mixtures in a State: In a word, unless he can prove Power in
all Limited States, to be illimited: and all the Acts of will in the supreme to
flow from Gods Ordinance: He labors in vain from that text, or any else to
conclude against Resistance of subversive Instruments in a mixed Government.

CHAP. IX. His ninth Section Answered: the Reasons against Resistance
satisfied: and those for Resistance vindicated.
WE are now come to his last Section: In examination of which Reason as
Scripture aagainst that Resistance which I have asserted in my Treatise. Herein
he does two things. 1. Brings his Reasons against Resistance. 2. Endeavors to
answer those which I brought for it. But for more evident proceeding about
both, we must distinctly call to mind the Question, of what it is. 1. It is of
Resistance in this state; that is, a state which I have proved to be limited
and mixed in the very power it self. 2. It is only of Resistance of
destructive Instruments: Therefore if his Reasons do not reach to such a
Resistance, they are not to the purpose.

Now against Resistance the Doctor brings no fewer then nine Reasons; In his
first book he had only five, here he has made up in number, what they wanted
in weight. I will in few words answer them distinctly, for many need not. 1.
His first is from the wisdom of God putting his people under Kings, without
power of Resistance; this should be to us instead of a most forceable Reason,
p. 84. Answ. Well it may be instead of one; but it is not one. For 1. It was
their desire to be under an Absolute Government, as their neighbor Countries
were; and they offended God in it, as Lyra observes; therefore he giving them
such a King as they desired; did not in his wisdom intend a binding form for
all people: I think the Doctor will not affirm he did. 2. If he mean
Resistance of their Prince his Authority and person, I grant they were so put
under; and so are we, and all that are put under Monarchs; but if he mean the
Acts of the Princes will which were not Authoritative; I do deny it, and the
former alleged instances prove they were not: and that is all I affirm in
other Monarchies.

2. The word of God gives no direction for it. The Prophets call not on the
Elders for it: The new Testament commends patience in suffering for well-doing,
Answ. 1. In Civil matters negative reasonings from Scripture are not proving.
2. The word gives proving and imitable examples for it, as before: and indeed
the Scripture does every way justify resistance of cutthroats and private
destructive Assaulters of Laws and Liberties, who have no Authority derived to
them; and I defend no other.

3. The Apostle forbids Resistance of the Powers, not from any compact of the
people, but from the Ordinance of God. It Is true: for no compact of people
could establish an unresistible Power without the Ordinance of God. I
acknowledge the Apostles ground for it: and therefore allow no resistance where
there is Gods Ordinance to secure them, not for any abuse.

4. To be supreme and next to God implies a security from Resistance, p. 85. I
grant all; His Person, his Power is hereby secured: I condemn all rising up
against the King: but instruments of subversion, have nothing of the King in
them: not his person nor Authority is risen up against in them. For his
conceits about jus Regis I have said enough above. Neither do I give to the
Houses the power of the Lacedemonian Ephori. They had an Authority over the
very person of the King: which the Houses claim not. I give them no more then
Calvin does to the three Estates in their general meetings. The Doctor well
knows what I will answer him; which he seeks to evade, 1. By affirming that
the Resisting of Instruments acting by his Power, which he has committed to
them, is a resisting of him, p. 86. It Is true, it is so; but we speak of
instruments, which act not by his power, that is, his Authority; but by his
will in a course exceeding the Limitation of his Authority. Could he prove that
a limited Prince could commit Power to do acts without the bounds of his
Power, the Question were answered, else he beggs it, but answers it not. 2. He
would desire me to look again upon the two Assertions of the Reverend Divines
which I reject: He cannot conceive, how I can retain my own Assertion, and
reject theirs. The Doctor has a great mind to pick some contradiction in me;
but still fails in his endeavor. In good earnest, does he speak really, when
he says, he cannot conceive, etc. Well, let us look again on the two
Assertions which I reject in them. 1. Governors who under pretense of
Authority from Gods Ordinance disturb the quiet and godly life, are far
from being Gods Ordinance in so doing. 2. This tyranny not being Gods
Ordinance, they which resist it even with arms, resist not the Ordinance of
God. Do I defend any Assertions equivalent to these. Rather I assert in that
Treatise, and here also the contrary. 1. Governors whither in absolute or
limited States, keeping within the measure of their power, may disturb the
quiet and godly life, and yet be Gods Ordinance in that act, though crossing
the end of Gods Ordinance in it. 2. Powers though abused, yet being Gods
Ordinance, they which resist even in abusive acts of it, resist the Ordinance
of God. Is here no difference? Cannot I retain this Assertion, that exceeding
Acts in limited Monarchy are not Gods Ordinance, and may in instruments be
resisted: And yet reject theirs, who maintain resistance of Governors
themselves, in all acts of abused power? He makes no difference between Acts
exceeding bounds of power: and Acts of abused power: but of this more then
enough before. 3. But he will answer more particularly, so he had need. What is
it? He that bears the sword, that is, has the supreme Power, gives Commission
to under-Ministers for Justice; and to other Officers for the Militia: If
therefore the Resistance of those though abusing their Power, be a resistance
of the Power; so it is also of these. Answ. I grant all: for it proceeds only
of Ministers abusing Power committed to them: not of Excesses of Power. I will
retort it. Like as if when the supreme gives Commission of Justice to a Judge;
and he exceeding unto Acts without the compass of his Commission is but a
private man in those Acts and may be resisted: so if Commission of Arms be
given to a General, etc.

5. Subjection is due to a Prince, and the contrary forbidden without
distinction of a good and bad Prince. I grant it, and give the reason, because
they are Gods Ordinance: but the Question is of instruments of exceeding Acts,
in which they are not Gods Ordinance.

6. Good reason that he which has the supreme Trust, should have the greatest
security, p. 87. Answ. It is so; and so we grant him: for he has a full
security from all violence for both Person and Authority, what ever
exorbitance he breaks out unto. The people have not so: Every Subject being
under the penalty of the Law for it is transgressions. But the Doctor forgets
his Clients, He is not arguing for security of Sovereigns; but Subjects, if
they may be so called, which endeavor to subvert laws and governments. But
may we not also say, as it is good reason the supreme should have the greatest
security; so the people also should have some security; and not be exposed
like bruit beasts to the savage lusts of every instrument of cruelty: having
only this to comfort them, that they sin in so doing? and so they do, which
with cruelty destroy even the bruit creatures.

7. From the end and benefits of Government, for the enjoying of which, it is
good reason we should bear with the exorbitances. Still he speaks good
reason; but nothing to the purpose; for we dispute not of exorbitances of them
who have the power; but of them who have no power for what they do. In
exorbitances of lesser nature, their will may secure instruments; but it is
against reason that the benefits we have by their Government should cause us to
bear with them who would destroy their laws and government, for of such is the
Question. I wonder here again he brings Calvin, when he cannot but know that
he is expressly for power of Resistance in the Houses: and no doubt P. Martyr,
and the rest follow Calvin in this.

8. Power of Resistance in Subjects would be a remedy worse then the disease,
and more subversive of a State, then if it wore left without it, p. 90. Why
would it be so? It would be a continual Seminary of jealousies twixt Prince
and people, and confusion through the continuance of the mischiefs of War.
Concerning this Argument of his, see p. 60. of my Treatise, where it is fully
satisfied. 1. Who will believe the power of Resisting destructive instruments,
should be more destructive, then to let them alone without Resistance? 2.
Suppose by abuse of this power those evils should happen (for it so falls out to
the best physic, where the nocumentous humors are prevailing) yet this is
but by accident: such Power per se and of its own nature tends to the
preventing of subversion. On the contrary by woeful experience, this Doctrine
of the unresistiblenesse of such men, has nursed up a brood of audacious
projectours, and where it is taught, a state will never be without them.
Whereas, if the Truth were known it would refrain the spirits of wicked men
from paracide and State subversion. Neither can any thing be more mischievous,
then to teach an impunitie for projectours, and Agents of mischief: and he
has not the reason of a man who argues otherwise. 3. Neither can this
doctrine, as the Replier traduces it, extend to the deposing of Princes, or the
deminishing of their Authority, for it concerns only their Instruments, not
their Persons; their Absolute, extra-legall Will; not their Authority. And for
iealousies, they will be more bred by that Doctrine which gives the Prince a
Power to undo the State, then by that which terminates both; and gives neither
a power to subvert the other; Danger is the nurse of jealousy: that which
takes away power of hurting takes away Danger; and so removes iealousies: but
indeed such which have a plot of breaking up the hedge of Government, and
bringing lawless powers into a State, care not for having such a Power in
those Houses whom it would cause them to fear, and look on with continual
jealousies. The Homily of Rebellion is in vain cited against that which is no
rebellion.

9. The last and weakest of all is that of the hearts of Kings being in Gods
hands, Prove 21.1. and that of Gods Covenant with David and his seed, 2 Chronicles.
6.16. and 7.17. How the Doctor can draw hence a conclusion against Resistance
of subversive instruments, I cannot imagine. Sure if these Texts had any
proving force in them, they had not been brought so late: Rather then place had
been in the former Section, where in the close he says, He chose only to
insist on those Texts which are fit to bear argument but here he has broke
his word, yet he is excusable, for he had no better.

for Resistance. If they be not more concluding then his, would they had never
seen the light, nor come to the eye of any judicious man. Let us see what he
has to say to them.

1. That Resistance is lawful which is no Resistance of the Ordinance of God;
but this of subversive instruments is not, being neither of the Person nor
Authority of the Prince. He says, He has proposed and answered this above
under his third and fourth Reasons. And there I doubt not but the invaliditie
of his Answer does plainly appear.

2. Without this Power of Resistance all limitation of Government is vain; and
all forms resolve into that which is arbitrary. He tells me, My Argument is
inconsequent by my own description of Absolute Monarchy: so that the
restraint of a limited Monarch is Legal and Moral, not forceable and
Military, p. 93. I answer, I describe limited and Absolute Monarchy not by
Force; but the having or not having a bounds of Will; but how absurd it is when
the distinctive conceit in the definition of a limited Monarch, is a Law
terminating his will to take it of a moral terminating, which is common to
all, not only Monarchs but men? Especially since I explain my self so fully
afterward, as I do, there p. 7. in the three degrees of absoluteness. But I
have above enough discovered the fraud and falsehood of his confounding of
Legal and moral Limitation; and have prooved that to give a Limited Monarch
only a moral Limitation, is to resolve all into Absolute and Arbitrary, for
the most absolute under heaven has moral limitation.

3. Such Power is due to a public State for its preservation which is allowed
to a particular person. He answers, this is not universally true. Why not? a
State is more worthy, and comprehends a multitude of particular men: does
number detract from their privilege? He would seem to have reason for his
denial: A private man has by the law of nature power of selfe-preservation
against the force of another private man; yet is this power yielded up in
regard of Civil Power, and not to be used against persons endued with such
power, p. 94. 1. He still speaks Truth; but not to the Question: which is not
of persons endued with civil power; but such as we have proved to have no
power; grant them endued with power, neither a particular man: or a whole
Community must resist them: but having none, it is much more allowable in a
public state, then a particular person. 2. He speaks of a power yielded up,
as if in all governments the people do simply yield up all power of Resistance
into a full subjection unto all Acts of the Princes will: Whereas we have
prooved, that in limited Governments it is not so: but to the Princes Will
measured and regulated by a Law; and therefore they have that power still, in
respect of all instruments of acts of Will not so regulated.

But it is observable, that p 95. the Doctor is beaten off from his own
grounds, and yields up in the Close of his book a full Victory to Truth. Which
will appear if we look back to his first book, and Sect. 1. where he
proposes the Question in his own terms, whither if a King be bent or seduced
to subvert Religion, Laws and Liberties, Subjects may take up arms and resist.
He undertakes to maintain the Negative; and here was the beginning of the
controversy. Now see in this Reply how he is sunck and stolen off from that
which he undertook to defend; and upon the matter grants us the Cause. For, 1.
By bent or seduced to subvert, he tells us, he means not a purpose of the mind,
but doing many Acts arbitrarily tending to subversion; as if he would yield,
that (supposing him bent, that is purposing and intending it in his mind and
course) he might be resisted. 2. Nay, by [bent to subvert] he does not mean so
much as Acts subversive; but only Acts tending to subversion of themselves;
for the frame of government and Laws cannot be subverted without the consent
of the two Houses. So that now the Question is rather, Whither subversion be
possible by such instruments; then whether their Resistance be lawful: Sure it
were pity to disturb them by Resistance in an impossible work: Let them run
on rather till they see their own vanity and folly: but suppose they should
bring it to pass; then it would be too late to come to this Doctor and tell
him, he was deceived, and did deceive. Certainly those great Politicians who
have had this design in managing so many years, are not of his mind. Yea,
suppose it cannot be done without the consent of the Houses; yet the Doctor
can tell us in another case, that where there is an unresistible power, Consent
cannot long be wanting. What then; will he yield us a power of Resistance, if
we can prove such a design possible?

Here also because the Doctor says this liberty which I allow a State for its
preservation, tends rather to its subversion, p. 94. and every where
calumniates me as an inducer of confusion, and Anarchie, and my Assertions as
opening a way to Rebellion. It concerns me effectually to vindicate my self,
and the truth which I maintain from these aspersions; and make it appear that
the power of Resistance I defend is not a remedy worse then the disease of
subversion. Which I can do no better way, then by a positive setting down the
naked truth which I aver in this and the former Treatise; and show how it
shuts up every way to these evils which he lays uncharitably to my charge. 1.
I assert no forceable Resistance in any case but subversive and extreme. 2.
Subversive and extreme cases respect either particular men; or the whole state
and Government. For particular men even in extreme cases of state or life, I
allow no public Resistance: but appeal if it may be had; or if not, yet no
public Resistance: for whether the wrong be done him by inferior or superior
Magistrates, either it is, 1. Under form and course of Law, and power
committed them; and then to resist, is to resist the power. 2. Or without all
form and course of Law and power committed to them: and then a man values his
state and life too high, to make public resistance, and bring on the state a
general disturbance for his private good, and sins, though not against Gods
ordinance of Power, in this case, yet against the public peace and weal. For
the whole state or government, and the last cases of its subversion, of which
the Doctor puts the Question. 1. I condemn all force used against the Person
of the supreme, or his Power and Authority in any inferior Ministers thereof.
2. I aver not public forceable resistance of Ministers of acts of will which
are only actual invasions, or excesses of limitation; and not such as plainly
argue a bent of subversion, and apparent danger thereof, if prevention be not
used: so that the Doctor goes from the Question, and comes home to me, when he
says here that he speaks only of the former sort. 3. I affirm not force in
this utmost case to be assumed by private men against destructive instruments
of the Princes will: as if any man were warranted on his own imagination of
public danger to raise forces for prevention. But the Courts of Justice, and
especially the supreme Court, to whom the conservation of Government and Law is
committed, and a Power not only to resist, but also censure and punish its
violaters, much more its subverters without regard of number or warrant, (The
Law supposing no warrant can be in such case) This is the power of Resistance
which I have asserted: and it this be inducing of civil war, or a way to
subversion and Rebellion: It is a war raised by defenders of Law, against
subverters of Law: A Rebellion raised by Magistrates having Authority, against
instruments of arbitrarinesse having no authority: A resistance tending to
subversion, but of none but subverters. It Is good reason then, it seems, if
destroyers grow to the number and strength of an Army, for Magistrates to let
them alone, and not raise arms to suppress them, lest they open a way to
confusion and bring on the miseries of a civil War. This is the Doctors
preservative Doctrine, and my contrary is destructive. 4. I argued from the end
of the institution of the Houses, and their interest in making Laws, and
preserving the frame. He says this is grounded on my false supposall of their
being joined with the King in the very sovereign power, p. 96. Answer, I have
justified that supposall; and manifested his strange boldness in denying it
against the Kings, and so many Parliaments direct affirmations; and desire the
reader to take notice, that this is Calvin's argument for Resistance, in the
place above recited, how ever the Doctor does make so light of it.

5. From the power of inferior Courts to punish violaters of Law, though
pretending a warrant of the Kings will for it. He says this Argument is
inconsequent to prove power of raising Armies to oppose the Forces of their
Sovereign. He hastens to a conclusion, and weighs not much what he answers. I
say it concludes inevitably: for if the Kings warrant to violate Law, will not
privilege one from force of justice, then not a hundred, not an Army of
violaters. Their multitude makes the danger greater, and the Kingdom more
unhappy; not Malefactors more privileged. The forces of the Sovereign in
truth, are the Forces raised to defend his Government; not those which are
raised to subvert it. They are his, which have his Authoritative will; not
those which have only his arbitrary. If ever Reasons did demonstrate a truth, I
am confident these five have made good, The power of the estates in Parliament
to resist subversive instruments, be they more or fewer.

Thus have I traced this Author through his Reply; and whether Treatise from
it, I refer my self to the conscience of every one who has the
understanding of a judicious man; and the impartiality of a just man. In my
cap. 8. is a moderate debate of the present contention; and diverse Petitions
tending to pacification if it had been possible: but he touches not on that
chapt. His discourse shows him to have nothing to do with Moderation; nor
does desire Peace, but on the terms of a full dedition into the hands of
subversive instruments. I have done with him: He resolved, I Answered. He has
replied. I have returned on it. I am even with him; and in truth above him, I
am sure. Now I desire to spin out this contention no longer. Yet if he, or any
else please to rejoyne, I wish he would save himself, and me a labor: to let
alone the book; and deal only with the 4th; and 5th Chapters concerning the
Doctors supposals; if he can make good them; and invalidate mine, as much as in
me lies, I will yield him the cause: but I judge it impossible, if I know what
is impossible. The God of spirits allay the spirits of men from this extreme
opposition: And give such a issue to these woeful wars, that the scepter of
Christ, the Gospel of Peace may be fully submitted to and maintained by a King
enjoying inviolate his due sovereignty; and a People their due and lawful
liberties, Amen.

PHIL. 4.5. Let your moderation be known unto all men: The Lord is at hand.


FINIS.

