A SPEEDY POST FROM HEAVEN, TO THE KING OF ENGLAND.

Never put out by any before.

Written by A. H.

London, Printed in the year. 1642.

A Speedy Post from Heaven, to the King of England.
THat he fight not against the Gospel and the truth of Gods word, and those
his loving subjects that will defend his regal person, Crown and dignite, and
seal it with their blood: least it happen to him as to former Kings of Israel
and Judah. Read the twenty one of Ezekel the 25. 26. 27. And thou profane
wicked Prince of Israel whose day is come when iniquity shall have an end.

Thus says the Lord, remove the Diadem and take off the Crown this shall not
be the same, exalt him that is low, and abase him that is high.

I will Overturne overturne it, and it shall be no more until he come, whose
right is, and it will give it him, Read Isaiah the 14. and the 4. verse that
thou shall take up this Proverb against the King of Babylon And say how has
the oppressor ceased the Golden City ceased, 5. the Lord has broken the
staff of the wicked, and the Scepter of the Rullers he who smote the people in
wrath verse 6.
with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger 16. persecuted
and none hinders.

Thou shall not be Joined with them in 20. 21.
burial because thou have destroyed thy land and slain thy people, the seed
of evil doers shall never be removed, prepare slaughter for his Children, for
the iniquity of his father that he do not rise nor possess the land nor fill
the face of the world with Cities.

The judgment of God upon three Kings Ier. 22.
Shallum of Iehoiakim and Coniah for opresing of their subjects and breaking
their Covenant with God.

Ahab being left to the Council of his 1. Kings 21.
wicked Wife lost his Kingdom and his posterity after him.

You may read the judgment of God, 2. Kings 1. 1.
through wicked Counsel upon Ahaziah.

O King add not thou to this number of wicked Council, but add to the number
of those good Kings who by giveing ear to Good Council, preserved their
Kingdom long to them selves, And their posterytie, as King David in the 2.
Sam 18. 4.
first place that he was so far from seeking his own Council that he said to
his people, what seems to you best I will do, and who is best for the but the
high Court of Parliament, there was but two in David's Charge, but thou O King
have three in thy charge that thou have not only neglected to settle the peace
of them, but thou have by all means labored the utter destruction of them with
the first, the hostile manner against Scotland, and the bleeding condition of
Ireland, and as for England my pen shakes to write the Condition of it, not
knowing what will befall it, having begun, not how to end, seeing thy self o
King, And thy posterytie being compast about with thine enemies, and so little
regarding thy friends, which is the great court of Parliament, O KING return
to it and forsake these wicked counsel of all Achitophels which seeking
nothing more, the abolishing of the Gospel and the best of thy Subjects, whose
names here follows, Lord Kimboulton Master Stroud, Mr. Martin, Sir Henry
Ludlow, Mr. Hollis, Mr. Pim, Mr. Hamden, Sir Arthur Hasslridg, Alderman
Penington, Captain Venn, the Earl of Warwick, the Earl of Essex, the Earl
of Stamford the Lord Brook Sir John Hotham, these are like David's worthies and
mighty men that brake through the hosts of the Philistims to fetch water for
David in his necessity, but David would not drink the blood of these men,
then do not the o King drink the blood of these 2 Samuel 23.
men, which seeks to preserve thy Kingdom for thee and thy posterytie, from
these wicked sons of Belivl that are thy counselors against all right and
law of God, of nature and of the kingdom, and this power and order has
equity and truth in their mouth and the two edged sword in their hand Psa.
149. 6. 7. 8. 9.
to execute vengance upon the heathen and punishment upon the phople, to bind
their Kings with Chenes, and and their Nobles with fetters of Iron, to execute
upon them the Judgment written.

In this Psalm what became of all them that the holy Ghost sets down 63. Psalm.
such prayers and desires to light upon them, that go against any truth of
God, and diverse other places of Scripture, which might be aledged for this
purpose.

FINIS

