Die Jovis, 27. May 1647.
Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, that Mr. Hussy, is hereby thanked for his
great pains taken in his Sermon preached yesterday, before their Lordships, in
the Abbey Church, Westminster. And he is hereby defired, to cause the same to
be Printed and published, which is to be done only by authority under his own
hand.

Jo: Brown Cleric. Parliamenter.
I do appoint John Saywell to print my Sermon.

William Hussy.



The Magistrates CHARGE, FOR THE PEOPLES SAFETY. Laid open in a Sermon,
preached before the right Honorable House of Peers, in the Abbey Church at
Westminster, at their late solemn monthly Fast, May 26. 1647.

By WILLIAM HUSSY, Minister at Chesilburst in Kent.

HEB. 13.16. But to do good, and to communicate forget not, with such
Sacrifices God is well pleased.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Little Britain, at the Sign of the Greyhound, 1647.

TO The right Honorable, the Lords assembled in the high Court of Parliament.
Right Honorable,
WHen God is pleased to do any singular work, Kek. lib. 3. Eth. 5. Cap. 19.
either to lay the foundations of Kingdoms, or restore those that are shaken
to their integrity; he stirs up heroic spirits to perform it; great works
must be effected by powerfult causes: Now those that are of heroic spirits,
are led with vehement desire and love of some excellent end, and lift up their
mind to the last and chief end, even to God and holy things, to the highest
pitch of honesty; that so they might prefer the public good, before the
private, by a certain high prerogative: when desire is found in heroic
natures, men will walk with incredible constancy, so as that they cannot be
enticed from their proposed endeavors by any pleasure, or hindered by any
troubles and difficulties. N^^ue censebat civitatem felicem stantibus maenibus
mentibus mo^ibus, Ang de civitate (...) libro 2. c. 19. cap. (...)
that Common wealth is not happy whose manners are destroyed: In caelesti
nepublica Dei voluntas lex est, in an holy Common wealth, the will of God is
the Law unto which all the members of a Commonwealth must consent, Ut ex sonis
harmonia in musica, sic ex summis mediis and infinis concordia in republica, As
harmony in Music is made of diverse sounds, so is a Commonwealth made of the
concord of three states: The differences that arise between the Prince and
people must be brought to concord by the third: and therefore Aristotle says,
Arist. eth. 8 c. 11. (...).
as large as any society is, so large is friendship; and Kekerman, Amicitia
simpliciter necessaria ad vivendum, men cannot live without friendship. Ier.
29.7. Seek the peace of the City, whither I have sent you captive: pray for
it, for in the peace of it ye shall have peace: Kek. lib. 1. c. 3.
And Psalm 122.6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that
love thee: and this is the order that God has set in nature, that Gods Laws
should be above all humane. Those that are public above private, that which
does simply respect that which is honest before the public good: You see men
must prefer the public good before the private good; because every man's own
particular safety is lapped up in the public peace; but men must prefer
God, and truth or honesty, before themselves: but you may see that this is more
then an ordinary degree of moral virtue, to have an heroic and public
spirit: Men naturally when they have power, seek themselves: that is a divine
and her ick resolution, when they that have power in their hands, shall use
such moderation, as not to make any use of it to their own ends, and opression
of the public. When every part of the kingdom may have their due, then
certainly the sword is in a good hand: But this is and has been very rare,
when heret^^ore the flatterers at Court did persuade his Majes^y that all power
was in his hands, though indeed the orderly and just use of the Sword, was to
be exercised by and under the Courts of justice; yet in those times the
Courtiers did persuade his Majesty, to carry too strict a handover his
Commoners, and not suffer them to plead their privileges and liberties, as in
justice and equity they should have been permitted; and therefore God was
pleased for a time, to let his Majesty see that it was in his power wholly to
have wrested the Sword out of his hand: then there was an opinion passessed the
Commons, that they had gotten the Sword: And now again it comes into
confideration, whether they were not over strict in keeping the King and Lords
from pleading their rights in a peaceable and friendly way.

I humbly and heartily wish that the Houses would both agree to settle the
power and privileges of Parliament, in such a friendly way as may conduce to
peace, that no part wight make use of their power and interest of the people,
to assume to them more then of right does belong to them, to the prejudice of
the other pa^ty; power is a most uncertain thing, where it is not regulated by
wisdom and Law; that some course may be taken for the punishment of all
delinquent subjects, of what rank soever; and accordingly it might be
regularly administered: a course is plain, which way a Lord way be punished by
way of impeachment; but which way a Commoner of criminal, is not yet cle^re,
which I am confident has given this boldness to the Army to break out in this
extraordinary way. And now I shall take the boldness to inform your Lordships
a word or two touching this strange accident that has lately happened from the
Army: First, I say they are the rod of God, which is nothing to the justice or
unjustice of their proceedings, and that so far as they shall desire, that
course may be taken that the proceedings of Parliament may be put in a form of
justice, that may afford a speeay trial of such Members of the House of
Commons as shall be criminal, that may have a facile and speedy progress and
determination before competent Judges. And I hope the Army will be content to
inform what they can in a judicial way, against these Members they complain
off, and not desire that any judgment of suspension or otherwise, may be
passed against them, without trial: They profess themselves just men, I hope
therefore their demands, as somewhat the more large for that they saw no way
open for their trial, and for that none have yet been punished: which if the
way were opened, not only they would be content to walk in the common path,
and others that deserve it, may be punished as well as they; the Members
themselves made more wary, the people receive satisfaction, and a loving peace
confirmed, Which God grant.

Your Lorships Servant, William Hussy.

PSALM 2.10. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, be learned, ye that be
Judges of the Earth: serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice to him with
reverence.


I Shall not trouble your Lordships with any further preamble then what will
make for the argument of the Text, wherein I shall desire to sustain the
person, and perform the duty of a Steward of the manifold graces of God,
declaring the mind of God, not in the enticing words of man's wisdom, but
demonstration of the spirit in the word: not like the Scribes, but as one that
has received Authority from God, whose wisdom can shine through the weakest
instruments upon a believing heart.

This Psalm may be divided into 4 parts; a Prophecy that Nations and
Kingdoms shall set themselves against God and Christ in the three first verses.

2. A consolation to the Saints against the fury of them that go about to
overthrow the Kingdom of Christ, beginning at the fourth verse, unto the words
of my Text.

3. A charge given to the Kings and Judges of the earth, how they should behave
themselves in the words of my Text in the 11 verse, and beginning of the 12.

Lastly, an Argument to persuade Kings and Judges of the earth to look to the
charge.

Diverse Interpretersdoe uphold the literal sense of David and his Kingdom;
but so many great things are spoken of this Kingdom that is set upon the holy
hill of Sion, that they are enforced to acknowledge that the principal scope
of the words are verified in the Kingdom of Christ, whereof David's Kingdom
was a Type.

In the first part the Prophet sets down the enmity that Kings and Rulers
bear against Christ, their consultation is to shake off his Dominion.

Note earthly minded Rulers cannot easily bear the Dominion of Christ.

In the second part, God will laugh them to scorn, disappoint and frustrate
their consultations, break them with a r^d of iron, and dash them in pieces
like a Petters vessel.

Note the vanity of their consultation, and peril (...) their persons.

In my Text ye have a remedy, be wise now ye Kings be learned ye that be
Judges of the Earth.

Note that wisdom of Kings, and learning of Judges is the means to deliver a
Kingdom from destruction.

In the last, the inevitable danger that shall fall on them that use not this
remedy, if his wrath be kindled but a little, they must needs be in a sad
condition, no way to escape but by trusting in him.

Note, no power of man can withstand his displeasure.

The words may admit of a general division into three parts, circumstances,
persons, charge.

1. The (...) words that signify with others, and these are three.

The two first in this one word now.

The latter in these two words O ye.

The word now (...) does not only signify the time, but also an inference or
reason; Lorin. nunc habe^ uns illa^ro^^.
now is as much as to say seeing it is so as it is, seeing there is such power
in Christ as there is to dash you in pieces, let this be a motive, be wise
therefore, and do not anger him, this is plainly seen in that speech of God
to Moses repeated by Stephen, I have seen the affliction of my people, Act.
7.34.
and have heard their groaning, and am come down to deliver them, and now come
and I will send thee, that is therefore I will send thee at this time: the
Translators therefore have well translated it, now therefore, wherein are
contained the circumstance of time, and the reason.

The third circumstance is the exclamation, O ye

2. The persons are Kings, and Judges of the earth.

3. The charge it self, and that is, first singly to Kings, be wise. 2. Singly
to Judges, be learned. 3. Jointly to them both, serve the Lord in fear,
rejoice to him with reverence. I shall handle the persons, and part of the
charge distinctly, and interweave the circumstances as they shall make for the
sense of the words.

The persons are Kings, and Judges, who are here charged with the reparation
and avoiding the danger that may fall upon them that consult against God and
Christ. In the beginning of the Psalm they that consult against Christ are a
full Parliament exclusoclero; nay many Parliaments, many Nations, because many
Kings: now no Nation can have any more then one King, by the unity of whose
person wiser times did provide against faction and division, which I conceive
to be the iron rod whereby Christ will destroy them that rise up against him,
they shall fall one upon another, and dash themselves in pieces, no peace so
firm as that which comes from the Gospel of peace.

The parts of a Parliament are here express, (...) the People, (...) Rulers,
(...) Kings, but the charge of Reformation laid on Kings, and Judges (...).

The Doctrine, Doct.
when Kings, Rulers, and People, when Nations make Laws against God and
Christ, the Reformation is laid upon Kings, and Judges.

I shall first explane the words, then prove the Doctrine, and lastly make
Application.

It may be doubtful whether this be a figure called Hendiades, where the same
person or things are set down under diverse appellatives, 1 Samuel 8.^0.
the same persons may be Kings and Judges, the Israelits desire a King to judge
them, and fight their battles, though especially in hereditary Kingdoms, Laws
have provided Judges to judge for them, and in Parliaments, Nobles to judge
with them, to provide for defects of minority and education that they may with
the more honor and state enjoy the pleasure, and undergo the burden of
Government; and in war they provide Generals to eschew the hazard and danger
of their persons; yet the judgments of peace, and leading in war do belong to
the duty of a King, for the preservation of his Country, and good of his
Subjects, and therefore Kings and Judges may possibly be the same persons.

2. Kings and Judges may be several persons of several States, such Judges as
were before the Kings in Israel, and these were all one in the office and duty
of their place, they were chief Governors both in peace and war, differing
from Kings in Pomp and State, not in Power and Government.

3. They might be several persons of the same States, for that seldom
several Kings and Nobles met together in one consultation; but because many of
these consultations might agree in this that they were against God and Christ:
Therefore it is said Kings, and N^bles, and People were gathered against God
and Christ, for if all the Nations were against Christ, yet they could not be
said to consult unless they met and advised one with another.

2. It must be considered what kind of Judges these were, whether superior or
subordinate Judges.

I conceive they were superior Judges joined with the Kings in judicature.

There are diverse sorts of Nobles spoken of in the Scriptures. First, Nobles,
Court Princes, such as are called Princes of the Bakers, and Princes of
Solomon's work, Genesis 40 2. 1 King. 9.22.
his buildings and provisions for his house these are called (...) 2. (...)
which in the second verse of this Psalm, Pagnin.
are translated Rulers, such as had the next degree to the Kings chief
Councillors of State, Comites Imperii Barons, Lafords Thanes men of valor
and judgment, Pillars of the Crown, whose duty was to preserve the King both
in peace and war, from miscariages, and dishonor by punishing them in
judgment that shall misguide the King, or act any thing against Law, by any
surreptitious Warrants or Commissions from his Majesty, or transgress their
lawful Commissions to the wrong and injury of the people; these had a
principal hand in the making of Laws, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree
Justice, Prove 8.15. (...)
these are the men that were mentioned in the second verse, but in the words of
my Text they are called (...) Judges, and therefore it may be doubtful whether
they be the same men which did consult in the second verse, which are here
charged in the words of my Text; but I conceive they were the same for these
reasons.

1. Because (...) may be ascribed to the highest Judges in the world, to
absolute Princes, to Moses, Exodus 18.16. to God himself, Genesis 18.25. and that
is to let us understand that these chief Rulers that consulted with the Kings
had a place of judicature, that if any thing escape them in consultation, that
might be mended in judicature.

2. Those Rulers that were mentioned in the second verse, were guilty of the
crime which is here charged to be amended; and therefore it is most rational
they should be called to repentance.

3. If Kings, Rulers, and People should once join together and make a Law
against God and Christ, it were an hard matter for an inferior Judge to amend
it. It is true they may Judge against it, but it would be carried on by the
appeal, unless it be reformed in the suprcame Court, where the error first
began, and so the wrath of God remain unappeased. Thus you see who these Kings
and Judges were in all probability, they were several Kings of several
Nations, consulting with their own Nobles, and People against God and Christ,
that are here called upon to repent of their wicked Decrees, and Laws that
they had made against him, so that my Doctrine does now appear under this
form of words.

If any thing does slip in consultation with public consent of Kings, Nobles,
and People against God and Christ, the charge does lie upon Kings and Judges to
amend it.

But here arise three scruples how it should come to pass that when Kings,
Object.
Rulers, and People were guilty, the Kings, and Rulers are called to
repentance, and the people left out, what will God be content to spare a Nation
if Kings and Rulers repent, though the people go on still in their iniquity.

I answer in respect of temporal punishment: Ans.
It may be sometimes he will: if God would spare Sodom for ten; why may he not
spare a people for their Kings and Rulers? If he will plague Israel for David's
numbering the people; why may he not save a people as he did for Moses sake? but
always he does it not. The reformation of Kings and Nobles is a great means
to reform the people; but if notwithstanding their Reformation the people
remain wilful, their judgment does often fall the more heavy even in this
life as may appear. 2 Kiv. 23.25 26.
Josiah a most pious and holy Prince, yet God reserved evil to bring upon the
Jew^s for that they did not reform.

The Prophet renders a reason. Ier. 3.10
Her treacherous sister Judah did not turn to me with all her heart, but
fainedly. Josiah caused them to turn in show, but it was in hypocrisy, though
their hypocrisy was none of Josiahs fault, but their own.

2. But here arises yet a second scruple, how it should be in the power of
Kings and Nobles to amend that which is done amiss^ by Kings, Nobles, and
people, is it in their power not to put that in execution which is made into a
Law? Yes if against God and Christ, if against the Law of God, Gods Laws have
the force of an universal Law unto which humane positive Laws must give way,
lex particularis cedit universali, man's Law is void, Doctor and Student.
if against Gods Law.

3. But here will be a breach between these that shall so judge the King, and
Nobles, and the people, Object.
if that be adjudged against the Law of God, which is newly received for an
humane Law; and therefore this does put Kings and Nobles into streights; Ans.
This must not be carried with an high hand as an act of power, but prudently
as an act of wisdom, so as God may not be provoked, and dash you all in
pieces, nor the people neglected in the particular Covenant made with them.

They must wisely use means to revoke such Laws as are made against God and
Christ: Yet by their wise and learned carriage give the people satisfaction.
This charge of bearing the Laws, the yoke, and bonds of Christ is laid on
Kings and Judges for four reasons.

1. Because they of all men are most inclinable to shake off the yoke of
Christ; Fabritius exhortatio ^llurecipue necessaria qus gradu and pot^ntia
inter honines em^nent non sacile se jugo Christ's submittunt leges sibt
prescribs ^nviti patiuntur. Martinius chstat fastus us volunt emperitivideri
quibu, opus est institutione ill^ quamvis de officio ^^format^onem eminentie
suae authoritatis deformationem interpretantur.
great ones never think themselves great enough unless they be absolute,
unless they may act so as if they had no superior to whom they must give an
account. That exhortation does principally belong to them that are in
Authority, because they do not easily submit to the yoke of Christ, they are
unwilling to have any Laws given them; and the other Author Pride will not
suffer them to receive any instruction, because they will not seem to be so
unskilful as to need instruction, they think any information a stain to
their Authority.

Such opposition against God and Christ has been found in all Ages from great
ones.

Pharaoh, Exodus 5 2. 2 King. 8 33
who is the Lord that I should hear his voice? Zenacherib, has any of the
Gods of the Nations delivered his people ont my hands? Ie^. 2.3.
we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee.

Therefore does the Lord cry out upon Kings, and Princes, and Judges of the
earth, that they should have special care to submit to the Government of
Christ: exclamations are used in plain matters, and matters of great weight:
It is no small matter for Kings, and Nobles to shake off the bonds of
subjection to God and Christ; Vossiu^in minuu and cont-oversis (...)
ex^a^^tio^e p^^^ rile and s^igidum.
look to it Kings, and Nobles, Kings, and Judges, have a care of your charge,
or ye will be broken in pieces, ye will provoke the Lord to anger, and all
your purposes frustrated, and your persons destroyed, you have a great
inclination to forget me in regard of your greatness; therefore I charge you
to beware.

2. Reason, God has committed the care of his people to them that they should
seek their good, he is the instrument of God for thy good, Romans 13.4.
God does not so set Kings and Princes over his people as to have no care of
them himself: But he commits his people to them, so that he looks to them
himself; he gives them their charge, and takes account of them because their
inferiors cannot do it so easily; God does charge the King himself, Deuteronomy.
17.18.
to have a care that he write him a book of the Law. He takes account of the
Princes of the wrong done to his peaple. Esaias. 3.14, 15.
The Lord will enter into judgment with the Ancients, and Princes for the
wrong done to his people, for ye have eaten up the Vineyard, and the spoil
of the poor is in your houses. What mean you that ye beat my people to
pieces, and grind the faces of the poor, do you think I will take no
account of this, will you be broken in pieces with the iron rod? It belongs
to God as supreme to redress all the abuses of the most absolute Princes and
Magistrates on the earth. Appeals come to him like the cry: that came from
Sodom, no miscarriages shall escape him. 2 Cron. 16^.
The eyes of the Lord run too and fro, throughout the whole earth, to show
himself strong in the behalf of him, whose heart is perfect toward him: And
therefore does the Prophet David appeal to God. Psalm 82.8.
Arise, O God, and judge thou the earth, if men will not, the Lord of Hoasts
will, his Hoasts shall.

3. God does especially, charge Princes with their duty of subjection, because
they have a great influence upon the people, 2 King. 10.31.
especially to evil Jereboam the Son of Nebat made Israel to sin; if Princes,
Kings, and Judges be wicked, they shall not want instruments to forward their
wickedness: 2 Cron. 21.3.6. and 4.
If David will have the people numbered, Joab will act it though against
conscience, he said, why will the King be a cause of trespass, and in 6 verse,
the Kings word was abominable to Joab; yet in 4 verse, the Kings word
prevailed with Joab. Dan. 3.
If Nebuchadnezzar set up a Golden Image, none are found that withst and it,
but Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, Esaias. 9.16.
the leaders of this people cause them to err, and they that are led by them
are destroyed. Therefore God charge Kings with their duty for the safety of
his people.

4. If sins be committed as long as Kings, and Princes execute judgment, the
wrath of God is appeased toward that Nation: Numb. 35.33.
Blood defiles the Land, and it cannot be purged but by the hand of him that
flew.

Phinehas has turned my wrath away from the Children of Israel; Numb 25.11.
then stood up Phinchas and executed judgment and so the plague ceased. Psalm.
106.36.


Iethro saw Moses sitting in judgment alone, Exodus 18.17.
he was plain with him, and told him the thiug was not good, and advised him
to take help, or else he must needs tire out himself, and the people.

Again in stilling the rage of the people, the assistance of Nobles has been
always needful, Kings desiring all power into their own hands make
themselves unable to keep their own Courts from oppressing their Subjects, or
content their people, by means whereof people have often been enraged against
their Governors. Numb. 11 1^.
Moses complained to God that the people murmured against him, that he was not
able to bear their murmurings, and of the danger he was in, desiring God to
kill him that he might not see his wretchedness; that is, that the people
might not fall upon him in a m^^^rable manner and destroy him: D^^ dat.
For the remedy of which evil the Lord prescribes this, verse 16.
gather together seventy men of the Elders of the people whom thou know to
be Elders, and Officers over them, and bring them to the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and they shall stand there with thee, these were the Officers
that the Lord appointed to assist Moses in time to come against the rebelli^
the people, these Moses must gather togather in the great Counsel: where ye
may see of what number and sort of men these must be, they must be seventy a
set number, not too many for fear of diffention, not too few for fear of
partiality, ye may further see what manner of men they must be, Officers over
the people before they were called to the great Counsel, (...) Icrom.
Jerome calls them prafectos qui docerent ves singula, and the Septuagint
(...), Magistres Indicibus vestris, Masters of your Judges.

Implying that these that sat in this high Counsel to help Moses against the
commotions of the people, must be high in the peoples estimation, and must have
the power of the sword in their own hands, in their several Tribes whereby
they might execute their judgments and by their authority stop the rage of the
people.

Without power all judgments were fruitless and void, Tollet de cas (...),
lib 5. cap 56. J^d^n habeat petellatem, (...) formam vi^^. Judge Dodrig^ ^itle.
Earl^.
to what end were judgments if the Judges had not power to put their judgment
into execution? and therefore in this Kingdom had Earls the third part of
their Counties to make them high in the eyes of the people; they were great
Commanders, c^^es, and c^^itatus were relatives, every County h^d an Earl and
no more, and Barons had their Baronies, honorable revenue and command, whereby
they might assist the King, defend their Country, and do the people justice:
honor without command in war, and judicature in peace is useless, Esaias. 3 3.4.
and a scorn, whereas men whose faces are lifted up above the people, are as
necessary for a Commonwealth as bread and water. Honorable men unto whom the
people may have recourse in case of imminent danger to be a stay unto them, who
meeting in a public Counsel may carry all things for the public good: ye
may see what service David did to Saul against the Philistines, and what his
Worthies did for him, (...) 58.5.
in his wars against the house of Saul: ye may see what power the Nobles had
in the days of Zedekiah unto whom the King did confess the King is not ^e
that can do any thing without you.

To make a man great in war, that is not great in peace, is dangerous, unless
virtue sway, he will love the greatness of his condition too well, he that is as
great in peace as in war, will easily change his troublesome and dangerous
estate for rest and safety.

a^ will dash you all to p^eces, (...). 48.2
the Lord is the Lord of Hosts, a name that (...) has put upon himself, Esaias.
47.4. Ie^^va ex^r^iti^^ ^o^en ^p^s, the great n^me of God, Esaias. 4^ ^ Esaias. ^^
^.
all Hosts are his rod, wicked ones, holy ones, just or unjust, ^orra^e,
intestine, legal or rebell^^^s, they are all his; he punishes offenders by
them all, what power we have that we conceive our safety, that party that
conceive they have the power of the sword, strength in their own hands, they
think they may do what they will, but they are mightily deceived, they that
have all power to day, may have none to morrow, the Lord is the Lord of Hosts
(...) s^pientia est sui destructiva, force without wisdom will destroy it
self. Esaias. 3^^.
Therefore Rabsak^h joyneth counsel and strength together, and Aristotle
wisdom, riches and power, and descanteth that upon them; men think they have
quickly wisdom enough, but power and riches never enough, whereas too much
either of riches or power is troublesome, or at least unprofitable: But a man
can never have too much wisdom. That power we think we have we cannot
claim as ou^ own, it is Gods right, strength is in the Host whereof God is
the Lord, P^a. 4.28.
In the multitude of people is the Kings honor, but the want of the people is
the destruction of the Prince; it is the Lord that has hearts of people in his
hand, he makes them subject to their Governors, and mooveth them against
their Rulers, he uniteth and divides them in Court, in Council, in field:
when he has a purpose to dash them one against another, he does divide them;
Ier. 13.1^.14
I will fill all the Inhabitants of the Land, the Kings that sit upon David's
Throne, and the Priests and the Prophets, and all the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
with drunkenness. And I will dash them one against another, even the Fathers
and the Sons together, says the Lord: I will pity nor spare, nor have mercy,
but destroy them. He can make such divisions that no unity of interest, of
condition, of affinity, or consaguity can prevent, he can divide Kings and
Subjects, Subjects and Subjects, Kings and Lords, Kings and Commons, Lords and
Commons, Lords and Lords, Commons and Commons, Father and Son, Brother and
Brother: where still note that the nearer the conjunction the more dangerous
the discord. That some differences should arise among the people, is not
wonderful, the ordinary course of justice does heal them, that some
greivances should arise between the King and the Commons is not strange, it is
the business of a Parliament to redress them: Then my Lords had you a call
from God by the duties of your places, to have been the instruments of unity,
then should you have made use of your learning to have reconciled them, then
you had use for Divinity, Law, Policy, Instice, Power, a little of all these
in your hands would have set all things right, if ye and the King had then
been tied together with the bonds of Christ, ye might have ruled him, and
contented the people. But instead of reconciling the difference between them,
ye also fell at odds among your selves: Parliaments do expect some
difference, the first work the Commons use to do is to represent their
greivances unto your Lordships, from whom by the very intendment of the Law
they do expect redress. You by your places as Counselors to the King, and
Judges of the people having power over both, should have acted the parts of
good reconcilers; but this iron rod of Gods displeasure fell on you also, the
very Physician had got the plague. You likewise were divided among your selves:
I blame you not, I rather pity you, your power was broken by the iucroachment
of former Princes, you were defrauded of your learning here required, by
discontinuance of Parliaments; your education and honor among the people by
Courtship: Kings and Commons have heretofore joined together to break the
power of Lords, and now they fall out, the Lords have not power to help them.

And now I take up the (...) of my Text as applicable to this purpose, where I
crave leave to speak to your Lordshippes in the language of my Text.

It had been very good, that the King, and your Lordships had always been
wise and learned enough to have been always under the yoke of Christ, Psalm
72. from 1. to 15.
never to have consulted any thing against God and Christ, Match. Pranespag. 36.
never to have departed any thing from the ways of God and Christ, the ways
of judgment and justice, I mean which are his ways. That Turkish, cutlandish
distinction found in Machiavil of civilis and soluta potentia which is power
above Law, and by Law, had not been misconstrued, and made use of upon all
occasions in the Kings name at Court in former times: I wish it had been the
manner of our Kings always to have ruled by the positive Laws as far as the
justice of them would any ways extend, and when any thing of unjustice did
fall upon the letter of the positive Law that should be reformed by the Law of
God, and the universal Law of nature, that had not been done by a cabinet
Council, but a Council of State in Parliament: but that time is past, many
things have been done by prerogative above Law, I will not say any thing has
been consulted by King, Lords, and Commons against Christ; I fear some things
have been done with or without public consent that should not, I judge by
the event as every good Christian should when God is displeased: Yet now if
King and Lords would be wise and learned, ye might turn away the wrath of
God, and keeping off the iron rod from da shing you all in perces, if not, it
is to be feared the iron rod is in the fire to take a new hardening.

The division that has been hitherto, has on both parts been grounded on
verum and very simile, the King on the one part, the Parliament on the other,
one for prerogative, the other for right and interest, both pleading Law: the
King pretending all ought to follow him, the Parliament them, and all by Laws,
take heed of a subdivision among you, where no party does or can pretend Law,
for by the same reason God may justly bring a subdivision among you, until ye
come to utter destruction; for let any wise man consider when wars will cease,
if the victorious party shall set up new Principles, and make new Quarrels:
you have fought for liberty and common right according to the Laws of the
Kingdom, if your victories set you upon higher points, and ye will have all
the Laws of the Kingdom altered pro Imperio, while the sword is in your hand,
this is certainly a new cause, and if it should breed a new quarrel (which God
forbid) remember I pray you the iron rod is in the hand of Christ, and not
yours, God is the Lord of Hosts, and you shall see it if ye have much
experience in war, that God which has owned your cause that was without
controversy just, if ye raise a new quarrel upon a new cause, upon grounds
not known and stated in the world, may desert you in your new cause: it was
not the wisdom of the Parliament, but the justice of the cause, and the hand
of God that has helped you hitherto, you know not what help the color and
opinion of law did you in your cause, if once a war should arise without any
color of Law: if Machievills principle concerning the power of Kings should be
drawn down to the people, that they had power without Law, that, as it were
less regular, so it would be more cruel; neither the Authority of the King
nor of the Parliament would shelter any, but all would be dashed in pieces with
this iron rod; Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, be learned ye that be judges
of the earth; wisdom is of special use (in consultations) for Kings and
Lords, the greatest honor to them in the world is so to deliberate in their
public meetings, that they may have cause to rejoice in the wisdom and
justice of their consultations; to vote one thing to day, another thing to
morrow, is an argument of the greatest weakness in the world; yet if the
weakness be in the former it must be amended by a wiser, better to be wise now,
then never: I will not lay the supposition of my Text upon your Lordships; I
will not say ye have consulted any thing against Christ, but the counsel of
my Text, I will, and that in the words of Fabritins and Musoulus: * Fabritius,
si sorce quid finistre tentaverint adver sus Christum and Regnum ejus patient^r
tunc se, evecari ab errore and pirversis institutu s^^, (and paulo ante) sibi
caveam a temerariis, consiliis, and mo ititionibus contra Christum and
Regnumejus, ut eruditio^em and cast gationem admittant ex verbo Dei. Musculus
in locam, and nunc inquit cum Regnum Chris^^ ad hunc modum comparatum sit, nt
non solum impossibtle sit quod conamim, sed vobit exittosum etiamsihactenus
desipuisti tamen vel nune taadem nisi perirejuvat mutata sententia rescipiscite
etc. Nam alioqui quod putatu vos reguis vestris per id consulere quod Christo
domino repubnatis owniu^^ est stule^ssimum.
If Kings and Judges of the earth at any time have attempted any thing against
God and Christ, they would suffer themselves to be called back from their
error and perverse purposes [and before] that they would take care of rash
Counsels and endeavors against Christ and his Kingdom, that ye admit of
instruction and reproof from the word of God, Musculus: And seeing the
Kingdom of Christ is so ordered, that it is not only unpossible that ye
intend against it, but it is deadly to your selves, although you have hitherto
been unwise; yet now at last repent, unless you will perish, for it is the
foolishest thing in the world to think ye shall settle your own Kingdoms by
destroying his.

But lest some may raise a ground for inconstancy or departing from
deliberative consultations, which in plain terms is to vote one thing, and
do another, or to be unconstant in your votes^, because the Psalmist does
charge Kings and Judges to be wise, now after they had voted and consulted,
Kings, Nobles, and People and were all agreed. My Text affords no further
warrant for change, but when ye have voted against God and Christ, then indeed
it is high time to unvote that again; the Holy Ghost does not call upon them
after consultation to be wise without cause, and so I come to the second
circumstance: therefore certainly it is an unwise thing to change a vote
without cause, my Text which is the Commission by which I preach at this time,
does require you to be wise after consultation, when ye have consulted any
thing against Christ, therefore because it is against Christ, ye may have other
causes to alter a vote sometime, but I have Commission from God to charge you
with alteration in this case. And let me tell you to alter any thing is a
weakness either in the act of alteration, or in the thing that is amended; if
without cause, it is folly, if for a wicked cause, it is abominable; If ye have
at any time voted any thing for Gods glory, and public good, to alter that
for a friend, is abominable.

I have yet another use of information for your Lordships, which is personal
and, therefore belonging to this point. That even Kings and Princes, Kings and
Judges of the earth, in the places, of Kings and Judges of the earth must be
under the bounds and rules of Christ's Kingdom; or otherwise why should the
Psalmist have an especial eye on the^ in the establishing of Christ's Kingdom;
you see God does call upon Kings and Judges of the earth, and that because he
has set up the Kingdom of Christ upon Mount Sion: some refer all this honor
required to the Kingdom of Christ, unto the times after the calling of the
Jews. I willingly grant that the glory of Christ's Kingdom shall be more
conspicuous after that then before; Romans 31.12.
if the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the deminishing of them be
the riches of the Gentiles, how much more shall their fullness? But God has
given Christ all power both in Heaven and Earth already, Mat. 28 18.
even over all the Kingdoms of the earth, even from the time of his
resurrection, Ephe 1.
when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
beavenly places, far above all Principallity, and power, unto the end of 22
verse, therefore does God here command Kings to kiss the' Sun. [That is a note
of subjectio^ to the Son of God] threaten them with the iron rod, charge them
with care not to offend his Son; if Kings had nothing to do in the Church of
God, they might plead against this charge; we know we are thy Creatures, and
therefore we are subject to thee as God, and the son as the second Person in
the Trinity, but as thou have set him upon the holy hill of Sion, as he is the
head of the Church, so his iron rod is nothing else but the censure of the
Church; we may give some respect to it as Christians, but as Kings we shall
be bold to call them in question that use it, if they be too bold with it.

Again, it may be wondered at, why when the Kingdom of Christ was set up, the
Prophet did give no charge to the Bishops or Presbyters, that he had not said
be wise now O ye Bishops, O ye Presbyters, and Elders of the Church, but Kings
and Judges of the earth, putting no difference between the Church, and the
earth; certainly our Expositors did find this want, and therefore Brentius
says, you see by these verses, Vides autem ex hu v^rsiculu non tantum
E^^scoperum sed etiam regum and prin^ipum offierum offe us cogn^^e^nt ^e vera
Doctrinita Ecclelia C^r^sts, and ^urent ut tantum; privatimapp p^etatem
sectentor, sed etiam at populus Deumrecte colat. Doway notes.
that it is not only the duty of Bishops, but also of Kings and Princes, that
they know true Doctrine in the Church of Christ, and have a care not only that
they privately follow piety, but that the people also worship God aright; you
see he brings in Bishops, not by the Authority of this Text, yet by the Text
he is enforced to charge the care of the Doctrine of the Church upon Kings and
Judges: and the Doway notes on this Psalm say Christian Kings are instructed
to know, that it is the duty of Kings to defend the Church against Hereriques,
and after it is the property of Apostates to favor Heretics, to nourish
dissension, to overthrow the Church: Note cherishing Heresy is to maintain
discention, that is a plot upon the Church will overthrow the Church, let the
Commonwealth look to her self, it shall not wholly escape.

But I must but give you a taste of this point; if I should enter into the
polemicall part of it, I should defraud you of the charge, which is the
substance of the Text; I come therefore to the charge, which is, first, to
Kings, be wise, secondly, to Juoges, be learued.

And first of the charge to Kings is intelligite, not sapite, (...)
now this intelligite is understand Principles, that is, such truths that all
men (being proposed) would consent to, and embrace, if not by ased by lust; but
this may seem too natural, and not any moral virtue, nor properly the matter
of an exhortation; men do not use to charge men to be tall or beautiful, or
young, but valiant, and virtuous, which have influence upon the will. Butidor
(...).c, 11.
This the learned Moralists do thus determine, that to know and consent to
such truth as men by nature can easily grant, is no virtue, but to know them so
as to adheare to them without fear against all sophistications, and
temptations, that can be brought to the contrary; that is a virtue when by the
actual understanding of known truths, the mind of man is caused to adhear
firmly to indemonstrable principles, such as no rational man can deny in
nature, nor Christian in Christianity: and thus much Pagnin does affirm of the
Original word translated here intelligite, firmly adheare to know Principles
of justice and truth: such a carriage as this in a King is enough for the duty
of a King to enable him by the help of his Lords to redresle all former
miscarriages; so as the Lords be such as they should be: Kings ye see are
required to understand, that cannot be meant of the natural power to
understand, a man may know his Masters will: and not do it, this makes him
the worse, and his masters will never a whit the better done, but it must be
understood of the intellect which is a moral virtue firmly to adheare to
known and agreed on truths, to love truth because truth, and stand firm to
that without respect of persons, or to their own honors; thus you see the
general nature of that intellect here spoken of: But as it is required of
Kings, and as it stands in this Argument, be wise now therefore O ye Kings,
because that God has set his King upon his holy Hill of Sion; because he is of
that power that he can dash all the Nations of the earth in pieces with a rod
of iron, when he is displeased with the; therefore be wise, which is no more but
understand your own condition in reference to Christ; you must take your
selves for his s^aves, as bound with his cords, which is the description of a
slave, to be whloly at the will and pleasure of another, not in any such
condition, as if any thing of your own will or liberty might concur in the
things of God, they must know that Christ is their Master, and they must make
it the end of all their Government, to serve Christ of all their consultations,
to please him, and do that which may advance his Kingdom, and not add any
thing of their own to the service of Christ, nor seek their own advancement
by Religion, but Christ's, and this does planely appear to be the sense of the
words in this Argument. For the Holy Ghost does lay down this in the premises
that Kings, and Nobles, and People wereall in a rage, they conceived that God
and Christ did restrain them of their liberties, take away the honor of the
Kings power, of the Nobles privilege, of the People in that they might not
have the settlement of their Religion as they pleased for God and Christ but
they would bind them up, and restrain them from making Laws against them;
here is a quarrel picked with God and Christ, wherein God tells them how
they are like to speed if they look not to it, Christ is their King, nay he
is Gods King, and their Master, they are not his Subjects only, but his
servants: Therefore seeing the power of Christ is so absolute over the Sons of
men, the advice to Kings is to understand their own condition in reference to
Christ; If any strive with Christ for prerogative, it is likely to be Kings,
many Kings have usurped such power over the people of God as is due only to
Christ; nay few men of power have rightly understood their own condition in
reference to Christ, which thing is here required of Kings, least they be
broken in pieces.

That Kings and all such as act as Kings in the execution of humane Law, Doct.
must understand what their own condition is in respect of Christ, and act
according to that understanding: That is, they must firmly adheare to this as
an undeniable principle, that they must receive the Gospel as the commands of
Christ; so as Christ does require them without any limitations, restraints, or
circumstances arising from their own wills.

Now for the rule of our understanding, the principles of Christianity are
contained in the word of God by which we must regulate all our knowledge as it
is speculative, Thomas Aquin. 22.47 6. (...) habet in operabilibus, sicut
princeptum in speculativis.
what Principles are to our understanding that ought to be our end in practice;
so we must make it the end of all our actions to walk by Principles contained
in the word of God; what is grounded on the word of God, that we must firmly
adheare to; in matters of Religion we must take all argumments that are against
Scripture from nature, bonum publicum, advancement of the Gentry, freedom of
the Subject, honor of the Lords, prerogative of the King, to be the
sophistications I told you of, against which Kings ought to confirm themselves
by continual meditation on the word of God, and actual consideration of of
their own condition in respect of Christ.

Reasons, why Kings and such as act by supreme Authority must know that Christ
is their King, as indeed he is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6 15.
and act as his Subjects; Nay their Lord, and they must obey his commands as
coming from his will without any concurrence of our wills, are three.

First, the commands of Christ have the sanction or penalty of eternal
condemnation annexed to them that shall be inflicted on the transgressors which
no power on earth can resist; the power and strength of any Authority is in the
sanction where men can ratify commands with small penalties the transgression
is less terrible, and the command less absolute; therefore is the power of a
King nothing in comparrison of Christ's. Fear not him that can kill the body,
Luke 12.4.
and after that has no more that he can do; but Christ can do more, he can
render vengeance in flaming fire on them that know not God, and obey not the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 These 1.8.9.
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord: See men must obey the Gospel of God, or suffer eternal punishments, and
this reaches to Kings as well as others; this Gospel must be obeyed, it is
the command of Christ, Mat. 28 ^0.
go teach whatsoever I command you.

Secondly, Kings must know themselves absolutely under the commands of Christ,
because he can execute his own Laws by his own power, if he could not
execute his Laws without the consent of Kings, then their consent were
necessary; but he does not govern as the Kings of the earth do by a
consenting party, having no natural, but moral power over their wills, they
can incline them by acts of love, and with the help of the consenting party
move the dissenting by acts of terror: Pro. 14.28.
In the multitude of the people is the Kings honor, his power is naturally
resident in their persons, politiquely in their union that is kept and
preserved by Laws, prudentially by his virtuous adhearing and acting by those
Laws. But God and Christ that sits at the right hand of God, rules by his
own power, as in the same argument it does appear: the Psalmist does not say
he will bring Angels from Heaven, though a few of them would quell all the
power on earth; but the Son shall do it himself with the rod of iron in his
own hand, and the Prophet tells us his own arm shall rule for him: Esaias.
40.10.
God can work upon the hearts of men, physice immediately upon the will, and
make them that work deceitfully do his work; Ier. 48 10.
they that do the work of God deceitfully, shall have a curse for their
labor, but the work shall be done though they think not so, God makes them
act what they mean not, Esaias. 10 7.
yea, contrary to their meaning.

Thirdly, Kings must understand their own condition in relation to Christ,
that nothing of their own will must enter into, much less sway their actions
of Religion; if they do sway their Religion by their own wills, their
Religion then is nothing else but policy, and that will make God angry, laugh
them to scorn, disappoint their purposes, and break them in pieces; I told
you before that Christian Practice must make Christian Principles, the ends of
all their actions; they must profess Religion to honor Christ, and not
themselves, to do the mind of Christ, and not their own wills; it is plain,
if once Princes use Religion to other ends, then the glory of God, they
understand not what Religion is, what Christ is, what they are, and then they
may quickly anger him, and ruin themselves, He that sins against God
wrongeth his own soul. Pro. 8 36.
This was Jeroboams Religion when he was newly made King over ten Tribes by
revolt from Rhehoboam. 1 King. 12.27.
It was in commune bonum, for the public good of his Kingdom, that his
people should be kept from going up to Jerusalem to worship, where Rhehoboam
their former Lord (from whom they had revolted) reigned. Jeroboam, said they,
will kill me, and return to their Master; all the world would have judged this
a wise act in Jeroboam; but by this means he changed the sacrifice, and the
Priesthood, which was his ruin. Jeroboam would make Religion stoop to his
honor and safety, and by it displeased God, for which his Posterity was rooted
out. This was Absalons Religion, 2 Samuel 15.7.
he meant to get the Kingdom from his Father; but asked his Father leave to
pay his vow which he had vowed to the Lord in Hebron. You see Absalon sought to
promote himself under the pretense of Religion, and prospered accordingly; but
I come to the Application.

Use of information, that Kings that understand not themselves the servants of
Christ, are mistaken in their intellect, though in respect of the goodness and
kindness of God, we are brethren to Christ is friends, and all favor is
conferred on us; yet must the greatest of the Princes of the earth acknowledge
themselves so under him, that his wrath kindled against them will be their
destruction; that their duty is to respect and honor Christ, and endeavor so
to receive and embrace the government of Christ, as to frame the hearts of
their Subjects to the knowledge and obedience of the Gospel of Christ, ea
respublica est faelix ubiregit Philosophia, says the Philosopher; That
Kingdom and Nation that will not serve thee, Isay. 60.12.
(says the Prophet) shall perish.

Exhortation to Kings, and those that by the duty of their places, ought to
advise the King for his honor, to labor that his Majesty may act according to
these principles, that he might convert those undeniable truths of Gods word
which they cannot deny, unto the ends of his actions; we ought all of us to
look on the public actions of the King, as such, in which all our good is
much concerned: and here I shall crave leave to involve the acceptance of,
and politic use that was m^de of Christian Religion in later times, within
the miscariages of the Kings and Princes, and show that the contempt that Court
and Country had of Religion, and Christ, was the cause of this iron rod that
is here among us, that in consideration thereof, the like may be avoided for
the time to come.

The rise and fountain of all hypocrisy is, when Principles of Christian
Religion are pretended, but they are not made the ends of their actions that
did pretend them.

There was great pretense of honor done to the Clergy in the Court of England:
2 These. 5.13.
were the Bishops so much honored at Court, that Christ might be honored in
them, that Religion might be advanced by them: no such matter, but that they
might be popular Orators to draw over the people to put on the yoke of slavery,
and that has drawn so much envy of the people on them. The Principle
notwithstanding that was pretended, was a good Principle; 1 Ti^. 5.^^.
That he that labored in the Word and Doctrine, is worthy of double honor;
but the honor must be joined to the work, that the work may be done;
certainly it is the duty of Christian Kings and Princes, to use all means
that come to their hands to encourage the choice of men for parts and education
to become Ministers, to make such public provision for Ministers, that men
may by that obtain more honor, more maintenance; by it, then by any other
public profession, for my part I cannot prescribe rules to the wisdom of a
State; if Christ be an absolute King, his Laws must be obeyed: that place of
honor in Timothy mentioned to be given to them that labor in the word, is to
be understood of maintenance, as appears by the argument of the place, thou
shall not muzzell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. Such
private persons as did receive the Gospel in primitive times must make them
that teach them partakers of all their goods, Gal. 6 6^
all good things: such Nations as have received Christ, have made large and
honorable provision for the propogation of the Gospel, besides that of Tithes,
always accounting that too little: God in the old Law provided public
maintenance for his Priests, Cities, and Suburbs, and Sacrifices, and
Oblations, besides the Tithes; and has commanded maintenance to be given to
the Ministers of the Gospel under the name of honor: honor is a public
reward, and can have no public being without honorable maintenance: the
Gospel is sent to Nations, and Nations must receive it, and honor the bringers
of it in a national way; as for that distinction of civil and religions
honor, that is a fancy only to elude the authority of this Text; it is true
there is civil and moral honor, but that is nothing but public and private
honor, the King and State must give public and civil honor or none at all;
so that Kings and States cannot receive the Gospel, unless they honor the
messengers of Christ (according to the command of Christ:) not as beggars and
private men give honor with cap and knee, but with honorable maintenance, and
command that honor be given them from private Subjects: That honor is due to
the worthy is the Law of nature, who are worthy amongst Christians, the Holy
Ghost does declare: they that labor in the word and doctrine; but note that
those which have this honor must be so employed about the work, that the
honor may redound to Christ, they must not seek themselves in it.

But see were the Scriptures searched into, were they interpreted was the
knowledge of God advanced in the the Land, if that maintenance that was
bestowed on Bishops, and spent rather in the port of a Gentleman or Nobleman
had been employed on Schools of Divinity, we need not be beholding to Jesuits
for Comments on the Scriptures, who among many good things whereby they sweeten
their mischief, take all occasions to supplant the truth. But did those
Bishops advance learning and study of Scriptures? I know I shall be cried
down, they did, and outfaced, that learning did flourish to the highest degree
that diligence can bring it. And therefore now no more care to be taken for
learning seeing no better success of it; but havocke may justly be made of all
the provision that our Ancestors have made to encourage Ministers to follow
their books; this is the common cry of the multitude, ye may see what good
learning did in the Bishops time, we must never look for better from it;
therefore down with it; yet this I say, that if the value of but one
Bishopric were bestowed on seven honest and able Divines that might
maintain a School of Divinity, and the Scriptures interpreted by them
according to the best improvement of humane skill, such satisfaction would be
given, that the mouths of those that fill the world with new fancies would be
stopped, the hard places of Scripture made plain, unity and piety much
advanced, which no one man's skill will ever be able to bring to pass, that
would make more for the safety of the Kingdom then all the forces and power of
the sword.

But let it further be examined, whether ever Ministers of the Gospel were
received by the State, so as they were sent from Christ, whether opportunity
were given them of free meeting, and communicating their doctrines one ta
another, and that the Doctrine that was agreed on, were obedientially received
by the State: So Christ sent out his Disciples to teach the Commands of Christ,
which Commission must last to the end of the world, giving them this badge that
they should love one another, sending them out with his own authority; Luke
10.16.
were any Ministers received into this State as Commissioners to preach the
Gospel ought? have any sort of Ministers been received as Ambassadors from a
King to his own Subjects? were not those Bishops that were honored by this
State, first sized to the Princes humor, and good experience had of their
servile condition, then sent out to stop the mouths of all that were not
fitted to the same last, not with the commission of Christ to preach what he
commanded; but with a new Commission to preach what the Prince, and his
Commissioners should allow: and was all this done with intelligence according
to Principles of Christian Religion? or have not all this striving to keep the
Ministers of the Gospel under, come from a more corrupt fountain that they
might not be bold to preach against their corruptions, or lay on the yoke of
Christ too heavily on the necks of Kings, Princes, and People? or has not this
been the consultation spoken of in the beginning of the Psalm? let these words
of the Psalmist, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords
from us receive a possible sense, Cornerus says, these bands are the bands of
Christ, and his Ministers: and Martinius says, Cornerus C^^isti. L^r^. and
Mi^^str^^um. Martinius difficil^ est in submitter^ docend^s quibus ips^ so
pr^fectes judica^^.
it is a hard matter for men to submit themselves to be taught by them, over
whom men conceive themselves to have power. Let us: can the Kings of the earth
be sensible of any yoke of Christ, but by the preaching of the Gospel; how can
they cast off the yoke of Christ, but by saying to the seers see not? but by
dsepising the Ministers of the Gospel, and taking order that none should
preach, but such as please them, and in such manner as they please, was this
done to advance Christ that preaches by his Ministers to keep them under,
that they may not boldly speak the mind of Christ, nor communicate their
Doctrine according to their Commission.

Let it be considered whether Ministers ever had encouragement to preach the
Gospel without the fear of men: for though it be the duty of a good Minister
to preach the word notwithstanding any fear; yet it is the duty of those that
receive the Gospel to see that the Ministers be without fear. If Timothy come
see that he may be without fear, 1 Cor. 16.10.
for he works the work of the Lord; were not Bishops nursed up to keep the
Ministers of the Gospel from speaking boldly in the name of Christ: was not
this their style: no Bishop, no King? I never heard no Bishop, no Christ; but
had they relied on Christ, and heard Christ freely speaking to them out of the
Gospel, he would have kept them safer then the Bishops did; and I dare boldly
say no honor and freedom given to the Ministers of the Gospel, no Christ
received in that commonwealth, men dare not say Christ is proud, a course must
be taken to bring Christ a little lower, but Ministers are proud, they must be
taken down, they must come under the Gentry: if that be the end of taking
down the Bishops to make the Clergy below the Gentry, I would feign know by
what Principle, must wealth needs be of more esteem then Religion; but let
these men speak plain, and tell us they will bring Christ below the Gentry:
indeed I have heard a Gentleman that had some influence on the placing of a
Minister in a Country Church, should say he skorned any Minister should be so
saucy as to tell him his faults, and surely the carriage of the Gentry have
been such, as if they were above the commands of Christ.

I cannot but say the Clergy as well as other men may have their personal
infirmities, some of them may be proud, but in reference to diverse that object
pride unto them, they may much more truly be condemned of baseness in
discharge of their duties, then of pride; though I confess that many that were
base enough where they should be bold, were proud enough where they durst.

It is plain that Court and Country have ever had a desire to keep down the
Clergy; partly, for that they having fed themselves fat with the Abbeis, have
ever since desired another bit, and partly to obtain a greater freedom to sin
against God; but if casting down the Ministers of Christ be the shaking off
the yoke of Christ, and keeping them under, that they dare not speak as men in
the room of Christ, be the sin of Kings, and Rulers in this Psalm, then
certainly it has been the cause that many have been turned into potshards by
the iron rod of Christ: and give me leave to call upon Kings of the earth, in
the words of my Text.

O ye Kings understand your own condition in respect of Christ, you must
serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice to him with reverence; All your goods are
nothing to Christ, but to his Messengers that are in the earth; you cannot
honor Christ but in them that come with the Gospel, encourage them to study
the Scriptures, and discharge their duties in the name of Christ: Luk 10.16.
if heretofore ye have used any means to stop their mouths, to keep them
under, either by making them dependant or otherwise, now yet at last while
there remain any part of hopes, honors, and persons unbroken, set your hearts
to encourage Ministers in their duties, God will not leave a cup of cold water
unrewarded, that is given in the name of a Prophet: what you do, do it to them
in the name of Prophets, not in the name of Servants, Flatterers, Supporters of
your States; God has begun now to show his displeasure, there is cause
therefore you should now understand, that is, adhere to the Principles of
Christian Religion, and then advise with your Councillors the Judges of
Judges, or Judges of the earth, the gravest, the most interrested, and
entrusted Council, the Judges in your Parliament. Let your ends be right,
grounded on principles that make for the honor of Christ, otherwise your best
Council in the nature of Council, is worst in its moral consideration.
Achitophels counsel that was as from the Oracle of God, 2 Samuel 16.23.
was morally no better then that an ambitious and traiterous Son should kill a
Royal King, and loving Father: never refuse that for the end of your actions,
that is represented to your understanding as an undeniable truth, and then take
advice of your greatest and wisest Counsel, In the multitude of Counselors
there is safety. If Rhehoboam had followed this advice, Pro. 15.22.
his Kingdom had not shrunk from twelve Tribes to two as it did; and now my
Text does charge the King to come to his Parliament, and with them to submit to
the yoke of Christ; as a Minister of Christ, I ought to declare the mind of
Christ; as a Subject to his Majesty, I ought to seek his advancement, he shall
thereby obtain the privilege of such Kings as are Kings his in the Church of
God; this was David's privilege that his Kingdom was upon Sion, and hereby God
made him first borne higher then the Kings of the earth; It is a preferment to
a King to be a servant to Christ, and his only safety against the
disappointment of his actions, Psalm. 89.27.
and the peril of his person.

I beseech your Lordships to hearke^ to the second charge of my text, which is
your particular portion, be instructed ye Judges of the earth, the charge that
lies upon you is to be instructed; the word signifies castigare, to bind,
instruct, compel, correct; which discipline, Laws, bonds, punishments, (...)
your selves, that you wander not, and live after your own lusts, the
discipline and correction ye ought to restrain your selves withal, ought to
be straight sueh as we use to children in their tender years, the same that
(...) this ye must receive as Children from the word of God, subjicite vos
reprehensioni verbi, Cajetan.
Dei submit yourselves to the reprehension of the word of God.

From this second part of the charge; Doct.
that if any thing be consulted and agreed on against God and Christ, the
Nobles and Judges of the earth must receive instruction, reform, and amend
themselves, and together with the King submit to the government of Christ; but
the charge lies upon your selves in this clause, though the consociation with
the other clause require your conjunction; but I am now come to your duty as it
stands singly in this part of the charge.

Ye see my Lords, more is required at your hands, then of the Kings in point
of knowledge: ye ought to be the Kings Treasurers out of which he ought at
all times to draw wisdom; ye ought to be that multitude of Counselors that
might make all the Kings purposes succesfull; if the King want counsel he must
repair to you, if you want it, ye must provide it for him, it is the duty of
your place; therefore if ye be not learned ye must receive instruction, if
never so learned information, if ye be morally vicious ye must amend your
selves by Laws, Discipline, correction; ye must use your selves as men use
Children, correct your selves, or if need be as men use mad men, bind your
selves; rather then wander after unworthy and sinful lusts; whosoever are
ignorant, ye must be knowing, though corruption of times may lead some others
into swearing, lying, drunkenness, uncleanness, profannesse; yet none of all
these things should be found in you. It is a shame that a Christian Lord should
not be eminently above unchristian and heathenish vices, Her^s est supra ^mnem
legem humanam, more virtuous then any humane Law can require: how shameful is
it that they should be more vicious then any heathen Law should suffer? It is
sufficient for a King to understand and walk by principles, such as no man can
deny to be truth, to make good principles the end of his actions, you must
help him to the means which is the act of Council, when the end is agreed
on, Council must find out the means to obtain the end, and that is properly
wisdom, learning, and prudence, the same word is translated, be learned and
amend your selves, learning is a great means to amend a man; again it
signifies correct or punish your selves, nothing is so ready a way to amend a
man as punishment, because prudentia moralis versatur circa aff^ctus, moral
wisdom is conversant about af^ections, which are not moved with any reason,
but much with strips, nihil suasionibus plurimum flagris, as Moralists all
agree, and therefore is it that such creatures as are only sensitive are not
wrought upon by reason, but stripes only. I shall distinguish the requisits of
a Judge into learning and honesty, (...)
both contained in the original word which comes from (...) hence (...)
discipline or correction by learning instruction threats either active or
passive.

Again the learning that is required to Judges may be distinguished into the
learning of inferior and supreme Judges, honesty ought to be common to all
Judges, as likewise that learning of their own condition in reference to
Christ.

The learning of an inferior or subordinate Judge must be either habitual, or
upon all emergent occasions capable of new instructions.

His habitual learning must be the knowledge of the positive Laws and
customs of the Kingdom containing the right of the King and Subject, so as
they are applicable to continual practice; he must likewise know the rules of
moral Philosophy, a study much neglected in this Kingdom, the Lawyers rather
going by particular president, then rules of justice (which is rather
emporicall then learned) and from particular president gather an universal
rule, which is too much used for Lawyers Logic, when they are pleased to make
use of it, but they can forsake it for a friend at pleasure, which makes the
Laws of England so liable to abuse, and leave the Judges too great a latitude
to do amiss and yet excuse themselves, if they walk by a president they are
excused, if they desert their president, and make new (as in some cases they
may and ought) the weakness of this collection it was done, therefore well
done, it was the opinion of these Judges, therefore right, may well excuse
them, whereby the Judges have a latitude to judge, which way they please
without blame; because the study of the Law is rather by induction then
demonstration, rather by the will of former Judges, then rules of justice which
are to be found in the learned skill of moral Philosophy, and ought among us
Christians be regulated by Scriptures, with which in matters of justice the
light of nature does agree; these Rulers of justice ought to be the only guide
to judges in matters of judgment, to Parliaments in making Laws; therefore in
the Scriptures is justice annexed to judement. Judges and Officers ye shall
choose, Deuteronomy. 16.18.
and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment. Ex. 45.9.
Let it suffice O ye Princes of Israel, remove violence and spoil, execute
judgment and justice, take away your exactions from my people, Ier. 22.3.
execute judgment and justice. Justice is the rule, judgment is the
application of it to time and place.

2. There must be a learning that ought always to be in fieri upon emergent
occasions, that is, a diligent care to find out the fact, Job. 29.16.
that cause which I kn^w not I sought out diligently, this was the glory of
Solomon in case of the Harlots, and this must be in all Judges high or low.

3. There must be a sagacity or quickness in a Judge to make application of
the Law to the case in hand; this is the principal, if not the sole duty of a
Magistrate to execute the Laws, to see that all men that seek justice may
h^ve it without partiality; this belongs to a Magistrate essentially, and
cannot be taken from him while he remains a Magistrate, Judex debet habere
potestatem veritatem formam vim, Tollet.
that is, he must have authority, truth, and form before, and in judgment,
and force following it to put it in execution.

The reasons why Judges ought to have such learning, are, first, because no
action can be rational that is not grounded on some Principle of humane
understanding; God has given man understanding to rule all other faculties of
the soul; if man shall act any thing that is not first well digested in the
understanding, that is brutish, and therein men act not as men, but as beasts,
and therefore the Scripture does resemble those actions of men, wherein they
transgress the Law of God, and right reason to the actions of beasts, Psalm.
32.9. Ier. 5.8.
Be ye not like Horse and Mule, which have no understanding, They are (...)
fed Horses, every one neighing after his neighbors wife; now if all actions
ought to be guided by reason, or else they be beastly, the judgments of
Judges, if without rule, must needs debase them far below their condition.

2. That judgment that has no better ground then a Judges opinion, Aquin.
22.5 e. 1. Omni^ scientiae habetur p^r aliqua pr^^^pia per s^ ^o^a.
has a very frail foundation: Judges must be learned, not wilful and
imperious^ but learning is habitus acquisitus, men are not borne learned, nor
can become ^o without diligence and study; now science is the knowledge of
conclusion, which depend on certain Principles known by themselves, which are
delivered and received in the science that is studied, the rules of a science
are not uncertain, liable to mistake nor subject to the wills and affections
of men, qua^ minimum relinquendum non judi^ibus propter affectus, the Laws
ought to be clear, fully and plainly delivered, things may be set down as
clearly in matters of Law, as in any thing: Laws are not conversant about
unknown motions of Sta^s and Spheres, nor in the Mathematical speculations
of accidents remote from matter, but the manners and actions of men visible,
sensible, apparent actions. Again they ought to be expressed in words whereby
men are able to express their minds most fully; therefore Aristotle says,
Quod Lex non potest exprimere (...) h^m^ quidem potest.
that which the Law cannot express, that man cannot express, that cannot be
said to be learning, that is contained in the mystery of one or some few men's
abilities, but that which is in praeceptis scientiae traditis, which is made
common and public for every man to study; such ought the learning of a Judge
to be, that it may be rational, certain, and not subject to lust: Thomas
Aquin. 12.98.1. c.
Lex bona quia consonat rationi, and this the Lawyers profess; the Law is
reason, but being pressed with this argument, if the Law be reason, then men that
are not bred Lawyers must understand it; they answer it is reason to him that
is learned in the Law, what does the study of the Law change the nature of the
man? reason cannot agree to a man quatenus, a Lawyer, bu^ quatenus, a man; that
cannot be said to be reason, which a man cannot understand, unless he be a
Lawyer; this were to make a Lawyer differ specie from another man.

2. Reason, why Judges must be learned, because Judements are matters of the
highest concernment in the world, and that in two respects.

First, because they procure the favor or displeasure of God, Pro. 2^.3. Esaias.
5.7. and 5^ 15.
to do justice and judgment is more acceptable to God then sacrifice,
therefore the Prophet says, that Go^ looked for judgment, but behold
oppression; the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no judgment.

2. They are of highest concernment to humane society, they are the causes of
peace and war, Am^s 5.6.7.
Seek the Lord lest he break out like fire and divoure you, ye that turn
justice into wormwood: War is the breaking out of the Lord upon an unjust
people: I dare say, had the judges walked in judgment according to the
petition of right, punished those that first took monopolies, tunnage and
poundage, not exacted, because not granted in Parliament, or the exacters
punished in judgment; Shipmony not judged to be Law contrary to Law, it had
been impossible to have brought the people into such a distemper as to fall one
upon another; the fault was laid upon the Bishops and Clergy of the land: I
will not excuse them as far as they had any hand in overswaying the judges,
putting down the good ones, and setting up such as were servile, and might
easier be bent to serve the lust of the Court against Law, or as they were
active themselves in arbitrary Courts to the oppression of the people, such as
were the High Commmission, Star Chamber, Councell-Table; but this I dare say
the most immediate causes of breach of peace have been failings in judgment:
all failings in judgment are oppressions, therefore is judgment opposed to
oppression. Judgment stood a far off, he that abstained from evil makes
himself a prey. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them because they
refused to (...) judgment. Psa. 5.7. and 56.14. Prove. 21.7.
Ye see the Holy Ghost does plainly affirm, that refusal to do justice is
robbery, and the cause of destruction.

3. Subordinate Judges must be learned that they may discern the flourishing
of Rhethoricke and falacies in the arguments that are brought against the
truth, that he may be able to judge rightly of a cause, notwithstanding the
industry and ability of an advocate: advocates will be subtle, and no cause can
be so bad but it will find some to plead for it; the devil will be sure to get
as good counsel as he can, he that pleads his cause shall have a double fee:
if the Judge be not learned he will often prevail, he knows if he can but
pervert judgment, by what means he cares not, he shall promote wickedness,
advance his kingdom, and murder men, which is Satan's delight; therefore the
Judge must be learned to judge between plea and plea; Deuteronomy 17.8.
plea against plea make matters difficult in judgment; the want of learning to
decide them, the cause of divisions; this is the cause of civil dissentions
when matters are put in execution with an high hand, before they are peaceable
and clearly determined in judgment: I shall put you in mind of the great
questions that were raised in the beginning of these troubles which were not
peaceably and clearly determined in judgment; objections were sent abroad
among the people without the^ answers, which caused divisions among them. 1.
Concerning Power. 2. Concerning Law.


Whether the King had power to call and break a Parliament or no, the Lawyers
logic was clear enough for the King, they had presidents enough: That the
Kings counsel had an hand in the call, is most plain by the Writ; but whether
this counsel were a select counsel of Lords and Commons, some Lords, some
Commoners, Secretaries of State, officers of his Majesty's household, such as he
should choose, which as to the security of the Kingdom were as good as none,
or the Earls and Barons of the Kingdom, or what power they had in this great
business the learning of the Law did not determine; the practice of the times
did carry all by the will of the King, whereby Parliaments were rendered
useless to the Subject, and the whole Kingdom lay open to any such violence
as evil counsel, should at any time lead the King into. The want of learning
in this point was the first cause of this dissension, learning could not, and
therefore it was put to the determination of the sword.

2. When Parliaments were called, what power the King had, what the Lords, what
the people or Commons, what jointly, what severally, was not clearly enough
determined in the Law, and therefore left to the determination of the sword;
learning was wanting, and therefore God brought in his iron rod.

In matters of justice what ought to be adjudged treason, what not; how those
treasons mentioned in the Statute, and referred to the Paliament to be
determined, ought to be judged, and by whom, the learning of the Law did not
clearly determine, and therefore left to the determination of the sword.

The learning of the Law did never yet clearly and publicly determine between
Plea and Plea, in these objections following, that none ought to be adjudged
but by positive Law; Secondly, that all Laws ought to have publication, none
ought to suffer for any attempt, except against the Kings Person, which
objections would easily have bin answered, if the study of moral Philosophy
had been well taken into the study of the common Law.

I shall only acquaint you with some few rules of moralls concerning these
points. First, ignorantia juris universalis non tollit peccatum; that need no
publication, the boy to the ancher and cross of the door has no place here,
that publication does belong only to particular Laws, not universal.

2. Though subordinate Judges may not, yet the supreme Judge may judge by the
universal Law, salus populi suprema Lex.

3. Attempts against the Kings Person are only criminal by positive Law, but
there the fact is likewise treason; but where the fact cannot be punished, the
attempt must by the universal Law of self preservation as an attempt to
conquer the Kingdom, change the Government in any Subject must be punished,
the fact cannot prosperum and faelix scelus virtus vocatur: when such questions
as these were on foot, the learning of the Law ought to have been clear, the
Judges should have been learned, but they were not, and therefore God was
angry, its now therefore high time for Judges to be wise, there has many
miseries happened to us of late, which are yet hard to be remooved for want of
learning, and therefore there is great reason all means should be used to get
it; there is great cause therefore the Holy Ghost does cry out upon you, O ye
Judges be learned, Children and women cry out for fear often where no dangers
is; but where wisdom it self does cry out, there the danger must needs be
great.

But now my Lords, I come to the learning that is required in your Lordships as
Judges of Judges: It cannot be denied that all learning that can be desired in
any, would adorn and beautify a Lord; yet let not any cunning Sophister
persuade the world that a Lord is not fit to be a supreme Judge, unless he be
a cunning Lawyer; if any Law be hard for a Lord to understand, it is too hard
to be a rule for men to walk by. It is sufficient for a Lord to know
unjustice, when it is so obvious that it is become a public grievance, to
keep the Judges from bribery and flattery of the King, or oppression of the
people, that nothing be done by violence without judgment, or in dispite of
Parliaments.

If your Lordships could have but hindered the gathering of tunnage and
poundage, taxation of shipmony, raising of monopolies, used means to have
Parliaments orderly called; told the King his duty, punished his instruments
when unjust, so far as they appeared to public view, advised the King to
forbear any illegal power over his people, punish such as should advise him
to any unlawful thing, when prooved, and plainly appearing to you, and by
your power suppressed all power raised against Law, This had been sufficient,
to have preserved the Kingdom from ruin, seditio non oritur levi de causa.
That which is principally required of your Lordships in point of knowledge, is
to receive instruction, ye cannot want knowledge enough if ye will receive it
to deliver the Kingdom from the stroke of Gods wrath, the dissension of the
people.

I cannot but confess these times have involved your Lordships in very great
difficulties; but the greatest difficulty is to amend your selves, if you
could but give testimony to the world, that you see your selves partly by the
fault of your Ancestors, and partly by your own, disabled from doing your
Country that service which the duties of your places do require, and that you
earnestly desire a reformation of your selves; if you could but undertake the
principal duty of your places, to be reconcilers of the King and people, and
propose such terms of agreement as may be fit for Prince and people to
receive, God would certainly assist you. All Governments are species
amicitiae, kinds of friendship, the differences that are at this time between
the King, and his people are very great; you my Lords ought to use all means
to set them at one; you are the Umpiers of the State, your wisdoms ought now
to appear, you ought to deal plainly with King, and people, where you find
the fault lay the blame, press the King to his duty, and the people to theirs;
let your Propositions be legal, reasonable, and wholesome for the State; God,
and good men will not leave such endeavors without comfort and success, you
ought not to join with the King against the Commons, nor with the Commons
against the King, but carry the Balance of justice so justly and friendly
between them, that they may join in friendship one with another, you are
trusted with the honor of the Crown, the justice of the people, the setting
up the honor of Christ's Kingdom, ye must not suffer any of these to sink.

2. Ye must amend your selves in point of unity, you ought all of you to be
united as one man. Unity is the safety of the people, in no sorts of the people
so dangerous as among Lords, pauci viri boni non minus conjuncti quam si essent
unus homo, it is that only that shall make you able to save your selves, and
your Countries: the difference is between the King and the Commons: if one
part of you side with the King, another with the Commons, and look toward the
sword, by it to bear down the adverse party, you make your Country become a
prey, and ruin your selves and your Posterities; the end that ought to be
before your eyes to bring the government, subspecie amicitiae, that you cannot
endeavor until you keep and preserve unity among your selves, you cannot
seek unity between the King and his people, until you seek it first among
your selves.

3. Ye must look to this charge of my Text; remember what ye are in
reference to Christ, ye are his servants, ye must take his advice, call such
as can show you the mind of Christ, to your assistance; ye must receive
instruction from him as he is pleased to give it by the Ministers of the word;
Luke 10.16. He that receives you, receives me, he that despises you,
despises me; ye see Christ does own them as his Deputies, if ye receive
them into your Counsels, ye receive Christ, if ye cast them out of your
Counsels, ye cast Christ out of your Counsels; if any such thing have been
done in hight of opposition, be learned, receive instruction, and learn to
amend; Nations must hearken to the commands of Christ Parliaments, that act as
Nations must do it, or else they will displease Christ.

2. Let nothing be carried with a strong hand, till they be peaceably descided
in a friendly and Parliamentary way the prerogative of the Crown, the right of
Lords, the honor of the Messengers of Christ, the Privileges of the people;
let no parties presume by power of the sword to overbeare another.

3. Ye my Lords ought to preserve the dignity of your public places: it may
not be esteemed an act of humility in a Majestrate or a Minister to lose the
right that belongs to their public places, that is breach of trust, and
neglect of duty; therefore ought Majestrates, to maintain the honor of their
places, and act by them for the good and peace of their Countries, and honor
of Christ, that so they may escape the anger of God, and the stroke of Christ's
iron rod.

FINIS.

