A CHARGE DELIVERED Into the House of Peers upon Wednesday last, by Major
HUNTINGTON, against Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, and Commissary General Ireton,
concerning the KINGS MAJESTY, With His Majesty's Speech to the Commissioners
from Scotland, and His Resolution to lose His life, rather then to yield to
what is contrary. And His Oath and Covenant to all His liege People within His
Realms and Dominians, at the conclusion of a late and well-grounded Peace.

Likewise, Prince Charles His Message to the Citizene of London; and His
Desires to the said City, touching His Royal Father the King, presented to
both Houses of Parliament.

Also, the Parliaments Message for Peace, And their humble Desires to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty; Ordered to be sent by the Earl of Middlesex, Sir John
Hipsley, and Mr. Bulkley.

blazon or coat of arms C R

HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE



Imprinted at Lond^^ (...) ^. Wh^^^^n, MD^XLVIII.

The Proposalls of the Britains within the Principality of Wales, sent to his
Highness Prince Charles.
UPon the third of this instant August, it was advertized from Wales, that the
Britains begins to levy a new War for the King, and have made choice of the
Prince of Wales to be their General, as appears by the ensuing Declaration
and propsitions sent from the Welsh-men to his Highness, which follows in
these words.

May it please your Highness, We hope our Declaration which we have now sent
unto your Highness, will give you ample satisfaction as well of Our Integrity
heretofore, as of Our intentions for the future to serve your Royal Father and
your self, as far as We are able to make you both great and glorious as the
Parliament promised, and we ever intended, and did ^ill of late conceive that
they did so too, but as soon as we clearly saw that they went clean contrary
ways, we addressed our selves to his Majesty, and had a promise to have a
speedy directions from him, which we have not yet had the reason whereof, as we
conceive, is because of the close restront upon him, in regard whereof we do
now apply our selves unto your Highness: we have sent some Propositions,
which, we hope, will seem reasonable to your Highness; and to confirm us in
our endeavors, and that your Highness will please to sign them and some
instructions concerning our wants and supplies, to which, we hope, your
Highness will please to give us a speedy answer, that so we may go on the more
cheereful to restore your Royal Father to his greatness, that he may long
reign over us, and when it shall please God to give him a Kingdom of glory in
Heaven, to leave all his Kingdoms on earth, to you his successor in peace and
happiness, which shall ever be the prayer of your most Loyal and liege
people, the trve Britains etc.

The Welshmens Propositiones to his Highnsse the Prince of Wales

1 That his Highness the Prince of Wales will be pleased to own them for his
Army and to be their General, and if he please to come heither in person, if
not to appoint.

2 That they may have an act of Oblivion and Indemnity, and a general pardon
for all things heretofore don by them during this War, and to be freed from
suits in Law, by particular persons for any thing by them done touching, or in
relation to the War.

3. That they may be paid all be paid all such arrears as shall appear to be
due to them at this time, and for which the Parliament has promised to give
them Debenters, and reasonable time and course to be appointed for the payment
thereof, and for their futer pay.

4 That they may continue in such ffices and places as now they have, until
they be preferrd to greater: and not to put them out without just cause, nor
new Officers over them against their will.

The Welshmenes Declaration to Princ Charles.

We whose names are here unto Subscribed do declare that we will use our best
endeavors to bring the King to a personal treaty with his Par. in fredom,
honor, and Safty; to the end that the just Prerogative of the King,
Privileges of Parl. Laws of the Land, Liberties of the people may be all
maintained and preserved in their proper bounds and the Prodistant Religion, as
it now stands established by the Law of the Land.

The Transactiens of the prosedings of both Houses of Parliament, in relation
to the King, City, and Kingdom.

THe House of Commos, having spent much time in debate upon the expedent, about
Treating personally with his Majesty and in regard many inconveniences and
unanserable, appear by his Maj. coming to nea^e London on the one side, and as
many objectians that his Majesty grants the 3 proposi^ions before a Treaty, and
the latitud if demands on both sides be seen: They agree that the Treaty be in
the Isle of Wight, and that it be with Honor Freedom, and S^fety, to his
Maje. also to the Parl. for the time manner, and place in the Isle of Whight,
and app^inted acommittee to consider of the place. And upon Mun. July 31, The
Lords and Commons as Com. for peace, fa^ about place, time and manner of the
Treaty with his Maje. Voted that a Message be sent unto his Maje. to desire him
to appoint what place he will in the Isl^nd, that may be with Honor and Safety
to both sides, And upon Tuesday August. 1

Their Lordships made choice of the L. of Midlesex to go from their House, and
desire the Commons to go as Com. to his Maje. which accordingly they did, and
upon Wednesday l^st had some debate in relation to a Treaty and named their two
menbers, that are to go to his Majesty with the Earl of Middelsex, to acquaint
him That the Parliament desires he will appoint what place in the Isle of Wight
he please, to treat with freedom, honor, and safety to himself, and the
Commissioner sand upon those particulars presented at Hampton Court, and what
his Maj shall offer, as also what the Commis: shall further offer.

This day several Reasons were presented to the House of Peers, showing the
grounds and cause why Major Huntington left the Army, in which he sets forth
the whole transaction between his Maj, and Lieut. General Cromwell, and
Commis. Genesis Jreton, with other things, which he has seen and heard in the
Army.

The Gentlemen that came from Duke Hamilton with a letter to his Maj. is
returned from Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight: He has delivered the
said letter to his Maj. who upon his Maj. reading the same, had private
discourse with the King, and after some dispute, His Maj. returned an answer to
Duke Hamiltons letter, and sent a letter back to his Highness, by the said
Messenger.

The House of Commons likewise understanding, that their Committees Arguments
were not satisfying last night to the Common Counsel, by act of the said
Common Counsel, inviting all that would, to come and lift horse, men, or
disburse money, for defense of the City and Parliament, which should be
accounted an acceptable work, and Commis: and Treasurers were appointed at a
certain place in Guild Hall to take subscriptions, who are to report the same
to the Common Council: The Commons after some debate hereupon, appointed a
Committee to go to the City, to know if they owned that paper or Act, and by
what authority they did it.

August 3. This day were extant a book entitled, An Expedient for the King,
containing several Propositions, to his Maj. as a Peace Offering for his
people, viz.

1. That you will not break any Privilege of Parl. and therefore it were fit
that the particular Privileges were set down, that so the King may not
entrench upon them in the least. 2. That your Majesty will not diminish or
entrench upon the liberty of the Subject, but hold your self strictly to the
Laws of the Land. 3. That your Maj. will not extend your Prerogative in the
least, beyond the due bounds granted to your Predicessours, or to the prejudice
of the Persons of your Subjects, or the known Laws of the Land: To which end
you desire the particulars and extent of it to be set down, and agreed upon,
that so you may the better perform it. 4. That you will grant nothing to any
person out of your Revenue, and this for your posterities sake; that so by your
own good husbandty, you may be the better enabled to reward those you desire.
5. That you will answer no Petition, for matter of profit, to any Petitioner;
but first that you will refer it to two Judges of the Law, to certify you the
legallity of it, and that no subject (or the Crown) be any way prejudiced by
it; and if your Maj. be abused in it, the Judge to be highly punished, and if
he dye before the discovery, his Estate to satisfy it to the Crown. 6. That
your Maj. will protect the person of no Subject for debt, but only your meniall
servants, and yet not his Goods or Estates neither, but all things, except his
person, to be liable to the Law. 7. That your Majesty will give no protection
to any person for above 6 months; but not for their Coods or Estates at all. 8.
That your Maj. will demolish all Forts and Castles the Parl. shall desire
within the Kingdom of England. 9. That your Maj. engage your (...)


II. Kings Covenant with his People.

J C.R. Do here in the presence of the blessed Trinity [God the Father, God the
Son, and God the Holy Ghost.] profess to all the world, without any
Equivocation or mental Reservation, that I now do, and for ever will forgive
and forget all kinds of offenses against me, either in word or deed, committed
by any of my Subjects in England, and contained in the Act of Oblivion; and
this of my own free will and desire, I do, that all my People may see and
behold the Candor of my Heart: and I do here bury in the grave of Oblivion, all
things contained in the Act of Oblivion, in my soul not desiring to remember
it, and vowing never to revenge it. So help me God, and the contents of this
holy Book: and this I confirm by the taking of the Sacrament.

The Kings Maj. being acquainted, that Mr. Aliburton were come from Scotland,
with letters from the Commissioners, he were called in to the presence Chamber,
and his Maj. proposed some Queries concerning the Scots Officers now in
England. And further declared, that he would offer such things, as shall he for
the Peace and safety of his people, and that he will rather lose his life, then
yeald to what is contrary. His Maj. has delivered a letter to Mr. Aliburton,
in answer to the letter from the Committee of Scotland. On Wednesday August 2.
A paper was delivered to, and read in the House of Lords from Maj. Hurtington,
of reasons why he left the Army. They are very large, being a narrative of L.
G. Cromwell, and C.G. Ireton, since the Parl. going to disband the Army, what
was done by them in that, also the overtures with his Maj. Their proceedings
against the Lords Co^^ons and Aldermen that were impeached. The Lieu, Genesis
acquainting the King with the Propositions, and asking his Maj approbation,
C.G. Iretons, saying they were the veriest knaves that ever was, they made not
good all promised to the King. And how contradicted etc. Prince Charles
declares that he ha^h a good opinion of the City, That the (...) are come in to
res^^e the King his father from imprisonment. That he is resolved to endeavor
the same, and hope: that all good people will join with him therein, for a
personal Treaty with the King his Father, That he has made stay of same Ships
belonging to City Merchants, but not disposed of them. That if the City will
speedily advance him ^^000, they shall be repaid it out of the Customs, as was
^^^merly appointed for the ^^^^^ing of the (...) Sea, which his Highness will
take care of, and to secure the Merchants Trade at Sea, etc.

FINIS.

