OVROGRAPHY OR Speculations on the excrements OF URINE; With the Distinctions,
Causes, Colors, and Contents thereof: and other Symptoms observed in Nature.

Also, a Philosophical discourse of the Colors of Urine, with the Art of
mixing them, according to quantity, number, and weight.

Honor a Physician, with the honor due unto him, for the uses you may have of
him. Ecclus 38.1. By HENRY HAMAND.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the Marygold, in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

THE PREFACE.
I Shall not, like the Citizens of Mindium, make a large Preface to this short
discourse, lest I incur the like Censure the Inhabitants received from their
tub'd-Cynick Diogenes, Viri Mindii, claudite ostia, ne urbs vestra egrediatur,
shut your Gates, lest your City run out at them. In this Ourographicall part
therefore, or Doctrine of Urines, being but an Appendix to a greater work, I
have inserted a Philosophical Discourse of colors, with the art of mixing
them according to their number and quality; the use whereof (as I conceive)
may avail much to the knowledge of Diseases, by discerning the several
contrarieties happening in one and the same sickness, and which of the humors
does abound: for there is scarce any internal Malady can happen unto man, but
it is accompanied with the Symptoms of sundry diseases, all of them tending to
the dissolution of the same body. And this opinion may be grounded from the
holy text; where the father of Publius (as St Paul has noted Acts 28.8.)
Febribus ac Dysenteria detentus, decumberet, lay sick of a fever and a bloody
flix both at one time, which were diseases of different qualities, the one
being laxative, the other restringent. Now by the number of Colors, and their
qualities and quantities, concurring to the composition of one mixed color,
the learned and expert Physician may the better judge of the number of diseases
they signify, and which of them is predominant in every distemper.

To the view of Urines, which are drawn and put into Colors, you are chiefly
to note such as are concoct, crude, or lethall. First, concoct Urines, such as
signify health, if substance and contents are answerable, are either
(Subrufus) paler or partly saffron: or (Subcroceus) light-saffron like water
wherein Bastard-saffron is dissolved. Secondly, crude Urines, such as men make
when they incline to sickness, are (Lacteus, subpiceus, rubeus, subrubeus, that
is) white, pale, the color of saffron it self, and claret. Thirdly, lethall,
such as are made when the Patient is in great danger of death, are ( Viridis,
lividus, niger, that is) green, ash color, and black. Their particular
significations, gradations, and alterations, are observed in this ensuing
tract, which may come perhaps to the hands and view of some that have more
learning then virtue; to others of more virtue then learning: how either will
esteem of it, remains in their power; how I shall value their esteem, remains
in me.

H. H.

Analysis; or resolution of the several Chapters and Sections contained in
this Book.
CHAP. I. Of Urine, whereof made, concocted, and separated in the body, with
the parts from whence it gives signification. Sect. I. URine, whence derived.
II. Urine defined, how made, concocted, and separated in the body. III. How the
urine descends into the ureters, and gives knowledge of the state and
disposition of the humors.
CHAP. II. Of Obstruction and Conversion of Urine; and of the diseases that
follow it. Sect. I. OBstruction of Urine, how caused. II. What diseases
obstruction of urine causes in the members. III. Of conversion of urine to the
parts of the body; and the maladies thereupon ensuing.
CHAP. III. A Discourse of the Colors of urine; and of mixing them according
to quantity, number, and weight. Sect. I. OF Color, what it is, and how made
perspicible, and distinguished. II. Of Simple colors, viz: of white and black.
III. Of secondarie Colors, and from whence they arise. IV. Of Colors
intermediate or mixed.
CHAP. IV. Of Colors and substance simul. Sect. I. OF white urines, like milk,
snow-water, water, or silver shining etc. what they signify. II. Of urines
pale, flaxen, or palish. III. Of Vrines subrufe, yellow, citrine, or yellow
like gold. IV. Of subcitrine, light saffron, or saffron-urines. V. Of Urines
Crystalline, milk-white, with thick substance, or horn-white. VI. Of red Vrines
like cherries, blood, red apples, or saffron it self. VII. Of bloody Urine and
Mattery. VIII. Of reddish Urine, red like a burning Cole, or ruddish dimmer
then gold. IX. Of Claret, crimson, purple, blew, and bluish Vrines. X. Of
Vrines that be green, greenish, dim-green and oily-green. XI. Of Urines that be
Ash Color and color of lead, and their indications. XII. Of Black and
blackish Urines.
CHAP. V. Of the number, color, substance and quantity of contents appearing
in the three Regions of Urine. Sect I. OF contents appearing in the sediment or
lowest Region of Urine. II. Of contents appearing in the sublation, or middle
Region, and how they differ from those in the sediment. III. Of contents
appearing in the Cloud, or upper Region. IV. Shows what the Clouds in Urine
are like, and what they signify. V. Of deformed Contents appearing in the
whole Region of the Cloud.
CHAP. VI. Of the Colors, significations, and differences, of foam, froth, and
bubbles appearing on the Crown or Circle. Sect. I. Colors appearing on the
crown or Circle. II. Of spume, foam, froth, and bubbles appearing in the
Circle. III. Of Bubbles, their kinds and signification. V. Of foam, froth, and
bubbles, more particularly, and what they signify. V. How foam, froth, and
bubbles, are distinguished.
CHAP. VII. Of Alteration of the Colors of Urine, in respect of Age,
Complexion, time of the year, and kind of life. Sect. I. Shows, that in
viewing of Urines, the age of the sick is to be considered. II. The time of the
year is to be respected. III. The Complexionall quality is to be observed. IV.
The kind of life and condition of the Patient.
CHAP. VIII. General Aphorisms, or considerations in the speculations of
Urines; with the division of the Urinall, and distinction of the three Regions
and contents appearing in the same. Sect. I. General Aphormes to be had in
memory. II. The significations of the several Regions of Urine. III. Of the
perspicuousness and darkness of Urine.

CHAP. I. Of Urine, whereof made, how concocted, and separated in the body,
with the parts from whence it gives signification.
THe two main and principal means which do lead to the knowledge of the
diseases in man's body, and the state thereof, are Urine and the Pulse.. 1.
Urine whence derived.
The first whereof being derived from a Greek word which signifies demonstrare,
to demonstrate, because by it humane dispositions are made known and evident;
as also the condition of the Liver, the whole habit of the body and Veins; is
therefore called Vrina, Urine, says Isidore, ex eo quod urat exeundo; vel quod
e renibus egeritur; and signifies the Urine, Piss, or Stale of man or beast*
or from (...), which is derived from (...), mingo, to make water. The second is
the Pulse, so termed a Pulsando, which signifies to beat, because it is always
in motion. Pulsus est motus continuus and non cessans, says Bartholinus, quia
continue generari debet vitalis spiritus. lib. 2. cap 6. The Pulse then, or
venae pulsatiles, pulse-veins, are signalls to declare the state of the heart
and arteries: the Urine of the Liver and veins; and which of them is of most
certainty, quaeritur? Leaving therefore the Systole or contraction of the
Pulse to the curious touch of the well-experienced Physician (who like Galen
could perceive by the pulse of a woman that she was in love with Pylades) I
shall describe the other, it being an excrement that gives best and surest
indication of the disease.

Sennertus, 2. Urine defined, how made, concocted, and separated in the body.
out of Laurentius and others, does define Urine and the matter of it, to be
nothing else but Excrementum tenue and aquosum ex potu genitum. lib 1. cap. 9.
a thin and watery excrement begotten of drink, or the watery portion of Chylus,
or whatsoever else may be converted into watery humor. Or with Rantzouius in his
book de conservanda valetudine; Vrina est serosior pars sanguinis a renibus
attracta. For Urine in waveing it self with the blood, conveyeth it self into
all the parts of the body; and from thence returning back again into the veins,
liver, and the vessels of the Urine, retains with it some Symptoms of the
condition of the parts affected from whence it proceeds. For the common food
of man being received, concocted and incorporated together, is there become
chylus, that is, a white juicy substance: then Pylorus, the neither orifice or
mouth of the stomach receivs it, passing thither by an issue: thence to
Duodenum, or first-gut: from thence to Iejunum, or the hungry-gut: from thence
again five of the Mesenterie-veins (being branches of the Vein called Porta,
which convey the juice of the meat concocted, from the stomach to the Liver) do
suck so much as is profitable for nourishment; where after many purifications
and concoctions, it is again conveyed into vena porta, where it is turned into
blood, and thence sent into vena cava, the hollow vein, where it is again more
purified, the excrementitious parts thereof being separated and sent to their
proper seats; as A.A. Kernells belonging to the kidneys or the receptacles of
Melancholy blood. B. The right Rein, or Kidney. C. The left Reine. D. The
Trunck of the hollow Vein descending. E. The Trunck of the great Artery
descending. F.F. The right Ureter or water-conduit. G.G. The left Ureter. H.H.
The right spermatick vessel. I.I. The left spermatick vessel. K. A part of
the bladder belonging to the Urine, by which the vessels carrying the seed
pass under the Abdomen into the yard. L.L. The lowest part of the Abdomen.
Choler to the Gall, Melancholy to the Spleen, and the wheyish part thereof to
the Emulgent-veins: from whence again it is drawn of the Reins, and altered
perfectly into Urine.

. 3. How the urine descends into the ureters, and gives knowledge of the
state and disposition of the humors.
Urine being an unprofitable excrement, descends into the Vreters or
water-conduits, and from thence into the bladder; where by the assistance of
the muscle Sphincter, which is musculus constrictivus shutting the neck of it,
it is at man's pleasure in part voyded, but not all; for some part thereof,
together with the blood, is distributed into every member of the body, and
voided afterward: and therefore urine is not only made of that watery
substance which is drawn from the Liver; but also, from the greater and lesser
veins, and from the whole body. Vrina est serositas sanguinis in Renibus et
Vesica. Alstedius Encyclopaed. lib. 7.

Urine thus searching the whole body by an universal source and influence,
cannot but give light, together with a general knowledge of the state of the
whole body: but chiefly and more especially from the Stomach, Gutts, and
Mesentery veins, from the Liver, and Vena cava, from the Bladder, with his
muscles, sinews, and Yard. For as it does manifestly show the state of the
humors contained in the liver and greater Veins: so also it does reveal to the
judgment of exact inspection, the griefs and maladies residing in the smaller
veins, and substance of the whole body.

CHAP. II. Of obstruction and conversion of Urine: and of the diseases that
follow it.
ALthough urine be thus made, concocted, and separated, as before is declared;
yet it suffers many impediments by obstruction and conversion, from whence
proceed many infirmities, according to the diversities of the causes.

. 1. Obstruction of Urine how caused.
Obstructions are farthered by tumors, grosse-humors, stone, gravel,
inflammations, ulcers, impostumes, flesh-growing; and sometimes through wind,
and weakness, distempers, fractures, ruptures, dislocations, wounds in the
water-conduits or vessels of urine. Now as oppilations or stoppages are caused
by some of these: so according to the seat of the disease and part grieved
(for dolor ostendit locum) and other signs consenting and concurring, the grief
may be found out by the part obstructed.

As obstruction of urine is the cause of many evils in the body: 2. What
diseases, obstruction of urine causes in the members.
so it being generated and made in the body, and not voyded nor expelled, but
being converted into the head, it causes the Frenzy, Melancholy, Catarrhs,
impostumes, and weakness of the brain: into the stomach, vomiting, gnawings,
and crudities: into the throat, Bronchocele, or throat-dropsie: into the belly,
the Dropsies Ascites, Tympanites, Anasarca, with its species Hyposarca,
Sarcites, and Leucophlegmatia: which Horace long since has truly described in
lib. 2. Ode 2. Crescit indulgens sibi dirus Hydrops,
Nec sitim pellit, nisi causa merbi
Fugerit venis, and aquosus albo Corpore languor.
The self-indulgent dropsy grows
Nor does the palats thirst unlose,
Till man from veins the dolours cause,
And pallid watery faintness draws.
into the gutts, iliaca passio with lasks; and sometimes when it is mixed with
wind, the rolling of the gutts together, or knitting of them, which is the
disease miserere mei Deus, which is very seldom cured: into the womb,
menstruarum fluxus: into the Cods, ruptures, and Hydrocela, which is a disease
that has confluence to the stones, with swelling and soreness: into the
joints, Sciatica, and the joynt-sickness: into the parts grieved, weakness and
impostumations.

. 3. Of conversion of urine to the parts of the body.
Or if the parts formerly obstructed do exonerate themselves by urine, then the
head is distempered with catarrhs: the throat with Angina, squinancy,
hoarsenes, and coughs: the Lungs with inflammation, heat and wasting: the solid
parts of the body with Marasmodes, consuming and melting fevers: the spleen
with Melancholy: the Gall with choleric fluxes: broken veins with pissing of
blood: the spermatick vessels with Gonorrhea and flux of seed: the womb with
terms suppressed, and voyded by urine: the Hemorrhoidall veins with the
Hemorrhods: the joints with Arthritis or articularis morbus, the
joynt-sickness, viz. Sciatica, chiragra and podagra: and diverse other parts of
the body with evacuation critical, symptomaticall or artificial; for the
parts and members being inflamed, like Cupping-glasses draw humors unto them.

CHAP. III. A discourse of the Colors of Urine; and of mixing them according
to quantity, number, and weight.
NOw for the better finding out of each particular distemper, the color and
contents of the Urine is to be considered.

. 1. Of Color, what it is, and how made perspicible, and distinguished.
For color (without which no man can judge or distinguish of Urines) is defined
to be a bright shining, terminated in some object illustrated by light: and by
reason of its diverse temperament does offer a various shape to the sight, or
visible spirits of the eye; which proceeds either from the humidness of the
subject, or from the light it self. And because to describe every particular
color were (to use Politians words) Sibyllae folia colligere, a matter
difficult, and in a manner infinite: I shall reduce them to their first
grounds, and write only of as many of them as are for my purpose. Color (says
Aristotle lib. de sensu and sens:) est extremitas perspicui in corpore
terminato. Three things are required that color may apeare: 1 extremitas in
corpore: 2 pellucidum, because in the dark no color appears: 3 corpus
definitum, because on those bodies that are far distant no color is discerned
at all.

The two extreme Colors are white and black: intermediate to these are
puniceus, purpure, yellow, green, and others that are mixed of them, as
follows in order. Of colors some are simple; some are mixed: Of simple
colors, there are two primarie, viz. white and black, out of which all the
rest are made: for simple colors are of such absolute perfection, as that they
need not the participation of any other color to make them absolute.

2. Of simple colors, viz. of white and black.
1. Albedo est color simplex (says Scribonius lib. Physicor.) in corpore
tenuiore multa luminositate co^stans: and is caused when the humor and moisture
dries, as in lime, chalk, salt, sugar, etc. or thickneth, as in snow, spume.
For the air being enclosed, by reason of its subtilness, propter internum
aerem, affords very much light; and by reason of much purity and brightness
collected unto it, has amongst all colors most light, in which respect it is
very hurtful unto the eyes; as it is manifested in those that look too
intensively on snow; for by reason of the power and force of light, the visuall
spirits are dissipated and confounded.

2. Nigredo, Black is a color diametrically opposed to white, and is thus
defined by Scribonius, Nigredo est color in corpore crassiore exiguae
luminositatis particeps. in a gross of earthy substance: which is caused
either by the adustion of moist air, or water thoroughly mixed with the earth:
for so the air being shut out, it leaves behind a dark, thick blackness, as in
a dead cole, soote of the chimny, smoke, etc. for the moisture being exhausted
by the fire, there remains naught else but blackness: quaecunque enim ignis
allambit, nigra fiunt. This color is no ways grateful to the sight; but
proves very obnoxious unto it, as appears in them that along time have bin
detained in darkness. Sebast: Ver: lib. 4. de gener.. 3. Of secondary colors,
and from whence they arise.


Secondary colors are such as either arise out of the mingled portions of
simple colors: whereof some are mean between both, as bloud-red, red like
saffron it self, green, sky-colour: these are colores medii, and have their
primary essence from the simple colors, either by an equal, or unequal
mixture of them; for mixtus color est, qui ex simplicium contemperatione
producitur. whereof some are compounded of both the simples; and some declining
more to one then to the other, by an unequal proportion: or such as arise out
of either extremes; as saffron, that is, such as is like to water wherein the
flower of saffron has bin dissolved; or blew, a deep blew made of an equal
mixture of white and black.

. 4. Of colors intermediate or mixed.
The intermediate colors then are produced out of the mixture of the extremes,
whereof some of them incline to white, other to black: to white is conjoined
according to the opinion of Aristotle lib: de sensu and sens.

1. Flavus, yellow; which is generated as often as much white is mixed with
lesser black, and therefore the splendor is drowned with a certain obscurity:
or, as Varro affirms, lib. 4. de gener. when there is a mixture of two
portions of white, with one of red. Of this color is ripe corn, the yolk of an
egg; which is sometimes changed into the color of pure gold, fulvus, and is
caused where the humor waxes dry: for experience teaches; that corn looks not
yellow till its moisture fails; as in Autumn, when natural moisture
decays, the color of green leaves is changed into yellow.

2. Viridis, green, belongs unto black, which arises out of the mixture of
lesser red and more black; as appears by the definition, Viridis est color
nigredine copiosiore and rubedine minore contemperatus. Others compound it of
four parts white, and five black.

3. Rubeus, red, is generated when much opacous light is fixed in brightness,
which brightness is terrestrial; yet so cleansed, that the light mixing with it
becomes red. So that red exactly compounded does participate of two simples
indifferently: which Scribonius thus defines, Rubedo est color aequali simul
albedinis and nigredinis combinatione constans. But the beauty of the color is
much changed from black and white, to bloud-red. Again, if the light in it be
splendid, it turns to purple, as we often see in the flame of fire, being
mingled with fume and brightness. Subordinate to this color is

4. Puniceus, red like apples, or saffron it self, containing one part of white
and two of black. This color does resemble the fire, the highest and noblest
of the four elements.

5. Purpureus, purpure, is next red, and is in a diaphanous body more opacous
and impure, and therefore more obscure: and this is the color of Violets, or
the leaves of the flower De-luce. Purpure consists of much red and a small
quantity of black, and is thus defined; Purpureus color est qui a multa
rubedine, and pauciore nigredine commiscetur.

6. Coeruleus, fuscus, blew, sky-colour, or Azure, consists of more black,
and lesser white, viz: of three parts black, and two of white; which produces
such a color as is seen in the sky when it is very clear and transparent; for
the vapors receiving the pure light of the sunbeams causes a Sapphire-like
color to appear.

CHAP. IV. Of Color and substance simul.
. 1. Of white Urine like milk, snow-water, water, or silver shining etc. what
they signify.
1. LActeus, milk-white with thin substance, signifies the same as snow-water
does (Niveus Aqueus:) which is either Cruditatis nuntia, a signification of
cruditie, obstruction, or conversion of humor. Again, Cruditie is caused
either through decay of natural heat, and signifies the weakness of the
concocting faculty: or through suffocation. (1) Cruditie through want of
natural heat causes a Consumption, or lingering Ague, Diabetes, or pissing
evil, with thirst; but if grossness appear with it, then the neck of the
bladder is stopped: for in all humoral diseases before concoction appears,
urine is white and thin, and causes pain in the Spleen, evil digestion and a
cold liver; it demonstrates excess in drinking, pain in the back, evil in a
frantic person, as says Hippocrates Aphor. lib. 4. which Theophilus also
affirms in his Judicial of urines.

2. Urine shining like silver, of women, betokens she is with child, if she
cast often, and have no appetite.

3. Water-colour with a dark sky betokens death.

4. Urine watery and thin, in the aged signifies Gout in the feet and joints
proceeding from fleame.

5. Urine watery and thin having no residence, signifies the Tympany, and is
more rubicund if the inflammation waxes worse.

6. Urine watery and pissed forth little in quantity signifies the stone in the
Reins: with gravity residence, that the stone is removed from the Reins.

7. Urine white, thin, and watery, signifies Quotidian fevers: if virulent,
thick, and troubled like beasts urine, the Lethargy, Gonorrhoea, Morbus
Gallicus, or the Plague if it be red.

8. Dim water, Inopus or Kianos, signifies adustion of blood, and if it has no
residence, with a fever lethall: without a-feaver it does demonstrate gouts or
scabs.

9. Caropus, which is grayish of the color of a man's nail next the joint, or
of Lions eyes, signifies abundance of fleam, melancholy, imperfect digestion,
or the stone with gravill. (2) Cruditie being of two sorts, the next is through
suffocation, and causes worms, Hydropsies, with cold distemper: with thicker
urine, Apoplexy: falling evil, with leadish color: Vertigo or swimming in the
head, with greenish color: Palsy, fleame, melancholy, gout, with little motes
in the sediment.

lacteus



10. White Urine and Virulent, betokens in women, sickness in the reins and
secret receptacles: and in those that do rave with madness a very evil token.
Hippoc. Aph. 72.

2. Obstruction of the liver, reins, ureters, etc. if the urine be made with
pain, it signifies stopping of menstrues; with blackish dust in the sediment,
Jaundies, stone in the bladder, strangurie, impostumes growing near the passage
of urine, Iliaca passio, or wind in the small guts.

3. Or conversion of humor another way: if to the head, it causes Catarrhs,
which distilling into the inferior parts of the body, viz. to the nose, it
causes the Polypus; to the eyes Ophthalmia; to the ears, deafness; to the
palate, the falling of Columella; to the throat, hoarsness; to the mouth,
exulcerations; to the jaws and mandible, toothache; to Trachea arteria, or
windpipe,the Cough; to the lungs, Asthma; to the bowels, the iliack, whereof
sometimes follow the fluxes Diarrhoea, Lienteria, and Dysenteria; to the Reins,
Nephresia; to the joints, articularis morbus or the gout.

1. Subpallidus, spiceus, Pale,. 2. Of Urines pale, flaxen, or palish.
flaxen, and somewhat more concoct then the former, signifies an exulceration
and consumption of the lungs, in quantity little, and color leadish, only
paler, which with a lask is lethall.

2 If pale, abundance of fleame; if thick, a Quotidian; if remiss, great cold.

3. If palish, abundance of fleam mixed with some choler, and great distemper
of the body.

Of Urines Crystalline, milk-white and horn-white, see more page 32.

Subpalidus



1. Subrufus, aureus, citrinus, ^ Of (...) or yellow like gold.
Subrufe, yellow, citrine, signifies (says Rantzovius cap. 19. de urinae
excretione) in whole men perfect health; if it be made without heat, without
cold, without pain, without stench, moderately perspicuous, and mean both in
substance and quantity, having contents white, smooth and equal, descending to
the lowest region of the urine. But in sick men, hot and sharp distempers: in
old men, a double tertian: in children, a Quotidian: in young men, diseases of
the breast, with Bubbles in the Region; the Spleen, with rodds and streaks like
Meteors; of the Liver, if it be in quantity much, the body lean and belly
costive. And when it is not changed from its healthy color, sometimes it
signifies sharp diseases, as febris diaria, the Plague, or such like.

Subrufus



2. Urine subrufe, choleric, somewhat yellow and moderatly thick, signifies a
pure intermitting tertian; also if it has by and by a white cloud, and a
laudable sublation in the midst. If the urine be more red, and if in the
first f^^t there do appear neither sublation in the midst, nor cloud, the
fever will extend, and remain 7. days.

3. Yellow like gold, the beginning of some sickness ingendered in the liver
and stomach: if it be thin in substance, abundance of fleam, which will kindle
some of the kinds of fevers. gold color in women does signify carnal
appetite.

4. Citrine, if bright, does foreshew the distemper of the Spleen; if thin, the
distemper of the Liver; if full of Bubbles, that the Lungs be out of order.
Urine Citrine signifies gout in the feet and joints proceeding from a choleric
flux. Dr. Board of Urine.

. 4. Of subcitrine, light saffron, or saffron Vrines.
1. Subcroceus, subflavus, flavus, croceus; light saffron, saffron, subcitrine,
signifies choler, as in a tertian, if it be thin: distemper of humors in the
blood, if it be thickish black: Melancholy, if it be in substance thick.

2. Citrine, abundance of fleam mixed with choler.

3. Yellow, like the yellow of a lantherns horn, that Melancholy has great
dominion: if waterish color, that fleam is predominant

4. Fallow-Kiropus, signif. Hydropsies, wind under the side, stone in the Reins
of the back, or Apostumation of the Lungs, and fleam.

These Urines following, viz. Crystallinus, Lacteus, and Glaucus, are species
of the urine Lacteus, and are to be reduced unto it, as in page 24.]

Subcroceus



. 5. Of Urines Crystalline, milk white with thick substance, or horn-white.
1. Crystallinus, Crystalline positively white, in substance thick, betokens
abundance of raw humors: consumption, with fatty substance: Impostumes, with
filthy matter, and stinking settling down to the sediment.

2. Lacteus, milkwhite, with thick substance, betokens matter of the stone
voyded; or an ulcer in the instruments of urine, if it be mattery, and settle
to the sediment; or flux of seed in man or woman; or Coition, if it be without
stench; or Dropsy, if the yellow Iaundise continue through great cruditie in
the Veins.

3. Glaucus, horn-white, like the horn of an old lanthorn dark through smoke,
with thick substance not troubled, betokens gross humors, and phlegmatic
diseases in the whole body; or that the veins are full of ill humors; or
headache through agitation of ill humors ascending.

Rubeus, puniceus,. 6. Of red Urines like cherries, blood red Apples, or
saffron it self.
red like cherries, blood, red Apples, or saffron it self; of cause external,
signifies, that the Reins and Loins are beaten and bruised; or some Vein near
the Reins open or broken; or, by applying Sena, Rubia major, Cantharides, or
the like, to any part of the body: or internal, as the wideness, thinness or
looseness of some Veins near the Reins through which blood sweateth in great
quantity; or the reins and bladder fretted until blood comes, as in the grief
of the stone after labor with gravel; or abundance of blood, as in rotten
Agues; or abundance of choler, as in Agues tertian, with an unclean residence;
or semitertian, with a leadish color, and green cloud; or abundance of
unnatural heat says Rantzovius, melting the Rubeus

moisture of the body into Urine in great quantity, with fat floting aloft, as
in the consumption; or Urine stayed too long in the body, whereby it becomes
more colored and concoct, as happens in the Palsy, Apoplexy, Epilepsia,
Bloudy-flux, Colic, Iliack; or obstructions of the Gall, as in the Iaundise,
with pain in the neck and short-ribbs; or obstruction of the Spleen, or Liver,
as in the Dropsy; or Relapse, if it be in substance first thick and shortly
after thin, before and after the Critical day: in young men without danger, in
old men lethall.

1.. 7. Of bloody Urine, and mattery.
Bloody urine signifies that the bladder is hurt, or some rottenness within it:
if it be without sickness, that some vein is broken: or if it be in women clear
as water, it betokens Headache.

2. Red like blood, if it stincketh, sign: a putrified Liver, or some
impedim^^^ in the inferior parts. Bloody urine may come three ways; first,
from the Liver; secondly, from a Vein named Kyli, which is a Vein in the Cods;
thirdly, from the bladder. If from the bladder, the Urine will stinck, and the
substance fall to the bottom, with pain about the share, bladder, and yard: if
from the Liver, the Urine willl be clear and bloody, with pain on the right
side: if from the Vein Kyli, then some Veins which have recourse to that are
broken, and the blood distilling from the Vein makes it bloudish. Also blood
may come from the reins of the back, and so into the bladder; and then the
Patient does feel pain and pricking in the reins of his back, which does come
of the rasing of a stone in one of the water Conduits.

3. Urine bloody and mattery with stench, signifies Ulcers of the bladder and
of its neck, with a gross residence like bran: and sometimes thin skins, like
leaves and wool, are sent out with it. also it signifies a putrid Liver.

1. Reddish Urine and thick sign.. 8. Of reddish Urine, red like a burning
Cole, or ruddish dimmer then gold.
Headache caused of blood: reddish like waterish blood is of the same
signification with bloud-red.

2. Red like a burning Coal: demonstrates a fever; or else inflammation of
the Liver: if cloudy, a Pleurisy; if thick, that the blood is infected; if
thin and cloudy, that choler abounds.

3. Ruddish dimmer then gold in Children signifies distemperature; in aged
persons, a good sign of health, if the contents be good, which do yield
certain judgment of the disease, whiles the Urine it self is a meretricious
Harlot.

. 9. Of claret, crimson, purple, blew, and bluish Urines.
1. Subrubeus, palmeus, Claret, like to Bole-armoniack, signifies inclination to
sickness, and continuation of the disease; yet without danger, if it has a
sediment of like color and substance.

2. Purpureus vineus, Crimson like blackish red-wine, signifies in whole men
excessive labor in the heat of the sun, or fire, whereby the blood is
inflamed and roasted, as in a burning Ague, with thirst, watching, Coughs, and
other Symptoms of an Ague; or Choler adust turned into Melancholy.

3. Passeus, Cyaneus, purple of the color of raisins of the sun, indicates
the yellow Jaundise if it continues long: or health, with signs of concoction:
or abundance of blood in young men, with heaviness about the Liver.

4. Vinetus, fuscus, caeruleus, branus, blavus, Blew, betokens Subrubeus

stripes and bruseings, and that the humor is voyded; or extreme cold and
mortification; or great heat and rosting of the blood; or strangurie at hand in
those that have the stone; or recovery and health, where the Patient is mending.

5. Bluish signifies the Flix, Hydropsies, and pain in the Liver.

. 10. Of Vrines that be green, greenish, dimm-green, and oily-green.
1. Viridis, porraceus, prassinus, Green as leek-leaves, coleworts, or rather
greenish alone, is commonly lethall: Viridis mortem plerumque designat, (says
Rantz.) or cold mortal, if leadish color and black follow successively at
diverse times: or Quotidian Ague, or Melancholy adust, or yellow Iaundise with
an Ague: or heat and adustion of humors, if green has black immediately
succeeding, and not leadish coming between, with great heat, thirst, Viridus

short breath; and the like with the Urine glistering. Green also signifies
adustion of choler, green-Jaundise (commonly called the green sickness) and
resolution of the natural humidity of the Patient.

2. Greenish signifies adustion of blood inducing the yellow-Jaundise, altering
the natural complexion into unnatural.

3. Dimm-green, adustion of Choler and Melancholy, inducing the black-Jaundise.
Dr. Board of Vrines.

4. Oleaceus, Oyly-green in substance clammy and thick, and heavy as Oil, good,
if it be made after black Urine, as better succeeding worse: for so, if it be
made on the Critical day, and much in quantity, the disease is voyded;
otherwise it indicates either the dropsy or the colic: or ill, by reason of
great distemperature of heat, and imbecility of the body, as in a consumption
of the whole body; or of the Lungs; or tertian Ague, in fat and soft tender
bodies; or convulsion of dryness, madness.

1. Lividus, Plumbeus,. 11. Of Urines that be Ash Color, color of lead, and
their indications.
Ash Color, color of lead, good, in stripes and bruises, and in
black-Jaundise if it settle to the sediment, it gives notice that the matter of
the grief is voyded: ill, in hot agues, if green color was made before as at
other times; or strangury following in a burning Ague, mortal; or extreme cold
and mortification, if the color before was pale.

2. Lead color, in a woman conceaved, signifies that the child is dead. Vicar.
of Vrines.

Liuidus



1. Niger, Black,. 12. Of black, and blackish Vrines.
in substance thick, of cause external, eating of Cassia, or purgers of
Melancholy, or bruisings, beatings, falls, etc. or internal, by mixing of
Melancholy humous, adust blood, or choler; critical evacuation, with ease of
the Patient, after great diseases; or quartan, or burning Agues, with bleeding
at the Nose, else mortal, as Montanus observes in his tract, de excrementis;
or Menstrues heretofore suppressed and now voyded, ^f white, or such like went
before; or spleen with a tumor; or chronicall diseases of the back and matrix,
black-Jaundise, Haemor^hoids, madness, or the Reins affected with the stone,
with ^tench by breaking of some little Veins in the Reins; or Symptomaticall
and mortal with heat and adustion, as in sharp Agues, ^f green Urine went
before, or red Niger

accompanied with heat, leanness and thirst, the Urine virulent and small in
quantity; or cold, if blew, green, or ash color went before, with little
sediment, and united.

2. Black Urine: nigra est mala. for if the sick party lothes when he goes to
siedge, and speaks he knows not what when he goes to stool, it is lethall.

3. Black Urine like rust and canker in metal, little in quantity, with
residence like meal, signifies the Apoplexy.

4. Blackish Urine, as if one should mix soote wherein flesh newly killd had
bin washed, signifies suppression of the Menstrues.

CHAP. V. Of the number, color, substance and quantity of contents appearing
in the three Regions of Urine.
. 1. Of Contents appearing in the Sediment or lowest Region of Urine.
THe Regions of Urine are answerable to the several Regions of man's body: that
is to say, the upper Region with the Circle pertains to the head and Brain; the
middle Region does belong to the Heart, Lungs and Stomach, and to all other
official member^ about the Midriff; the lower Region to the Liver, Kidneys,
Reins of the back, and other inferior parts. The number, color, substance and
quantity of contents appearing in either of these, are here described.

1. Oleaceus, oyly-green contents appearing in the sediment or lowest Region of
Urine, ( as judicious Fletcher observes in his judgment of Vrines cap. 8.)
signifies consumption of the reins or bladder, with pain in the reins, without
an ague, and pissed fast: or if fatness swimmeth in the Urine, consumption of
the whole body with an ague.

2. Fat urine, white and moist, betokens the fever quartan; ponderous urine,
that the bladder is hurt. (Dr. Board.) There are two kinds of fatness in
Urine: the one is greasy, the other is of an Oily substance: if it be greasy,
it does signify debility in Nature, and wasting of it: if it be Oily, it
signifies Marasmos, or fever Hectic, or else some sickness to come shortly.

3. Eruaceum, Orobeum, red fetches do signify inflammation of the Liver,
consumption of the whole body, or of the Reins.

4. Dreggy sediment, mingled with blood, signifies death.

5. Folium Laminae, squamae] Plates, scales, signify a consumption with an
Ague; or exulceration of the bladder with stench and purulent matter; or
inflammation of the bladder and Liver; long sickness; if thick and heavy,
mortification: A Scaly water, like to the scales of fishes, does signify a
fever Hecticks; and a Squamous water a little bigger then the flakes of bran,
a consumption.

6. Furfur, Bran, course bran, signifies unkindly heat, with a consumption of
the whole body, with crudity and thin Urine; or scabbednesse of the whole body,
if the patient has no fever; or of the bladder only, with pain and itch about
the root of the yard.

7. Simila, pulls, fine meal or slower, indicates colliquation of the solid
parts, if they be white; or extreme adustion of blood, and therefore long
sickness, and for the most part mortal; or conception with child, if there be
fine meal or stirch in the swimm, or settling to the sediment like fine carded
wool, the rest of the urine a little troubled, and greenish, or Ash Color.

8. Crudus humor, raw humor, clammy like snevill, or the white of an egg, if
it be without pain, it signifies exulceration of the reins and bladder: or with
pain, impostume, or stone in the reins and bladder: or raw humors sometimes
causing an Ague, and appearing in the Sediment, signifies either Ache in the
Reins; or the Sciatica, Strangury, or Tenasmus.

9. Pus, rotten and purulent matter, like the matter of a sore, and stinking,
which when the Urinall is shaken disperseth it self into fatty and oily
resolutions, signify exulcerations of the reins without pain: or ( as
Fernelius de Vrinis observes,) of the bladder, with pain about it: or of the
Liver, with pain under the right short-ribbs: or putrefaction of the Liver, if
it be very dreggie: or Impostume of the Lungs, or Pleurisy: or thick rheum
causing difficulty in pissing: or Frenzy, or Squinancia, if there be pain in
the Lungs, Liver or bladder; or if there be no pain in these members it rises
either from inflammations, or contagious flux of Venus.

10. Slimy or congelate matter, like the white of a raw egg half decocted,
signifies either pain in the reins of the back, or in the neck of the bladder,
or about the fundament, or in the head of the yard, and if not helped in short
time, lethall. Dr. Board of Vrines.

11. Filthy matter, flows either from the reins of the back, or from the
bladder, or from the Liver. Where note, if it comes from the reins of the back,
the Patient does feel pain about the Loins and Flanks; if from the bladder, he
does feel pain about the share; if from the Liver, he does feel pain about the
rightside.

12. Poli, caruncula, filamenta, hairs like pieces of flesh, long, slender,
and hairy, do signify with thick Urine, either dissolution of the whole body
with an Ague, color oily, or green: or dissolution of the reins without an
Ague, the hairs fatty and gross: or obstruction of the reins with gross and
clammy humors, as in the Strangurie and pissing evil: or exulceration of the
reins and bladder, with purulent matter: or flux of Sperm after Coition,
Gonorrhoea, or Venerous pollutions: or when women have their white-flowers, or
unclean matrices.

13. Chopped haires] betokens resolution, and wasting in the reins of the back.

14. Arenula, sabulum] Gravel or sand, in color red, white, or blackish, do
signify (says Rantzovius) the breeding of the stone in the reins of the back,
if it be red: or the stone in the bladder, if it be white, with pain in the
bladder and about the share. Also the heat of the Liver and the reins, or
adustion of humors, if it be blackish, as in choleric diseases and
burning-Agues; or Melancholic infirmities; or pain in the joints or reins,
leprosy, or morbus Gallicus confirmed: Hemorrhoids, costivenesse, or heat in
the Liver, if there be no pain in the reins: or the receipt of sharp diuretic
Medicines and abstersive, producing gravel from the reins.

15 Sanguis, grumus sanguinis] Bloua pure, thick, gross, or cloddy, signifies
that the vessels of blood and veins, either have their orifice open, as in
critical evacuation of Menstrues without pain; or declination of the diseases
of the Spleen, with much residence and dreggs; or when the Veins be too weak,
as in Exanthemata or small poxes; or the Liver too weak, for so, pure blood is
voyded by stool; or the reins and bladder too weak, as in old men; or membranes
and tunicles of the Veins loose, thin, and full of pores, whereby* thin blood
is voyded; or substance and membranes hurt by a fall, beatings, brusings,
leaping, and violent exercise, and so, cloddy blood is voyded; or corrosive or
caustic medicines; or openers of obstructions; or by the exulceration of the
reins, or bladder; or by the stone, and so, filthy and cloddy blood is
evacuated.

16 Sperma, semen,] Seed, which (the urinall being shaken) lightly floteth and
ascends, signifies that either the seed abounds in quantity, as after
Coition; or else in quality, being sharp, hot, and salt; or else is thin, and
waterish, and departs involuntarily, making the Loins and body lean; or else is
virulent and contagious, as in the French pox, with gravelly and sandy
contents; or else the Spermatick vessels are too slippery; or else too weak in
their retentive faculty, wasting the whole body, as in the Apoplexy, palsy in
the Genitors, falling sickness: for in these diseases, stool, urine and seed
are involuntarie. Fletcher judgment of Vrines, cap. 8.

17. Cineres] Dust, black, or leadish, and heavy, signifies the flux of the
Hemorrhoids at hand, the color of Urine remiss; or pain, and diseases of the
spleen, the dust being somewhat brown and purple; or stopping of Menstrues, in
substance thick, color pale, flaxen or white, with little residence; or pain
in the loins, reins, and other inferior parts by which the blood passes in
the Hemorrhoidall Veins to the fundament. Dr. Board.

18. Atomi] Motes, such as appear in the sunbeams, either red or white,
signify putrefaction, as in the Pestilence, Morbus Gallicus, with stench: or
agitation or commotion of humors, as in the small pox, or measles: or diseases
of the Mother; floting all over the urine yet warm, and afterward settling to
the sediment, do signify a double strife betwixt Nature and the disease: or
Rheum in the whole body, if they appear universally: or in the superior parts,
if they appear in the cloud; or in the middle parts, if they appear in the
swimm; or in the lowest parts of the body, if they appear in the sediment: or
conception in women, if they settle down to the bottom: which if they be red
through great abundance of heat and blood, a male-child is conceived; but if
white, through lesser abundance of heat and blood, a female.

. 2. Of Contents appearing in the sublation or middle Region, and how they
differ from those in the sediment.
II. There is little or no difference between the Contents of the sediment, or
lowest Region, and between the middle region and sublation, except it be in
these few particulars. viz. 1. Contents in the sublation sig: some windiness.
2ly, Good contents in the swimm, as white, saffron, clarret, and equal, are
not so good in the Sediment. Presence of the swimm is a sure prognostic of
health; yet the presence of the sediment is necessary before there can be a
recovery. Thirdly, Ill Contents in the swimm which are signs of sickness,
are, black, green, leadish, solid, and deformed. 4ly, Contents in the swimm
point out the diseases of the middle parts, as about the Hypochondria, Viscera,
etc. 5ly, Sand or gravel in color reddish, and cleaving to the sides of the
Urinall, as if the urine did congeal into stones, signifies adustion of the
Liver. 6ly, Motes being puffed up by unnatural and flatuous heat, and afterward
settling to the Sediment, and troubling the urine, demonstrateth great strife in
the veins, betwixt natural heat, and the disease to be determined by age,
strength, diet, complexion, and good order of the Patient. Fletch: ex Montan.
de excrem.

III The third or highest Region of Urine is called the Cloud,. 3. Of Contents
appearing in the cloud, or upper Region.
wherein is to be considered (as in the former) the substance, quantity,
color, etc. where there is little difference, save only, the contents in the
cloud (compared with other Regions) have least signification of good, in good
signs: and on the contrary, least signification of ill, in ill signs. We will
therefore proceed to their description. viz.

1. Albus] white, signifies in perfect tertian Agues, abundance of choler, and
so continuance of the disease; or in rotten Agues, great danger through pain
and grief in the forepart of the belly, about the short ribbs.

2. Rubeus] red, signifies the changing of the sickness into a Quartan; or
concoction of humors; or headache through flatuous spirits ascending up into
the head, and so continuance of the disease.

3. Niger] black, signifies long-watchings and lack of sleep, whereof follows
the lightness of the brain, raveing, doting, which in old age is mortal.

Clouds in Urine are much like unto spiders webs,. 4. Shows what the clouds
in Urine are like; and what they signify.
and do signify evil digestion; coming through evil digestion of the Liver,
and imbecility of it through weakness of the stomach. If they are in color

1. Reddish] the sickness is sharp and strong. If

2 Yellowish it signifies calefication of the Liver.

3 Swart or it signifies calefication of the Liver.

4 Purple it signifies calefication of the Liver.

5. If fattish] unkind heat in the spiritual members, and wasting of the
natural Moisture in man, and resolution of the whole body, if it has long
continued: but if it appears on the sudden in heaps, and continues not long,
it demonstrates the colliquation of the Reins. Rantz. de vrina excretione.

6. Dark-sky, signifies death.

. 5. Of Deformed contents appearing in the whole Region of the cloud.
Deformed contents appearing in the whole region of the Cloud are, viz.

1. Nebula] a little white cloud appearing in the upper Region of the urine,
signifies phlegmatic matter to be elevated by strong heat, a sign of
concoction and declination of the disease, if it settle in the Sediment.

2. Fumus] smoke in the whole Region of the cloud, in color blackish, reddish,
or yellow, signifies viscous and tough matter, adust and choleric; or
abundance of unnatural heat, puffing up some raw matter, and therefore
continuance of the disease.

3. Granula divulsa] small grains, dropps, or motes dispersed, if blackish, do
signify adustion of matter, and wasting of the solid parts, being violently
puffed up by unnatural heat of malign Agues, which oftentimes are mortal.

CHAP. VI. Of the Colors, significations, and differences, of Spume, foame
froth, and Bubbles appearing on the Crown or Circle.
THe Circles of Urine,. 1. Colors appearing on the Crown or Cirle.
according to their color and substance, show the disposition of the Brain and
head for

1. Plumbeus] Leadish, blew, and black, signifies the falling sickness,
Apoplexy, or mortification of the Brain, whereby the Sinews do not their
duty in sense and motion.

2. Rubeus] Red; being first leadish, and certain days after red, signifies
Headache; or recovery of the animal power: or red and thin in substance, pain
in the right side of the head coming of Choler.

3. Viridis] Green betokens Choler; or Frenzy of green Choler, if it be in
a sharp Ague; or adustion of hot choler assaulting the head. Green in a fever
does signify pain in the head, coming of choler; and if it does continue, it
will engender an Impostume which will cause a Frenzy. Dr Board. item Fletcher.

4. Niger] Black, is of the same indication as black urine is of, for it
signifies mortification, if leadish color went before; or adustion, if green
color went before.

5. Flavus] Saffron, joined with thick Crown, signifies choler in the head,
with headache thereof.

6. Aqueus] Waterish-white, demonstrateth fleam in the hinder part of the head.
Also Waterish color betokens cold and weakness about the brain, hindering
it is faculty from casting out superfluities: if it be wan and thick, abundance
of Rheum about the brain.

7. Subrubeus, purpureus] Claret or crimson, sig: abundance of blood in the
head, or headache caused of blood: if it be purple and thick, ach in the hinder
part of the head.

8. Spiceus] Flaxen, signifies ach in the left side of the head, caused of
Melancholy; or Melancholy complexion. Pale and thin, distemper and coldness in
the left side of the head.

9. Fulvus] yellow, signifies headache proceeding from choler, with pricking in
the right side of the head.

10 Tremor corona] the trembling of the Crown, signifies either pain all along
down the backbone; or windiness; or thin humor; or stopping the Menstrues.

Thus far of the significations of the colors of the Crown, or Circle: next,
we shall declare the prognostics of spume, foam, froth, and bubbles.

. 2. Of spume foam, froth, and bubbles appearing in the circle.
Of the Spume, or Froth of Vrines there be three kinds: 1. a windy spume, which
is full of bubbles, which signifies Ventositie, and Viscositie in the body. (2)
the second is less then the first, and signifies fleam and corruption in the
stomach. the third like the foam of a Bores mouth, hanging together without
breaking, and does betoken unkind heat about the Liver; or else, ill humors
(as the learned observe) within the body: as ebullition of the Liver, or
agility of ill humors. And if they appear yellow, they betoken the
distemperature of the Liver ingendering the yellow Jaundise; if green, the
Agriaca, or green sickness; if black, Menstruae, a Bruise, black-Jaundise, or
mortification.

Furthermore, it is to be noted,. 3. Of Bubbles, their kinds, significatious,
and difference.
that there is difference between spume, and bubbles. Bubbles are of two
kinds. the one is resident and permanent: the other is neither resident nor
permanent.

The resident do signify ventosity intruded into the body, and that the
sickness is chronicall, and will so continue, unless some remedy be found out.

Those which be not permanent, but do quickly vanish away, do demonstrate
debility and weakness. Bubbles cleaving to the Vrinall, that the body is
repleated with many ill humors: also, they do signify the stone in the reins
of the back, says Dr Board in his Breviary of health. Thus foam, froth, and
bubbles are distinguished, by the learned Practitioners in this Art. Let us
examine them more particularly.

. 4. Of foam, froth, and bubbles, more particularly, and what they signify.
Foam, froth, or bubbles, is an extention, swelling, or puffing up of a viscous
moisture in a thick and gross vapor, through agitation either of heat, as in
water seething; or motion, as in the sea; or both, as in running waters: and
gives significations (as Argenterius de Vrinis notes) of Rheums and
distillations, and griefs descending from the head into the inferior parts of
the body. And Rantz. de Vrinae, excretione observes, that the appearance of
foam, froth, and bubbles in the urine, is caused either of cause external, as
of eating of pulse, or fruit, or surfeiting, or of pissing with some violence
into the Vrinall: or of cause internal, joined with color diverse, signifying
crudity, or white, raw, and phlegmatic matter; or saffron, signifying the
Jaundise; but mixed with some whiteness in the middle, diseases of the Lungs;
or lead-colour or blackish, matter adust; or black, extinction of natural
heat, which if they are much in quantity, many or thick together, long
continuing and scarcely to be abolished with a rods end wrapped about with flax
and put into the Vrinall, they do signify in whole men some tough and viscous
matter, which natural heat stirs. But in sick men (says judicious
Fletcher) if they appear in the Crown or Circle, abundance of raw tough matter
mixed with the ventositie and agitation thereof, which may signify either
colic, headache, or surfett. But if they appear over the whole face of the
urine, they signify weakness of the head; or flux of seed; or weakness of
nature, through obstructions and raw humors: if they appear in the beginning
of diseases accompanied with weakness, old age, feeble-pulse, winter, etc.
mortal. But after the beginning of the disease, with other good signs, may
signify health, because, such agitation is of natural heat now prevailing:
notwithstanding with ill signs, as ill color and contents, it signifies that
such agitation is, (not of natural heat, but) of unnatural heat, and
signifies in weak persons, death; but in strong men, long sickness and great
danger. When they shall appear in little quantity, they signify less headache
and ventositie; except the color be yellow; for so, choler increases the
grief. Wecker. Syntax.

They are again distinguished by their special differences;. 5. How foam,
froth and bubbles are distinguished.
viz: Granula and Ampullae.

1. Granula] little Bubbles like pinns-heads or little drops of quicksilver,
descending down toward the swimm, under the Crown into the body of the urine,
signify griefs of the head, as Rheum, which distilling down into the inferior
parts of the body, as to the Nose, the Polypus. etc. Vide page 8. cap. 2. of
Obstruction and Conversion of Urine.

2. Ampullae] Great Bubbles, signify grief of the Reins, (Nephritis) or grief
in the middle members of the body, as heart, liver, spleen; or drops of fat
like spiders webb, or drops of oil swimming aloft, signifies either
colliquation of the whole body with an Ague, and then this fat is pissed by
little and little at several times in small quantity: or Colliquation of the
Reins and bladder only, without an Ague, the fat being pissed fast, suddenly,
in good quantity at once, with pain and heat about the Reins: or inflammation
of the Liver: or critical evacuation, in concoction, and declination of the
disease, of some humor offending, whereby some fat member receives hurt, and
so part of the fat is dissolved.

CHAP. VII. Of Alteration of the colors of Urine in respect of Age,
Complexion, time of the year, and kind of life.
HAving in the former Chapters written of the Colors and substance of urines;
of the colors of contents, and several Symptoms appearing in the same: it
remains in this place, that I speak of the alteration of the Colors of Urine

1. Respectu aetatis,. 1. Shows, that in viewing of Vrines the age of the
sick is to be considered.
in respect of age. Thin Urine in children is mortal; therefore that is best
which is thick of substance, much in quantity, and in color whiteish: in
Springalls thick substance, but rather inclining to thin, in color yellow, or
light saffron; for black is deadly, says Salvianus. In young men, those
conditions are to be observed, which are mentioned in chap: 4. In old men, with
thin substance, white color, and little sediment. In women healthful,
substance rather thick then thin, dark, troubled, with many things swimming in
it, not so clear as in men, being much in quantity, with an impure sediment,
much thicker and whiter then in men's urine.

2. Respectu Temporis, in respect of the time of the year: as in Autumn,. 2.
The time of the year is to be respected.
when Solenters into the first degree of Libra, producing the Autumnall
equinox; which quarter being cold and dry, is compared with Melancholy, causing
Urines to have little sediment, yet without fault, the rest of that season all
mean. Or, in the beginning of winter the color of urine is white, substance
thicker, with contents more, and rawer, which quarter is cold and moist,
compared with fleam, Sol then entering into the first degree of Capricorn,
perfecting the Hyemall solstice. Or, in the Spring, when Sol enters into the
first degree of Aries, producing the Vernall equinox; which quarter being hot
and moist, compared with Sanguine, causes Urine in the beginning to be of
color white, and pale, but in spring proceeding, color changes from pale,
and flaxen, to paler and light; contents mean, and substance equal. In Summer
beginning, Sol then entering into the first degree of Cancer, makes the
Aestivall solstice: this quarter is warm and dry, compared with choler; causes
the Urine to be in color paler, and light saffron, in substance and sediment
thinner, white, smooth, and equal: but in Summer proceeding, color yellow
saffron, substance very thin, sediment very little, thin, and declining to
white.

3. Respectu Crasis,. 3. The complexionall quality is to be observed.
(so called from (...) misceo) in respect of the complexion, temperament and
mixture of natural humors. The Sanguine has reddish urine, with a certain
darkness, and substance indifferent thick. The choleric has urine yellow as
pure gold, much colored, and of substance thin. The phlegmatic has urine
white in substance, thick, quantity increased, and the sediment more raw. The
Melancholic has white urine with a certain dimness, because melancholy is in
quantity cold and dry: but if melancholy be voyded in substance, the urine is
black.

. 4. The kind of life, and condition of the patient.
4. Lastly, Respectu vitae conditioonis, in respect of the kind of life, as
wherein there is much exercise, fasting, anger, etc. making commotion in the
spirits, and strife in the humors, watchings, meats of hot operation; the
urine is more colored, and sediments fewer at the beginning, as long as those
passions do inflame the heat of the body, and there is moisture that may be
inkindled: or where there is much idleness, gluttony, surfets, sleep,
drunkenness, use of cold meats, the urine is white and thick, sediment much and
crude, the natural heat being oppressed and suffocated.

CHAP. VIII. General Aphorisms, or Considerations in the speculations of
Urines: with the division of the Urinall; and distinction of the three Regions,
and Contents appearing in the same.
IN the Speculation of Vrines,. 1 General Aphorisms to be had in memory.
many things are to be had in memory, considered, and called to mind. As, I.
collection, wherein consider, 1 The time wherein urine is made, as in the
morning. 2 The quantity, all; not part, nor several urines mingled. 3 The
color, which is always best when it is new-made and warm. 4 The Contents,
bubbles, and substance, which are best seen when the urine is settled. 5
Limitation of time: keep it not above six hours. 6 Remember to see it often,
and observe the perseverance or alteration of color, substance, and the like.

II. As some things do help Judgment, so there are many things do hinder
speculation; as much shaking, or pouring of it out, or cold to congeal it, or
wind to move it, or heat to exhale it, or meats and drinks to alter it, or
medicines to color it, or exercise, fasting, watching, labor, fear, anger,
sweating, purging, vomiting, which will alter the color, substance, quantity,
and contents.

III. The differences are either principal in the Urine, or less principal.
Principal, are substance, quality, quantity, and contents: less principal,
are such as arise from the causes, as Choler, Melancholy, sleep, watching,
diseases; or from the effects, sign. health, death, griefs of the stomach,
head, liver, breast, veins; from the manner of pissing, or suppressing of Urine.

IV. Remember that the urine according to its height, be divided into three
Regions, for the distinction of the contents appearing in the same; as it is
here demonstrated by a perfect, and well-formed Urinall, distinguished into
each several Region and parts.

As for example,. 2. The significations of the several Regions of Urine.
Contents appearing in the cloud, do signify diseases of the highest parts of
man's body. Contents appearing in the sublation or swimm, do demonstrate the
affections and diseases in the middle parts of the body, as about the short
ribs, Hypochondria, inward entralls, as the spleen, liver, heart, lungs,
bowels, breast, stomach. And lastly contents appearing in a] Corona b] Suprem
Regio c] Media Regio d] Infima Regio


a] Corona, which is the top-line for the Circle, or Crown. b] Suprema Regio,
the uppermost Region for the cloud. c] Media Regio, the middle Region for the
sublation or swimm. d] Infima Regio, the lowest Region for the sediment or
Residence. the sediment, do signify diseases of the lowest parts: and
therefore as (Atomi) Motes do signify putrefaction, or agitation of humors,
or Rheum in the whole body, if they appear in the whole urine: so they do
indicate Rheum in the upper parts, if they appear in the cloud; in the middle
parts, if they appear in the swimm; and Rheum in the lowest parts, if they
appear in the sediment, the motes being rough, and the urine troubled.

V. In viewing of the Crown or Circle, you must remember that the placeing of
the Vrinall, and difference of the sight, may occasion diverse colors in the
Crown: and therefore Actuarius his counsel is, to look into the crown with one
eye.

VI. Lastly,. 3. Of the perspicuousness and darkness of Urine.
consider the perspicuousness and darkness of urine as follows. (1) Clear
urine in whole men, signifies good digestion, abundance of natural heat, which
will separate and distinguish the Hypostasis: but in sick men, if it be too
clear, and in color saffron, it betokens yellow choler, unnatural heat, as
in Agues (says Wecker); more remiss, crude, and white, signifies cold,
cruditie, and continuance of the diseases. (2) or dark urine, whereof there are
three kinds: the first whereof is dark accidentally by outward cold, as air,
winter, etc. which of all other, is most thick and dark, and does stain the
Crown and top of the urinall, with a certain white, clammy thin humor, which
being chafed at the fire, returns to its self again: 2 ly, or dreggy urine,
signifying unclean Reins, with motes flying, floting, and swimming in the
urine, which afterward settling to the bottom, becomes a thick Residence;
which may also signify a new ulcer with blood; or an old ulcer with rotten,
purulent, and filthy matter. Fletcher, cap. 3. 3 ly, or confused urine, without
motes, continuing confused without alteration, does signify properly
confusion, putrefaction and corruption of the blood, and humors in the great
veins, and is found only in continually dangerous, and malign Agues,
Lethargies, and the like.

Scientia speculativa est, cujus finis ultimus est scire.
FINIS.
A TABLE Of the COLORS of Vrines and Contents, with their significations.
Chap. IV.
Sect. I. 1. MIlk-white with thin substance page 20 2. Urine shining like
silver page 21 3. Water color ibid. 4. Watery and thin ibid. 5. Watery and
thin, having no residence ibid. 6. Watery and pissed forth little in quantity
ibid. 7. White, thin and watery ibid. 8. Dim water page 22 9. Caropus ibid. 10.
White urine and virulent. page 24
Sect. II. 1. Pale, flaxen, etc. page 25 2. Pale ibid. 3. Palish ibid.
Sect. III. 1. Subrufe, yellow, citrine page 27 2. Urine subrufe page 29 3.
Yellow like gold ibid. 4. Citrine ibid.
Sect. IV. 1. Light safron, safron, subcitrine page 30. 2. Citrine. ibid. 3.
Yellow like a lanthorns horn ibid. 4. Fallow-Kyropus ibid.
Sect. V. 1. Crystalline positively white, in substance thick page 3 2.
Milk-white with thick substance ibid. 3. Horn-white ibid.
Sect. VI. Red like cherries, bloud-red apples or safron page 33
Sect. VII. 1. Urine bloody page 35 2. Red like blood ibid. 3. Bloody and
mattery page 37
Sect. VIII. 1. Reddish Urine and thick page ib. 2. Red like a burning cole
page ib. 3. Ruddishdimmer then gold. page ib.
Sect. IX. 1. Claret like to Bole-armoniack page 38 2. Crimson like blackish
red-wine ibid. 3. Purple like raisins of the sun ibid. 4. Blew ibid. 5.
Bluish page 40
Sect. X. 1. Green as leek leaves, coleworts page 40 2. Greenish page 42 3.
Dim-green ibid. 4. Oyly-green ibid.
Sect. XI. 1. Ash Color page 43 2. Lead-colour ibid.
Sect. XII. 1. Black, in substance thick page 45 2. Black Urine page 47 3.
Black, like rust or Canker in metal ibid. 4. Blackish Urine ibid.

Chap. V. Of the number, color, substance, and quantity of contents appearing
in the 3. Regions of Urine.
Sect. I. The Contents of the Sediment. 1. Oily-green page 48 2. Fat Urine page
49 3. Red fetches ibid. 4. Dreggy sediment page 50 5. Plates, scales ibid. 6.
Branne ibid. 7. Fine meal or flower ibid. 8. Raw humor, clammy page 51 9.
Rotten and purulent matter page ib. 10. Slimy or congelate matter page 52 11.
Filthy matter ibid. 12. Hairs like pieces of flesh page 53 13. Chopt-haires
page 54 14. Gravel, or sand ibid. 15. Blood pure, thick, gross or cloddy page
55 16. Seed page 56 17. Dust, black or leadish page ib. 18. Moats page 57
Sect. II. The difference between the Contents of the sediment and those of the
middle Region page 58, 59
Sect. III, The Contents of the upper Region. 1, White page 60 2, Red ibid. 3.
Black page 61
Sect. IV. The Clouds in Urine, if 1. Reddish ibid. 2. Yellowish ibid. 3.
Swarthy ibid. 4. Purple ibid. 5. Fattish ibid. 6. Dark-sky page 62
Sect. V. 1. A little white cloud in the upper region of the Urine page 62 2.
Smoke ibid. 3. Small grains, dropps etc. page ib.

Chap. VI. Of the Colors, significations, and differences of spume, foam,
froth and bubbles, appearing on the crown, or circle.
Sect. I. 1. Leadish, blew and black page 63 2. Red ibid. 3. Green page 64 4.
Black ibid. 5. Safron ibid. 6. Waterish white ibid. 7. Claret or Crimson page
65 8. Flaxen ibid. 9. Yellow ibid. 10. Trembling of the crown page ib.
Sect. II. Of the kinds and significations of the spume, or froath of Urines
page 66
Sect. III. Of Bubbles page 67
Sect. IV. The particular significations of foam, froth, and bubbles page
68.69.70
Sect. V. How foam, froth, and bubbles, are distinguished 1. Little bubbles
like pins heads page 71 2. Great bubbles ibid.

Chap. VII. The Alteration of the Colors of Urine.
1. In respect of age page 73 2. In respect of the season of the year ibid. 3.
In respect of the complexion page 75 4. In respect of the kind of life page 76
A CATALOGUE Of the diseases demonstrated by Urine in this treatise
alphabetically set down, as follows.
A
AGues page 45.51.83 Agues tertian, semitertian page 33.43 Ague quotidian page
40 Ague burning page 38.43 Agues rotten page 33.60 Ach in the left side of the
head page 65 Ach in the reins page 52 Agrica, or green sickness page 67 Ague
lingering page 20 Anasarca page 9 Animal Power recovered page 63 Arthritis page
11 Angina page ibid. Ascites page 9 Apoplexy page 22.35.47.56.63 Asthma page
25.40 Appetite, Carnal appetite page 29 Apostumation of the Lungs page 30
B
BAck pained page 21.45 Backbone pained page 66 Belly pained page 60
Bloud-vessells open page 55 Blood distempered page 30 Blood infected page 29.83
Blood, adustion of blood page 22.51 Blood, pissing of blood page 11 Bladder
pained page 53 Bladder scabbed page 50 Bladder inflamed page 51 Bladder
exulcerated ibid. Bladder hurt and rotten page 35.36.49 Bladders neck stopped
page 20 Body stuffed with ill humors page 67 Body distempered page 25 Brains
weakness page 9 Brain cold and weak page 65 Brain mortified ibid. Breast
d^seased page 27 Breath's shortness page 25.42 Bronchocele page 9 Bruisings
page 38
C
CAlefication of the Liver page 61 Catarrhs page 9.10.24 Chiragra page 11
Choler page 25.64 Choler in a tertian page 30 Choler abounding page 33.37
Choler adust page 38.40.42.45.64 Colic page 42 Child-dead page 43 Conception
page 20.51.56 Coition page 32 Concoction, signs of it page 62 Costiveness page
54 Colliquation of the solid parts page 50.72 Cold page 47 Cold extreme page
40.43 Cold mortal page 40 Convulsion page 43 Coughs page 11.25.38 Consumption
page 32.49 Consumption caused through crudities page 20 Consumption of the
reins page 38 Consumption of the whole body page 11 35.49 Consumption with an
ague page 50 Crudities page 9.20
D
DEath, signs of it page 20.47.50 62.70 Dead child page 43 Deafness page 24
Declination of the disease page 52.62 Diabetes page 20 Digestion imperfect page
22 Digestion, evil digestion page 20.61 Diarrhoea page 25 Distempers page 27
Difficulty in pissing page 52 Dissolution of the body page 53 Distillation page
68 Dotage page 61 Dropsy page 32.35.42 Dropsy in the throat page 9 Dropsy
Ascites ibid. Dropsy Tympanites page ib. Dropsy Anasarca with its species
page ib.
E
EPilepsia page 35 Evacuation critical page 45 Evil, falling evil page
22.57.64 Exulcerations page 51.52 Exulceration of the liver page 51
Exulceration of the reins and bladder page 53 Exanthemata page 56
F
FAt dssolued page 72 Fever page 37 Fever quotidian page 20.25 Febris diaria
page 27 Fever tertian intermitting page 29 Fever quartan page 49 Fever
Hectic ibid. Falling evil page 22.57.64 Phlegm page 21.25 Phlegm abounding
page 22.29 Phlegm mixed with choler page 30 Flux page 40 Flux of venus page
11.32.52.53 Fluxes choleric page 11 Flux of the Hemorrhoides page 75 Flatus
hypoccndriacus page 30 Flowers, women's white flowers page 54 Fundament pained
page 52
G
GNawings page 9 Gonorrhea page 11.22.54 Gout page 20.22.25.29 Gutts rolled
together page 10
H
Headache. page 32.35.60.64.70.71 Headache caussed of blood page 65 Headache,
caused of choler, phlegm ibid. Head weak page 70 Heart grieved page 7 Heat
unnatural page 33.40.45.50.63 Heat in the sun page 38 Heaviness about the
liver ibid. Hemorrhoides page 11.45.54.57 Humidity resolved page 40 Hoarsness
page 11.24 Humors raw page 32 Humors gross and phlegmatic ibid. Humors
adust page 40.54 Humors in commotion page 57 Humors concocted page 60
Hydropsies page 23.30.40 Hydrocela page 10 Hyposarca ibid. Hypocondria page 59
I
JAundise yellow page 67.69 Jaundise green page 40 Jaundise black page 42.54.67
Jaundise page 24.380 40.42 Imbecility of the liver page 61 Illiaca passio page
10.24 Impostumes page 10.32.51.24.64 Joynt-sickness page 10
L
Labor excessive page 38 Lasks page 10 Lethargy page 22.83 Lethal, color
lethal page 40 Leaness page 47 Leprosy page 54 Leucophlegmata page 9 Lienteria
page 25 Liver page 50.72 Liver heated page 66.67 Liver adusted page 59 Liver
inflamed page 50.54 Liver putrified page 36, 37.52 Liver obstructed page 53
Liver pained page 40.57.72 Liver distempered page 29 Liver cold page 20.27
Loins imbecility page 60 Lungs page 69 Lungs impostumated page 52 Lungs
inflamed page 11 Lungs heat ibid. Lungs exulcerated page 25 Lungs wasted page
43
M
Madness page 24.43.45 Marasmodes page 11.50 Matter phlegmatic elevated page
62 Matter tough and viscous page 62.69 Matter raw ibid. Matter adust page 63.69
Matrix page 45 Matrix unclean page 54 Melancholy page 10.11.22.30.40.45.54
Miserere mei Deus page 10 Menstruarum fluxus page 10.67 Menstrues voyded page
45 Menstrues suppressed page 25.47.57.66 Menstrues without pain page 55 Measles
page..25 Morbus articularis page 10.57 Morbus Gallicus page 22 57 Mother,
diseases of it page 67 Mortification, signs of it page 50.64 Mortification
page 38.43.24 Mouthexulcerated page
N
NAture weakened page 49.70 Natural moisture wasted page 61 Natural heat
extinguished page 63 Neck of the bladder pained page 52 Nephresia page 10
Nephritis page 71
O
O^structions page 20, 24 Obstruction of the reins page 53 Opthalmia page 24
P
PAin in the head page 64 Pallet-falne page 24 Palsy page 22.35 Palsy in the
genetors page 56 Pestilence page 37 Plague page 22.28 Pissing-evil page 53
Pleurisis page 30 Phrensy page 9.52.63 Podagra page 11 Polipus page 24.71
Putrefaction page 22.57.64 Pox page 2.55 5.56 Poxes page 55.58
Q
Quotidian fever page 20.25.27.40 Quotidian Ague vide tit. of Fever and Ague.
page 45
R
RAving, i e. madness page 61 Reins misaffected page 24.36.52.72 Reins beaten
and bruised page 33 Reins unclean page 83 Reins washed page 49 Relapse page 35
Ribs pained page 52.60 Rheum page 27 Rheum in the brain page 65.68.71
S
SAreites page 9 Sciatica page 10.11.51 Scabbs page 22.50 Seed page 56.70
Sickness beginning page 29.37 Sickness at hand page 49 Sickness like to
continue page 50.67.70 Sickness, i e. green sickness page 40.67 Sickness, i e.
falling sickness page 22 Sperme page 11.32.52.53 Stone page 51 Stone in the
reins page 20.22.30.45. Stone page 54 Stone in the reins page 20.22.30.45.51
Stone in the bladder page 24 Stone voyded page 32 Sleep wanting page 61
Strangury page 38.24.51.53 Stripes page 38.43 Spleen page 31 Spleen pained page
20 Spleen diseased page 27.57 Spleen distempered page 29 Spleen obstructed page
35 Spleen with a tumor page 45 Squinancy page 11.52 Stomach 's weakness page
61 Stomach oppressed with fleam page 66 Surfett page 68.69
T
Terms suppressed page 11 Tenasmus page 51 Tertian ague page 60 Tertian, a
double tertian page 27 Thirst page 40.47 Toothache page 24 Throat-dropsie page
9 Throat swollen page 11 Tympanie page 9.20
V
Veins broken page 11.33.35 Veins, i e. strife in the veins page 59
Ventosity page 66.67.69.70 Vomiting page 9 Vertigo page 22 Viscera pained page
59 Venus page 52 Venereous pollutions page 53 Ulcers new and old page 83 Ulcer
in the uriters page 32
W
WAtchfullnesse page 38 Wasting of the reins page 54 Wasting of the solid parts
page 63 Weakness of the brain page 9 Weakness of the Stomach page 61
Weakness of nature page 67 Windiness page 59 Women's white flowers page 54
Worms page 22
Y
YArd pained page 52 Yard, Palsy in the yard page 56
Courteous Reader, These Books following are printed, and are to be sold by
Francis Eglesfield, at his Shop at the Marigold in Paul's Churchyard.
THe holy Court in five Tomes, written in French by N. Caussin, and done into
English by Sir T. Hawkins, and others.

Most excellent Instructions for the keeping of Merchants Books and Accounts,
by way of Debtor and Creditor, after the Italian manner, by John Carpenter
Merchant. in Folio.

Aelians Trackticks, or the Art of Imbattelling an Army. in Folio.

Animadversions of War, or the Military magazin, by Robert Ward Gentleman and
Commanander. in Folio.

The Works of John Tailor the Water-Poet, collected into one Volume. in Folio.

Heywood of Angels, in Folio.

Pareus on the Revelation in English, in Folio.

Bp. Usher, his Body of Divinity, in Folio.

Decapala in Psalmos, sive Commentarius ex december Linguis, antiqui Patribus,
Rab. Historicis and Poetis a Joanne Vicars Anglo, in Folio.

A faithful Register of the Transactions in Parliament in the Third and Fourth
years of the Reign of our late Sovereign lord King Charles, containing the
several speeches, Cases, Arguments of Law, and grand Mysteries of the Kingdom
then in Agitation? by T. F.

Gulston in Rhetoricam Aristotelis, gr. lat. in 4to.

The Works of that famous Mathematician, Edmund Gunter, sometime Professor of
Astronomy in Gresham College, newly printed with many corrections and
additions, by Samuel Foster, late Professor of Gresham College. in 4to.

The Works of Sir Rich, Baker, Viz. Meditations and Disquisitions on the Lords
Prayer, in 4to. On the first Psalm, in 4to. On the seven Penitential Psalms,
in 4to. His Cato Variegatus, or Cato's Moral Disticks translated into English
verse, 4to. On the Creed, in 12. Motives for prayer upon the seven days of the
Week, in 12. The Soliloquie of the Soul, in 12. An Apology for Laymens writing
in Divinity in 12.

Decimal Arithmetic, or the use of Napiers bones by William Barton, in 8to.

The Sea-man's Secrets with the Tables newly calculated, very useful for young
Seamen, in 4to.

A Commentary on the first Psalm, by Phineas Fletcher, in 4to.

The Purple Island, being Poetical Miscelanies, by Phineas Fletcher. in 4to.

Joy in tribulation, or Consolations for afflicted Consciences, by Phineas
Fletcher, in 12.

Five Sermons upon several occasions preached at Court, by Dr. Preston, in 4to.

The Needles excellency, a most useful Book of Cut-works, in 4to.

Light from Heaven by Dr. Sibbs in 4to.

Lydia's Conversion, or the Riches of Mercy, by Dr. Sibbs, in 12.

The whole works of that Eloquent Divine Thomas Plafere D.D. collected into one
Volume, in 8vo.

The handmaid to Arithmetic refined, by Nicolas Hunt, in 8vo.

The art of Dialling by John Foster, corrected and much enlarged by the Author
himself in 4to.

An Introduction to the right receiving of the Sacrament by W. Pemble, in 12mo.

The burden and unburthening of a laden conscience, by Richard Kilby, in 12.

Spiritual food and Physic being a large Catechism composed by John Mico, in
8vo.

A Catechism by M. Nicolas, in 8vo.

Corpus Christi, together with the demonstration of Antichrist by John Gurney,
in 12.

The History of Heliodorus in ten Books translated by W. Lisle, in 4to.

Aesop's Fables in Prose and Verse gammatically translated, illustrated with
Pictures, much enlarged; exactly translated out of the original Greek,
together with the History of his Life, in 12.

Divine Emblems and Hieroglyphics, by Francis Quarles, in 8vo.

The usefullness and excellency of Christ, by C. Jelinger. in 8vo.

The Office and Duty of Constables, Churchwardens, and other Officets,
excellently set forth by Nicholas Layer, Counselor, in 8vo.

A Collection of Speeches in Parliament, by Sir Edward Deering, in 4to.

A Discourse of proper Sacrifice, by Sir Edward Deering, in 4to,

Posselii Syntaxis Greek, in 8vo.

God's Summons to general repentance; by John Harsnet, in 12.

Juelli Apologia, in 8vo. Greek and Latin* and also in Lat. in 12.

Diverse Sermons upon several occasions, by John Bond Master of the Savoy, in
4to.

The Doctrine of the Bible, in 8vo.

Gospel-conversion, by John Cotton of New England, in 8vo.

A Brief of the Bibles History in 12. by Euoch Clapham.

Occasional-Meditations, by Jos: Hall in 12.

A brief Exposition on the Epistle to the Hebrews by David Dixon, in 8vo.

Short handwriting, or the art of tachygraphie, by Thomas Shelton, in 8vo.

Wollebii Compendium Theolog. in 12.

Spare minutes, or Warwicks Meditations, in 12.

A Map of England, the most exact that is extant, with thc Kings of England
about, done by W. Holar.

Lucian's Dialogues translated into English. 4to.

Holidai Philosophia, in 4to.

Veneti Historia, in 4to.

Death's Deliverance, and Eliah's fiery Chariot in two Sermons, by Alexander
Gross, in 8vo.

A Manual of controversies in Engl. by Osiander, in 8vo.

Munition against man's misery, by R. Smith, in 8vo.

Wit and Mirth, by John Tailor in 8vo.

The Garden of spiritual Flowers, in. 12

Bible Battles, by Bernard, in 12.

Monuments in the Saxon-tongue, written 700 years ago, showing, that both the
Old and New Testament, Lord's Prayer, and the Creed, were then used in the
Mother tongue, collected by W. Lisle, in 4to.

The Excellency of a gracious Spirit, together with Moses Self-denial, by
Jeremiah Buroughs, in 8vo.

The power of the Christian Magistrate in sacred things, by Lewis de Moulin,
History reader in Oxford. in 8o.

Brief notes upon the whole book of Psalms, by George Abbot lately published
in 4to.

Amicus Reipublicae, the Commonwealth's friend, or an exact and speedy course
to justice and right, and for preventing and determining tedious Lawsuits, by
Io. March of Grayes-Inne.

The Soul's possession of Christ, by Thomas Hooker of New England, in 12o.

The Saints Dignity and Duty, together with the danger of Ignorance and
hardness, by Thomas Hooker of New England, in 12.

Rhetorices Elementa, by William Dugard Master of Merchant-Tailors Scool,
London, in 8vo.

Also, Retoricae Compendium Anglo-Lat., by Thomas Horn Master of Eaton Scool.

A piece of great Leaning, entitled, The height of Eloquence, written
originally in Greek by Dionysius Longinus, translated into English by J. Hall
Esquire.

The High Court of Justice, a Sermon preached before the Judges of assize
Leicester, by Anththony Scattergood.

Moses his Choice, showing the excellency of a gracious heart, etc. by Mr.
Jeremiah Buroughs.

A glimps of Christ, discovering the sweet incomes of Christ to a spiritual
heart, by Robert Dingly.

The use of the Quadrant, fitted for daily practice with lines, by Sam. Foster
late Professor of Astronomy at Gresham College.

Reusneri Symbola, exactly corrected, and the defect of the 3. Tables in former
Editions rectified and made into one.

Letters of Mounsier de Balzack, 1.2.3. and 4th parts, trnslaated out of the
French into English, by Sr Richard Baker and others, now collected into one
volume in 8vo.

None but Christ, the 9th, Edition, by Clement Cotton, the author of the
English Concordance, in 12.

A Treatise of Liberty and Necessity, wherein all controversies concerning
Predestination, Election, Free Will Grace, Merits, Reprobation, etc. is fully
decided and cleared, by Thomas Hobbs, in 12.

The Covenant of Grace, discovering the Great work of a Sinners Reconciliation
to God by Joh. Cotton, late Minister at Boston in New England in 8.

The Theater of Complements, or the Art of Eloquence and most refined way of
speaking by Basileus Musophilus, in 12.

Cases of Conscience, practically resolved by Joseph Hall Bp. of Norwich. in 12.

The way to Heaven discovered, and the stumbling blocks cast therein by the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, removed; the second Edition much enlarged by
Robert Purnell, in 8.

Satan at Noon, being an impartial relation of the proceedings of the
Commissioners of the County of Berks against John Pordage, Minister of
Bradfield in the said County, published by Christopher Fowler, in 4to.

The Crumbs of Comfort, a prayer book, in 24.

The Psalms of David in Meetre, to be sung in usual and known tunes, by Will.
Barton, M of Arts.

The mortified Christian, showing the nature, signs, necessity and Difficulty
of true Mortification with a discovery of sincerity, by that faithful
Minister of Christ, Christopher Love. in 8.

The Scotch design discovered, Relating their dangerous Attempts lately
practiced against the English Nation, with the sad consequences of the same, in
4to.

Poems, Humane and Divine, by Robert Herrick Esquire, in 8.

The History of Bees, by Charles Butler, in 4to.

Lucius Florus in Latin, in 24.

C. Salustius In Latin, in 24.

Phraseologia puerilis, or selected Latin and English Phrases, very useful
for young Latinists, to prevent Barbarismes and bald Latine-making: and to
initiate them in speaking and writing elegantly in both Languages, the third
Edition, Methodically digested and very much enlarged by the Author John
Clark, Bachelour in Divinity, sometimes Master of Free-scool in Lincoln.

Formulae Oratoriae in usum Scholarum concinnatae cum praxin and usu earundem
in Epistolis, Thematibus, Declamationibus conterendis, Accessit Dux Poeticus,
cum suis aliquot poematiolis, Editio septima, Novssima Autoris Lima expolita,
per Joh. Clarke, B. D. and sometime Master of the Free-Scool in Lincoln.

The Parable of the wedding Supper explained wherein the offer of Salvation
both to Jews and Gentiles is pithily and plainly applied, the second Edition:
whereunto is added a discourse for the payment of Tithes; by Thomas Larckham M.
A. sometime of Trinity College in Cambridge.

The Rock of Ages, or a Treatise of the eighteen Attributes of God; twelve of
them communicable, and six incommunicable, being the substance of Sundry
Lectures, by Thomas Larkham M. A. sometime of Trinity College in Cambridge.

FINIS.

