THE REPLY OF Richard Hutchinson, Esquire, TO Sir Eliab Harvey's ANSWER.
SIR
Eliab begins his Answer with an Insinuation, as if the Printed Cast was only
In the Name of Richard Hutchinson Esquire when it is well known, that it was
Written, Printed, and Published, by his Direction. Next, Sir Eliab pretends,
That the Objection against those who Voted for him without Right, was, That
they were made by the Present Bailiffs to Serve a Turn: Whereas, the Objection
was, That they were made at several Times, contrary to a known By-Law. And
though he suggests, that but One was made while these Men were Bailiffs; it is
in Proof, That many were made in their Time without Right, and that in favor
of Sir Eliab.

He affirms, That None were denied the Taking up their Freedoms which had Right
to require them: When it will be proved, that several were denied their Right
till an Action was brought by One of them for such Denial.

He says, the Sixteen Clergymen that Voted for him had Freedoms by Birthright
( or otherwise), yet cannot show, that more than One of them had any Right, but
from the Free Gift of them who, by the By-Law, were restrained from giving away
any Freedoms. Besides that, it was contrary to the Prescriptional Right of the
Town; which appears by Record to have been a Borough in the Time of Hen. I. and
the Indentures of Returns to Parliament have been by the Burgesses of the
Borough.

He says, That Clergymen and Nonconformist Preachers Voted for Mr.
Hutchinson; when there were but Two, one of which was made Free before the
By-Law, and the other as his Son, born after his Freedom.

He says, Every Freeman was called over according to his Seniority: which is
quite otherwise; it being by a mere Contrivance; by which Sir Eliab had Seventy
One at the Beginning, when there were but Five on the other Side. Nor was ever
any thing with less Color than his Assertion, That Mr. Hutchinson's Friends
pressed to have the Books of Freedom in their Custody for a Week: When it is
well known, that he was chiefly insisted upon it, proffered to proceed to the
Scrutiny upon the Place immediately, if he might have an Inspection of the
Books of Freedoms to compare with the Poll; by which it would have appeared,
that Mr. Hutchinson had a considerable Majority of True Votes.

He says, All the rest of Mr. Hutchinson's Paper will appear False and
Frivolons. But if Bribery, among other Things, be proved, as it is not doubted
but it will, certainly this will not appear Frivolous.

Upon the whole, it is to be observed, That Sir Eliab did very prudently, not
to deny that there is such a By-Law as is urged against him; because, though it
is not to be found in the Books, he cannot but believe, that the examining into
the Tearing it out of the Book, will not make for his Cause; and therefore, it
was best to say nothing of it.


