HYBERNIAE LACHRYMAE, Or, a sad contemplation on the bleeding condition of
IRELAND.
To the Honorable and excellently well accomplish Sir John Clotworthy Knight,
and Colonel.
I Shall not here Sir, polish or repeat
The story of your worth, nor tell how great
You are in goodness as in fame; how immense
In your minds fair Republique; how propense
Indulgent nature has been of her store,
By enriching you, thus to make others poor:
These as essential Truths, I might infer,
From each Comma raise your Character;
But these soft lays I leave to such soft wits
Who teach their Muse the trade of Parasits,
To bombast easy greatness with, and please
Their pampared Patrons with Hyperboles.
My Muse wears no such masque, nor can her Rhyme
Lackey or hold opinion with the time.
Invited hither to perform that due
Tribute of thanks she owes, and owes to you;
To you best Sir, who have a witness been
Of what she writes, to you Sir, who have seen
Those Tragedies she treates of, and have known
The losses of great Ulster in your own.
Then since she is thus aspired, she humbly prays
To let her Ivy wait upon your Bays.
UP sad Melpomone, up and condole
The Ruins of a Realm, attire thy soul
In sorrows dress; O let thy fountains rise
And over flow the floodgates of thine eyes:
Fill up thy sanguine Cisternes to the brim,
Spread forth thy expanded arms, and strive to swim
In thine own tears, that so thou may make known
The grief of others fully as thine own:
Oh! here is a Theme indeed, if Mortals could
Not now lament, the Rocks and Mountains would,
The melting Heavens whose influences steep,
The stubborn stone would teach us how to weep;
The Blood-imbrued Earth does blush to see
Such horrid Massakers, and shall not we?
Sure should we not, we had less sense then those
Hard hearts who were first Authors of these woes.
Disastrous State! How beautiful, how fair
Thy Buildings, and how foul thy Vices were?
How were thy glorious blossoms turned to dust;
And blasted with the lighting of thy lust?
Brim'd with excess, how did thy cups overflow
Faster then all thy trickling tears do now?
How did thy crimes eclipse thee (and crying loud
For vegeance) masque thy forehead in a cloud?
Thy greatness but increased thy fall, and that
Which was thy glory, ushered on thy fate,
Thy wealth and plenty have but centuplyd
Thy greater plagues, and made the wound more wide,
And what should most revive thee, and restore
Thine health, has served to exulcerate the sore.
Thy stately Forests, which did once invite
The eye t'a feast of wonder and delight,
Proved but thy Funeral Faggots to consume
Thy glory, and t'exaggerate thy doom,
Whilst all thy blazing Territories have
But Torches been, to light thee to thy Grave.
And shall she perish, and we languish thus?
And is there none t'helpe her, or succor us?
Shall she pine thus unpiti'd? shall her grief
Thus daily find a voice, but no relief?
O happy England! which wilt scarce confess,
(Lulled within a lethargy) this happiness:
Thy troubles were but trivial, and thy fears
But merely Fantasies compared with here.
It Is she, it is she has sufferd, and drunk up
Those dreggs whereof thou'hast only kis'd the cup:
Those puny plagues which partially have met
In thee, have been so ample, so complete,
And numerous in her, that nothing more
Could once be heaped or added to the score.
But ah! complaints are shadows, and too brief
To Express or show the substance of thy grief:
And such whose fancy strives to utter it,
Show not so much their sorrow as their wit:
Thou that were once great Britains chiefest glory,
Art now become a gazing stock, a story
Exiled from humane helps, and heavenly smiles
Over whelmed, and sepulchred in thine own spoils.
How does black fate inviron the about?
That hope cannot get in; nor horror out.
Famine thou sister of the sword, and son
Of Death, how many worlds have thou undone?
How do thou tyrannize, and keep thy Leets,
And constant stations in her open streets?
Oh! how the palefac't sucklings roar for food,
And from their milk less mothers breast draw blood.
They cried for bread that had scarce breath to cry,
And wanting means to live, found means to dye.
The Father gasp: his last, and to his Heir
Bequeathes his pined corpse, the Nurses tear
And quarter out their Infants, whilst they feast
Upon the one half, and preserve the rest:
O cruel Famine! which compells the Mother
To kill one starved child to feed another.
Thus is thy glory vanished in a trice,
And all thy pomp lies buried in Abyss:
Thy joys are turned to sorrows, backed with tears,
Whilst thou, poor thou, li'st pickled up in tears:
Yet be thou never dismayed with boundless sorrow
These Nights of grief may find a joyful Morrow.
Clear then thy clouded countenance, and calm
Thy discomposed looks; Heaven, Heaven, has Balm
As well as thunderbolts, and be thou sure
Thou can not bleed so fast as he can cure.
It Is he, it is he can heal thee, and crush those
That have insulted in thine overthrowes.
And thou proud Prelate (whose ambitiousnesse
A triple Diadem can scarch depresse;
Prostrate at whose proud footsteps, Legions lie,
And fall as low as Hell to keep thee high)
Shall one day be subjected too, with all
Those Accomplices tryumphant in thy fall
Sad Realm? A day there is when Heavens decree
Shall call them to account as well as thee;
And the time will come (if Soldiers may divine)
To work their ruin that have thus wrought thine.
FINIS.

