The Island of ASSADA, Near MADAGASCAR Impartially defined, being a succint,
yet Plenary Description of the Situation, Fertility and People therein
Inhabiting.

Clearly demonstrating to the Adventurer or Planter, the right way for
disposing his Adventure to his most Commodious advantage; Advising people of
all degrees, from the highest to the lowest, how suddenly raise their Estate
and Fortunes.

By Lieutenant Colonel Robert Hunt, Governor thereof.

Mercatura, si tenuis, sordida si magna splendida, quaerenda pecunia primum.

Printed for Nicholas Bourne, at the South entrance of the Royal Exchange.

A DECLARATION, SHOWING, The Grounds and Reasons, with the Motives that induced
Lieut. Col. Robert Hunt, to undertake the Voyage and Adventure, for settling a
Plantation upon the Island called Assada, near Madagascar; Published for
satisfaction of his Friends, who earnestly desire the same.
Dear Friends; It may seem strange to some of you, that I, who through the
blessing of God, had a comfortable provision for my out-ward subsistence in my
own Native Country, should now travel so far abroad, and leave a Wife so
dear unto me, so many near Relations and Christian Friends, together with
places of preferment which were offered me at home; But the truth is ever since
I had the Honor to be employed by those Noble Lords, and other Adventurers, by
providence as Governor there; In which voyage, having seen shose Southern
Plantations, beholding the Sweetness. Pleasantness, and Profitablenesse of
them, as Nurseries of Trade to England; And considering the only end of my
coming into the World was to glorify God in my Generation, which according to
the light of nature given me, I am persuaded that nothing more would conduce to
that end, then endeavoring to make known God in the World, and to be useful
and serviceable to my Native Country, both which in this undertaking my Eye is
fixed upon. For the First, I am persuaded the Lord has a great work by his
Servants to make known the Lord Jesus Christ, to the poor Heathen in these
Eastern parts of the World, and I shall much rejoice if the Lord shall please
by me to open a door for that purpose. For the second, the settling a
Plantation in those parts, is likely to be of great advantage to this
Commonwealth, in the increase of Trade and Navigation, since the discovery of
this Island of Assada to me; I had longing thoughts and earnest desires of
going thither, looking upon it as a work of great concernment for the future
to this Nation, and out of our first attempt, I hope God in his due time will
do great things, therefore let none contemn the enterprise of small things;
My purpose is by the blessing of the Almighty to endeavor the Settlement of an
honest and just Government there, nearest to ehe Laws of this Land, for
greatest encouragement and securily to Adventurers; and for the better carrying
on this work, my Intentions are to settle two or three Godly men as Agents, at
the King of the North end of Madagascars Court, whose work shall be to
endeavor to inform him and his people in the knowledge of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ and to keep a loving and peaceable correspondency with them.

FOr Information of such who desire to Adventure or Plant there, I shall now
lay down a Description of the Situation of the Island of Assada (as presented
to me.) This Island lies Thirteen degrees in the Latitude of Barbadoo's, and
is about that bigness and goodness, and reported by them who have been upon
it, to be good Land, and to afford large Sugar-Caines, Rice, Corn and Cattle
upon it, with store of Fruits, Fish, etc. and whatsoever will grow upon
Barbadoo's is likely to grow there, being all the year summer, and at one and
the same time the Trees do bear Buds, green and ripe Fruits, it has small
hills and valleys, with fresh running waters and lies about nine miles from
the great Island of Madagascar, and there are not above fifty or sixty poor
people upon the island, which the King left to tend Cattle, to Fish and Plant
SugarCaines, which at time of the year they may carry to (...) Bay, to sell to
the Arabians; about ten years since there (...) four or five hundred people
gotten from Madagascar, and ^^volted from the King, they made War with him
diverse (...) and pillaged the Arabian Junks, in which time an English Ship
touching there, the King offered them, if they would help him to carry his men
over to the Island, he would give them the Island, and half the people to be
their servants: but they refusing it, he having no Boats, but some few Canoes,
which would carry not above 3. or 4. men at once in them, and not knowing how
to get 40. men over to the Island, made rafts of Timber and so wafted them over
to the Island, subdued the revolters, leaving but the number as aforesaid: so
that my intentions is to buy this Island of the King for the Account of the
Adventurers, and to give him full conrent and satisfaction for it, He having
first freed and promised it, or any other place in his Country to the English,
we shall desire to promote his Trade and benefit which he is desirous of; And
those which have been with him assures me, we need not question a free sail of
our commodities, at a reasonable value: near this Island are diverse small
Islands without any people inhabiting them, which may be useful to us.

This Island for bigness is reckoned 16. miles square, and has a good
Harbor, where we intend by Gods blessing to build a Fort and Town, and there
to set down our selves: It is believed that this Island would maintain near a
hundredth thousand people in way of Trade and Plantation, if once well planted,
having enough besides, for above 200. Sugar works, besides other Commodities.

The Commodities we hope to raise, are Sugar, Indico, ginger, cotton wool,
Tobacco, Rice, and Pepper, etc. And for provisions, Corn; Cattle, Hoggs,
Poultry, Rice, Gravances, Potatoes, Oringes, Lemmons, and Pines, with other
fruits, very useful and at far easier Rates, then at Barbados, (as for
instance,) A Plantation of 300. Acres of Land to plant a large Sugar-work, will
cost at Barbados 2000, pound. 20. English servants to transport with
Provision, 300. l. 100. Negroes servants at 25. l. and 30. l, apiece, 2700. l.
Tool, Clothing, and several necessaries, 300. l. 20. Cattle of several
sorts, 700. l. The like at Assada, 6000. pound. 300. Acres of Land purchased at
12. d. the acre, 15. l. 20. English servants to transport and furnish, 300. l.
100. Negroes at 20. s. 100. l. Tools clothing, etc. 200. l. 20 Cattle of
several sorts, 25.. l. And for all manner of clothing and Tools may be had
near hand for the 3. part it cost at Barbados, 640. l.

So that the proportion will hold for a greater or lesser work of Sugar,
Indico, Cotton, Ginger, and Tobacco, etc. And whereas at Barbados they relate
they plant 16. hund. or 20. hund. of Sugar, each servant, 160. l. or 200. l. of
Indico, 1000. l. of Cotton-wooll, 20. hund, weight of Ginger, 1500. weight of
Tobacco, in a year, its hopeful to raise those Commodities far Cheaper then
at Barbados: we hope to build small Vessels, to trade to our Neighboring
Countries, and vend the same at as good rates as they are like to be worth at
London for ready money, and other Commodities which are useful to vend in
India: And by that means preserve the Coin of this Nation, and in a short
time, when once settled, may invest our selves at our Returns with East India
Commodities, bringing home thence as much commodities as usually came to this
Nation, and save the sending out of a 1000 l. per annum of Silver, fully
providing our selves of men from Arabia Madagascar, Africa, and India, to Plant
some to be free men, others servants. One English man will govern ten of those
Nations: thus may Men, Women, and children be bred up in the knowledge of God,
and in time this Island lying so well for Trade, may be a scale of Trade to the
English, for those parts of the World, as Batavia is to the Dutch, and God to
the Portingalls, who have 20, times their number of Strangers live amongst
them, and under their Government.

The Island of Madagascar, which lies in sight of this Island of Assada, is
900 miles long, it has seven Kings in it, the chief lives at the North end,
the Commodity it affords, is R^i Ambergreese, Iron, Tortle shells,
Landall-wood, Ibony wood, Druggs, etc. Augustine Bay where our English usually
touch to water and buy Cattle, is the worser part of the Island, in regard
there is usually no Trade with any other Nation: nor any Towns, nor provisions
for Planting, their being but a small number of people which are Cow-keepers,
etc.

Whereas at Assada, Bay, an English Ship putting in there in her Voyage to
India, found a small Town called Antasia, where the Arabians lades diverse
Junks of Rice, yearly in exchange for Cullivers, Knives, and India Commodities,
from thence our English traveling up to the Kings Town, about 20. miles up in
the Land, passed through two Villages about a mile long, well inhabited with
people, there being about them fields of Rice, and Sugar Caines, with hundreds
of Cattle; their buildings are of Timber two stories high, open to walk in
the hot weather, the upper Rooms to lodge in. The people naturally are very
kind and courteous, the North part for 2 hundred miles in length, is governed
by a King, whom they went unto, to obtain license to trade, he and his women
dwelling in a Palace about a quarter of a mile round, at the end of which is a
small Town, like a Park in it, about 500. Oxen feeding, the people are
generally his slaves, he uses our English courteously, showed them his
Treasure, which was a Massy Silver Staff, some pieces of Eight, pieces of
cloth of Gold, of Satin and silk stuffes, Arabian Coats, which the Arabians
brought from India, being bought of them for Ambergreese, Tortle-shels, which
are his own Commodities.

He invited our men to come again, and promised all his Country should be at
their command.

So that notwithstanding the dissolving of the Plantation at Augastines Bay,
where those that know it dare say, there is neither good fresh water, nor wood
to build withal, nor Provision, nor Gardens for man's use: But it is a Marsh
ground, like Sandwitch ^ownes in Kent, not sit for Plantation, which is an
encouragemen^ to (...) to proceed in this design.

Thus you have heard in part what is related to me, by those who have been
near 8. Mone^^e upon the place, men of honest conversation, who I believe
deals truly with me, and the same is confirmed in the general in Print by
English and Portugal writers, for those fellow Soldiers, Country men and
dearest friends of mine, that resolve to travel, I do believe, by Gods
blessing, that not any part of the World is more advantageous for a Plantation,
bring every way as well for pleasure as well as profit, in my estimation. And
for those that have either little or much to adventure, they may employ it this
way, and those which have nothing, if they come over, for four years as
servants to their Adventurers, they shall have Meat Drink and Apparel
provided, and at the end of the term in recompense of their service, have as
much Land to Plant on as they can employ, with six Months provisions, and
three Negros servants, which at Barbadoo's were worth a 100. pound, which if
endustriously employed, may raise their Fortunes every year as much.

And to my Honorable and worthy Adventurers, my humble suit is, that you would
take care of sending me timely supplies of men, that I may be more enabled to
go on with those designs proposed; which I forbear to mention in public,
until a more convenient time for the some,: And by the blessing of God I doubt
not of a good issue.

FINIS.

