A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE Prophecies OF Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi.

BY GEORGE HUTCHESON Minister at EDINBURGH.

EZRA 5.2. Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son
of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem: and with
them were the Prophets of God helping them.

2 PET. 1.19. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well
that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day
dawne, and the day star arise in your hearts.

April the 29th. Imprimatur, EDMUND CALAMY.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. and E. M. for Ralph Smith, at the Bible in Cornhill
near the Royal Exchange. 1654.

CHRISTIAN READER,
THe former Undertaking of this Reverend and learned Author, has found so much
acceptance, and has been received with such a general Approbation, both by
Ministers and other godly Christians, as that it has emboldened him to make a
further Essay in the same kind. This ensuing Treatise presents to thy view a
brief Explication of, and choice Observations upon three other of the Lesser
Prophets. All that I shall say to encourage thee to read it, is, That it is
written by the same Master Hutcheson, that it is as elaborate and as useful as
the former, that it will fully satisfy expectation, and tend much to thy
spiritual edification.

Imprimatur, EDMUND CALAMY.

To the Right Honorable JOHN EARL of Cassillis, LORD KENNEDY, etc. Grace,
Mercy and Peace, through Jesus Christ be multiplied.
Right Honorable,
SUch is the tender kindness and rich bounty of our all sufficient and
gracious God to his Church and people, whom he has chosen from among the lost
posterity of Adam, as that in wrath he still remembers mercy; and when his
dispensations seem to speak greatest displeasure, and to render them most
miserable: yet upon serious consideration they will find cause to say, that he
is good, and his mercy endures for ever. He does not deny to them the sure
mercies of David, when for wise reasons he cuts short their outward delights,
and their afflictions when they need them, are taken in as Articles and
Privileges of his unchangeable Covenant with them, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34.

In particular, it is a mercy never enough acknowledged, that the Lord
vouchsafes upon his people his Word written in holy Scriptures, which as it was
a special favor to Israel of old, Psalm. 147.19, 20. so the riches thereof, and
the advantages to be had thereby are not soon pondered; for herein is held
forth the true and saving knowledge of God, and an impartial discovery of our
selves; herein we have the offer of the salvation purchased by Christ, and by
it is the infallible way of attaining true happiness pointed out. It is to the
Word we are directed by the righteousness of faith, to know the mind of God
concerning lost sinners, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. It is the Word the Lord employes to
be the seed of regeneration, and which the regenerate man should esteem more
then his necessary food, for promoving his growth: By the Word the Lord does
quicken his people when they are dead, reclaim them when they are wandering,
comfort them when they are afflicted, and point out their way unto them. Hereby
we are directed to try the spirits, when delusions are aloft, and Satan is
transformed into an Angel of light. By the light thereof we may infallibly know
what is right, and what is wrong in the world, when all things are to sense
wrapped up in clouds and mists, and may know what to think of sad times and
lots, and what issue to expect of them. And in a word, the Scriptures are
profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good works, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

As this great and inestimable favor ought to engage all Christians to be much
in searching the Scriptures, and conversant with God speaking therein,
(especially in times when the Lord's letting out many strong delusions,
proclaims our negligence, and not receiving the love of the truth; and when his
chastisements call on us to seek teaching out of his Law.) And as it does call
on Ministers in their public stations, to be instant in season and out of
season, inculcating this Word of truth: so it has invited me to essay how I
might be instrumental, through the Lords assistance and blessing, in opening up
some parts of this Charter, for the more general use and help of the Lords
people: And having met with such acceptance of my former Essay, as has
encouraged me to make this further progress, upon these three last of the
Lesser Prophets; I do humbly crave leave to present it to the world under your
Lordships Honorable name, who have obtained mercy of the Lord, to taste that
he is gracious, as is daily evidenced by your desiring the sincere milk of the
Word, and by your cordial resolution and sincere endeavor to cleave to the Law
and Testimony, and follow the revealed Will of God in your ways. Which as it
has made your Lordship precious in the hearts of the godly who know you; so I
judge my self bound in a special way, to take hold of this opportunity to
express my sense of the same, who have had more frequent oceasion for many
years, (both during my service in the Ministry in that part of the country,
where your Lordships interest and residence is, and since my removal from
thence) to be a witness and observer of the grace of God in you, and have met
with such undeserved respects, for the truths cause, from your Lordship, as
requires a more worthy testimony and acknowledgement of my obligations, and
bound duty to honor you, then is this piece, as to what is my part in it. Yet
such as it is, I make bold to offer it to your Lordship, and being an
Exposition of holy Scriptures, and of such places, as do hold forth much of the
Lords mind, concerning his public work, and state of his Church; I hope it
shall not be unacceptable to your Lordship, whose care and diligence in seeking
light from God, and cleaving to it, and whose following the public work of God
in singleness of heart, (even to the prejudice of your particular interest)
has convinced and put to silence, even such as were enemies thereunto.

I shall not insist on this subject, which I know your Lordship takes no
pleasure to hear of, nor is it my way to dwell much upon; nor shall I trouble
your Lordship with any account concerning my part in this work; only this I may
say, that the subject matter is divine; being a part of that light which shined
in a dark place in the days of the Old Testament; many passages thereof need
an Interpreter and thread of Exposition as much as any, and the doctrine
therein contained is useful for our admonition, on whom the ends of the world
are come. We may read herein the true causes of Judahs captivity, the ill use
they made of deliverance, which drew new plagues upon them out of Gods hand,
and their conceit of external performances, when yet they neglected the weighty
matters of the Law. We will find God so reproving them for sin, as yet
encouraging them to duty, and richly comforting them when they are engaged in
it; we will see them declining after a reformation, and this to be the cause of
the many calamities that ensued. We will also find here many sweet Predictions
concerning the Messiah, in the accomplishment whereof, the Gospel Church ought
to rejoice, and predictions concerning the various dispensations of God toward
his ancient people the Jews; partly, in their rejection and dispersion after
the coming of the Messiah, in the accomplishment whereof, we should read the
severity of God; and partly, in their future conversion and recollection, which
we should be much in prayer to God for, that he would hasten it. These and many
other precious truths, are expressed in these Prophecies, and briefly hinted at
in the Exposition and Notes: Which that they may prove useful to the Church of
God, and in parricular to your Lordship, is the prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships obliged Servant in the Gospel, GEO. HUTCHESON.

TO THE Reader.
Christian Reader,
THy Acceptance of my former endeavors upon some of the Lesser Prophets, has
encouraged me to go on in this work, and to offer unto thee also this
Exposition of these three Prophets who lived in the Church of the Jews, after
their return from the captivity of Babylon. My aim and desire herein has
been, and is the promoving of thy spiritual good, by holding forth, as briefly
as I could, the sense and use of this part of Holy Writing; And I desire that
accordingly, thy care may be to make right use of this, as of other means
which God in these times (notwithstanding the thick clouds of errors and
delusion that now abound) offers unto thee. And that it may be so, it is
requisite that thy scope in reading be not to satisfy curiosity, or to judge
of men's abilities and parts in accomplishing what they undertake, (which is the
most that many in this nauseating and wanton age propound to themselves in
reading) but that thou be one, who indeed art making earnest in working out thy
own salvation, and of honoring God in thy station and generation; In which
case only the Scriptures will relish with thee, as being driven thereunto, for
reproof, consolation and direction as thou needs them. Nor is it to be
expected, that what is here gathered from the Scripture, and presented to thy
view, will have due weight, till first thou learn in thy heart to magnify the
truth, and certainty of the written Word, and see God, who cannot lie, speaking
to thee in it, and by it, and then thou may discern much more in it, and in
every sentence of it, then our weakness can dip into or comprehend, and that
thou art bound to deny thy self, thy corrupt sense and reason, and simply trust
God speaking in it, blessing him for so sure a ground whereupon thy soul may
lean its weight. I shall add nothing concerning this piece in particular,
wherein are expounded many dark places, by the obscurity whereof the Lord would
exercise and humble us, and the subject whereof is of use to the Church, under
variety of conditions and revolutions. Only recommending it to thy favorable
acceptance, and thy self in making use of it, to the Lords blessing, who
teaches his people to profit. I am

Thine to serve thee in the Gospel, GEO. HUTCHESON.

BOOKS Printed by RALPH SMITH.
Master Dicksons Exposition on the whole Book of the Psalms, in three Volumes.
Mr. Hutchesons Exposition on Obadiah, Jonah, Micah, Nahum, Habakkuk and
Zephaniah. The Christians Charter, showing the Privilege of Believers in this
life, and in the life to come, by Mr. Watson, Minister at Stephen Walbrook, the
third Edition much enlarged. Also Mr. Watsons Art of Divine Contentment, the
second Edition. A SERMON of Mr. Simeon Ash, at the Funeral of Mr. Jeremiah
Whitaker, together with a Narrative of his pious life. An Exposition on the
whole Book of Ecclesiastes, by that late learned and pious Divine Mr. John
Cotton, Pastor of Bostock in New England.
A BRIEF EXPLICATION OF THE Prophecies OF Haggai, Zechariah and Malachi.
Haggai.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Prophet with the two that follow, were sent of God unto the people of the
Jews, after their return from the captivity in Babylon. We read not of any
Prophets they had immediately after their return, but after that they had (by
reason of much opposition from without, and their own weakness) shamefully
neglected the building of the Temple, Ezra 4.23, 24. The Lord, who had
inflicted several plagues on them for this, did also stir up first this
Prophet, and shortly after Zechariah, to rouse up the people, and be helpful to
them in building of the Temple, Ezra 5.1, 2. And then sent Malachi list of all,
to reprove and correct the abuses that fell out amongst them, after the Temple
was built. Haggai being the first sent out, is employed, partly to reprove
their following their own interests, and neglecting of the work of God, and to
stir up that secure people to the work (...) partly, to encourage them to go
on, and to do it bonesily being set about it; In which Zechariah chiefly joins
with him; and enlarges that subject of their encouragement.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, (after the Inscription, v. 1.) we have 1. A Sermon reproving
the peoples sinful negligence, and stirring them up to build the Temple:
wherein he reproves their shifting to put hand to this work, as if the time of
doing it were not come, whereas they were most active in their own private
affairs, v. 2, 3, 4. And exhorts them seriously to consider their condition,
and for what God had so smitten them, v. 5, 6. and so to consider as to be
stirred up to set to the work of the Temple, in which God would show himself
gracious, v 7, 8. and the neglect whereof had been the cause of so many
plagues, v. 9, 10, 11. 2. We have the success of this doctrine, all of them
fearing God who spoke by his Word, set to the work, v. 12. and being encouraged
by the Prophet in so doing, v. 13. they are so active, as in short time they
have materials ready, wherewith they begin the work, v. 14, 15.

Verse. 1. IN the second year of Darius the King, in the sixth month, in the
first day of the month, came the Word by the LORD, by Haggai the Prophet unto
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, Governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son
of Josedoch the High Priest, saying,

In the Inscription we have not only the Author and Penman of this Prophecy,
but the time of i^ reckoned from the year of the Persi^n Kings reign, under
whose power now they were, and the month designed, which was the time of their
hervest, (the Feast of Tabernacles being the fifteenth day of the next month.
See, Lev. 23.15, 33, 34.) and the persons to whom it is directed, which were
Zerubbabel, the Civil Governor, (who seems to have been the natural son of
Pedajah, 1 Chro. 3.19. and the legal son of Shealtiel or Salathiel, as
succeeding him in the Government though not now kingly; or Shealtiel was his
Grandfather, and Pedajah his father,) and Joshua the High Priest, whose father
had gone into captivity, Chro. 6.15. The message is directed to them, not as
chief in the guilt, being godly men) but that bearing (...) they might stir up
themselves, and help to excite others, ^^tting what has been observed on
former Inscriptions; We may learn hence, 1. Whatever men may think of Gods
threatenings when they are in prosperity, and of his promises when they are in
adversity, yet time will prove the truth of both in experience; as here it is
supposed, notwithstanding this peoples presumption while they stood a Kingdom,
and their fainting in captivity, yet they had both been sent into captivity, as
the Prophets had sorewarned them, and were brought back again according to Gods
promise. 2. When the Lord has delivered his people from the outward captivity
wherein they were held, he may see it fit to keep them yet in a low and poor
estate, that they may yet repent of their sins, which neither before nor in
their captivity, have been seriously laid to heart, and may be kept from
doting on much external glory, but be held eying that which is the true
spiritual glory of the Church; for these ends are the Jews when returned yet
under Darius the King, their time reckoned by the years of his reign, as a
token of their subjection; and have only a Governor and High Priest of their
own, in stead of the Kingly dignity they formerly enjoyed. 3. As the Lord in
mercy toward his people, sweeteneth their sad times by sending messengers unto
them, as a means and token of good: so it is an encouragement to his servants
to go on in their duty in most desperate times, when they consider that his
blessing upon the endeavors of a preaching Ministry, may be effectual to help
forward his work speedily, which, without this had lien long behind; for here
the Word of the Lord came by Haggai to them, and that in the second year of
Darius. Now the work was finished in his sixth year, Ezra 6.15. which being
forty six years in building, John 2.20. gives us to understand that by his
and Zechariahs help, (as they are called helpers, Ezra 5.2.) the work went
faster on in some years, then in forty two years before; yea, when it had
been laid by so long before. 4. As it is the duty of faithful Watchmen, to be
instant in season and out of season, so especially to take advantage of
afflictions on sinful people, to see how the rod may help the Word to work:
therefore came the Word of the Lord in the sixth month, that their scarce
harvest (as is marked, v. 6.) might excite them to consider Gods Word. 5. It is
the duty of men in highest power to submit to what God says in his Word, and
to be active also that the Word of God have place amongst others, (...) they
have power; and that Rulers in Church and State concur to see this work carried
on; for these causes, came the Word of the Lord by Haggai unto Zerubbabel and
to Joshua.

Verse. 2. Thus speaks the Lord of Hosts, saying, This people say, The time
is not come, the time that the LORDS house should be built.

3. Then came the Word of the LORD by Haggai the Prophet, saying,

4. Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your fieled houses, and this house
lie waste?

That the Lord may reprove their negligence in building the Temple, he
propounds their pretenses whereby they thought to justify them selves; to wit,
that finding many lets and impediments from the Kings of Persia, and many
difficulties from themselves, they neither pretend to unwillingnesse, nor yet
profess misbelief but that it will be built; only (however the seventy years
of their captivity were expired) they pretend that Gods time was not come,
wherein they should meet with no rubs, and might be able to build it more
stately, and so pretended to acquiesce in Gods secret Will and Providence,
looking for better times. This the Lord refutes from their own practice, who
did admit of no such excuse in their own affairs, but notwithstanding all
difficulties and vexations every one builded stately houses to themselves, and
how much more might all of them build an house unto the Lord? Doct. 1. It is a
fearful, though usual sin in the Church, when that which is the principal fruit
and end of all their deliverances, and a chief means of their happiness, and
which they seemed to esteem most of when they wanted it, is most neglected when
they are delivered, and have occasion to testify their affection and
thankfulness, such was the building of the Temple to this people, and yet this
house lies waste. 2. It is a most dangerous way of sinning, when the sinner
pretends affection to God when he wrongs him and his matters most, and when he
thinks himself able by fair pretenses to excuse, if not to justify his way;
so did this people sin, alleging no disaffection, but that the time is not
come, etc. 3. As the Lord may permit very great obstructions to be laid in the
way of a work, which yet he will carry on: (as was seen in this Temple, which
took forty six years, ere it could be gotten perfect:) so a people, who do
not openly disaffect the work, may sinfully concur in obstructing of it, as the
Jews do here; And namely, 1. When they are not sensible of obstructions in the
way, but are soon hindered; for so much speaks their senseless submission in
this particular. 2. When they neglect or pass from a known duty upon any
pretense of Providence, or of Gods secret will: as here they leave off a
commanded duty, alleging that Gods time was not come. 3. When they are
hindered from their duty in advancing the Work of God by any hazard whatsoever,
if it were even by the command of misinformed authority, especially when they
have clear law for what they do, as well as Gods command; for this was their
fault, that they were hindered by Artaxerxes letter, Ezra 4.23, 24. when they
had Cyrus decree standing for them, which Darius sustaines, Ezra 6.2, etc. when
they were challenged for building without a new warrant. 4 When they look for
times wherein there shall be no difficulties, but all advantages for doing Gods
work in, and in expectation of such times do lie by from present duty; because
their times were not such, they say, The time is not come; whereas his work
goes on in the midst of disadvantages, Dan. 9.25. 5. When the true cause of
men's negligence, which lays many a lion in the way, is their love to their
own things and private interests, carrying their spirits of public matters and
the things of God, and all that men say beside, are but pretenses to hide their
shame; so much does the Lord discover in their dwelling in sieled houses; when
his house lay waste. Doct. 4 Men's own consciences, when they speak impartially,
will convince them of heinous sin, when they study to promote their own
interests, who are but worms, with the neglect of the great Gods affairs, when
they are sooner laid by in his matters then their own: when they can get time
for their own affairs, and will not stand at any difficulty, but no time for
Gods work, and every more there is a mountain; when they care little how it be
with Gods house, so their own house prosper, and when they can live in pomp and
ease, and make a good life for themselves in an ill time, and let Gods work lie
in the dust, as that they can do nothing for, nor are sensible of, nor
challenged for any neglect about it; This is imported in that pinching
question: Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your sieled houses, and this
house lie waste? that is, can you find a time and opportunity to raise your
selves to such state, who are poor crawling worms, and yet find none so much
as to raise the house of the great God out of the ruins thereof, and not be
challenged? 5. A peoples sinful negligence in Gods matters (especially having
received many favors from him) though times were never so perilous, renders
them contemptible, whatever their privileges be, and provokes God to bring
them down to know themselves better; therefore he styles them, This (not my)
people, and O ye, to wit, base worms for whom I have done so much. 6. As God
would be seen the sinners Party, in discovering and reproving of sin; so a
sight of his Majesty and Power, who has all things at his command to employ as
his army, may terrify the secure and negligent, and promise sufficient
protection to the willing doers of their duty, in times of greatest hazard,
from Tyrants and Oppressors; Therefore is his authority prefixed, both to the
challenge and discovery of their sin, Thus speaks the Lord; and to the
refutation, Then came the Word of the Lord, etc. and he is designed the Lord of
Hosts, able to crush them persisting in their sin, and able to protect them in
their duty against all their ill neighbors.

Verse. 5. Now therefore, thus says the LORD of Hosts, Consider your ways.

6. Ye have sown much, and bring in little: ye eat, but ye have not enough: ye
drink, but ye are not filled with drink: ye clothe you, but there is none
warm: and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with holes.

Having thus reproved their sinful negligence, he exhorts to a serious
consideration of their course, and of their ingratitude, prophanity and
carelessness in this matter, that it might be amended, especially considering
the hand of God upon them, and that they were lying under some of the visible
curses of the Law, Deuteronomy. 28. Either the earth denied them increase, or God took
away the blessing, that they were neither fed nor clothed by it, and the fruit
of their labors were put in a bottomless bag, all which could not be without
some cause, which they were to search out, and lay to heart and amend. Doct. 1.
A chief cause of a peoples going wrong, and continuing wrong, is the want of a
serious examination of themselves, to know how it is with them, and the want of
a serious pondering and laying to heart of the sinfulness of these courses,
which otherwise they are not simply ignorant of; therefore here he exhorts them
to this sovereign remedy; Consider your ways, or, set your heart upon your
ways. 2. God has the fruit of the earth, and of men's labors, and the
blessing of what they have, so absolutely in his hands, as that he can when he
pleases take them away; can make a man's riches not to consist in the abundance
of what he possesses; and will take them away when his people hunt after these
things, neglecting better; for herein he would have his hand seen; Ye have
sown much, and bring in little, ye cat, but ye have not enough, etc. 3. When
the Word of the Lord does not discover effectually men's sinful ways unto them,
the Lord uses to send affliction to put them upon a search, and when rods are
lying on, and God is executing his threatened curses, it calls aloud to secure
sinners, to make enquiry into themselves, that they may be humbled and amend
their faults; Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways: ye have sown
much, etc.

Verse. 7. Thus says the LORD of hosts, Consider your ways.

8. Go up to the mountain, and bring wood and build the house, and I will take
pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the LORD.

He exhorts them yet again to consider their ways, and (that they might
testify their reality herein) to bring forth the fruit thereof, by obeying the
Command of God, and going speedily to provide timber from Lebanon, and
materials to build the Temple: To which he subjoynes this encouragement, that
according to his promise made, concerning the first Temple, and Solomon's
prayer, 1 Kings 8.28, 29. He would take pleasure to show himself gracious
therein, as in his resting place, and would be glorified by his peoples service
there, by his appearing gloriously for them from thence, and by getting praise
from his people for the gracious answering of them in their need. Doct. 1.
Self-examination is a duty from which men are naturally averse, and a duty
which is not often done to any good purpose, or so as from through conviction
of conscience they subscribe themselves guilty of what the Word challenges for,
which yet is necessary for a right reformation of abuses: therefore it is
pressed again and again, Consider your wayer. 2. As the Lord does not approve
of amendment of faults, without a serious laying to heart of former debordings;
so kindly convictions will not die out, nor let the convinced sinner alone,
till it appear in fruits of outward obedience: for these two are joined
together; Consider your ways, and go up to the mountain, and bring wood. 3. It
is the Will of God, that his people, as they be careful to have their own
souls, and every one within their charge in a right way, so especially to have
the public work and service of God, wherein all are concerned, set on foot and
kept up: for this was in part, the meaning and use of this Ceremonial Temple,
to be a place for Gods public worship, concerning which all are commanded: Go
up to the mountain, bring wood and build the house. 4. Where God evidenceth his
presence among a people, by setting up his Tabernacle, and public worship
among them, and makes them active in promoving the same, it is a pledge that he
will not abhor them, but make his presence known by gracious acts, that he
will let out proofs of his glory there, accept their service as glory given to
him, and give them frequent occasion of glorifying him; for, Build the house,
and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says the Lord. 5. It
may be a great encouragement to the Church, to do service, that the
all-sufficient Lord should condescend to accept any service they can do, or own
and take pleasure in them or it; for, so does the Lord encourage: Build the
house, and I will take pleasure in it, that is, your service shall be owned, I
will dwell in that which ye build; See, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. 1 Kings 8.27.

Verse. 9. Ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little: and when ye brought it
home, I did blow upon it: Why faith the Lord of Hosts? because of mine house
that is waste, and ye run every man to his own house.

10. Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed
from her fruit.

11. And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and
upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon that which
the ground brings forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the
labor of the hands.

To stir them up yet more effectually to the work, he again lays before them
the evidences of Gods anger against them, in disappointing their hopes of the
harvest, and not blessing what they had gathered in, and all because there was
no care had of the Temple and public worship of God, but all sought their own
things, v. 9. for which cause God had remarkably smitten them, making the
heavens to deny dew, and the earth to deny fruit, v. 10. for the drought had
not only destroyed the fruit of all kinds, and made all men's endeavors
useless, but he had made men and beasts feel it also, by want of drink and
food, and by diseases which such a season occasions, v. 11. Doct. 1. Even rods
when they are sent on do not soon work, nor speak Gods mind to an afflicted
people to any purpose; therefore here the observation and use of their r^d is
again inculcate. 2. When the Lord is provoked, he can not only send an
affliction, but so order it, by fair appearances of a better lot, and
heightening of the sinners expectation and desire, as may make it most sad: Ye
looked for much, and lo, it came to little. 3. Sinners are never a whit the
nearer contentment and happiness, that they have these things which usually men
take for their portion of happiness; for by withdrawing a blessing God can
make it all one, as if they had them not; And when ye brought it home, I did
blow upon it. 4. Though impenitent sinners, having felt some strokes, may
readily, because of that, expect exemption for the future; yet it is righteous
with God to pursue them with rod upon rod, till they be completely miserable,
unless they return; for, it is not enough, that the great harvest they
expected came to little, but that little is blasted: I did blow upon it. 5. As
when the Lord strikes his own people, there must be some special and
remarkable cause to be sought out; so the stupidity of a stricken people, is
ordinarily so great, that they can neither search nor find it out, till God
discover it; this question, Why, says the Lord of Hosts? does not import any
ignorance in him, but that it was their duty to search the cause, and yet could
not find it out without his light. 6. The true cause of the Church and
Professors, their ill thriving in the world, is, that their care of these
things takes them up from minding Gods work and matters, and that they are
taken up with the worst things, neglecting the best: thus to seek to gain is
indeed to lose, for zeal for the public and work of God, is the compendious
way to prosper in our private affairs: this is the true cause of their want;
Because of my house that is waste, and ye run every man to his own house. 7. It
is useful for secure sinners, being afflicted by God, to take a serious view of
the rods upon them, that they may see more of the bitter fruits of sin, then
can be discerned at first: therefore does the Lord repeat and enlarge the sight
of their stroke, v. 10, 11. that therein they might see God provoked to be
their Party in whose favor their life stood; I called for a drought: that they
might see all the creatures armed, and ready to execute Gods quarrel for sin:
Heaven stayed from dew, and the earth from fruit, both conspiring the sinners
ruin; that they might see man's frailty, (however he be oft-times stout against
God) in that there is no need of striking him immediately, but take away one of
many drops from him, and he is gone, stay but the heavens from dew, and the
earth, from rain and fruit, and man will smart for all; that they might see
that vengeance pursuing sin, will cut a man short of all his contents and
refuges on all hands, will blast a land and all the fruits of it, will sinite
man and beast, and all his labor, v. 11. and in a word, the afflicted sinner
may see that it is great folly to provoke the Lord to jealousy, and that there
is no safety, but in being reconciled with God, and setting about duty.

Verse. 12. Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshuah the son of
Josede^h the High Priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice
of the LORD their God, and the words of Haggai the Prophet, (as the LORD their
God had sent him) and the people did fear before the LORD.

The fruit and success of this doctrine is recorded, that the Rulers and
remnant of the Jews, who were left of the preceding sore judgments, or who
had returned from captivity, did acknowledge the voice of God in the mouth of
his servant, though there had been no Prophets sent of a long time before: and
out of the sense of their guilt, and justness of Gods judgments, did stand in
awe of God speaking to them, and did submit to the Command, and go to work.
Doct. 1. The Word of God in the mouth of his servants will not take effect till
his authority be seen and acknowledged in it, and his servants looked on as
coming in his Name; for here they look on this message, as the voice of the
Lord, and the words of Haggai as the Lord had sent him, that is, that the Lords
voice was in his Word whom he had sent. 2. It will be a notable means to make
the Word effectual, when beside the absolute authority of God, speaking in his
Word, his interest in his people is considered and believed by them, and that
he who speaks, and reproves, and directs, is their Confederate God, whom they
should be loath to offend or disobey, so much the rather as his relation
stands, notwithstanding their faults; for, thus is the Lord named here, The
Lord their God. 3. When God is seen speaking in his Word as a Party to the
sinner, and when his love is believed for all that, even in his reproving it
will make the guilty and smitten sinner, to stand in much awe, will both break
and melt him, and will make him look on his former ways, wherein he has lien
secure, with much affrightment and horror; for the fruit of the former is; And
the people feared before the Lord. 4. When the awe of God, speaking in his
Word, in his Majesty and goodness, has had place in the heart, it will put
men to give obedience in some measure to what is commanded; for, the people in
this temper obeyed the voice of the Lord. 5. It is a sweet and blessed like
case, when men in power are patterns and encouragements unto others, in
submitting to the Word of the Lord in the mouth of his servants, and when a
peoples affliction does not hinder their respect to the Commandments, as here
is marked: that Zerubbabel and Joshua first, and then all the remnant of the
people obeyed. 6. It may encourage the servants of God to go on in their work,
when they consider what a great blessing God can, and sometime does give to
their endeavors beyond all probability: for here, by one Sermon, all the
people are set about a long neglected work, in the midst of many difficulties.

Verse. 13. Then spoke Haggai the LORDS Messenger, in the LORDS message unto the
people, saying, I am with you, says the LORD.

Upon the peoples obedience, the Prophet is sent out to testify and assure
them of Gods approbation and presence with them: which message he delivers
confidently, to encourage them against any sense of their former guilt and rods
lying on, and against the fear of any opposition from enemies without, as the
history tells us they met with, Ezra 5.1, 2. with 3. Doct. 1. Albeit a people
formerly negligent, might in justice expect many bitter days, even after they
have amended their faults; yet such is the Lords tender care of his truly
humbled people, that he allows them to begin their work with encouragement;
for, when they fear and obey, Then spoke Haggai, etc. 2. As the people of God
no sooner put hand to any work of his, but they are environed with so many
difficulties within and without, that they will need to setch their
encouragement from God only, so the Lords peace and approbation, his presence,
blessing and assistance, which he assuredly gives his own people in his way, is
sufficient to bear out in hardest service: in opposition to all they could meet
with, this assurance is given; I am with you, says the Lord. 3. It helps much
to lean our weight on promises, when we are much about the study of the divine
authority of the Word, as also when we look upon the confidence of his
servants, in carrying the message, who do believe and then speak; therefore is
the Prophets authority again repeated, and his Commission to deliver this
message in particular, together with his confident speaking of it, as being
persuaded of the truth of what he said, and now encouraged and confirmed by the
success of his former doctrine; Then spoke Haggai the Lords messenger in the
Lords message, saying, etc.

Verse. 14. And the LORD stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshuah the son of Josedech
the High Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and they came
and did work in the house of the LORD of hosts their God.

15. In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in the second year of
Darius the King.

The fruit of all his doctrine, especially of the last encouragement, is again
recorded, to wit, that the Lord effectually stirred up, by the Ministry of his
servant, both the Rulers and People, so that within twenty three days after
his beginning to preach, (as may be seen from v. 15. compared with v. 1.) every
one in his station is about the work, having not only provided materials, but
are at work in the house, at least making ready for building, as we gather from
chapter 2.10, 15, 18. Doct. 1. Albeit obedience unto God will not want its own
commendation, and reward in the obeyer, yet the glory of our obedience is due
to God only, who is the first mover in it; therefore to clear how they came to
obey his voice, it is said, the Lord stirred up their spirits. 2. However
choicest of men or people considered in themselves, or being left of God, will
prove base and unable, and unwilling for any good work; yet when the meanest
are set on work by God, they will be courageous to undertake, and able to
effectuate great things; for when God stirred up the spirits, of that seemingly
despicable people; They came and did work in the house of the Lord, which was
an enterprise full of hazard. 3. At it is the honor of the greatest to be
employed in Gods work; so, however all cannot attain to like eminency in it,
yet the meanest endeavor of the meanest person, will be marked and taken
notice of by God: therefore are Zerubbabel and Joshua about the work, and yet
not only they, but all the remnents coming and working, is remarked. 4. It is
necessary for our enabling to duty, to join encouragement with convictions,
and especially to have assurance of our interest in God, and faith in his Power
and Omnipotency; therefore upon the encouragement, v. 13. Their spirits were
stirred up, and it is said, they did work in the house of the Lord of hosts
their God. 5. This speedy success of the Prophe^s Ministry in a work of so
great difficulty, and which had lien so long neglected, as it testifies how
willing the Lord can make his people in the day of his power, so it may leave
fad convictions upon many, who have been dealt with by the Word for more
years, then Haggai had days to dealt with this people, and yet were never
stirred up to any good, or acceptable work, tending to Gods honor, or
advancement of their own salvation.

CHAP. II.
THe people being set on work at Gods Command to build the Temple, the Prophet
is sent forth to declare further of Gods mind unto them in a threefold Sermon.
The scope of the first Sermon is to be an antidote against the peoples
discouragement, taken from the meannesse of the work they were about, v. 1, 2,
3. and to encourage them notwithstanding to go on with it, by arguments taken
from his presence, according to the standing Covenant, v. 4, 5. and by a
promise of Christ's coming in the flesh, to fill that house with glory, v. 6, 7.
which should make up the want of any outward splendour which God could easily
furnish, v. 8. yea, and should make it to transcend the first Temple in glory,
v. 9. The scope of the second Sermon is, 1. To exhort them who were employed in
so holy a work, to consider their former sin in neglecting of it, and to do it
purely, lest they polluted it as to themselves: which is propounded in two
cases, v. 10, 11, 12, 13. and applied, v. 14.^. 2. To encourage them yet to do
the work in expectation of a blessing, and of Gods change of his outward
dealing, which heretofore had been ^^d, v. 15, 16, 17. but from that day should
be better, v. 18, 19. The third Sermon is directed to Zerubbabel as the type,
promising stability to that people in the midst of all commotions; and to
Christ as the Antitype, holding out the stability and enlargement of his
Kingdom, v. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Verse. 1. IN the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month,
came the Word of the LORD by the Prophet Haggai, saying;

2. Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to
Joshua the son of Josedech the High Priest, and to the residue of the people,
saying;

3. Who is left among you that saw this house in her first glory: and how do
you see it now? Is it not in your eyes, in comparison of it, as nothing?

These verses hold forth the time of this Sermon; the persons to whom it was
directed, and the occasion of it, which was their discouragement; considering
the meannesse of this Temple, being compared with Solomon's, which now appears
to them by the materials they had provided, and by their taking the rubbish off
the old fouudation, which had been laid in Cyrus time, Ezra. 3.12. for as yet
they had built none themselves, v. 10, 15. and so they were discouraged,
consideriog that Ezekiel prophesied of other things. Here two things would be
cleared, 1. How it can be supposed that any then alive should have seen the
first Temple, for many years before this, they are called ancient men who
remembered it, Ezra 3.12? Answ. This place speaks only by way of supposition, if
there were any such, and to such as kept on foot that complaint which they had
heard from others, at the first laying of the foundation, Ezra 3. 2. It would
be cleared upon what ground, the second Temple is thus ex^en^^^^, for Cyrus his
decree, Ezra 6.3. compared with Solomon's fabric, 1 Kings 6.2. seems to make it
larger? Answ. 1. We are to suppose that Solomous building was measured by
sacred cubits, (called the first measure, 2 Chro. 3.3) and that Cyrus decree
mentions common cubits, which were by one half less, and so the difficulty is
in part removed. 2. We are not to conceive that Cyrus allowed to double the
height of the Temple, but that the porch which was before one hundred and
twenty, 2 Chronicles. 3.4. was to be now sixty cubits, and that the sixty cubits in
breadth, comprehended also the length of it, which therefore seems to be
omitted in that decree, because these cubits expressed both these dimensions.
3. There were many other things which might make this Temple as nothing in
their eyes, as the loss of many things which had been in the first Temple, and
their base materials, having but rolling stones, Ezra 5.8. and 6.4. in stead of
polished stones, 1 King. 5.18. and 6, 7. and wanting gold such as David and
Solomon had prepared to adorn it withal, which is a part of their trouble
removed by God, v. 8. Doct. 1. As they who are about the Lords work will need
to be frequently encouraged, so when the Lord has engaged a people in a work,
he will not fail to obviate all their tentations by comfortable messages;
therefore shortly after they had begun, even in the seventh month, etc. came
the Word of the Lord, etc. 2. As all are bound to submit to the Word, so the
Lord has an especial eye upon the difficulties of every one employed in his
work, to encourage them; therefore are all ranks (even to the meanest) spoken
to again, v. 2. that they may be strong. 3. As a people sleighting the Lords
work, are justly contemptible in his sight, so when they fall to duty, they
become precious in his sight, and he is tender of their afflictions: for now
they are not this people, as chap. 1, 2. but the residue of the people. 4.
Satan is so violent and so active an enemy to a work of Reformation, and our
hearts so unfit for going about it, that when other impediments fail, he will
fetch discouragements from men's own carnal minds, and the work it self, as
nothing answerable to their expectation, and so be in peril to make it be laid
aside when none other would hinder it: for this is a new impediment laid in the
way, that the house was nothing like the former. 5. Our judging of Gods work by
outward appearances, and looking upon it with a carnal eye, is a great enemy
to reformation, while we consider not that the more spiritual glory Christ is
about to manifest in his Church, the less visible glory will he let appear,
because it would take out heart off the other: this was their tentation; Is it
not in our eyes in comparison of it as nothing? as judging of prophecies
according to sense, whereas Christ by taking away of some of the outward glory,
was making way for the greater spiritual glory of the Temple.

Verse. 4. Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says the LORD, and be strong, O
Joshua son of Josedech the High Priest, and be strong all ye people of the
land, says the LORD; and work: (for I am with you, says the LORD of hosts.

Notwithstanding any alleged cause of fainting, the Lord exhorts all of them
to be encouraged and go on with the work, and gives the first ground of
encouragement from his presence with them. Doct. 1. Discouragement in any of
the Lords people, is a disposition ill pleasing to him, and which they should
oppose in themselves, whatever reason say to the contrary, and when their
tentations are at the height; therefore in opposition unto, and in the midst of
all their fainting thoughts, Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, etc. says the
Lord. 2. Whatever debates and fainting thoughts of heart, the Lords people may
meet and be exercised with, yet they would guard against slackening of
diligence, and weakening of hands from duty by them; which will be the result
of entertained discouragement, whatever present exercise it may seem to put men
to; therefore says the Lord, be strong and work. 3. The Lords work is so
honorable an employment for any to be put to, and his presence and approbation
so sweet a cordial, that it will be found a great wrong for such as are so
employed and rewarded, not to be encouraged: Be strong (says the Lord) and
work: for I am with you, says the Lord of hosts.

Verse. 5. According to the Word that I covenanted with you, when ye came out of
Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you: Fear ye not.

The exhortation is yet pressed, and this first ground of encouragement
confirmed: The Covenant made with them when they came out of Egypt, stood yet
in force to assure them of his presence; and as they had seen in the
deliverance from Egypt, what God would and could do for his confederate people;
so the same God was by his Spirit and power present with them: or standing (as
the word is) ready for employment, whereof some evidences were given in the
sending out a Spirit of prophecy, and consequently they needed not fear.
Doct. 1. Faithless and slavish fear is a principal cause of much miscarriage,
and will muster up many discouragements and lions in the way of our duty, to
hinder us from it, and therefore is to be set against; Fear ye not. 2. It may
guard the heart of the Lords people against sinful fear, to consider that
their mercies are not left in uncertainty, but are made sure to them by a
Covenant, which stands firm, notwithstanding sad days, and will be
forthcoming for them in due effects; so does the Lord here speak of their
mercy and the Covenant; According to the Word that I covenanted with you, when
ye came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you. 3. The former
experiences of Gods appearing for his confederate people, do stand firm as a
ground of comfort to them, in following exigents; (however their case and
temper may alter) considering his covenanted immutability, and that these
things were done not for their worth, but because of his free love: therefore
does the Lord hold forth what was done, when they came out of Egypt, as a
ground for their present expectations. 4. As it is a sweet sign of Gods
presence with a people, where there is a Spirit of prophecy, or (that failing)
messages, put in the mouths of his servants to them; or where his Spirit is
putting forth his sanctifying virtue, and is a Spirit of grace and
supplications; so where the Lord is present according to his Covenant, there
his own immediate power and virtue is forthcoming, and ready to effectuate
what they cannot carry through, even that power which needs not, yea, will not
have (and therefore lays by) our help: in the confidence whereof his people
may boast much; all this is imported in that promise; My Spirit remains among
you.

Verse. 6. For thus says the LORD of hosts, Yet once, it is a little while,
and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land.

7. And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and
I will fill this house with glory, says the LORD of hosts.

As the first ground of encouragement speaks chiefly to the exhortation, and
that they should go on; so this second directly meets with their tentation,
arising from the meannesse of the work, which he undertakes to make up with the
glory of Christ's coming in the flesh, and the spiritual things of his Kingdom,
which should begin in and under the time of that second Temple: and promises,
that as of old when he gave the Law, he shook the earth, Exodus 19.18. so now
again, within a-short time, he would shake both heaven and earth, and all
Nations, to make way for the coming of Christ, who is the light, and life, and
desire of all the Elect among the Nations, and for their bringing unto him, who
promises here to fill the second Temple with glory, by his being presented
there unto the Lord at his birth, by his public teaching there, and by the
promulgation of the Gospel in his Church, prefigured by that Temple, and in
part during the standing thereof. This promised shaking has relation not only
to the great commotions and alterations, (usually represented in the Old
Testament as a day of dissolution of heaven and earth, Isa. 13.13. and 34.4.
every state having somewhat eminent, resembling an heaven: and somewhat
inferior resembling an earth in it,) that befell that people and other states
about, to make way for Christ's coming, according to the foregoing prophecies:
or to the shaking of heaven by his descension and ascension, and by the joy and
admiration of Angels, and the commotion of the Jews on earth, at the report of
his birth; or to the fignes in heaven and earth (such as darkness,
earthquakes, etc.) at his death and resurrection: but also to the great change
wrought by the preaching of the Gospel, shaking loose and annulling the
alterable estate, and ceremonies of the Jewish Church, represented here by
heaven, that room may be made for a new state of the Church, or Kingdom of
Heaven, wherein all Nations might have interest, and which should not be
altered: and shaking the world in all the parts of it successively, both
Islands and Continents, by the preaching of the Gospel, crying down idols, and
(as men interpreted) turning the world up-side down, and shaking the Elects
hearts throughout the world, making them to flee in to Christ, as the Hebrew
reading of v. 7. will bear; I will shake all Nations, and they shall come to
the desire of all Nations, who is to be manifested in that Temple, and bring
themselves and their desirable things with them according to the prophecies,
Isa. 60. and elsewhere, which will be still in doing from age to age, and
Nation to Nation, till once for all, God shake and remove these visible heavens
and earth, as some expound that of the Apostle, Heb. 12.26, 27. which is indeed
the full accomplishment of the prediction, but the place does also include
these other shakings, to bring in a Gospel-state and worship into the world, as
previous to that. Doct. 1. As Christ manifested in the flesh, is in himself the
only desirable and lovely one; so it is he in whom all Nations, as well as
Jews, have a right; who if he were known, would be seen desirable, and the
only choice of all; and whom his own in all Nations shall be made to desire and
flee unto, till the fullness of the Gentiles be all brought in: so is he here
described, the desire of all Nations, as well as the Lord whom the Jews
sought, Mal. 3.1. not with relation to any desire of him, any Nation beside the
Jews actually had before he came, but with relation to his excellency, to his
purposes concerning them, and to what the event of his manifestation should be,
according to that prophecy, Genesis 49.10. 2. The promised Messiah and Savior of
the world, his coming in our flesh to perfect the work of our Redemption, was
to be performed during the standing of the second Temple, and within a short
while after their captivity, being compared with the time that had past since
he was promised to their fathers, till that time; for, it is a little while,
and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill the house, etc. The
time being now confined to Daniels seventy weeks: so that the Jews who
understand this place of the Messiah, and yet deny that he is yet come, after
so many hundreds of years, do bewray the blindness and hardness of their
hearts. 3. The way of Gods worship and of the Church, established by Christ at
his coming in the flesh, is such, as however there may be many commotions even
until the end of the world, for its getting footing where it had none, and its
restoring where it has been dispossessed; yet in its own nature is
unalterable, and is to continue without any new forms or ways, till God once
for all shake and dissolve heaven and earth: for, however after that shaking at
Sinai in giving the Law, there was to be a new shaking of the ceremonial Law,
to make room for the Gospel-way: yet it was to be but yet once, and no
alteration after that. 4. As the Lord will shake and overturn all things before
his Word fail, and his people want promised help, and as all Nations have
their own time of shaking and commotions: so every such case does not speak
ruin, but sometime is the forerunner of Christ's coming in a
Gospel-reformation, especially where Christ becomes precious and desirable unto
a people; therefore to confirm the Jews, does he hold forth his power
employed for fulfilling his promises, and that in this order, as to shake
heaven and earth, etc. and then the desire of all Nations shall come. 5. As
there is much opposition lying in Christ his Kingdom and Gospels way in the
world, and especially in men's own stubborn hearts, which he both can and will
remove, where he has a purpose of good to any: so there must be strange
shakings of Nations and persons, before Christ and the Gospel can have their
due place or employment: therefore he shakes heaven and earth, and all Nations,
ere this great mercy can have place, or they be fit for it, that the desire of
all Nations come. 6. Christ manifested in the flesh, and his presence in his
Gospel, makes up the want of all outward visible glory amongst a people, and
the want of external pomp in worship: for, in opposition to their mean
thoughts of their work, it is promised: the desire of all Nations shall come,
and I will fill this house with glory; yea, the administration of the Gospel is
more glorious then that of the Law, in regard that in giving the Law he only
shook the earth, but now both heavek and earth, as it is expounded, Heb. 12.26.
7. Christ the promised Messiah, as he was to be true man, bone of our bone; so
was he also from eternity very God Jehovah, equal in power and glory with the
Father, who was conversant by his Spirit with his own people, and had a care of
them before his incarnation: for he, whose presence was to make up the glory of
the Temple is Jehovah, and here himself promises, I will fill this house with
glory, says the Lord of hosts, which is Christ's speech, to whom we come in
the Gospel, as is cleared further, Heb. 12.24, 25, 26.

Verse. 8. The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says the LORD of hosts.

9. The glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the former, says
the LORD of hosts: and in this place will I give peace, says the LORD of
hosts.

The third ground of encouragement raises the promise of glory mentioned, v.
7. yet higher, and meets with a particular rcason of their tentation; for
whereas they complained of the want of gold and silver wherewith to adorn the
Temple, and make it stately, as in Solomon's days; the Lord declares, that if
he accounted that to be the true glory of his Church, and took pleasure in that
carnal splendour, he could easily be at the expenses, having as much at his
command, as in Solomous days; but did refrain from that now, as purposing to
train them up for a greater glory of the second Temple, by Christ's presence
and spiritual gifts poured out, (of which all the glory of the first Temple was
but a shadow,) and particularly, by the preaching of the doctrine of
reconciliation and spiritual peace by the death of Jesus Christ which should
begin there, and from thence go through the world. Doct. 1. The absolute
dominion of the riches and splendour of the world belongs unto the Lord, who
has all these things in his power to dispose of as he pleases, and who is to
be eyed, acknowledged and submitted unto by every man in his portion and lot,
according as he dispenses it: for, the silver is mine and the gold is mine,
says the Lord of hosts. 2. It may satisfy the people of God in their wants,
to consider that God has all they want at his command, and would not withhold
it, unless he saw such a dispensation tending to their good; to meet with the
Jews tentation of poverty; the silver is mine, etc. says the Lord of hosts.
3. When the Lord withholds any glory or splendour, from his people and work, it
is for their advantage, and flows from a purpose to give what is better, if
they had eyes to see it; for when he withholds silver and gold which they so
much desired, he purposes that the glory of this latter house shall be greater
then of the former. 4. The spiritual things of Christ's Kingdom do far surpass
all the legal administrations in glory, and do put more real splendour on any
place where they are administered, then all the pomp of the world beside can do:
the glory of this latter house shall be greater then of the former, says the
Lord of hosts: for there, there was but a Solomon, here a greater then Solomon:
there was gold and worldly splendor, here heavenly treasures shined: there was
the ministration of the letter, here of the Spirit; there a precious ointment,
here the oil of gladness; there God dwelt in thick darkness, here the light
of the world shined; and in a word, there were the dark shadows, here the true
substance. 5. As peace and reconciliation with God, is the allowance of Christ's
subjects, which out-shines all the splendor and glory of the world; so it is
the great glory of the Gospel-administrations, that by them peace may be had
through Jesus Christ, which was attainable by none of the works and ceremonies
of the Law being rested on; therefore in stead of their wonted splendor, and
in opposition to former administrations, it is promised, that by Christ's
coming, his death and doctrine; In this place will I give peace, says the Lord
of hosts.

Verse. 10. In the four and twentieth day of the nineth month in the second
year of Darius, came the Word of the LORD by Haggai the Prophet, saying;

11. Thus says the LORD of hosts, Ask now the Priests concerning the Law,
saying;

12. If one bear holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do
touch bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? and
the Priests answered, and said, No.

13. Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any of
these, shall it be unclean? and the Priest answered, and said, It shall be
unclean.

14. Then answered Haggai, and said, So is this people, and so is this nation
before me, says the LORD, and so is every work of their hands, and that which
they offer there is unclean.

This second Sermon was delivered two months after the former, when now having
prepared materials, as chapter 1.8. and fitted all things in the space of three
months, chapter 1.14, 15. they are ready to lay the foundations of the Temple, or
at least to build on the old foundations that had been laid at their first
returning, Ezra 3. in so far as they were not demolished, as appears here from
v. 15. and 18. and the scope of this part of the Sermon is, from ruled and
clear cases in the law, which the Priests could resolve unto them, to discover
their former sin for which God had punished them, while they rested upon their
building the Altar, Ezra 3.2. and offering sacrifice on it, and yet in the mean
time did follow their own interests, neglecting the Temple of the Lord, and to
stir them up to do the work they were now about purely, and to join personal
reformation with it. In sum, it is as if Haggai had said, As your ordinary
Priests will out of the Law resolve you, that however the sacrifices being
consecrate to God, and now holy, put some ceremonial holiness on the garments,
which immediately touch them, Lev. 6.27. yet that holiness cannot be extended
to any thing which the garment touches, either of purpose or by chance, and
not the flesh immediately, v, 11, 12. and on the contrary, that ceremonial
pollution does make, not only a man's garment unclean, but whatsoever also,
whether common or sacred, it touches, v. 13. (which is clear from the Law,
Lev. 11.24. and 15.4. Numb. 9.10. and 19.11, 13.) So on the same grounds do I
in the Name of the Lord assure all of you, who deserve not the name of my
people, that your former negligence could not be cleansed by your sacrifices,
but it rather polluted them as well as your selves, and your other works: and
that a present holy work will not sanctify profane workers, but your
prophanity will rather pollute it, as to you, v. 14. Doct. 1. All that is
written in the Law concerning ceremonial pollution, is but a shadow and
representation of the moral uncleanness of men; which the sensible soul will
find as difficult, (if not more) to avoid, as the Jews found that, while it
put them to a perpetual affrightment and caution: therefore Haggai by the one,
points at the other as the substance, and shows that the same proportion
holds in both. 2. It is a profitable way for effectual convincing of sin, to
make use of any principles of light that are in men, and by them to draw
conclusions upon the conscience; so does Haggai make use of acknowledged and
ruled cases, from which he inferres a guilt upon them, which they did not so
clearly see. 3. As the lips of the servants of God are to preserve knowledge,
and they are to be made use of by his people, in resolution of difficulties; so
they are not to be looked on as infallible guides, as if every thing they say,
they could not err in it, but they are to speak from the Word, and their
Doctrine to be examined by it; for this is the will of the Lord of hosts, that
we ask the Priests concerning the Law. 4. Such as rightly examine themselves
will easily perceive the great difficulty there is of good, in comparison of
ill, and how they are far more easily polluted then sanctified: so much do
both cases hold out, that holiness extended no further at best then the
garment which immediately touched the holy thing, but pollution reached
further. 5. External performances, whether of Gods worship or in his public
work, will not of it self make a man acceptable; but on the contrary, want of
personal reconciliation and purity will pollute best works will render the
workers contemptible, and all they do vile; so does the Lord teach us, that by
reason of former and present pollution, So (to wit unclean) is this Nation
before me, says the Lord, and so is every work of their hands, and that which
they offer there is unclean. 6 It is a profitable study when people are about
works that are in themselves right, to be sensible not only of former failings
and neglects, but of present uncleanness which they may contract in them; and
for this end to search what they are in the sight of God, that they may be
humbled, and not delude nor please themselves with the bare work; for this end
comes this Sermon out that same day they were ready to build, that they might
not so soon forget their former way, nor be unmindfull that there was more
required for approbation, then being employed in an holy work.

Verse. 15 And now I pray you consider from this day and upward, from before a
stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of the LORD.

16. Since those days were, when one came to an heap of twenty measures, there
were but ten: when one came to the presse-fat for to draw out fifty vessels,
out of the press, there were but twenty.

17. I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with hai^e in all the
labors of your hands: yet ye turned not to me, says the LORD.

18. Consider now from this day, and upward, from the four and twentieth day of
the nineth month, even from the day that the foundation of the LORDS Temple
was laid, consider it.

19. Is the seed yet in the barn? yea, as yet the vine and the fig tree, and
the pomgranate, and the Olivetree has not brought forth: from this day will I
bless you.

The scope of the second part of this Sermon, is to show that however God will
put difference betwixt workers; and knows who are sincere, and who not, yet
to encourage them to be diligent in it, as being a work which he approves in it
self, and which he will reward with temporal blessing and a change of his
former dispensations. And therefore he stirs them up to remarke the tokens of
Gods anger on them while they neglected the Temple, v. 15. that their
expectations of the harvest, and what they had gathered, were much
disappointed, v. 16. and the Lord, with the drought, Chap. 1.11. had otherwise
also smitten the fruits of the ground, whereof they had made no good use, v.
17. but now having begun the work, v. 18. he promises to send a blessing on
the fruits of the ground, and this he does in the midst of winter when their
seed was sown and nothing had budded, and conseqently nothing could be foretold
of the ensuing harvest, but by God only; that so by observing the subsequent
seasons and the harvest it self, they might be confirmed in the faith of Gods
approving their work, and be encouraged in it, v. 19. Doct. 1. Though the Lords
dispensations be visible and felt by all, yet the right considering and
understanding of them is a work of much difficulty, and to which men need
serious stirring up, especially to take up the right cause of them; therefore
after all the pointing out of their former condition in the former Sermons,
they are again invited to consider it, I pray you consider, etc. 2. Famine and
scarcity is one of the public scourges whereby the Lord chastises the sinful
contempt and negligence of his people in his work and service; and he will be
conspicuous in inflicting of it; for, Before a stone was laid on a stone in the
Temple of the Lord, when one cams to an heap of twenty measures, there were but
ten, etc. I smote you with blasting, etc. 3. As it is the usual plague
accompanying common judgments that they do not work upon the hearts of men, to
draw them nearer God, but rather harden them: so such an impenitent disposition
when God strikes, is a ground of further controversy; therefore he marks by the
way their stupidity, Yet ye turned not to me, says the Lord, 4. However
temporal things are not to be looked on as the chief reward of serving God, nor
as absolutely promised, nor yet are they to be so much looked to under the
Gospel, as the Church of the Jews might under their pedagogy; yet in this the
promise, even concerning these things, holds good, that following of God has
the promise of this life, in so f^rre as it is for the followers good; that
Gods changing adversity into prosperity when a people set about his work,
should be a confirmation to their faith and strengthen their hands that
whatever adversity come on the Church, it is not to be fathered on Gods work,
as if it had been the cause of her woe; that as neglecters of Gods work are
real losers in their own affairs, and will prove so in the end; so followers
of his work, have a real advantage in it; and in a word, that Gods work is
never followed without a blessing evidenced some way or other to the godlies
satisfaction; This much we may learn from this particular promise made to the
Church of the Jews, whereas they had been formerly much afflicted, now, from
this day will I bless you. 5. It is a profitable study, to remark the
advantages of following God, and to study encouragement in that duty; so much
are we taught by the Lords exciting them to consider the change of his dealing,
as trysting with the very day of their amending their fault. 6. God is so
sovereigne and absolute a Lord of all things, and has times and seasons,
blessings and cursings so in his hand, as he may undertake to do things,
whereof there is no visible probability or certainty in the second causes, and
can certainly perform them; therefore does he undertake to bless them, when
second causes and the season could speak no such thing. 7. It is the
prerogative of God only to know future contingent events, which depend on times
and seasons and uncertain second causes; and are known by men by no study of
second causes, and their influences, but only by immediate revelation; this is
held forth as Gods prerogative by his extraordinary Prophet, to foretell in the
midst of winter, what the succeeding harvest should produce.

Ver. 20 And again the Word of the LORD came unto Haggai in the four and
twentieth day of the month, saying,

21. Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens
and the earth.

22. And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the
strength of the Kingdoms of the heathen, and I will overthrow the charets, and
those that ride in them, and the horses and their riders shall come down, every
one by the sword of his brother.

23. In that day, says the LORD of hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my
servant, the son of Shealtiel, says the LORD, and will make thee as a
signet: for I have chosen thee, says the LORD of hosts.

The last Sermon, delivered on the same day with the former, may be understood
of Zerubbabel the type, unto whom is promised for the behoof of his successors
and that people, that whereas God was about to send great commotions, and was
about to overthrow Kingdoms of the world and their power, setting them by the
ears among themselves; yet he would preserve him, and that people governed by
him, as his precious jewels, and as his chosen people, especially because
Christ the substance of this type, was to come of them. And so we learn, 1. It
is the duty of the Lords watchmen to approve themselves before him in their
diligent and active going about their calling, and preaching the Word of the
Lord instantly; for Haggai is here sent out again upon the same day he had the
former Sermon. 2. As the office of Magistracy, especially over the Lords
people, is no easy work; so honest Magistrates shall have their own peculiar
encouragements from God; Therefore is Haggai commanded to speak to Zerubbabel
governor of Judah. 3. Honest Magistrates will be selfe-denied, and will look
on their public charge as if it were their own particular, so that favors
promised and conferred on the people they govern, are matter of encouragement
to them; for this promise made to Zerubbabel was not accomplished to himself
nor in his time, but to the people under his successors, when the Persian and
Grecian Monarchies were overturned, and all the Kingdoms on every hand were
reeling, and threatening ruin to the Church amongst the rest; and yet this is
his encouragement, as if all had tended to his own particular behoof. 4. As
the Kingdoms of the children of men, even of very Pagans, are at Gods disposal
to lettle or remove them as he pleases; so these most eminent dignities, are
but uncertain things, obnoxious to many alterations, wherein neither authority
nor power will hinder Gods purpose, nor will means be wanting, so long as
there is one Nation to dash upon another: so much is held out in this promise,
I will shake heaven and earth, and I will overthrow the threne of Kingdoms,
etc. 5. Albeit the Church may seem to have reason to fear her enemies, when
they are in power, and to fear the great commotions that are in the world about
her, lest she being a weak party, come down with the rest, yet in her weakest
condition she may expect preservation in the midst of combustions, especially
where God has any further work to do in her; for as the Church of the Jews,
lying in the midst of tottering Kingdoms, especially of Syria and Egypt,
(which seemed most to threaten her ruin) gets a promise that in that day of
common combustion, she shall be as a signet; because Christ was to be born in
her: so may every particular visible Church expect, who has Christ mystical in
his members to bring forth to God. 6. The Church is to confirm her own faith in
the truth of promises, by considering not what she is in her self, or what her
condition can promise, but by looking to what Gods power, and providence can
make her, and do for her; for so the promise runs, I will take thee, and make
thee as a signet, be what thou will in thy self. The fountain of all the
Churches happiness, lies in her having a room in the Lords intimate affection,
making her precious in his sight, and being forthcoming for what is good to
hen; of which the Church is to take fast hold, and read every dispensation by;
for all the favors intended to Zerubbabel, and in him to the people, is summed
up in this, I will make thee as a signet; which imports great respect and
affection as to a ring and jewel, which being on the finger, is still in the
possessors sight and kept diligently, see Jer. 22.24. Cant. 8.6. 8. As
obedience is the way of obtaining favor, so the ground of all respects and
favors flowing from it to the Church, is Gods free choosing of her, according
to the good pleasure of his will, to be the object of his tender love; and of
the mercies which love allows on her, which the Church is to look unto and not
to any thing in her self, therefore is the promise made to Zerubbabel my
servant and the reason given, For I have chosen thee, says the Lord of hosts.

The promise may also more fitly be understood of Christ the substance, who was
in Zerubbabels loins, and whose type Zerubbabel was in his Government; and so
the promise holds out the same in substance with what we heard, v. 6, 7. to
wit, that God was about to work great alterations in the heaven, or religious
external form of the Jewish Church: and in the earth and kingdoms of men,
setting them one against another, breaking their power, and bringing them down,
and all for Christ's behoof, that he as the chosen servant of the Father, and
his Church may be seen to be precious, and become glorious by stability and
enlargement. Hence learn, 1. Christ the promised Messiah is the true Son and
successor of David according to the flesh, the sweet Governor and King of his
Church, and he who is the conductor of his people out of their spiritual
bondage and captivity; for these causes is he spoken to under the name of
Zerubbabel Governor of Judah. 2. The promises concerning the Churches
happiness are made unto Christ as the Fathers party, who having purchased them
by his obedience unto death, is also able to secure them to his people;
therefore this promise is made to Zerubbabel in the type. 3. Albeit the Lord
was author and enjoyner of the external form of the Jewish worship, and the
Covenant made with them is the same in substance with the Covenant of the New
Testament; yet it was not the will of God that the external way of
administration of the Convenant among them should endure under the Kingdom of
the Messiah, who was by his death to put an end to these shadows; for, I will
shake the heavens, says the Lord. 4. Although there be many tossings in the
world where Christ comes with his Gospel, yet his Kingdom will be no loser by
them, but will be the Lords delight, which he will adorn with these ruins, by
making it to stand while others fall, by bringing down opposition and enemies,
and dantoning and breaking men, that they may more easily embrace the Gospel,
and he may make conquests upon them; therefore when he makes all these
overturnings, v. 22. In that day I will make thee as a signet, v. 23. glorious,
precious, and safely kept. 5. The foundation of the Churches happiness stands
on Christ's having been obedient to his Father as her surety, on his interest in
the Fathers affection, and that he is the only chosen way of her safety, which
the Father has found out, and wherein he acquiesceth, and in all these that
He to be hid in him; therefore is all the happiness of the Gospel Church
summed up in this, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, and make thee as a signet,
for I have chosen thee, says the Lord of hosts.

Zechariah.
THE ARGUMENT.
THe Prophet Haggai, having spent some time in preaching to these who had
returned from the captivity of Babylon; the Lord sends forth this Prophet
Zechariah to assist him in the work, and to declare further of his mind to the
Church; partly in visions, partly in doctrinal Sermons, and partly in
prophetical predictions; who having exhorted the people unto repentance,
propounds diverse visions for the encouragement of that people in their low
condition, and to go on in the work they had begun, withal declaring that he
was ill pleased with their sins, and would punish the guilty, however the
Church and his work prospered, chap. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Then he resolves their
case of conscience concerning their former fastings, showing unto them what had
been their failings hitherto, and what their duty is, if they would enjoy the
great things be intended for them, chap. 7, 8. Lastly, be comes to prophefie of
the ruin of all their enemies round about, of the coming of Christ, his death
and passion, the pouring out of his Spirit, and spreading of the Gospel, with
the rejection of the Nation of the Jews, till the time appointed for their
Conversion, chap. 9.10, 11, 12, 13, 14.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, (after the Inscription, v. 1.) the Lord exhorts them to
repentance, from the consideration of Gods displeasure against their fathers,
v. 2. and from the hope of his favor, v. 3. and that they should not imitate
their fathers in contemning of the Word, v. 4. considering that though their
fathers, and the Prophets also who had admonished them, were dead: yet the Word
is permanent in all ages, and the truth of it appeared in the effects upon
their fathers, which were yet to be seen, v. 5, 6. Next, he propounds two
comfortable visions for their encouragement, in the first whereof is held forth
Christ in his Kingly office, attended on by Angels, v. 7, 8. perfectly knowing
and observing the quiet estate of enemies, while the Church was afflicted, v.
9, 10, 11. interceding thereupon for the Church, v. 12. and getting a good
answer, v. 13. which by the Prophet he communicates to the Church, v. 14, 15,
16, 17. In the second vision, the enemies who had molested the Church; are
represented to the Prophet, v. 18, 19. together with instruments prepared of
God to crush their power, v. 20, 21.

Verse. 1. JN the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, came the Word of
the LORD, unto Zechariah the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the Prophet,
saying.

This Inscription is the same in substance with that of Haggai, only he comes
out two months later, and has been a man whose ancestors have been of note
among that people, and of the Priests lineage, as appears, Nehem. 12.12. with
16. Concerning whom I shall not determine whether this be he of whom mention is
made, Mat. 23.35. or if it be the son of Jehoiadah, (who it may be had two
names) of whom, 2 Chro. 24.21. though both the name and times reckoned by
Christ, seem rather to plead that it was this Prophet. Doct. As it is a mercy
unto faithful Ministers, when the Lord raises up helpers unto them, to
strengthen their hands, and join with them in their painful services; so it is
a token that God has some great work amongst a people, when he raises up many
faithful instruments, as on the contrary, it is a sad token when their number
decreaseth; therefore Haggai being imbarqued in that work, and the Temple-work
being to prosper; In the eighth month, (two months after the former,) came
the Word of the Lord to Zechariah.

Verse. 2. The LORD has been sore displeased with your fathers.

The Prophet being to carry comfortable tidings to this people, begins-with the
doctrine of repentance, inviting them not to obstruct their own mercy by
impenitencie: and to make way for this doctrine, he points out to them the
greatness of Gods displeasure against their fathers for their sin, as might be
seen in the horrible calamities that did come upon them, which might teach
their children not to expect exemption if they followed their way. Doct. 1. A
people are prepared and fitted for favorable manifestations of God, by
repentance; and mercies are sweetest and most comfortable unto penitents,
therefore the Lord premits this doctrine to the following visions, as the only
way to fit people for them, and make them truly comfortable to them. 2. No
privilege bestowed upon any people, will exempt them from sharp corrections
when they sin; for, albeit the Jews were the only people of God at that time,
yet the Lord has been sore displeased with your fathers, which is also a
warning to them. 3 Though the Lord do not chastise any of his chosen and
regenerate people in pure wrath, or beyond the bounds of moderation; yet his
fatherly displeasure may be very hot and sad in its effects, and his
displeasure against a visible Church, which has abused mercy very grievous,
and therefore ought to be seriously laid to heart; therefore he calls them to
consider how the Lord has been sore displeased, or had displeasure on
displeasure. 4. Albeit examples of Gods anger, especially when they are near,
ought to be effectual documents to others, exciting to tremble and repent, yet
such is the stupidity of men, that notwithstanding any such warming, they will
be ready to adventure on the same sins, which God has so remarkably punished;
therefore they need stirring up to see and make use of Gods anger against their
fathers, the effects whereof were very visible to them.

Verse;. 3. Therefore say thou unto them, Thus says the LORD of hosts, Turn
ye unto me, says the LORD of hosts, and I will turn unto you, says the LORD
of hosts.

The Lord subjoynes the use of the former example, in an exhortation to
repentance, to which he encourages them by his own invitation, and promise of
being reconciled to them, and of dealing favorably with them. Doct. 1.
Judgments rightly studied, do call for repentance as the only remedy, and
ought not to harden, stupifie, or provoke to murmuring, which aggredges sin,
and ripens for more judgments; upon the former doctrine in v. 2. is inferred,
therefore turn ye unto me, says the Lord of hosts. 2. It may be a great
encouragement to the guilty sinner to repent, to consider, that the Lord not
only allows, but calls him to it; and that he is most excellent to whom the
penitent sinner comes; therefore God interposes in this, Say unto them, Thus
says the Lord, turn ye, and thrice designs himself the Lord of hosts. 3.
True penitents, and souls indeed sensible of sin, will discern, that sin has
not only caused a distance betwixt God and them, but an alienation of affection
in them, and that their back is turned on God, and will not only loath, but
renounce their sinful way, not resting on any thing, till they attain to
communion and reconciliation with God: so much is imported in this description
of repentance; Turn ye unto me. 4. The Lord, in letting out his displeasure
against his people, does not cast off thoughts of mercy, but chastises them,
that he may drive them to his mercy, which upon repentance he is ready to
manifest: Turn ye unto me, and I will turn unto you. 5. The Lord in suspending
his turning unto us till we repent, does not import that we can repent of our
selves: but his scope is to convince us of our duty, and make us sensible of
our inability, that we may flee to him, and then he will both turn us and turn
to us; thus are we to understand this order of his command and promise; Turn ye
and I will turn: See, Jer. 31.18, 19. 6. No outward dispensation or token of
favor can be comfortable, or promise that things shall go well, so long as a
people are not turned to God; so much does also this order, Turn ye, and I will
turn, teach, that ^o dispensation of God could assure them, that he was turned
to be in favor with them, till they repented.

Verse;. 4. Be ye not as your fathers unto whom the former Prophets have cried,
saying, Thus says the LORD of hosts, Turn ye now from your evil ways, and
from your evil doings: but they did not hear nor hearken unto me, says the
LORD.

A second exhortation is, that they would not imitate their perverse fathers,
of whom they were descended, in contemning the admonitions to repentance given
them by the Lords Prophets, which is also an argument inviting them to repent,
who were come of such Progenitors. Doct. 1. Custom and example in a sinful
way, is so far from being a warrant to others to imitate it; that on the
contrary, when men consider the ill disposition they have from their
Progenitors, the power of inveterate sinful custom, and how much old debt is
lying upon them, who walk in such paths, it may be a special motive to
repentance, and getting out of such a course: therefore says he to the Jews
who gloried of their fathers, Be not as your fathers, etc. 2. It is an usual
lot of the Lords faithful servants to labor in vain in outward appearance,
and it is an old sin of the visible Church, to contemn the Word of God in their
mouth, of which posterity is to be aware: therefore he instances this sin of
their fathers which they are to avoid: that the Prophets cried, but they did
not hear. 3 As it speaks much patience and long-suffering in God, to warn a
sinful people of their danger; so these who are sent out in that employment,
ought to be faithful, bold and free, enforcing their doctrine from the divine
authority of the Word; for as their sinful fathers had the former Prophets, so
they cried, saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts. 4. The Lord requires of such
as would approve themselves true penitents, that their turning to God, and
reformation, flow from a serious conviction of the sinfulness of their
debordings; the Prophets doctrine was not only to turn, but turn ye from your
evil ways, and from your evil, doings, that is, their courses which they ought
to look upon as gross. 5. As some may come to that height of sin in the
Church, as not to give an care to the Lords message; and as none can prove
themselves hearers, who make not some conscience of giving obedience; so
inadvertency, and not considering who speaks, and what is spoken, is a cause
why the Word has so ill success; They did not hear, (either would not give an
ear, or did not obey) nor hearken (to wit, attentively) unto me. 6. The
contempt and sleighting of the Word of God in the mouth of his servants, will
be reckoned as a contempt and injury done to God; the despisers of the former
Prophets, did not hear nor hearken unto me, says the Lord.

Verse. 5. Your fathers: where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever?

6. But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the Prophets,
did they not take hold of your fathers? and they returned and said, Like as the
LORD of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according to
our doings; so has he dealt with us.

He subjoynes a reason why they should not imitate their fathers, taken from
the fruits of their contempt, they who would not hearken to the Word, were now
not to be found, but consumed with judgments, according as had been
threatened: and albeit the Prophets died as well as their fathers, and that it
may be before what they threatened was executed, yet their fathers had found
that the Word they spoke died not with them, but was effectually executed,
insomuch that they were made to confess that threatenings had not been
pronounced in vain, but were accomplished as was foretold, and according to
their works; and therefore, however their fathers who had been warned, and the
Prophets who spoke unto them, were dead, yet they ought to look on the Word as
a perpetual rule of righteousness, which is still alive to have alike
execution in all ages: and this example of their fathers disobedience, and the
sad fruits of it should be fresh in their memory, and alive to instruct and
invite them to repentance, so much the rather as some of these fruits, were yet
to be seen in their low and afflicted condition. Doct. 1. When the Lord honors
a people by sending his Word unto them, it is their part serionsly to consider
and lay to heart, the authority and certainty thereof, that they may take heed
that they dally not with God speaking therein, and so deceive themselves; for
this end does the Prophet, in the beginning of his Ministry, so seriously
inculcate the truth and certainty of the Word from former experience. 2.
Contemners and fleighters of the Word will not always continue to mintain
their opposition and rebellion, but will at last succumbe in their cause, and
be a missing; for, your fathers (who did not hearken) where are they? what is
become of their opposition? how have they gained their point? so he
interrogates their children, that they may consider on this. 3. Whatever
encouragement to sin, men gather from the evil example of others, yet a right
view of the issue of their way, may convince them of folly who follow it: for,
your fathers, (of whom ye boast, and whom ye will imitate) where are they? 4.
The divine authority and certainty of the Word does not depend upon, nor is to
be judged by the condition of the men who are employed to carry it: their
frailty does not diminish its perfection, their baseness does not take away
its authority, their outward hard lots will not hinder it from having effect,
and their mortality and death will not hinder it to be immortal, and take
effect in all ages; for, though the Prophets do not live for ever, yet my Word
did take hold, etc. when they were gone it lived. 5. Every man by nature is a
fugitive from the convictions or directions of the Word, and a defender of
himself from the rod following thereupon, so long as he is able, so much is
implied in the Wo^d its taking hold, or overtaking of him as a fugitive. 6. The
Word of God in its performance and effects, will at last reach and overtake the
greatest shifter, will drive him from all his subterfuges, and st^ike through
all his bucklers: for, my words -- did they not ta^e hold of (or overtake) your
fathers? 7. The conscience of the greatest contemner of the Word, will at last,
when God reckons with him, be forced to acknowledge the infallible truth of the
Word, and certainty of its accomplishment, and the desert of sin, and that
however they thought it sweet and advantageous, yet the real fruits of it are
such, as Gods Word tells, and that justly: for their stiffenecked fathers
returned and said, Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according
to our ways, and according to our doings, so has he dealt with us. 8.
Examples of Gods judgments are not to be looked on as singular things,
concerning only these on whom they are inflicted: but as executed according to
a rule of righteousness revealed in the Word, which is still the same in all
ages, and therefore to be a document to others, when they who smarted are gone:
therefore when their fathers and the Prophets are dead, the Lord sets this
example before them to excite them to repentance, considering that the Word
lived and was still the same, and that the ruins of their fathers calamity
were left amongst them to preach to the living.

Verse. 7. Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the
month Sebat, in the second year of Darius came the Word of the LORD unto
Zechariah, the son of Barachiah, the son of Iddo the Prophet, saying;

8. I saw by night, and behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood
among the myrtle-trees that were in the bottom, and behind him were there red
horses, speckled and white.

Follows a comfortable vision, wherein is represented Christ on foot in his
Church, taking notice of the case of all people for her good, and drawing the
condition of all enemies to the Churches use, by interceding for her, and
getting good answers, which he communicates. In these verses, after the
designation of the time, and declaration of the authority of this vision, v. 7.
we have Christ represented in his Kingly office, caring for the things of the
Church, under the type of a man riding on a red horse, among the myrtle-trees
in the bottom or valley, by which we may understand, partly the low and
obscure condition of his Church at that time, and partly, the way of Christ's
reigning in the world, which as in it self it seems humble and low, as being
in a valley, and covered with the shadow of black and thick trees, such as the
myrtles are, so is it not always seen by the Church for her comfort, till her
eyes be enlightened as the Prophets were. This Kingly state of (...) Christ
further described from his Attendants; for, under the type of red horses
speckled and white behind him, is represented his having Angels for Ministers,
and all creatures ready for every dispensation, whether sad, represented by
red; or comfortable, represented by white; or mixed of mercy and judgment,
represented by speckled horses, v. 8. Doct. 1. It concerns these who are
invited to repentance by the Lord, to be real in hearkening to that invitation,
and real in that duty; therefore after the former Sermon, there is no further
message for three months at least, till it were seen what fruit that Sermon
had, and how real they were in any thing they professed; the former was in the
eighth month, and this upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh
month. 2. The Lord does teach his Church, and they are to receive instruction,
not only by his Word, but by signs appointed by him joined therewith, whereby
also the Church is informed, that the reality of what God says is such, as if
the thing said were exhibited; for, this whole vision as well as the doctrinal
part of it, is called the Word of the Lord unto Zechariah, saying, intimating
that these types were appointed to reach, and that Gods words are not empty
words, but real things, exhibiting to view promised mercies. 3. Things
spiritual cannot be seen of us while we are within time, but darkly, and as
through a glass; so much does this way of representing things spiritual by
things bodily teach us. 4. As the eternal Son of God had his delights among the
children of men, before the earth was made; so from age to age before his
Incarnation, he gave proof unto his Church, what pleasure he had in her, and to
become a man, and be found in the form of a servant for her sake: as appears
from this, that he who is the Angel of the Lord, and Intercessor for his
Church, v. 12. who has Angels attending him, and at his command, v. 8, 11.
yea, who is Jehovah, v. 20. (and therefore is no other then the Son of God)
appears here for his Church, and that as a man appearing in bodily shape, and
(as it were) essaying beforehand, how it would fit him to be bone of our bone
indeed. 5. Christ's residence and abode in an especial way is in his Church, and
as her low condition will not banish him, or make him seek another lodging; so
his presence is matter of her comfort, how little soever it seem to promise: so
much may be gathered from his being among the myrtle trees in the bottom,
pointing out his Church in a low condition, and this as a matter comfortable,
though his presence and way seem as little conspicuous, as a man under a dark
shade. 6. Though Christ's presence in his Church be ofttimes wanting to sense,
and little discerned by most, nor feared by enemies: yet they who have open
eyes may see him in the Church in the darkest hour: this is held out to us in
that the Prophet even by night saw a man among the myrtle trees: neither the
night (taking it figuratively for their dark condition) nor the dark shadow,
could hide him from the men illuminate by God. 7. Christ in his Church is not
asleep in her danger, but ready and watching a fit opportunity to let forth
that zeal and vengeance, wherewith he is clothed against her enemies:
therefore is he riding, and that on a red horse, signifying vengeance and
severity, and he stood among he myrtle-trees as watching his opportunity to
prove that it was so. 8. Christ the King, Head and Protector of his Church,
has all power in heaven and earth given to him for her behoof, he has Angels
and all creatures at his call to execute his will, and dispensation of all
sorts, at his command, to let forth, as her condition or the temper of her
enemies requires: for, behind him were there red horses speckled and white.

Verse. 9. Then said I, O my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked
with me, said unto me, I will show thee what these be.

10. And the man that stood among the myrtle-trees, answered, and said, These
are they whom the LORD has sent to walk to and fro through the earth.

11. And they answered the Angel of the LORD that stood among the myrtle-trees,
and said, We have walked to and from brough the earth: and behold, all the
earth sits still, and is at rest.

So much of this vision is expounded, as was at that time for the Churches
behoof, and is given by Christ under the representation, of an Angel talking
with the Prophet, who is the same with the man among the myrtle trees, as
appears, v. 10. and it is he who intercedes for the Church, v. 12, 13. and
gives the Prophet a Commission, v. 14. which is only Christ's Prerogative. And
so he represents Christ in his Prophetic office, who before appeared as Head
of the Church on horseback: he being enquired at by the Prophet, undertakes to
inform him, v. 9. and accordingly teaches him concerning his Omniscience and
Sovereign Providence in the world, that he exactly considers the condition of
all countries and men, and how all the world about are at ease except the
Church, all which is represented by the type of Angels sent forth to view the
world, as great Kings do their Intelligencers and Agents, v. 10. and by their
returning an account of their diligence concerning the worlds quiet condition,
v 11. Doct. 1. As Christ is appointed King and Head, so also to be the great
Prophet and Teacher of his Church and people, who has revealed the Father, and
his counsel concerning man's salvation, and who must be the teacher of all those
who would instruct his people to any purpose; for, the man among the
myrtle-trees, is also the Angel that talked with the Prophet. 2. As the Lord
exalts none to much communion with himself, but they need somewhat to abase
them, and keep them in mind of their own wants; so in a special manner, as
men grow in a right way of knowledge, they will also grow in the humbling sense
of their own ignorance: therefore the Prophet being exalted to see visions,
finds his own Ignorance, and is put to propound questions; O my Lord, what are
these? 3. As Christ has all treasures of wisdom and knowledge to solve every
difficulty; so he is willing to clear every dark case to his people, who humbly
employ him, in so far as is needful and for their good; for, his answer to the
Prophets question is, I will show thee what these be. 4 Angels are at Christ's
command, to come and go at his pleasure, and he is their Head, to whom they are
subject and accountable, and their promptitude and obedience unto him is such
as may be a pattern to all his servants This is implied in his sending them to
walk to and fro through the earth, and that they answered the Angel of the
Lord, we have walked to and fro through the earth. 5. Christ has persect
notice of all the affairs, and conditions, and ways of the children of men,
for the good of his Church: this is represented by his Angels going forth to
spy all things, and by their bringing him an account for information; not that
he needs these helps, who knows all things immediately by himself, but he
expresses it thus; partly to set out his glory to our capacity, that he is a
Royal King, with a great train, and many intelligencers and agents abroad, and
partly to condescend to the weakness of our faith, which would see means for
effectuating that which he has alsufficiency in himself to do. 6. It pleases
the Lord for the trial and exercise of his Churches faith and patience, and
for making way to his bowels of sympathy, to afflict his people, when other
people are at ease, and to leave them furthest behind to sense in outward
things, who have best right to be well beyond others; for the whole earth
sits still and is at rest while Judah is vexed. 7. As Christ perfectly
knows the condition of the world and of his people, so his infinite wisdom is
the only fit carver of all remedies, and improver of cases, to his Churches
advantage, this is insinuate in that they make their report simply, without
prescription of a remedy, but leave that to him.

Verse. 12. Then the Angel of the LORD answered, and said, O LORD of hosts, how
long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the cities of Judah, against
which thou have had indignation, these threescore and ten years?

13. And the LORD answered the Angel that talked with me, with good words, and
comfortable words.

As hitherto Christ has been represented in his Kingly and Prophetical Office
in this vision, so here he is represented in his Priestly Office, upon this
information interceding for his afflicted Church, as if he were afflicted with
her, and passionately expostulating, that though the seventy years of their
captivity were long since expired, yet the Lord, who easily could do it, had
not put an end to that ^ad dispensation, and let forth some effects of his
mercy toward her, when all others were at ease: To which a good answer is
returned. Doct. 1. Albeit Christ do not always appear in glorious acts of
power for his people in trouble, to prove his remembering of them; yet it is a
ground of comfort and token of good, to know that the Church and her
afflictions have a room in Christ's heart, and are matter of his intercession to
the Father; therefore the scope of this vision is to assure them of Christ's
intercession for them, as the ground of many promises to be performed in due
time. 2. Christ by virtue of the Covenant of Redemption past betwixt the Father
and him, and the Covenant of grace made with sinners in him, did exercise his
Office of Mediator and Intercessor for his people, making the price to be paid
forthcoming in all ages, even before his incarnation; for here at this time,
he is interceding for the Church of the Jews. 3. Christ the Intercessor is
engaged to see the Churches good, and has perfect knowledge of her affairs,
and what her case requires, which puts him to appear for her in every
necessity, and that very affectionatly, as if himself were concerned and
engaged in her trouble, all this is here said of this Intercessor, for he looks
on her as his charge, for which he must make account, as being the Angel, or,
Messenger of the Lord for that end: his information received in the former
verse shows, that he is neither ignorant nor careless of her case; his
interceding upon that information unrequired, and answering it, as calling him
to do his duty, shows how merciful and faithful and High Priest he is, and
his pleading how long etc? does not import any distrust in him, or quarrelling
of his Father, but his deep resentment of his Churches calamity, and his
cordial affection to her and her welfare. 4. These for whom Christ intercedes
are not the perishing world, but his own in the world, and his visible Church
for their sake, that she may be so dealt with as may most conduce for their
bringing in and training up for heaven; for, here he prays for Jerusalem and
the cities of Judah, as representing the visible Gospel Church, and as being
the visible Church wherein the elect were brought forth to God. 5. Christ in
his intercession will not quit any of his or his peoples rights, but will plead
them to the full, and keep up his whole claim, however matters seem to go; for
however they were now scarce one City, yet he pleads for Jerusalem and the
cities of Judah, for all the people; and is accordingly answered, v. 16, 17.
for things are never desperate, which are within his claim. 6. Albeit Christ
does intercede for his own that are not within the fold that they may be
brought in, yet then have we clear ground to make use of, and apply the benefit
of Christ's intercession to our comfort, when we are engaged in the way of our
duty; for no mention is made of them who returned not from captivity, but only
of Jerusalem and the cities of Judah. 7. Christ's way of intercession teaches
his people to come through him to God in faith as to one completely able to
help them in all extremities; for he prays to him as Lord of hosts, who could
remove all impediments out of the way of his peoples happiness. 8. Such are
fit for receiving the comfortable fruits of Christ's intercession, as are
humble, and made to stoop and expect them from free mercy; for Christ
intercedes on no other terms, but that he will have mercy; which is extended
to the miserable, and such as are sensible of their being such. 9. Tender
mercy, and bowels of compassion in God, is the carver out of what shall be the
lot of his humble people; for Christ comprehends all they are to receive in its
fountain, which is mercy. 10. Such as Christ the Mediator takes charge of he
will not have them behind with any for happiness; for, so much does his
complaining that mercy was not showed to the Church, while as others were at
ease, teach us. 11. Christ does tenderly weigh the measure and continuance of
the Churches trouble; so does he here; Against which thou have had indignation
these threescore and ten years. 12. Albeit the Lord for a time let out
displeasure against his Church for sin, yet his ordinary way of dispensation
in the world, and his peculiar favor to his Church, will allow her to expect a
vicissitude and change of her hard condition into a better, after his prefixed
time for trial is over; for after the seventy years captivity Christ pleads,
that indignation should resolve in mercy. 13. The sad effects of a captivity
may last long time after the captivity is over, that so the fruits of sin
may be well studied, that a people so used may be stirred up more earnestly to
seek God, and that Christ may have much occasion to let forth his bowels of
affection, and his fathers through him; for here, after the seventy years are
over, the Lord yet had not mercy on Jerusalem, to wit, in that measure of
outward effects they had enjoyed before their captivity, and was promised to
them after it. 14. Christ is such an Intercessor, as even when he takes most
desperate-like causes in hand, he will be heard, and must be satisfied in his
desires; for, the Lord answered the Angel that talked with me. 15. The answer
which Christ the Intercessor receives will be satisfactory and comfortable, it
will be such as he accounts good, and so should we, and being good should be
comfortable, and will prove so in the end; for he is answered with good and
comfortable words. 16. A Church may receive rich fruits of Christ's
intercession, although at first they be not delivered, nor get the rest which
they expect, to wit, when they are led to spiritual things instead of temporal
which they want, and get promises renewed of what is in due time to be
performed: for Christ's answer here is good and comfortable words, or promises
concerning spiritual things, and their own enlargement, after published.

Verse. 14. So the Angel that communed with me, said unto me, Cry thou, saying;
Thus says the LORD of hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem, and for Sion with a
great jealousy.

This good answer is not kept up by Christ the Intercessor, but the sum of it
is presently given to the Prophet to publish unto the Church for her comfort,
it contains several particulars; whereof the first is, a commission to
publish the Lords affection to his Church, to do her good, and his indignation
and grief (speaking after the manner of men) for the injuries sustained by
her, no less then any man has for his married and beloved wife. Doct. 1.
Christ's fidelity and affection to his people for whom he intercedes, is such,
that he will not long keep up from them the fruits of his purchase and
intercession in their need; this is represented to us in this, that a good
answer and good news being given, before (so to say) he read the packet, he
posts it away to the Church by the Prophet, So the Angel that communed with me
said, Cry thou, etc. 2. Good news concerning the Church are to be expected
from heaven as the fruit of Christ's intercession, and are to be read in the
Word and messages put in the mouth of his commission-servants from day to day:
So here, these good news are the answer which Christ received to his prayer,
and are sent from Heaven to be published by the Prophet. 3. It is incumbent to
these who are employed as Ambassadors betwixt Christ and his people, to
publish his mind with such zeal and alacrity, such affection and confidence,
as may in some measure represent his great love who sent the message, his
delight to do them good, and his real purpose to perform what he says; for
this cause is the Prophet here commanded, to cry this message. 4. The Lords
relation to his people is a marriage tie, which is not broken by every fault,
nor cast off in sad dispensations: for, his being jealous for her, imports,
that she was the wife still, for all she had done, or had come upon her. 5.
Albeit the Lord will neither hold strokes off his people when they need or
deserve them, nor deliver them till his time come; yet his marriage-affection
does resent all their trouble and injuries done to them, so that they grieve
not, nor are wronged, but his heart bleeds, as in due time will appear in
effects; I am (says he) jealous for Jerusalem and Sion with a great jealousy.

Verse. 15 And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease: for
I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction:

A second branch of the answer given in commission to the Prophet, holds forth
Gods great displeasure against the enemies of the Church for all their quiet
condition, because that when God intended to correct his people by their
means, they had proven severe executioners. Doct. 1. As it is an heathenish
mark to live at ease in an uncertain world, especially when the Church is in
trouble; so Gods displeasure against heathens, or men of heathenish disposition
and practices in afflicting the Church of God may be very great, and ready to
break forth in due time, notwithstanding their easy life and quiet estate, I
am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease. 2. The Lords hottest
displeasure against his own people will be found very easy when it is compared
with his severity against his enemies; therefore however the Jews be called to
consider it in it self, as sore displeasure, v. 2. yet being thus compared
with the lot of others: it is said, I was but a little displeased. 3. Albeit
none of the Churches enemies, and instruments of Gods chastisements, can
transgress the bounds of his purpose and permission, to add any thing to the
Churches trouble, yet as they go beyond his revealed will and approbation, so
they use to execute Gods purpose, with such cruel minds and so destructive
intentions, as renders them highly guilty before God; thus, They helped forward
the affliction, when God was but a little displeased, they had more cruelty in
their way then God determined to be executed, and they intended and aimed at
the utter destruction of the Church, when God intended only to correct and
purge them. 4. As the cruel designs of the Churches enemies will fail them;
so their severity in executing the Lords controversy, is a token of Gods sore
anger against them, and of their approaching ruin; for, the Church is now
delivered in part, beyond their expectations and desires, and this their way,
speaks God very sore displeased, which will not long conceal.

Verse. 16. Therefore thus says the LORD, I am returned to Jerusalem with
mercies: my house shall be built in it, says the LORD of hosts, and a line
shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

A third branch of this answer and message, holds forth some promised effects
of his declared love to his people, to wit, that the Lord, being now reconciled
with them, the Temple should be built: and their City and wall also in
Nehemiahs time (signified by the stretching out of a workmans line to square
his building by, when he works) and so in effect promises to erect their
public worship, and Politic State. Doct. 1. The Lord who speaks comfortably
of his love to the Church in her trouble, will in due time let forth real and
convincing proofs and fruits thereof; This promise comes in on the back of the
former concerning his love to his people, and hatred against her afflicters,
with a therefore, as minding to give a real proof of what he said. 2. As the
Lords presence with his people as a reconciled God, is a chief fruit of his
love; so temporal calamities will not hinder his manifesting of his being
reconciled, in his own due time; for after he had been angry with them, and had
gone away, as to any outward manifestation of his presence, he assures them
again, as a great proof of his love. Thus says the Lord, I am returned to
Jerusalem. 3. The Lords furniture and train when he comes to dwell in his
Church, are tender mercies of all sorts, without which his Church could not
enjoy him, nor he dwell long with her; and which shall rejoice over any other
dispensation he may let out upon her, I am returned to Jerusalem with mercies,
says he. 4. The Lord may be reconciled with, and in the midst of his people,
laden with mercy, when yet all things are but in the promises, going to bud
forth in performance, I am returned, says the Lord, when yet neither the City
nor house were built. 5. The setting up of Gods house and worship amongst a
sinful unworthy people, is a chief evidence of his presence, and fruit of his
tender mercy; My house shall be built in it, is the first fruit of his
returning with mercies. 6. Albeit the building of Gods house, and setting up
his worship, be the Churches duty, the neglect whereof is her great sin; yet
it is the Lord who only can undertake to set it up and hold it up, and the
humble follower of his duty, may be encouraged by considering that what is
their task, God is also engaged by promise to see it done, therefore what they
were commanded to do by Haggai, here God promises to see it done when they set
about it, My house shall be built in it, says the Lord of hosts. 7. Where
Gods work goes first on as men's chief care, their own particulars will succeed
the better, although they were to raise out of the very dust and ruins of long
desolation; therefore it is promised in the second place, and a line shall be
stretched forth upon Jerusalem.

Verse. 17. Cry yet, saying, Thus says the LORD of hosts, My cities through
prosperity, shall yet be spread abroad, and the LORD shall yet comfort Sion,
and shall yet choose Jerusalem.

The last branch of this answer (for which the Prophet gets a new commission)
contains yet more effects of his love, that whereas now they were but a few
and poor people, so that they behoved to bring people from the country to
inhabit Jerusalem, Neh. 11. The Lord promises that all their Cities should not
only be peopled, but should overflow with men and prosperity, (as some shadow
of the enlargement of Christ's Kingdom under the Gospel) and that by all these
dispensations he would comfort this people, and confirm them in that
privilege of being his chosen people, notwithstanding their temporal
rejection. Doct. 1. When the Lord has said much for the comfort of his people,
he has still yet more to say, to be as confidently avowed, as if he had made
but promise of one thing; and his servants need much up-stirring to search into
the riches of Christ, and not to weary in bringing it forth unto his people:
therefore after the former commission and promises, Cry yet says the Lord. 2.
Though there be many things that seem to lie in the way of promises, such as
guilt, difficulties, length of time, etc. which may make performance seem
improbable, if not impossible: yet the faith both of Preachers and people ought
to step over these, and whatever appear to the contrary, the promise is to be
published and believed; this is imported in the many yets in this commission
and promise; Cry yet, my cities shall yet spread, etc. showing that whatever be
said to the contrary these things should be. 3. When God is reconciled with a
people, all things that concerns them becomes the Lords; in a special manner,
to get protection and blessing from him; for now their cities are his: My
Cities. 4. Though the Lords people reconciled with him, may lie low for a time,
yet his blessing can exalt them beyond all expectation; My cities through
prosperity shall yet be spread abroad. 5. Though the Lords people seem
oft-times to be stricken with incurable and grievous wounds, yet the Lord both
can, and in due time will comfort them over all their sorrows, and make them
forget their miseries; And the Lord shall yet comfort Zion. 6. The great
comfort that arises to the Lords people from all his gracious dispensations, is
that by them they are confirmed in the privilege of being his peculiar people,
and standing in his favor, which by sad afflictions seemed to be annulled and
made void: for their comfort is, that by these dispensations he shall yet
choose Jerusalem, or give a new proof of it.

Verse. 18. Then lift I up mine eyes, and saw, and behold, four horns.

19. And I said unto the Angel that talked with me, What be these? And be
answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and
Jerusalem.

20. And the LORD showed me four Carpenters.

21. Then said I, What come these to do? And he spoke, saying, These are the
horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head, but
these are come to fray them, to cast out the horns of the Gentiles, which lift
up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.

In this second vision, that part of the former message concerning Gods
displeasure against the Churches enemies, is confirmed, and the removal of all
obstructions in the way of performance of promises is held forth; the sum
whereof is, that as when God purposed to exercise and chasten them, strong and
fierce enemies had arisen from all quarters of the world, and had scattered the
whole body of Gods people, both of Israel and Judah, (which enemies are
represented to the Prophet, and under the type of horns, alluding to the
custom of soldiers, who had iron horns in their helmets for terror, or to
beasts whom enemies resemble in cruelty;) so albeit the Jews could not resist
them, nor shake off the yoke till their trial was perfected; yet the Lord had
other enemies and fitted instruments ready in all quarters, to be terrible unto
these oppressors, and cast them out of their power, and to break and crush it,
which also is represented to the Prophet under the type of Carpenters, or
Hammer-men, able to break and cut off these horns, and both these types are
explained by the Lord unto him. Doct. 1. When greatest promises are given to
the Church, her faith may have sorest essays, and greatest obstructions may
appear in the way of performance, from potent, cruel and beastly enemies on all
quarters, concurring together for her ruin; and not only threatening, but who
have actually exercised so much cruelty, as may put her in fear for the
future; for, when all these promises are made; Then I lift up mine eyes, and
behold, four horns, which have scattered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem. 2. As
difficulties invironing the Church would be seen by her, that she may be
stirred up to her duty: so the best sight of them, and expounding of their way
is had from God, whereby she will see them to be under an overruling
Providence, and that God takes notice of every circumstance of her trouble;
therefore the Prophet is made to see these horns: and albeit their trouble
from enemies was a known thing, yet the Lord will discover it in vision, and
expound it himself upon the Prophets question, to show that God knew, and had
an hand in what they did. 3. Albeit the Lord take notice of all the cruelties
exercised upon his Church, yet in a special manne^ he resents the enemies
design, to cut the face of a Church from off the earth; for, they scattered
Judah, etc. as beasts toss what they get upon their horns into the wind, and
for this cause it is, that the scattering of Jerusalem, where the Temple stood,
is considered by it self, though it be a part of Judah. 4. Albeit the Lord do
not alike soon deliver all his afflicted, yea, albeit these who were last
afflicted be first delivered, yet the sufferings of all are in his heart, and
not forgotten in their trouble; and present sufferers have the advantage of all
the Churches former trouble, whose wounds do all bleed on every new stroke;
therefore albeit Judah get the present comfort of this vision, as appears, v.
21. yet the Prophet is made to see, that the horns have scattered Judah,
Israel and Jerusalem, not only because some Israelites had cleaved unto Judah;
since the renting of the ten tribes from the house of David, but to show that
Isreal's troubles were laid up in his heart, to be forthcoming for their good
in due time, and that Judah had this advantage against her enemies, that Israel
had suffered by them also. 5. Such as have opened eyes may discern as much for
the encouragement of the Church, as can be seen against her: that God is
powerful to crush all her enemies, and has as many effectual means for that
end on all quarters, as they have power and confederates: for, the Prophet is
made to see four Carpenters, in opposition to the four horns. 6. However
difficulties and enemies may easily be seen; yet help against them can be
showed by God only; for whereas it is said of the horns that the Prophet saw
them, it is said of their help expressly; The Lord showed me four Carpenters.
7. Christ the King, Priest and Prophet of his Church, is very God, equal with
his Father; for here the Angel, who all this while had communed with, and
informed the Prophet in vision and who had interceded for the Church, is
Jehovah; The Lord showed me. 8. No success which enemies have had against the
Church, during her trial and exercise will assure them against a day of
vengeance, or make them stand before the fitted instruments thereof; for,
however these horns have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head,
yet these are come to fray them, and cast out the horns of the Gentiles: The
instruments of vengeance will easily affright them who had been the terror of
the world, and will cast them out, not only from possessing the Churches
inheritance which they had usurped, but from their own kingdoms and power
which they had employed so ill. 9. Whatever other wickedness; persecutors of
the Church may be guilty of, or whatever quarrel the instruments of their ruin
may have against them; yet the Lords great controversy which fills their cup,
and which the Church themselves, and the world about should look on as the
cause of their ruin, is their opposition unto, and their oppressing of the
people of God; therefore is it the third time set down in this vision, that
they lift up their horn over the land of Judah to scatter it.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter we have a third vision showed unto the Prophet, wherein under
the type of a man measuring Jerusalem, v. 1, 2. and attended with Angels, v. 3.
is promised the future enlargement of Jerusalem, v. 4. and her safety, v. 5.
the application and use of which vision is held forth in a threefold
exhortation, 1. To the Jews who remained at Babylon, that they would return to
their land, v. 6, 7. in regard, that Christ was out of his love to them, to
reckon with their enemies, which he would easily effectuate to their
satisfaction and confirmation, v. 8, 9. 2. To the Jews who were returned, that
they would rejoice because of his presence among them, v. 10. because of the
accession that should be of many Nations to the Church, v. 11. and because the
Lord would yet confirm their election, to be his chosen people in their own
land, v. 12. 3. To all misbelievers of the promise and opposers of his Church,
that they should stand in awe, and compesce their fainting or fury, v. 13.

Ver. 1. I Lift up mine eyes again, and looked, and behold, a man with a
measuring line in his hand.

2. Then said I: Whither go thou? And he said unto me, To measure Jerusalem,
to see what is the breadth thereof, and what is the length thereof;

3. And behold, the Angel that talked with me, went forth, and another Angel
went out to meet him;

4. And said unto him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall
be inhabited as towns without walls; for the multitude of men and cattle
therein

Here is promised unto the Church, that however they were now a few people to
inhabit the city or country, and destitute of cattle as well as men, yet they
should so increase, as that the walls of Jerusalem should not contain them, but
they should dwell without the precincts thereof, and spread themselves into the
country and villages, hereby prefiguring the future enlargement of the Church,
beyond what was under the Old Testament. This is represented unto the Prophet
under the type of Christ, as a man with a measuring line, declaring unto the
Prophet his purpose to build and set bounds to his own Church, and who being
attended by Angels, sends one of them to the Prophet with this message to be
communicated unto the Church, for to encourage them to go on in the work, and
to invite the scattered Jews to come home and join with their brethren. Doct.
1. Such as would see the true case and condition of the Church, had need of
elevated and spiritual minds, enlightened by God; for, Zechariah lift up his
eyes and looked, being enlightened of God in this vision; and saw the Churches
case far otherwise then the case of the city, looked on by a natural eye at
that time, could promise. 2. These who see Jerusalem, and the Church well, will
see Christ still employed about her, and careful of her well-being, and that
her prosperity is the great business of heaven, about which Christ and Angels
are busy, and of this Christ would have his Church assured; for, here he
looked again after the former vision, wherein he had seen Christ, and behold, a
man with a measuring line, etc. to wit, Christ himself in humane shape, who is
busy measuring the city, going forth to it, and making to work; and another
Angel, (one of many attending him) went out to meet him in this work: and
command is given that the Church know this, Run, speak, etc. that this man is
Christ, appears, in that it is he who has command of Angels, v. 3, 4. for he
who spoke to the Prophet, v. 2. is the Angel that talked with him, v. 3. 3. It
is the duty of all the Lords people, and particularly his Commission-servants,
to be humbly and carefully diligent to search out the Lords mind in his
actings and Providence: and for that end, as to search into his Word, so to
present many suites unto himself; for here the Prophet, seeing Christ at work,
desires to be informed; Then said I, Whither go thou? 4. Christ has the
bounds of his Church at his disposal and measuring, he has abounding charter
granted by the Father, which no opposition shall be able to retrinch; for he
alone has the measuring line, v. 1. He can design the length and breadth of
Jerusalem, v. 2. and can irrevocably declare the enlargement thereof. v 4. 5.
As the Lord can easily enlarge his Church from a small beginning, so it is his
purpose under the New Testament, not only to extend the pale of his Church
further then to the Nation of the Jews; but still to enlarge and make his
Kingdom come from Nation to Nation, till all Israel be saved, and the fullness
of the Gentiles come in, and the Kingdoms of the earth become the Kingdoms of
the Lord, etc. for, here in the letter, Jerusalem (now small) shall be
inhabited as cowne; without walls, for the multitude of men and cattle therein:
and by this type the enlargement of the Gospel Church is held forth, which we
are still commanded to pray for. 6. As the Lord may employ whom he pleases,
even young men, and make them fit and able for his work; so whosoever are
employed by him, ought to be nimble and active in going about his directions in
their office, and to be abased in their own eyes before him who employeth them:
for, here the Prophet is called this young man, either in respect of his age,
or because he ought to be nimble in his office as a boy, or in respect of his
abasing himself, and being nothing in his own eyes, when he saw Christ and the
created Angel.

Verse. 5. For I, says the LORD, will he unto her a wall of fire round about,
and will be the glory in the midst of her.

Whereas the former promises of Jerusalems enlargement, as towns without walls
seemed to import, that they should not be in safety; the Lord prevents this,
and promises that his protection should make them as safe, as if they were
encompassed with a wall of fire, (as Israel was, when the pillar of fire stood
betwixt them and the Egyptians, Ex. 14. as Elisha in Dothan, 2 Kings 6.17. or
as travelers in the wilderness kept off lions and wild beasts, by building
fires round about them;) and that they should have the comfort of his glorious
presence, dwelling in the midst of them, making them glorious, and assuring
them of protection, Doct. 1. One promise of Christ, and proof of his love, will
still call for another to make that sure, and so on till the Church get
performance once for all; therefore, the former promise of enlargement calls
for this new one of protection, and gets it. 2. When the Lord sees it fit to
exempt his people from trouble, he can in most unsafe times, and when they are
weakest, safely protect them, by bridling enemies by his secret hand, by making
the Church find favor in their eyes, or making their attempts as ineffectual,
as if they would essay to go through a fire; and even when his Church tastes of
trouble, yet she is not secluded from his protection, nor exposed to the will
of enemies, and what they do against her shall be as prejudicial to them, as if
they had gone through a burning fire; I, says the Lord, will be unto her a
wall of fire round about, does import all this. 3. As the Lords presence with
and amongst a people is their greatest glory, and makes them glorious; so it is
a pledge of their protection, that he will secure his own habitation, and put a
defense on his own glory, whatever they be; for, where he is a wall of fire,
there he is the glory in the midst of her, and therefore a wall.

Verse. 6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North, says the
LORD: for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven says the
LORD.

7. Deliver thy self, O Zion, that dwell with the daughter of Babylon.

This doctrine concerning Jerusalems enlargement and safety, is by Christ
applied to several sorts of persons for use, in a threefold exhortation: 1. To
the Jews, who having in seventy years time forgotten their own country, many
of them also being borne in captivity, and being taken up with the pleasures of
Babylon, and looking on all as desperate in their own country, did voluntarily
stay still when the rest came away; these are again and again exhorted with all
speed on all hazards, to return and help to build the City and dwell in it,
that so that people might be conspicuous til Christ should come, who would
enlarge his Chureh, and that they might share with the rest in these promises.
In this exhortation two reasons are couched: 1. That their scattering into
Babel, and into all other corners, (of which see, Ezekiel. 5.12. Jer. 4.11.) was a
judgment, and therefore not to be s^te under, especially now when God in pity
to them, was restoring them. 2. That being Zion, it was not seemly to see them
in Babylon, when they might be at Jerusalem. Doct. 1. It may encourage every
one in their station to put their hand to help forward Christ's work, and to
come and join in it, when they consider that he is about it, in whose hand
nothing will miscarry, and Christ's kindness to his Church, may invite all to
come and join with her; for, the scope and drift of the preceding vision is
declared to be the encouragement of the Jews, to go on in the work, and an
invitation of their brethren to leave all and come unto them. 2. The worst and
bitterest of conditions may in process of time, be sat down under by
unsensible souls, with stupidity, and such an outgate made of them, as they
will be quitting hope of better; for, these people who could not think of going
to Babel, have now settled themselves in it, as their home, and need call upon
call to come out of it; Ho, ho, flee, deliver thy self. 3. It is an usual sin
in men, through negligence, love of the world, prejudice at the way of God, and
unwillingnesse to embarque in difficulties, to neglect their own true good, and
their duty for enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ: for these causes it was
that the Jews need so many calls to leave Babylon, and come to Jerusalem to
join in the work of God, and enjoy the means of salvation. 4. Albeit the
commands of God seem many times unjust to our sense, and obedience thereunto
very prejudicial, yet upon better information, we will find that our advantage
lies in speedy obedience upon any hazard; therefore the call to these lingering
Jews, is not only to come forth, but to flee and deliver thy self, or, make
an escape on any terms, as out of a great hazard, albeit they thought it their
best to abide there. 5. As the Lord, in showing mercy to his people, calls to
mind their forms afflictions, that he may be so much the more kind; so
however the Lord may make the place of his peoples captivity easy to them, yet
it is a judgement-like disposition, when a people chooses that for their rest,
and outgate, which God has cast them in, in wrath, and as a punishment for
sin, however it may seem to promise ease; therefore the Lord himself minds
their scattering when he is to show mercie^ and minds them of their scattering
as a fruit of his wrath, that they should not think to dwell still there; Ho,
ho, come forth, for I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heaven,
says the Lord. 6. The Churches serious considering of her Profession,
privilege and dignity, may discover unto her, how unbeseeming many of her
practices are, how little she adornes her profession, or walks worthy of her
high calling: therefore does he name her Zion, that it might shame her from
dwelling with the daughter of Babylon. 7. Unnecessary and voluntary conversing
with idolaters, is an evil full of hazard to the people of God, considering how
much they lose by neglecting better company, what danger there is of infection
by them, and of participating with them in their judgments; therefore is Zion
to deliver her self, who dwells with the daughter of Babylon.

Verse. 8. For thus says the LORD of hostles, After the glory has he sent me
unto the nations which spoiled you; for he that touches you, touches the
apple of his eye.

A third reason is expressly subjoyned to the exhortation, to wit, that after
Christ had visited and afflicted his own people; and especially after he has
begun to make his glory shine in restoring them, he is also sent by his Father
to punish their enemies, and restrain them from impeding the perfecting of the
Churches glory, by doing whereof he would make known his affection to the
Church, and his resentment of her afflictions; and therefore it was not safe
for them to stay in Babel, nor fit to stick at impediments. So that by the
glory here we are to understand partly the Church, which are his glory, and
among whom he manifests his glory, Isa. 4.5. and Dan. 8.9. in the Original, and
after whose afflictions God would, out of his love to her, reckon with her
enemies; and partly, his glory manifested in her restoration, as v. 5. after
the breaking forth whereof God would engage against enemies, that they should
not hinder the perfecting of it. Doct. 1. Christ is the fit and faithful
Interpreter of his Fathers will, the revealer of his counsel, and he who sees
it executed; for here he tells what the Lord of hosts says, and is sent to
see the Fathers will done. 2. The Church will find it to be a very unsafe
course for her to join and comply with her enemies, even although these who do
otherwise seem to expose themselves to great hazard; for, albeit the Jews in
Judea were environed with enemies, and these in Babylon seemed secure, yet
wrath was to come there, and therefore it was their best to flee. 3. The Church
of God is the society, where he sets forth his glory more then among all the
world beside, and in doing good to whom he delights to be glorified: and
fetches arguments so to do from his own glory, when there is no cause in her:
therefore she is here called the glory. 4. As it is no mark of the true Church
to be exempted from afflictions; and as she loses none of her splendor in his
eyes, by any afflictions: so the Churches afflictions are forerunners of
judgment on the world, and her enemies; and when he begins to let forth his
glory in her, after a storm, he will see that no enemies shall impede him in
carrying it on (...) for she has been afflicted, and is the glory for all
that, and after the glory he has sent me to the nations which spoiled you. 5.
As Gods severity against his people takes not away his sympathy with them in
their afflictions; so his sympathy makes the Churches trouble go very near his
heart, which he will in due time prove upon the instruments thereof; for this
is the cause of his going unto the nations, they spoiled you; and the reason is
brought from his sympathy: for, he that touches you, touches the apple of
mine eye a touch of them on any part, is to his sympathy, a touch of the apple
of his eye, which is a most tender part.

Ver. 9. Forbehold, I will shake mine hand upon them, and they shall be a
spoil to their servants; and ye shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent
me.

This reason is further enlarged and cleared from the manner of Christ's taking
order with their enemies, to wit, that though they be great in power; and have
none to oppose them: yet if he do but shake his hand and give the sign, or
toss them a little their very servants whom they formerly conquered and kept
in slavery, shall undo and lord it over them, and possess their goods, wherein
the Jews were actors in part, both in the days of Esther, and at home when
they brought their enemies about, who had concurred in afflicting them, into
subjection. The effect of all which shall be a confirmation of them by this new
experiment, that Christ is sent of the Father to declare and execute these
promises, as Protector of his Church. Doct. 1. Albeit when we hear Gods Word
speaking for the Church, or against her enemies, we are ready to question: How
can these things be? yet Omnipotency will easily find a way to fulfill promises
or threatenings, and can take the most contemptible, and successefully employ
them against most potent Conquerours, who have left none (as they think) in the
world, to take order with them: for, behold, I will shake mine hand upon them,
and they shall be a spoil to their servants: and to confirm this, he declares
himself to be the Lord of hosts. 2. It is the Lords way, not only to bring
down oppressing enemies, but so to do it, as may pour most ignominy upon
them, and let all the world see their vanity and folly, who placed their
security in any thing beside God: for, they shall be a spoil to thy servants.
3. As it is not enough to have a brain notional knowledge of God, and what he
has revealed, unless it be experimentally engraven upon the heart: so even
the people of God may have their own questionings, concerning Gods care of
them, and concerning what he has said in his Word, till by performance and
experimental proofs he put it out of all controversy, which in due time he
will do; for, when this is wrought, then they begin to know as they ought, and
by this experiment he makes them certain, and ye shall know. 4. As every
dispensation of God ought to instruct and fix lessons in our heart: so a
special lesson to be read and learned by the Church, is Gods good will in
employing his Son for their good, and Christ's being on foot to procure good
tidings to her, and let her see them really performed, he being employed by the
omnipotent God for that effect; And ye shall know that the Lord of hosts has
sent me.

Verse. 10. Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for lo, I come, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee, says the LORD.

The second exhortation directed to the Jews that were returned from captivity
(which may serve also as an argument to these in Babel to come and partake of
their promised happiness) is, that however they were in a low condition, yet
they should rejoice and express their joy by singing. This he presses from
three grounds, whereof the first is, that Christ would come and take up his
habitation in the midst of them, not only typically or in legal shadows, or
by his grace and Spirit only, but that in the fullness of time he would also
come in person, and become man and dwell among them. Doct. 1. No difficulty or
strait can take away from the Church the true cause of her joy, nor excuse her
for not rejoicing in it; for when the Jews are now a contemptible handful,
deserted by their brethren, vexed by their enemies, and some of themselves
conspiring with them, Nehem. 6.17, 18. and 13.4. yet she is called to this
duty; Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion. 2. The Lords own presence in and
with his people, is his choice and matchless gift, which he is willing to give
before any other thing, and which as he will not disdain to bestow in his
peoples lowest condition; So it is a gift that should occasion much joy and
refreshment to them; for when they want many accommodations, the Ark and the
cloud, and the company of their brethren, yet this is his great gift wherein
they should rejoice; Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion: for, lo, I come, and
will dwell in the midst of thee. 3. As the Lords presence with his own chosen
people is perpetual, and will bring intimate familiarity and love; so himself
will be at all the pains to make up this union, he will not, by sin putting
him (as it were) away for a time, be provoked to stay away, and will have this
communion still upon the growing hand till they come to full fruition; for he
will dwell constantly, and that familiarly in the midst of thee, and for this
end I come, says he, or am at the pains, I will not be kept away from coming
again; and though they had his presence in some measure before, yet it is still
I come. 4. It is the great ground of the Churches encouragement, and the
fountain of all other manifestations of God, that the Son of God became man,
that her Redeemer is God, that he came and dwelt in our nature, and was like us
in all things without sin; and that we may tryst with God in the man Christ,
and know our tenderhearted surety to be also God over all blessed for ever,
and able to save to the uttermost; this incarnation of Christ is it which this
promise ultimately points at as the ground of their joy, Sing, for I come, and
I will dwell in the midst of thee, says Jehovah.

Verse. 11. And many Nations shall be joined to the LORD in that day, and shall
be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, and thou shall know that
the LORD of hosts has sent me unto thee.

The second reason of the exhortation, is, because many Nations shall join to
the Lord and become one Church with them when he is incarnate, by which they
should yet further be confirmed that Christ is sent of the Father to be the
Mediator and Redeemer of his Church. Doct. 1. Whatever encouragement the Lord
withholds from his people in following their duty, it is because he purposes
richly to make it up another way; for if the Jews were discouraged in building
the Temple by their brethrens staying behind, here is a promise of an
accession to make that up, And many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in that
day. 2. It is the matter of great joy, that by the incarnation of Christ, the
partition wall betwixt Jew and Gentile is cast down, that all Nations without
any difference, or distinction, have access, and do come to him, and that he
makes many to be willing in the day of his power; for this is a new cause of
their song, Many Nations shall be joined to the Lord. 3. It does contribute to
set out the glory of Christ's Kingdom under the Gospel, that not only he has
elect and converted members of all Nations, without distinction: but that he
brings whole Nations in visible Covenant with him, and makes a whole Nation to
become a National visible Church: for so is here prophesied of these days,
Many Nations (and not some of a Nation only) shall be joined to the Lord, at
least by visible Covenant, in that day. 4. Most glorious promises may be
mistaken in their performance, by carnal hearts, and not prove so comfortable
as indeed they are; for the conversion of the Gentiles, is promised here as the
matter of the Jews joy, and yet it proved a stumbling block to the body of the
Nation when it was performed, and will do till the conversion of the Gentiles
provoke them to jealousy, Romans 11.11. 5. A people do then indeed come unto
God, when beside their being visibly in Covenant with him, they seek also union
with him through says in his Son, and do give themselves up to his
obedience, and that they may become his; which the sensible and humble soul
ought to look upon, not only as their duty, but as Gods promise; so much does
this Prophecy ultimately point at, They shall be joined to the Lord, and shall
be my people. 6. As the Lords presence is that which makes the society of
Saints comfortable, were they increasing never so fast; so the more the Church
increases, he will let out the more of his presence with her; for in that day
of this accession it is added again, And I will dwell in the midst of thee.
Much conversion proves him to be present, will draw forth more of his presence,
and that will be all the converts joy. 7. As the conversion of the Gentiles to
the Church, and removing all obstructions out of their way, is a part of the
Messiahs errand to the world; so also much conversion is an ample testimony to
Christ, that he is the appointed Mediator sent of the Father, that he has
alluring beauty under seeming deformity, invincible power and virtue managed by
apparent weakness, and that he has received gifts for men, even for rebels
that he may dwell among them; therefore by this work also, Thou shall know that
the Lord of hosts has s^^t me unto thee, says he, to Sion.

Verse. 12. And the LORD shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy land, and
shall choose Jerusalem again.

The third reason of the exhortation, speaks more nearly to the present case of
the Jews, for whereas they might, upon the former promise concerning the
Gentiles, look upon themselves as rejected, especially having neither the face
of a Nation nor Temple, since they were rejected at the Babylonish captivity;
therefore the Lord promises that he will gather them from their dispersions,
and set them as his peculiar heritage in their own land, and that he will give
new documents of their election to be his people, though it seemed now to be
interrupted; that so they might be a peculiar habitation for him till he should
come in the flesh, if not also pointing at their future conversion and
restitution: seeing he speaks of them as an inheritance. Doct. 1. As the Lords
Covenant entered in with a people may meet with many interruptions, in the
visible effects of it, without a dissolution of the bond and tie: so in
particular, his relation to the Nation of the Jews is such as no temporal
rejection can utterly make void; for here notwithstanding all that has come
upon them, they keep their titles, and their election stands, and does yet to
this day, as is expounded to us, Romans 11.28, 29. 2. The Lords people may expect
to be no losers by all their troubles, when God comes to repair and make them
up; for Judah after their captivity, gets the holy land, so called, not only
because the holy Lord dwelt there, in a peculiar way of presence, and because
it was the habitation assigned to his people consecrated to him, and so an holy
Nation; but because it was a type of Heaven. 3. The Lords Church is his
peculiar portion, which he separates for himself from the world, to deal with
them singularly; The Lord shall inherit Judah his portion, he will take them
for his heritage and portion, and use them so. 4. The Lords free choice and
election of his people is of such consequence to them, and may meet with so
many assaults and dispensations seeming to brangle it, that there is need of
frequent confirmations and tokens for good, to establish them in the faith of
it: for this cause is this promise, And shall choose Jerusalem again.

Verse. 13. Be silent, O all flesh, before the LORD: for he is raised up out of
his holy habitation.

The third exhortation is directed to all opposers of these promises, whether
misbelievers among the Jews, who might be reasoning against this doctrine, or
enemies, who might boast to make them prove vain; these are compesced, and
commanded silence, in their doublings and brags, seeing God was begun to appear
out of Heaven for his people, as one not unmindfull of his promise. Doct. 1.
The promises of God may oft-times be little heard in the Church for her
comfort, by reason of the tumult of fightings within, and of fears and
opposition without, for so is here imported. 2. A right considering how much
frailty appears in our distrusting, how weak all opposition is, and how strong
the Lord is, and how far wronged he is in his glory, by misbelieving his
promises, may silence, and cry down our unbelief and compesce enemies fury;
for the Lord here so teaches, Be silent, O all flesh before the Lord, the word
importing such a silence, as when a Master comes in among scholars, or when a
Prince appears. 3. Albeit Gods presence in Heaven, and among his people, might
silence unbelief, and terrify opposers, considering that he is there, though
he appear not, and that he will in due time appear; yet it may much more show
the folly of these ways, when God has appeared and begun to work; for, his
appearing once should confirm faith, and assure his people of a complete
issue; and put enemies out of all hope of gaining their point, yea and assure
them that their begun disappointment and ruin is a pledge of more, whatever
strength or power they have; this may silence all flesh before God, For he is
raised up out of his holy habitation.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter we have a fourth vision, tending to encourage Joshua and all
the Priests and people to go on in the work, notwithstanding all the
machinations of Satan, stirring up enemies and taking advantage of their sins
to provoke the Lord against them, and keep them in their low condition: wherein
Satan accusing Joshua, v. 1. is resisted by Christ, v. 2. who takes away the
ground of his accusation, v. 3, 4. and restores the Priestly dignity, v. 5.
with a renovation of the Covenant concerning his office, v. 6, 7. And because
Joshua, in his building of the Temple and office, was but a type of Christ,
therefore he and the people are comforted by a promise of the incarnation of
Christ the true Priest, v. 8. and the foundationstone of the spiritual Temple;
who by his Priestly office should perfectly expiate sin, v. 9. and be the
author of true peace, v. 10.

Verse. 1. ANd he showed me Joshua the High Priest standing before the Angel of
the LORD, and Satan standing at his right hand to resist him.

For our right taking up of this vision, we are to consider that as heretofore
the Lord has discovered unto the Church how he would remove great outward
difficulties and opposition in the way of the Temple-building; so here they are
lifted up to consider of higher and stronger enemies, even Satan, who not only
stirs up enemies to the work, but will take occasion of their sin, for
which they had smarted, to plead against them and the work in their hand,
unless Christ interposed. And as heretofore the encouragements were given
generally to all, so here particularly to Joshua the High Priest; partly
because he was a chief man in building the Temple, and therefore as he would be
much set on by Satan, so his confirmation and sustaining was needful, that he
might encourage all others; partly, as being a Priest and representing all the
inferior Priests, as appears from v. 8. the contemptiblenesse of whose Office
at that time, was a great discouragement to themselves and the people, and
therefore new promises are made of adorning the Priestly Office; till Christ
the substance of that type should come: together with an instructing of them to
do their office better, and a promised reward to the faithful discharger of
his trust; and partly, as in his office standing before the Lord in name of the
whole people, and therefore gets promises made to him common with them: This
being taken along will make all the purpose clearer. So in this verse we have
represented unto the Prophet, the impediment lying in the way of the work and
of the instruments thereof, to wit, that while Joshua is employed in his
Office, for himself and the people, before the Angel, representing Christ
whose type and Minister he was; Satan, the Churches special enemy, does what
he can against him, by interposing his accusation to hinder his acceptance, and
plead him not worthy to do such a work, and so sets him to stand there as a
delinquent before his Judge. Doct. 1. As the Lords people going on in his work,
will see difficulty arising after difficulty to obstruct their way; so is there
in Christ sufficiency of encouragement, against all of them; for so much does
the scope of this vision teach; after all the difficulties represented in the
former visions, here is a new difficulty, and Christ also answering it. 2. The
deepest and subtilest plots of all opposers of the Church are most clearly
known to Christ, who will either immediately crush them, or make them known to
his Church, that she may make her use of them; for He showed me Joshua, etc. as
a case not unknown to him. 3. It is the duty of Gods servants, especially in
hard times, to be much with God, and found in their duty whatever may come; to
make much use of Christ for coming speed at Gods hand; to set themselves
always in their duty, as in his sight, and to study to be approven of him: All
which is imported in his posture, he was standing before the Angel of the Lord,
who is the same with Jehovah, v. 2. to wit, Christ called an Angel, not in
regard of his nature (for he took not upon him the nature of Angels,) but in
regard of his office, being sent of the Father, (as the word signifies) for the
redemption and salvation of his people 4. Such as see through all the
opposition made unto the Church, and would have the right use of any opposition
they see, would look higher then any visible enemy, even to spiritual
wickedness in high places acting in them, who can be opposed only by spiritual
weapons, and to Satan getting much advantage by their own sins provoking God
against them; for, so is revealed to the Prophet, Satan chief to resist him. 5.
Satan is a great enemy, as to every godly soul in particular, so especially to
the restoring and building of the Church, and to such as are eminently
instrumental therein, and to a Ministry, that so they may be discouraged and
made useless; for, he resists Joshua the High Priest, who was eminent in
building the Temple, and represented all the Priests and people. 6. Satan has
great advantage of the Lords people, by reason of his subtilty and power, and
especially by reason of their guilt, if Christ did not interpose; for, he is
standing at his right hand to resist him, which form of speech imports not
only ability to hinder his enterpris^^ (which are done by the right hand) but
as having great advantage, as seeming to favor a just cause, in pleading for
Gods justice, and therefore it should seem he ought to be successeful: Thus the
form of speech seems to be taken, Psalm. 109.6. 7. As the Lords people may meet
with saddest assaults from Satan in their approaches to God; and as the sad
fruit of any challenge appears most in being denied access, when they come in
a strait, so it is the Churches great advantage, that the Tribunal before which
Satan brings his accusation against her, is that where Christ her Advocate and
friend sits Judge: this is imported in that Joshua was standing before the
Angel of the Lord; or Christ, when Satan came to accuse, and in part, appears
further afterward.

Verse. 2. And the LORD said unto Satan, The LORD rebuke thee, O Satan, even the
LORD that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke thee. Is not this a brand plucked out of
the fire?

In the next place is represented unto the Prophet, Christ who is the Lord,
taking the defense of Joshua, and by his intercession, (acting as the Angel of
the Lord) pleading, that Satan may be rebuked, confounded and restrained in his
malicious and cruel design to destroy them whom God had chosen, and them who
having been almost consumed in trouble, were miraculously plucked out and
preserved from total ruin. Doct. 1. Christ in his office of mediation and
intercession, is the strong refuge of the Church against Satan, who is
sufficient to oppose all his machinations, being himself God equal with the
Father, zealous for, and affectionate to his people and their weal; and the
Father being engaged to help him and his, by virtue of the Covenant; for, The
Lord said to Satan, The Lord rebuke thee, even the Lord rebuke thee. Where
Jehovah interposeth for Joshua, who has ground to call to Jehovah the Father
to appear also, and who testifies his zeal by doubling his request. 2. Albeit
the ground of Satan's accusation of the Lords people before God, and in their
own consciences may be true and just: yet his insatiable and cruel malice in
prosecuting that controversy to their destruction, and casting out of Gods
favor, is so far from being Christ's allowance, that it is hateful unto him,
and will be effectually suppressed by him; This is imported in his
intercession; The Lord rebuke thee, or restrain thy malice, and make void thy
intention. 3. The Lords election of, and free love toward his people, is that
whereby they are allowed to answer Satan's tentations, which otherwise might be
heavy upon them; and where the Lord has chosen and purposed to do good unto a
people, he will also have a care of their Ministers for their sake. This we are
taught from Christ's first reason of intercession: The Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem, rebuke thee. God having chosen them, Satan's bill (how true soever)
could not be heard to destroy them, or to reject Joshua their Minister. 4.
Though the people of God, may be cast into painful and hard trouble, and may be
kept in it till it come to some extremity that they may be purged, yet shall
they certainly be rescued and brought out again: for so was it with Joshua, and
this remnant, a brand plucked out of the fire; a stick halse burnt, and yet
thought worth the pulling out. 5. As the former afflictions of the Lords people
do so endear them to Christ's heart, that he will not hear Satan's accusations;
so his eminent appearing for them in trouble, is a pledge that he will not
destroy them, but perfect his work notwithstanding Satan's machinations: for,
this is the force of the second reason of Christ's intercession, Is not this a
brand plucked out of the fire? as if he said, should my anger smoke yet against
my people who are already almost consumed by it, and whereof they yet bear the
marks? should I not make an end of pleading with frail flesh? and shall I
prove so foolish a builder, as when I have appeared in bringing them out of
consuming trouble, giving them a remnant to escape; I should again forsake
them, and let all my pains be in vain.

Verse;. 3. Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and stood before the
Angel.

4. And he answered, and spoke unto those that stood before him, saying, Take
away the filthy garments from him. And unto him he said Behold, I have caused
thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with change of
raiment.

Christ having defended Joshua against Satan's opposition, does further
represent to the Prophet, his taking away the ground of Satan's accusation;
there being many sins both of his own, and of the Priests and people for whom
he interceded, wherewith they were polluted, as a man with filthy garments, and
whereof the badges were the base and low condition, both of Priests and people
at that time; Christ does take away the sin by pardon, and with it the tokens
of anger, and adornes him with his righteousness and with holiness in the
fight of God, signified by the taking away of filthy garments, and putting on
new raiment, and this is done by these who stood before Christ, that is, by his
own appointed means and instruments, or by the Ministry who are employed by
Christ in this work, as Angels were his Attendants in this vision. Doct. 1. As
sin in it self does pollute and make vile, so where the pollution thereof in it
self and before God is not laid to heart, God is provoked to let it appear in
visible evidences, making the sinner vile and contemptible; for, so is imported
in that Joshua was clothed with filthy garments. 2 As the sense of sin ought
not to drive away the sensible sinner from Christ, or from duty; so Christ will
not cast them from his presence or care, till he help them against that which
troubles them* for, Joshua in all this stood before the Angel. 3. As God
requires, that his people for whom he appears, and especially instruments
eminently employed, be holy and reconciled with him, that so Satan's mouth may
be stopped, the work may prosper in their hands, and God may bless them, and
take away the tokens of his anger: so the only way for attaining this, is by a
free pardon of sin, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and by his
virtue put forth for their sanctification: for, this closes the plea, when the
filthy garments are taken from him, and when Christ causes his iniquity to
pass from him, and clotheth him with change of raiment, or new garments in
place of the old. 4. As it is Christ's office, and a peculiar fruit of his
mercy, to pardon, justify and sanctify his people; so has he sufficient
means and ways to apply this to his people, (especially by his Messengers, to
whom he gives the Ministry of reconciliation,) and to take away the tokens of
his anger for sin; for, while Christ spoke to these that stood before him, to
do this, it does not import that Angels are employed about this work, though
they take pleasure in the prospering of the Church, but that the Lord has
employed in this work a Ministry (represented by these Attendants,) who carry
these glad tidings, and instrumentally do retain and loose sins, in whose
mouth, speaking from the Word, we are to find Christ's mind to the sensible
soul, and whose voice they are commanded to obey, Isa. 50.10. and that sin
being pardoned, Christ has instruments enough to take away any bitter fruit of
sin, even Angels themselves being willing to minister for their good, Heb.
1.14. 5. Whoever be the instruments employed, yet Christ is the chiefactor in
the Churches reconciliation and happiness, who is to be eyed in what we enjoy,
and who must speak the Word to the heart, before we can be fully comforted;
this is imported not only in that he spoke to these that stood before him: but
in that himself says the Word, and expounds, and confirms that action, Unto
him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, etc.

Verse. 5. And I said, Let them set a fair mitre upon his head. So they set a
fair mitre upon his head, and clothed hi^ with garments, and the Angel of the
LORD stood by.

Christ having promised remission of sin and sanctification, common to the
Priests and people, here is further represented the restoring of the Priestly
dignity, the baseness whereof was a great discouragement to that people in
their work: the Prophet in vision seeing what was done, interposes that what
was wanting of the Priestly dignity might be supplied, which is granted, and a
promise is made of fitting Joshua with such graces and abilities as were
suitable for his Priestly office, signified by the Priestly mitre and garments
put upon him; Christ standing by to ratify the act, and assist his servants.
Doct. 1. Christ takes pleasure to have his gracious purposes carried on by the
intercession and prayers of his people, who ought to stir up themselves to take
hold of the opportunity of a time of love, to represent such things to Christ,
as grieves and are a burden to them; for, the want of the former dignity of the
Priesthood being an affliction of that time, and the Prophet seeing Christ at
work to do good to that people, interposeth for this, And I said, etc. and gets
a good answer: the prayer put in his heart, being as a pledge that Christ would
do the thing. 2. As the true grace of God, and reconciliation with him is an
excellent qualification for any vocation to which the Lord calls a man,
especially for, the holy Ministry; so these who are called to that charge, do
stand in need of a peculiar dispensation of the Spirit in abilities and graces
requisite for their employment, which is also to be^sought from Christ, not
only by themselves, but by all the members of the Church; for, here Joshua,
gets reconciliation, and the robes of righteousness first on, v 4. and then
more is sought from Christ in reference to his office; And I said, Let them set
a fair mitre on his head. 3. As Christ will have a peculiar care to keep up a
Ministry in his Church, and to furnish them with the gifts of his Spirit; so
Christ being reconciled with and about to do good unto a land, his Ministers
may expect peculiar dispensations of his Spirit, and to be kindly dealt with
for that end; for so are we taught by setting of a fair mitre upon his head,
and clothing him with garments, albeit now these ornaments were all lost; yet
the type shows, that when the Lord is taking away the sins of the people, the
Priesthood and Ministry should not fail, and that in such a time it should be
well with them. 4 Christ is the Church and his servants fast friend, who will
not see their affairs neglected, nor his purposes of good concerning them
frustrated, and does undertake to assist and maintain them in their duty, and
up-holding them against all the opposition, that his employing them, and doing
for them, may raise unto them; for while they are clothing Joshua^^ The Angel
of the Lord stood by, as it were, to see it done, and avow his servant whoever
opposed him.

Verse. 6. And the Angel of the LORD protested unto Joshua, saying,

7. Thus says the LORD of hosts, If thou will walk in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge, then thou shall also judge my house, and shall also keep
my courts, and I will give thee places to walk among these that stand by.

Unto this restoring of the Priestly dignity, there is subjoyned in the vision
a solemn engagement unto Joshua, and in him to all the Priests, that if he
would be faithful in his duty, he should be continued and protected in his
office, and after death have a place in heaven amongst these glorious Angels,
who stood by Christ attending on him in this vision. Doct. ^. Neither the duty
nor the encouragements of a faithful Minister can be so seriously pondered, as
they ought by these who are so employed, till Christ inculcate them again and
again; therefore the Angel of the Lord protested unto Joshua, thus installed
with new dignity in his office, or took these present in the vision, to
witness concerning his duty and the reward of it. 2. These who are employed as
Christ's Ministers, had need to have much of his teaching that they may teach
others, and must look to him for encouragement and reward of their work,
whatever they get among men; therefore the Angel here both teaches Joshua his
du^y, and tells him his reward. 3. Faithful Ministers are both to take heed to
themselves and their flocks, and to join faithful walking as religious men
with fidelity in their public charge, that their conversation may commend the
duties of their function, and their own experience may help them to be tender,
zealous, faithful and lively in their public trust; for, both are joined here
in Joshuahs lesson; If thou wite walk in my ways, as all Israel are bound to
do, and if thou will keep my charge, which belongs to the Priests office. 4. In
all times and vicissitudes wherewith the Lords servants may be exercised,
fidelity in their duty is their only way of safety, whatever probability or
tentation say to the contrary; for, unto Joshua so walking is the promise made.
5. It is no small reward and encouragement to the faithful servants of God,
while they are within time, to have opportunity of a calling, wherein to do
service to God, and to have any blessing from God upon their endeavors in it;
for, this is the encouragement of Jashua unto fidelity, Then thou shall also
judge my house, that is, thy service shall be a reward to it self, thy
continuing in it with my blessing and protection, shall richly recomp^nce thee.
6. The Ministers of Gods house have not only the Ministry of holy things, as
Word and Sacraments committed to their charge, but also the power of
Ecclesiastical Government, to take order with scandalous offenses within the
family; both these are here promised to Joshua and the Priests; Thou shall
also judge my house, and shall also keep my Courts; and this promise of
government is according to the law, Deuteronomy. 17.9, 12. and warrantable practice, 2
Chro. 19.11. wherein no shadow of a type appears: for the government and kingly
power of Christ was held forth in (at least) some of their Kings, and not in
the Priestly office. 7. Whatever may seem to be wanting in the reward of Piety
within time, will be richly made up after death, to the godly man in heaven,
therefore is that other encouragement added; And I will give thee places to
walk, etc. 8. Albeit the riches of the glory of Saints inheritance in heaven,
cannot be conceived while we are here, yet it may refresh us, to consider that
in place of our bondage and restraint one way and other, we shall then obtain
glorious liberty and freedom, signified here by places to walk, or galleries,
(alluding to these that were about the Temple) wherein to expatiate at
freedom: that whereas here we may be in low esteem, are vile and base in our
selves, and oft-times vexed with ill company, we shall there be far otherwise,
and have places amongst these that stand by, that is, Angels whom we shall be
like and converse with them* and that in place of much distance and many
desertions, we shall then enjoy and attend upon Christ for ever, signified by a
place amongst these that stand by, which points at the Angels happiness,
wherein Joshua was to participate, that they stood constantly by, as pages
attending on Christ, wherever he appeared.

Verse. 8. Hear now, O Joshua the High Priest, thou and thy fellows that sit
before thee, for they are men wondered at: for behold, I will bring forth my
servant the BRANCH,

In the second part of the chapter, Joshua is led up to see the Author and
Purchaser of all these benefits promised to him, and what is the substance and
thing signified by his office, and the Temple which he was building, and to
encourage him and stir up all to build the Temple, and to make much of the
Priesthood he leads them to Christ the true Temple, in whom incarnate, dwells
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, who is the builder of his Church, and
ground-stone of the building, and the true Priest who by his sacrifice
sanctifies all believers.

In this verse, Joshua and the inferior Priests are called to give attention,
as being wondered at for their bold enterprises, and as being also in their
office and way of life, types of Christ: and a promise is made to them that
Christ should come in the flesh, as a contemptible branch of Jesse's dry root,
who in his estate of humiliation should perfect the truth of the Priesthood, as
his Fathers obedient servant. Doct. 1. Christ is the substance and kernel of
all the Churches encouragements, the procurer of them, and in whom is supplied
all that is found wanting in other means of comfort; he is the restorer of his
Church, the absolver of his people, the substance of the Priesthood, and the
Upholder of the Ministry and true worship: therefore is the promise concerning
him subjoyned, to make up all the rest by. 2. There is need of special
up-stirring and attention, for the taking up of Christ, and the comforts
allowed in him, considering our carnal dispositions, and how little may be
discerned in Christ by them, till we get new senses, and how the noise of
discouragements and tentations may keep out the sound of comfort; Hear now,
says the Lord. 3. Christ is the substance of all the ceremonies of the law,
and of higher and lower offices in the Temple, who completely answers and
fulfils, that whereof they were a shadow: in him alone is to be found in
reality all that they prefigured: therefore Joshua the High Priest, and his
fellows that sit before him, are all called to hear, Christ being the
substance of all their ministration, not only employed in the Churches eminent
affairs as the High Priest was, but one who condescends to meanest employments
about her, and the nail upon whom the meanest vessel hangs. 4. As the Lords
servants must not consult with flesh and blood, but undertake services to which
God calls them, though they should be admired as monsters in so doing; so it is
the special encouragement of such, that they have Christ to look to, to whom
they have relation in that work, and to whom the promise is made, and who will
have the honor of doing that wherein they are instruments. Thus may we join a
twofold interpretation of these words, They are men wondered at, to wit,
admired in being chief in undertaking the work of the Temple: and that for
their encouragement they were to look on themselves, as types of Christ, who
indeed carried on the work of that Temple, and who would build his own Church,
and therefore they behoved to continue and the work go on, not only because
Christ had chief hand in it, but that the type might resemble the thing
typified. 5. It is the Scripture-character of the true Messiah, that according
to the flesh he is to spring out of obscure and contemptible beginnings, and to
execute his offices, (especially his Priesthood,) and accomplish the work of
Redemption in the form of a servant, coming humbly to serve, and not to be
served, and becoming obedient to his Father, till having finished his work, he
ascend to glory, and then the branch will spring out and flourish beyond all
probability, and fill the earth with fruit and glory: all which is the comfort
of the Church, that she has such a lowly Savior, in whose abasement and
obedient sufferings she is exalted and saved, and in whose sympathy, flowing
from the experimental essaying of her case, she finds a shelter in trouble;
for, here it is both a character of him, and a comfortable promise to the
Church concerning him; Behold, I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH.

Verse. 9. For behold, the stone that I have laid before Joshua: upon one stone
shall be seven eyes, behold, I will engrave the graving thereof, says the LORD
of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.

In the next place, Christ is promised as he who is represented by the Temple,
and who is the ground and corner, stone of his own Church, and the Rock on
which she is built, bearing all the burden of the fabric, (which is signified
by some stone solemnly laid in the building, by the Priests, or in their
sight,) concerning whom is promised, that Gods infinite providence shall be
about him and his Church, himself endued with perfect wisdom to see to, and
care for all his members, and that by the effects and rays of the glory of God
shining in him, he shall draw all eyes to him, and keep them on him: as also
that he shall be so polished and adorned by God, as shall be mavelous to the
world. Doct. 1. Christ the Mediator is not only a part of the spiritual
building, making up one Christ mystical with all his members, and the eminent
and most excellent part of it: but the very foundation of his Churches being,
upon whom all the Church, and every particular member thereof is and must be
built, and without whom they cannot subsist; for, he is the stone laid before
Joshua. 2. As Christ in his office of Mediation, is a means of the Fathers
appointment, by him to derive happiness to the Church, and establish her in
it; so whoever despise and reject him, yet the Father will have him high and
eminent in that building; for, I have laid the stone before Joshua, says the
Lord; See, Matthew. 21.42. 3. As Christ has all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge, employed for seeing to the condition, and finding out the way of
happiness for his people, in every case and exigent; signified by seven eyes
(which is a number of perfection) engraven on that one stone; and as the
vigilant Providence of God is always intent upon Christ as Mediator, and for
his sake upon the welfare of his Church and Kingdom, as being his chief
delight, signified also by seven eyes over that one stone: so also is Christ as
Mediator, God-man, revealing the Father in himself, and as the support and
upholder of his Church, so glorious and excellent as may draw all to admire
him, and to fix their expectation on him, as the only choice and resuge of lost
sinners, and will do so to all the elect: which is also signified by seven (or,
many) eyes fixed on that one stone, admiring him, and having all their
expectation from him. 4. The beauty, excellency and furniture of Christ the
Mediator, is divine and rare, and he is the ornament, glory and storehouse of
all the spiritual building, being as God the brightness of his Fathers glory,
and the express image of his person, Heb. 1.3. his Humanity also being adorned
with the gifts of the Spirit without measure for his calling, and with all
divine persections in so far as the humane nature is capable, John 1.14. withal
his sufferings for his people, (as so many curious engravings) speak not a
little his beauty to these who have interest therein. This is signified by the
Lords engraving the graving: of this stone, polishing it as a precious jewel,
and adorning it by his Art.

Two benefits are promised to flow from Christ the Priest to his people; the
first whereof is, remission and purging away of fins by the sacrifice upon the
cross, once for all, which needs not to be repeated as the Jewish sacrifices
were, Heb. 9.12. and 10.12, 14. This is promised to the whole elect and
mystical body of Christ, figured by the Jews and their promised land, beside
what peculiar relation it may have to them and their land, that their sins,
being taken away by Christ, should not hinder him to savor them, nor the land
for their sake; but should be looked on in due time, not as polluted and
spewing them out for sin, not possessed and overrun by enemies. Doct. 1.
Remission and removal of sin is the choice mercy of Christ's people, and the
rise of other mercies, I will remove iniquity, is the fruit of Christ's coming
to the world and of his glory as Mediator. 2. Sin is pardoned and removed
only by the merit and virtue of Christ's one sacrifice, only once offered and
not to be repeated on what pretext soever, for, iniquity is removed in one day.
3. Christ's own peculiar and given people of the Father, are they upon whom the
privilege of pardon and sanctification is conferred, and on whose behalf
Christ offered up himself to procure these benefits; for it is the iniquity of
that land (a type of the elect Church,) that is removed.

Verse. 10. In that day, says the LORD of hosts, shall ye call every man his
neighbor under the vine, and under the fig tree.

A second benefit flowing from the former, is the taking away of all trouble,
and the fear of trouble, which sin procures; and the giving of peace,
represented by peoples walking abroad, and daring, in the open fields under
shades, to invite and call one another to feasts and enjoyment of the fruits of
peace; which promise is spiritually performed to all the elect when they are
assured that God is at peace with them; and is sometimes outwardly performed to
the Church, when it is for her good, beside what Israel may expect when they
shall turn to Christ. Doct. 1. True and sound peace comes only from Christ,
and from the sense of the pardon of sin through his blood, which these who
have fled to Christ, ought to take as their allowance to rest confidently upon,
whatever danger there be, and feed upon as the choicest of dainties and feasts;
for, when iniquity is removed, In that day, says the Lord of hosts, shall ye
call every man his neighbor, under the vine and under the fig tree. 2. As
outward peace and tranquillity in the visible Church and Nation where it is, is
a great mercy if it be well improven; so it shall not be wanting when it is for
her good: for this promise is put in her charter for that also, and left in the
hand of her wise and tender guide, to dispense it as he sees may be for her
profit, being the Lord of hosts to make it forthcoming for her, when he
pleases. 3. As it is a token of a blessed and through peace, when with outward
and foreign enemies* God removes intestine dissensions; and as amity among
the inhabitants of a Nation, especially in the Church, is a blessing and favor
in its own kind; So true spiritual peace ought to be entertained and improven
by mutual godly Society, and communication of conditions and experiences for
common edification: This is signified unto us, in that peace whether inward or
outward is described, by calling every man his neighbor, living in amity; and
inviting to mutual feasts and banquets.

CHAP. IIII.
THis Chapter contains a fifth vision directed chiefly to Zerubbabel (as the
former was to Joshuah) wherein under the type of a golden candlestick and two
Olive Trees represented to the Prophet, which he is stirred up to consider, v.
1, 2, 3. and which the Prophet sensible of his ignorance desires to understand,
v. 4.5. Zerubbabel is instructed concerning Gods way in carrying on and
perfecting the work of the Temple, v. 6. and assured of the success of it
notwithstanding all opposition, to the shaming of all their heartlesse
discouragement, v. 7.8, 9, 10. The scope of which vision being thus explained,
the Prophet desires to understand the meaning of the two Olive Trees, and gets
an answer, v. 11.12, 13, 14.

Verse. 1. ANd the Angel that talked with me, came again and waked me, as a man
that is wakened out of his sleep:

2. And said unto me, What see thou? and I said, I have looked, and behold, a
candlestick all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it, and his seven lamps
thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps, which were upon the top thereof.

3. And two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the
other upon the left side thereof.

A new vision is here ready, but the Prophet, wearied and astonished with
former visions and promises, is not able seriously to ma^k and consider this,
till he be rouzed up by Christ; and then he gives an account of his seeing a
golden candlestick, with a bowl on the top of it, which by two golden pipes
(as is added, v. 12.) does receive ^ile from two Olive Trees, without any
humane industry, whence it is communicate to seven lamps, by as many pipes, to
keep them perpetually burning. In all which allusion is made to the candlestick
in the Tabernacle and Temple, something being added to sit the vision to the
present scope. Doct. 1. The consolations and encouragements of a people
following God, are so far from being rash imaginations of men's brain who are
employed in Commission, that Christ has more to communicate then they are able
to comprehend; for this end is it marked, that the Prophet behoved to be ^^uzed
up by the Angel; and put upon the considering this vision, that he may carry it
to the Church. 2. As bur weakness is such while we are environed with
mortality, that we cannot long bear up in spiritual duties; So great promises
in hard times, and when there are small deservings, will rather overcharge our
narrow hearts with astonishment, then be entertained and rested on by faith;
for, here the Prophet is as one asleep, with weariness and astonishment. 3.
There is need of much upstirring from our natural laziness and ordinary
indisposition, when we are employed in holy duties, if we would reap benefit by
them, and see into the riches of advantage to be had in them; for, the Angel
waled me us out of a sleep, says the Prophet. 4. Loving kindness in Christ,
will both prevent his people with mercy, and come over all impediments, which
they lay in the way of their own comfort; for, the Angels has visions ready,
when the Prophet dreamed not of them, and wakens him to see them, that he may
communicate them to the Church. 5. Albeit only the scope of this vision be
explained in the Angels answer to the first question, and the Prophet in his
second question does only enquire concerning what was rare in the vision, the
parts of the candlestick being already known to such as understood the meaning
of these types in the Temple; yet we may, for our instruction, take up the
sum of this vision as expounding the typical candlestick in this, that
nothing can be done in the Church without Gods preparing of instruments, for
directing, adifying, and comforting of her, and without his giving the graces
of his Spirit to every one, to carry on the work in his station. And so, 1. The
Temple here represents the Church to be enlightened by Christ, she being in her
self but dark and void of light and comfort till he come and appear in her,
and for her, and make her light. 2. The Ministry appointed of Christ for the
direction, edification, and comfort of the Church, are here (though elsewhere
and in some respect it represent the Church it self, Rev. 1.20.) represented
by the candlestick, who should be pure, that they may be precious in his sight
as gold, and who ought to shine by purity and holiness of life, and be
instrumental in making the Church a shining light in a dark world. 3. The bowl
upon the top of the candlestick, which immediately receives the oil, does
fitly represent Christ as Mediator, the head and storehouse of his Church, to
whom is entrusted all fullness of gists and graces for the Churches behoof. 4.
The variety and sufficiency of gists communicate by Christ, for the good and
salvation of the Church, is represented by seven lamps, all tending to one
common end of burning and shining. 5. The way of deriving grace from Christ to
his servants, by ordained and sanctified means, especially by his Covenant,
our dependence, and the bands of communion betwixt him and his people, is
represented by seven pipes going betwixt the bowl and the lamps. The rest of
this shadow and type being afterward expounded by the Angel, we shall seek it
there. Doct. 6. The Lords condescending to teach this Doctrine, as it were,
twice to the Prophet, once in the type, and again in the explication; may teach
us the certainty of the thing it self, our incapacity, and what need there is
of studying it again and again.

Verse. 4. So I answered and spoke to the Angel that talked with me, saying,
What are these, my Lord?

5. Then the Angel that talked with me, answered, and said unto me, Know
thou not what these be? and I said, No, my Lord.

The Prophet desiring to understand the meaning of this type, is prepared for
an answer by the Angels drawing out a new and express confession of his
ignorance, to humble him. Doct. 1. Gods calling of his people to enjoy
manifestations of himself, calls upon them to desire to profit, and be
instructed by them, as sensible of their own short coming; for, the Prophet
answered, saying, What are these? as being called by this vision to seek more
light and edification. 2. Even when God is acting and working before our eyes,
we will remain ignorant and not understand it, till he come and open our eyes;
the mercy of discerning is a new mercy, after we have had the mercy it self;
for the Prophet seeing all this, must put the question to the Angel; What are
these, my Lord? 3. It is not unusual; nor obscure in Scripture Language, to
give unto the sign the name of the thing signified or represented by it,
without any change of the one into the other, but only because of typical or
Sacramental representation; for, here the Prophet enquiring, What are these?
does not profess ignorance of these things in themselves, (for he expresses
the contrary unto the Angel, v. 2, 3.) but what they were in that state, or
what they signified and represented. And so in the answer, v. 6. This is the
Word, etc. The meaning is not that the candlestick was that promise, but that
it signified the thing promised, and was a representation of it. 4 Christ
requires of these whom he will teach, that they be sensible of their own
ignorance, and humble in the sense of it; and that not in a superficial way,
but that it be deeply rooted, and their heart again and again convinced of it,
that the mercy of Christ's help may be the more esteemed; therefore albeit the
first question imply the Prophets confession of his ignorance, yet Christ will
not satisfy him, till he be more humb^ed with it, and till by a new question,
Know thou not? he draw out a new confession, No my Lord.

Verse. 6. Then he answered and spoke unto me, saying, This is the Word of the
LORD unto Zeru^babel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit,
says the LORD of hosts.

The Prophet being thus prepared, gets an explication of the scope of the whole
vision, in two particulars, in the first whereof Zerubbabel, and with him all
the people, are informed concerning Gods way of carrying on his own work, that
they might not faint, though outward probable means of armies and strength of
men fail them, but rely on God, who is alsufficient by his own Spirit and
intrinsecal power and virtue to set up his Church, to preserve and furnish it
with all things needful without these means, and who uses to lay these
oft-times by, that his own immediate power may shine. Thus the explication
answers well unto the type; for as the candlestick was constantly supplied with
oil, that the lamps might burn, without humane industry, the Olive Trees
pou^ing in oil of themselves, so should this work go on, without any means
that might in probability carry on such a work. Doct. 1. It is a great blessing
when the Lords people are instructed, and made wise concerning the way of his
working, and carrying on a work in his Church, that they be not crushed under
mistakes, as thinking that he is about to ruin, and desert it, when indeed he
is taking the best way to perfect it; and here the Lords own teaching is
requisite for understanding his deep counsels in so far as may be for our
good: therefore the Lord himself teaches Zerubbabel in this point, that he
stumble not. 2. As all that are employed about the work of God, and are
cordially affected to it, will find it lie near their heart; so especially
these who have any place of power among Gods people, and in carrying on his
work, ought to take such a burden of it, as may send them to seek encouragement
from Heaven; for, Zerubbabel needs a particular word, This is the Word of the
Lord unto Zerubbabel. 3. Albeit might and probable means do not always stand
in opposition to Gods power in his work, but may sometimes be subordinate, as
principal workers, and instruments by which he works: yet, 1. Might and power
are not to be doated on, nor leaned to when they are given to the Church, but
Gods own power should be immediately eyed, which must stir up, enable, and
bless these means before they can do any thing, and who will take means away
when they are trusted to, and he forgotten. So long as God stands obliged by
his power to do for his people and work, they are not to be anxious though all
probable means fail them; seeing he, who only makes means active and
effectual, can fulfill his own counsel without them, being still the Lord of
hosts, when visible armies fail. 3. It is the Lords way in carrying on his
work, to lay by much of humane power and probable means, that he may extol
his own power and commend his love to his people and work, when much of him,
and little of the creature, is seen about them. All this is imported in this
information, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, or, power and
virtue, says the Lord of hosts. His power is only to be trusted in, and to be
trusted in what ever else appear, and it will be eminently seen, and other help
be obscured and laid by in Temple-building.

Verse. 7. Who art thou, O great mountain; before Zerubbabel? thou shall become
a plain, and he shall bring forth the head-stone thereof with shoutings,
crying, Grace, grace unto it.

The second particular in the explication of this vision, is to assure
Zerubbabel concerning the success of his building the Temple, (as a type of
Christ the builder of the Church by his own power,) that as the candlestick,
furnished by the Olive Trees, did continually shine and hold out light, so the
Lords power should carry on this work, not only without, but also against all
humane power and opposition; which should be so far from hindering the work,
that it should help to pave a way to it; and the same power should bring this
work in Zerubbabels hand to a perfection, to the commendation of the grace of
God, and joy of all, testified by their acclamations when the work is
perfected, and by their prayer that God would continue to bless it. Doct. 1.
Christ's work in his Church, whether externally reforming and setting up an
house, or internally converting, may have opposition in the way, which will
seem as insuperable, as to carry a great train or make weak persons climb
over high and steep hills; and such a work will not go on without exercise and
fears; for, here is a great mountain in the way, whereby in relation to
Zerubbabel, was signified the Monarchy of Persia, in so far as it obstructed
the work, and the Samaritan faction about them: and in relation to Christ and
his Church, it signifies all the opposition that devils and men (especially
great ones) in the world, can raise to hinder that work. 2. Whatever great
opposites may seem to be in their own eyes, or in the thoughts of the fainting
people of God, yet in Gods eyes they are nothing and contemptible, and his
Spirit is provoked at their presumption in undertaking such an enterprise, and
that they should offer to cross his beloved work and people; for, Who art
thou, O great mountain? imports his contemning of them, his indignation
against them, and that he will make them know themselves better then to
adventure on such a work. 3. Not only will opposition not prove so hurtful as
it appears terrible, and be easy when the Lords people comes to it, and not
hinder the work; but the overruling hand of God will make opposition a means
of furthering and carrying on the work, which it was appointed and intended to
hinder, to the praise of the glory of his own wisdom and power, who is above
enemies in that wherein they deal proudly, for, the great mountain shall
become a plain, not only not a mountain and easy to walk over, but shall
pave a way, and fill up valleys, and hollow places, that the work may go on.
This was accomplished in the type to Zerubbabel and the Jews, when Darius by
his Decree promoved the work, and compesced their enemies about them, and made
them furnish what might advance the work, Ezra 6. and is daily brought to pass
by Christ in making all the plots of devils and men, and all their debates,
contribute to clear up truth, and promove the work of conversion and salvation
of his own people. 4. As instruments, how weak soever their honest and single
minding of Gods work, and not driving their own interest along with it, is
the way to make it prosper, and to make opposition ineffectual; (for, such a
one in the type was Zerubbabel, before whom the mountain becomes a plain:) So
Christ being party to all opposition against the Church, is ground of hope to
her, that it shall not prevail, but be made subservient to her good; for, it
is he in the substance, of whom it is said, before Zerubbabel thou shall become
a pla^ne. 5. As it is the Lords great mercy (yea, and his way, where a people
cleave to him) that he brings a begun external work of Reformation to a
perfection such as is attainable, in despite of all opposition, however it be
often interrupted, and go but slowly on, and by degrees; (for, so was it here in
the type, He shall bring forth the head-stone thereof, alluding to some
custom, wherein as the foundation-stone; so also the capestone was laid in the
Magestrates sight, or by himself:) So, it is Christ's prerogative and way, to
perfect his begun good work, and to carry on his mystical body, and every
member thereof, by degrees unto perfection; for, the substance of this promise
is perfected in him, and his work about his people, He shall bring forth the
head-stone thereof. 6. As there is matter of joy in the going on of Christ's
work; so has he reserved much joy for his people in the perfecting of it; for,
as some shouted for joy at the laying of the foundation, Ezra 3.11. so more is
abiding; He shall bring out the Head-stone with shoutings: as a shadow of the
joy of the Lords people, when a long desired and much interrupted work of
Reformation comes to some period; but especially of the Hallelujahs and joy
that shall be when Christ presents his Spouse perfect and complete before the
Father. 7. The Lords work among his people is so carried on, as not only free
grace begins it, but the further it goes on, grace is the more to be magnified,
and most of all seen at the very close of it: yea, any perfection it attains to
within time, must be upheld by the same grace that gave it; for, so it was in
the type here; this shouting; Grace, grace unto it, is both an acclamation and
acknowledgement of the much and multiplied favor of God that had shined in
that work, till its perfection; and also a prayer that God would let out his
grace, and bless that Temple in the use for which it was built. 8. Christ's
work in and about his people, is so full of tender favor and loving kindness,
as may bring unto him the glory of abundant grace from all impartial Judges,
and will one day proclaim it before all the world; for, this acclamation and
applauding of the work made so beautiful and complete by grace, making every
one commend and wish well to it, is nothing else but a commending him and his
grace who made it such, and leads his people to expect that day wherein he
shall be glorified in his Saints, and admired in all tha^ believe, 2 These. 1.10.

Verse. 8. Moreover, the Word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

9. The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house: his hands
shall also finish it, and thou shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent me
unto you.

The success of building the Temple is confirmed by a new message, that their
hearts may rest on it, and by seeing the accomplishment, may be assured of
Christ's being sent of the Father, to promise this, and see it performed. Doct.
1. The Promises of the Word are faithful and worthy of our trust and
confidence, as being the Word of him, who by his Word gives being to all
things; this repetition of the promise, and that as the Word of Jehovah,
shows, not only how ready we are to distrust, but how serious he is in
promising, and will not eat in, but make good what he says, so that his Church
may lean to it. 2. It is a peculiar proof of Gods favor to a land, when the
Lord not only grants a Reformation, and the building of an habitation of pure
doctrine and ordinances for his own Name amongst them, but when he perfecteth
it speedily, and in the age wherein it begins, and is not provoked by their
sins, to leave the generation whom he brings out of bondage, to perish in a
wilderness, before they come to such a promised land: therefore it is a
special promise to the Jews in the type, not only that the Temple should be
perfected, but that the hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this
house, his hands shall also finish it. 3. However Christ's works and counsels in
the world may seem to lie long interrupted, yet where he begins he is
unchangeable, and endures to all generations to see it perfected; for, this
promise is also true of him in the substance: The hands of Zerubbabel have laid
the foundation of this house, his hands shall also finish it. 4. The Lords
dispensations toward his reconciled people, are then rightly studied, when the
fruits of Christ's being employed as Mediator about them appears, and his
fidelity, love and care of his people are seen to shine in them: and they are
still to be studied, over and over again till this be seen, that so Christ's
love may be shed abroad in their hearts, and he become high and precious in
their estimation; for, the event of this success is, And thou shall know that
the Lord of hosts has sent me unto you, where the speech is directed unto the
Prophet, for the good and inf^rmation of the whole people: Unto you, says he,
in the plural number, albeit the Prophet be spoken to, that he might teach
them; Thou shall know, etc. 5. Albeit Christ in his office of mediation be
inferior to the Father, and sent and employed by him, yet that diminishes
nothing of the glory of his Godhead, but be is Jehovah, equal with the Father
for all that: for, here the Angel who speaks unto the Prophet is Jehovah, v. 8.
and yet he says, The Lord of hosts has sent me.

Verse. 10. For who has despised the day of small things? for they shall
rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel with those seven:
they are the eyes of the LORD which run to and fro through the whole earth.

The Lord subjoynes the reason of this so frequently reported promise, and the
use of the doctrine, which is to reprove the corrupt judgment of that people,
who judged of that work by the small beginnings thereof; and their
discouragement flowing from it, as fearing all they did would be in vain, that
it should not be like the first Temple, and so their enemies should mock them,
as well as the ancient men wept, Ezra 3. This the Lord reproves and promises
they should yet rejoice in seeing Zerubbabel, (a type of Christ) as chief
director, making to work, and by considering that Gods constant providence,
which is intent on Christ, and on the Church for his sake, as chap. 3.9. goes
also through the world for their good, to provide what may prosper, and to
obstruct what may hinder the work. Doct 1. It is the Lords way in his work,
whether with the Church or particular souls, to begin at small things,
promising very little, that he may set forth the glory of his power, in
bringing out a work out of them, which men could never have expected: for,
there is a day of small thingr, which ends in a glorious Temple. 2. Judging of
Gods work, by outward appearances, or the first view, and undervaluing of it,
when it satisfies not our mould, or seems not to promise much, and being
discouraged thereby, is a sin which the Lords people should be ashamed to own
or avow, considering how much God will bring out of small things, and that
cherishing of them is the way to make them great; for, Who has despised the
day of small things? says he, intimating that none ought to take with it; and
this sin of despising does not break forth only in open contempt and mockery,
but may shelter it self under the pretense of being sorry, that things are so
little, (as these do, Ezra 3.12.) may express it self in heartlesse lying by
from duty, as the Jews did here, and men may also pretend that they would not
despise small things, but that they are grieved because they can see nothing;
for, so did their discouragement account of these small things, Hag. 2 3. 3.
Christ's graciousnesse and tenderness toward his people, is oft-times such, as
to refute their greatest discouragements and mistakes with mercy, and silence
their groundless complaints with giving them matter of joy, and causing them
to rejoice because of it; for, despisers shall rejoice, says he. 4. Gods begun
work in his people and Church, how contemptible soever it appear, will end in
joy to his people, the hope whereof should silence present discouragements;
for, Who has despised the day of small things? for they shall rejoice. 5. So
long as Christ has his hand at his own work, and has not given it over,
although it be not perfected, yet it affords matter of joy, considering that it
says, he has not yet abhorred his work, and will perfect it: for, in the type
this was one ground of joy; They shall see the plummet in the hand of
Zerubbabel, to wit, as chief director of the work, going about it, and seeing
that all be right built; which agrees most completely to Christ in the
substance, who is himself the Master Builder. 6. Not only is it to be reckoned,
that where Christ has begun a work, he is still about it till it be perfected;
but in special he may be reckoned working, when he is fitting his people to be
stones in his building, and (if it were even by trials) cutting off
superfluities of naughtiness from his work and people, which might deforme his
building, albeit in the mean time the work do not appear visibly to advance;
this may be signified by the plummet-line, the sign of his being at work,
which is the instrument whereby builders try and square their building, and cut
off all excrescences in it, and is as needful as to lay on more stones upon it
to raise it higher. Christ may be very busy at work when we are ill pleased
with it, and when our sense is not satisfied that it is so: and working under
ground, by discoveries, purging, humility, trials, etc. is as needful as that
we long most after. 7. A right sight of the vigilant providence of God, which
is employed to have a care of Christ and his Church, and governes and orders
all things in the world, so as may best contribute for the good and welfare of
the Church, may afford matter of joy in the midst of many discouragements, as
declaring that his people are much in his heart, when his providence in all the
world is with an eye to their good, and allowing us to cast all our cares and
fears on him, who has all power in his hands; for this is another ground of
joy, they shall see these seven; or, the perfect eye of providence on that
chief stone, and all the building, which also are the eyes of the Lord, which
run to and fro through the whole earth.

Verse. 11. Then answered I, and said unto him, What are these two Olive Trees
upon the right side of the Candlestick, and upon the left side thereof?

12. And I answered again, and said unto him, What be these two Olive-branches,
which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of themselves?

13. And he answered me, and said, Know thou not what these be? and I said,
No, my Lord.

14. Then he said, These are the two anointed ones that stand by the Lord of
the whole earth.

The scope of the vision being thus explained, and the Prophet understanding
that of the Condlestick, which was ordinary in the vision, does only desire to
be informed concerning the two Olive Trees furnishing the Candlestick, v. 11.
and particularly concerning two branches which did furnish the Candlestick by
two golden pipes, with bright oil, (which therefore is called gold,) v. 12.
Unto which question (the Prophet being again prepared and humbled with a new
sense of his ignorance, v. 13.) answer is returned, v. 14. For understanding
whereof, Consider, 1. That by the two Olive Trees, it is not clear to understand
only the graces of God poured out on his Church, for that is indeed signified
by the oil, according to the Scripture, Psalm. 45.7. but here the resolution is
concerning the trees that furnished the oil; Nor yet are we in general to
understand them of a fountain of bounty in God, for there can be no reason
given why that should be compared to two trees, and be said to stand before the
Lord. But by them we are to understand Christ anointed in his Priestly, (which
includes his Prophetical) and Kingly office, who was chief in this work, and in
furnishing all instruments, who furnishes his Church, and serves his Father in
the work of Redemption, and is cared for by him, as will be expressly cleared
to us, chap. 6, 12, 13. Consider, 2. That the Angel answering both his
questions in one, leads us to understand the one by the other, in so far as is
needful; and therefore we may conceive, that either that of the branches is not
touched as needless, or pointing out only the fit ways of communicating
himself to his peoples capacity, the pipes not being able to receive the oil
of the whole tree at once, or that branches only now furnishing, imported
Christ's communicating himself in a small measure, in this typical work of
building the Temple in respect of what he had, and was to communicate in the
building of his Church under the Gospel, or if we will stretch it further, it
may take in Joshua and Zerubbabel, the one anointed Priest, the other a
successor of their anointed Kings, who however as instruments in the work, they
were resembled by the burning lamps, getting furniture from the bowl; yet In
respect of their office among that people, and their influence upon all
instruments of building the Temple, they were types of Christ, and so might be
represented by two little branches, resembling him the great Olive Tree; and
this interpretation seems to have ground, Rev. 11.4. where as the two witnesses
are resembled to Moses and Aaron, Elijah and Elisha, in regard of the effects
of their Ministry, v. 5, 6. So also to Joshua and Zerubbabel in their time,
under the type of two Olives and two golden Candlesticks, also (perhaps called
two in respect of the double rank of lamps on it) standing before the God of
the earth, as being instrumental to keep in life in the Church, when all power
shall be opposite to her; However leaving what further may be said of C^trist
and his offices, till we come to chap. 6. We may here learn, 1. When Christ is
doing much for his people, he may yet let somewhat be wanting, to the end he
may stir us up to prayer, employing him, whereby to draw prepared mercies out
of his hand, that so we may not only have the mercy, but be confirmed and
comforted in the acceptance of our persons and services, by his granting our
desires; for, this vision is so explained in the former answer, as leaves room
for new information upon new prayer and enquiry. 2. Christ does not allow that
his people should rest upon the habits or seed of graces within them, nor upon
old sensible experiences, but where he is about to manifest himself, he keeps
grace in exercise, and puts his people to frequent actings of it; for, albeit
the Prophet had been but lately humbled in the sense of his ignorance, v. 5.
yet here he is put to it afresh again, v 13.3. Christ's humbling of his people
when they seek to him, and his giving such answers at first, as may contribute
to that end, gives them no ground to think, that either he does reject, or will
deny their suit, but rather assures them, that he is making way for a
satisfactory answer; for, Christ's humbling of the Prophet, hinders him not from
satisfaction in his demand. 4. Christ sustaines very many relations to his
people, and is very much to be seen in her furniture and well-being; for, many
things in this type point at him; he is the Olive Trees, having as God, and in
his mediatory office all fullness, and being both active and willing of
himself, to communicate it according to their capacity. He also may be pointed
at in his two offices by the two golden pipes, conveighing the oil from the
trees to the Candlestick, it being through his merit as Priest, and his
efficacy as King, that the fullness in him becomes ours, and that gives us
allowance to depend on him for it: and further, as he has all fullness, and
has found a way to make it ours, so is he the bowl to keep it, and to guide
us and it, and be forthcoming for our good with it. In a word, Christ is to be
seen all in all to his people. 5. The work of the Churches Redemption and
salvation by Christ, is a work well-pleasing to God, however he be the party
offended, and in doing whereof Christ does acceptable service to his Father,
and is maintained and cared for by him; for, the two anoinied ones, (or Christ
in his offices, represented by these trees, or, sons of oil) stand by the
Lord, as doing him service in his office, and upheld by him; and so God in
Christ reconciles the world, and is at peace with his people. 6. As God is
blessed over all, and allsufficient in himself, so he has given, daily gives,
and will give proof hereof, in carrying on the salvation of his Church through
Christ, making his power and dominion in all the earth contribute thereunto:
therefore in this work is he named the Lord of the whole earth. 7. As any
measure of furniture is given to any member of the Church, that it may be made
use of for the good of the whole; so all such as desire to be useful in their
stations, ought to be much in dependence on God, and to study to stand in his
favor, and be under his care: for so much does this answer, as it may concern
Joshua and Zerubbabel the types, teach us. Any oil they have is to be poured
out for the good of the whole, and they are to stand by the Lord.

CHAP. V.
THis chapter contains a sixth and seventh vision, holding forth doctrine
different from the former: wherein is declared, that sin continued in, would
bring on private calamities, and having filled up the measure thereof, would
also draw down public judgments upon the whole Nation: and so in the first
vision, under the type of a large flying roll, v. 1, 2. is represented the
curse of God, ready to be executed upon transgressors of the first and second
table, v. 3. and to cut off their house and family, v. 4. In the second
vision, under the type of an Ephah or measure, v. 5, 6. and of a woman,
representing wickedness, cast and closed therein with a talent of lead, v. 7,
8. and all carried away together to the land of Shinar, v. 9, 10, 11. is
represented, that when the Land should fill up the measure of their iniquity,
they should be carried into captivity as formerly they had been.

Verse 1. THen I turned, and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, a
flying roll.

2. And he said unto me, What see thou? and I answered, I see a flying roll,
the length thereof is twenty cubits, and the breadth thereof ten cubits.

The Lord having hitherto comforted this people with sweet visions and promises
of the prospering and blessing of the work, does now season these with hard
threatenings for their sin: showing, that their own sins not only hindered the
work, but (notwithstanding any great things he had done, or was to do for them)
would draw plagues on particular sinners, and if they persevered, would utterly
subvert and overturn the Nation; all which their former experience might not a
little help them to lay to heart. The type of the first vision (containing
threatenings of public calamities for sin) represented unto the Prophet, is a
flying roll, or large parchment written upon, according to the custom of
writing books in these times, and containing the threatened curses of the law
against private sinners, now going forth in execution. Doct. 1. As sin is
sufficient to obstruct the performance of glorious promises, where there is no
other enemy; so Gods kindness to a people will not hinder, but that he should
reckon with them for their sins: therefore are these visions subjoyned to the
former, to show them what was the cause of their low condition, and of the
Temples coming ill speed, and to warn them what they might yet expect,
notwithstanding former promises. 2. Even these who are most intent about
spiritual things, have need to stir up themselves, and to be stirred up of God,
to be yet more diligent and exact; for, the Prophet seeing the roll, is stirred
up to consider it better by a new question, What see thou? 3. The right way
of understanding and taking up calamities for our use, is to look upon them
through the prospect of the Word, which will discover the author and the
procuring cause of trouble, and the use we should make of them: therefore are
the calamities to be inflicted compared to a roll, with relation to the book of
the law threatening them, which we should consider when we feel the stroke. 4.
The judgments denounced against sinners and sin by the Word of God, will not
still lie by as if they were asleep, but will break forth in execution, and
will speedily overtake and bring down the rebel; therefore this judgment is
not now lying within the Temple, but gone forth and visible; yea, a flying
roll, swiftly to take the prey. 5. As the threatenings denounced in the
Word-are sad when they are executed, so the execution will be exactly
answerable to the threatening, whatever sinners may dream to the contrary: for,
the dimensions of this roll, being in length twenty cubits, and in breadth ten
cubits, does not only show that it was a large roll, containing many curses,
(being written on both sides, v. 3.) to meet with all sins, and make the sinner
completely miserable, but particularly it may be conceived to have relation to
the houses into which it should enter, which being ordinarily twice as long as
broad, imports that the curse should fill the house, or, to the porch of the
Temple, from whence the roll came, and where the Law was taught, which being of
the same size with this roll, 1 Kings 6.3. does import that the execution
should be exactly as large as the threatening pronounced, and answerable
thereunto.

Verse. 3 Then said he unto we, This is the curse that goes forth over the face
of the whole earth: for every one that slealeth, shall be cut off as on this
side, according to it, and every on that swears shall be cut off as on that
side, according to it.

This type is expounded to signify the Lords curse, going sorth to do
execution in all the land of Judah, and to cut off sinners against the first
and second table of the Law, and that according to the contents of the roll,
which was written on both sides, with relation to the two tables of the Law.
Doct. 1. Whatever be the particular punishment inflicted by God for sin, yet
this is seriously to be laid to heart, that every such punishment has in its
bosom a curse, till the sinner awaked thereby, flee to Christ, who became a
curse, that his own may inherit a blessing; for, This is the curse that goes
forth, says he. 2. The Lord is an impartial avenger of sin, when it is
persevered in without repentance: and when other means are ineffectual, he
will not spare to cut off the desperate sinner; for, the curse goes over the
face of the whole earth, or, land, and every one shall be cut off, without
exception, who are guilty. 3. The Lord will not spare, but indifferently punish
sin, whether against the first or second table, in avoiding of both which the
Lords people are to testify their sincerity; this is signified by cutting off
of every one that steals, and every one that swears; all sins against both
Tables being comprehended under these two, which were frequent in these times,
and in themselves gross, and the roll having curses on this side, and this
fide, according to which both sorts of sinners were to be cut off. 4. When a
people are delivered out of sore troubles, and yet their lusts are not
mortified, they ordinarily prove covetous, false, and oppressing, as laboring
by all means to make up these things that trouble has stripped them of;
therefore is there a particular threatening against every one that steals, it
being arise sin at their return from the captivity, for they went every man to
his own house, Haggai 1.9. were cruel oppressors, Nehem. 5.1, 2, 3. etc. yea,
and robbed God of tithes and offerings, Mal. 3.8. 5. Covetous and false men, in
their bargains with men, will make no bones of impiety and perjury, if that may
help to gain their point; for with the former is joined, every one that
swears, which is expounded, v. 4. to be swearing falsely by Gods Name.

Verse. 4. I will bring it forth, says the LORD of hosts and it shall enter
into the honse of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely
by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume
it with the timber thereof, and the stones thereof.

The punishment of these sins is more particularly declared, that the curse
shall not only cut off the sinner himself, but shall pursue his house and
family, and like a moth consume it, till it fall about his ears, and ruin
him and his Doct. 1. God is the executor of his own threatened judgments, and
will make them effectual, oppose him who will; I will bring it forth, says the
Lord of hosts. 2. Vengeance will pursue the sinner, even in that condition
wherein he thinks himself most secure, nor shall he be able to resist or remove
it, till it perform the work for which it is sent; for it shall enter, even
into the house, where he thinks to live securely, and it shall remain in the
midst of the house. 3. Sinners do oft-times not only draw down judgments upon
themselves, but do also provoke God to ruin their houses and families thereby,
that they may be monuments of his severity, and warnings to all others; for, it
shall abide in the midst of the house, and shall consume it with the timber
thereof, and the stones thereof. 4. The Lord needs not make use of violent
remedies to take order with impenitent sinners, and their families, but can by
his curse, and removal of his blessing from what they have, make it insensibly
melt away, so that they shall be ruined, and themselves cannot well tell how;
for so much is imp^^^ted in the expression, the curse shall consume the house
with the timber and stones, or be as a moth in it, to waste it away.

Verse. 5. Then the Angel that talked with me went forth and said unto me, Lift
up now thine eyes and see what is this that goes forth.

6. And I said, What is it? and be said, This is an Ephah that goes forth. He
said moreover, This is their resemblance through all the earth.

Not to trouble the Reader with diversity of apprehensions, concerning the
scope of this vision, whereof so little is interpreted, and that so darkly by
the Angel; That which appears to come nearest truth is, that as in the former
vision was showed, how the Lord would pursue the sin of particular persons with
private calamities; so in this is declared that he would also punish the whole
Nation, and cast them out of their land, when the measure of their iniquity
should be filled up. And this the Lord in this vision not only warnes them of,
by showing what had formerly come upon them, but denounces and foretells for the
time to come. To this all the parts of the vision agree; whereof the first is
an Ephah coming forth in view, which was one of the dry measures among the
Jews, and is generally taken for any measure. This the Angel interprets to be
their resemblance, or, eye in all the earth, or, in all the land, to wit, of
Judea; that is, that measure, which by little and little is filled up to the
brim, represents or resembles the measure of their sins, which God in his
long-suffering and patience bears with, till by every one in the land, their
putting in a part, and adding sin to sin, all of them make up an heap to fill
the measure, and ripen them for judgment; in all which the Providence and eye
of God is upon them to observe and measure up their sins, as by an Ephah till
it be full. Doct. 1. When the Lord pursues sin with many particular calamities,
and neither the corrected nor others are bettered thereby, it is a presage that
the land is ripening fot a national stroke; so much does the connection of this
vision with the former teach. 2. Such is the Lords long suffering and patience,
that he does not proceed upon every provocation to plague his people, till sin
he come to an height and past remedy, and till that measure be filled up, which
he in his long-suffering and providence prescribes; for, here is an Ephab to be
filled up, ere it be carried away. 3. When a land is ripening for judgment,
and declining from God, the sins of every particular rank and person in it,
adds to the provocation, and contributes to increase the flame, and hasten the
judgment: for, the Ephah is their resemblance in all the land. Every one in
the land contributes to fill it up, and however the sins of every one apart may
seem little, yet being put together in the measure, they will amount to much.
4. Albeit God be not always smiting for sin, yet he is not asleep, but
carefully observing how men fill up the measure, who they are that contributes
most to that effect, that they may drink the deeper of the cup of judgment,
and observing when it is full, that he may arise and punish: for, thus the
words will also read, This is their eye in all the land, or the Ephah
reptesents Gods Providence upon them, observing and measuring the sins of every
one, and of all in common.

Ver. 7. And behold, there was lift up a talent of lead: and this is a woman
that sits in the midst of the Ephah.

8. And he said This is wickedness, and he cast it into the midst of the Ephah,
and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof.

The second part of the vision is a woman in the Ephah, representing that
sinful and wicked people and Nation, having now filled up the measure of their
sin: and a talent of lead, pressing her down in the Ephah, signifying a
concluding of them under sin without pardon, and a keeping them under their
guilt, till they be punished. Doct. 1. Sin persevered in by a land, will at
last fill up the measure, and Gods patience toward them will come to a period:
for, the woman representing wickedness, grows up and fills the Ephah, wherein
she sits. 2. When the Lord contends with a land by judgments, it is not so
much because of ordinary escapes and infirmities, as for gross iniquity come
to an height; for, this is wickedness, says he, or a representation of that
people, now become extremely wicked, which is the cause of the threatened
captivity. 3. When the Lord has long contended by his Word, and particular
afflictions, with the sin of his people, and they yet persevere, it is
righteous with him to give them up to their own hearts, and leave them as
captives under the power of impenitency and guilt, till he, without any
altering of his sentence plague them: for, Wickedness is cast into the midst
of the Ephah, and the weight of lead upon the mouth thereof: that is, they are
left under the power of their sin, till vengeance be executed.

Verse. 9. Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there came out two
women, and the wind was in their wings (for they had wings like the wings of
astork) and they lift up the Ephah between the earth and the heaven.

10. Then said I to the Angel that talked with me, Whither do these bear the
Ephah?

11. And he said unto me, To build it an house in the land of Shinar, and it
shall be established and set there upon her own base.

The last part of the vision, is of two women carrying away the Ephah, and the
woman therein to the land of Shinar, to abide and dwell there. Whereby is
signified, that when their cup was full, they should speedily be carried into
captivity out of their own land, where they should long abide, as in a dwelling
place. They are said to be carried captives into the land of Shinar, or,
Babylon, Genesis 11.2, 3, etc. partly to express their future captivity by the
Romans, in such a way, as might be most sensible to them who had been captives
in Babel before; and partly, because in their second captivity many of them
were scattered in these parts, because of the many Jews who abode still there.
As for the other circumstance of the vision concerning the two women who had
the wind in their wings, or were helped to flee by the wind, it were
curiosity to determine of them further, then as pointing out the vanity of that
peoples ways, which should drive them out of their land: or rather the
instruments of their captivity, who are resembled to women, only to agree with
the rest of the vision, wherein the sinful Nation is resembled to a woman, and
to two women, as being a competent number for his work, as the disciples went
out by paires. Doct. 1. A people abusing afflictions, and mavelous
deliverances from it, by their sinning yet more, may expect their afflictions
will be returned upon them in harder measure: for, a new and sorer captivity,
and longer dwelling under it is here threatened upon their renewed
provocations. 2. The Lord has sufficiency of instruments at his command, to
execute his determined judgments, who being employed by him against his sinful
people, shall find all things concurring with them to carry on that work: this
is signified by two women, enough to carry the Ephah, and by their wings like
the wings of a storke, enabling them to flee, and do the work violently and
swiftly, and to flee high betwixt the heaven and the earth, above the reach of
any opposition made unto them by men, and by the wind in their wings,
providence, as it were, concurring to help them forward. 3. Captivity and exile
among profane Nations, and from enjoying the face of God, or the society one
of another in his Ordinances, is one of the Lords sore judgments whereby he
plagueth the sins of his own Church; for, Wickedness is carried to the land of
Shinar. 4. As the Church is no place wherein reigning sin will get a biding
habitation: so a people that are enemies to the Church, are accounted in Gods
sight, as the common sink of all wickedness, whom therefore he will certainly
punish: this is signified by the carrying of wickedness out of the holy land,
to the land of Shinar, as its own place, where all wickedness dwelt: from
which also the Jews might assuredly gather, that as he had punished them, so
he would not spare their enemies.

CHAP. VI.
IN the first part of the Chapter we have the eighth vision, wherein, under the
type of four charets with horses of several colors, v. 1, 2, 3. is
represented Gods effectual providence, in guiding the world by fit instruments,
for variety of dispensations, v. 4, 5, 6, 7. whereof in part an account is
given to the Prophet, v. 8. In the second part of the Chapter, under the type
of two Crowns made of some silver and gold offered by strangers, and set upon
the head of Joshua, v. 9, 10, 11. is represented Christ to be incarnate, the
builder of his Church, and the King and Priest thereof, v. 12, 13. under whom
strangers should come and join with the Jews in building the spiritual
Church, v. 14, 15. which Doctrine is closed with assuring this people that
experience should prove the truth of his authority in Prophesying, and with a
declaration that obedience was the only way for them to find the comfortable
fruit of these promises, v. 15.

Verse. 1. ANd I turned and lift up mine eyes, and looked, and behold, there
came four charets out from between two mountains, and the mountains were
mountains of brass.

2. In the first charet were red horses, and in the second charet black horses;

3. And in the third charet white horses, and in the fourth charet grizled, and
bay horses.

4. Then I answered, and said unto the Angel that talked with me, What are
these, my LORD?

5. And the Angel answered, and said unto me, These are the four spirits of the
heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.

In the vision there are four warlike charets, which are expounded, at the
Prophets desire, to signify the four spirits, or, winds of the heavens;
whereby we may understand, either bands of Angels, (who are spirits, and as
winds, Psalm. 104.4. and are represented by charets, Ps. 68.17.) employed at
Gods direction to all the quarters of the world, and therefore called four; or,
generally, all instruments acted by the Spirit or motion of God, to do his will
every where. The variety of colors of the charet-horses, signifies variety of
dispensations, whether joyful, sad, or mixed, which are in Gods hands; the red
portending calamities of war and bloodshed, the black, calamity or
destruction coming any other way then by the sword, and the white, peace and
prosperity, and the grizled and bay, a mixed dispensation of mercy and justice,
though the bay may be rendered strong, as a common property of all the
charet-horses. These charets come forth from between two mountains of brass,
signifying the unchangeable decrees of God, which these instruments execute,
and his firm providence by which they are ruled. Doct. 1. It is an useful
employment for the Church of God, to be much in studying the Lords sovereignty
over the world, whereby it is subject to his government and administrations:
and that he has competency of fit instruments whereby to execute his purposes,
and to exerce his providence and sovereignty in the earth; for, so much is
represented to the Church in this vision, wherein God is Lord of all the earth,
has instruments sufficient for all the parts of the world, and these
instruments, obsequious to receive directions, as standing before the Lord, and
nimble as spirit, or winds, and strong as warlike charets to execute them. By
studying whereof the Church is taught, to exalt God, to stoop to him, to cleave
to her duty having such a Protector, and to be comforted in such a portion as
he is, whose presence and train, for her behoof, makes her famous, Psalm.
68.16, 17. 2. It will contribute further to settle the minds of Gods people,
and make them to submit to every dispensation, to study that all things are
ordered in the world according to the pleasure of God, that his decrees and
purposes are, and shall be effectually executed in all the earth, and that his
effectual providence does overrule all instruments, that nothing be done but
what he has decreed; This is also represented to the Church in this vision, by
the four charets, (or instruments of God in all the parts of the world) their
coming out from between two mountains of brass, that is, his unalterable
counsels, which they are sent forth to put in execution, and his effectual
providence by which they are hemmed in on every hand, that they do nothing but
according to his pleasure. This study will lead the Church to see God in every
dispensation, (which is comfortable when she is reconciled to him,) and to see
that no ill purposes of men can be effectual without him, and that none of his
thoughts of peace will be hindered. 3. The counsels and purposes of God in
governing the world, are deep and unsearchable, rather to be adored and read by
the Church, according to the tenor of the Covenant, then pried into, till by
his executing and perfecting his work, she be able to see and discern that
which otherwise might readily be mistaken; this is signified by the charets,
coming out of some deep valley, between two mountains, which is obscure, and
cannot easily be seen into. 4. The Lord has variety of dispensations,
according as the condition of men (whether enemies, or the Church) calls for
them, laid up in store, and at his command to carve upon, and let out at his
pleasure without controulment; so that he is to be seen, and his wisdom,
fidelity, justice or mercy, etc. to be adored in every one of them, according
as they are let forth, and made beautiful in their time, and in respect of
these toward whom they are dispensed: this is signified by charet-horses of all
colors, going forth at Gods direction. 5. As the study of the divine authority
of the Word, and what is revealed therein, is that which the Church ought to be
much about, in a time when she has her comforts to bring from thence; so in
such a time she is to be much in dwelling upon the Word, and stirring up her
self to understand the riches and fullness thereof: for, by this question, so
often propounded, and here repeated by the Prophet, v. 4. we are taught both that
nothing in this vision, or explication of it is invented by him, but all of
God, and therefore to be leaned to; and also that for attaining the full
comfort of the Scriptures, and of knowing Gods mind, laziness would be shaken
off, and God much employed for clearing it up unto us, being a depth not easily
comprehended or taken up.

Verse. 6. The black horses which are therein, go forth into the North-countrey,
and the white go forth after them, and the grizled go forth toward the South,
country.

The scope of the vision is more particularly cleared up, by showing the
particular employment of these instruments, in several parts of the world,
designed from their situation in relation to the land of Judah. We need not
enquire concerning the red horses, (though some read the Hebrew, as pointing
at them also, these which are therein, (pointing at the red charet) and the
black horses go forth, etc.) the number and colors pointing only at
sufficiency of means for all parts of the world, and of dispensations as they
are needed; whereof only three are expounded. Two of these charets, the black
and white, are employed toward the North in Babylon, signifying the destruction
of the Babylonians by the Persians, and the deliverance of the Jews, which
being already verified, might confirm the Church, and the godly in it, to wait
for the like in time coming. If not also pointing out that the sad condition of
the Jews, who yet remained in Babylon, should at last end in peace and
prosperity, many of them coming up afterward to Judea. A third charet is
employed toward Egypt southward to Judea, whither many of the Jews went with
Johanan, Jer. 43. who were to be exercised with a mixed dispensation, as the
color of the horses imports Doct. 1. Whatever sad dispensations the Lord send
either upon his people, or the Nations among whom they are, yet he has a
peculiar care of them to provide a good issue of their trouble, and can make
sad calamities not to ruin, but be a means of their deliverance; for, when
the black horses go forth into the North-countrey, the white go forth after
them. The ruin of Babel where they remained, proved their delivery, and their
own calamities end well: which is yet remarked after it is done, to show, that
God is still the same to ruin enemies, and do good to the Church, and make
overturnings, wherein it should seem she would be overwhelmed as well as
others, bring about her happiness. 2. Albeit afflictions and lots which God
sends on a people, especially for sin, may be very grievous and sad, yet they
have ordinarily more comfortable issues then afflictions of their own choosing;
for, the white horses go after the black to Babylou, whither God had sent the
Jews, whereas the charet sent to Egypt, whither they went of their own accord,
is grisled. 3. Albeit the Lord be justly provoked against his peoples following
their own ways, especially under trouble; yet his severity even to them is
mixed with mercy; for, the charet sent to the South is not black nor red, but
grisled.

Verse. 7. And the bay went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and
fro through the earth, and he said, Get ye hence, walk to and fro through the
earth: so they walked to and fro through the earth.

Whether we understand this of all the charets, whose horses were strong (as
the word also signifies) or of the fourth charet only, who having done that
particular work showed to the Prophet, sought to be employed elsewhere, all
comes to one purpose, that by Gods allowance and command, they are employed
through the earth; Hence learn, 1. As all instruments are subject unto God, and
no service can be acceptable to him, but what is warranted by his command: so
he has instruments, (and especially Angels) very ready and willing to seek and
take employments, and see them executed; this we are taught in that they sought
to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth; and in that having
received orders, they walked to and fro through the earth. 2. Albeit the Church
get now and then a clear sight of some special Providence, yet it is but parts
of his way that she is able to take up: His Providence is not idle in all the
parts of the world, though she see not so well through it, and it is her
comfort to know so much, that his Providence is so universal for her good; for,
here is a command to get hence, and walk to and fro through the earth, obeyed
by them, holding out his providence, and this is discovered to the Prophet for
the Churches comfort, though particular actions, done by them, be not declared.

Verse. 8. Then cried he upon me, and spoke unto me, saying, Behold, these that
go toward the North-countrey, have quieted my Spirit in the North-countrey.

An account is given to the Prophet of that part of the vision which specially
concerned the Church, that the instruments employed in the North, had fulfilled
his counsel in severity against Babel, and tenderness toward the Jews there,
as a pledge for future times. Doct. 1. Albeit the Lord do effectually execute
his purposes in all the world, yet his providence about his Church is (to speak
after the manner of men) his special care, in the study and knowledge whereof
his Church is to acquiesce, albeit many other passages be hid from her;
therefore it is that the Lord takes pleasure in giving an account of that
passage, and declares that only unto the Prophet, leaving the rest untouched,
Then he cried to me, and spoke to me, saying, Behold, these that go toward the
North, etc. 2. The Lord accounts himself not a little concerned in the
afflictions of his people, and the prosperity of their enemies, nor will he be
at rest till he plague the one, and relieve the other; for, the red and white
horses do quiet his Spirit, which was before commoved. 3. Whatever work the
Lord undertake against his enemies, and in delivering his Church, and whatever
instruments he employ, there shall be nothing left undone or imperfect, or be
delayed, but shall be fully accomplished according to his purpose, and as he
has promised or threatened; for, says he, They have quieted my Spirit in the
North-countrey, or done all things according to my mind.

Verse. 9. And the Word of the LORD came unto me, saying,

10. Take of them of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah,
which are come from Babylon, and come thou the same day, and go into the house
of Josiah the son of Zephaniah.

11. Then take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of
Joshua the son of Josedech the High Priest.

In the second part of the chapter, we have a promise of Christ the Builder and
Governor of his Church, and of the Conversion of strangers, the type whereof
is the making of two Crowns, the one of silver, and the other of gold, as
sacred signs appointed of God for the uses after-mentioned, and the setting
them solemnly on the Head of Joshua the Priest. These Crowns are to be made of
what was offered by four men, (the first whereof and the last seems to have
had two names, v. 14. at least the first of them, fur Hen might be brother to
Josiah) who seem not so much to be eminent men amongst them, who were fainting,
and made others to faint by their example, and therefore needed to be
encouraged, as to be men lately come from Babylon, with offerings for
themselves, or in name of others; of which for special cause the Crowns are
made to encourage them to come and join with their brethren, from (...)
promise of Christ, (at that time in whom all that they missed in Judea was to
be made up) and of the Conversion of strangers, as is after cleared. Doct. 1.
Where Christ sets up his Church in the world, he can when he pleases induce
men to join themselves thereunto, though it seem to bring much outward
disadvantage; for, there are of the captivity which are come from Babylon,
where many of these Jews thought themselves better accommodated then to leave
it for Judah. 2. The Lord is very tender of such as are at any pains to seek
him, and allows special encouragement upon them, and commands all diligence to
be used for that end; for, this great type, and the explication thereof is for
their encouragement, and the Prophet is to come the same day unto the house of
Josiah, or the place where he lodged, if he be one of the number. 3. None are
to appear before the Lord empty, but when they come unto him in his Church,
they are to give up themselves, and what they have to be at his disposing: this
is signified by their bringing silver and gold, which the Prophet is to take of
them. 4. Albeit our services, and any thing we can offer to God, be of no worth
before him, and may justly be rejected; yet such is his graciousnesse that he
may make more of our services then we could well expect; for, not only are
their gifts accepted, but made use of in contributing to this type, their
silver and gold were the matter of the Crowns. 5. The Lord may employ persons
to sustain extraordinary relations as types, which it is not lawful for them to
exerce in any ordinary way; for Joshua's getting two Crowns to be an
extraordinary type of Christ in his two offices, was no warrant for Joshua in
his administrations, to take on him not only the Priestly, but the Kingly
office also, whereof some shadow was yet remaining in David's race, and
presently exercised by Zerubbabel.

Verse. 12. And speak unto him, saying, Thus speaks the LORD of hosts,
saying, Behold, the man whose Name is the BRANCH, and he shall grow up out of
his place, and he shall build the Temple of the LORD.

Follows the application of this type in two particulars; the first whereof
is, of Joshua's being crowned with two crowns; which lest any should mistake,
it is cleared to him that all this type pointed at Christ's coming in the flesh,
the true King and Priest of his Church; who albeit in his humiliation he should
appear contemptible as a tender branch, yet should he grow up miraculously, and
build his own Church, whereof the Temple was a type, and in building whereof he
also had a chief hand. Doct. 1. Christ manifested in and to his Church, is an
excellent and sovereign encouragement, to invite men to come and join with her
in how low an estate soever she be; for, the substance of all this type, and
the encouragement held out unto these strangers, to draw them and their
brethren out of Babylon, is, Bebold, the man whose Name is the BRANCH. 2. It
neither takes away the glory of Christ, no^ the encouragement of his people in
him and from him, that he was incarnate, and became a man like us, and appeared
contemptible, during the state of his humili^tion; but rather contributes much
to their encouragement, that he came so near unto them, and was so like them in
all things, and to his glory, that from so small beginnings he grew to so great
an height; and makes his Church to flourish; therefore is he here described:
The man whose Name is the BRANCH, or, tender bud, out of the root of Jesse, who
shall grow up. 3. As Christ and his work are still upon the rising and growing
hand till his body be perfected in glory; so his own arm and power is able to
raise him up beyond all probability, and without all humane help; for, he shall
grow up out of his place, that is, out of Jesse's withered root, when the glory
of David's family was quite extinct, and out of his place Nazareth, which his
Name the BRANCH in the Original points at, Mat. 2.^3. 4. Christ's having his
hand at a work, and his engagement to perfect it, ought to be an encouragement
to all in their station to put hand to it, especially considering what presage
or forerunner that work may be of a more glorious work to be done by Christ;
therefore these Jews are invited to come and join in building the Temple,
since Christ was principal undertaker therein, and that by so doing they should
set up a clear type of his building his own Church; And he shall build the
Temple of the Lord.

Verse. 13. Even he shall build the Temple of the LORD, and he shall bear the
glory,, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a Priest upon
his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.

The promise of Christ's building his own Church, is again repeated for further
confirmation; and concerning him, for explaining the type, it is further
promised, that in him the glory of that people should shine again, and to him
only the glory of building his Church is due that there should be a conjunction
of the Kingly and Priestly office in his person; the exercise of both which
should sweetly concur to carry on his purposes concerning his people. Doct. 1.
There is great need of being much studied in the certainty of Christ's carrying
on of his own work, and that it depends on him only, whether means be or not;
for this end is this promise again repeated; Even he shall build the Temple of
the Lord. 2. All the glory and excellency of the Church is to be found in
Christ, and however she in her self and in her officers may seem very vile; yet
she is raised up to glory in him, and all outward pomp that is wanting, is
made up in him; this is signified by the two Crowns on Joshua's head, that
however, both the Priesthood and Princely dignity were now contemptible, yet he
should raise them to glory in his person: He shall bear the glory, though
Zerubbabel and Joshua were in a base condition, and had little or no splendour.
3. The glory of rearing up and building a Church to God in the world, is a
burden too heavy for any but Christ to bear, and would crush any mean
creature, however they be very ambitious of glory; this also is implied in that
he shall build the Temple, and he shall bear the glory. 4. Christ alone is
all-sufficient for all the affairs of his Church, being invested with all
offices that may contribute for her good, and appointed both King and Priest
for her; for, he shall sit and rule, and be a Priest upon his throne. 5. Christ
as he is invested with power and authority, so he is not idle, but actively
goes about all affairs, which his offices engage him to; for, he rules, and is
a Priest upon his throne. 6. Christ has a stable possession of all his offices
and dignities, from which no opposition will remove him to the prejudice of his
people, to leave them without an Head, a King or Priest; for, he shall sit and
rule, etc. his sitting points out his stable and settled possession. 7. Albeit
Christ be invested with many and diverse offices, yet considering that he is God
all-sufficient, none of them shall hinder another, nor shall he be overcharged
with many employments toward particular souls, his Church in general, or his
enemies, but shall carry them on altogether, and particularly his Kingly and
Priestly office, though very different, the one being for execution of justice,
the other for obtaining mercy and pardon, shall ^weetly concur to work out
peace and safety for his people, his Priestly office tending to purchase, and
his Kingly office to make his purchase forthcoming, and to maintain and defend
it to them; for, the counsel of peace shall be between them both, that is, his
two offices.

Verse. 14. And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah,
and to Hen the son of Zephaniah for a memorial, in the Temple of the LORD.

15. And they that are far off shall come and build in the Temple of the LORD,
and ye shall know that the LORD of hosts has sent me unto you. And this shall
come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of the LORD your God.

The second particular explained in this type is, of the making of the typical
crowns of their offerings who came from Babylon, and the crowning of Joshua
before them. After the crowns had been made use of on Joshua's head to
represent Christ, they were to be laid up as a monument in the Temple for these
men, not only to be a witness of their liberality, or a token to confirm
their faith of the promised Messiah, but as a pledge, that many both Jews in
Babylon, and strangers, should come from afar (as they did) and join in
building of the Temple, but especially to make up a Church to God, some shadows
whereof appeared afterward in strangers adorning the Temple with their gifts,
as now it was by their crowns, and in the help that they got from the Persian
Court, in sending up their brethren under Ezra. Doct. 1. The Lords
dispensations and manifestations toward his Church, ought to be of long and
enduring use unto her, and may contribute to many purposes if they be well
studied: therefore beside the present use of these crowns, they are to be set
up for a memorial in the Temple, to teach long after, and to be a pledge yet
further, that they that are afar off shall come. 2. Such as in times of great
discouragement, do appear for strengthening the hands of the Church, are
singularly taken notice of, and may expect singular favors; for these men
coming from Babylon with their offerings, in a time when the lingering of the
Jews there was the Churches grief, have this honor put upon them, that the
Crowns shall be to them for a memorial, as a testimony of their zeal and
affection, a pledge of the Messiahs coming, and of strangers joining to the
Lord. 3. The hope of enlargement of the Church, is matter of great
encouragement to the truly godly, and that God will bring these who are far
off, lying by, or opposite to the work, to join in it when he pleases, and
will accept of them and their service when they come: this is an encouragement
to the Church of the Jews; They that are far off shall come and build in the
Temple: and may be still an encouragement to them who are afar off, and have a
mind to come 4. Such as come to join with Gods people are not to be idle and
useless, but to study in their stations to contribute somewhat for edifying
and building up the body; for, they that come, must build in the Temple of the
Lord.

Unto this doctrine two things are subjoyned by way of Conclusion, 1. That
their own experience should prove that Christ the Mediator was sent to reveal
these prophecies, and that the Prophet had authority to publish them, which was
in part verified unto them, by their getting help to the work, from these they
little expected it of, and is now fully verified to the Church in after-ages,
as their successors. 2. That it was requifite on their part to be diligent, in
obedience to Gods commaods, if they would not be hinderers of the performance
of promises, so far as they could, and would not deprive themselves of benefit
by their accomplishment. Doct. 1. Whatever debates may arise in the minds of
Gods people, concerning the truth of promises, yet experience and the event
will put it out of all controversy, that God is true: for, Ye shall know that
the Lord of hosts has sent me, which may be understood of Christ sent to
reveal these things to the Prophet, or rather of the Prophet sent to publish
them to the Church in the Lords Name, as v. 9. 2. The Lords accomplishing and
performing what he has foretold in his Word, should lead his people back to a
new and serious consideration of the truth of it, that their confidence may
rest on it in new exigents, without hesitation; for this is the use of what God
does, that we may know God has sent his Word by his servants, and learn to
magnify it as true. 3. Albeit the performance of the Lords absolute promises
be not suspended upon men's doing of duty; yet neglect of duty may keep back the
performance of many particular conditional promises, may justly be charged with
impeding the performance of all promises to men's power, and does always hinder
the comfort and fruit of performed promises from coming to the guilty man; for,
says he, This shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey etc. Not that
the promise of Christ's coming, and Conversion of the Gentiles depended on the
Jews obedience, but that their neglect of duty would hinder men's present
favoring of the work of the Temple, whom their sins had made enemies of a long
time, and that they did what they could, if they finned, to obstruct all, and
should certainly have no comfort by these spiritual promises. 4. The people of
God are then accounted to make conscience of their duty when they submit to
what God injoynes in his Word, however it suit with their inclinations; when
they are careful to hear and seek out Gods mind in his Word, not shifting
light; when they are diligent and active in endeavoring obedience, as becomes
so great a Lord to be obeyed by his creatures, trembling lest they be found out
of the way, in a course of disobedience, or sleighting convictions, and
contemning the light of information; and when all this obedience is performed,
not as a cause of righteousness and justification, but as a fruit of faith,
closing with God, reconciled in Christ, and as a testimony of thankfulness;
for so is duty here described; If ye will diligently obey, (or hearken to) the
voice of the Lord your God, which includes their absolute subjection to the
Word, their enquiring and hearkening to its directions, and both these with
great diligence, and as a fruit of their being in Covenant with God.

CHAP. VII.
IN this Chapter, occasion of a case of conscience propounded by some from
Babylon, concerning their fasting in remembrance of their desolations, v. 1, 2,
3. The Lord sends out his Prophet, to condemn all these their fastings, and
their feastings also, v. 4, 5, 6. and their neglect of obedience, which if it
had been studied, might have prevented their exile, and such questions, v. 7.
And (to clear up their duty, and the right way of composing all differences
betwixt God and that Nation,) the Prophet at Gods command repeats the whole
procedure betwixt God and them; to wit, that God had given faithful warning to
them, and laid their duty before them, v. 8, 9, 10. that they had been
rebellious and disobedient, v. 11, 12. -- and that therefore God in his justice
had let forth his displeasure, neglected them in their trouble, and brought
that on them and their land, which their sins had deserved, v. -- 12, 13, 14.

Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass in the fourth year of King Darius, that the
Word of the LORD came unto Zechariah, in the fourth day of the ninth month,
even in Chis^eu.

2. When they had sent unto the house of God, Sherezer, and Regem-melech, and
their men to pray before the LORD.

3. And to speak unto the Priests, which were in the house of the LORD of
hosts, and to the Prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month,
separating my self as I have done these so many years?

Hitherto this Prophet has been for most part employed in receiving and
communicating to the Church several visions: Now there follows a doctrinal
Sermon, occasioned by a case of conscience propounded, whereof the rise was
thus: the people of the Jews during their captivity observed diverse yearly
Fasts, in remembrance of their many desolations, of which, chap. 8.19. one in
the renth month, in remembrance of the besieging of the city, which began in
that month, 2 Kings 25.1. one in the fourth, because the city was then taken,
2 Kings 25.3. Jer. 52.6. one in the seventh month, because of the scattering
of the remnant of the Jews, when Gedaliah was slain, 2 Kings 25.25. and one in
the fifth month in remembrance of the burning of the Temple and City in that
month, 2 Kings 25.8, 9. Now the City being again inhabited, and the work of
the Temple far advanced (being two years since they had gone to work again,
comparing v. 1. with Hag. 1.15.) two chief Ambassadors with their train are
sent (belike from these in Babylon,) to worship God, and to propound the case
to the Lords ordinary or extraordinary Ministers; whether it were needful to
continue that Fast or not? Doct. 1. However the Lord in his wisdom may, when he
pleases, forbear to employ extraordinary means and dispensations, even in the
time when such are in use, and leave his people to the use of ordinary means;
yet upon new emergents he will not fail to appear as formerly: for here, after
Zecharies first Sermon, containing the former visions, which was in the second
year of Darius, chap. 1.7. we find no more revelations, till the fourth year
of King Darius; yet when this new case comes to be solved, the Word of the Lord
came unto him. 2. To know the mind of God in our duty, is worthy of much
pains, and matters of Religion should be looked upon as of very particular
concernment to every one: therefore they think a solemn embassage little
enough to seek resolution of this question; They sent unto the house of God,
Sherezer and Regem-melech with their men. And though they were more then one of
them who came, and far more concerned in it, yet the question is propounded as
by every one in particular, Should I weep, etc? 3. As matters of our duty may
be oft-times very dark and unclear, for our humiliation, and up-stirring to
make use of means; so it is not sufficient that a person or people employ God
in their particular strait, unless in their ordinary course they be seekers of
God: and such as would have light from God, or his servants useful to them,
would depend much on God, and be much in prayer to him; therefore are they
sent, by reason of this dark case, to pray before the Lord, and to speak to the
Priests, etc. To testify, that they were seekers of God, and of the same
Religion with their brethren, and when they are to employ the Priests and
Prophets for light; they begin at prayer to God. 4. Ministers of the Word are
bound to be able to resolve the cases of Gods people, not only in general
doctrine, but in particular emergents and difficulties: for, the Priests and
the Prophets are to be spoken to in this business. 5. No means appointed of
God for our help in difficulties, is to be neglected or vilipended by these who
expect a blessing; for, they are to speak, both to Priests and Prophets: both
ordinary and extraordinary means (where they are) are to be used. 6. Solemn
fastings and humiliations, because of Gods displeasure, ought to have much
inward sense evidenced by separation from outward delights, and mourning; for
so the question imports they had done, weeped and separated themselves: though
that be not all required of an afflicted sinful people, nor yet to make a Fast
approved, yet it is a part of the duty. 7. Whatever general instructions may be
gathered from their propounding of this case, worthy of our imitation; yet the
question, as propounded by them, is many ways faulty, which serves also for
our warning; as 1. There is a great deal of formality in sending such an
embassage about a ceremony, when yet they neglected the substance of Religion;
Formality may make great show of little, and most noise about that which is to
least purpose. 2. Much unbelief appears here; for, in that they enquire about
omitting this Fast only, they insinuate that they doubted of removing their
other calamities, for which they fasted also, (as we will hear afterward,) and
so go no further then their sense; yea, in questioning about this same, they
insinuate their doubting that the Temple should be perfected. Unbelief will
receive or expect no more then it sees, and so breeds us much vexing exercise.
3. Much oftentation that they had done it so long, for so many years, which
now they look upon as somewhat when the work is going on; when the Lord
blesses any work that we have been using endeavors about, our hearts are then
very ready to think much of our doing. 4. Much unsafe walking having no ground
of their doubt, but their old custom, Shall I weep as I have done these so
many years? how small ground and warrant soever there was of this their
fasting, yet many have no better then custom and education, for their ground
in following the true Religion, which makes very unsure work. 5. That they now
think of laying aside this duty, (whatever warrant they had for it, of which
they do not doubt no^ enquire concerning it) bewrayes, partly how ready men's
hearts are to weary of duties, especially if they be any thing hard: and
partly, that when men have gotten some deliveries, they are ready to dream of
having no more to do with fastings and humiliations: which is folly to expect,
so long as we are within time.

Verse. 4. Then came the Word of the LORD of hosts unto me, saying,

5. Speak unto all the people of the land, and to the Priests, saying, When ye
fasted and mourned in the fifth and seventh month, even those seventy years;
did ye at all fast unto me, even to me?

The Lord sends out his Prophet to declare his mind concerning this question,
not only to these who propounded it, but unto all the people of the land, and
the Priests also. And before he give a full answer to this question to their
contentment, he premits in this chapter somewhat by way of reproof of their
way. And first, he reproves their way, not only in this Fast, but in all the
rest, (whereof he names one,) as being faulty in that it was not done to God.
Whereby we are to understand, partly that they were of their own appointment,
and not enjoined by God, it not being lawful forthem to appoint such days for
fasting, unless the Prophets amongst them had in Gods Name appointed and
allowed of these Fasts, of which we read not: For however all these calamities
did call them to fasting and weeping, and Gods imposing the necessity by his
dispensations, did warrant them to set apart some time for that purpose; and
however they might agree to do so from time to time, during the time it was
revealed by God, that their captivity should continue: yet it was not lawful
for them to fix such anniversasary days by dedication, or consecration, and
sanctification, as making it unlawful to take that day again for worldly
employments, if providence so called, or unlawful to do worldly business, if
called to them on that day, even as the work of their calling at that time,
whereas works of necessity are to be done on the Sabbath with a Sabbath-dayes
heart; or as if the service were more acceptably performed on that day then on
another: as they chose the very days of their greatest calamities for their
Fasts, as if the time should have influence on the work. All these are to
encroach upon the Prerogative of God, and far less is it now lawful to fix
such anniversary days, either for fasting or thanksgiving: seeing that (beside
the want of authority so to do) we have not such certainty what our future
condition shall be, as they had during the seventy years captivity, and know
not but providence may call us to rejoice, when our time is to weep; and to
weep when our time is to rejoice; and so it belongs to God only to fix times
for such duties, whose providence can make our condition suitable to the duty
of the time. But beside this defect, the Lords reproof does also strike at the
manner of their performing these Fasts, as being done in such a way (whatever
warrant there were for them) as could not be acceptable to him. Doct. 1. When
the Lord speaks his mind unto his people, and especially against their formal,
and inveterate customs, it is needful to take him up in his absolute dominion
and omnipotency, as being able to crush them who contemn his Word, and to make
them happy who follow his way, whatever it seem to promise in it self:
therefore is this message called the Word of the Lord of hosts. 2. The Word of
God, and the doctrine therein contained, concerning our duty, is of general
concernment unto all, however many times only few are sensible of their need of
it: for this cause it is, that the answer is not given only to these who
enquired, but to all the people of the Land, as being a doctrine of general use
to all, 3. Such as ought to be instructers of others, may oft-times turn as
far aside, and need instruction as much as any; for, the very Priests who were
enquired concerning this case, v. 3. are to be spoken to and taught, and so the
Church had been in a sad case, if the Lord (who is never wanting to his
Church,) had not provided this remedy of an extraordinary Prophet, as is marked
on v. 1. 4. The Lord accepts no service, how glorious-like soever, as done to
him, that is not commanded and enjoined by himself; for, says he of these
Fasts of their appointment; Did ye at all fast to me, even to me? even albeit
they both fasted and mourned. A will-worshipper fancies a god in his own
imagination, to accept his service, who is not the God who has revealed
himself in his Word; or at best is a mistaken God. 5. The excellency and worth
of our service, and our happiness thereby, does not consist in what measure of
performance we can attain unto, but in Gods accepting of it as service through
Christ, which we are chiefly to look unto, and have a care of, and not to be
discouraged with mean endeavors, if he respect them, nor puffed up with
fairest flourishes, while that is wanting, so much is implied in that doubled
question: Did ye it to me, even to me? 6. As humility is a sure symptom of one
who serves God in a right manner; so it may humble us in performances before
the Lord, to consider that our services cannot profit him, nor is he obliged to
us for them, otherwise then by free grace: so much also is imported in this
question; for in opposition to their ostentation in propounding their question,
the Lord lays them low by telling them it was not done to him, all the profit
(if there were any) would be their own. 7. Days of fasting and humiliation,
with never so much sense and feeling, can never be acceptable to God, so long
as only the sense of our own calamities sets us on work, and we rest there
without attaining to sense of sin, and minding to turn to God; this is another
fault reprehended in their fasting; Did ye at all fast unto me? had ye any
sense of the injuries done to me, or purpose to amend them? was it not because
of your own miseries ye fasted and mourned? 8. Men do for most part mistake or
remain ignorant of their own condition, and careless of what the Lords
servants say, through want of serious examination of their own conscience. A
tender, active and well-informed conscience would show much, as the Lords
servants do say; therefore the Lord appeals to their own consciences in this
question, as able to solve the doubt, and plead for him, if it were put to it;
Did ye fast unto me?

Verse. 6. And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink, did not ye eat for your
selves, and drink for your selves?

He proves their abuse of fasting from their sinful way of eating and drinking
after their fastes were over, and their feastings at other times, in which they
satisfied their own lusts, without respect to his glory. Hence learn, 1. It is
the duty of all, especially of the Lords people, not only in their immediate
worship, but in their common and ordinary affairs, and use of ordinary
refreshments, to do them as service to him, and eye his glory in him; for, it
was their fault, that they did eat for themselves, and drink for themselves. 2.
Such as in their ordinary conversation do not mind and eye God, may justly be
suspected as sleighters of his immediate worship: and such as do abuse
prosperity, do prove that adversity has not been sanctified; for they fasted
not to God, because they did eat for themselves, and drink for themselves, both
in their ordinary refreshments, and prosperous conditions.

Ver. 7. Should ye not hear the words which the LORD has cried by the former
Prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities
thereof round about her, when men inhabited the South of the Plain.

The second fault which the Lord finds with their way is, that they were taken
up with these observations, but neglected that which was substantial. He
declares that it were rather their duty to hearken to, and obey these commands
which God had enjoined them by his Prophets, when all was well with them in
Judah, when Jerusalem and all the cities thereof were yet entire, and the land
inhabited, which if they had been believed and obeyed, they had not been driven
into exile, nor needed such questions. He mentions the South and the Plain, (as
it is in the Original,) because Judahs portion, and these who joined with him,
lay partly Southward to Jerusalem, and partly in the Plain toward the
Philistines, Josh. 15.1, 2. Obad. v. 19. and so it comprehends the whole land;
The word also rendered South, does signify in the first place dry and desert
ground, and by consequence the South, because the heat of the Sun made these
places barren; and so it comes all to one purpose, to show, that not only
Jerusalem and all her cities, but all the country was peopled, when God warned
them of their duty and danger; and that not only fruitful Plains, but even the
hills, (which were usually dry in Judea, and may be understood here in
opposition to the Plain) and other desert places were frequented with people
dwelling therein. Doct. 1. External performances of external duties of Religion
are nothing in Gods sight, where there is not study of obedience to all his
revealed Will, not will howling under misery avail, while wickedness is kept
under their tongue; for, so says the Lord to these Fasters, Should ye not hear
the words which the Lord has cried? 2. The Lord in all ages is uniforme and
like himself, in approving and enjoining of duty, and in disliking of sin,
yesterday, and to day, the same for ever; for, the Lord here requires the same
he required of their fathers; Should ye not hear the words which the Lord has
cried by the former Prophets? 3. The longer the Lord by his Word has been
pressing duty upon his people, they ought to heed it the more, lest judgment
prove the sadder; for, he presses a doctrine that had been long since cried,
to be so much the rather heard. 4 The Lords chastiling a people for sin and
disobedience, does not warrant them to look on their deliverance from the
chastisement, as a full assurance of their being reconciled, as if their
strokes had made up all but being delivered they are to make conscience of
obedience, otherwise the controversy still stands, whatever deliverance they
get, and they may expect to smart again. Therefore, after all their captivity,
they must hear and obey. 5. It may help us to take heed to what God says in a
sad time, when we consider that if it had been hearkened unto, it might have
prevented much misery; for, so is this doctrine commended, it was cried when
Jerusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity, etc. that so the thoughts of their
former prosperity, which had ended in sad desolation, might let them see the
ill of former neglect, and stir them up to be more serious.

Verse. 8. And the Word of the LORD came unto Zechariah, saying,

9. Thus speaks the LORD of hosts, saying, Execute true judgment, and show
mercy and compassions every man to his brother.

10. And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the
poor, and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart.

To clear further this last challenge, and to justify the Lords way in all
that came on this people, and teach them how to compose the controversy: The
Prophet Zecharie gets a commission to clear the whole procedure betwixt God and
their fathers, for them to make use of, and not lean to their Fasts: and
first, by repeating the doctrine of the former Prophets to their fathers,
(which stands yet in force to oblige their children, and therefore as God
spoke it, so he yet speaks it,) he cleares that God had required of their
fathers, that they would prove their faith and sincerity in the true Religion,
by the exercise of justice and mercy toward all, especially the afflicted; and
that both in actions and inclinations, as is required in the second Table.
Doct. 1. When the Lord has let forth his displeasure against a people, it
concerns them who are reserved to be well informed in the proceeding and
causes of it, that they may lay it to heart, and know how to make their peace:
therefore does Zecharie get a new Commission, to repeat this unto them, which
had been said and spoken ta their fathers; The Word of the Lord came to
Zechariah, saying, Thus says the Lord of hosts, etc. or, thus he spoke to
them, and thus he speaks to you, the word will import both. 2. Obedience to
God in the duties of the second Table, is the true touchstone whereby to try
sincerity in Religion, and obedience in duties of the first Table; this was it
by which God tried his Church in all ages; Execute true judgment, etc. 3. Our
doing of things required of us in point of justice is no such proof of
sincerity, unless acts of tenderness and affection, enjoined by charity, be
made conscience of likewise; therefore they are conjoined here: Execute true
judgment, and show mercy and compassions every man to his brother. 4. For
right performance of works of justice and mercy, it is requisite that we put on
affection one to another, as coming of one root, whatever difference there be
in outward dispensations: and especially to men of the same Religion, as being
tied to them in more near relation: therefore are they designed toward whom we
are to walk in these duties, as brethren: Show mercy every man to his brother.
5. It is a special proof of an heart subjected to God, and his fear, and
filled with true love to our neighbor, when one is bound up from wronging of
the afflicted, or taking advantage of their low condition to run over them, and
when conscience makes a man tender and sensible of their affliction, and as
afraid to do them wrong, as if they were a strong party, able to repay
injuries; so is here required: Oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the
stranger, nor the poor. 6. Such as would approve themselves to God in their
obedience, ought not only to look to their actions, but to watch over their
very inclinations, which are the fountain of their actions, and are only seen
by God, for to all these commands is added; And let none of you imagine evil
against his brother in his heart.

Verse. 11. But they refused to bearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and
stopped their ears, that they should not bear.

12. Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone, lest they should hear the
Law, and the words which the LORD of hosts has sent in his Spirit by the
former Prophets: therefore came a great wrath from the LORD of hosts.

13. Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear,
so they cried, and I would not bear, says the LORD of hosts.

14. But I scattered them with a whirlewinde among all the Nations whom they
knew not: thus the Land was desolate after them, that no man passed through nor
returned: for they laid the pleasant Land desolate.

In the next place, the Prophet at Gods command, gives an account of what had
been their fathers part in reference to these duties: when God thus exhorted
them, they obstinately rebelled, refusing to hearken, despising to take on the
yoke of his obedience, yea, stopping their own care, and hardening their heart,
against the commands, or conviction for the contempt thereof, to the grieving
of the Spirit who spoke in the Prophets. Doct. 1. It is the duty of men to
hear when God speaks to them, and to take on what yoke he imposes thereby, how
grievous soever it be to flesh and blood; for, it was their great fault, that
they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, as an undantoned beast
from the yoke. 2. Men by nature are very high-bended against God, and against
being subject unto him, and have an antipathy against holiness, and the way
which the Word prescribes unto them to follow; so is imported in their refusing
to hearken, pulling away the shoulder: and in their guarding care and heart,
lest the Word should prevail with them, as Psalm. 58.4, 5. 3. As disobedient
sinners, living under the Ministry of the Word, cannot but be pursued with
some convictions troubling them, unless they be given over to a reprobate
sense: so it is a dreadful character when they shift convictions, and make it
all their study how to sin without disturbance; for so did these, They stopped
their ears, that they should not hear. 4. So long as the Word heard does any
way affect a sinner, there is some hope of him, how rebellious or shifting
soever he be; but the most desperate and lamentable temper is, when sinners
have so far put out the light of their own mind, blunted the edge of their
conscience, deaded their affections, and confirmed their hearts in sin, that
they can go on boldly, and without remorse, hear what they will: this is the
height of spiritual plagues; Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant, lest
they should hear, etc. 5. They are the most stubborn and obdured of all
sinners, who living under the Word, have learned to contemn it, who have
blinded themselves by opposing clear light, and who have sinfully hardened
their own hearts, and added to their natural obduration by despising commands,
sleighting and rejecting of convictions and challenges; Such, not only stop
their cares, but make their hearts as an Adamant stone, which is the hardest of
stones. 6. The sin of disobedience unto the Word, is an opposition not unto
men, but unto the Spirit of God who employes them, and speaks by them; who
though in his special operations of grace he works effectually and invincibly:
yet in his persuasions by the Word, working as a moral agent, is oft-times
resisted and opposed, for such is their sin here, they would not hear the Law,
which the Lord of hosts sent in his Spirit by the former Prophets: See, Acts
7.51. Isa. 63.10.

In the last place, the Prophet gives an account of Gods just procedure, in
punishing this their carriage: as they provoked the Lord exceedingly to anger,
so he let it break forth upon them in sad judgments, under which he (justly
recompencing their rebellion) would not bear them to deliver them; and did
suddenly and violently cast them out of their land, and scatter them among
strangers, as chafe before a whirlwinde, and laid their land desolate, which
was to be charged upon their sins, which had polluted it. Doct. 1. Contempt of,
and opposition unto the Word, does provoke God to hot, and more then ordinary
displeasure, which will break forth irresistibly when the iniquity is come to
the height, as being the displeasure of an Omnipotent Lord; for, Therefore came
a great wrath from the Lord of hosts. 2. As God can make the stoutest hearted
sinner, who cares least for him, stand sensibly in need of his help, when he
pleases; insomuch that a favorable look of God, and his interposing will be
his only refuge; so it is just with God to recompense his contempt of Gods
Word, with not regarding his cry in his strait; and when the Lord seems not to
beat prayer in trouble, he calls us thereby to lay to heart, and be humbled
for our not hearkening to his Word: for, Therefore it came to pass, that as I
cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and I would not hear, says the
Lord of hosts. 3. Gods pursuing a controversy against his Church, makes
enemies endeavors successeful and dreadful, and her opposition in vain; for, I
scattered them with a whirlewinde, which cannot be resisted. 4. It is a fore
judgment, and the fruit of contempt of the Word and Ordinances, when the
people of God are scattered from the fellowship one of another, and cast among
strangers, with whom they can have no communion, especially in Ordinances; I
scattered them among all the Nations whom they knew not. 5. It is no small
addition to a judgment, or aggravation of guilt, to consider the desolation
that sin brings upon a land for the sinners sake; especially upon a land
wherein God has dwelt which is the only beauty of a land, able to supply the
want of all other pleasure; for, Thus the land, even the pleasant land was
desolate. 6. Albeit all calamities for sin are to be ascribed unto God, as the
author and inflicter thereof in justice; yet guilty sinners procuring the
stroke, are to look on it as their deed, and themselves as justly charged with
all that a land, the Church, or others suffer: for, They laid the pleasant land
desolate. 7. The tenderness of God toward his people is such, as in greatest
severity he still does somewhat that speaks ground of hope of future mercy:
for, the lands being desolate after them, that no man passed through or
returned, was not only a judgment for sin, but a mercy, that during their
captivity no Nation about did sit down and possess their land, but it was left
void till they should return to it, and have none to contend with them for
possession.

CHAP. VIII.
IN this Chapter, 1. The Lord encourages the Jews against the grounds of their
distrust, by setting before them, his affection toward them, evidenced in their
late deliverance, v. 1, 2. assuring them of his being reconciled unto them, and
of his purpose to restore them to their wonted privileges, v. 3. that they
should increase and multiply in much peace, v. 4, 5. which his power was able
to effectuate, v. 6. and that he would gather his people from all quarters, and
bring them to their land, v. 7, 8* 2. The Lord exhorts them to make use of
these encouragements, to strengthen them to go on in building the Temple, and
to hearken to the Prophets, stirring them up thereunto, considering the great
change of Gods dealing, and blessings which they had foretold, and had really
come on them since they began to bulld, and were yet more to be letten forth
upon them, v. 9, 10, 11, 12. And that God was to make them as remarkable an
example of his blessing, as they had been of his curse, v. 13. and would as
certainly perform these promises, as he had formerly executed his threatenings,
v. 14, 15. 3. The Lord exhorts them to study to please him, in following true
piety and justice, v. 16, 17. promising to give them causes of feasting instead
of their Fasts, v. 18, 19. and that many Gentiles should be converted by the
Ministry of Jews, and that they should be much honouerd, because of their
enjoying the true Religion, v. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Verse 1. A Gain, the Word of the LORD of hosts came to me, saying,

2. Thus says the LORD of hosts, I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy:
and I was jealous for her with great fury.

In this Chapter, the Lord goes on in answering that question propounded
concerning their fasting, as appears, v. 19. and as the Lord found much to be
reproved in their way in the former Chapter: so also, considering that these
questions flowed in part from their discouragement, and doubtfulnesse how
matters would succeed; therefore he subjoyns unto the reproof several grounds
of encouragement unto them, whereof the first is taken from his
marriage-affection toward them, as they might read in what he had done of
late, his destroying of Babel, and delivering them, being an unquestionable
evidence of his love toward them, and of his indignation toward their enemies.
Doct. 1. When the Lord is most severely reproving his people for sin, it is not
his purpose to drive any sensible soul into discouragement, but he allows them
to strengthen themselves that challenges may work the better; therefore is this
doctrine subjoyned to the former, lest they should mistake his scope and
purpose in it. 2. The authority of God speaking in his Word, is to be much and
often thought upon by all such as desire the benefit of Scripture-comforts;
therefore albeit this be but a part of the former Sermon, yet it is found
necessary to repeat the Prophets Commission; The Word of the Lord of hosts
came unto me, in regard that many promises here made, could only be assured to
them from his being God; and for this end is he so often brought in speaking in
all the Chapter. 3. The fountain of the Churches encouragement, is in Gods free
love and marriage-affection, which as it does not break off in affliction, so
will it be very severe in avenging injuries done to such as are beloved of him;
for so is here held forth: I was jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I
was jealous for her with great fury. His jealousy proves he is married, his
fury testifies how much he resents their affliction, and both these concur to
comfort her. 4. The Lord has at all times prevented his Church and people,
with such manifestations of himself, as may be abundant proof of his affection
toward them; and ground of encouragement for the time to come: therefore he
leads this people back to what had been done, especially in their late
deliverance, to clear this truth, and encourage them for the future; I was
jealous, etc.

Verse 3. Thus says the LORD, I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in the
midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a city of truth, and the
mountain of the LORD of hosts, the holy mountain.

The second ground of encouragement is, that God was now reconciled to them
again, would dwell among them as of old, and restore them to the dignity and
privileges they formerly enjoyed. Doct. 1. The Lords being reconciled unto a
people, and their enjoying his favor, is a special ground of their
encouragement, especially that after just wrath he will deigne them with mercy,
and be at pains to make up the friendship; for, thus he encourages them; Thus
says the Lord, I am returned to Zion. 2 When the Lord is reconciled unto his
people, he will manifest his presence unto them, and be as near and careful to
help every grievance, as the heart is to supply every member; for, I will dwell
in the midst of Jerusalem, says he 3. Reconciliation with God, is the way to
recover a peoples lost honor and privileges, and to make them enjoy them and
the comfort of them; for, upon his returning look what made her eminent before,
and it shall be restored. She shall be called by her old names, which is not a
promise of a bare tittle only, but that she shall be eminent in her duty, and
the privileges and mercies following thereupon, shall be as visible as if they
were her name. 4. It is the great honor of a people, to enjoy, and sincerely
to adhere unto and profess the truth of God, as he has revealed it in his
Word: to adorn that Profession with fidelity and uprighteness in matters of
the second Table; and to be the people to whom God verifieth the truth of his
promises: so are we here taught, Jerusal^m shall be called a City of truth, in
place of her idolatry, and corrupting the worship of God, her double dealing in
her conversation, and her feeling the sad fruits of threatenings. 5. To have
relation unto God, and be owned as his, speaks much honor to a people, that
he, unto whom all things belong, should appropriate them unto himself, as a
peculiar lot, to be cared for in an especial way: this honor is imported in
that name, the mountain of the Lord of hoster. 6. As holiness beseems a
people who are the Lords; so it is their special honor and dignity to be such,
and a commendation to the truth they profess when they hold a good conscience
with it: for, this mountain shall be called the holy mountain.

Verse. 4. Thus says the LORD of hosts, There shall yet old men, and old women
dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff in his hand
for very age.

5. And the streets of the City shall be full of boys and girls playing in
the streets thereof.

The third ground of encouragement is held forth in a temporal promise of their
increasing in number, and enjoying of peace. Whereas they were now a few of
many, they should again be many, men and women living unto old and decrepitage,
and a numerous issue springing up to succeed them: and whereas the sword had
cut them off in their cities, Lam. 2.21. and 5.11, 12, 13, 14. and they might
sear the like, considering the times, yet he promises that old men should
walk, and young children play in the streets, as in times of great peace. Doct.
1. The increase of a people, (especially such as are members of the Church,)
and peaceable times with the common refreshments thereof, in living to old age,
want of terror, not being cut off by violent deaths, childrens recreations,
and growing up without fear of enemies, etc. are in their own kind, choice
mercies to be acknowledged where they are, and to be a cause of humiliation
where they are wanting: for, the promise of this is a ground of encouragement
here. See Ps. 78.62, 63, 64. and 144.11, -- 15. 2. A people reconciled to God,
and adhering to the true spiritual privileges of Gods presence, shall enjoy as
much outward prosperity as is for their good; for this promise is subjoyned to
the former, as a fruit of them.

Verse. 6. Thus says the LORD of hosts, If it be mavelous in the eyes of the
remnant of this people in these days, should it also be marvellons in mine
eyes, says the LORD of hosts?

In regard these promises might seem improbable and impossible to be performed,
considering that the Jews were at that time but a despicable remnant, and the
times full of dangers and fears; the Lord removes all difficulties, by leading
them to look on him to whom nothing is impossible. Doct. 1. As faith is very
necessary for honoring of God, and our own comfort in receiving his promises;
so it is no small difficulty to attain to it. Things promised may seem very
impossible, not only to carnal men, but sometimes even to the Lords people;
for, this confirmation of the former doctrine shows, that he expects faith to
close with what he says; and its being mavelous or hid (a thing which they
cannot see through as feasible or possible) shows their temper. 2. The
fountain of much unbelief is, men's looking to themselves and their present hard
condition, and receiving no more truth then reason and probability, thus
pre-occupied, will convince them of; for, this is mavelous, because they
looked on themselves, as the remnant of the people, and on these days as hard
days. 3. The way to attain to faith in hard and difficult times is, to eye God
who makes the promise, and give him the glory of being God, of faithfulness in
promising, and Omnipotency to perform and overcome impossibilities, whatever we
be: for he refutes their unbelief by leading them from themselves to eye him:
The Lord of hosts, in whose eyes it is not mavelous. 4 A people taking up
God rightly, will, themselves being Judges, condescend, that it is a wronging
of God to lay any thing in opposition to his power as able to over-balance it,
or to distrust his promises, whatever they see in the world or their own
condition to render them improbable: for, in this he appeals to themselves, If
it be mavelous in your eyes, should it also be mavelous in mine eyes? says
the Lord of hosts.

Verse. 7. Thus says the LORD of hosts, Behold, I will save my people from the
East-countrey, and from the West-countrey.

8. And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem, and
they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in Truth and in
Righteousness.

The fourth ground of encouragement, (which also clears the promise of their
increase) is, that he will gather them from all parts of the world, where they
were scattered, (comprehended under East and West, as Psalm. 113.3. Mal. 1.11.
Psalm. 50.1.) and bring them to Jerusalem and Judea, and renew the Covenant with
them: which was verified at several times after this Prophecy till Christ
came, beside what further accomplishment of it may be reserved till Isreal's
Conversion. Doct. 1. Such as are following their duty, though with much
hesitation and discouragement, because of the averseness of others leaving
them alone in it, may expect confirmation from God, and that in due time, (if
it be for their good) such as have weakened their hands shall join and
strengthen them; for, this promise of the gathering of Gods people is given to
encourage them, who by reason of their paucity, and the difficulties they met
with, were ready to think they were come too soon home. 2. Interest in God will
bring a people out of a low condition, and gather them after a sad scattering;
for, Behold, I will save my people from the East-countrey, and from the
West-countrey, and will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem. 3. Particular favors and deliverances are then comfortable to a
people, when the Lord either makes or renewes a Covenant with them, giving
himself unto them with these favors, assuring them that old kindness stands
yet firm, and undertaking for their part, to make them such as he will accept
of, and may continue these blessings with; therefore is the renewing of the
Covenant subjoyned, wherein God undertakes for both parties, And they shall be
my people, and I will be their God. 4. Where God enters into a Covenant with
his people, he intends really to perform all that he engages to do, without all
dissimulation, so that it may be trusted to as a portion; for, this Covenant is
in truth. 5. The sure foundation of the Churches comfort by a Covenant, is the
righteousness of Christ, whereby she is made able to stand before God: and the
right way to confirm her of her interest therein, is a study of righteous and
upright walking before him: both these are implled in that second property,
that the Covenant shall be in righteousness.

Verse. 9. Thus says the LORD of hastes, Lut your bands be strong, ye that
hear in these days these words by the mouth of the Prophers, which were in
the day that the foundation of the house of the LORD of hosts was laid, that
the Temple might be built.

These encouragements being published, the Lord exhorts them to make use of
them, in cheerful going about the work of building the Temple, to which also
are subjoyned further motives and encouragements. And first, that they are
exhorted to it by these Prophets, who these two years since they began again
to work, had encouraged them unto it, and not only assured them that it would
be perfected, but had foretold other blessings, which had come to pass, as is
after-cleared. Doct. 1. As encouragements from God are to be made use of, to
make us faithful to him, and in his work: and as the work of God would be
followed with much faith and alacrity, so men have ordinarily many tentations
to be discouraged, from within and without, which they are to wrestle against
and employ God under; so much is implied in this exhortation subjoyned to the
former doctrine; Thus says the Lord of hosts, Let your hands be strong. 2. It
ought to be a notable encouragement to go on in Gods work, when he sends out
his messengers constantly to stir up his people to it, and assure them of the
success thereof, and that Gods hand is about it to see it perfected; for, this
is an argument: Ye hear in these days these words by the mouth of the
Prophets, which were in the day that the foundation of the house of the Lord of
hosts was laid, that the Temple might, (or, should) be built: which last words
are a part of that doctrine they had delivered in the bygone years,
intimating that the Temple should be built: as a promise on Gods part, and
therefore ought to be built, as their duty, having such a promise.

Verse. 10. For before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire for
beast, neither was there any peace to him that went out, or came in, because of
the affliction: for I set all men every one against his neighbor.

11. But now I will not be unto the residue of this people as in the former
days, says the LORD of hosts.

12. For the seed shall be prosperous: the vine shall give her fruit, and the
ground shall give her increase, and the heavens shall give their dew, and I
will cause the remnant of this people to possess all these things.

This motive is yet further cleared from the blessings that had come upon them
since they began to build, according to the predictions of these Prophets when
they exhorted them to it: for, whereas before they began the work all went to
ruin, there being no success of endeavors of man or beast, no peace by
reason of hostile incursions and civil discords, v. 10. now their condition was
changed, according to what the Prophets had foretold, and was to be yet changed
to greater felicity, (for, v. 11. which is in the Hebrew, But now I not unto
the refidue, etc. does include both I am not for the present, not will be for
the future, as in the former days.) And particularly he promises to bless
the increase of the earth, and give unto them though a remnant, the peaceable
enjoyment thereof. And therefore they were to give credit to the same men,
promising by the same authority the success of the work. Doct. 1. Particular
proofs of the truth of Gods Word in the mouth of his servants, ought to be a
special motive to faith and obedience in other things, which they enjoyne and
promise in the Lords Name, and by his warrant; for, by this seen accomplishment
of the Word, they are invited to build and believe the success. 2. Such as
neglect the Lords work, may expect to have all their endeavors for their own
things blasted; for, before these days there was no hire for man, nor any hire
for beast, that is, no fruit of labors, as Hag. 1.6. nor any shift whereby a
man might earne his bread. 3. When a people do not study to advance the work
and honor of God, when they enjoy peace and prosperity, it is righteous with
him to vex them with hostile incursions, and deprive them of that which they
employ so ill; for, neither was there any peact to him the went out or came in,
because of the affliction, or, enemy. It seems their ill neighbors made
inrodes upon them. 4. A^ when men's minds are not united in God, and about his
work, they are punished with dissensions among themselves, especially when
outward troubles do imbitter them; so civil discord is a judgment wherein Gods
hand is especially to be seen, and trembled at; therefore is it subjoyned for,
(or and, as a plague added to the former,) I set all men, every one against his
neighbor, whereof somewhat appeared in their oppressing one another, and their
dissensions about that, Nehem. 5.1, 2. etc. 5. Albeit we are not to judge of
duty by events, yet it is a double guiltiness not to be active about it, when
the Lord rewards it by visible blessings, and promises to do so yet more, for,
Now I am not, (or, will not be) unto the residue of this people, as in the
former days, says the Lord: and therefore they are to be strong. 6. Even the
mercy of outward plenty, and securing the possession thereof to the Lords
people, will be much esteemed of by those who have tasted of want and trial of
that kind, and ought to be taken as an obligation put upon us to employ our
selves more for God and his service, however it be little esteemed of by these
who enjoy most of it: for such is the encouragement propounded, v. 12.

Verse. 13. And it shall come to pass, that as ye were a curse among the
heathen, O house of Judah, and house of Israel: so will I save you, and ye
shall be a blessing: fear not, but let your hand^ (...) strong.

A second motive to build the Temple, (containing a further explanation of the
promise of his change of dealing) is comprehended in this general, (wherein
Israel also has a share,) that the Lord would takeaway the signs of his
displeasure, and so visibly bless them with prosperity, that as formerly they
had been a byword to all cursers, who wished these they hated to be dealt with
as the Jews were, so they should become a pattern of blessing, that all men
should desire these they wished best unto, to be in the Jews case, which might
be a ground of encouragement to them. Doct. 1. The Lords severity against his
sinful Church is very remarkable, and may, for outward dispensations, speak
much of a curse, whatever be in his heart; for, Ye were a curse among the
heathen, or, an accursed people in all their accounts. 2. The remarkable
corrections of the Lords people will in due time end in as remarkable
blessings: and the condition of Gods reconciled people, countenanced by him, is
such, as none could wish a better to them they wished best unto; for, As ye
were a curse, so will I save (or, deliver) you, and ye shall be a blessing. 3.
When the Lord is manifesting kindness, by word or work, his people would take
heed that they do not undervalue it, by continuing in discouragement, but are
to honor him by being strengthened and comforted thereby: and in this
especially they are to guard against their own fearful and fainting hearts,
which will make discouragements where there are none: and which being
supported, will make that no outward dispensations shall discourage; therefore
are they again exhorted, Fear not, but let your hands be strong.

Verse. 14. For thus says the LORD of hosts, As I thought to punish you, when
your fathers provoked me to wrath, says the LORD of hosts, and I repented not:

15. So again have I thought in these days to do well to Jerusalem, and to the
house of Judah: fear ye not.

All these encouragements, and the truth of the promises holding them out, are
yet further confirmed, from the truth they had found in former threatenings;
for, as the Lord had executed threatenings for their sins, and that
nowithstanding all their thoughts, that he would revoke his sentence, and not
see their last end: so had he now as unchangeable a purpose to bless them, and
to perform these promises, and therefore they were, contrary to all their
doubes and fears, to believe, he being as unchangeable in the one, as in the
other, and withal a God that delights in mercy. Doct. 1. There may be (and many
times are) immutable thoughts of love in God, and of doing good to a people,
after that he has, without relenting, brought on sore judgments on them: for,
after all that sad lot, v. 14. I have thought to do well unto Jerusalem, says
the Lord. 2. It Is the ordinary weakness and distemper of the Lords people,
that they are most ready to doubt that which they are most called to believe,
and to believe that for which they have no ground; for, this people could not
believe any thing but promises, when God thought to junish them, and therefore
it is said, ^re ented not, as they dreamed he would. And now they could
apprehend nothing but discouragements when promises are allowed, and they need
to be exhorted; Fear ye not. 3. The disappointments our misbelieving hearts
have had, (whether in execution of promises or threatenings) ought to be an
argument for persuading us to believe what is revealed in new exigents;
therefore he lays before them how far judgments had come beyond their
expectation, that they might learn not to measure promises by their
apprehensions. 4. The Lords afflicted people need not want a confirmation of
Gods fidelity in promising, so long as the strokes on them prove his truth in
threatening, his striking according to his threatening when they deserved it,
is a pledge, and may be a ground of hope, that he will perform his Word of
promise when they need it: for, by such an argument does the Lord confirm these
fainters here. See, Jer. 32.42. 5. As the Lord does not strike his people
without pity, but upon just provocation given, which it concerns him in his
glory and respect to them not to pass over: So any good that comes to them,
arises freely from his own purpose of love, and that is to be rested on for it:
for in the one it is, I thought to punish you when your fathers provoked me to
wrath; in the other, So again in these days have I thought to do well, etc.

Verse. 16. These are the things that ye shall do: Speak ye every man the truth
to his neighbor, execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.

17. And let none of you imagine evil in your heart sagainst your neighbor,
and love no false oath, for all these are things that I hate, says the LORD.

The Lord makes further use of these enconragements to stir up this people to
straightness and piety in their private conversation: and so makes further way
for further encouragements, and for the positive answer to their question. He
tenderly recommends to them (as a Father to his children,) that they would in
their carriage toward their neighbor, both in private and in courts of justice
study truth without dissimulation, and to judge righteous judgment in such a
way as might tend to peace: and to put on affection which might guard their
heart from wishing or devising evil to their neighbor. And that in reference
to God they would not profane his Name by false oaths, all these things being
an abomination before him. Doct. 1. It is a sweet case, and speaks much of a
blessing, when men join a public spirit with personal holiness: therefore
after the exhortation to build the Temple, this concerning their private
conversation is pressed. 2. Such as desire to approve their sincerity before
God, ought in their speeches, professions, or promises to their neighbors, to
study truth without dissimulation or double dealing, and pretending to that
which they intend not: Speak ye every man the truth to his neighbor. 3. In
perfect administration of justice care should be had, by such as would approve
themselves to God, that judgment go not forth without exact knowledge of the
cause, or out of any by-respect to persons, violence of passion or affection,
or according to men's inclination, being blinded with gifts; but singly and
according to truth. Execute the judgment of truth in your gates, which was the
place appointed for courts of judgment, Ruth 4.1. 2 S^m. 15.2. 3. As truth, so
also peace both private and public is to be studied after in administration of
justice, and care is to be had that judgment be equitable, so as may breed
peace, that perverted justice breed not private quarrels, and that by
protracting of lawsuits, irritations and bitternesses grow not; Execute the
judgment of truth and peace. 4. The Law of God is spiritual, reaching to the
inward as well as the outward man, so that an ill course is not sufficiently
abandoned, unless we mortify our love and affection to it: for so is
expounded here; Let none of you imagine evil inyour hearts against his
neighbor, and love no false oath. 5. It is a fearful profanation of Gods
Name, when an oath is taken to affert a falsehood, or in promising of that which
men mind not to perform, or wilfully do not perform; this they are dissuaded
from, Love no false oath. 6. As Gods displeasure and hatred against sin ought
to be a sufficient aw-band to keep men from it; so the consideration thereof is
the most cleanly motive to dissuade from sin: therefore is this only argument
used here: For all these are things that I hate, says the Lord.

Verse. 18. And the Word of the LORD of hosts came unto me, saying.

19. Thus says the LORD of hosts, The fast of the fourth month, and the fast
of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be
to the honse of Judah joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts: therefore love
the truth and peace.

The Lord having thus reproved, encouraged and exhorted this people, upon
occasion of their question concerning their fasting: He gives yet a new
commission for further encouragement, and particularly to resolve their
question and assure them, that not only that fast, but all the rest of them,
(of which see, on chapter 7, 1, 2, 3.) should resolve in joy, causes of their
sorrow being taken away, and matter of feasting given, which therefore invites
them yet to study their duty. Doct. 1. The sorrowful days of Gods people will
not only have an end, but will resolve in such advantages, as will afford much
matter of joy; for, These fasts shall be unto the house of Judah joy, and
gladness, and cheerful feasts. 2. The Lords allowance unto his people, is far
beyond any thing they ordinarily propound unto themselves; for, their question
was but of one fast, his answer of four, they only question about leaving it
off, he promises to make it end in joy. 3. The more frequent encouragements we
get from God, the more are we to mind our duty, at least to grow in love to
it, and desire of obedience; for, it is subjoyned: Therefore love the truth and
peace. By which we may understand, either, 1. Love sincevity and peaceablenesse
in your dealing, as v. 16. Or, 2. Love the truth of Religion, (not doting on
your fasts) which only can bring you true peace. Or, 3. So love truth in all
debates, as love to peace be joined with it, yet so as truth be put in the
first place, as the only way for attaining sure peace.

Verse. 20. Thus says the LORD of hosts, It shall yet come to pass, that
there shall come people, and the inhabitants of many cities.

21. And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go
speedily to pray before the LORD, and to seek the LORD of hosts, I will go
also.

22. Yea, many people and strong Nations shall come to seek the LORD of hosts
in Jerusalem, and to pray before the LORD.

To confirm the truth of the preceding promise, and clear how their Fasts
should be turned into joy, the Lord subjoynes a new promise of the accession of
the Gentiles unto the Church, v. 20. who should mutually exhort and stir up one
another to seek God, v. 21. and should be so blessed therein, as that great and
potent Nations should come and worship God in his Church, whereof Jerusalem was
the type, v. 22. Doct. 1. It is the Churches safety to learn to understand
promises spiritually, and not expect satisfaction to their carnal humors; for,
thus does the Lord clear unto them, that the matter of their joy should be
spiritual, in the Gentiles joining with the Church. 2. Saddest times should not
hinder the Church from minding her charter for enlargement, and believing her
privileges to come; for, in her sad times she is called to think on this:
There shall come people, and the inhabitants of many Cities. 3. Mutual
up-stirring to holy duties is an especial mean^s to make a growing time and
thriving Church; for, The inhabitants of one City shall go to another, saying,
Let us go, etc. 4. The true errand of real Converts in Religion, is singly to
seek God for himself, and his favor and peace, and the special way of
testifying and obtaining their desire, and making grace to grow is to be much
in prayer: this is twice set down as their work, Let us go pray before the
Lord, and seek the Lord of hosts, v. 21. and again, v. 22. 5. True liveliness
in Religion, will admit of no laziness, luke-warmnesse, formal indifferency or
want of constancy in seeking God, but men's greatest activity will be accounted
but a slow pace, and all that as nothing, unless it be constant; for, Let us
go speedily or continually, is their call and invitation one to another. 6.
Mutual up-stirring is then most effectual, when every one casts a copy in his
own practice of what he would have others to do; for, so is it here, I will go
also, says every exhorter. 7. As great and potent people, (and not only the
weak and poor) have been and will be brought in to the Church; so the
excellencies in Religion being known, may cause men think meanly and nothing of
all excellencies beside, if they want it; for, Many people and strong Nations
shall come to seek the Lord. Kings may be glad to share in the poor and
needies allowance from God, Ps. 72.10, 11, 12, etc.

Ver. 23. Thus says the LORD of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass,
that ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the Nations, even shall
take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for
we have heard that God is with you.

The Lord cleares further the way of the Gentiles Conversion, and how it should
be matter of joy to the Jews, as being to be done by their Ministry, and as
contributing to set out the honor of that Nation, that they enjoyed the true
Religion; for, the knowledge of God, spreading forth from amongst the Jews,
and his interest in them being published, innumerable people, ( ten is put for
very many) of all languages shall cleave to them, as children or Parents,
desiring to be taught by them, and join with them, who are so much honored by
enjoying and knowing the true God. This was accomplished, when the Gentiles
flocked to the Apostles, and Christian Jews upon hearing the Law which came
out of Zion, and may yet further be verified when the salvation of all Israel
shall bring a resurrection from the dead to the Gentiles, Romans 11.15. Doct. 1.
The excellency of Christ published in the Gospel, and the grace of God
cooperating therewith, is effectually able to invite many, and yet none
needing fear a disappointment, or not to be satisfied; is able to make people
concur in seeking Christ, who in other things were Barbarians one to another,
and to make them come willingly, and to be so far from needing compulsion, that
they will bear themselves upon him; for, In these days t^n men of all
languages of the Nations, will take hold of the skirt of a Jew. 2. Such as are
indeed converted and following after Christ, are very sensible of their own
wants, and earnest pursuers of all appointed means; for, They take hold of the
skirt of a Jew, saying, We will go with you; as children that cannot go, and
know not whither to go without they grip their Parents, so they being sensible
of ignorance and inability, shall press upon the Jews for teaching, and join
in the Church where God is to be found. 3. It is the great honor of a people
to enjoy the true Religion, and to be instrumental in doing good to others, and
such will be honored of all who know God: for, this is the honor of a Jew,
that his skirt is taken hold of by the Gentiles, because that God is with him,
and thus do the Convert Gentiles honor them. 4. As the Jews had the honor of
the first offer of the Gospel, and of having a great hand in planting the first
Christian Churches, so should we long for the time, wherein they, who are
enemies for our sakes, may yet have God with them, and may cause a reviving
from the dead among the Gentiles; for, this prophecy reaching to that time,
invites us thus to pray, not only for their sakes, but even for the Gentiles
advantage.

CHAP. IX.
IN this Chapter the Lord does comfort the Church of the Jews, and encourage
them to go on in the work, by prophesying, 1. Of the calamities that were to
come on the enemies bordering about, such as Syria, v. 1. Hamath, v. 2. Zidon
and Tyrus (whose prudence, strength and riches shauld not preserve her, v. 2,
3. but should bring her down, v. 4.) and the Philistines, who should be
affrighted, destroyed and made desolate, v. 5. and strangers possess their
Cities, whereby their pride should be stained, v. 6. and their cruelty repayed,
v. 7. -- and in the midst of all this the Church should increase, -- v. 7. and
be protected, v. 8. 2. He prophesies for their encouragement, of the coming of
Christ and his properties, v. 9. and his getting unto himself a Kingdom, v. 10.
who is the deliverer of his Church and people, v. 11. who allows them to hope
for a rich recompense of their miseries, v. 12. and promises that he will
strengthen them against all their enemies, v. 13. that he will be their
General, and appear for them in fight, v. 14. will give them victory, and
satiate them with spoils, v. 15. (which victory shall set forth Gods glory,
and make them honorable, v. 16.) and that he shall give them cause to glorify
him for this, and for the fruitfulness of their land, v. 17.

Verse. 1. THe burden of the Word of the LORD in the land of Hadrach, and
Damascus shall be the rest thereof: when the eyes of man, as of all the tribes
of Israel, shall be toward the LORD.

Hitherto the Prophet has had Commission, especially to reveal visions and
doctrinal instructions to the Church: Now there follows to the end of the
book, particular prophecies and predictions concerning the time to come, for
their use and benefit. And concerning this first prediction of vengeance on
several enemies; under these who are named, (as being most noto^e and known) we
are to understand all the enemies of the Church. But there is a difficulty
about the time of accomplishing this prediction: for the words in the close of
this verse, when the eyes of man, (is it is in the Original) of all the tribes
of Israel shall be toward the Lord, seem to refer it to the time, when all
Israel and the fullness of the Gentiles shall be saved, that then much
vengeance shall be poured on enemies, and especially on these bordering on
Canaan, (who had infested that land, and hindered their quiet possession
thereof) that so Israel may possess it in the extent thereof, according to the
charter given them of God. On the other hand, it is clear from histories, that
all these cities here mentioned were destroyed under the Grecian Monarchy,
betwixt this Prophecy, and the coming of Christ, of which, v. 9. and these
words in this verse formerly mentioned, may also be thus read; For the Lords is
the eye of man, and of all the tribes of Israel, that is, the providence of
God, (which is his eye upon man, chap. 3.9. and 5.6.) is over all Nations as
well as his people, and therefore he will take notice of their faults and
punish them, as well as his Israel. In this difficulty it suffices us, 1. That
the sense of the particular predictions is clear, whatever time we referred
them to. 2. That the Lords scope in them is also clear, which is to encourage
the present Church, and strengthen her for her duty: for which end it is not
unusual for God in one prediction, to point at somewhat near to be
accomplished, and yet to intend that but as a pledge of somewhat further off,
and so both these may come in under one prediction, somewhat to be shortly seen
by the Jews, and that pointing at somewhat to be done long after. 3. That the
sense of both these translations of the close of the verse, concur in Gods
executing of vengeance on enemies: for he does punish them, because his
providence is not confined to his Church, but is exerced over all the world, in
observing the ways of all men (as well as of his people) and recompencing them
accordingly, and therefore he will not spare them more then his own people; and
the time of his doing of it, is, when his people, whom he avengeth, have their
eyes and hearts toward him. 4 That it is clear and certain there is a time
coming, wherein the eyes of the fullness of the Gentiles, and of all Israel
shall be toward the Lord, Romans 11. at which time the Lords accomplishment will
expound many dark promises, concerning Iraels restitution to their land, and
victory over their enemies: for unto this, many things in this and the
following chapters seem so clearly to point, that whatever was literally
performed to the Jews, was but a taste of the fullness of the prediction: and
whatever be done to Israel in the Spirit in a spiritual way, yet the prediction
in its full and literal sense seems to look another way.

Having premitted this as a necessary Introduction, not only to this part of
the chapter, but to the whole ensuing prophecy: I shall so go through
particulars, as chiefly to gather general instructions, without relation to
particular times, yet not omitting to point at the several passages, which
speaks most clearly to Isreal's conversion and restitution. And so, the first
place threatened with this burdensome message is, the Kingdom of Syria, called
the land of Hadrach, from the name of some of their idols, (as Judea is called
Immanuels land, Isa. 8.8. So also the Moabites are named by their idols, Jer.
48.46.) or from some part in Syria called by this name. And particularly
Damascus, (the chief City of Syria, Isa 7.8.) is threatened, that this
vengeance should dwell on it. Whence learn, 1. The Word of the Lord, how light
soever it seem, yet in the end will prove insupportable and crushing to these
against whom it speaks bitter things; for, a threatening is, The burden of the
Word of the Lord. 2 As the Lords providence is universal; so enemies shall not
escape his hands in due time; for, the Lord (who has an eye upon man, and all
Israel,) has a burdensome word, in the land of Hadracb. 3. As eminent places in
a land enjoy most of the mercies, and ordinarily have most accession and
greatest share in the sins of the land; so sad judgments ordinarily afflict
them most: therefore Damascus the chief City is specially threatened. 4. Gods
judgments upon wicked men, and especially enemies to his Church, do not come
with a light touch, but they lie sad, and are permanent upon them; for,
Damascus shall be the rest of this burdensome word. 5. It is a clear evidence
of approaching judgment on the wicked, when the Lords people turn unto him,
and make their peace with him through Christ, and are kept in humble dependence
on him, for expeding them out of their difficulties; for, so do the words hold
out as they are in the translation; This shall be when the eyes of man, and of
all the tribes of Israel shall be toward the Lord, and is agreeable to other
Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. 20.12, etc. Psalm. 56.9. and elsewhere: and we are to long
for the performance of this to Israel, that it may make way for bringing down
of enemies.

Verse. 2. And Hamath also shall border thereby: Tyrus and Zidon, though it be
very wise.

3. And Tyrus did build her self a strong hold, and heaped up silver as the
dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.

4. Behold, the Lord will cast her out, and he will smite her power in the sea
and she shall be devoured with fire.

In the next place Hamath, (a country lying to the North, betwixt Judea and
Syria, 1 K' ngs 8.65. 2 Kings 25.20, 21.) is threatened, that it shall border
by Syria, or be next in misery to it: then the judgment is to come along to
Tyrus and Zidon, yet nearer to the land of Israel, concerning whom (especially
the first,) it is declared, that neither her prudence nor strength, being built
on a fortified rock in the sea, nor her riches, which abounded as the vilest
commodity, should exempt her from Gods casting her down, overturning her strong
holds, and burning them with fire. Doct. 1. The Lord has the execution of
judgments wholly at his disposal, to send them against whom he will, and in
what measure he will; for, so are we taught here; he disposes of the burden
here and there, And Hamath also shall border thereby, Tyrus and Zidon, etc. 2.
It is a judgment on many people, when God is to plague them, that they are
puffed up and secure, because of carnal policy and confidences; for, Trrus is
very wise, strongly situate and rich, whereby they think they are secured. 3.
It discovers the vanity of all things under the Sun, as to making men happy,
that the more is enjoyed of them, they appear the more empty and vile; for,
silver as dust, and fine gold as the mire, imports not only abundance of them,
but that abundance makes men undervalue them. 4. Omnipotency is too strong a
party for any creature-opposition, and where grounds of carnal confidence are
greatest among enemies, the Lord will delight to show himself great in ruining
of them; for, notstithstanding Tyrus wisdom, strength and riches; Behold, the
Lord will cast her out, (or make an exile of her) and smite her power in the
sea, (whether fortifications or ships) and though she dwell in the midst of
waters, yet she shall be devoured with fire.

Verse. 5. Ashkelon shall see it, and fear, Gaza also shall see it, and be very
sorrowful, and Ekron for her expectation shall be ashamed, and the King shall
perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.

6. And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the
Philistines.

7. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from
between his teeth; but he that remains, even he shall be for our God, and he
shall be as a Governor in Judah, and in Ekron as a Jebusite.

The judgment comes further on against the Philistines the inveterate enemies
of the Jews: some of whose cities, (comprehending all,) are threatened with
terror at the sight of Tyrus fall, in respect they expected that its
impregnablenesse should stop the enemies proceeding: and are further threatened
with overturning their State and Government with the casting them out of their
country, and its being possessed with strangers, or a mixture of vile men, as
base, and having as little right to it, as bastards have to an inheritance.
Doct. 1. The terror of God is an ordinary forerunner of vengeance, and a sore
party to the stoutest; for, As^kelon shall see it and fear. 2. It is a
judgment on wicked men, that they get not the right use of calamities on
others; for, when they should repent and turn to God, they fear. 3. Whatever
it be beside God, that men in an ill time put confidence in, it will produce
nothing but fear, sorrow and confusion; for, so was Tyrus to the Philistines;
they see and fear, and be very sorrowful, and their expectation is ashamed.
4. Gods having a controversy against a people, how flourishing soever, is
sufficient to overturne their government, dispeople their Country, and put it
in the possession of foreigners; for, the burden some word makes that The King
(or government, which was managed in every city by a supreme Lord, 1 Saw. 5.11.
and elsewhere) shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited: and
a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod.

This judgment on the Philistines is amplified from two effects, that by this
calamity, the Lord should revenge and lay their pride, and should punish their
cruel and abominable oppression and preying on his people. Whence learn, 1.
Pride and insolency in prosperity, is a certain presage of ruin, and an evil
which God will be seen in bringing down, and stripping the sinners of all
wherein they gloried; for, by thus ruining them, I will cut off the pride of
the Philistimes, says the Lord. 2. As oppression is the fruit of pride, so it
is so beastly like and abominable a sin before the Lord, that he will
manifest himself eminently, before it be not punished, and hindered of its
course; therefore the Lord speaks of it as a beastly sin, which himself will
punish; I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abomination from
between his teeth. 3. It is a token of very great perverseness in a people; and
of very great displeasure from the Lord, when there is no end put to their
sinning but by their destruction; for, thus is it with the Philistines, it is
by their ruin that their pride is cut off, and their blood taken away.

Unto this threatened judgment on enemies round about, a twofold encouragement
to the Church is subjoyned: whereof the first (in the end of v. 7.) is, that
she should increase by the ruin of her enemies, the remainders of whom, should
be converted, and entered into Covenant with God, and be as careful of the
Churches affairs, and eminent in her, as if they were governors of Judah, and
particularly the Philistines and Ekronites should be converted and dwell in the
midst of Jerusalem as the Jebusites did of old, who had a Fort in it, till
David's days, 2 Samuel 5. or as Araunab the Jebusite. 2 Samuel 24.16. Doct. 1. The
Church of God is no loser by all the commotions of the world, he minds her
profit and rising, in the ruin of others: for, he will ruin many Nations, if
it were but to gather a few precious stones to advance her structure, But he
that remains shall be for our God. 2. As these who are reserved in
judgments, ought to be drawn to God especially* so preservation may give
ground of hope, that God intends much good to them who improve it well; for, He
that remains, even he (how low soever, or, how great an enemy soever he has
been) shall be for our God. 3. It is a great token of Gods favor toward
afflicted remnants, when they are driven to close with him in a Covenant of
grace, and when in faith thereof they consecrate themselves to him, to be for
him, and at his disposal; for, He shall be for our God. 4. These who really
turn unto God, and labor to be useful and comfortable to the Church in their
stations, may expect to be truly honorable in the eyes of God and of his
people, how many blots soever have been upon them before; for, He shall be as a
governor in Judah, both for tenderness in duty, and eminency for reputation.
5. Even the most inveterate enemies to the Church may be gained by grace, and
coming sincerely, will be welcome; for, such were the Philistines, of whom it
is promised, Ekron shall be as a Jebusite. 6. Testimonies of Gods prevailing
with, and receiving such as had been enemies and came to him, are not wanting
in the Church to encourage the Church to wait on him, and to encourage others
to come and make proof of his goodness; for, here there is an instance of
Jebusites, who not only dwelt long in Jerusalem, but were some of them eminent
in piety (as Araunah) to be a confirmation of this promise concerning the
Philistines: Ekron shall be as a Jebusite.

Verse. 8. And I will encamp about mine house because of the army, because of
him that passes by, and because of him that returns: and no oppressor shall
pass through them any more: for now have I seen with mine eyes.

The second ground of encouragement unto the Church, is Gods preservation of
her in the midst of calamities upon all round about her. Whereas they might be
in danger by incursions of enemies coming again and again upon them, and by
armies ranging up and down in the Countries about; the Lord promises to guard
his Church (signified by the Temple) that she should not be troubled with these
tumults and incursions, and particularly, that no oppressor should pass
through her: and that because he had taken a sufficient proof, and experience
had sufficiently showed the sinfulness and misery of his people, and their
inability to expede themselves, by themselves, out of their misery, and had
showed also what their enemies cruelty was. This being a promise peculiar to
the Jews, or Israel, however it was this far verified before Christ, that
when enemies came against these Cities before mentioned, or against themselves,
or were ranging to and again, through their land betwixt Syria and Egypt, they
did not so go through as formerly to burn the Temple, and carry them captives.
Yet the promise was not then fully accomplished; for, not only did oppressors
go through the land, and make it tributary; yea, and many times profane the
very Temple, but in process of time they were carried into captivity, and the
Temple made a desolation: whereas here it is said, They shall not pass through
them any more. And therefore it seems we must expect a more full
accomplishment of this to converted Israel, in Gods preserving his Church, and
their possession of their land in peace to them. Doct. 1. The Church may have
many and great causes of fear, when God is about to do great things for her;
for, she has armies, and passers by and returners, sometime coming to destroy
others* and sometime to infest her self, which are a trial to her. 2. Where
the Lord has his house and Church set up amongst a people, and they look on
that as their chief glory, he will protect it, and the State for the Churches
sake; for, I will encamp about my house, says the Lord; and that is a
safeguard to all the rest. 3. In God alone there is alsufficiency to oppose
unto all the Churches straites and fears: and where he undertaketh to protect,
no power of enemies will overcome, nor their assiduousnesse outweary him; for,
his encamping is sufficient to oppose unto an army, and unto him that passes
by and returns, whether by enemies continual recruiting of their forces
after they are again and again beaten, or by daily incursions, which would
weary any other army to watch over. 4. God is sufficiently able, when he
pleases and sees it for his peoples good, to turn all their storms into a
calm, and give them peaceable times without molestation from enemies, and
continue it so during his pleasure; for, he can make and perform sueh a
promise; No oppressor shall pass through them any more. Which may quiet their
hearts who find matters otherwise, seeing it is not so without his providence
who knows what is best for his people. 5. When the Lord in afflicting his
people, has given them a proof what their sinfulness and the misery that
follows upon it is, and how unable they are to make up any breach betwixt him
and them, or to be the better (without his help) of any hard usage; then it is
time for mercy to interpose, and make up the controversy, and to prove it
self as alsufficient as the creature is empty; for, so much is imported in
this reason expressed after the manner of men, For now have I seen with mine
eyes. He sees their case, when he gives them an experimental proof of it, as
Isa. 57.18.6. Every degree of trouble and enemies cruelty let out upon the
Church, as it is marked by God, and is a trial and discovery of what is in
their heart, when they have the Church under their power: so it contributes to
bring the Church nearer his heart, and to plead for deliverance; for, so much
also does this reason port, For now I have seen, etc. as Exodus 2.25. and 3.7.

Verse. 9. Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion: shout, O daughter of Jerusalem:
behold, thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation, lowly, and
riding upon an ass, and upon a colt the foale of an ass.

In the second part of the Chapter, the Church is encouraged, and invited to
rejoice (as the poor did in the Jubilee, when their lands were to be redeemed)
because of the coming of Christ in the flesh (as the Prophecy is expounded,
Mat. 21.5.) who is here described from his Kingly Office, and his properties of
justice, power to save, and lowliness which he openly avowes by riding without
state. Doct. 1. As Christ is the substance of all the Churches comforts, so
especially by his incarnation, and taking on our nature, is the fountain of
our encouragement in him, opened up; for, in this are they to rejoice: Rejoice,
shout: behold, thy King comes. 2. The encouragements that come through Christ
incarnate are not easily discerned, nor rested upon as they ought, even by
these who have special interest in them; therefore Z^on must be called once and
again to rejoice, shout, and beh^ld. 3. Christ is a King whatever he appear to
be in carnal men's eyes, and it is the Churches comfort that he is so, as being
he who will rule over her, when she would destroy her self, and under whose
protection she will be safe, though she seem to be a slave to others, Rejoice,
thy King comes. 4. It is sufficient ground of encouragement unto the Church,
that there is hope of Christ's coming unto her, albeit she be not in present
possession; shout, thy King comes, says he. 5. It also may encourage her,
that she has a peculiar interest in this King, and that he is at all the
pains to make her happy; he is Jerusalems and Zions King, and he comes unto
her, Thy King comes unto thee. 6. Christ is a King that will do no wrong unto
his subjects, but is to be acknowledged as just in all he does, nor will suffer
any to do them wrong, but he will avenge it, and he has imputed
righteousness, whereby to justify all his subjects who flee to him: this is
matter of Zions joy, he is just, which includes all these. 7. Christ also is a
King, whose prerogative it is to save, when and in what exigent he pleases;
who, wherever he comes by the light of his countenance, he brings salvation
with him, and has purchased salvation to his people, by his saving himself
out of all that he engaged in for them; for, he bath salvation. 8. It sets out
much of the glory of Christ's Kingdom, and contributes much for the
encouragement of his subjects, that he is a lowly and a meek King, who will
condescend to the low estate of his people, that he is easy to be entreated,
not easily provoked, not a sore quarreller, one to whom there is easy access,
and who will deal tenderly with his own; for, he is lowly or meek. 9. As
Christ's Kingdom is spiritual, and having no State like worldly Kings: So does
he prove his lowliness and make it visible to all, to take all scruple out of
the heart of the humble, that they may not be deterred from coming to him; this
is signified by his solemn entry into Jerusalem without any state, riding
upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass, which posture, whatever dignity
was in it of old, (as Judges 5.10. and 10.4. and 12.14. 2. Sam. 17.23. and
19.26.) yet in the days of this Prophecy, and the accomplishment thereof,
when great ones followed the customs of Kingdoms about them, it was a symboll
of a low condition, especially it being on an ass not as yet accustomed to
riding, Mark 11.2.

Verse. 10. And I will cut off the charet from Ephraim, and the horse from
Jerusalem: and the battle-bowe shall be cut off, and he shall speak peace unto
the heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea even to sea, and from the
river, even to the ends of the earth.

There is further prophesied concerning the Kingdom of this King, that God
would be so far from employing Isreal's armies to subdue the world unto the
Messiah and themselves, as they dreamed, that on the contrary, as he had cut
off all warlike power, from the Kingdom of Isr^el, so would he by the Romans,
cut of all visible power, of a Kingdom from Judah and Jerusalem, for their
rejecting of Christ, and so make them and Israel alike. And yet he should not
want a Kingdom, but by the Gospel of peace, would bring in the Gentiles, and
get an universal Kingdom in the world, spoken of with allusion to the whole
extent of Canaan, which was a type of the Church, and in their common speech
the borders thereof was put for the uttermost parts of the earth. But more
especially it seems to be a promise of Christ's recalling Israel in the latter
days to possess their land, according to the ancient bounds thereof, to make
up one Kingdom with the heathen formerly mentioned. Doct. 1. It is righteous
with God, where Christ is offered and rejected, to make them who will not be a
Church or house to him, not to be a Kingdom or people; for, I will out off the
horse from Jerusalem, and the battle-bowe shall be cut off, to wit, when Christ
comes, and is not received, but crucified by them. 2. A people spared when
others are destroyed, and yet continuing to add to their provocations, may
expect to partake of their lot who have gone before them, and that their former
exemption will not always endure; for, Ephraim and Jerusalem are here joined,
not that there was any face of that Kingdom of Israel when Christ came in the
flesh, but as Ephraim had been broken of old, so should the Jews be afterward;
I will cut off the charet from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem? 3.
Whomever God destroys for rejecting Christ, yet Christ will not want a
Kingdom in the world; and particularly, the Gentiles have a charter for being
a part of Christ's Kingdom; for, when the Jews are broken in their power, he
will speak peace unto the heathen. 4. As the spiritual weapons of Christ's
Kingdom, are the only effectual means for gaining people unto him, (whatever
Christian Magistrates ought to do for making way to the right exercise of these
weapons;) so are they sufficient of themselves to bear out and prevail, and
carry their point against all opposition. Christ can by preaching the Gospel,
and holding out thereby the peace purchased for sinners in his blood, prevail
over all Idolatry and power of men, and settle his Kingdom among them: yea and
get upon the thrones which, Satan possessed; for, he shall speak peace unto the
Heathen, and thereby prevail. 5. Christ his charter is to be an universal
King, the bounds of whose Kingdom, in reference to the world, or the land of
Canaan, is of Cods determining, and who will want none of his right, oppose him
who will; for, so is peremptorily declared here: His dominion shall be from
sea, even to sea, and from the river even to the ends of the earth.

Verse. 11. As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth
thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water.

After the description of this King; and the prediction concerning his
Kingdom; there is subjoyned a declaration and Prophecy concerning the
benefits of his Kingdom, redounding unto the Church of the Jews. Whereof the
first (directed to the daughter of Zion or Jerusalem which is to be repeated
from v. 9.) is, deliverance from their captivity and dispersion, where they
were half buried, without comfort, as in a dungeon, wanting so much as water
to refresh them; which deliverance comes by virtue of the Covenant, which had
been sealed by the blood of the sacrifices, typifying the blood of Christ,
which does confirm it indeed, and purchases all the benefits thereof. This the
Lord had already done for them in their deliverance from Babylon, as a pledge
of the future returning of their captivity, after Christ's coming, v. 9. and
after the calling of the Gentiles, v. 10 and he speaks of this, as a thing
past, because of its certainty. Doct. 1. The deeper any of the people of God be
in trouble, they lie nearer his heart and help: and he would have them look on
the comforts of the Kingdom of Christ, and the Covenant, as especially
intended for them; therefore does he apply the general comforts of Christ's
Kingdom to the distressed Jews: As for thee also. 2. As the afflictions of
the Lords people may be very bitter, and so ordered as they may be trials
indeed: so there will be special notice taken of them, when their rods become
so insupportable, that there is no subsisting under them; for, he eyes them,
when they are prisoners in a pit, wherein is no water, as sometime they may be.
3. God entering in a Covenant with his people, condescends to take in all their
outward necessities, and engages to have a care of them in these as well as in
things spiritual; and so all their mercies come by Covenant; for, it is by the
covenant, that the prisoners are sent forth. 4. The mercies of the Church are
not only rich and refreshfull in themselves, and in their Original, that they
come through a Covenant of love, but in their purchase that they are bought,
and the Covenant concerning them made sure by the blood of the Son of God; By
the blood of thy covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners. 5. The Lord minds
his Covenant, and through, and for Christ makes the promises of it forth coming
for his peoples good, when they have broken it on their part; for, though for
their perfidiousnesse they were scattered, yet the Covenant stands to bring
them back; Thy Covenant.

Verse. 12. Turn ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope, even to day do I
declare that I will render double unto thee:

A second benefit of his Kingdom redounding unto them, and the use of the
former, is contained in an exhortation to all those who either then were, or
after their rejection of Christ should be dispersed as prisoners, that as they
should have hope of restitution, so they would make ready to return to their
land, promising unto them, that they shall be richly made up for all their
losses. Doct. 1. No strait of the Lords people can be so great, but there is
matter and ground of hope in it, which should be cherished, to discover
daylight unto us in a dark night; for, they are here prisoners of hope. 2.
Hope in straites is to be improven, for strengthening to duty, and will hearten
men to the use of means whereby the strait may be removed: whereas
heartlesnesse lays men idle; for, prisoners of hope are to turn them to their
strong hold. 3. The Church of God, how weak soever in her self, yet by reason
of Gods protection is invincible and a safe refuge for tossed people; for, it
is a strong hold, turn ye to the strong hold. 4. Hope in God setting about
duty, will never be ashamed, but has assurance of comfortable success; for,
prisoners of hope, are in their duty seconded by a promise. 5. As the Lord may
be intending comfortable things, when in the mean time his people are in great
straites; so hard times will not silence him from promising mercy, and should
not hinder our faith to believe it; for, even to day do I declare. 6.
Affliction of the Lords people, are in due time richly and doubly made up unto
them, by their seeing double the misery, that ever they suffered, afflicted on
their enemies; by rich advantages and benefits from their own exercises, by
doubling their felicity in respect of what they had, when it is for their good;
and especially in Christ every blessing is double, in it self, and in the
purchase; in what it is, and in its being a pledge of eternal life: for, I will
render double to thee. 7. In making up the afflictions of the Church, the Lord
has an especial eye to every one in particular, that they have no cause to
account themselves or their afflictions slighted; for, whereas before it was
in the general prisoners, now the promise is particular to every one, I will
render double to thee.

Verse. 13. When I have bent Judah for me, filled the bow with Ephraim, and
raised up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and made thee as
the sword of a mighty man.

A third benefit promised unto them, (whereby also the former shall be
accomplished) is victory over all their enemies that shall invade them, which
was in part accomplished in the conflicts of the Jews in the days of the
Maccabees, with their enemies who were a part of the broken Empire of Javau, or
the Grecians; but considering that Ephraim is mentioned as well as Judah it
seems to reach further, to victories to be attained both by Judah, and Ephraim,
or the ten tribes, against their enemies, who it may be shall be inhabitants of
Grecia, or the Turk. This promise is branched out, for more distinct
confirmation, in several branches. As first, God employing them, as his bow,
arrows and sword, and stirring them up against their enemies, shall make them
strong. Doct. 1. The reason of courage and success, or the want of them, is
not in the creature, but comes from God, who imployeth and lays by, raises
up and casts down; and according as he changes, the creature proves strong or
weak; for, the fountain of the Churches victory, is Gods making Zion his
bended bow, Ephraim his arrows to shoot, and his raising up Zions sons
against Greece. 2. The Church of God is too sore a party for any opposite; in
respect of that though she be laid by, she will be employed again, and be
enabled to fall to afresh, after she has been overcome, and when God imployes
her she is invincible; for, though Ephraim and Zion were laid by, yet again God
will bend Judah for him, etc. and in his hand they shall be as the sword of a
mighty man, or giant.

Verse. 14. And the LORD shall be seen over them, and his arrow shall go forth
as the lightning: and the Lord GOD shall blow the trumpet, and shall go with
whirlewindes of the South.

A second branch of the promise is, God shall be General in their enterprises,
shall protect them as of old he did by the cloud, Exodus 14.19. shall animate
them as by a trumpet blown; and fight from Heaven with thunder and lightning,
and scatter and overturne all as whirlewindes do in the deserts to the South of
Judah: or, as when he overthrew Egypt at the Red Sea, Psa. 77.16, 17, 18. Exodus
15.10. Doct. 1. The Churches defense and victory is of God, who is chief in
her enterprises against her enemies, and delights to be seen on her behalf,
encouraging her and making her victorious; for, The Lord shall be seen over
them, etc. 2. The Church and her wel-being is so precious in Gods sight, that
he will do strange things ere she be not delivered, and he brings her to
extremities, that her help may be seen to be from Heaven; for, His arrow shall
go forth as lightning: and he shall go forth with whirlewindes of the South.

Verse. 15 The LORD of hosts shall defend them, and they shall devour, and
subdue with sling-stones, and they shall drink and make a noise, as through
wine, and they shall be filled like bowls, and as the corners of the Altar.

A third branch of the promise is, God, going forth for them, shall not only
defend them, but give them victory, and make them devour and subdue their
enemies who are as base as stones cast out of a sling, (or, shall overcome
them, though they had but sling-stones to fight with, as David had when he came
against Goliath) and shall make it a complete victory, and full execution, so
that their swords shall be satiate with blood and slaughter, as the bowls or
basins of the Temple, and corners of the Altar, were with the blood of
sacrifices; and themselves satisfied abundantly with the victory, and spoils,
to make them keep feasts and be merry; if not also to offer praise to God,
which is spoken of in terms taken from the ceremonial law, wherein they
filled the bowls with the blood of sacrifices. Of these bowls, or basins of
the Altar, See 1 King, 7.50. Ze^h. 14.20. Numb. 4.13, 14. Basins were made use
of by Moses to keep the blood in, till it were sprinkled, Exodus 24.5, 6, 8. and
it seems they carried the blood in basins to the Altar, to sprinkle it upon
the horns thereof, and pour out the rest at the bottom of it; as Levit.
4.30. and elsewhere. Doct. 1. The Lord can put his people in a safe condition
in the midst of greatest dangers; The Lord of hosts shall defend them. 2. When
enemies bre^k loose upon the Church, it portends that that controversy shall
end in their ruin; for, the defended Church shall devour and subdue. 3. As all
wicked men are abominable and base in Gods sight, so especially these who would
rise upon the Churches ruins shall be contemptible, and brought down with
ignominy; thus both the readings come to one purpose, the Church shall subdue
the sling-stones, or, subdue with slingstones, their easy overthrowing them,
as with sling-stones, shall declare that they are base, as sling-stones cast
out upon the ground, in Gods sight. 4. When the Lord pleads the cause of his
people, he will not only give such proof of himself as may curb enemies, but
such as may fully satisfy his people, and comfort and refresh their spirits,
and make them praise him: This is signified by this satiety of blood and spoil
promised to make them rejoice, as men refreshed with wine and feasts; They
shall drink and make a noise as through wine, and they shall be filled like
bowls, and as the corners of the Altar.

Verse 16. And the LORD their God shall save them in that day, as the flock of
his people, for they shall be as the stones of a crown lifted up, as an Ensign
upon his land.

The victory is further amplified from Gods glory, and tender mercy, shining in
his mavelous helping of their infirmity, as if a shepherd pulled a sheep out
of the wolfes jaws; and from the effects of the victory, that they should be
exalted in their own land, as the precious stones of a crown, when their
enemies should lie on the ground as stones cast out of a sling, and they should
be set up as a banner or monument of Gods victory. Doct. 1. Every new look of
Gods mercies toward his people, will discover more and more in them to refresh
their hearts; for, here at every new repetition there is more to say. 2. That
which is chiefly remarkable and refreshful in the Churches deliverance, is the
seeing of the glorious power of God, his fidelity and tender mercy toward them
shining in it: as here, The Lord their God shall save them in that day as the
flock of his people: his doing of it as being their Consederate God, and tender
shepherd, looking on all the rest of the world, as goats, and swine, and
boares, commends it to them. 3. These in whose deliverance God will be most
seen, are in themselves most encompassed with infirmities, and convinced of
inability, that Gods glory may be the more visible; for, they are as a flock
exposed to wolves, in that day that he saves them. 4. However the Lords people
may sometimes be in a contemptible-like condition, yet in due time their
preciousnesse in Gods eyes shall be visible, and they shall be such monuments
of his power and love, as may invite others to join with them; for, They shall
be as the stones of a Crown lifted up, as an Ensign upon his land.

Verse. 17. For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! corn
shall make the young men cheerful, and new wine the maids.

A fourth benefit promised unto Israel through Christ, is, the making of their
land fruitful in such measure of corn and wine, as should make them full of
vigor and mirth, and that not only the aged who most need it, but even the
younger sort for their further pleasure and refreshment; the confideration of
all which benefits tends to the commendation of Gods goodness and excellency,
which as it is the fountain of them all, so it is here admired at. Doct. 1. As
one blessing from God, will still need and call for another, so one blessing
from him follows upon another, he will provide for these whom he preserves,
and will answer all their necessities, and give them occasion to read his
love, even in the fruits of their ground, and daily bread; for, after victory
corn and new wine is promised to maintain the Conquerours. 2. As it pleases
the Lord sometime to deal liberally with his Church in outward favors; so at
all times when he is kind, it becomes his people to be encouraged and study
cheerfulness, whereby to commend his dealing; for, Corn shall make the young
men cheerful, and new wine the maids. 3. As Gods free love and goodness is the
fountain of all his peoples mercy; so he will in due time (whatever hard
thoughts his people have of him,) get a commendation from them as good and
doing good: For how great is his goodness! 4. Gods goodness seen in his
present dealing, ought also to commend the beauty of all his by past
administrations, as admirably carried on to such a close; and should make us
rebuke our selves for judging otherwise at any time, and ought to commend his
own beauty and comeliness to our hearts, that we may embrace himself as a
portion, without resting on any particular benefit: For, how great is his
beauty! is subjoyned to the former. 5. The Lords goodness and excellency,
infinitely surpasses the reach of creatures capacity, and may be adored and
admired, but cannot be comprehended or fathomed; and our commending and
declaring of it is best performed, when we set it most above the reach of our
ability; so much does this way of admiration import: How great is his
goodness, and how great is his beauty!

CHAP. X.
IN this Chapter we have a continuation of the former Sermon, wherein, 1. He
directs Israel to employ God for the supply of their necessities, v. 1. and not
idols who do but deceive, as their fathers had found in Gods just displeasure
at their sins, v. 2, 3. whereas God has given proof of his love and ability to
save, to encourage them to seek him, v. -- 3. 2. He prosecutes the former
prophecy, concerning Isreal's restitution and victories, promising to fit them
with all necessaries for their own defense, and for attaining victory, v. 4. to
strengthen them to subdue their enemies, v. 5. to recollect scattered Israel,
and join them with Judah, and restore them fully, v. 6. to strengthen these of
Israel particularly, and fill them and their posterity with consolations, v. 7.
and he confirms more especially that promise of restoring Israel, showing
that he will do it easily with an hiss, and make them increase as formerly, v.
8. that he will preserve them in their scattering, as seed in the ground, till
the time of their Conversion and restitution, v. 9. And that he will remove
difficulties in their way, arising from the power of enemies, or other
impediments, v. 10, 11. unto all which is subjoyned a prediction of their being
encouraged by all these dispensations, to be an holy people, v. 12.

Verse 1. ASk ye of the LORD rain in the time of the latter rain, so the LORD
shall make bright clouds, and give them showers of rain, to every one grass
in the field.

This part of the Chapter depends upon the close of the former, wherein, having
promised plenty, direction is here given how to obtain it, to wit, by employing
God to send rain, to bring the fruits to maturity, with a promise that God
should send bright clouds, (or lightnings a forerunner of rain) which will
pour out themselves in showers, to cause plenty for them and their beasts.
Doct. 1. When the Lord purposes much mercy to his people, yet he will be
employed, and put to it by their prayers, to do it for them, that they may see
the more of his love in it, and acknowledge him for it; for, after the promise
of plenty, chapter 9.17. Ask ye of the Lord rain, etc. says he. 2.
Notwithstanding the established course of nature, yet God reserves the
disposing of all Providence in his own hand: and will evidence this especially
in his way to his own Church; for, albeit God has settled a course of former
and latter rain, yet they are to ask it of God, and Canaan was a land which
especially depended on the dew and rain of heaven, Deuteronomy. 11.11, 12. 3. Needy
man calls for many things to supply his necessities, and many things concur to
serve him, which only God is powerful to supply; however he be much neglected:
for, frail man could be ruined by the very clouds their denying their
influence, and they at Gods direction, (who only can create and direct them)
weary themselves to water the earth for man's good; Ask ye of the Lord rain, so
the Lord will m^ke bright clouds, etc. 4 Such as are necessitated to employ God
for every thing, shall find their labor not to be in vain, having not only
Gods call to employ him, but his promise to be answered in their strait, in so
far as is good: Ask ye of the Lord rain in the time of the latter rain, so
the Lord shall give showers of rain. 5. The Lord has a respect to every one
that seeks him, and to every one of the meanest necessities of every one that
seek him; for, to an asking people he will give to every one the grass of the
field, to supply their very beasts necessities, much more their own, under that
general including all the fruits of the field, fit for man and beast.

Verse. 2. For the idols have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie,
and have told false dreams, they comfort in vain: therefore they went their way
as a flock, they were troubled, because there was no shepherd.

Unto this exhortation to employ God, is subjoyned a disswasion from using
sinful courses to supply their necessities, and particularly, that they forsake
not the true God, and follow Idols, Astrologers, and vain dreamers, reasons
whereof are taken, partly from the emptiness of these means in all ages,
idols revealing nothing to be trusted in, diviners being themselves deluded,
could tell no better then they saw, their dreams being false for matter,
contrary to the Word, and proving false in the end, and so they proved false
comforters: partly from the experience of their fathers, who following these
courses, were sent into captivity as a flock without a shepherd, wanting Gods
care, and being misled by their Rulers. Doct. 1. When the Lord seeks his
people to renounce all other confidences, and only employ and depend on him, he
is seeking their real good and happiness in it, and to lead them from their
own ruin; for, so he declares here, Ask ye of the Lord, and he will give
showers; but employ idols, and the idols have spoken vanity, etc. and this is
his reason why he exhorts them to seek him only, Ask ye of the Lord rain, for
the idols have spoken vanity. 2. Whoever renounce trust in the Lord, and the
way of his service, and embrace false religions or ways, in hope of success
and prosperity, will meet with miserable disappointment: and fair promises of
comfort that way, will in performance prove emptiness and falsehood; for, so it
is here, Vanity, lies, falsehood, and comforting in vain, is the best that can
be expected of idols and diviners. 3. Experience of the fruit of sinful ways,
ought to make fools wise, and it is a double sin to fall over again in the
sin, for which we have felt affliction our selves, or seen others smart:
therefore does he warn them from their fathers experience, who essayed these
sinful ways. 4. Renouncing of God, and cleaving unto idols, though it may seem
to be a cause of prosperity, (as Jer. 44.17.) yet it will draw on captivity,
desolation, and sore troubles; for, therefore they went away as a flock,
scattered here and there, as a flock before the Wolf. 5. Whatever people may
think in their prosperity, yet their adversity will discover how sad it is to
cast themselves out of Gods protection, and to have followed such idols as
fail them in their strait; and how sad to have wanted faithful Rulers, to do
their duty for keeping them right: both these may be included in this, They
were troubled because there was no shepherd. They found the fruit of wicked
Rulers Government, when they came into captivity, and what a plague it was to
be left to their idols, and without Gods care, as a flock wanting a

Verse;. 3. Mine anger was kindled against the shepherds, and I punished the
goats: for the LORD of hosts has visited his flock the house of Judah, and
has made them as his goodly horse in the battle.

In the first part of this verse, the Lord cleares some more or his mind in
that stroke on their fathers, for their childrens use, to wit, that in their
captivity, his anger had been against the wicked goats among them, and
especially their wicked Rulers both in Church and State, who had been goats for
insolency, Ezech. 34.17. rather then shepherds, and not against any that
sought him amongst them: and therefore they would take heed, lest he still
punish such, and so be stirred up to depend on him. Whence learn. 1. The right
understanding of Gods sad dispensations against his people, is a lesson of his
own teaching: therefore himself expounds it here. 2. The outward stroke is not
all to be looked to, for right use-making of afflictions, but especially what
is the controversy, and whom God is angry at: for, so is here cleared, My
anger was kindled wainst the shepherds, and I punished the goats. 3. When God
punishes his Church and people, however strokes and dispensations may be
distributed, yet his special quarrel is against the wicked and ungodly, and
these who have had greatest hand in the provocation, and particularly wicked
Rulers, are the chief but of his displeasure; for, Mine anger was kindled
against the shepherds, and I punished the goats.

In the latter part of the verse, the Lord confirms that his quarrel was
especially against the wicked, and their perverse Rulers; for, however he had
sent his people into captivity, to cut off such a corrupt crew, yet he had not
cast them off, but had visited, (and would yet visit) them in their
afflictions, as a shepherd does his flock, and would employ and govern them, in
defending themselves against their enemies, as a Rider does his horse. And so
gives another reason, encouraging them to employ God only, considering what he
had done and would do for them. Whence learn, 1. The Lord will in due time give
proof, that whatever deluges of trouble he let loose upon the Church, because
of the iniquities that are therein, yet that he has not cast off his relation
and affection to her, but will, when his work, and her trial are perfected, own
her in her lowest estate, and deliver her; this is given as a confirmation of
what he had said; For the Lord of hosts has visited his flock the house of
Judah. 2. Gods relation to his people, and his employing of them, is sufficient
to make nothing to be somewhat: for, He makes them as his goodly horse in the
battle. 3. God has, and does from day to day, let forth such proofs of
himself unto his people, as may sufficiently convince them of the advantages of
seeking to him only; this is a reason for employing God, and not idols; For the
Lord of hosts has visited, etc.

Verse. 4. Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him
the battel-bowe, out of him every oppressor together.

To clear this of Gods change of dealing, the Lord prosecutes the former
prophecy, concerning his mercies toward Judah and Israel, holding forth many
promises and confirmations thereof concerning their victories, conversion and
restitution, of which whatever performance the Jews had before Christ, or
Israel after the Spirit gets under Christ in a spiritual way, yet they relate
further to the Conversion of all Israel.

The first promise is, that albeit they should be exposed to injuries, yet God
should furnish them with all necessaries for their own establishment, and
prevailing over their enemies: they should be furnished with Governors as
corner-stones, to keep the building firm and in frame, and complete officers,
as a nail fastening timber, or to hold all vessels, Is. 22.23. and with
furniture for war, and ability to prevail and make their enemies tributary.
Doct. 1. Government and order among the people of God is so necessary, as a
cornerstone in a building, and a nail in a timber-frame; that the granting
thereof by God is a great mercy, and a pledge of his turning in favor to them;
for, Out of him came forth the corner and the nail, is a proof of his love.
2. When God sees it good for his people, he can easily enable them to be
Conquerours, and bring them in subjection who had been their oppressors; for,
Out of him came the battel-howe and every oppressor, (or, exactour of tribute,
as the word signifies) together.

Verse. 5. And they shall be as mighty men which tread down their enemies in the
mire of the streets in the battle, and they shall fight because the LORD is
with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.

The second promise explains further their power to prevail over their
enemies; that they should be strong as giants, to tread down their enemies, and
even to shame and put to flight horsemen, though not by their own strength.
Doct. 1. There is no power nor might can prevail against the Church supported
by God, but when disadvantages are greatest, victory shall be most remarkable:
for, They shall be as mighty men to tread down their enemies as mire, and
confound riders on horses. 2. The strength whereby the Church is enabled to
bear out and wrestle with difficulties, is much and frequently to be observed
and remarked; therefore is it again held out in the promise. 3. As the Churches
strength to go through, is not het own, so it is necessary that God be much
exalted and acknowledged for it, when she has it; this is held forth for our
use. They shall fight because the Lord is with them, reconciled and in Covenant
with them, and assisting them in that enterprise.

Verse. 6. And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house
of Joseph, and I will bring them again to place them, for I have mercy upon
them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the LORD
their God, and will bear them.

The third promise is, that as he will strengthen Judah, so he will convert and
assert the ten tribes out of trouble, and so join them with Judah, and bring
them again not only to the Church, (which is imported in their being saved,)
but (as appears) to their own land: and restore them to his favors, and take
away the signs of his anger as if they had never been rejected. The causes
whereof are his mercy, and the constancy of his Covenant, turning them to seek
him, and hearing them when they seek. Doct. 1. It is a point of truth seriously
to be believed by Gods afflicted people, that he can, and in due time, will not
only strengthen them to endure their lot, but enable them to recover their
wonted power and ability, after they have been exhausted with many calamities;
therefore is the promise so often repeated; I will size^g then the house of
Judah. 2. These who belong unto the Lord and his Covenant, though they may be
long cast off, and in a lost condition, for trouble and captivity; yet God will
seek them out, bring them again to himself, and set them free from all
troubles: of this, his dealing with the ten tribes is a special instance, whose
right to the Covenant is unalterable by any temporal rejection, Romans 11.28, 29.
I will save the house of Joseph. 3. When God turns his people to him, not only
does his favor shine upon them, but their privileges lost through sin, are
restored unto them; according to the tenor of his Covenant made with them;
for, the house of Joseph being saved, I will bring them again to place them,
the promise made concerning their land (as appears this should be understood)
is forthcoming when they come to God. 4. Tender mercy in God will bring about
good things to his people, where there is no other probability thereof, and it
is an argument sufficient to move him to perform his promises to them, that in
so doing he will magnify his own mercy; this is the reason of the promise, For
I have mercy upon them. 5. A people turning unto God, however they have
sustained sad calamities, and such marks of his displeasure, as it would seem,
should leave a perpetual print behind them; yet they may expect that God can
fully restore deplorable conditions, and is willing to do it in outward things,
in so far as is for their good; whereof his promise to Israel is an instance.
They shall be as if I had not cast them off: and holds always true in
spiritual mercies, that upon repentance and fleeing to Christ, the sinner is in
due time restored to Gods favor, as if he had not hid his face from him. 6.
Gods entering in Covenant with his people, is a bond which stands firm,
notwithstanding many temporal sad lots, and will be forthcoming for the
Confederate, after it has seemed to be made void for a long time; this is
another argument, why the Lord will restore Israel, even that he may give a
proof of the constancy of his Covenant, For I am the Lord their God. 7. As it
is a sweet fruit of Gods keeping Covenant, when he brings back his people from
their wandering to seek him and call upon him: so the Covenant assures the
Supplicant of getting audience; this follows on his being their God, I will
hear them, which presupposes that he will convert them to pray to him.

Verse. 7. And they of Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall
rejoice as through wine: yea, their children shall see it, and be glad, their
heart shall rejoice in the LORD.

The fourth promise is directed especially to the ten tribes, that they shall
also be made giants in the common cause of the Jewish Church, that they shall
be filled with consolation as with wine, and that their children who succeed
them shall enjoy the same mercies, and shall rejoice in God, and follow the
Christian Religion of their Progenitors. Doct. 1 In a time of love, the Lord
has a special respect unto these who have tasted deepest of trouble, and whose
condition seems most desperate, that they may be assured of his good will, and
not come behind with any; therefore Ephraim or the ten tribes get the promises
repeated, and the same with what was given to Judah, v. 5. And Ephraim shall be
like a mighty man. 2. The Lords appearing for his people will change their
condition beyond any thing that their case in probability could promise: for,
broken and undone Ephraim, being assisted of God, shall be like a m^ghty man.
3. Albeit the consolations of Gods people may often times be under the clod, yet
when he returns unto them, he allows comfort upon them, which is able to
refresh and cheer up their heart, as if they had the choice of outward
delights, and it is Gods work to apply these consolations effectually; for,
Their heart shall rejoice as through wine, says he, undertaking to give matter
of comfort, and to make it effectual. 4. The continuance of the Church from
generation to generation, and the mercies of posterity, are matter of
refreshment to the present generation, as if it were done to themselves; for,
this is a promise to converted Israel, and an addition to their own mercy; Yea,
their children shall see it and be glad, or, they shall partake of the same
mercies to make them rejoice. 5. As the Lord will have a Church in every
generation, and particularly a Church of Jews and Israelites after their
Conversion, till his second coming; so the Lord has reserved for every
genetation their own peculiar mercies, which may refresh them; Their children
shall see it, (to wit, Gods mercy, and the renewed performance of these
promises) and be glad, 6. Right joy in the Church ought not only to arise upon
spiritual grounds, but to be managed and expressed spiritually, so as the Lord
alone, and her interest in him, and not any outward favor, nor any spiritual
and good thing as it is an habit in her, ought to be the matter of her
gloriation; therefore is it added, Their heart shall rejoice in the Lord.

Verse. 8. I will hiss for them, and gather them, for I have redeemed them: and
they shall increase as they have increased.

These promises in regard they were incredible, and many difficulties stood in
the way of performance, are amplified and confirmed, and every difficulty taken
out of the way by new promises. And first in general* he assures them that he
can and will as easily gather them, as a shepherd gathers his flock with an
hiss, and gives a reason of his gathering them, not so much because he had
given that Nation of old proofs of his power, in temporal deliverances,
(though that be true also, and was a pledge of good to them) as because of the
price paid for the Elect among them: and further, he inlarges the promise, that
being returned and restored, he will make them to increase as of old. Doct. 1.
Difficulties in the way of a thing promised of God, ought not to drive us to
doubt of performance; God who makes the promise, undertaking to see to, and
come over all difficulties; and it beseems both the power, wisdom, and love of
God toward his people, to have difficulties lying in the way of promises made
to them, that he may be exalted, in making opposition ineffectual. And in
particular, no impossibility ought to make us question the mercies promised
unto all Israel, since God undertakes to perform them; for, to this scope do
all these confirmations of the promises tend. 2. Such is the power and wisdom
of God, that what seems not only difficult, but impossible, he can, and
(having promised it) will not only do it, but do it most easily, and without
any trouble; for, if he but hiss for them, he will gather them 3. Such as
Christ has redeemed and paid a price to justice for, as they are certainly
known to him, so they cannot perish, but will in due time be brought to Christ
and saved, whatever difficulty seem to be in the way; for it is said, that for
the redeemeds sake; (which Christ declares there are) Israel must be converted,
and gathered, For I have redeemed them. 4. Christ's redeemed ones are not only
blessed themselves, but are great blessings to the visible Church and Nation to
which they belong; for, it is for the redeemed and elects sake, that the whole
Nation of Israel is brought to the Christian Religion, I will gather them, for
I have redeemed them. 5. The gracious purposes of Gods heart toward his people
are not soon told nor conceived; but as the fountain is infinite, so are his
outlettings, according to their capacity: Therefore at the repetition of the
promise, there is a new addition to it; They shall increase as they have
i^creased. 6. There is no work that God has done for his people, but he can do
the like again, and the best times that the Church has had can be repeated
again and get a parallel, when it is for her good; for, here a proof of this
is promised to Israel. They shall increase as they have increased.

Verse. 9. And I will sow them among the people, and they shall remember me in
far countries, and they shall live with their children, and turn again.

Secondly, whereas their scattering among the Nations might be looked on as a
great difficulty; the Lord promises to turn that into a sowing of them among
the Nations and in remote parts, partly so keeping them as winter-seed in the
ground till the springtime of their conversion and restitution; and partly,
making them seed to bring in an increase of the fullness of the Gentiles at
their conversion, as their Synagogues were a special means of publishing the
Gospel at first to the Gentiles. And further the Lord promises, that their
scattering should not hinder their conversion; for, while they are scattered,
the veil shall be taken away, and they shall remember the Lord, and they and
their children being preserved, shall returue to God, and (as appears, it being
opposed to their being scattered in fa^re Countries) to their own land. Doct.
1. There is no hard lot lying on the people of God, nor difficulty lying in the
way of their mercy, but God cannot only remove it, but turn it in a blessing;
so does the Lord promise he will order Isreal's scattering. 2. As the
preservation of Israel in their wandering or lost condition, in order to their
future conversion is a great mercy unto them, whatever it seem for present: so
the mercy of their scattering will further appear, when the Lord shall make
their being converted, as seed to bring in much increase of the Gentiles with
them unto the Lord; this is imported in this promise, I will sow them among
the people. 3. As the first thing that the Lords people get and are to seek of
him, is conversion and reconciliation to himself, upon which every good thing
follows: so mercy and a purpose of love will seek out, and find these it is
sent to, notwithstanding all disadvantages; for, so is imported in that Israel
is converted, even in their exile and scattering, and before any other proof of
favor. They shall remember me in far countries. True conversion unto God,
not only sets him up high in the heart, and makes him chief in the desires, and
stretches out the soul for such further enjoyments of him as he has promised;
but will lead the soul back to be senfible of its prejudice by being sormerly
deprived of God; They shall remember me, says the Lord, that is, call to mind
what fair privileges they have been deprived of through their insidelity, and
being now scattered, shall long to enjoy the wonted proofs of Gods love. A
form of speech which is made use of also to express their exercise under the
captivity of Babylon, Isa. 26.8. 5. Whatever difficulties converted Israel may
be assaulted with, yet the Lord shall preserve them, and their families, in the
midst of all dangers, till he restore them and satisfy their longing desires;
for, when they remember the Lord, They shall live with the Lord, and turn again.

Verse. 10. I will bring them again also out of the land of Egypt, and gather
them out of Assyria, and I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon,
and place shall not be found for them.

Thirdly, wheteas the power of great enemies on all hands, might appear to be a
great difficulty; the Lord promises to deliver them even from the strongest,
as of old he did from Egypt, and now of late (as some of them who were about
the work in Zechariahs time had seen) from Babel and Assyria; and that he
should bring them back in so great numbers, as to possess the outmost coasts
of their land, (as Gilead and Lebanon were,) all which should be too little to
contain them. Doct. 1. No opposition or power of men shall be able to
frustrate or hinder Gods purposes of love toward his Church, but that, either
by fair means, stirring them up to do his work (as he did with Gyrus) or by
foul means, crushing their opposition, (as he proved on Egypt) he will gain
his point: of this the Lord has given proofs of old, as pledges to his Church
in all ages, and particularly to his Israel: I will bring them again also out
of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria. 2. Albeit the Lords
people who have interest in him, may be far scattered in all the corners of
the earth, yet he will want none of them, but will seek and find them in all
quarters; for, though they be in Egypt on the South, and Assyria on the
North-hand, yet he will bring them again, and gather them. 3. Whatever decay
the people of God may be threatened with through much affliction, yet God can
make them wonderfully to increase, and be more in number at their delivery,
then they were before their stroke; This is to be verified in Israel, whom the
ancient bounds of their land shall hardly contain when they are converted to
God: I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon, and place shall not
be found for them.

Verse. 11. And he shall pass through the Sea with affliction, and shall smite
the waves in the Sea, and all the deeps of the river shall dry up: and the
pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart
away.

Fourthly, whereas there might be many other impediments in the way of their
return, joined with the power of enemies, to oppose them, or keep them
captives, (as Egypt and the Babylonish or Assyrian Empire did,) the Lord
promises to appear as when he brought his people out of Egypt to Canaan, and
dried up Seas and rivers; and to deal with enemies as when he brought down the
pride of Sennacherib and Belshazzar, and when he drowned Pharaoh and the power
of Egypts Kingdom. Doct. 1. However difficulty upon difficulty may start up to
oppose the Churches happiness, yet the Lord is sufficient to do all his
pleasure, and to make his way and his peoples the more conspicuous, that there
be difficulty in it; for, He will pass through Seas, and dry up rivers, etc.
2. Whatever opposition is laid in Gods way, will not prove an hinderance to
him, but brings trouble to it self for its attempt; this was proved on the
Sea, which he passed through with affliction (or, trouble, alluding to the
trouble of the Red Sea, Ps. 11 4.3.) and smote the waves of the Sea, and
promises to make good the like on all opposition. 3. The Lord will not stand in
delivering his people, to overturn the very course of nature, to crush men's
chief excellencies, and whatever else they are proud of, yea and to overturne
Kingdoms, ere his people be not happy; for, he will dry up Seas and rivers,
And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt shall
depart away.

Verse. 12. And I will strengthen them in the LORD, and they shall walk up and
down in his Name, says the LORD.

This Prophecy is closed with a promise, concerning their way and carriage for
whom the Lord does all this, that they shall be encouraged and strengthened to
be an holy people, and to persevere in faith and obedience, which is to be
understood of the elect and truly godly among them, who yet at that time will
be very many. Doct. 1. When the Lord has done greatest things for his people,
it is yet a new gift to give them the use thereof, to encourage and strengthen
them thereby; for, it is a new promise, I will strengthen them. 2. As God can
easily encourage the most feeble and faint-hearted, so their sure grip of it is
to have it laid up in God for them, and by faith and dependence draw it forth
as there is need, I will str^ngthen them in the Lord, says he. 3.
Encouragement in God is only well improven when it is made use of to strengthen
unto holiness and perseverance, which is the only sweet fruit of all mercies,
rendering them comfortable to the receiver, when he is led nearer God by them;
I will strengthen them, and they shall walk up and down, or, incessantly walk,
to wit, in their duty. 4. Holiness is then rightly set about, when we are
constantly in it, when we adhere close to the rule, when by faith we draw
furniture out of God, and aim at his glory, and give him the glory of all our
performances: for so much is imported here, They shall incessantly walk in his
Name. His Name imports what he has revealed of himself for directing our way,
and for us to place our confidence in, and his Name revealing himself, is his
glory, which every one by walking holily and confidently, ought to study to
make more conspicuous. 5. The Lord needs not be hindered to show himself
gracious, by the unworthiness and unholinesse of his people, but when he is
about to do them good, be can be surety to himself, that the fruit thereof
shall be forthcoming to his glory; and can make them he does much for, to be
such a people as his dealing toward them obliges them to be; therefore, after
all the former promises, the Lord himself undertakes to make them holy; They
shall walk up and down in his Name. 6. The sweet comfort and refreshment of the
promises will only be felt by these who dwell much on the study of God the
promise-maker, and consider how alsufficient he is, and how worthy to be
credited for the performance of what he promises; Therefore does he subscribe
his Name to all this Prophecy, says Jehovah.

CHAP. XI.
IN this Chapter the former comfortable promises are, upon wise grounds,
seasoned with a sad denunciation of the desolation of the land, and destruction
of the City and people of the Jews, by the Romans, v. 1.2.3. which is
amplified from the causes procuring the same, to wit, their horrid ingratitude
in rejecting of Christ; who being appointed of the Father to be the shepherd of
that people, during the time of Gods patience, the calamity yet going on, v. 4,
5, 6. and undertaking and executing that charge so as might reclaim them, v.
7.8. -- yet they ingrately prove worse; for which they are threatened with his
displeasure, v. -- 8. and with depriving them of the benefit of his Government
and care, v. 9, 10, 11. -- wherein the godly should observe his hand and
justice, v. -- 11. and further to testify their ingratitude, they not only
reject, but also crucify Christ, thinking him worth no more then a small sum
which might betray him to the death, v. 12, 13. for which they are further
threatened with a total rejection from his care, v. 14. and a giving them up
to wicked Rulers in Church and State, v. 15, 16. who should come to ruin, and
the people and Nation with them, v. 17.

Verse. 1. OPen thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy Cedars.

After all the former promises, the Lord subjoynes a prediction of the
destruction of Jerusalem, the wasting of the land, and the rejection of the
body of that. Nation for many generations, that they should neither be a Church
nor Kingdom, as they were before the coming of Christ. This judgment is here
generally published, the alarm being given by the voice of the Prophet, as the
Lords trumpeter; and to show the certainty of it, he speaks to Lebano^, whereby
we are not to understand so much the Temple built of the Cedars of Lebanon, one
gate whereof opened of its own accord before their last destruction as a
presage of its future burning. Nor yet that the Romans were to cut down the
trees of that forest, to employ them in the siege against Jerusalem: But this
being a strong part on the border of the land, by this the Lord would signify,
that nothing should be so strong in Judea (which was populous and flourishing
like that Forest, and therefore compared to it, Ezeck. 17.3.) as to resist the
violence of the enemy making havoc with fire and sword: but that what was
eminent, persons or Cities, (signified by Cedars) should go to ruin. Doct. 1.
The Lord may have great things to do for a people; who, yet by their own
provocations may not only foreslow the performance thereof, but provoke him to
lay them: desolate, and cast them off for a time; for, so much death this
Chapter, subjoyned to the former, teach. 2. The determined judgments of God
against the visible Church for sin, are of good use to be known by her, and
are to be intimated from the Word, that the wicked may not harden themselves in
presumption, and that the godly may be warned in time, and when they see the
execution of threatenings, may be confirmed to expect the accomplishment of
promises also; for, for these causes, and uses, is the judgment denounced, so
long beforehand. 3. Divine vengeance pursuing sin will make fearful
desolation of most flourshing Countries: It is a fire entering in a fair
Forest, devouring and burning all to ashes. 4. When God pursues a controvesie,
nothing will be able to stand in his way, every thing will make patent doors,
and what is most eminent will succumb: So much does this form of speech teach
us, Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy Cedars.

Verse. 2. Howl Firre-tree, for the Cedar is fallen, because all the mighty are
spoiled: howl, O ye Oaks of Bashan, for the forest of the vintage is come
down.

The Prophet persists in the metaphor of a Forest, and threatens destruction
to men of inferior rank, and meaner places of the Country, who could not
expect to be spared, when the most eminent places are overrunne, and greater
persons cut off, no more then Firre-trees can think to subsist when Cedars
fall, or Oaks in the open field of Bashan, (how strong soever) can think to
escape fire, when the forest of the vintage, or flourishing vineyards (which
use to be well kept) or, (as the words also will read) when defenced Forests
(such as Lebanon) are destroyed. Doct. 1. Judgments for sin pursuing the
Church will be universal, reaching the greatest, and even the meaner sort, who
may seem to be beneath the fury of enemies, are not to expect, but that the
stroke shall reach them, one way or other; for, Cedars, Firres, Oaks, and the
forest of the vintage, are threatened. 2. Whatever be the stupidity of men in
their guilt, yet God pursuing for sin, will make them sensible, and to know
their misery, which is ordinarily all that men attain to, who feel the stroke,
and are not led up to see the cause; this repeated command, to howl, is not
any enjoying of it as a duty, or, approbation of their carnal lamentations, but
a prediction of the greatness of their calamity, and what their temper under
it should be.

Verse. 3. There is a voice of the howling of the shepherds: for their glory is
spoiled, a voice of the roaring of young lions, for the pride of Jordan is
spoiled.

A particular denunciation is sent forth against the Rulers, who being
shepherds in office proved ravening young lions in their practice: it is
foretold they shall howl and roar, because their glory and splendour shall be
brought down, in the destruction of the people, (in the multitude of whom is
their glory, Prove. 14.28.) and of that numerous and flourishing Nation of the
Jews, resembled by the yearly proud overflowing of Jerdan, Josh. 3.15. which
ran through their land. Doct. 1. In times of calamity greatest ones will not
be spared, and these who having authority, do prove wicked and abuse their
power, may expect to share deep in the judgment; for, Shepherds shall howl,
and young lious shall r^ar, till their voice be heard afar off. 2. However
men in power usually despise and account little of their subjects and people,
as if all were made for them: yet strokes on people, ought to affect
Magistrates, as being punished in their peoples calamities, and wanting them,
they would soon find themselves to be nothing; for, if this their glory, and
the pride of Jordan be spoiled, they will howl. 3. A people enjoying much
prosperity, and waxing wanton under it, do ripen themselves for a judgment;
for, when they resemble the pride of Jordan, they are spoiled.

Verse. 4. Thus says the LORD my God, Feed the flock of the slaughter;

5. Whose possessors slay them, and hold themselves not guilty: and they that
sell them, say, Blessed be the LORD, for I am rich; and their own shepherds
pity them not.

This judgment is again repeated and amplified, from the cause procuring the
same, which was their rejecting of Christ, unto whom somewhat of this Prophecy
is expressly applied, Matthew. 26. This the Prophet not only foretells, but
represents at large as a thing in acting, making also use of some external
types (as appears, v. 15.) to set it out to the present Jews. And first he
represents a charge laid on Christ by his Father, to have a care of that
people, during the prefixed time of his patience, while this calamity was going
on, and that people were used as sheep appointed for the slaughter, by all
these, whether Natives or Foreigners, that had any power over them, who using
them severely at their pleasure (as men either slay or sell their flocks, as
being their own,) were so far from thinking they did wrong, that they thought
it a blessing from God to be made rich, though it were by the misery of the
people. In this time Christ gets a charge by his Prophets, and especially by
his own coming in the flesh, to be a shepherd to the Jews, chiefly for the
elects sake among them. Doct. 1. Christ is the great shepherd and overseer of
his Church, who not only went about that office in his own person, but in all
ages provides his Church of leaders, by whom he feeds and has a care of her,
and he it is through whom any of these means do her good; for, unto him it is
said, Feed the flock. 1. The benefit and comfort of Christ's office and relation
to his Church, is best seen, when the rise of it is seen to be not only from
his own tender heart, but from a command laid upon him by his Father, to take
charge of the Church, and elect in it, as one that must be accountable; and
from a Covenant of Redemption, whereby the Father has engaged himself to be a
God unto his Son as Mediator, and to these that flee to him, and to save all
these whom he should redeem: Thus is Christ's Office held out unto us here, Thus
says the Lord my God, Feed the flock. 3. Herein does the Lords indulgence and
long-suffering toward his Church appear, that he does not inflict saddest
strokes, nor totally ruin, till it be seen, that Christ and an offer of mercy
is rejected: and that calamities come to an height, only when the matter is
otherwise past remedy; for here, before this growing calamity come to an
height, Christ is sent out to feed the flock. 4. It may commend Christ to the
Churches choice, that much trouble will endear her to his care, if she embrace
him; and his people who make use of him shall find that no afflictions shall
estrange him from them, but rather make them the more capable of his feeding,
and him the more tender of them: and that the more they are wronged by others
who should guide and be Pastors to them, he will see the more to their
wel-being; and that he will be near at hand under calamities, to welcome any
who flee to him, to be freed from them, or from the curse of them; for, he will
feed the flock of the slaughter, whose possessors slay them. 5. As corrupt
Rulers are oftentimes made the scourge and plague of a sinful people, so it is
great cruelty in men, to employ their power given them for the good of a
people, to their ruin; for, it is marked as the way of the peoples calamity,
and the Rulers sin, Their possessors slay them, and their own shepherds pity
them not. 6. It is a great snare upon oppressors, not only to be given up to
that sin, but (partly through their consciences being deaded and blinded with
such a gross iniquity, and partly through their looking on the oppresseds
guiltiness, or that themselves are spared, and not punished when they do evil)
not to be convinced and challenged for it, but rather to think sin a duty;
this is the snare and judgment of Rulers here, Their possessors slay them, and
hold themselves not guilty. 7. Prosperity and advantage by an evil course is a
great snare, and a chief cause why men will not be convinced of the evil of
it; for, I am rich, takes their minds much up. 8. Sin is most wickedly and
dangerously committed and defended, when men color all with a pretense of
piety, pretending to observe and acknowledge providence, when in the mean time
they make providence and success a mark of Divine approbation, how contrary
soever to the revealed will of God their course be; for, thus do these
oppressors, They say, Blessed be the Lord, for I am rich. They take their
enriching by oppression, for a token of Gods approbation, and cover all with a
pretense of acknowledging of God.

Verse. 6. For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, says the LORD:
but lo, I will deliver the men every one into his neighbors hand, and into the
hand of his King, and they shall smite the land, and out of their hand I will
not deliver them.

The Lord expounds his mind further, concerning this going on calamity of the
Jews, when Christ was sent unto them, and declares himself to be the author
of it, and that he had determined, after they had rejected this offer of Christ
(as is after cleared) to cast off all pity, and give them up to intestine
divisions; and to be cut off and their land laid waste, by the Roman Emperor
(whom they chused to be their King, rejecting Christ, Joh. 19.15.) In all which
there should be no such moderation or delivery as they had found in former
troubles: And therefore Christ is sent unto them, as to have a care of the
elect in these calamities; so in Gods righteous judgment, to fill up their
cup, that the calamity may come to an height. Doct. 1. Whatever be Christ's
errand to the elect in a land, yet his coming to a people with his offer of
mercy, may oft-times be the forerunner of saddest calamities, by reason of
their sinfulness, which by despising of mercy, ripens fast for a stroke;
therefore this is subjoyned, when Christ is sent to food the flock, For I will
no more pity, etc. 2. It is necessary to see God to be the Author of
calamities, whether for humiliation under them, or comfort by them; therefore
does the Lord own all the oppression done, or to be done to them, I will no
more pity. 3. The Lor^s pity and compassion is the fountain of the Churches
happiness, which being taken away (as it has its period toward the visible
Church,) opens the door to all misery; for, their calamity begins, I will no
more pity the inhabitants of the land, says the Lord. 4. As seditious and
intestine divisions are a sore rod and a token of Gods laying aside pity toward
a people, so are they ordinarily the forerunner of judgments from
foreigners; for, I will deliver every man into his neighbors band, is a fruit
of his not pitying, and a forerunner of falling in the hands of their king. 5.
Whatever it be that men choose as a happiness, in opposition unto Christ, shall
turn to be their plague; for, the Jews chused Caesar, when they rejected
Christ, and here is the issue, I will deliver every man into the hand of his
king, and they shall smite the land. 6. Albeit the Lord do oft-times, in love
to his people, moderate their procured judgments, and speedily deliver them,
yet he will not always do so, but when provocation is given, and severity
breaks forth, he will let them lie and consume under their calamity; Out of
their hand I will not deliver them.

Verse. 7. And I will feed the flock of slaughter, even you, O poor of the
flock: and I took unto me two staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other I
called Bands, and I fed the flock.

In the next place is represented Christ's undertaking of this charge,
especially for the poor and Elects sake, and his going diligently about it,
signified by two shepherds staves: the first whereof, called Beauty, holds
forth (as is expounded, v. 10) the sweet and beautiful order of his Covenant,
and the doctrine thereof, whereby the Church is directed in says, worship and
obedience of God: the second called Bands, signifies (as we may gather from v.
14.) that policy in Church and State whereby they are kept one, and without
schisms among themselves. Doct. 1. Christ the Mediator became an obedient
servant, and is willing, and takes pleasure to be employed for his Churches
good; and will have a tender consideration of their case; for, when the charge
is laid on Christ, I will feed the flock of the slaughter, says he. 2. Christ
in his care over the visible Church, has an especial eye to his Elect, and the
regenerate in it, how abject-like soever they seem in the eyes of men, or in
their outward condition; for, says he, I will feed even you, O poor of the
flock; who, what they were, see, v. 11. 3. Christ is a faithful shepherd,
singular and incomparable in his care and diligence about his people; for,
says he, I took unto me two staves, whereas other shepherds use but one. 4.
The Covenant and doctrine revealed by Christ unto his Church, as it sets forth
the beauty and excellency of God, so it is beautiful and sweetly ordered in it
self, so as faith and obedience sweetly work to others hands, and make the
followers thereof to be beautiful and excellent above all people; for, the one
staff I called Beauty. 5. As unity and concord in a Church, is a fruit of
Christ's feeding his flock, so policy and order, whereby unity is preserved is a
rich blessing; The other I called Bands. 6. Christ's performances are answerable
to his undertakings; what he says he does, and his practice will never give
his promise the lie; for unto his promise, I will feed, is subjoyned, And I fed
the flock.

Verse. 8. Three shepherds also I cut off in one month: and my soul loathed
them, and their soul also abhorred me.

Follows a particular account of Christ's feeding, with their ill use of that
mercy, and his displeasure thereupon. He cut off in a short time many of their
wicked Governors, partly by calamities, (which certainly imported that there
had been no small plague on people, when public judgments cut off so many
Rulers,) and turning of Priests out of their Offices frequently, and especially
by his own Ministry, bringing in contempt the sects of their false teachers,
Pharifees, Sadduces and Essenes, all which Christ did to reclaim them, but in
vain; their carriage was such as provoked him against them; whereby also they
were more estranged from God. Doct. 1 Christ taking a work in hand, can
effectuate strange things speedily; for, in one month, (or a short time) he
cut off three (or many) shepherds. 2 Christ uses many times to make way for
his own entertainment, by sending calamities thick and threefold, hereby to lay
a necessity on people to come to him, by cutting off such as had been
instruments of ill unto his people, that he may commend his affection unto
them, and by staining and over-clouding false teachers and false ways, that
himself alone may be seen choice-worthy; for, cutting off three shepherds in
the month, imports all these, he cut off evil governors, who had oppressed
them, with whom no doubt many of the people fell, and brought their false
teachers in contempt: all which he did to commend himself unto them as an
excellent shepherd. 3. Christ exercising his tenderest care of his Church, is
oft-times met with very provoking carriage, depriving her of his favor, which
should be so much the bitterer to bear, as that Christ takes not away such a
mercy willingly; for, when Christ is thus feeding, they instead of turning to
him, carry themselves so, as that his soul loathed them, or was straitened for
them; or; abhorred them, but with grief, as his frequent complaints declares.
4. It is a great judgment upon people, and a token of much wrath, when Christ's
declaring himself provoked, and withdrawing from them, does estrange and
alienate them more from him, and not stir them up rather to pursue him when he
seems to depart; for, thus was it here: My soul loathed them, and their soul
also abhorred me. 5. As the contempt of Christ is the great sin of the visible
Church, so where Christ is not heartily received, it cannot choose, but he will
become burdensome and loathsome company: Their soul abhorred me.

Verse. 9. Then said I, I will not feed you: that that dies, let it die: and
that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off, and let the rest eat, every one
the flesh of another.

Having spoken of their ingratitude in part, he repeats the calamity flowing
from his displeasure, by way of sentence pronounced for this their sin, and
threatens that he will quit his charge, and give them up to perish, partly by
ordinary judgments, and partly by the foreign and intestine sword. Doct. 1.
The patience of Christ toward his visible Church, will have a period; when they
contemn him, he will weary: and where he is provoked to loath, he may forsake:
Then said I, I will not feed you. 2. Christ's forsaking and giving over his care
of a people, exposes them unto all miseries and calamities: for, 1. Contempt of
Christ, (for which he forsakes) is provocation sufficient to draw down saddest
judgments. 2. Men have of themselves infirmities and diseases sufficient to
make them complearly miserable, where he does not interpose. 3. And the world
is so full of hazards, and the Church so maligned in it, that if he take away
the hedge, every step will be on destruction. 4. Contemners of the Gospel are
given up to ill tempers, to make them run on ruin. 5. And who will pity or
care for these, toward whom Christ has cast off pity? Then it will be, that
that dies, let it die: and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off, and
let the rest eat, every one the flesh of another.

Verse. 10. And I took my staff, even Beauty; and cut it asunder, that I might
break my Covenant, which I had made with all the people.

11. And it was broken in that day: and so the poor of the flock that waited
upon me, knew that it was the Word of the LORD.

Christ's renouncing of his charge, is confirmed in the representation, by
breaking the staff of Beauty, the badge of his office, whereby is signified a
breaking of that Covenant made with the body of that people: and a plaguing
them not only with heresy and superstition in place of the found doctrine
contained in the Covenant, but also by taking away the dignities, privileges
and benefits promised to them in that Covenant. Which when it should be put in
execution, the godly would observe and read Gods justice according to his
Word, in it. Doct. 1. When Christ is provoked to forsake a people for their
ingratitude, even their choicest mercies; and such as they thought surest, as
being by Covenant are fore-faulted, the Covenant being but conditionalto the
body of the visible Church; for, I took my staff Beauty, and cut it asunder,
that I might break my Covenant, etc. See, Number. 14.34 1 Samuel 2.30. 2. It is the
height of a peoples misery to be cast out of Gods Covenant, to be pestered with
errors in stead of the sound and wholesome doctrine thereof, to be denied
interest in God, to have no ground of hope for access to him in straits, and
to be exposed to all the judgments threatened against Covenant-breakers, which
are sadder then if they had never had interest; this was the Jews judgment, I
brake my Covenant which I had made with all the people. 3. Christ is Omnipotent
to make his judgments effectual, and to reach his end upon a people; for, It
was broken in that day. 4. Whatever effects judgments have upon the wicked,
yet the godly will get right sights and uses of them; for, the poor of the
flock knew, etc. 5. A seeing of Gods hand, and the accomplishment of the Word
in judgments, and reading of them by the Word, is the way to get right use of
them, for, They knew that it was the Word of the Lord 6. The right frame of the
godly, especially in times of judgment, and for making use thereof, is (as they
are oft-times poor in their outward condition, so) to be spiritually poor and
empty, that they may wait on Christ, and depend on him, as the handmaid on her
Mistress; for, They are the poor of the flock that waited upon. me, or,
observed me, says Christ.

Verse. 12. And I said unto them, If ye think good, give me my price; and if
not, forbear so they weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver.

13. And the LORD said unto me, Cast it unto the potter; a goodly price, that I
was prized at of them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to
the potter in the house of the LORD.

The ingratitude of the Jews toward Christ is further represented (under the
type of a shepherd demanding his wages, wherein it seems Zechariah did act
somewhat) in that they slew him, and thought him worth no more for all his
service, then such a small sum as might induce Judas to betray him, which as
it would scarce hire a potter to make tile to cover the Temple, (and therefore
was to be cast to him in the type,) so in the event, providence so overruled,
that the price of Christ's blood bought a potters field, to be a standing
monument of their contempt of Christ, of their shedding of his blood, and
valuing him at so low a rate, Mat. 26.15. and 29.7, 10. Doct. 1 Christ's
condescending to take care of his Church, puts her infinitely in his debt, and
lays obligations upon her, to endeavor some return: and it will be the sad
dittie of contemners of him, that they had the offer of a benefit which could
not be esteemed nor recompensed; for, Christ is a shepherd that may justly
crave wages, and being provoked, will let the provokers know that it is so: And
I said, Give me my price. 2. Christ does not call for any recompense of his
services as if he needed it, or any thing men could do: but to take a proof of
peoples affection to him, or their contempt of him: for, he requires it as one
indifferent for his part, only they would bewray their hearts: If ye think
good, give, and if not, forbear. 3. Christ, for all his pains and care, is
ordinarily less thought of, and more basely rewarded, then men's meanest
servants; They weighed for my price thirty pieces of silver, the ordinary price
of a slave, Exodus 21.32. and more fit to be cast unto the Potter, then given to
Christ. 4 When men turn contemners and unde valuers of Christ, they will
readily turn persecutors, and he will be thought worthy of nothing but death,
and that which may help to bring him to it: for, thus it was in the event,
Christ's price was thirty pieces to Judas, to betray him. 5. The contempt
offered to Christ as Mediator, watching himself immediately or by his
servants, for the good of the Church, is accounted of God to be a contemning of
himself who fends him: The Lord said, Cast it to the Potter, a goodly price
that I was prized at of them. 6. God will in due time make the consciences of
Contemners confess the horridness of their guilt; and not only so, but cause
them by their practice to proclaim it; for, so did Judas by his repentance, and
casting back the silver in the Temple; and the High Priests by their not daring
to put it among the treasures of the Temple, as being the price of blood, and
by their purchasing with it a base field; this was the full accomplishment of
that typical action, I cast them to the Potter in the house of the Lord.

Verse. 14. Then I cut asunder mine other staff, even Bands, that I might break
the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

Follows yet again their calamity, by way of punishment for this their
ingratitude: and first, they are threatened with the breach of brotherly
concord, (as when Judah and Israel were rent asunder under Rehoboam, because of
Solomon's idolatry,) and with the removal of peace Civil or Ecclesiastical, (as
was at large verified in the siege before their last destruction) so making way
for the complete breaking and scattering of the body of that Nation, as is seen
this day, and for a long time obstructing of that brotherhood betwixt Judah and
Israel under Christ, promised of old, Ezech. 37.22. all which is signified by
breaking the staff of bands. Doct. 1. Christ has multiplicity and variety of
judgments, whereby to let contemners of him see and feel, that so to do is
their great misery; for, he has yet another staff, even Bands, to cut
asunder. 2. It is a sad judgment, and fruit of a contemned Christ, when a
Church is given up to rents and schisms, and when peace and concord is broken
among a people; this ordinarily proves a presage of sad scattering, and an
hinderance of many choice blessings; thus is Christ's death punished: I brake
the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.

Verse. 15 And the LORD said unto me, Take unto thee yet the instruments of a
foolish shepherd.

16. For lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, which shall not visit
those that be cut off, neither shall seek the young one, nor heal that that is
broken, nor feed that that stands still: but he shall eat the flesh of the
fat, and tear their claws in pieces.

Secondly, they are threatened to be given up as a prey to false teachers, and
to be devoured by all robbers. Of this Zechariah is commanded to use a type, v.
15. which is expounded, v. 16. that they shall be given up to Rulers, who will
not only neglect all duty toward the flock, but also cruelly prey upon them.
Doct. 1. Contemners of Christ and his easy yoke, are justly punished with
unfaithful and corrupt Rulers, under whom they will groan; for, thus is the
Jews ingratitude punished by a foolish (or wicked) shepherd raised up in the
land. 2. Though Government and Governors be in themselves choice mercies, yet
where Governors do not their duty, they are a great plague, and a compendious
means to draw on general judgments; for so were they to Judah, I will raise
up a shepherd that will not visit, etc. 3. The visible Church consists of
variety of tempers, conditions and infirmities, which are to be wisely
considered, and proportionable and suitable means applied by these who would
approve themselves to be faithful Rulers: this may be gathered from the
properties of this false shepherd: there are the hidden or cut off, lost and
gone out of the way, whom it is a fault not to visit and seek out: there are
the young ones, more apt to wander then others, whom it is their duty in a
special way to seek, and have an eye to. There are the broken with afflictions
and challenges, who are to be healed, not crushed. There are that stand still
for weakness, not being able to go on, and these are to be sed and borne (as
the word also is) wi^h tenderness and compassion if need be. 4. It is a mark
of unfaithful Rulers in Church and State, to mind their own profit and gain
chiefly, and to be cruel unto those whom God has committed to their care: for
such were they; He shall eat the flesh of the fat, and tear their claw^s in
pieces, to wie, by overdrawing of them.

Verse. 17. Woe to the idol-shepherd that leaves the flock: the sword shall be
upon his arm, and upon his right eye: his arm shall be clean dried up, and
his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Thirdly, he threatens to punish these Rulers, and the people with them, even
to the breaking of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State, and scattering the
people: declaring that a sword shall be upon their arm and right eye: whereby
we are not to understand the taking away of their gifts and abilities, and the
power and life of them, which is imported already in that they are foolish
shepherds, nor yet only peculiar judgments on Rulers, in their authority and
prudence, for they are raised up here to bring, or occasion judgments on a
people: but that Gods judgment should cut off their power, the people being
cut off and scattered, who are the arm and strength of Rulers; and should also
follow Ecclesiastical Rulers, who are the right eye of the Commonwealth, (for
the people and Civil Rulers considered as a Kingdom, are the arm which is to
be broken, and the people and Priests considered as a Church, are the right eye
to be put out) and declaring also that this judgment should be total and
irrecoverable. Doct. 1. Such as take on any employment and office, and make no
conscience of doing duty, are in Gods account but statues and images, he is the
idol-shepherd 2. It is a sad plague upon men to be left to themselves, to be
unfaithful in their trust, and it portends great woe and judgment to come; for,
woe to the idol-shepherd. 3. Unfaithful Rulers, not discharging their duty, are
in the same guilt before God, with them who turn their back upon their charge
in times of greatest danger: for, they leave the flock, in respect of duty,
though we read not of their running away from them. 4. Wicked Rulers given to a
people in anger, and for a punishment of sin, will soon perform their work, and
bring ruin upon themselves, and on these they are sent to be a plague unto:
they will soon ripen a people for scartering, and Civil and Ecclesiastical
authority for breaking: The sword shall be upon his arm, and right eye. 5.
When a people and their Rulers provoke God to break the face of Church and
State, and to scatter them, it is a stroke that is not soon recovered: for, His
arm shall be clean dried up, and his right eye utterly darkened, that is,
their office and a face of Government shall not soon be recovered, the people
being dissipated, as appears on that Nation to this day*

CHAP. XII.
IN this chapter, the Lord, who is Omnipotent to perform what he says, v. 1.
promises unto Israel, 1. That the endeavor of enemies against them, shall
tend to their own ruin, v. 2, 3. 2. That he will prove his favor toward them,
by defeating every means employed to wrong them, v. 4. 3. That they shall be
blessed with godly Governors, v. 5. And 4. That he will bless their
endeavors with success against their enemies, and in restoring Jerusalem, v.
6. 5. That weakest places should find the first proof of his protection, v. 7.
6. That he would defend that people, and increase their strength in straits, v.
8. 7. That he will seek out even their scattered and secret enemies to destroy
them, v. 9. And lastly, that he will give unto them the Spirit of Conversion
and repentance, for their rejecting and crucifying the Messiah, which will be
very vehement and sincere, v. 10. as when the people lamented Josiah, v. 11.
and general, throughout all ranks and families, in their private humiliations,
v. 12, 13, 14.

Verse. 1. THe burden of the Word of the LORD for Israel, says the LORD, which
stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the foundation of the earth, and
forms the spirit of man within him.

This chapter is a continuation of that prophecy in the tenth chapter: for as
the Lord thought it necessary to season these comfortable promises with a
denunciation of the desolation, to come upon the Jewish Nation, lest the secure
and wicked should break their neck upon them, chap. 11. so lest the godly
hearing of these calamities, should think that all hope were gone; the Lord
subjoynes many comfortable promises in this chapter, which however they have
their own accomplishment, and yield comfort to the Israel of God in all ages,
yet the full accomplishment of them is reserved for converted Israel: for the
day of performing these things, is the time of their turning to God, and of
their mourning, as we see, v. 9, 10, 11, etc. Unto these promises, two things
are premitted in this verse, 1. The nature of this doctrine, (at least a great
part of it) that it is a burdensome word for the good and behoof of Israel,
being threatenings against Isreal's enemies, but promises unto her. 2. Because
the promises many of them might seem incredible, therefore the Lord not only
prefixes his Name, but proves his own Omnipotency, from his creating the
Heavens, founding the earth on nothing, and creating the soul of man, which may
assure the Church of the certainty of what he promises and says. Doct. 1. As
the Lord will not always write bitter things against his people, but in due
time let out somewhat for their advantage: so times of comfort and love to
them, will be sad times to their enemies, and the promises unto them will be
sad threatenings (...) persecutors; there is, the burden of the Word of the
Lord (...) Israel. 2. The greatest obstruction of the Churches comfort from the
promises, is caused by their own increduli^y and unbelief, that will not give
God the glory of truth in promising, and so leaves themselves discouraged, say
what he will; therefore is it so needful to use so many confirmations of faith
when God promises any thing. 3. Not only does the all-sufficient Nature of God
put the truth of his promises out of question, but the visible effects of his
Omnipotency, in creating heaven, and earth by his naked word, and the upholding
of the earth as a ball in the midst of the air, without any other foundation
then a word of command, may shame all flesh from suspecting his ability to make
good whatever he says; from this is the ensuing doctrine confirmed, Jehovah
says it, who stretches forth the heavens, and lays the foundation of the
earth. 4. Albeit that the Parent produces man in respect of his body, and the
uniting of the soul with the body, yet the Original of the soul of every man
is from God, and it is immediately created and infused into the body by him;
for, it is here reckoned among the works of Creation and Omnipotency, that God
forms the spirit of man within him. 5. Every misbeleever of Gods Omnipotency to
perform his promises, carries in his own bosom a refutation of himself; the
very excellency of his soul, created so like God, which being put into a dead
lump of clay, does animate it, and fit it for excellent employments, may teach
him what incredible things God can work, and may particularly assure him, that
God has power over the spirits of men which he has made, to order them so, as
men shall not hinder the accomplishment of his will: for, this is an antidote
against infidelity; God forms the spirit of man within him.

Verse. 2. Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of trembling unto all the people
round about, when they shall be in the siege, both against Judah, and against
Jerusalem.

The substance of all this ensuing doctrine, may be reduced to these three
Heads; that the Lord will plague the Churches persecutors, and give his Church
victory over them; that he will defend, preserve and establish his Church,
which follows on the former: and that he will give his Church conversion and
repentance, as the means to hasten on and perfect the other two. These three
are in this chapter propounded, enlarged and amplified in several particular
promises, for their more distinct and particular information and encouragement.

The first promise is in sum thus, that the trouble whereunto enemies shall
put the Church, shall be so far from ruining her; that troubling of her shall
be her troublers ruin, as if they had drunk a cup of poison, when they would
swallow her, which shall produce trembling by exhausting their vigor and
radical heat, or slumbering and astonishment, and make them reele and dash like
drunken men, till they fall and perish, Doct. 1. Even when the Lord has done
great things for his people, and delivered them, they are not to expect
exemption from troubles and exercises; for, here it is supposed that rejected
Israel are not utterly cast off, but restored, and yet are in straits and
besieged, All the people round about are in the siege, both against Judah, and
against Jerusalem. 2. The enemies of the Church are very cruel, and earnest in
their pursuit of her; and it is as great delight to them to vex and devour
her, as it is for a thirsty man to drink; for, Jerusalem is a cup, which they
are earnest to drink down. 3. When the Lord permits his Church to be in a
condition of trouble and hazard, he cannot only make enemies to miss in their
desire, and be never a whit the nearer their point, when they have (as they
think) devoured and swallowed her down, but will make their opposition and
apparent success to be their ruin, and never to cease till it undo
themselves; for, Jerusalem is a cup of trembling, or, poison, which is most
deadly when it is drunk out. 4. The advantage of the Churches low estate, is
best seen, when God, and what he can make out of trouble, is looked unto;
otherwise consulting with flesh and blood will not discover it; for, it is God
who makes Jerusalem a cup of trembling, which she could not be of her self.

Verse;. 3. And in that day will I make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all
people: all that burden themselves with it shall be cut in pieces: though all
the people of the earth be gathered together against it.

The same promise is repeated in another similitude, taken from men's trying of
their strength, in lifting of some great and heavy stone: The sum is, the
Church, and especially restored Israel, (for that is that day pointed at here,
v. 9, 10, 11.) shall be so fixed, that whoever would seek to remove it, should
but break themselves, even though all the world should conspire to effectuate
it. Doct. 1. The promises of God concerning the welfare of his Church, are
neither easily taken up in their fullness, nor believed, and therefore are to
be studied over and over again: so much does this repetition of the promise
teach us. 2. The Church is looked on by enemies in the world, as a troublesome
neighbor, whom they would gladly remove, and be rid of, and they will not
spare to prove their utmost strength, nor care to take on heavy burdens, so it
may effectuate their purpose; for, Jerusalem is a stone for all people, which
they would have unfixed and removed, and would burden themselves for that end.
3. The Church is so established by divine power, and by virtue of Christ's
charter, and the indignation of God against all such as seek to molest her, is
so heavy and insupportable, that all who essay to shake her, come to seek, and
do find their own ruin, while as she remains established; for, God will make
Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all people, all that burden themselves with it
shall be cut in pieces. 4. As it is the Churches lot to find fewest friends in
the world of any society: so the multitude and strength of opposers can
contribute nothing for carrying on the design of ruining the Church, all the
world will effectuate as little, and be as unable to resist the deserved
vengeance, as the ^^eanest man in it; for, God will do this, though all the
people of the earth be gathered together against it.

Verse. 4. In that day says the LORD, I will smite every horse with
astonishment, and his rider with madness, and I will open mine eyes upon the
house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people with blindness.

The second promise confirms and explains the former, showing that the
fountain-cause of this dispensation toward the Church is, Gods restoring them
to his favor, from whom he had hid his face so long, and his vigilant and
affectionate providence over them: and that the way of disappointing and
ruining enemies, shall be by defeating their wisdom, counsel and strength, and
plaguing every means they employ. Doct. 1. There it no wisdom, counsel nor
strength can subsist where God is Party, and he needs no more, but blow upon
all enemies and their means, and they will be to seek, and run madly and
blindly on their own ruin; for, In that day, says the Lord, I will smite
every horse with astonishment, and his rider with madness, and will smite
every horse of the people with blindness. 2. However the Lord may hide his face
for a time from his people, and Atheism will always be ready to say in
trouble, that the Lord does not regard: yet in due time he will prove, that his
people are not wronged, but when he has been a witness and taken notice, that
he affects them, and has an eye upon them; for, I will open mine eyes upon the
house of Judah, says the Lord. 3. The Lords favoring of his people, and his
providence and eye upon them, will not consist in bare observation, but when he
has marked their wanderings, tears and afflictions, that they are come to an
height, his favor and care will shine forth in wonderful effects: I will open
mine eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the people
with blendresse.

Verse. 5. And the Governors of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants
of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the LORD of hosts their God.

The third promise holds forth the disposition of Israel, as to the use of
means, when the Lord thus appears for them, and especially of the Governors,
who should be the instruments of their good. It is promised they shall have
Governors, for directing all their affairs, and managing their wars, and that
they shall be holy men, not placing their confidence in multitudes of men, but
every one esteeming it strength sufficient that God is reconciled with their
subjects, and reckoning that these, how weak and few soever, shall be able,
through Gods blessing to carry through in any difficulty. Doct. 1. It is a
token of great mercy to a people, when the Lord not only delivers them from
confusion, and settles Rulers over them, but when he makes Rulers really holy
and straight for him; for, Judah in that day, shall have governors so
qualified. 2. It is an evidence of Piety in Rulers, when public affairs do
touch them as near, and are as faithfully seen to, as if they were their own
particular; for, so shall every Ruler reckon, that help to the public is a
lift to themselves, who cordially wrestle under it; My strength shall they call
it. 3. It is another mark of Piety, when Rulers, beside their personal
carriage, study to advance Piety where they have power, and are encouraged by
the growth of Piety, and are encouragements to such as incline that way; for,
that shall be the Governors refreshment, that their people are reconciled to
God. 4. It is a great evidence of Piety, when any are fully persuaded of the
truths they receive, and generally assent to, when truths are not received in a
fleeting superficial way, but rooted in the heart, so that what they say, they
say it in their heart. 5. A people reconciled unto God, are the great strength
of a Kingdom or Nation, and they will prove help to it indeed, how contemptible
soever they seem to be; for, so shall these Governors reckon, The inhabitants
of Jerusalem shall be my strength in the Lord, etc. 6. Whatever good may be
expected of an holy people, is not to be expected from any inherent worth or
holiness in them, but from Gods free favor toward them, and with much
immediate dependence on him, lest God being deprived of his glory, they be
blasted: therefore is it distinctly added, They shall be my strength in the
Lord of hosts their God.

Verse. 6. In that day will I make the Governoure of Judah like an hearth of
fire among the wood, and like a torch of fire in a sheafe; and they shall
devour all the people round about, on the right hand, and on the left: and
Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in her own place, even in Jerusalem.

The fourth promise is the same in substance with the first, under another
similitude, holding forth, that these godly Governors should not be
disappointed of their confidence, (of which, v. 5.) but they and the people
under them should be victorious, and overcome their enemies, as a furnace
consumes timber, and a torch burns a sheaf of dry straw. Which promise is
further amplified, that Jerusalem thus preserved, should be inhabited again,
which that it be not understood only spiritually of the Church, it is added,
that Jerusalems own place is even in Jerusalem, which seems clearly to point at
their repossessing of their land, and of that city, not as being then any more
typical, but as being the most kindly inheritance to Israel, when they shall be
converted as a Nation. Doct. 1. Faith and hope in God will never be ashamed;
but these who promise themselves much good in God, shall find it so; for, the
Governors of Judah, who expected strength in God, v. 5. do get what they
expected, and are made like an hearth of fire, etc. 2. Enemies of the Church
may expect to be destroyed by their own assaults and enterprises against her;
for their coming to smother or extinguish her, is casting of wood upon a
hearth, or, asheafe upon a torch of fire, which puts not out the fire or torch,
but burns themselves. 3. The destruction of such as afflict the Church shall
not be ordinary, but violent, total and irrecoverable; for, as fire and a
torch, they shall devour all the people round about, on the right hand, and on
the left, which does not point at the Churches cruelty, but at the way of
enemies being ruined. 4. No opposition made unto the Church, will be able to
make any promises given unto her, or gracious purposes of God concerning her,
ineffectual; for, notwithstanding all their enemies, or wars and troubles
they may be put to, yet, Jerusalem shall be inhabited again, in her own place,
even in Jerusalem.

Verse. 7. The LORD also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of
the house of David, and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not
magnify themselves against Judah.

The fifth promise holds forth especially Gods method, in bringing about this
promised salvation and help, that the weak villages in the country should get
the first proof of his protection, that so God may have the glory of saving
them, and such as have either power or prudence, (as a walled town, and great
Rulers) may have no cause to glory of any excellency in them above others, to
make themselves happy. Doct. 1. The safety of all the Church, is a matter out
of question, however the Lord do not take the Churches own way, means or
method to bring it about; for, the Lord will save, though the question be, whom
he will save first. See, Hos 1.7. 2. The Lord has, and will always so order,
as that in his Church there should be variety of conditions and estates, for
letting forth variety of proofs of himself toward and upon them; for^ there are
tents of Judah, the house of David, and inhabitant: of Jerusalem. 3. The Lord
so orders his gracious providence, as that they who are lowest in trouble,
and have least wherewith to help themselves, do lie nearest his help; for, the
Lord shall save the tents of Judah first. 4. The Lords way of conveying
deliverance toward his people will be so ordered, as that he alone will be seen
to be the doer of it, and he will stain the pride of all glory, and take
occasion of boasting from all, and the more excellency that any have, he will
put them the more frequently to be humbled before him: for, he saves the tents
of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David, and the glory of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, do not magnify themselves against Judah.

Verse 8. In that day shall the LORD defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David: and the house of
David shall be as God, as the Angel of the LORD before them.

The sixth promise is of divine protection, (taking in the inhabitants of
Jerusalem also, though the tents of Judah find the fruit of it first, v. 7.)
and of strength, wherein is held forth that (as their Governors expected
through faith, v. 5.) when that people shall come to any hazard, the feeble
among them shall be endued with heroic fortitude, such as David had, and that
their Rulers and great ones shall be raised to a divine and Angelick pitch of
strength, which is to be understood, that they shall be so through says in
Christ their Head, who is the true root and off spring of David, and they his
family and train, and who is true God, and as he was the Angel of the
Covenant, who went before the people in their deliverance out of Egypt, Exodus
14.19. and 23.23. so he promises to prove himself the same again. Doct. 1. The
Lord will so have a care of all his people, as, however he see meet to humble
some of them at some times, and to delay his help till they be humbled, yet it
is not his purpose to deny them altogether, therefore is the promise made
particularly to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and David's house, to show that
however he would prefer Judab^ tents to them in the matter of speedy help, yet
he will not reject them: In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, etc. 2. The Lords protection is the sure safeguard of his Church,
beyond any thing they get strength to do themselves, yea, it is the strength of
their strength, to abide under his shadow with it; therefore is the promise of
defense premitted to that of their strength, as being their sure refuge, and
that which makes them strong; The Lord will defend Jerusalem, and he that is
feeble shall be as David. etc. 3. However the Lord may keep his people in a low
and weak condition for their exercise, yet he has undertaken to let out
proofs of his strength in them, in a time of need, in a singular way, and will
make their weakness in themselves a presage of their being strengthened in
him: He that is feeble among them, at that day shall be as David. 4. None do
attain in this life to that measure of strength and courage, but they do yet
stand in need of more, and ought to be on the growing hand: for, the house of
David needs a promise of this, as well as the feeble. 5. As Christ will be unto
his Church in her need, whatever he has been unto her at any time; so what
Christ is, that are believers in him their Head, as they need it, all fullness
dwelling in him for their behoof: for, as Christ had been as on Angel of God
before that people, so will he be yet, and the house of David so in him.

Verse 9. And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy
all the Nations that come against Jerusalem.

In the seventh promise, Gods purpose of destroying the Churches enemies is
repeared and confirmed, that though they were never so many, yet God will
destroy them, and will be serious in effectuating it, seeking out secret
plotters as well as open enemies, or seeking them out after they are scattered,
and their enterprises frustrated, to ruin them. Doct. 1. The Lords Church has
many enemies both open and secret, enemies standing yet unbroken, and these,
who though they be broken, yet remain enemies; for, there is an all of the
Nations that come against Jerusalem. 2. Albeit some, who persecute and oppose
the Church of God, may find mercy to come and join with her, and be saved:
yet for the most part it is a token of so much displeasure, and so many former
controversies against men, when they are le^t to themselves to be persecutors,
that their destruction only will end it; I will destroy all the Nations, etc.
is the ordinary issue of their being enemies 3. The Lord is not slack or
remiss in avenging injuries done to the Church, but will do it as effectually,
as men do their most serious affairs, when they bend their wits to devise
means to c^rry it well on, and do pursue it to the uttermost: this is imported
in that he will seek to destroy all the Nations, as is before explained.

Verse 10. And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplications, and they shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns
for his only son: and shall be in bitterness for him, as one that is in
bitterness for his firstborn.

In the eighth promise, is held forth the future conversion and repentance of
Israel, the full accomplishment whereof was not that which we read in the
primitive times, Act. 2. but is yet to be accomplished, when all their families
shall concur in this work, v. 14. which was not then fulfilled. The Lord
promises unto the body of that people. that he will give unto them the Spirit
of conversion and prayer, to help down their enemies, and repentance for their
piercing of Christ, by consenting to their fathers deed, and by their
reproaches against Christ and all Christians for his sake, during the time of
their infidelity: and that this sorrow shall be sincere and vehement, as for an
only son, or a firstborn. Doct. 1. Prayer is a special and effectual means of
bringing down the Churches enemies: for, in that day that he seeks to destroy
enemies, v. 9. this promise goes along, And I will pour upon the house of
David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the Spirit of grace and of
supplications. 2. Prayer for bringing down enemies is not the work of received
habits and qualifications only, but must flow from the Spirit of God, who where
he is given to any, is the gift of Gods free grace and favor, a pledge and
worker of grace in them, and an assured token of Gods favor to them; for there
is a Spi it of supplications, who also, being given for that end, is the Spirit
of grace. 3. As all that any do by way of duty, in promoving their own
happiness, is but the fruit of Gods preventing grace, so are his dispensations
of grace ample and liberal, like to the giver: for, when they supplicate, it
is, because he furnishes them by his Spirit so to do; and this Spirit is
poured out in large measure. 4. It is not enough in times of strait, to
supplicate God for help out of trouble, but guilt ought to be our greatest
burden and exercise, and repentance for it joined with our prayers: for, when
they have the Spirit of supplications, they shall mourn. 5. Sin will then
affect the heart most, when the wrong done to Christ by it is studied, and
especially a true penitent will be most affected with any persecution of Christ
in his members, whereof he has been guilty: for so will it be with the
converted Jews, They shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall
mourn. 6. A true penitent will be easily convinced, and will take with the
guilt of that which they have been approvers of consenters, and upstirrers
into, though others have acted it; for, the Jews will then reckon that they
pierced Christ, though it was done by the hand of the Roman soldiers: yea,
their posterity shall take with it, because of their consent to what their
fathers did. 7. Repentance for sin flows from faith in Christ, and the faith
of our interest in his sufferings, for, says Christ (who being God from
eternity, does here speak) They shall look upon me whom they have piered, and
mourn, which imports not only their considering that their fathers with wicked
hands pierced, but their looking to him by faith; (as Israel did of old to the
brazen serpent, Numb. 21.8, 9.) as pierced for, and by their sins, even
though they were such enemies, to purchase reconciliation for them, which will
draw forth repentance. 8. As acceptable repentance for sin ought to be
sincere and real without dissimulation, so kindly sorrow for it will come
behind no sorrow for any prejudice whatsoever: though sometimes spiritual
sorrow may fall short in outward expression, as being above it, and so great,
that to get it expressed were an ease; for, They shall mourn for him, (where
the person is changed, God the Father speaking, or the Prophet in his name) as
one mourns for his only son, etc.

Verse. 11. In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the
mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.

The repentance of the converted Jews is further described, that it shall be a
sorrow as vehement and solemn, as when all Judah by public appointment
lamented the death of Josiah in Hadadrimmon, near the valley of Megiddon where
he was slain, 2 Chronicles. 35.22, 23, 24, 25. and where it seems the lamentation
begun. Doct. 1. Christ is indeed the soul and life of his Church and people, in
whom their happiness stands, so that injuries done to him, and piercing of
him, and crucifying of him afresh, will produce sad lamentations from sensible
souls: so was Josiah unto Judah, and therefore all of them lamented him, and so
will converted Judah (and all the people of God should) reckon Christ to be,
and will mourn for their piercing of him by their cruelty and sins. 2. It is
not only lawful, but necessary, that a people under guiltiness express their
repentance in solemn fasts and humiliations, for mutual up-stirring to
repentance, and for public testification thereof: for, so will it be among the
converted Jews, In that day shall there be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as
the mourning of Hadadrimmon, in the valley of Megiddon, where there were
public humiliations by solemn appointment, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

Verse. 12. And the land shall mourn, every family apart; the family of the
house of David apart, and their wives apart: the family of the house of Nathan
apart, and their wives apart:

13. The family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart: the family
of Shimei apart, and their wives apart.

14. All the families that remained, every family apart, and their wives apart.

It is further declared concerning this repentance, that it shall be universal
among all the people, and all ranks, and that not only in a public way, but
also by private humiliations in families, of Rulers, and Teachers, who had been
chief in the guilt of crucifying Christ, and of all other ranks, who should in
their mourning shut up themselves from their wives, and other lawful delights,
as was the custom of the Jews in mourning. The Rulers are signified by the
house of David, and of Nathan a son of David's, 2 Samuel 5.14. whose posterity
it seems, were in some eminency in this time: and the teachers are signified,
by the house of Levi and of Shimei a son of Gershom the son of Lovi, 1 Chronicles. 6.17. whose posterity also seems to have been some way remarkable in
Zechariabs time, and therefore particularly poken of. Doct. 1. The conversion
of the Jews or Israel unto the Messiah, is not to be of some few only, but
Nation ^ll of the body of that people, and there will be real repentance among
many of them; for, All the land shall mourn, and all the familier that
remain, men and their wives. 2. True penitents will not satisfy himselves
only with public humiliations where custom and example may draw many; but
will also make conscience of the duty in families, and where no eye but Gods
sees them; and will lay their own sins and public sins particularly to
heart, and bring home public provocations to their own doors, no rank or
degree excluding or freeing themselves; for, Every family shall mourn apart,
and their wives apart. 3. As the Lord will have his own among eminent Rulers,
so it is a desirable blessing, when Rulers and Teachers, who ordinarily have
chief hand in public provocations, do not draw back, but are eminent in the
duty of repentance; for, so is here promised, The family of the house of David,
of Nathan, of Levi, of Shimei, shall mourn. 4. In setting about the duty of
repentance and humiliations, persons are not only to cast off sinful
distractions, but even to lay aside lawful delights, that they may afflict
their souls before the Lord, and seriously mind the duty; for, The families
shall mourn, and their wives apart.

CHAP. XIII.
IN the first part of this Chapter, the spiritual blessings of the Gospel
purchased by Christ are promised to the Church, especially to Israel, such is
remission of sins and holiness, verse. 1. Reformation of the Church, verse. 2.
and zeal against false teachers, v. 3. some of whom (at least) shall be
convinced of their way and quit it, v. 4. taking them to other callings, v. 5
and shall acknowledge the equity of severity used against them, v. 6 In the
second part of the Chapter, there is a Prophecy of the suffering of Christ,
and scattering of the visible Church, and his care of his own, v. 7 and that
the greater part of the Church was to be cut off, and but a few to be
preserved, v. 8. who being purged by afflictions, should increase in holiness,
and in the sense of Gods favor toward them, v. 9.

Verse. 1. IN that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David,
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin, and for uncleanness.

There are several blessings and benefits of the Kingdom of Christ here
promised, which as the godly Jews before Christ did enjoy, though more darkly
and in lesser measure then under the Gospel: so though they be the common
privileges of the Gospel Church, in every age, yet a more full accomplishment
of them is reserved for the converted Israelites, and therefore are peculiarly
promised for that day when they shall repent and be restored, as appears from
the end of the preceding Chapter. The first benefit is, Remission of sins and
sanctification, purging away the guilt of sin, by the grace of God in for
giving sins through Christ's blood, and the virtue of his blood applied by the
Spirit, and laid hold upon by faith, for purging all uncleanness of sin:
this is compared to a springing fountain made open to all, in opposition to
the small measure of water carried into the Temple for legal washings. This
benefit will be very conspicuous toward converted Israel, when the Redeemer
shall turn iniquity from Jacob, Romans 11.26. Doct. 1. The great and chief
privilege of the Gospel is remission and purging of sin, which as they are
only attainable through faith laying hold on Christ's blood, and the grace of
God through him offered in the Gospel, so without these no other advantages by
the Gospel will avail much, or be comfortable; for, it is the first here, A
fountain for sin, and uncleanness, or, se^cration through uncleanness,
pointing at all filthiness of sin, shadowed out by legal uncleanness,
causing men to be sequestrate; and particularly at original sin, shadowed
out by menstruous uncleanness, for the purging whereof this fountain also
must be made use of. 2. The free grace of God toward lost man, and the virtue
of Christ's blood is a treasure in exhaustible, and which cannot be overcome
with the greatness and multiplicity of sin in these who flee unto it; for,
it is a fountain, or spring 3. Pardon, and virtue for purging of sin is not
only purchased, and the way to it made patent, by the death of Christ, giving
access unto God through him: but is held forth in the offer of the Gospel and
Ministry of the Word, that none may pretend ignorance, nor any who need it
seclude themselves from so free an offer; and that the godly who have found the
fruit of it, may come and daily make use of it: for, it is a fountain opened.
4. As the greatest must be in Christ's reverence for this benefit, even these
who have greatest gifts and are Rulers of others; so the meanest in the Church,
however they be not equal to others in gifts, yet have a like interest with
them in this saving benefit; for, it is opened to the house of David, or,
Rulers who attend in Christ's Courts, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, or
body of the Church. 5. When the Lord poures out upon his people, the Spirit of
repentance and humiliation, it is a forerunner of ample manifestations of the
grace of God, in opening up the treasures of the Gospel by the Ministry of the
Word, and in granting of pardon, and growth in purity; for, when the land shall
mourn, Chap. 12.10. In that day, there shall be a fountain opened.

Verse. 2. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the LORD of hosts, that
I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more
be remembered: and also I will cause the Prophets, and the unclean spirit to
pass out of the land.

A second benefit promised, is, Reformation of the Church from all
superstition, idolatry, and corruption in worship, under the name of Idols, and
from false Doctrine in removing of false teachers, and the unclean spirit that
leads and acts them: This is accomplished in every reformed Church, by Doctrine
and constitutions of Discipline according to the measure of their Reformation,
but will more especially appear in the Church of Israel, when they are
converted and restored. The Doctrine and Discipline of that Church shall cast
out all Heretics, Sectaries, and Schismatics out of the land. Doct. 1.
Gospel-Reformation consists not only in the internal purging away of sin,
but in the outward Reformation of Doctrine also, whereby Gods truth, and
Ordinances, which he has promised to be with, and to bless for conversion and
renovation of souls, are established and set up; for here, with the fountain
opened, such a Reformation is promised. 2. The Reformation of a Church is
promoved and carried on, especially when the Spirit of repentance for sin,
and former deboardings from God is poured out upon a people; for, this
Reformation goes on in that day, when they are mourning, chap. 12. The neglect
of this provokes God to reform his Church rather by judgments then by such a
merciful way. 3. Every corruption in the worship of God is an idol, in so far
as it is a device of man's own brain, and the deviser imagines to himself a
God, who will not approve of such worship, which certainly is not the true God:
so it is here held out, I will cut off Idols. 4. Idolatry and superstition are
so grievous in the eyes of a jealous God, so scandalous blemishes in his bride,
and evils to which we have such an inclination by nature, as the least mixture
of these with his worship cannot but dishonor God, and pollute the Church; and
the very memorial of them, will be enough to draw us back to Apostasy;
therefore in a right Reformation, The names of idols are to be cut off, and to
be no more remembered, to wit, in any religious state especially. 5. Whatever
false worship may seem to be, or promise, yet in effect it proves but matter of
terror and sorrow, when the worshipper stands in greatest need of comfort in
his worship; for, so does the name of idols (which in the Original is sorrows,
or, terrors) import. 6. Purity of worship and Doctrine must go together, all
corrupt worship having false Doctrine at the root of it; and as corruption in
worship ushers in heresy in Doctrine, so unsoundnesse in Doctrine flowing from
an unsound heart, cannot consist with pare and acceptable worship; for here,
idols and Prophets, or teachers of false Doctrine (who are here designed as
they use to design themselves) must go together. 7. Approven Reformation does
not only oppose the error by way of doctrinal declaration and refutation, but
also the teacher of the error, by way of Discipline; for, where Doctrine is
reformed, The Prophet passes out of the land. 8. False Doctrine and corrupt
worship are accomplished with, and flow from, not only the polluted and corrupt
heart and imaginations of men, but from a spirit of Satan, the father of lies,
who contributes to make them have place in the world, among them who receive
not the love of the truth; which spirit, how plausible soever, is not an
harmless and innocent spirit, but an unclean spirit, working upon the vilest
affections in men, to hatch and broach error, and oftentimes leading the
erroneous person into blemishes in conversation, that in Gods wisdom the veil
may be taken off their way; for, with the Prophet, there is an unclean spirit
to pass out of the land in a time of Reformation. Hence it is that errors are
called the error of the wicked, 2 Pet. 3.17. and are works of the flesh, Gal.
5.19, 20. and work on lusts and wantonness, 2. Pet. 2.18 See, 2 These. 2.9. 9.
It is the Lord who has chief hand in the Churches Reformation, and to whom the
glory thereof is due: it is he who prescribes the rule of Reformation, who
cleares it up from his Word unto a people, who stirs them up to embrace it,
and who by his Spirit makes it effectual, notwithstanding all opposition; for,
In that day, says the Lord of hosts, I will cut off the names of idols, etc.

Verse;. 3. And it shall come to pass, that when any shall yet prophecy, then
his father and his mother that begat him shall say unto him, Thou shall not
live: for thou speak lies in the Name of the LORD: and his father and his
mother that begat him, shall thrust him through when he prophesies.

A third benefit (which is a branch of the former,) is zeal in the godly
against false teachers, who shall be so tender, of the truth and glory of God,
and the safety of the Church, (all which are endangered by error,) that it
shall overcome natural affection in them; so that parents shall not spare their
own children, being seducers, but shall either by an heroic act (such as was
in Phinchas, Numb. 25.8.) themselves judge him worthy to die, and give sentence
and execute it, or cause him to be punished, by bringing him to the Magistrate
who has power, according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 13. It is here promised, that this
zeal shall be conspicuous in converted Israel. Doct. 1. Times of throughest
reformation, will not want their own measure of opposition by some adhering
unto, and persevering in their old corruptions; yea, it is ordinary, that in a
time of Reformation, Satan will be let loose in false teachers, as intending
thereby to scandalize all Reformation, but God intending hereby to make
Reformation more pure, and truth the clearer because of opposition; for, when
God is reforming, there will be who shall yet prophecy. 2. The toleration of a
false Religion in Doctrine or worship, and the exemption of the erroneous from
civil punishment, is no more lawful under the New Testament, then it was under
the Old, it being no more lawful to compel consciences (if sobe that this be
a compulsion, as men give it out) then, nor it is now; for, here is a Prophecy
of the days of the New Testament, alluding to the Law, Deuteronomy. 13.5, 6, 9, etc.
as being then to be in force. 3. The Lords promising and undertaking a work of
Reformation, and the suppressing of error and idolatry, ought to be no
hindrance to Magistrates and others in their stations, to suppress what may
hinder Reformaton, but rather an encouragement unto them, having such ground of
hope that their endeavors shall be successful; for, though God promise to
bring about this Reformation, v. 2. yet it is foretold that they shall do their
duty, v. 3. A Magistrates duty is no more inconsistent with the promise that
Reformation shall be Gods work, then Ministers preaching against error is, both
of them being means whereby God accomplisheth his promise. 4. Albeit that all
erroneous persons stand guilty before the Lord, yet his controversy is
specially against seducers and false teachers, unto whom punishment is
specially due from the civil Magistrate; for it is, They who prophecy, that
are to be punished. 5. Zeal for God is very lawfully and warrantably employed
against error, as well as against prophanity; and dearest relations and natural
affections ought to give place unto it, it being cruelty to suffer these we
affect to lose their own souls, and the souls of others; for, When any shall
yet prophecy, then his father and his mother that begat him, shall say unto
him, thou shall not live. 6. It is not enough nor a sufficient testimony of
zeal in Magistrates, to suppress and punish erroneous persons, when they do by
their Doctrine and practices disturb the civil peace of the State, but their
wronging of the truth of God, corrupting of souls food, poisoning them with
lies instead of truth, and wronging of the God of truth by fathering of a lie
upon him, ought to stir up zeal to take order with them; for, this is the
reason of the sentence, Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies in the Name
of the Lord. 7. Some errors are so eminently blasphemous, and some persons so
eminently engaged in venting and promoting of them; as in Gods account, calls
for the death of the seducers; for of some Prophers and Prophecies it is said,
Thou shall not live, and they shall thrust him through.

Verse. 4. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Prhphets shall be
ashamed every one of his vision, when he has prophesied: neither shall they
wear arough garment to deceive.

5. But he shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an husbandman: for man taught me to
keep cattle from my youth.

A fourth benefit, flowing from the two former of Reformation and zeal of the
godly, appears upon some of seducers themselves, who through the clearness and
abundance of the true Doctrine, and of knowledge, and observing the severity
used against some, shall be convinced in conscience of the error of their way,
and shall willingly cease from deceiving the people, and from their accustomed
counterfeiting of holiness, they shall lay aside the habit used by true
Prophets in sign of sobriety, 2 Kings 1.8. Mat. 3.4. whereby they had deluded
the people, and they shall renounce the Profession, and take them to their
wonted callings, which they had left to turn deceivers, and to live idly. Doct.
1. How strong and taking soever error be, yet truth is infinitely stronger,
and can prevail over it, and convince and confound the greatest opposite that
ever he should have been against it; for, In that day the Prophets shall be
ashamed, every one of his vision, when he has prophesied. 2. Errors and
erroneous ways, are not to be lightly, and without remorse abandoned, (as if
it were but a change of judgment,) but with deep conviction of conscience, and
shame of face, as for other scandalous sins; for, the Phophets shall he ashamed
every one of his vision. 3. Civil powers, their suppressing and punishing
erroneous persons and seducers, is not a means to make men turn hypocrites:
but being joined with due conviction, may be blessed with reclaiming of them
indeed; for, this conviction renouncing hypocritical shows, and acknowledging
their error, speaks so much at least in some of them. 4. As it is usual for
Satan and false teachers to delude the world, under fairest pretexts of
holiness and mortification; so it shall add to the conviction and repentance
of the truly convinced, that they have covered so vile a course with so fair a
veil; for, as they did wear a rough garment to deceive, so they shall not do
it any more when they are convinced. 5. When God convinces and wakeneth the
consciences of seducers, and of unfaithful teachers, it will be sad and
grievous unto them, that they did run without a calling, and did undertake a
charge, for which they were not fitted, and they will be ready to subscribe to
their own senrence and ejection; for, they shall say, I am no Prophet, I am an
Husbandman: imports not only that they shall be convinced, that they wanted a
calling to that office, but that they shall judge themselves more fit for the
Plough then the Pulpit. 6. As it is a great iniquity for men whom Providence
has settled in a lawful calling, to leave it, and at their own hand turn
teachers, and as this is the means to breed many errors in a Church, when all
the Congregation will be holy, and think that teachers take too much upon them:
so a chief cause why men turn and continue seducers and false teachers, is
unwillingnesse to be at pains for their livelihood in a lawful calling, which
they think to gain more easily that way: this is it which makes Husbandmen,
bred to keep cat el from their youth, quit their calling, and pretend to
prophesying, which as it made many teachers of lies, so they will see it, and
confess it to be a great sin, when God speaks ^o their consciences.

Verse 6. And one shall say unto him, What are these wounds in thine hands?
Then he shall answer: Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.

This benefit and effect upon false teachers is further declared, in that they
shall not only relinquish their deceiving, and take them to their old
employment, but when any shall enquire what the prints of inferior
chastisements, that had been inflicted upon them who escaped death, mean,
(which however they might be hid on the rest of their body, yet were visible on
their maked hands) They shall justify the censure, and acknowledge that the
inflicters, (whether their Parents, v. 3. or Judges,) were friends and not
enemies. Doct. 1. That the Spirit of God is not here prophesying of spiritual
censures, and the Churches piercing of seducers with threatenings of eternal
wrath, but is foretelling of civil corporal punishments, is clear from this
Scripture; for, there will be wounds in the bands, which are visible, and
occasion questions from others. 2. It is not the Will of God that all errors be
alike severely censured, nor all seducers punished alike, but that the
punishment be proportioned to the error, and to men's obstinacy in main taining,
and activity in promoting them; for, of these Prophets some were not to live,
v. 3. others less guilty, or more penitent are chastened only, and escape with
wounds in their hands. 3. As it is a great kindness to any, to use all lawful
means, how severe soever, to reclaim them from error: so themselves, whenever
they find grace to repent, will account it so, whatever may be their
apprehensions in the time of their wandering; for, Then shall he answer, Those
with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.

Verse 7. Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my
fellow, says the LORD of hosts: smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be
scattered, and I will turn mine hand upon the little ones.

The Lord having foretold this happiness to come upon the Church, especially
on converted Israel: and lest the godly should over-rejoyce because of this
dream of a constant gale of prosperity: therefore he subjoyns a prophecy of the
sufferings of Christ, the afflictions of the godly, and the purging of the
visibie Church by judgments, ere all this Reformation, especially of Israel,
were brought about. This prophecy has its chief and first accomplishment in
Christ's person, his disciples, and the visible Church of the Jews after his
death, but may be extended also to point out the lot of Pastors, and particular
members of the visible Church in all ages.

In this part of the prophecy, Christ's sufferings are foretold, in a charge
given to affliction or persecution, (signified by the sword) to assail and
smite Christ for the sins of his people, according to the paction past in the
Covenant of Redemption. Upon which it is foretold, that the flock shall be
scattered, (whereof an external symbol was the flight of his disciples, Mat.
26.31. but was more fully accomplished in the dispersion of the Jews after his
death,) and that in that scattering God would have a care of his own, who are
little in their own eyes, would preserve them, and change his dealing toward
them, as was verified in his recollecting and strengthening his scattered
disciples, and preserving of his own among the Jews. Doct. 1. The Church of
Christ is not to dream of flourishing and trivmphing days, but to be fitted
for what is promised her by trouble, and to have them seasoned when they come
with trouble; so much does the seasoning of former promises, with these
predictions of the suffe^ings of Christ and his servants, as if they were false
teachers, import. 2. It is no sufficient argument to hinder the Church and
Christian Magistrates zeal in punishing error, that the faithful servants of
Christ are oft-times under persecution for truth, the one being the Churches
duty, which may not be omitted without sin; the other, her affliction only;
for, it is nothing the less a mercy to have false prophets thrust through, v.
3. that sometime the sword is drawn against Christ and his followers. 3. Christ
incarnate is the good and faithful shepherd of his flock, who willingly gave
his life for his sheep, who was obedient to his Father unto death, served him
in the work of Redemption, and who in his office is approved and accepted of
him, and lost none of his Fathers respects by his afflictions; for, the Father
acknowledges him my shepherd. 4. Christ in one person is both God and man,
being true man as incarnate, and true God in his divine nature dwelling by the
personal union in the humane nature, equal with the Father, because of the same
essence, though in respect of his office and voluntary dispensation, he be
inferior; for, he is the man that is my fellow, equal, or companion, says the
Lord of hosts. 5. The sufferings of Christ, (and consequently of all his
followers) are overruled by the effectual Providence of God, so that nothing
is done to him without the Fathers consent, who yet is free of the sins of all
instruments employed in afflicting him, who were about another thing in that
work then the Father approved of: for, it is God who commands the sword to
awake, and smite the shepherd. 6. Christ is the Chieftain and Ringleader of
all the Churches fuflerers, who in his own person has paved the way to his
followers, and tried the swords, and who by his interest and sympathy, chiefly
suffers in the sufferings of his people: for, the sword assayes him first,
Smite the shepherd. 7. When the Lord sends troubles upon the visible Church,
the Pastors and Watchmen are to resolve for hardest measure, as being Satan's
greatest eye-sores, and they who ought to confirm others by their sufferings;
for, as this was verified in Christ, so also at other times trouble ordinarily
begins at Smite the shepherd. 8. Trouble is a very terrifying thing when it
comes to a pinch, and may affright those who thought themselves very stout, and
make them shrink if there be any way to shun it; for, so did appear in the
accomplishment of this prophecy, in the disciples flight. 9. Albeit it be
Satan's policy to cause men to undervalue Pastors, and look upon them as
burdens, which the Church would be the better to want; yet their trouble
prognosticates trouble to come on the Church, their death, exile or
imprisonment scatters the visible society of the Church; for, this is of
eternal verity, as well as in the disciples flight; Smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered. 10. It is an especial presage of the Churches
scattering by the loss of Pastors, when they themselves have an hand in the
persecuting of Pastors; for, so was this accomplished on the Church of the
Jews, they smote Christ who was their shepherd, and therefore were justly
scattered themselves. 11. Saddest afflictions do not seclude the elect and
faithful from Christ and his Fathers care, but that he will moderate and change
his dealing toward them, when afflictions are universal and sore; for, as while
Christ was suffering in his humane nature, he ceased not to work in his divine
nature, and to care for his own disciples and followers: so in all ages he
(being raised from the dead) and his Father with him, does turn his hand upon
the little ones, or give them a renewed proof of his love, in recovering them
after their scattering, and in preserving them by his tender care under common
calamities, after they had been left to themselves to get a proof of their own
frailty. 12. It is an evidence of Christ's flock, and of these that he cares for
in trouble, that they are humble and little in their own eyes, and that their
afflictions contribute to make them so more and more; for, they are the little
ones.

Verse. 8. And it shall come to pass, that in all the land; says the LORD, two
parts therein shall be cut off and die, but the third shall be left therein.

9. And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as
silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried: they shall call upon my
Name, and I will hear them: I will say, It is my people: and they shall say,
The LORD is my God.

In this next part of the Prophecy, we have the further exposition of the
flocks scattering, in respect of the several sorts of dispositions in it, there
being a generality (signified by two parts,) who are ordinarily naught, these
are to be cut off and destroyed, and only a remnant, or third part left, who
yet should not be free of affliction to purge away their dross, that they may
be more fervent in Gods service, and in getting prooss of Gods hearing their
prayers, and of his love intimated unto them, they may increase in faith and
confidence. This was accomplished, not only on the Nation of the Jews, but in
all ages is to be seen in the visible Church, when he sets up his fire in it.
Doct. 1. As the visible Church is for ordinary so mixed, as that the generality
thereof is unsound, and not answerable to their obligations: so it is righteous
with God, to send trials and judgments upon her, whereby he purges her of
such dross, and cuts them off, who living in his house, will not submit to his
yoke; for, in all the land, two parts shall be cut off, and die. 2. In times of
Gods saddest judgments upon the visible Church, as God will have a special
care of his own children, so uses he to preserve a remnant toward whom to show
mercy; for, the third part shall be left therein. 3. Albeit the Lord reserve a
remnant to himself, yet he will not always free them from tasting of so much
affliction and calamity as may exercise them; for, I will bring the third part
through the fire. 4. The Lords end in letting our affliction upon his own is
not to destroy them, but to give them a proof of themselves, and to purge them
from their dross, and make them better, and by this testify his estimation of
them (...) I will refine them as silver is refined, and try tham as gold is
tried. The meaning of which similitude is not, that they shall be purged from
all their dross, or, that they can abide such a surnace, as silver or gold Isa
4.10. but that (as these precious metals) they have some dross, which cannot
be discovered or purged but by some searching trialls: that they shall not
prove chasse, stubble or dross in the furnace, but have some metal, which
shall be preserved and shine the brighter; and that God by taking this pains on
them, declares that he accounts them his treasure, and precious metal. 5. It
is a sweet evidence of a peoples profiting under the rod, and being purged of
dross, when their zeal in Gods worship, their need of him, and delight in
calling on his Name, is increased; for they shall call on my Name. 6. When the
Lord blesses his people with fruitfulness under affliction, and puts them to
employ him much; it is a pledge that God will hear their prayers, and shed
abroad the sense of his love in their hearts, assuring them of an interest in
him; for, I will hear them, I will say, It is my people. 7. As fait, and the
increase of it, enabling men boldly to prosesse it before God and the world, is
a choice Gospel-blessing, and a rich recompense of much affliction: so Gods
preventing grace and kindness toward his people when they seek him, especially
under affliction, is such, as may invite them to make him their portion, and
give them warrant, confidently to rest and rely on him; for, upon his hearing,
and saying, It is my people, they shall say, The Lord is my God.

CHAP. XIV.
IN this Chapter there (...) continuation of the prephecie beg^n, in the end of
the former chapter, wherein an account is given of the case of the Church, from
this Prophets time to the end of the world, in these particulars. 1. The
destruction of Jerusalem, with the judgment and mercy in that stroke, v. 1.2.
2. It is cleared, that the instruments of this stroke should not go unpunished,
v. (...) no^ the Church (...) by this stroke, for the way of salvation should
be made clear unto the Gentiles, v. 4. to which the elect Jews should join, v.
5.3. It is fore^old, that the condition of the Church and Elect under the days
of the Gospel, shall be unsettled and mixed of variety of dispensations, yet so
as in end, and when men would least expect, it should prove better, v. 6.7. 4.
It is fore-prophesied, that the doctrine of salvation, and the refreshments
following thereupon, shall spread to all parts of the world, v. 8. whereby
Christ shall get an universal Kingdom, wherein there shall be unity, v. 9.5. A
particular promise is made of the exaltation, restitution and safety of
converted Israel, v. 10, 11. 6. There is a threatening of judgment against the
enemies of the Church, that they shall be cut off, as by a consumption, v. 12.
by intestine discord, v. 13. by the hand of the Church, v. 14. and that the
stroke shall reach all means they had employed against the Church, v. 15.7.
There is a promise of the Conversion of many of these enemies who are reserved,
v. 16. and if not, that visible judgment shall pursue them yet more, v. 17,
18, 19. Lastly, there is a promise of the holiness and purity of the Church,
v. 20, 21.

Verse 1. BEhold, the day of the LORD comes, and thy spoil shall be divided
in the midst of thee.

The chapter begins with a more clear prediction of the destruction of
Jerusalem then before, wherein God being Judge and Avenger of his Sons blood
which they should shed, would bring a day of special vengeance upon that city,
putting it wholly in the power of enemies, who, without fear of ambush or
surprisal, should divide the spoils of the city in the midst of lt: and by
this doctrine he clears what had been said, chap. 13.8. of cutting off two
parts, and leaving a third part. Doct. 1. It is the Churches advantage to be
ordinarily warned of a stroke before it come, that she wisely considering Gods
judgment, may labor to prevent or prepare for it; that the godly be not
surprised with such a judgment when it comes; and that God may be justified,
if he make them feel justice, who will not believe truth speaking it; therefore
are they excited to consider this approaching judgment; Behold, the day
comes. 2. The Lord is chief and supreme in all the Churches calamities, he it
is who executes his Word by them, who pleads his controversies, and who,
however he be but little seen or regarded in the visible Church, yet by his
judgments will be discovered to be Jehovah the Lord; for, the day of the Lord
comes. 3. It is one evidence of divine displeasure, wherein God is to be seen,
when enemies get power over the substance of his people, (in pursuing after
which God is oft-times forgotten) and do without fear of any, dispose thereof
at their pleasure; for, it is the day of the Lord, wherein he is seen, when the
spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.

Verse. 2. For I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the
city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished, and half
of the city shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the people shall
not be cut off from the city.

This calamity is further described, from both the severity and moderation that
shall be in it. The Lord was to gather the Roman army, (consisting of many
Nations, subject unto them, and confederate with them) against Jerusalem; and
to deliver the city into their hands, that houses might be pillaged, and women
ravished; and yet he would not utterly destroy that Nation, for some of them
should be preserved by going into captivity, and others should leave it before
the time of the siege, (as the Christians who went to Pella) and so should not
be cut off from the city, or from that Nation, whereof the city was a part.
Doct. 1. There is not a motion or enterprise among men in the world, especially
about the Church, but Grd has a sovereign hand in it, and is by them carrying
on purposes which they little mind; for the Roman armies coming against
Jerusalem, is Gods deed to avenge his Sons death; I will gather all Nations
against Jerusalem to battle. 2. As the Lord has not a few, but all Nations at
his command, to put them in subjection to whom he will, and to be employed as
he pleases: so many of them are employed against the Church, that he may bring
many witnesses to the pleading of his controversy, and may discover to her her
folly, in provoking him to give her into the hands of these who formerly hated
her, but could not prevail because of his protection; for, all Nations are put
under the Romans by him, and gathered against Jerusalem. 3. It is no strange
thing to see enemies prevail against the Church, when God is pursuing a
controversy with her; nor, when she rejects Christ corrupts his worship, sheds
righteous blood, is given to covetousness, injustice, Iuxury, etc. and is
obstinate in all these, to (...) quite overthrow and overturn her, and make her
a spectacle of sad judgments; for such were the sins of Jerusalem, and for
these, The cities shall be taken, housesrifled, and the women ravished.
The^fore other Churches may expect the same measure, if they provoke God, and
being under calamity, are to be thankful in so far as they come short of this
stroke. 4. Every one ought to submit and prepare for what God may carve out as
their share of a common calamity, according as in his wisdom he thinks fit,
without complaining of being otherwise dealt with then others: for, the city
being taken, there is death (of which no mention is made here) rifling of
houses, captivity, and (which is worse then death) ravishing of women, when
husbands and parents are not able to defend their wives and children, of which
some tasted of one, some of more, as God saw fit. 5. The Lord can so season
saddest dispensations to his people, and set bounds to overflowing trouble, as
even when they seem bitterest, some mercy may be in the bosom of them; for,
not only was this fatal stroke a mercy, in that it was a clear demonstration
that the Messiah was come, in that their Commonwealth was quite abolished, and
their Ceremonial worship put to a close, the Temple being destroyed: but yet
further mercy appears, in that that Nation is not quite cut off, but a part
reserved for future mercy; a refidue not cut off from the city. Which as it was
literally true in Antiochus invasion before Christ, that some were left in the
city, so under the Romans, some of that Nation and City escaped the siege and
these calamities. 6. The Lord may conveigh purposes of mercy in a sad time,
through very sad dispensations, which at first view would seem to promise no
such thing; for, as this mercy of being preserved, was granted to some in
escaping the siege, so others were reserved to be a seed of that Nation by
their captivity into strange Nations: Half of the people shall go forth into
captivity, is both a calamity, and yet a mercy to that Nation.

Verse 3. Then shall the LORD go forth, and fight against those Nations, as
when he fought in the day of battle.

In the next part of this prophecy, the Lord cleares some difficulties that
might arise upon the hearing of this sad judgment, And first, it might be
enquired what shall become of these so cruel enemies? to which, answer is here
made, that they should not escape unpunished, but God should appear and fight
against them, as ever he did at any time for his Church, and his fighting
imports success; this the Romans and their Consederates felt in many
calamities, since that time till now, Doct. 1. No affliction of the Church for
her provocations, not yet Gods seeming to hide himself, will hinder him from
testifying his affection to her, or from being her enemies party in due time,
and to embarque in her quarrel, and engage his power for revenge; for, the Lord
shall go forth and fight against these Nations. 2. Albeit the Lord by his
secret Providence do so order affairs, as that the Churches enemies do nothing
but execute his quarrel; yet they are to expect no thanks for their service
against his Church, as minding nothing less therein then the execution of Gods
will, but they may rather reckon that they are permitted to go on in that
service to ripen them for vengeance; for, though the Lord gathered them, v. 2.
yet now, he will fight against them 3. The Churches low estate may be a time of
greater mercies, at least as to his reckoning with her enemies, then when she
is most flourishing; for, then, when Jerusalem is destroyed, albeit he do not
yet restore them, yet he will go forth and fight against their enemies. 4. All
the Churches experiences in former times, are forthcoming for the Churches
comfort in after-ages, according as she shall need them, and as the Lords
wisdom sees fit to improve them; for, he shall fight as when he fought in the
day of battle, which is not to be restricted to any one particular experience
or time, but generally to be understood of all or any experience, which may
seem most comfortable in this or that strait.

Verse 4. And his fect shall stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which
is before Jerusalem on the East, and the Mount of Olives shall cleave in the
midst thereof, toward the East, and toward the West, and there shall be a very
great valley, and half of the mountain shall remove toward the North, and
balfe of it toward the South.

A second question might arise upon the hearing of this judgment; what should
become of the Church, when Jerusalem is gone, the Temple burnt, and that Nation
cut off or scattered? To which, answer is given, that the Church should not
perish, for God should reveal the doctrine of salvation, and make a plain way
for the Gentiles to come unto the Church in place of the Jews, and to worship
him according to his will from afar off. Thus do I take up this dark speech,
without troubling my self with other expositions: for the clearing whereof,
consider, that the City J^rusalem was encompassed with hills, Ps. 125.2.
(whereof this Mount of Olives was one,) so that it was not seen afar off, nor
the way to it easy. When eby was signified, that under the Law, the Church and
way to heaven was hid up from the rest of the world, being not only dark to the
Jews in respect of many ceremonies, but these ceremonies were a
partition wall, betwixt the Gentiles and the Church; so that the turning of
that hill into a plain valley, imports, that God should make the Church, and
way of his worship clear to them afar off, that they might look there-away, as
of old they did to the Temple, 1 Kings 8. Dan. 6. (testisying their worshipping
God, as he had prescribed and revealed himself,) and that he would remove
impediments in the way of their Conversion, and make a plain way without
ceremonies for them to come unto the Church. In this dark speech the Mount of
Olives is only mentioned, though there were other hills about Jerusalem,
because of an external symbol of this prophecy, accomplished on that Mount;
when Christ ascending into heaven from off this Mount, gave Commission to his
Apostles to carry the Gospel into all parts of the world, Acts 1.8, -- 12. and
upon his Ascension poured out his Spirit, and so, did make the Church notor,
and the way to it conspicuous and easy through the world. As for the valleys
lying Eastward and Westward, and the parts of the cleft Mount going to the
North and the South, it is not curioufly to be dipped in; for the parts of it
were to go somewhere, and it may be thus conceived, that through all the world,
(the large extent whereof is ordinarily taken up from East to West, Psalm:
103.12 and 113.3.) the Church shall be conspicuous, or rather, because the City
lay to the West of the Mount, the two parts of it bendved to go that way to
North and South, and not to overwhelme the city, which would overturn the scope
of the figure. Doct. 1. No commotions and overturnings in the visible Church,
will deprive Christ of a Church and people, he will find a way to get a people
amongst these who are little thought of, when these who account themselves the
children of the Kingdom are cast out, for so are we taught here. 2. The opening
up of the way of salvation, is God and Christ's own work, who by his preventing
power and grace, overturnes mountains of impediments, to bring the light of
salvation unto men, and make it have place with them; for, His feet standing on
the Mount of Olives, makes it cleave and be a valley. 3. The access and
Conversion of the Gentiles unto the Church, is a work of glorious power and
grace, in effectuating which, mountains were cleft, partition walls broken
down, etc. and here it is prophesied of as an altering in part of the course of
nature, and turning hills in valleys. 4. It takes away all ground of excuse
from the children of men, that Christ has purchased a clear right to all
Nations indifferently, to whom the offer is made to come to him, and has laid
out a plain, clear, and comfortable way wherein to come; for, now the city
hedged in with mountains, is made patent to all, and mountains in the way are
turned in great valleys.

Verse 5. And ye shall flee to the valley of the mountains: for the valley of
the mountains shall reach unto Azal: yea, ye shall flee like as ye fled from
before the earthquake in the days of Vzziah King of Judah: and the LORD my
God shall come, and all the Saints with thee.

It is further foretold in answer to the question, that the way to the Church,
and of worship and salvation being made clear without ceremonies, and patent to
all, as a valley made of the divided mountain, the Elect among the Jews who
should escape these calamities should seek unto the same with the Gentiles.
Unto which prediction is added, that this valley shall reach unto Azal, a word
which signifies any thing that is separate, or, set apart, either by election,
and so it points at the Church figured by Mount Sion, which is chosen of God,
or by sequestration, and putting far off, and so it points at the Gentiles, who
before were separated from the Church, as by a partition wall, unto whom this
valley or way of salvation shall reach, excepting such as are yet on Azal, that
is, sequestrate by Gods decree of reprobation: and thus taking both together,
it agrees to what is said of the Elect Jews, they shall join with the
Gentiles, for then the partition wall shall be taken down, and no difference
shall be betwixt Jew and Gentile, they being cut off from the exercise of
ceremonies and use of the Temple, and however they will be scattered far off
from the Holy Land, yet that valley shall reach them, and at that distance they
shall see Zion, and may worship God with the Gentiles that are afar off. It is
further added, that they shall flee as before an earthquake, that was memorable
among the Jews; (of which we hear no more, but that it is pointed at Amos 1.1.
It may be it was when Uzziah presumed to offer incense,) whereby may be pointed
out their fleeing out of the land, because of the judgments on them to destroy
the Temple, and make way for their joining in the Christian Religion with the
Gentiles; but it rather holds out their fleeing from the wrath to come, being
moved by the power of the Gospel, whereby this mountain was divided, and so
overturned all as an earthquake, Doct. 1. The Gospel-way of salvation, and the
way of Gods worship is purchased by Christ, and revealed to the Church, not for
contemplation only, but for practice and use-making; for, Ye shall flee to the
valley. 2 Under the Gospel, the Jews have no special privilege of a peculiar
way of worship and salvation, but are to join with the Gentiles, to walk in
that new and living way; for, Ye shall flee to the valley that reaches to
Azal, or them that were separated. 3 No distinction of persons, nor distance of
place does seclude any from the offer of the Gospel, nor from communion with
Christ in his Church, if they embrace it; for, the valley shall reach to Azal,
or these who are separated at a great distance, and it shall reach back again
to Azal, or, the chosen mountain, they shall see Zion in that valley at
greatest distance, to direct their service to God dwelling there, according as
they did toward the Temple. 4. Albeit the distinction of Nations be removed
under the Gospel, yet grace is not universal then; insomuch as the means of
grace are not offered to all, at least in one age; for, so also is there still
an Azal, or some separate place where this valley ends. See, Ezech. 47.11.5.
The power of the Gospel, setting forth Christ, overturning men's excellencies
and prerogatives, discovering sin and wrath for sin, will let men see as much
cause to flee to Christ, and to embrace the way of salvation, as for men to
avoid the most terrible accidents in the world; for, when by the Gospel the
mountain shall cleave, and the valley be made, and Jew and Gentile ranked as
equal, notwithstanding all the Jews Prerogatives; then, Ye shall flee like as
ye fled from before the earthquake, in the days of Uzziah King of Judah.

Unto these predictions the Prophet subjoynes a Conclusion, and the Lord my God
shall come, etc. which may be diversely, considered, and explained with relation
to the former predictions. As, 1. By way of confirmation, that these things
concerning the destruction of Jerusalem, and of her enemies, and the
propagation of the Gospel should come to pass, because God had undertaken to
come and fulfill them, having Angels or other fitted instruments, (sanctified or
set apart by him,) to effectuate his purposes; and so it teaches, 1. It
beseems the people of God to set to their seal, and believe that what he has
undertaken will be effectual, he having instruments and means at his command,
and it is a part of the homage they owe to him, not only not to misbelieve, but
not to rest on a general assent, but to rouse up themselves to close steadfastly
with the Word, and rest on it as a thing certain: for, thus does the Prophet
conclude, believing, the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints. 2. However
a believer may find little comfort of the Word, looking to probability, or to
a mis-believing mis-regarding world, yet it will prove a rich treasure when he
keeps communion with God, and has converse with him, and studies to hold up
every word (especially promises) by way of thankful acknowledgement to him: so
does the Prophet turn his speech to God, showing whence his faith got life, --
and all the Saints with thee. Secondly, this Conclusion may be conceived with
special relation to the last promise of enlargement of the Gospel-Chureh, and
that Christ was to come in the flesh to effectuate this, and to be spiritually
present in his Church, whither all his Elect should be gathered, as his
Attendants to wait on him, which does so affect the Prophet, that he speaks it
over in a confident acknowledgement, as one affected in believing it. And so it
teaches, 1. The Lord bestows upon his people, not only things present that
are refreshful but also the hope of future mercies unto the Church, which will
comfort in present sad times; for, the Prophet here is refreshed with what was
to come. 2. Of all the sweet thoughts and sights within time, the estate of the
Gospel Church is the first, especially where there is much Conversion, and
Christ and his train coming to the Church, for, this ravisheth the Prophets
heart: The Lord my God shall come, and all the Saints. 3. As Saints coming in
to the Church is an evidence that Christ is there, who draws, and as the
Churches husband begets them; so it is an evidence of yet further
manifestations of him, wherewith to entertain these his friends; for, when the
Saints come, be comes also, and they with him: every Convert helps to bring yet
more of Christ's presence to the whole. 4. Christ and choicest Gospel-mercies
cannot relish to any, but such as have an interest themselves in them: and such
as are affected with the happiness of the Church, and mercies showed to her,
may take that as a mark that they have an interest, and that they may call
Christ their God; so does the Prophets style teach us, it would not have so
warmed his heart, nor could he have discerned this glory, if he had not had
warrant to say, The Lord my God shall come. 5. Christ's excellency being
studied, especially by them who have interest in him, and his kind
manifestations to his people, cannot but ravish hearts, and draw them to
delight in conversing with him; for, the Prophet beginning to speak of him,
must close with speaking to him; All the Saints with thee. Thirdly, we may yet
conceive the words as looking further to the second coming of Christ, thoughts
whereof being represented to the Prophet, (as being the close and consummation
of these Gospel-dispensations, hastening upon the back of them, and in some
measure shadowed out by them,) does yet more refresh him in thinking upon the
days of the Gospel: this interpretation is but a further enlargement of the
former, and may well consist with it: And teaches us further, 1. As the days
of the Gospel are the latter days, bordering upon eternity; so whatever the
godly find of Gospel-mercy within time, yet their full comfort is laid up for
them in eternity; yea, the more they find here, the more will they mind that,
and what is wanting here, is richly made up there: therefore the Prophet steps
from the one to the consideration of the other, to make the refreshment full.
2. It is a refreshful thing for one who has interest in Christ, to think now
on his second coming, and it shall be so afterward to see it, when the
excellency of Christ their Head shall be fully revealed, in his appearing as
Jebovah, in his own and his Fathers glory, when he shall come attended with all
his glorious Angels, and all his Saints, in whom he will be admired and
glorified, when he shall testify his love and rerpect in coming again the
second time to fetch up his Bride, and when the poor believer shall fully find
the fruit of interest in him, and his being his God, and shall for ever enjoy
the company of Christ and his followers, where none but Angels and Saints are;
all this is imported in this ravishing mederation, The Lord my God shall come,
and all the Saints with thee.

Verse 6. And it shall come to pass, in that day that the light shall not be
clear nor dark.

7. But it shall be one day, which shall be known to the LORD, not day nor
night, but it shall come to passe' that at evening-time it shall be light.

The Lord by his Prophet having cleared these difficulties, concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem, and foretold the enlargement of the Church under the
Gospel, does now more fully clear up the condition of the days of the Gospel.
So the third part of the Prophecy is a prediction of the condition of the
Elect and Church of the Gospel, during the whole tract of time, under the
notion of one day, or tract of Providence, that it should be unsettled and
mixed, as a dark day, till toward the evening of that day, or the close of
time, at which time it should be light. Doct. 1. As the condition and state of
the Gospel Church, is to continue till the end of time; so are we to look on
the time thereof as short, and hasting toward eternity: In both these respects,
it is ealled one day, or tract of Providence, though having diverse periods of
morning and evening, in regard there is no change of administration of the
Covenant, or way of worshipping God, to be any more expected under it, as was
before, when the Ceremonial Law was abolished: and in regard of the shortness
of the time, not only in respect of the life of particular persons, but of the
whole time till the second coming of Christ, being compared with the time
expired before, and therefore the very dawning of this day is called the last
days, and end of the world. See, Heb. 1.2. 1 Pet. 1.20. 1 John 2.18. 1 Cor.
10.11. 2. Though the condition of the days of the Gospel be far above the
days of the Law, yet the Church and godly are not to expect settled happiness,
but to have an unsettled, uncertain, mixed condition of light and darkness,
truth and error, comforts and afflictions, and discouragements, clouds and
Sunblenks, striving together and succeeding after other; for, so is imported in
that the light shall-not be thoroughly clear, (or, precious) nor dark, or
thoroughly mixed, where by preciousness we are not to understand scarcity,
(things precious being rare,) as if the light should neither be scarce nor
thick, but a bright light constantly: for, not only does preciousnesse, spoken
of light, signify the brightness of it, as Job 31.26. in the Original, but
the seventh verse clears this to be the meaning, where in the Original, it is
not, it shall not be day and night, that is, a vicissitude of day and night,
but still day, but thus; not day, and not night; that is, neither a clear day,
nor yet dark night. This condition of the Church may be more sensible and
visible toward the end, and before the evening of this day, as is foretold, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. but yet it has had its own verity in all the periods of
it, since the first dawning of this day. 3. It may be an encouragement to the
Church and godly, in their uncertain and unsettled condition, that they are but
mixed, that heavy afflictions and discouragements want not comforts to make
them tolerable, that no errors get truth banished, and that light is not
wanting, wherein men may work and walk; for; as the light is not clear, so it
is not thickly dark, as it is not day in regard of some darkness, so it is not
night, in regard of some light and confolo^ions, which should not be small with
us. And in this respect the days of the Gospel, how mixed soever, are still a
day, as differing from a Sunset, and dark night of total ignorance,
ceremonies, discouragement, etc. 4. As the determining of times continuance
after the promulgation of the Gospel, is by the Father kept in his own hand, so
it may be an encouragement, to endure the various conditions of these times,
that they will be but short, be what they will; for, It is one day known to the
Lord, that is, known to him, how long it shall continue, Mat. 24.36. yet this
is known to all, that it shall be (at least to every one in particular) but
short as one day. 5. It is a further encouragement to the Gospel Church, that
all her lots are of Gods carving out, and that he has an especial eye and
providence upon her dark times for her good; for, thus also is the day known to
the Lord, carved out and cared for, and seen to by him. 6. It may yet further
encourage, that the Churches saddest times shall end in light and comfort; It
shall he light: that this light shall come, when looking to all probability, we
might expect more darkness, as at evening time, when the Sun hers, and light
removes; and especially this may encourage, that toward the end of the days of
the Gospel, especially when all Israel and the fullness of the Gentiles shall
be converted, there will be a time of light, comfort and ease; for, at the
evening-time of this day, it shall be light, which is not to be understood
absolutely, that there should be no mixture then, but comparatively, in respect
of former times; for, tribulations shall be immediately before his second
coming, Mat. 24.29.

Ver. 8 And it shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem: half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the
hinder sea: in Summer and in Winter shall it be.

The fourth part of this Prophecy, contains a prediction of the spiritual
graces of the Gospel, whereby the darkness of the times are counterbalanced;
and made to shine with some light. In sum thus, the doctrine of salvation,
containing all Gospel refreshments, and holding forth, and instrumentally
communicating all gifts and graces acted and applied by the Spirit, (for so are
living waters to be understood, John 4 14. and 7.38, 39.) shall by the Apostles
be derived from Jerusalem ere it be destroyed, to all parts of the world,
figured out by the bounds of the land of Canaan, from the lake of Sodom on the
East, (or further to the Persick sea, Ezech. 47.8.) and the Mediterranean sea
on the West, and shall be as a Spring-well, which shall continue both Summer
and Winter. That on the East is called the former, and that on the West the
hinder sea, according to the Jews way of naming the four winds of heaven,
from the posture of a man with his face to the East, where the South is on his
right hand, the North on his left, and the West behind him. Doct. 1. The
pouring out of the Spirit, and the refreshments of the Gospel, are the chief
means of healing the Churches distempers, and sweetening her sad times; for,
this makes light in her darkness and evening, that living waters go out. 2.
The Spirit of Christ and Gospel-riches are sufficient to satisfy and quench
the souls thirst, to take away excessive longing after other things, to refresh
the weary, purge the unclean, and make the barren fruitful; for, in these
respects are the treasures conveyed in and by the doctrine of the Gospel,
compared to waters. 3. It is the character of these who enjoy the Spirit of
Christ, and feed indeed upon the treasures of the Gospel, that they are lively
and fresh, not mouldie, rotten and formal, nor as empty clouds without rain:
for, these waters are living waters, not only themselves springing and
constant, but in these who drink them, lively in their effects. 4. It speaks
much of the freedom and riches of grace offered in the Gospel, that they are
not confined to any one Nation or People, but sent abroad unto all (or many)
Nations, and that they are sufficient to refresh and satisfy all, as a river
that waters a whole Kingdom, or whole city, every one receiving, as if there
were no more to receive; for, They shall go forth from Jerusalem to the former
and the hinder sea. 5. The doctrine of the Gospel is permanent, and to endure
for ever, so as neither heat of persecution, nor decay of zeal in the Church,
shall be able to overthrow it, or hinder it from spreading where Christ
pleases, and from triumphing over errout. It is also permanent in its effects
in believers, in whom grace once received shall never be totally extinct, and
it shall be to them enough for all conditions, to refresh them in the heat of
persecution, and quicken them in their dead and frozen condition. In Summer and
in Winter it shall be, as a Spring, that is, neither exhausted with
Summer-heat, nor made inaccessible, or dried up with Winter-frost.

Ver. 9. And the LORD shall be King over a^ the earth: in that day shall there
be one LORD, and his Name one.

The communicating of these Gospel-blessings unto the world, is amplified from
an effect, that they should so water and fructify the world, and bring it in
subjection unto Christ, that he should be an universal King over Jews and
Gentiles, and that this Kingdom should be an united Kingdom, being in
subjection to one Lord, and his spiritual regiment, idols being renounced, and
following one way of truth, profession and worship (which are his Name whereby
he is known) false doctrine and corruption in worship and government, and
badges of distinction being taken away. Doct. 1. It is the work of the Gospel
to bring in our Lords rent, as King of the earth, which otherwise he gets not;
for, however Christ as God be King of all the earth, in all ages, yet he is not
acknowledged to be so, but by them who receive the Gospel. 2. Christ as
Mediator and King of Saints, has by right, and will have by possession, an
universal Kingdom, by the spreading of the Gospel, and gathering of a Church
unto himself, in one Kingdom after another, till the Kingdoms of the earth
become the Lords and his Christ's: for, The Lord shall be King over all the
earth; wherein yet there may be a limitation of some Azal, or some place
sequestrate. 3. The Church is not only Christ's Bride and Spouse, but his
Kingdom, to be subject unto him in all things, to be ruled by his Word and
Spirit, and ought to acknowledge that spiritual order and government,
established by him in his own house; for, The Lord shall be King. 4. Whatever
difference there be in the world about a Deity, and about the doctrine and way
of worship of the true God, yet as there is but one true God, so there is but
one way of faith, of worship and Government established and approved by him;
for, when the Church comes to be right indeed, then there is but one Lord, and
his Name one, which is agreeable to the pattern. 5 As unity in the faith, and
uniformity in Religion and worship, is a desirable blessing among them who
acknowledge Christ: so it is a mercy to be expected under the New Testament, so
that they are undoubtedly in the way of God, who in their station endeavor it,
and it would come better speed, if these who outwardly profess one Lord, would
lay aside idols and interests, and not mould Christ's affairs, so as may best
snit with their designs; for, here is a promise, the Lords Name shall be one,
to wit, in all the earth, where he is King, and this goes on, when indeed in
matters of Religion, we eye and mind but one Lord. The accomplishment of this
promise, as it has begun in some more ample measure of late then formerly, so
the more full accomplishment of it, seems to be reserved for the conversion and
restoration of Israel, of which in the following purpose.

Verse. 10. All the land shall be turned as a Plain, from Geba to Rimmen, South
of Jerusalem: and it shall be lifted up, and inhabited in her place: from
Benjamins gate unto the place of the first gate, unto the corner-gate, and from
the tower of Hananiel, unto the Kings wine-presses.

11. And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more utter destruction,
but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabited.

In the fifth part of the Prophecy is held forth Isreal's interest in these
Gospel privileges, and their being a part of this universal Kingdom, (which
will be a part of that light evening v. 7.) unto them is promised, 1. That the
Church and people of Israel should be exal^ed, noble and conspicuous, as if all
the hilly land of Judea, were turned in a plain, betwixt Geba or Gibea of
Benjamin on the North, 1 Kings 15.22. and Rimmon on the South, Josh 15.21. with
32. and the City Jerusalem lifted up on an hill, and made conspicuous. 2. That
the City Jerusalem should be built again in its old place, having the same
precincts and limits, and be inhabited by them. 3. That the City being again
repaired, should be no more utterly destroyed, as formerly, which cannot be
understood of the City, as it was in building in Zecharies time, for it is
fore-prophesied, v. 1, 2. and history and experience confirms that it was
destroyed utterly, but that after the Conversion of Israel, and its reparation
in its own place, (which cannot well be taken spirit^ally) it should not be so
destroyed again. 4. That Jerusalem shall be a safe habitation for them, to wit,
especially after these enemics are subdued, who shall molest them and hinder
their possession of the land: of which in the following verses. Doct. 1. As the
Church of converted Israel will be a noble and conspicuous part of Christ's
universal Kingdom, and to whom many will look as a conspicuous pattern of the
uniformity promised in the former verses so the Church, whether of Jew or
Gentile, is the only noble society of the world, to which all interests ought
to subordinate themselves, lest God raise his Church upon the ruins of them;
for, all the tand shall be turned as a Plain, from Ge^a to Rimmon, South of
Jerusalem and it shall be lifted up 2. Long desolations of a Church, and the
rubbish of countries and cities, wherein God has an interest, will be in due
time remembered, and their calamities end in a complete restitution; for so will
Jerusalem and that people find, Jerusatem shall be inhabited in her place etc.
and men shall dwell in it. 3. The Lord will, when he sees it fit, and his time
is come, not only restore his people, but preserve them being restored, and put
an end to their calamities, in so far as whatever trouble they may have to
exercise them, yet they shall not utterly be destroyed, or lie under such
calamities, as may prove them devoted to a curse; for, There shill be no more
utter destruction, or, no more Anathema. 4. The Lord will sometime even give
his people a breathing from troubles, after long tossing, as well as exemption
from ruin by their troubles when they come: and however the Church be not
always so dealt with, yet she is the place of greatest security for habitation
in all the world, and where the Lords people may take their hazard of any lot
that may come, with greatest confidence; for, Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited, or, abide in confidence.

Verse. 12. And this shall be the plague wherewith the LORD will smite all the
people that have fought against Jerusalem: their flesh shall consume away,
while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their
holes, and their tongue shall consame away in their mouth.

In the sixth part of this prophecy, the judgments of God upon the enemies
and persecutors of the Church, and especially of converted Israel, are foretold
and branched out in several judgments: the first is, a sudden stroke from the
Lord shall shortly consume them, and so frustrate their hopes, and silence
their boasting. Doct. 1. As the Church of God will not want many enemies, so
every one who engage themselves in such a course, do but seek their own ruin;
for, There is a plague for all the people that have fought against Jerusalem.
2. The Lord needs neither armies nor advantages of visible help or time
wherewith to plague his enemies, but as he usually reserves such for his own
hand, so he can so suddenly and unexpectedly consume their strength and power,
as may make their ruin a wonder to themselves and others; for, Their flesh
shall consnme away while they stand upon their feet, before they get so much as
leisure to sit down, and be sick, some proof whereof was given on Antiochus, 1
Mac. 6. and Herod, Act. 12. 3. As men's parts of Prudence or Eloquence will
prove nothing when God is a party: so the insolency, blasphemy, and cruel
hope of enemies to see the Church ruined, will be more severely avenged then
their afflicting otherwise, and an end will be put to it, by Gods plaguing
them; for, this consumi^g of their eyes and tongue, imports, not so much a
consuming of these particular members, as in general, a blasting of their parts
and abilities under this stroke, whether of Prudence in foreseeing and taking
up of things, or Eloquence to express themselves, whereby men have sometime
expede themselves out of trouble; and in particular, that their haughty eye
and blasphemous tongue shall suffer especially, and that this stroke shall
consume their eye which hoped first to see the destruction of the Church, and
their tongue wherewith they hoped to boast of victory.

Ver. 13 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from the
LORD shall be among them, and they shall lay hold every one on the hand of his
neighbor; and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor.

The second judgment upon them shall be intestine dissensions from the Lord,
so that they shall in an hostile manner lay hold on, and rise up against one
another. Doct. 1. The Lord needs no more for ruining enemies, but their own
swords, he can divide their tongues and hands, and make a Babel of them, every
one hindering or overturning another; for, They shall lay hold every one (not
so much to be supported in this extremity, as by way of violence) on the band
of his neighbor, and his hand shall rise up against the band of his neighbor.
2. Intestine dissension amongst a people, is an evidence of a great judgment
from the Lord upon them, and of a madness; for, It is a great tumult from the
Lord among them, that causes this, which is the posture and carriage of mad
men. 3. No wisdom of men nor politic principles wherein they are united, will
keep them together, who are not at one in God, and in his way, but when he has
them to ruin, he can shake them asunder; for, when he sends a tumult, the
wisest, and these who otherwise would think it madness to divide, will take
hold, and rise up against his neighbor.

Verse. 14. And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem; and the wealth of all the
heathen round about shall be gathered together, gold and silver, and apparel in
great abundance.

The third judgment upon them shall be, that God shall employ his people to
act for their own defense, and give them so complete a victory, as that they
shall gather the rich spoil of enemies, to make up themselves. Doct. 1. Albeit
deliverance to the Church be sweet, by whatever means God send it, yet it is a
special token of favor, when God employes his people, and makes them
instrumental in their own deliverance from enemies; for, so it is, that Judah
also shall fight, (and consequently prevail) at Jerusalem. It is a public
evidence of Gods being with them, and intending their good in these
deliverances. 2. As men that spoil all the world to enrich themselves,
ordinarily are never satisfied, so especially enemies their coming against the
Church, is not so much out of poverty or want, as cruelty and desire of her
blood; for, they have wealth, gold, silver, and apparel in abundance, and yet
must trouble the world more, and they are not well enough, unless they drink
the Churches blood. 3. When the Lord sends troubles upon his people, it is his
way to make them up thereby ere all be done; for, all this wealth is gathered,
that Judah, haying obtained victory, may be enriched by the spoil.

Ver. 15 And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel
and of the ass, and of all the beasts that shall be in these tents, as this
plague.

The conclusion of this threatening is, that not only the enemies themselves
should feel this judgment, but the very means employed by them in their wars,
whether mercena^ie soldiers, who employ themselves in war for gain, and so
are like beasts, or rather literally their beasts for carriage and service,
should share in the plague, and especially in that consumption, v 12. Doct. 1.
The Lords indignation against troublers of his people is such, that it will
break forth not only on rational creatures, but upon the very means and
instruments they employ, that so he may disable them from the like attempts in
time coming, and let it be seen how he resents his peoples wrongs, in ruining
them and theirs who have hand in it: for, horses, mules, etc. that are in these
tents, are plagued as well as men. 2. It is the great sin of man, that being
the creatures Lord, he should employ them against God, and so bring them under
the stroke of, wrath, and be the cause of much misery on all things as well as
himself; for these enemies bring all these creatures to be plagued with
themselves. 3. Gods justice upon the very senseless or irrational creatures
ought to be laid to heart, as well as that which comes upon men; for, this
plague is held out to be couside^ed as well as the rest.

Verse. 16. And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left of all the
Nations which came against Jerusalem, shall even go up from year to year to
worship the King the LORD of hosts, and to keep the Jest of Tabernacles.

In the seventh part of this Prophecy, there is an exception made from the
former sentence of judgment, foretelling of the conversion of multitudes (or
many of every sort) of the enemies of the Church, when they shall see Gods
judgments on the rest. And that they shall join with the Church of Israel in
acknowledging Christ, and in his public spiritual worship, expressed in terms
taken from the Ceremonial Law, because it could not be understood in the
Prophets time, but in these terms. Doct. 1. As after the Lord has plowed the
world by judgments, he uses to make a seed-time, an harvest of Conversion: so
he can, and oft-times will bring in very enemies, by sad strokes, and by m^king
friends of them, show his kindness to his Church; for, after all these
judgments, every one that is left, etc. shall come to the Church. 2.
Gospel-worshippers ought to be painful and spiritual going up, or ascending,
and constant, doing this from year to year, and ought to have an high
estimation of God, and come with reverence before him, who is the King the Lord
of hosts. This is the substance of that type of yearly appearing before the
Lord at Jerusalem; the worship of God not being tied to any special place under
the Gospel, but the public worship of Christians, wherever they dwell, makes
it a Jerusalem. 3. This keeping of the feast of Tabernacles, is not to be
understood literally, in regard the Ceremonial Law is abolished by the death of
Christ, but the spiritual public worship of the Church is pointed at, which
was signified by these solemn feasts, and particularly this feast is pitched on
rather then another. 1. Because it was a feast of great joy, Lev. 23.40.
signifying that the New Testament affords not only matter of feasting, but
cause of exceeding joy. 2. Because this feast shadowed out Christ's Incarnation,
and dwelling in the Tabernacle of our flesh, Joh. 1.14. which is the chief
subject and matter of joy to the Church of the New Testament. 3. Because it had
relation to the preservation of Israel, forty years in the wilderness, till
the Lord brought and settled them in the promised land; and so it holds out that
these Converts will especially observe the Providence of God toward them, in
preserving them, till by the Gospel they were brought into the Church: and
generally, that true Converts under the Gospel, will be eying much the heavenly
Canaan their rest, as approaching on the back of these days.

Ver. 17. And it shall be, that who so will not come up of all the families of
the earth unto Jerusalem, to worship the King the LORD of hosts, even upon
them shall be no rain.

Unto this petition a threatening is subjoyned against these who will not
submit themselves and join with the Church, to wit, that they should want
rain, whereby is signified literally, barrenness of their land and famine, or
more generally, the want of a refreshful blessing, or of a testimony of favor
upon them and what they have, they wanting heavenly grace and influence. Doct.
1. Most fruitful and flourishing times of the Church, will not want sleighters,
opposers and refusers; for, there will yet be, who will not come up, etc. 2.
Judgments will be multiplied on these, who having seen the hand of the Lord
upon enemies, and having been convinced by the stooping of others, do yet stand
out and rebel; for, after the plague of the Nations, and others going up to
Jerusalem, this plague comes on others. Clear convincing light, being
disobeyed, ripens for sad strokes. 3. Where the Gospel, and Christ offered in
it is not received, as it is a judgment sufficient to be deprived of the
refreshful grace of God, and be left under scorching wrath: so God can easily
add to this, famine of their bodies who suffer their souls to starve, and the
withholding of his blessing from temporal estates; for, Even upon them shall be
no rain.

Ver. 18. And if the family of Egypt go not up, and come not, that have no
rain: there shall be the plague wherewith the LORD will smite the heathen that
come not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles.

This threatening is particularly applied to Egypt, the Churches old enemy,
who by reasson of the overflowing of Nilus, seemed not to need rain, Deuteronomy.
11.10. and though they had some at sometimes, Psalm. 105.32. yet they might
subsist better without it then others, they are threatened with the same plague
with others, and to be as much straitened as if they needed rain. Doct. 1. As
such as have been greatest enemies, may yet be gained to the Gospel, so such
persevering in their rebellion will be especially eyed and stricken: therefore
he names Egypt the Jews ancient enemy, supposing that some of them will
submit, as is promised, v. 16. and threatening the rebels that he will then pay
them home, once for all. 2. The way of the wickeds temporal mercies seem to put
them out of Gods reverence, or at least they reckon so, whereas the excellency
of any mercy the godly receives, consists in this, that it puts them yet to
more dependence on God, and to need further manifestations of him; for, Egypt
is a land that seems not to need rain, whereas Canaan depended on the dew of
heaven, Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11, 12. 3. No outward estate or condition will put a
people contemning God, without the reach of his blow; for Egypt that has no
rain shall not miss the same plague with others.

Ver. 19. This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all
Nations that came not up to keep the feast of Tabernacles.

This threatening is again repeated, and generally denounced, that as all do
concur in this sin, (as the word also bears,) so all such shall be punished.
Hereby teaching, 1. God is an impartial Judge, and avenger of all such as
continue enemies and despisers of him, be who they will; for, Egypt and all the
Nations that come not up are thus plagued. 2. The wrath of God pursuing such as
flee not to him to seek his face, is not easily believed, either by such
despisers to make them stand in awe; or by the Church to confirm her in her
way of seeking him; therefore such a doctrine needs to be repeated, and
inculcate.

Ver. 20 In that day shall there be upon the bells of the horse, HOLINESS UNTO
THE LORD, and the pots in the LORDS house shall be like the bowls before the
Altar.

21. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holiness unto the LORD
of hosts, and all they that sacrifice shall come and take of them, and sees
therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of
the LORD of hosts.

In the last part of the Prophecy we have the purity and holiness of the
Gospel Church, especially after the Conversion of Israel, and of these Gentile
enemies unto the Church; this is held out in these particulars: First, that the
bells or ornaments of their horses should be marked with holiness unto the
lord, which of old was written upon the High Priests mitre. Whence learn, 1.
That holiness is the sweet result of all dispensations toward the Church; for,
so does this whole promise in the general, following upon the former purpose
reach. 2. Nothing is so profane, but it may be sanctified and made holy, when
Christ begins to reign through the world, and it is so unto the pure; for then
holiness shall not be confined to Priests and Temple-services, but bells of
horses going to war, and these employments that seem most impure shall bear
holiness unto the Lord. 3. Holiness does then bear full sway, when that which
was against God of a man shall be consecrated to him; for, so also the bells of
these horses that had been employed against the Church, v. 15. should be
consecrated to God, and employed in his service, as if pots and instruments for
the Temple, (allu^ing to the legal worship) were made of them.

Secondly, it is promised, that the pots in the Temple should be like the
bowls before the Altar, not so much for number in regard of many sacrifices,
v. 21. as for purity: there being degrees of holiness in the several places
and instruments belonging thereunto in the Temple, these should be elevated to
an higher p^g, as if the pots were scoured to shine as bowls, and employed
before the Altar, whereby we are taught, not only that all the means of
Religion, and parts of external worship ought to be according to the Word, as
these very pots in the Temple were appointed by God: But, 1. That under the
Gospel, especially holiness ought to be upon the growing hand, and increasing
from degree to degree, as if pots were taken to the Altar. 2. That meanest
parts of Gospel spiritual worship has greater true splendor, then what was
more glorious under the Law, pots now are like bowls then.

Thirdly, it is promised that the pots in Jerusalem and Judah shall be
consecrated to God, and emplo^ed in sacrifices. Teaching, 1. That true
holiness will extend it self, and shine in a man's most common things and
employments, that all these things shall be holy to the holy, and that the
godly man will study holiness in all his life and actions, as if he were about
immediate worship: The pots in Jerusalem and Judah shall be holiness unto the
Lord, as if they were to be employed to boil sacrifices. 2. Times wherein
there are many in-comers to the Church, is a time of thriving in holiness;
for, these things are thus holy, when there are an all that sacrifice, and they
needing to take these to make use of.

Lastly, it is promised, that the^e shall be no mo^e the Candanite in the house
of the Lord of hosts: where allusion is made to the state of Israel before
Christ, and it may signify, that however at their first entry into the land,
the Canaanites were not quite expelled, and after their return from Babylon,
there were Samaritanes and others in the land who vexed them, yet the purity of
doctrine and discipline of the Gospel Church, especially in the latter days,
shall be such, as no such Canaanite shall be admitted to abide in the Church.
And so it teaches, 1. That the doctrine and discipline of the Church is then
agreeable to the Scripture, when by doctrine it is declared that none are
allowed or approved as members of the invisible Church in the Court of
Conscience, but the elect and faithful, and the Israel of God only: and when by
discipline none are admitted or continued members in the outward Court, but
such as submit to the doctrine and discipline of the Church, and give up their
names unto Christ; for, when this rule is followed, there is no Canaanite
admitted in the house of the Lord. And who so follows not this rule, but will
follow the rules of the inward Court, in their external Ecclesiastical
administrations, or will in the point of doctrine allow people to acquiesce in
that as sufficient before God unto salvation, which is sufficient to the
visible Church to go upon in the outward Court, these cannot but condemn the
innocent, and absolve sinners. 2. The Lord may and does at some times let out
much of his Spirit upon on his Church, to make real holiness and purity abound
in it and shame out what is contrary to it, or short of it, yet without any
prejudice to the rules ordinarily prescribed for constitution of Churches; for,
taking this Prophecy at its fullest extent, it only foretells, that in some age
of the Gospel Church, and particularly about the Conversion of Israel, real
holiness and Conversion shall be very frequent, so that all who come to the
Church, shall be ashamed not to look somewhat like them, yet supposing they
were all to be real Saints, (which never will be within time,) it does not
follow, that it is the duty of the Church in all ages to admit none but such in
the outward Court, for his dispensations are not the Churches rule, more then
it will follow, that because the Lord makes in every age some real Saints more
eminent then others, therefore the Church should reject all who come not to
that pitch. But if we look on these words more narrowly, we may find them
looking another way: for the promise is not of their being cast out of the
land, but of their not being in the Temple, where Canaanites weee not admitted
as such to enter or abide: sometime indeed pr^phane Nations entered it by
force, but that was the Jews affliction, not their sin, and has nothing to do
in this place, where the holiness, not the security of the Church is held out.
And therefore I conceive that the place points at the practice of the Jews in
their Temple, who had Gibeonites, (who were Canaanites, and were afterward from
their office called Nethinims, Ezra 2.58. 1 Chro 9.2) given for the service of
the Priests and Congregation, in bringing wood and water to the Altar and
sacrifices, Josh 9.21, 27. and foretells that there shall be none such then in
the Temple, to signify and teach, not so much that there should be no
sacrifices then needing such service; as 1. That under the Gospel there is no
distinction of Nations, no Canaanite in the Temple, to serve in inferior
offices, and Israelite or Levite to the Minister to the Lord, for, then Priests
and Levites are of remotest Nations, Isa. 66.20, 21. 2. That the truly godly
will be ready to condescend to meanest service to God, and for his people, and
esteen of the lowest place in the Church as too high for them; for, there shall
be no more a C^naanite, there shall be no need of some baser people to set
apart for these services that are basest, for the greatest of these who
consecrate themselves to God, will be willing to do them, and count a
doo^-ke^pers place honor enough for them, Ps. 84.10.

Malachi.
THE ARGUMENT.
THis Prophet being the last of the Old Testament, is raised up of God after
that the second Temple was built, when the peoples zeal was decayed, purity of
worship corrupted, and vices had crept in amongst them, and all things were now
grown worse, and he seems to have lived toward the latter end of Ezra or
Nehemiah, in whose times some of the faults taxed by him were committed. The
scope of the Prophecy is, partly to reprove these gross faults, whereof (for
most part) both Priests and people were guilty, such as ingratitude, contempt
of God and his worship and service, unlawful marriages, polygamie, adultery,
divorces, perjury, oppression, sacrilege, atheism, murmuring against
Providence, etc. partly, to encourage the godly, who kept their integrity in
such declining times. And partly, to foretell more distinctly of the coming of
Christ in the flesh, and of his forerunner John the Baptist; and to direct the
Church how to carry themselves in the mean time, and to assure both wicked and
godly what they might expect by his coming.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter after the Inscription, v. 1. the Lord by the Prophet, 1.
Reproves the people for their ingratitude, and light estimation of his love,
which had appeared in his Election of Jacob their father, rather then Esau, v.
2, 3. -- and moderating their afflictions when Esaus land was desolate, v (...)
3. and should continue so, v 4. whereby they should be convinced of Gods
goodness toward them, v 5. 2. He reproves their contempt of God, v. 6. which
appears in their polluted service, v. 7. and faulty beasts for sacrifices,
which no governor would take off their hand, v. 8. and threatens them with
rejection of their prayers and intercessions, v. 9. and of their persons and
sacrifices, as being greedy, and justly unacceptable, v. ^0. with transferring
his worship from them to the Gentiles, v. 11. to punish their profane contempt
of him and his service, and their wearying at, and sleighting of it, v. 12, 13.
and with a curse for their double dealing with so great a Lord, v. 14.

Ver. 1. THe burden of the Word of the LORD to Israel by Malachi.

The Inscription of the Prophecy holds out, 1. The authority of this message,
and the instrument that carried it, it is the Word of the Lord by Malachie, who
what he was, whether Ezra, (called by this name in respect of his office) or
some other, is no great matter, only his name signifies my messenger, or, Gods
messenger, by whom God sent his Word, which is the chief thing to be eyed in
Gods servants, that we do not slight God in sleighting them, and what they
say. 2. These to whom the message is directed are Israel, that is, such of all
the tribes, as had come up from Babylon: for, though Judah and Benjamin were
chief, yet others were joined with them; They are called Israel, that
considering they were all that was now left of Israel, in any visible
fellowship with God, the rest being scattered for these sins which they now
committed, and considering that these courses were more like Israel, yet
rejected, then Judah that had obtained so much mercy, they would hearken to the
Word, and not persevere. 3. The nature of this message, (at least a great part
of it, for there is somewhat beside) is a burdeu of reproofs and threatenings,
which were heavy for a tender Prophet to carry, and insupportable in their
effects for a wicked people to endure. It teaches, that when the Church
enjoyes any time of a settled Reformation, ordinarily she grows so carnal, and
carries her self so, as provokes God to have much to say against her; for,
whereas the former two Prophets were sent out with many encouragements, while
the Temple was in building: now when it is built, and the people after their
long tossing, settled, this Prophet is sent in a different style, and with the
burden of the Word of the Lord to Israel.

Verse. 2. I have loved you, says the LORD: yet ye say, Wherein have thou loved
us? Was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the LORD? yet I loved Jacob,

3. And I hated Esau, and laid his mountains, and his heritage waste, for the
dragons of the wilderness.

The first fault reproved in this people, is their ingratitude, and not
observing nor esteeming of Gods love toward them, which therefore he
demonstrates, from his choosing of Jacob their father, and preferring him to
Esau the elder brother: not only in the matter of Election to eternal life, but
in that God had chosen Jacob to be the root out of whom the blessed seed should
come, and the Church propagated in his posterity; and accordingly (as an
external evidence of this rejection of Esau and his posterity) the Lord had
given to him but an hilly barren country, and had now cast them out of it,
and laid it desolate as an habitation for wild beasts: whereas the seed of
Jacob had gotten a fruitful land, and were now restored to it again after their
captivity. Doct. 1. The chief and principal study of the visible Church, and
the godly in it, ought to be the love of God manifested toward them, as being
that which God will not allow to be suspected, and which ought to oblige them
to him* that which will be the sad ground of a process when it is forgotten
and undervalued; and that which being looked on when God reproves, will
encourage and strengthen to take with it, and make use of it. Therefore does he
begin his doctrine, and the sad challenges with this, I have loved ^on, says
the Lord, that is, all of you in general, have tasted of respects suitable, and
beseeming my Bride and the visible Church: and particularly the Elect among you
have tasted of my special love. 2. Gods love to his Church is oft-times met
with great ingratitude, in not being seen and acknowledged as becomes,
especially under cross dispenlations, in undervaluing the effects of it, when
they fit not our mould, and in deeds denying it, while thoughts of it do not
beget love to him again; for, Yet ye say, Wherein have thou loved us? 3.
Election unto eternal life is a sufficient testimony of Gods love, to be
acknowledged and commended, although all things else went cross, and seemed to
speak dis-respect; for, in this, the Lord loved Jacob, and hated Esau, as is
exponed, Romans 9.13. and this is sufficient to answer their quarrelling. 4 To be
chosen and selected to be the Lords Church and peculiar people, speaks so much
respect from God unto a Nation, as may counterbalance many other hard lots;
for, thus also was Ja^ob loved, and Esau hated, and is a favor to be esteemed
of. 5. The Lords love will not be so clearly seen and acknowledged, when we
compare some dispensations with the privileges bestowed upon us, but when we
consider our own original, and wherein we are dealt favorably with beyond
others, as good as our selves, if not better; for, however Israel, looking on
their many privileges, could not see Gods love in their low condition, yet it
would better appear when they looked back, that Esau was Jacobs brother, (and
the elder too) and yet I loved Jacob and I hated Esau. 6. The grace of God is
not dispensed differently in the world, upon any difference in the point of
worth among men; but grace it self makes the difference in choosing out one,
and leaving another, as good in himself to his own ways, according to his
pleasure, who has mercy on whom he will have mercy; for, Jacob and Esau are
equal, till love make the difference. 7. However no man can know love or hatred
by outward dispensations, simply considered in themselves, yet afflictions are
to wicked men, real testimonies of Gods displeasure, and Gods people being at
peace with him, may look on external mercies, as speaking special love; for
Esaus hilly land, and the desolation thereof, speaks hating of Esau, not only
as rejection from Canaan, was a type of rejection from the Church and heaven,
but as it was a judgment inflicted on a Nation unreconciled, whereas (at
least) the godly in Israel, might look otherwise on their land and restitution.

Verse 4. Whereas Edom says We are impoverished, but we will return and build
the desolate places; Thus says the LORD of hosts, They shall build, but I will
throw down; and they shall call them, The border of wickedness, and the people
against whom the LORD has indignation for ever.

5. And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, The LORD will be magnified from
the border of Israel.

The last evidence of a difference put betwixt Esau and Jacob, in laying Esau's
land desolate, is yet further confirmed, by meeting with a great objection;
for, whereas Esau might think, that as Judah and they had been both afflicted,
so they should recover and return as well as Judah; The Lord threatens that
their condition should be irrecoverable, and their endeavors that way to no
purpose; for, however they were a people after this, yet their captivity was
never recalled by any decree, only some relics of them, mingled with other
Nations, remained in the land, till they were subdued by the Jews (as History
records) and forced to receive circumcision, and renounce their Nation, and
till at last their name utterly perished. This their condition is further
amplified, that it should be conspicuous and remarkable, 1. To all beholders,
who seeing Gods anger against them, should account them and their land, a
border of wickedness, where impiety has come to an height and border, and
overflowed to the very border, so that if any should come to their border, they
would stay there, and cry, Ah wicked land! and because of this should account
them hated for ever of God. 2. It should be remarked by the Jews, and they
should be forced to confess his goodness to them and their land, and that he
is magnified from the border of Israel, that is, from the land of Israel, from
whence they might observe Gods magnifying his vengeance on Edom, while they
were well dealt with; or, upon which God would magnify himself by showing
mercy on it, and the inhabitants, even to the very border, as v 4. Edoms
wickedness and plagues stretched to the very border. Doct. 1. It is the
property of wicked men when God plagueth them, to think of a change and to
oppose the course of Gods justice, and to think to free themselves, without
minding repentance; for, Edom says, We are impoverished, but we wi^^ return,
and build the desolate places. 2. As where God is a party, men's endeavors to
exempt themselves from trouble, will not avail: so an impenitent people, not
submitting to God in rods, nor laying to heart his controversy, will find all
means that may promise them delive^ance, prove vain; for, Thus says the Lord
of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down. 3. It is a sad addition to
plagues, that the Lord thereby not only makes a people mi^erable, but to be
public spectacles, and beacons hereof to others; And they shall call them,
etc. 4 Judgments ought never to be looked on, nor will be rightly considered,
but when sense of sin and guiltiness procuring the same, is looked on, and
that in all its aggravations and grossness; for, first they are called the
border of w^ckednesse, and then anger will be seen justly to follow. 5. It is
the sad lot of the wicked under their strokes, that they are procured by
grossest sins, prosecuted by unmixed wrath of the great God, and that they
are without hope of restitution, within time, and (however it go in time) may
expect to have their misery eternal; for, so is Edom, the border of
wickedness, and the people against whom the Lord has indignation for ever. 6.
As no dispensation of God, especially upon eminent enemies, should pass over
without the Churches observation; so the Lord will in due time convince his
Church of his love to her, how much soever the quarrel it; for, Your eyes shall
see, and ye shall say, the Lord will be magnified. 7. As Gods kindnesses toward
his Church, are not ordinary but singular, wherein God magnifies his mercy,
power, etc. so the thought thereof especially being compared with remarkable
strokes on enemies, ought to produce praise and acknowledgement; for seeing
that on Edom, from their own land, they shall acknowledge their own mercy and
say, The Lord is magnified from (or upon) the border of Israel.

Verse. 6. A son honors his father, and a servant his master. If then I be
a Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a Master, where is my fear, says
the LORD of hosts unto you, O Priests, that despise my Name? and ye say,
Wherein have we despised thy Name.

The second fault, for which the Priests especially are at large reproved, is
the contempt of Gods Name, which the Lord may justly complain of, considering
both, that he was herein slighted more then any creature calling for such
respect was by another; a master or father would get more respect then he who
was both in an eminent way, to that people; and (which is yet more) that they
did not consider this, nor were convinced of it. Doct. 1. The Lord does approve
of domestical and civil relations, and of these duties and respects which flow
therefrom, he approves that a son honor his father, and a servant his
master. 2. Relations to, and in God are not bare titles, or grounds whereupon
we may expect favors from God only, but do carry in their bosom obligations
to duties on our part; for, his being a Father, calls for honor; and his being
a Master, for fear. 3. As the Lord has an absolute dominion over all his
creatures, and especially over his Church, whom he has made and purchased to
be his in a peculiar way: so it has pleased him to sweeten this with a more
warm relation of fatherly affection and care, to his people; He is both a
Master, and a Father. 4. The Lord allows and requires that service performed to
him be seasoned both with fear and love, that love and a desire to honor him
as a Father, be the principle of our obedience, and yet that we look on our
selves as servants in respect of strict obligation to duty, and sear to offend;
for, as a father, he must have honor, and as a master, fear. 5. As it is the
grand delusion that blindes the visible Church, that it is sufficient to give
good words, and fair titles to God, though no care be had of answerable
walking; So the Lord will make use of that which every one acknowledges, to be
a witness against themselves, if their carriage be not answerable; for, If I
be a Father, (as ye call me) where is my honor? If I be a Master, where is my
fear? says the Lord of hosts. 6. As men in performing duties to God, come
far short of that which very nature will teach them is due to creatures,
standing in the same relation (though in an inferior degree) that God is; so
the very respect, which is paid as due to such, will be a ditty against
sleighters of God: for, A sons honoring his father, and a servant his
master, reproves them, who neither honor nor fear God, being both. 7. Carnal
contempt, and want of reverence unto, and an high estimation of God, in every
duty, is a fountaine-cause of all miscarriage, and an evidence that we behave
our selves neither as sons nor servants; for, he proves want of honor and
fear, because ye despise my Name. 8. However to slight and disesteem of God be
a general sin in the visible Church, yet ordinarily teachers of others are
chiefly guilty, not only in their own walking and service, but also in their
accession to the guilt of others, while their way makes others to abhor or
contemn God and his service, or hardens them in so doing, and while they
neither inform or reprove people in their sleighting of God, but applauds them
in it, as if it were good service; therefore, however all the people were
guilty of these faults, yet more especially ye Priests despise my Name. 9. A
people living under ordinances, and enjoying privileges, and not profiting,
will soon come to this, not to see their sin well, not to consider on it, and
be hard to be convinced of it; for, when God challenges, they reply, and ye
say, Wherein have we despised thy Name? and so frequently through this book.

Verse 7. Ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and ye say, Wherein have we
polluted thee? In that ye say, The Table of the LORD is contemptible.

The Lord proves this challenge of their contemning him, which they denied, or
considered not by their public service offered to him. Wherein they heeded not
the rule, but used profane or common bread instead of shewbread, or in their
sacrifices of thanksgiving, Lev. 2. or generally all their sacrifices were not
agreeable to the Law, whereby indeed they polluted God who appointed the
service, and made the Lords table (or Altar, Ezekiel. 41.22.) contemptible, and
that so much the rather, as this flowed from a corrupt principle, that the
outward splendour of the Temple ceasing since the captivity, there needed not
such an exact care of the service, or the outward service of it self being but
base, as pouring out of blood, burning of fat, etc. therefore it was not to be
stood upon, any thing might suffice. Doct. 1. Sleighting and profaning of Gods
worship is matter of a sad challenge, it being full of hazard to practice what
is not commanded in worship; to do that which is commanded, slightly, bringing
common dispositions to his immediate service; or, in ordinary conversation not
to walk as becomes worshippers; for, this is signified by this challenge, ye
offer polluted bread upon mine altar; their sacrifices were polluted, either
when they were not such as the law required, or when the worshippers had not
Temple purifications, or when having committed abominions, they came and
trusted to their purifications and offerings, Isa. 1.11, -- 15. Jer. 7.9, 10.
2. God constructs of men's profaning of his worship any way as done against
himself, and flowing from much contempt of him, who if he were reverenced, his
service would be more exactly attended; for, their offering of polluted bread,
proves that challenge that they despise his Name, v. 6. and is a polluting of
him: our respect to him will appear chiefly in our immediate approaching to
him. 3. As it is a special, and not an ordinary favor, for sinners to be
bettered by admonition, and reproof; so the more they are reproved and not
bettered, it hardens the more and adds to the sin; for, this reply, wherein
have we polluted thee? imports not only that they had been reproved before by
the Prophets, but that they were so far from being bettered, that they went
on in the sin without a challenge, and were so hardened, that they would not
be convinced. 4. It is a great aggravation of sin, when men not only go wrong
and see it not, but see also reason why they should do as they do, and their
principles lead them to sin; for, it was an high polluting of God, when not
only the bread was polluted: but they seemed to have reason for what they did,
and said, That the table of the Lord is contemptible, and therefore, they might
offer any thing. 5. It is also an high provocation in men, to bring the worship
and service of God in contempt, in their own or others estimation, when it is
not looked on as men's highest honor, and advantage in the world, to get leave
to serve him: but either outward discouragements attending it, makes it to be
slighted; or carnal dispositions, and familiarity, breeding a bold
profaneness, by looking on the external means of worship, not eying the end
they are appointed for, or the blessing that attends them, makes them seem low,
and base and not to be regarded; for, this was their fault, They say, The table
of the Lord is contemptible, his worship not to be regarded, considering the
baseness of the Temple, or of the external Ceremonies in themselves.

Verse 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? and if ye
offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? offer it now unto thy governor; will
he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person, says the LORD of hosts?

The challenge is yet further proven by instancing their faulty sacrifices,
prohibited by the law, Lev. 22.20, 2^. Deuteronomy. 15.21. which their own consciences
could not justify: and it is aggravated from this, that their governors, who
received some acknowledgements from them, Nehem. 5.14, 15. would not accept
them in bringing such a gift, as they offered to God to please him. Doct. 1.
The best way to convince our selves or others of sin, is to be particular in
our examination, or reproof, and not to rest on generals; for, the Lord here
condescends on particulars, to instruct the challenge the better. 2. It may
stir up Ministers to freedom and faithfulness, and persuade others to allow
them in being so that all the faults of the people which they reprove not, nor
oppose, are laid to their charge; for, they are challenged for all the faulty
sacrifices the people brought, in regard they did not reject them, nor reprove
the bringers, but offered them up. 3. Albeit conscience does not always get
liberty to speak impartially to men, yet the consciences of the most corrupt
and stupid, will plead against their way, when they are put to it, and
especially for sleighting of God in the matter of his worship, as if his rule
were not to be followed, nor he worthy of our best things. Therefore, he
appeals to themselves who for present would not be convinced, If ye offer the
blind for sacrifice, is it not evil? etc. 4. These properties required in
sacrifices, as they shadowed out the absolute perfections of Christ the true
sacrifice for sin: so they also pointed out somewhat to be regarded by every
Christian in their sacrifice or spiritual service, that they should study
integrity and uprightness in them, and particularly, that God does not approve
of ignorant service, worshipping we know not what, signified by the blind
sacrifice. 2. That he approves not of crooked hypocrisy, where there is not a
throughnesse in our resolutions to follow God, 1 Kings 18.21. or, where there
is a discord betwixt the outward and inward man, signified by the lame
sacrifice 3. He dislikes also languishing service, wanting life, or vigor of
affection, or cheerfulness, signified by the sick sacrifice. Doct. 5. It is
the high presumption and atheism, and will be the sad challenge of men, that
they please themselves in offering that unto God, and do that in his service
which they durst not do unto a superior mortal man, and which they know well
enough men would take off their hand, nor be pleased with them that did so;
for, Offer it now to thy governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy
person? says the Lord of hosts that is, he will neither please thy gift, nor
accept of thee for bringing of it, but thy gift will make thy self to be
rejected.

Verse. 9. And now, I pray you, beseech God, that he will be gracious unto us:
this has been by your means: will be regard your persons, says the LORD of
hosts?

Having thus challenged them and proven them guilty: unto the end of the
Chapter, he pronounces sentence and threatens them, repeating also the causes,
to evince the equity of the sentence. The first part of the sentence contains
a rejection of their intercessions for themselves or the people, (as was the
Priests office,) and appealing to experience, bids them try it, and see what
speed they should come; and appeals to their own conscience, whether they who
were chief authors in this evil of polluting Gods worship, and (as the original
also reads it) by whose very hands these faulty sacrifices were offered, were
fit to pray for the rest? or if God should accept their person or face, as
Mediators in name of the people? Doct. 1. It is the woeful presumption and
neck-break of many, that when they walk as they please, they yet think to
continue in the reputation of being seekers of God, and by prayer (while yet
they continue in unrepented sin) to turn away any stroke; for, this holy
irony, and putting them to it, I pray you, beseech God, imports, that they
thought to assey that, and to make all well. 2. It is high time for a people to
pray, when guilt is contracted and wrath is threatened; mercy also must be the
praying man's refuge, and all ought to be sensible of their having an hand in
public provocations; for, however this exhortation be directed to them, as
that which they could neither well obey, nor would their obedience be accepted,
yet it contains in it self a pattern of duty, that in such a time men should
beseech God, plead for graciousnesse to us, where the Prophet ranks himself
among the rest of the people needing this grace. 3. It is a sore judgment to
lie in such a condition as provokes God to reject prayer, considering how we
are indigent of all good, and exposed to all danger, and that prayer is the
only means to obtain the one or remove the other; and especially it is a
judgment to be so, and not know it till we be put to the extremity; for, I
pray you, beseech God, will he regard your persons? imports that God would
sufficiently punish them in not hearing them, and that they were so stupid as
not to know it, till they essayed it. 4. All who would find acceptance and
audience in prayer, ought to study personal reconciliation with God; and these
who are employed by Office or otherwise to intercede for others, ought to be
holy themselves, that their personal wickedness wrong not themselves and
others; for, will he regard your persons? imports that their persons were not
reconciled, and so they could not be heard, and that they were most unfit to
intercede for others. 5. As ordinarily unfaithful Ministers are chief in the
guilt of the people: so such as are chief authors in an evil way, cannot but
find their prayers for themselves or others rejected; for, This has been by
your means, (or, from your hand) will he regard your persons? says the Lord
of hosts. 6. Whatever may be the presumption of secure and impenitent sinners,
yet God will make their own conscience, when he awakens it in strait, to
pronounce their sentence; for, he appeals to themselves, will he regard your
persons?

Verse. 10. Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for naught?
neither do you kindle fire on mine altar for naught. I have no pleasure in you,
says the LORD of hosts, neither will I accept an offering at your hand.

The second branch of the sentence is, the rejection of their persons and of
all their sacrifices, and services performed in the Temple, which is amplified
from a question in the beginning of the verse; the meaning whereof, as it is
translated, is, as if he said, All of you Porters, Priests, and others, have
been well rewarded by tithes and other casualties, for your meanest service,
and yet ye have proven evil servants, ye have been more greedy of gain then
duty, ye have been careful for your selves, and would do nothing for me or any
of the people for naught, and yet ye have been negligent, and did not your duty
faithfully, nor watched over the sacrifices to try them exactly; and therefore
I reject you and your service both. The words in the Original will also bear
this reading, Who among you would shut the doors, and not kindle a fire on my
altar in vain? etc. as if he said, Is there none among you that has so much
zeal as rather to shut the doors of the Temple, and so hinder these offerings
which are in vain, for I approve not of you, nor will receive them? Both these
come to one purpose, that God abhorred and would reject the service of these
ingrate servants, it being (in some sort) better they offered none at all.
Doct. 1. It is a sad judgment when a people are put altogether out of service,
that God will have no more from them, or not accept them in it: as importing
that God is angry at them, that he will put such away altogether from him at
last, and will deprive them of the free reward which is bestowed on his
servants; for, this is their doom, I will not accept an offering at your hand.
Whereas a people getting leave to offer service, and God accepting it at their
hand, speaks mercy in saddest times, Judge. 13.23. 2. The worth and excellency
of our service depends upon Gods free favor, and his acceptance in Christ of
our persons and worship, which when we provoke him to take away or withhold, no
worth in us or it will avail, whatever we may conceit or dream; for, where he
has no pleasure he will not accept an offering. 3. The meanest service
performed to God, wants not a reward, yea, even the superficial service he
gets, has its outward reward, during the time of his patience; for, Priests
and Porters did not shut the doors, or, kindle the fire for naught, they were
well paid. 4. It is the Lords allowance, that these whom he sets apart for his
public service in his Church, do live and be maintained thereby; for, Priests
and Porters had their allowance. 5. It is the sin, and a token of
unfaithfulness in Ministers, when they become covetous, and eye the reward
more then the work; for, this challenge imports also their covetousness, and
that as they had allowance, so they minded it much, and were sure to do nothing
without that, and having gotten that, they regarded not much Gods part. 6. The
more kind God has been to any in serving him, if yet they prove unfaithful,
the greater will their sin be; for, thus is their sin aggravated, they did
nothing for naught, and yet did it not well. 7. However it be still a sin to
neglect altogether commanded duties, yet in some respect slighted service, and
resting upon external performances, is more heinous then if men altogether let
it alone, as being an open proclamation of contempt of God, and that to his
face; for, so much does the other reading of the words import. See, Isa. 1.12,
12. and 66.3.

Verse 11. For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the
same, my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense
shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering: for my Name shall be great
among the heathen, says the LORD of hosts.

The third branch of the sentence is, that he will transfer the Priesthood from
their order, and his worship from that people, and get among the Gentiles (whom
they despise) people and Ministers, who will worship him more purely through
the world then they do, when he shall magnify his grace, and manifest his
majesty among them; this is subjoyned as a reason to the former sentence, v.
10. he will reject them, for he will get better service elsewhere. Doct. 1. The
Lord is no loser by any who slight him: all the advantage or loss of men's
service is their own; and though God reject a visible Church for sin, yet he
will not want enough to serve him; for, so does he threaten the Jews and
Priests, that he would fill up their room with Gentiles. 2. The glory of God,
and of his Kingdom in his Church, does shine more conspicuously under the
Gospel then under the Law; for, then his service was restricted to one Nation,
now enlarged to all Nations of the Gentiles; then his worship was shut up in
Judea, and their solemn worship was only in one place, Now from the rising of
the Sun to the going down of the same, and in every place, he may be
worshipped; then their service, however pure in respect of institution, yet was
carnal and full of shadows, and was at this time profaned by them: But the
Gospel-service is not only pure in respect of institution, but more perspicuous
and spiritual; and however many do yet pollute it, yet many perform it more
purely then they did, and there are far more spiritual and pure worshippers in
the Church of the Gospel, then was in the Church of the Jews: It shall be
incense and a pure offering, speaking of Gospel worship in the language of
these times. 3. As God is great in himself, so an high estimation of him,
(which only himself, who does reveal himself, can work in hearts,) in his
majesty and graciousnesse, is a means to produce reverend and pure worship;
for, My Name shall be great among the Gentiles, says he, twice over, as
undertaking it, when incense and a pure offering is offered.

Verse 12. But ye have profaned it, in that ye say, The Table of the LORD is
polluted, and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible.

The equity of this sentence, of rejecting them and choosing others, is
confirmed from their (especially the Priests) profaning of Gods Name, which
the heathen would magnify when it should be made known unto them. This he
proves by their deeds and expressions accounting of the Altar and Temple, as
polluted in respect of what it was, and all the oblations or any thing they had
for their share as contemptible, and therefore any thing might suffice to be
offered. Doct. 1. The equity and justice of Gods sentence against sinners,
especially in the visible Church, is not soon seen or laid to heart by them,
nor the causes procuring it, considered; therefore is it so needful to press
it, as here. 2. Necessary truths and instructions are oft-times so ill heard,
that they must be again and again pressed, therefore is that same doctrine
repeated here from v. 7. 3 Contempt of God and his service is no where more
rife, then where there is most frequent occasion of service, and it is
superficially performed; for, the Priests being still before God, and still
about service, they profane his Name, and say, The Table of the Lord is
polluted, etc. 4 Hypocritical and formal worship is a profanation, and taking
the Name of God in vain, and in its own kind an hainons breach of the
command, for which God will not hold men guiltless; for, Ye have profaned my
Name, in that ye say, The Table of the Lord it polluted, etc.

Verse 13. Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it? and ye have snuffed
at it, says the LORD of hastes, and ye brought that which was torn, and the
lame, and the sick: thus ye brought an offering: should I accept this of your
hand, says the LORD?

A further evidence of their profaning his Name, (which yet confirms the
sentence) is, that they served God with weariness, and snuffed at the
frequencie of sacrifices, and multitude of ceremonial observations. Whence it
came to pass, that they made no conscience of sacrifices, but the people
brought, and they accepted what came to hand, or could do no good otherwise,
which their own conscience might tell them could not be accepted. Doct. 1.
Wearying and repining at Gods service, as it is the ordinary sin of all within
the visible Church who are earnal, and see not the Majesty of God, nor feel
sweetness in worship; and especially is the ftuit of contempt of him: So it is
enough to make service abominable before God, seeing he loves and requires a
willing people; Ye said also, What a weariness is it? and ye snuffed at it. 2.
They who weary in Gods service, if they do not quite abandon it, will soon
slight it, and mind nothing more when they come about it, then how to get it
over any way; for, Ye brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick
for an offering. 3. When men have bred themselves to weary and slight God in
his service, it is no wonder to see clear light and their conscience prove no
aw-band or tie unto them, they will soon either silence or slight its voice;
for, God appeals to their own consciences, Should I accept this of your band?
as pleading for him against themselves, and yet they went on.

Verse 14. But cursed be the deceiver, which has in his flock a male, and
voweth and sacrifices unto the LORD a corrupt thing; for I am a great King,
says the LORD of hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the heathen.

Follows upon these sins the last part of the sentence, wherein a curse is
pronounced upon them, for their great hypocrisy, in pretending too much
forwardness, and yet (out of diffidence, that if they gave their beasts, they
would be poor, and out of their contempt of God, as if any thing might suffice
him,) they offered but the refuse of what they had to God: the sinfulness
whereof might appear, by considering the greatness of God, which calls for
other service; and from the respect he has among heathens, by reason of common
Providence, whereof some proofs appeared, when God showed forth himself in
delivering them from Babylon. Doct. 1. As to be under a curse from God is the
saddest of judgments, though no present outward affliction should follow
thereupon; so it is the portion of obstinate sleighters of Gods worship: Cursed
be the deceiver, etc. 2. The Lord abhors the wrongs that are done under fairest
pretenses of zeal and piety, more then these that appear in their own colors,
as being twice an injury; for, The deceiver is cursed, who does all under
color of zeal and forwardness, making vows which are a testimony of
singular affection; and performing them, which seems to speak integrity, He
vows and sacrifices, and yet it is but a corrupt thing, when he has better.
3. Albeit the Lord can get nothing of it self perfect from his people, yet it
is their duty not to give him the refuse of what they have, as if all were lost
that is employed in this service, but to spend and employ the best of their
strength, time, parts and affections in his service; and albeit our obligation
go far beyond our ability, yet it cannot but procure a curse, when willingly we
lie by, and improve not all received ability; for, He is cursed, who has in
his flock a male, and voweth and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. 4. As
double and superficial dealing in Gods service, flows from mean thoughts of
him; so his greatness is such, as will not sit with affronts, especially under
pretense of doing him honor; for, this is one reason of the curse; For I am a
great King, says the Lord of hosts. 5. The estimation that very Pagans are
forced to have of a Deity, by reason of common Providence, and of the true God
from what they see of him at any time in doing for his people, and against
their enemies, may condemn the contempt of him that is among his seeming
friends, and show the equity of his plaguing them, that he may set forth his
glory to the world, upon them who would not honor him, It is another reason of
the curse, My Name it dreadful among the heathen.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this chapter the Lord prosecutes the controversy with
the Priests, showing that the former doctrine concerned them specially, v. 1.
which if they neglected, he threatens to plague them and the people, v. 2, 3.
and cleares, that this should be no breach of Covenant on his part, v. 4. for
he had indeed made a Covenant with that tribe, to do them good while they
walked with him in their office, v. 5, 6. as was their duty, v. 7 but they
transgressing, v. 8. it was just with him to plague them, v. 9. In the second
part of the chapter, he accuses Priests and people of other faults. Such as,
1. Injustice and deceit, v. 10 2. Marriage with idolaters, v. 11, 12. whereupon
followed afflicting of their lawful wives, contrary to their obligation, v. 13,
14. by Polygamie, v. 15. and injust divorce, v. 16. 3. Impatiency under
afflictions, and murmuring against the Providence of God, v. 17.

Verse. 1. ANd now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you.

The Lord having sharply reproved and threatened for the sin of slighted
worship in the former chapter, does apply that general charge more particularly
to the Priests, whom it concerned to see that the public worship were not
profaned. Doct. 1. Particular application of general truths, i^ the only way
to make the Word effectual, that which is spoken generally toall, being
ordinarily looked on as spoken to none: therefore does the Lord here apply it.
2. However men may shift and guard themselves from the challenges of the Word,
as thinking themselves not chief in any guilt reproved: yet the impartial Word
of God will find out the guilty, and charge that upon the conniver or
flatterer, which another acts; for, however the Priests might have laid the
blame on the people that brought no other sacrifices, and allege that if they
off^red not these, they should offer none at all, and so public worship should
cease, yet he charge it on them who did not their duty to have it otherwise 3
Ministers had need to have much spoken to them from God concerning their duty,
they having so few beside to speak to them; therefore does he here take them in
teaching, O ye Priests, etc. 4 Albeit an obligation lie on every public
worshipper, to carry himself so as he may be approved of God; and albeit Civil
Magistrates ought in their Sphere to protect the true worship of God, and hold
off disturbers; yet the care of Christ's affairs in his Church, belongs
peculiarly to his own Church Officers, who by doctrine are to reveal his will,
and by discipline to censure, and (in an Ecclesiastical way) restrain the
violation of the rule; for, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you. 5. Every
reproof and threatening for sin, carries in the bosom of it a command to
amend the fault, and the mind of God in them is then rightly seen, when we
neither stand out, nor (taking with it) are discouraged or hopeless; but when,
taking with the fault, we endeavor to get out of angers way, by repentance and
reformation: for, in this respect all the reproves and threatenings in the
former chapter are a Commandment, to wit, to return and reform the abuse.

Verse 2. If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give
glory unto my Name, says the LORD of hosts, I will even send a curse upon
you, and I will curse your blessings: yea, I have cursed them already, because
ye do not lay it to heart.

The use of this application is, that yet they would lay the challenge and
their sin to heart, and glorify God in their office, by seeing that God be
sanctified in his worship, and by acknowledging their former negligence, as
Josh. 7.19. upon the neglect whereof, the Lord threatens to curse them and the
people, and that in their very outward enjoyments, which are in themselves
blessings, or in sending curses in stead of the blessings, which they
pronounced should come on the people, whereof they had some experience already.
Doct. 1. The first step unto well-doing is, when people get an attentive ear,
to attend unto the Word, and do not proph^nely contemn so much as to hear; If
ye will not hear. 2. When the Word is hearkened unto it will not yet avail,
till what we hear, be seriously meditated upon, and pondered, and the authority
of God speaking in it, be laid to heart, and our carriage contrary thereunto,
become grievous unto us: and in this duty much unsanctified light makes little
seriousness; for, this is required of these Priests who knew more then others,
and it is supposed they will prove negligent; If ye will not lay it to heart.
3. Every one who seriously considers their condition, and what the Word says
unto them, will be careful to honor God by taking with their faults, and aim
at his glory in their stations. And especially Ministers being sensible of
their duty, will make it their chief care, to see God exalted in his own
ordinances, rather then how to advantage or set out themselves; for, this
follows on the other two, to give glory unto my Name. 4. Albeit the curse of
God, (which is the saddest of judgments) be due for every transgression of his
Law; yet it is for the sin of impenitency chiefly, that the Lord lets out any
visible evidences thereof, for, it is when they will not hear, etc. that he
sends a curse upon them. 5. Curses are most sad curses when they are inflicted
on blessings, either in removing of them, or in depriving of the comfort and
blessing of them, or in making them snares to the enjoyers, I will curse your
blessings. 6. It is also a sad evidence of a curse upon Ministers and people,
when the blessings allowed upon, or promised to the Church take not effect, and
when Ministers are left to themselves to promise and pronounce good things,
when in the mean time God is sending on judgments: Thus also are blessings
cursed, when they (pretending to their office, Numb. 6.23.) flattered the
people with promised blessings, and God did contrary, and sent a curse instead
thereof. 7. It is a sad judgment when a people are under a curse, and are
insensible, and not stirred up to repent; but need to have their case being so,
and the cause thereof, pressed upon them; for, they know not till God tell
them; I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.

Verse;. 3. Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your faces,
even the doing of your solemn feasts, and one shall take you away with it.

He threatens further upon their disobedience, that he will take away their
maintenance, by hindering their seed cast into the ground to grow; and will
deny his blessing to their preaching, and that as they slighted God and his
service, so he will make them and their artificer as contemptible, as the dung
of the sacrifices, and cast them out of his sight, as the dung is carried from
the Temple. He alludes to the Law, of carrying the dung of sacrifices out
without the Camp, Lev. 4.11, 12. and shows, that they should be as if it were
all cast on their face, so that these who corried away the dung, might offer to
carry them with it. Doct. 1. It is righteous with God, that such as lay not sin
to heart, nor are sensible of spiritual judgments, be stricken in that which
they will feel more sensibly, and that they who care not how they serve God, or
how his work prosper, so they have a maintenance, be made to know, that he has
their daily bread in his hand, and that the best way to have that ensured, is
fidelity in his service; for, says he, Behold, I will corrupt your seed. 2.
The Lord needs no more for blasting of all second causes, and making them
disappoint the expectations of men, but a word in anger from his mouth, who
gave them a being and preserves them, and makes them answer the creatures
necessities; for, so it is in the O^iginal, I will reprove, or rebuke your
seed, and that will corrupt it. 3. As a fruitless Ministry is a sad
affliction, if not a judgment both on Ministers and people: so it is just with
God to make the Word ineffectual in their mouths, who contemn it in their own
practice: for, this threatening may also relate to their sowing the seed of the
Word in preaching the Law, that it should be corrupted, and do no good to
people. 4 Nothing is more vile in Gods sight, and which he will less endure,
then men whom he honors to have eminent opportunity to serve him, and who yet
slight him, and then the service which they so slightly perform, I will
spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and one shall
take you away with it. 5. There is no sure^ way for men's keeping in honor and
reputation then fidelity, and not dallying with God in his matters or service;
for, when men neglect this, they become as dung to be carried away.

Verse. 4. And ye shall know that I have sent this Commandment unto you, that my
Covenant might be with Levi, says the LORD of hosts.

Whereas the Priests looked much to the Covenant made with the tribe of Levi,
especially with Aarons family, whereof an illustrious instance was given to
Phinebas and his posterity, Numb. 25, 11, 12, 13. as if that might exempt them
from threatened judgments; therefore the Lord cleares, that all this might
consist with that Covenant, that his smiting of them who had not done their
duty, was no breach of Covenant on his part, and that they shall be convinced
by his sending of this reproof and warning, that any breach that should follow
lay not at his door, this warning testifying that he had no delight to strike,
were it not for their unanswerablenesse. Doct. 1. As the Lord has always set
some apart in his Church, to minister unto him in holy things, so has he
allowed upon such peculiar encouragements made sure by paction: for, the^e is a
Covenant with Levi. 2. As the Lord has given peculiar encouragements unto them
to whom he gives eminent employment in his service, so are they tied by
peculiar obligations to their duty, how high soever they be; the neglect
whe^eof is so much the more justly punished, as encouragements are singular,
and the punishing of transgressors is without any violation of Covenant on Gods
part, the Covenant importing that they should do their duty, or else be
punished as Covenant-breakers, and the correcting of them being a means to
restore the Covenant, by bringing them to obedience, that they may enjoy the
privileges of it; for, there is not only a promise to, but a Govenant or
mutual stipulation with Levi, and all these threatenings and judgments
consists with that Covenant with Levi: and tends to this, that it may be with
him, if they make use of it. 3. It will be an aggravation of men's misery under
judgments, when their conscience shall convince them, that God takes no
pleasure in giving up with them, but that they have extorted and wrung strokes
from his hand: Ye shall know that I have sent this, Commandment unto you, that
my Covenant might be with Levi, is as much as to say, your consciences shall
bear me witness in your straits, that by these warnings I have used means to
make the comforts of that Covenant forthcoming to you. 4. Every warning given
to sinners from the Word, concerning their way and the issue of it, will be
sufficient to evidence that their destruction is of themselves, and that God
has no pleasure in their death: for, the sending of this Commandment, will
convince that he would have his Covenant with Levi.

Verse 5. My Covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave them to him,
for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was afraid before my Name.

6. The Law of truth was in his mouth, and iniquity was not found in his lips:
he walked with me in peace and equity, and d^d turn many away from iniquity.

To clear the matter further, and show where the fault lay, and the breach was,
the Lord repea^s the tenor of the Covenant, and shows the carriage of their
Ancestors, that it might be seen how far they had swerved from the rule of the
Covenant, and from the example of their Progenitors. In this Covenant, the Lord
not only promised long li^e to some of them, but generally all welfare and
preservation of them in soul and body, together with such a measure of
prosperity, as was meet for them, to be forthcoming for them upon their fear
and reverence of God, in their person and worship, and their trembling with
fear and zeal at the contempt of Gods Name in others, which was the practice
of Phinehas, Numb. 25. (to which here he points) occasioning that Covenant. And
in this, their Progenitors studied to walk in some measure answerably, in
teaching the Law holily and purely, and studying to please God, and enjoy the
promised peace of the Covenant, by humble and quiet obedience to the rule of
righteousness. And as they endeavored to acquit themselves, so God blessed
their labors in converting many. Doct. 1. It concerns them who stand under
any particular obligation to God, to be much in studying both of the
encouragements allowed upon them, that they faint not in his service, and of
their duty, that they delude not themselves, expecting privileges when they
mind not their work: for this end is the Covenant of Levi, so clearly laid
before the Priests. 2. Faithful Ministers have especial need of a Covenaut of
preservation from God, being exposed to much hazard many times: and of the hope
of etrnal life, being often exercised with sad times here; and in outward
things, to have the Lord securing their portion to them. And for all these may
faithful Ministers trust God; for, My covenant was with him of life, (that is,
preservation here, and hope of a better life hereafter) and peace or
prosperity. 3. It is a special qualification of faithful Ministers, and an
evidence that they are to receive a blessing, when much familiarity with holy
things does not breed contempt, but their heart is filled with awe and
reverence of God, and they go about his worship with holy reverence and
trembling, and do testify much tenderness and zeal against any wrong done to
God; for, I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me and was
afraid before my Name. And thus was it with Phinehas, Numb. 25.12, 13. 4. The
practice of these who have gone before, and by walking in the ways of God,
have inherited the promised blessing, will be a ditty against them who decline,
and look upon their duty as intolerable, or their encouragements as hopeless;
for, the practice and blessing on former Priests are recorded, to condemn the
present unfaithful ones. 5. It is incumbent to faithful Ministers, that they be
neither dumb nor liars, that they oppose themselves faithfully against error,
and be faithful publishers of truth; for, the Law of truth was in his mouth. 6.
Albeit no mortal man can be so faithful, but that if God search him, he will
not be able to stand: yet it is not sufficient for a Minister, that he do not
grossly debord in his calling, but he ought to carry himself so as he may
abide a trial, for, he endeavored holiness, singleness and integrity in
revealing the counsel of God; for, Iniquity was not found in his lips. 7.
Albeit people are to look to the Word carried by Ministers, and obey God
speaking it, whatever the Messenger be: yet it is the duty of faithful
Ministers, to take heed that their carriage do not belie their doctrine, or
minister occasion to bring it in contempt; but that their practice may prove
their own believing of their doctrine, and that they shine in their private
conversation, as well as in their public station; for, therefore is the
walking of honest Priests marked as well as their doctrine. 8. As it is the
duty of all Christians, so especially of Ministers, to be constant in the ways
of godliness, and walk in them, to be sincere in them, as in the sight of God,
and to be on his side of all the controversies of their time, which is to walk
with him, to make peace with God their great aim, and for that end to be
humble in their obedience, and not rebellious to occasion quarrels, which is to
walk with him in peace, and to follow the rule of righteousness, and walk in
equity, or rightnesse in all their ways. 9. Albeit the Lords most faithful
servants, may oftentimes see cause to complain of the ill success of their
labors, Isa. ^9.4. partly, in that they are sometimes sent out to harden the
generality of a people in Gods justice, Isa. 6.9. partly, while they see not
the fruit that is, as it was with Elijah, 1 Kings 19.14, 18. and partly,
because the seasons of the appearing of fruits are in Gods hand: yet honest and
faithful Ministers will not want such fruit of their labors, as may testify
Gods approbation of them; for, They turned many away from iniquity.

Verse 7. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the
Law at his mouth. for he is the Messenger of the LORD of hosts.

That part of the Covenant which concerns the Priests duty, is further
confirmed from a general Proposition, showing that what their Progenitors did
in practice, is the duty of all Priests, who are bound to have knowledge of the
Law, and to hold out the true sense thereof to the people, who also are bound
to employ them for that end, as being Gods trench-men. Doct. 1. Ignorance is a
great sin in Ministers, who ought to be stored with knowledge literal and
experimental, for the edification of others; for, the Priests should preserve
knowledge, they should not only have it, but preserve it as a storehouse for
the Churches use. 2. It is not sufficient for Ministers, that they have a store
of abilities and knowledge, and please themselves therewith: but they ought to
be communicative, and make what they have forthcoming for the people; for, the
Priests lips should prese^ve knowledge. He should so preserve it, as that it be
still in his lips, bringing it forth in season and out of season as need
requires. 3. Albeit all men be liars, and people are not to follow Pastors in
an implicit way, but only in so far as they bring the Word of God with them:
yet it is the Will of God that there be an Ordinance of Ministry, and a
distinction betwixt teachers and these that are taught in the Church, and that
people not only receive the Word, when it is inculcate on them, but seek to
know the mind of God in his Word from them, on particular exigents; for, They
should seek the Law at his mouth. 4. The Authority and Commission wherewith God
has clo^hed his Ministers, as it is an obligation upon them to adorn their
station, and fa^thfully discharge their trust from so great a Master, without
adding or diminishing: so it is an argument to persuade people to submit to the
Ordinance, and reverence what they say from so absolute and great a Lord, how
far soever it cross their humors; therefore, it is subjoyned as a reason to
both the Priests and peoples duty, For he is the Messenger of the Lord of
hosts.

Verse. 8. But ye are departed out of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at
the Law; ye have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the LORD of hosts.

Having repeated the Covenant, and declared what was the carriage of the former
Priests; the Lord subjoynes a challenge for their degenerating from the rule,
and from such examples: they had in effect ^enounced their duty, and gone out
of the right way, they had not turned many from iniquity, but by their practice
or false glosses, had stumbled others, and made them mistake and break their
neck: and whereas others had kept the Covenant, they had violated it, and made
it void on their part. Doct. 1. It is certain that Ministers may, and many
times do err both in doctrine and practice; and albeit it be great folly, and
a snare of Satan, when people because of this will heed and regard them in
nothing: yet it is high presumption in any man to pin peoples faith on his
slieve, as if he were infallible; for, says the Lord of these Priest^, who had
as fair promises as any, But ye are departed out of the way, etc. 2. It is the
fearful guilt of unfaithful Ministers for which they must answer to God if they
do not repent and amend, that where they do no good, they do much ill, and are
neck-breaks to many* their scandalous life confirming others in their impiety,
their negligence, connivance and countenancing of sinners, letting them sleep
to the pit, their perverting of the Word of God, poisoning souls with errors
and delusions, and their whole way making many contemn Gods Word, Ordinances
and Religion, about which they are employed; Ye have caused many to stumble at
(or, in) the Law. 3. As men's unfaithfulness is the greater, that their
encouragements are singular and sure, and their obligation strict: so by
proving unfaithful, they forfeit their claim to all their privileges; for, Ye
have corrupted the Covenant of Levi, imports, that they had sinned
notwithstanding their obligation, by Covenant, and that the Covenant
sufficiently encouraged them to duty; and that now they had made the Covenant
void for their part. 4. It is a great aggravation of men's sins, when they
degenerate from the holy example and copy that is cast by these who have gone
before them; for, this challenge comes in opposition to what was said of their
Progenitors, The ^aw of truth was in his mouth, etc. but ye have departed out
of the way, etc.

Ver. 9. Therefore have I also made you contemptible, and base before all the
people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the
Law.

Hence follows their sentence and punishment, notwithstanding their pretenses
to the Covenant; as they had not kept Gods path, but partially wrested the Law,
out of respect to men: so God had made them contemptible, and diminished their
estimation among men. Doct. 1. Contempt is in it self a sore scourge and trial,
wherewith God (as by other rods) uses to punish sin; and therefore they are
not to count light of it, who inflict that rod unjustly; I have made you
contemptible, is a sufficient scourge for wicked Priests. 2. Albeit it was the
lot of Christ, the Prophets and Apostles, to be disrespected in a wicked world,
and albeit such a trial may be useful to faithful Ministers, to purge out
ambition and self-conceit (the weed that grows among greatest excellencies,
and is an enemy to sincerity) and to make them die more to the world and
study to approve themselves to God; and that by this trial, God may breed them
for enduring harder sufferings (the great sting whereof is shame and reproach)
when he shall give a calling to them; yet unfaithful Ministers are the most
contemptible crew in all the world, in Gods estimation, and ignominy, and
contempt, is the just fruit of their unfaithfulness, their lot being made like
their service, and such a lot is then a plague and judgment, when it is the
fruit of such carriage; for therefore have I also made you contemptible, and
base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways. 3. As it is
a fearful sin to pervert the Word of God, whereof men are but dispensers, and
may well testify their own presumption, and delude others, but cannot alter
one tittle of the Word in its effects, God being no respecter of persons; so it
is righteous with God, that Ministers hunting after honor, applause and
estimation, by partiality and pleasing of men, do by that very mean come in
contempt, whereas faithful Ministers may have a testimony and respect in the
consciences of these who hate them most; for, I have made you contemptible,
according as ye have been partial in my Law.

Verse 10. Have we not all one Father? has not one God created us? why do we
deal treacherously every man against his brother, by profaning the Covenant of
our fathers?

In the rest of the chapter, other faults common to Priests and people are
reproved. And first, the Lord challenges their treacherous dealing one with
another, which may indeed be well applied to the partiality of the Priests,
profaning their Covenant as an aggravation thereof, considering that whatever
difference they make amongst men in their doctrine, for outward respects, yet
in Gods account all these by-respects will vanish, and he will look on them as
equal, James 2.1, 2, etc. And that their partiality is treacherous and
perfidious dealing to these whom they spare, however they think it to be
savor. It may also be applied to that which follows, of their breach of the
Covenant of marriage made amongst themselves, who were of one stock and
Religion, and their marrying with idolaters. But it is more clear to understand
it generally of unjust and fraudulent dealing in men's affairs, which is a
violation of many bonds and relations, being all Abraham's children, created and
made a peculiar people to himself by the same God, having spiritual relations
in following the same true Religion, making them brethren one to another, and
being bound by a Covenant, (derived to them from, and often renewed with their
fathers,) to God and among themselves, to the duties both of piety and justice,
Doct. 1. Profaned and slighted worship is oft-times accompanied with gross
faults against the second Table, that in these men may read their
transgression of the first, and their little considering of it; for so much
does its challenge, and the rest that ensue, following upon the former, of
neglected worship, teach us. 2. Injustice in Civil affairs, especially where
it is conveyed under fraudulent pretexts, is an evil which the Lord will not
bear, nor will a wakened conscience bear within it self: for, Why do we deal
treacherously, etc? says he, pofing themselves about it. 3. As we are bound to
deal justly with all, so especially it is an abomination to deal perfidiously
with these to whom we are tied by many bonds of Nature and Religion; for, Why
deal we treacherously, every man against his brother, having one Father, and
one God having created us? 4. Gods entering in a Covenant with a people and
Church, and continuing the privileges thereof long with them, and making it to
stand, when their provocations might justly have broken it off, is an
aggravation, not only of impiety, and corrupting of worship, but even of
injustice among men; for, Why deal we treacherously in profaning the Covenant
of our fathers? walking as profanely as if they were not tied by Covenant, and
as if a Covenant were a profane, not a sacred thing, and as if the privileges
thereof, continued from their fathers to them, were but small things, and not
obliging favors. 5. Such is the slavery that men, devoted to their lusts and
idols, are brought under, that no relations or obligations will bind them up
from debording; for, notwithstanding all these ties, there are who deal
treacherously. 6. If men's consciences were acting their parts, the Lords
servants might have less toil in discharging their duty; men would not only
see their sin, but would aggrege it in its sinfulness; for, these many
questions shows, that tender consciences would plead this cause for him.

Verse 11. Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in
Israel, and in Jerusalem: for Judah has profaned the holiness of the LORD,
which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange god.

The second fault whereof both Priests and people were guilty, as the history
of these times clears, is in the matter of marriage, wherein the chief guilt
and fountain of all the rest is their marriage with idolatrous women,
occasioned as appears, in that their lawful wives being out-wearied with
travel, they loathed them, and fell in love with the women of the country.
This is aggravated from the nature of the sin, the persons committing it, the
place where they did it, and that it tended to a prostituting, (as a profane
thing) of their peculiar dignity, to be the Lords holy, or separated and
set-apart people, and of that holiness which God required in them, and they
professed to approve. Doct. 1. As marriage is a comfortable Ordinance of God,
so especial care is to be had by the people of God, of being equally yoked, and
to avoid the sin and snare of marriage with idolaters, and these of a false
Religion; for, however under the Gospel, the partition wall that was betwixt
the Church, and all other Nations under the Old Testament, be pulled down; and
albeit difference of Religion be no cause of dissolving a marriage under the
Gospel, which is consummate, especially being made up before the Conversion of
any of the parties, 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. yet it is still a blot and guilt for a
member of the Church, to marry the daughter of a strange god, so called because
of her Profession. See, 2 Cor. 6.14. 1 Cor. 7.39. and before the Law it was the
sin of the old world, that the sons of God came in to the daughters of men,
Genesis 6.2. 2. Such as would see sin in its colors, would take it up in its
aggravation, both in respect of God and men, and how abominable and perfidious
it is so to do; for, so is this sin aggravated, as treacherous dealing, both
against God, and their lawful wives to whom they were tied, and as abomination
in the sight of God, making them abominable to whom this was forbidden. 3. The
consideration of the person sinning, adds much to the aggravation of sin, and
the place and time wherein they do sin, when it is done by members of the
Church, as it were in Gods view in his Church, and after God has been kind to
them; for, if Judah and all that now remained of Israel do thus, who shall
serve him beside? and if they do it in Israel and Jerusalem, where God dwells
in the midst of them, and to which they are restored after their captivity,
when and where will they think it needful to omit it? 4. Scandalous and gross
sin is not acted in the visible Church, without profaning of eminent
privileges, violating of equitable obligations, and belying of many
professions, all which does aggravate it; for, all these aggravations are in
this sin, as the words are before explained; Judah has profaned the holiness
of the Lord, which he loved, and has married the daughter of a strange God.

Verse 12. The LORD will cut off the man that does this: the Master and the
Scholar out of the Tabernacles of Jacob, and him that offers an offering unto
the LORD of hosts.

The Lord threatens for this sin, that he will cut off the guilty and
impenitent from among his people and worshippers, either by excommunication or
extraordinary judgments, whether they be Nobles o^ Commons, Teachers or
Scholars, Masters or Servants, (the one of which has power to awaken, and the
other is bound to answer, as it is in the Original) or Priests, who stood in
Gods Courts to do him service, or people who thought all well if they performed
outward Ceremonial worship: This threatening seems in part to relate to a
faction of Priests and others, who for these marriages were separated from the
Church of the Jews, and went among the Samaritanes, and built a Temple on
Mount Gerizim, of whom some hint is given, Nehem. 13.28. Doct. 1. To be upon
just grounds cut off from the society of Gods Church and people, is a sad
judgment; for so it is threatened, They shall be cut off from the tabernacles
of Jacob. 2. Just excommunication is in effect but a judicial giving up of men
to the way which they have chosen, and a declaration of what they were in
effect, while they lurked within the visible Church; for, Cutting off from the
Tabernacles of Jacob, is but a leaving of them to the way wherein they walked,
when they married the daughter of a strange god. 3. As God is the Author of
every just censure inflicted by his Church, and does ratify it in heaven, so
where other punishments are necessary, and men either lie by, or are not able,
God will take the punishment in his own hand; for, in excommunication God cuts
off, and in other judgments the Lord will cut off, etc. 4. God will punish sin
impartially, without respect to persons or dignities, and will not be turned
away by outward performances of worship, while there is not repentance and
reformation; for, The Lord will cut off the Master and the Scholar, and him
that offers an offering, who does this.

Verse. 13. And this have ye done again, covering the Altar of the LORD with
tears, with weeping and with crying out, insomuch that he regards not the
offering any more, or receives it with good will at your hand.

This fault is further aggreaged from a sinful effect following upon it, to
wit, their afflicting of their lawful wives, by taking in other wives in their
time, to afflict them, Lev. 18.18. by their sleighting of them in respect of
the strange women, and by divorces, (as is after cleared) who being thus
oppressed did run to God, and because it was not regarded and amended,
therefore God did not regard their service, as if the Altar were covered with
the tears and cries of their oppressed wives to hinder their acceptance;
otherwise it is not properly to be conceived that they got liberty to come to
the Altar, or to pour out their tears upon it. And that it is to be
understood of this mourning of their wives, hindering their acceptance, is
clear from the following verse, where the reason of Gods rejecting them is
held forth. Doct. 1. As ordinarily one sin draws on another till there be no
end; so addition of sin to sin, is a great aggravation thereof; And this ye
have done again. 2. It is a man's saddest disadvantage, when he gives to any
just occasion to cry to God against him, and the best remedy to be had of any
wrong, is, when we commit it to God by prayer; This ye have done covering the
Altar, with tears, with weeping, and with crying. This was their afflicted
wives refuge, and their husbands did it against themselves, when they gave their
wives just occasion. 3. As family-discord is a great hindrance to worship, and
to access to God in it; so neglect of duty in our several relations will not
be gotten skinned over, by performances of worship, but will hinder acceptance
therein; for, when they wrong their wives and make them cry to God, He
regards not the offering any more, or receives it with good will (or, with
pleasure) at your hand.

Verse. 14. Yet ye say, Wherefore? Because the LORD has been witness between
thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously; yet
is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.

Because the husbands might be ready to deny some of these challenges, or to
extenuate them, as no relevant ground for rejecting their service and worship.
Therefore the Lord lays forth the sin of their carriage toward their wives,
and aggreges it as a wrong against God, who was president and witness in the
Covenant of marriage, and to whom the oath was made, and therefore cannot but
avenge the wrong, and as being treacherous dealing to the wife, who was the
man's first love from his youth, who has right to him by Covenant and sworn
promise, and being by the tie of marriage the companion and half of the man,
with whom he is one flesh. Doct. 1. Men may be in an evil condition, and yet be
little convinced or sensible of it, or of the high provocation that is in it;
and that it may justly make service abominable: Yet ye say, Wherefore?
wherefore should not our service be accepted? 2. God has an especial interest,
and is a party in every lawful paction, which is confirmed by an oath, and
especially in the Covenant of marriage, wherein he observes wrongs, who are
chiefly guilty, and will accordingly punish; The Lord has been witness
between thee and thy wife, against whom thou have dealt treacherously. 3. Where
the Lord has tied parties in marriage, continuance of conjunction ought to
increase and settle affection, and incident infirmities and blemishes ought not
to alienate it; for, She is the wife of thy youth, married to thee from thy
youth, and therefore it is not seemly to see her despised now, and was thy
choice in thy youth and hers, and therefore not seemly to contemn her, when
age and infirmity alters her. 4. As marriage makes man and woman no more two
but one flesh, so it is the duty of wives to prove comfortable yoke-fellowes
and helpers, not hinderers of their husbands good; and husbands are to entreat
them as companions and not slaves: Yet she is thy companion. 5. Marriage duties
are not left arbitrary to parties, whether they will perform them or nor, but
by the mutual Covenant, they have given power of their bodies each to other,
and are strictly tied to perform the mutual duties required in such a state of
life without revocation; She is the wife of thy Covenant; and therefore,
neither to be rejected, neglected, nor another taken with her.

Verse. 15 And did not he make one? yet had he the residue of the spirit: and
wherefore one? That he might seek a godly seed: therefore take heed to your
spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.

The Lord confirms the challenge yet further, and shows particularly the
sin of their carriage: And first, concerning polygamie, or taking more wives
at once, and bringing in of strange women upon their lawful wives, he declares
it to be against the institution of marriage, wherein God, who had breath and
spirit enough to make more women for one man, did only ereate one man and one
woman, that so there might be a lawful issue procreated in lawful marriage.
Hence he exhorts them to keep inviolable the tie of marriage, and for this end
to guard their own hearts, and let the salvation of their precious spirits
persuade them to this duty. Doct. 1. In all things wherein a controversy
occurs about what is sin or duty, right or wrong, we are not to dwell on
custom, practice or pretenses, but to recur to Gods institution and
appointment, to which all reasonings must submit; for, thus is the controversy
of marriage decided. 2. Whatever have been, or may be the customs of men, yet
by Gods institution, both in precept and practice, lawful marriage is only
betwixt one man and one woman: and this conjunction, the wisdom of God (who
might easily have done otherwise,) has thought most convenient for the ends to
be attained by marriage-society; to which experience in all ages has
subscribed: Did he not make one? and yet be had the residue of the spirit. 3.
One and the chief lawful end of marriage is, the hope of posterity, that man
who cannot abide always on earth, may in a sort perpetuate himself in his
posterity, while the world endures; one end of marriage is, to seek a seed. 4.
Such children as are brought forth in a state of lawful marriage, have an
excellency, which others begotten in uncleanness want; for however grace be
free to the one as well as the other; yet it is in it self a dignity and
privilege of men above beasts to be thus procreate; therefore he made one,
that he might seek a godly seed, or, seed of God, that is, (as the Original
imports) an excellent seed, having that excellency of being lawfully begotten.
5. Reproof would be accepted from God for use, and that not only for
conviction, but for reformation, Therefore (says he) let none deal
treacherously, etc. 6. If men's spirits were precious, or their salvation dear
unto them, it might keep off many sinful courses which endanger them; Take heed
to you spirits, and let none deal treacherously, may import this, that their
precious spirits are at the stake in this business. 7. Men who would keep from
sinful out-breakings, should watch over their own hearts, where the rise of
them is, and should take heed that abilities do not deceive them with excusing
or extenuating their faults; Take heed to your spirits, may import further,
that their lustful spirits are the spring of all this miscarriage, and
therefore to be heeded especially, and that men's spirits are dangerous patrons
of the evils, which their affections are enslaved to.

Verse 16. For the LORD the God of Israel says, that he hates putting away:
for one covers violence with his garment, says the LORD of hosts; therefore
take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.

Secondly, concerning divorces, which was their next shift, when they could not
get both wives kept, they found means to put away their old wives. The Lord
declares that to be hateful to him, as not being a quiteing of their violence
to their wives, but an executing of it under that pretext of Law, and so but a
covering it as with a garment; and again exhorts them to purge and watch over
their spirits. Doct. 1. Whatever the Lord did permit for the hardness of
Isreal's heart, yet divorce and loosing of that marriage tie upon trivial
causes, or any other cause beside that of adultery, Mat. 19.9. and malicious
desertion, 1 Cor. 7.15. is a sin, and hateful to God; For the Lord says that
he hates putting away. 2. Not only does the authority of God prohibit
groundless divorces, but his own carriage toward his confederate and married
people, in not giving up with them for every fault; shows how unpleasing such
courses are to him in others: for, not only the Lord, but the God of Israel
says this, his not ceasing to be the God of Israel, shows how unsuitable it
is to his mind to break off marriage-affection. 3. The nature of sinful courses
are not changed, but only daubed over, when they are acted under pretense of
Law, and therefore are so much the more hateful to God; for, the Lord hates
putting away as covering violence with a garment. This form of speech covering
with a garment, or (as some read it) violence covering the garment, seems to
allude to the Scripture-expression, wherein covering with the garment,
signifies conjugal protection, Ezekiel. 16.8. Ruth 3.9. and so while they spread
their garment over another wife, they covered that violence with a pretext of
divorce, and violence covered that act of marrying another: it was but
violence, though they pretended to have law for the marriage after divorce. 4.
The Lords frequent challenges ought to stir up men to double diligence in
reforming their way, it being a double guiltiness to sin after admonition: and
such as would reform sin, must first see their spirit polluted, and begin
their reformation there; for this cause is the exhortation repeated; therefore
take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.

Verse 17. Ye have wearied the LORD with your words: yet ye say, Wherein have
we wearied him? when ye say, Every one that does evil is good in the sight of
the LORD, and be delights in them, or where is the God of judgment?

The third fault reproved, is their impatiencie under afflictions, breaking
forth into murmuring and blasphemy against God and his Providence, as judging,
that because enemies and wicked men prospered more then they did, either God
did approve of wicked men, and delight in their sin, or else was not a just and
impartial Judge, or had no Providence at all in the world. This carriage did
grieve Gods Spirit, albeit they either denied the fact, or that it was such a
sin to complain. Doct. 1. Hard times drive on tentations unto Atheism, and may
prevail with many in the visible Church, as this example teaches. 2.
Tentations unto Atheism begin ordinarily at the matter of Gods Providence in
the world; and first, it carves out a Providence to men's own mind, that God
loves none, but whom he deals kindly with in matters of the world, and that he
delights in such as he spares outwardly. Then it falls a quarrelling under
cross dispensations, that his providence is not just, when every one that is
evil is good in the sight of the Lord. And at last comes to an express denying
of providence, and consequently of God, Where is the God of judgment? 3.
Tentations of impatiency and Atheism, arising from cross dispensations, do
flow from too much conceit of men's selves and their deservings, and prove them
not mean in their own eyes, or humbled under the rod; for, while they quarrel
his goodness to others that do evil, it imports they look on themselves as
good, and deserving no such usage as they meet with. 4. Impatiencie and
quarrelling of Gods Providence is a vexing evil, which the Lord will not
endure, especially when men are not wrestling against it in their bosoms, but
let it break out in expression without controulment; Ye have wearied the Lord
with your words, Isa. 40.27. He cannot properly weary, but will do with such,
as wearied men do with an insupportable burden. 5. Men falling in a quarrelling
disposition prove themselves to be deprived of tenderness, and in an ill frame
of spirit, in that they can neither discern what they are doing, nor be
sensible of the heinousness of such an evil, which a tender heart would
tremble at; for, these murmurers have the boldness and stupidity to reply to
the challenge; Yet ye say, Wherein have we wearied him?

CHAP. III.
IN the first part of this Chapter, we have a Prophecy of Christ's coming in
the flesh, v. 1. who would be found far otherwise then many of them looked for,
in refining his Church, v. 2. purging of his people and Ministers, that their
worship may be pure and acceptable, v. 3, 4. and in manifesting of all
wickedness, and taking order with it, v. 5. the reason of which benefits is
his unchangeable grace, and the constancy of his promise toward his people, v.
6. In the second part of the chapter, he accuses them of desperate
impenitencie in their defection, v. 7. of sacrilege, v. 8. (which as it was a
special cause of the judgments lying on them, v. 9 so upon their repentance
and amendment, he undertakes remarkably to bless them, v. 10, 11, 12.) and of
blasphemy and wearying in Gods service, v. 13, 14, 15. In the third part of
the Chapter we have the carriage of the godly in such a time, and the fruit of
these doctrines upon them, v. 16. -- who are encouraged from Gods observation,
and laying up their carriage as upon record, v. -- 16. from a promise of being
precious in Gods sight, and graciously and tenderly dealt with, v. 17. and that
the difference betwixt the godly and wicked in Gods esteem, shall in due time
be made manifest, v. 18.

Verse 1. BEhold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me: and the LORD whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his Temple: even the
messenger of the Covenant, whom ye delight in: Behold, he shall come, says the
LORD of hosts.

In this Prophecy of Christ's coming; first Christ speaks himself, and
promises to send John 'Baptist as his forerunner and Harbinger, (as is
exponed, Luke 1, 76, and 7.27. Mat. 11.10. Mark 1.2.) who by the doctrine of
repentance and of grace to be given to the penitent through Christ, should
prepare the way for the exhibition of Christ: Then the Father speaks, and
promises that Christ the Messenger of the Covenant, whom the Jews longed so
much after, should shortly after John's preaching, come into his Temple (being
exhibited in the flesh,) and preach the Gospel there. Doct. 1. The love of God
in Christ toward the world, will not be impeded by the wickedness of men, nor
will he make void his promises of the redemption and salvation of his Elect,
because of the perversity of many in the visible Church; therefore,
notwithstanding their quarrelling, chap. 2.17. Christ is here promised. 2.
Convincing evidences of Christ's Godhead do appear in this Prophecy; as first,
that he was before his Incarnation, keeping intercourse with, and making
promises to his Church; Behold, I will send, etc. Secondly, that he authorizeth
and sends messengers into his Church in his Name, and upon his errands: I
will send my Messenger to prepare my way. Thirdly, that he is Lord of the
Temple of Jerusalem, and he to whom homage was paid there, It is his Temple.
Fourthly, that when he appears in the form of a servant, a worm and not a
man, David's son and a small twig out of Jesse's root, yet he is under all that
veil, The LORD, and above all. Fifthly, that he and his Father are about one
and the same work, speaking in the same promise, as being one in essence,
though distinct persons. Doct. 3. As Christ when he comes to any person or
people must be received as a King, (for Kings have their Harbingers going
before them) so men are by nature unprepared for the receiving of Christ,
having so many obstructions laid in his way, being so unworthy of such a mercy,
and having (in their own conceit) so little employment for such a Savior: and
men would still continue so, unless Christ who freely gives himself, do also
freely prepare his own way, so much does this promise: I will send my
messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, import. 4. It is a sweet
forerunner of Christ's coming, when he sends a Ministry amongst a people, and
causes the Ministry to take place, especially in convincing of sin, and
showing the necessity of repentance; for thus was John in his Ministry a
forerunner of Christ's Incarnation. 5. Christ's Incarnation and dwelling in our
flesh, and his presence hereby in his Church, is the sweet and refreshful
encouragement of his people, the riches whereof will not be seen at first view;
therefore is the promise doubled, and men called to consider it; The Lord shall
come, behold, he shall come, says the Lord of hosts. 6. As it is the high
privilege of the Church to be singled out among all the world, to enjoy Christ
and the fruits of his coming: so it behoved the true Messiah to be incarnate,
while the second Temple stood, and to come and preach there; for, the Lord
shall come to his Temple, is a Prophecy of his being present in the material
Temple, as a type of his Church, to which all his special manifestations are.
7. As it is a double mercy when the Lord makes great dispatch in performing
promises, considering the long attendance others have been put to: so where the
Ministry of the Word, and repentance have place, it is a token the Lord is
hasting to manifest more of himself; The Lord shall suddenly come, partly, in
respect the time betwixt this Prophecy and his exhibition was to be short,
considering how long he had been expected before: and partly after John's
preaching, and its having place, he should come upon a sudden. 8. Albeit Christ
be God over all, blessed for ever, yet he took upon him the office of Mediator
and Ambassador of his Father to the Church, and having obtained of his Father,
by the Covenant of Redemption, that a Covenant of reconciliation should be
betwixt God and man, he came into the world to make offer thereof in preaching
the Gospel, and to confirm it by his own blood: and he it is who from time to
time persuades the Elect to embrace the conditions of the Covenant, and does
make the Covenant sure to them who flee to him as Mediator for that end; and
confirms the faith of such as rest on the Covenant with many proofs of his
love: This Lord who comes, is even the messenger of the Covenant, and in all
these respects, he proves himself so. 9. As Christ ought to be, and is unto his
peculiar people, their chief desire and joy, and his presence, or hope of
future manifestations of him, their life: so many may pretend much respect to
Christ at a distance, in hope of satisfaction to some lusts by him, and may be
so impatient in expectation, that if God delay his coming, they will scarcely
have hope to see him at all, and yet mistake him when he comes: for, Christ is
the Lord whom they sought, and delighted in, who were not only the godly among
them, whose hearts longed for his Incarnation, but even the wicked, as hoping
to get temporal felicity by him, and who therefore quarrelled God for delaying
to send him. These the Lord promises to make liars, but little to their
advantage.

Verse. 2. But who may abide the day of his coming? and who shall stand when he
appears? for he is like a refiners fire, and like fullers soap.

Follows a prediction of the effects of Christ's coming, which was begun when
he came in the flesh to the material Temple, and is verified daily when he
comes to his Church in the power of the Gospel, to reform it, and to govern
and rule in it. In general, it is declared that Christ will be quite another
thing then hypocrites dream, he will be such a winnower and purger, as it will
be hard to abide his trial, which will be as fire to purge dross, and as soap
to wash away filth. Thus was his fan in his hand, Mat. 3.12. and his scourge,
John 2.14, 16, and his axe laid to the root of the tree. Doct. 1. Christ
manifested in the flesh, and coming even in his low estate, is a terrible sight
to his enemies, and will be a stone of stumbling and rock of offense to many;
for, who may abide the day of his coming? and who may stand? etc. 2. Christ's
coming to his Church in the Ministry of his Gospel, and to carry on a
Reformation, makes a time prove very winnowing, and a trying time, and so hard
to be endured, that it is a wonder to see any get through in it: and no wonder
if we consider the many hypocrites in his Church, and the great hypocrisy and
dross of his Saints which he cannot endure; the great vicissitudes and
shakings that attend a time of Reformation; the many errors and delusions that
usually are aloft then; the efficacy of the Ministry of the Gospel in
discovering of sin, by which if men be not amended they grow worse, the civil
turn profane, the formal loose, and the profane insolent: and how speedily a
people under the Gospel fill up the measure of their sin, and ripen for many
judgments; for these causes it is, that Christ's coming is held out as so
terrible a day; Who may abide? who shall stand? 3. Not only is there much
unsoundnesse to be found in Christ's Church, but this is ill to discern till
Christ discover it, and it cleaves close to men, that it is ill to remove for,
no less then a refincers fire, and fullers soap, can either discover this
dross in the metal, and filth in the cloth, or remove it away, his fan only
can discover the chafe, and take it away. 4. Christ has power sufficient to
purge his Church, and reach the dross, and is so zealous that he will not
spare, and will either consume altogether, or separate the dross away; for, He
is as a refiners fire, and like fullers soap.

Verse 3. And he shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver: and he shall
purify the sons of Levi, and purge them as gold and silver, that they may
offer unto the LORD an offering in righteousness,

4. Then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the LORD,
as in the days of old, and as informer years.

The particular effects of Christ's coming and office in respect of the godly,
is the purging of them, his public worship and Ministers, that so their
worship may be cleanly and acceptable, all things being restored to their
integrity. Doct. 1. The purest Church of Christ is so ready to contract
pollution within time, that purging is needful, and the choice people of God
who are not to be destroyed, will need purging, as having much dross; and it
is their comfort that he intends only their purging, how hot soever the furnace
be; for, unto his Church he is a refiner, and will purify. 2. As Christ's
purging of his Church, by his Word, Spirit and rod, speaks his love, and a
purpose of much good; for, he sits at it as his task that his heart is upon,
and purisies as gold and silver, precious metals refined for honorable use:
so must the godly submit to his way of purging, either for the time, though he
sit at it as a work not to be soon done, or for the measure of it, though it
seck them as silver and gold is sought by the fire, as knowing that he sits at
the furnace, and that he will still make it appear his refining is not with
silver, as to the heat and extremity of the trial, Isa. 48.10. 3. Christ's
coming under the Gospel, tends not to the destruction of a Ministry, though
they need indeed to be often purged; for, He shall purify the sons of Levi. 4.
As pure ordinances, and an offering in righteousness, according to the rule,
and through the righteousness of Jesus Christ, is a choice mercy of Christ's
Church: So the mercy is completed, when that is joined with personal
reformation, when there are purisied Levites, and an offering in
righteousness: and it is personal renovation and reconciliation that sets men
on the way of pure service, and right service must begin there; He shall
purify the sons of Levi, that they may offer an offering in righteousness. 5.
An holy Ministry is an especial blessing to the Church, for keeping Ordinances
pure, and for being instrumental to promo^e purity among people, and setting
them on a pure and acceptable way of worship; for, when the sons of Levi are
purified, they offer in righteousness, and the offerings of Judah and
Jerusalem are pleasant to the Lord. 6. As we are not to please our selves with
what we do in service, unless God accept of it; so the only way of acceptable
worship is through Christ, when he takes any in his hand, and translates them
out of their polluted condition, and makes them and their service (which in it
self is abominable) well-pleasing through him; for, when he comes and purifieth
his people, then shall the offerings of Judah and Jerusalem be pleasant unto
the Lord. 7. Christ by his coming in the flesh, and his death and Gospel is the
restorer of all things, and the substance of all excellencies unto them that
close with him; for, to be pleasant as in the days of old, and as in former
years, imports not only that their setvice shall be acceptable, as of old when
most godly men offered; but that all the remarkable proofs of favor manifested
toward them, and wondered at in their fathers days, as the free reward of
their service, are really to be given to the godly in and by Christ.

Verse 5. And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against false
swearers, and against those that oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow,
and the fatherless, and that turn aside the stranger from his right, and
fear not me, says the LORD of hosts.

The effect of Christ's coming and office, in respect of the wicked, (uttered
here again by Christ himself, that we may remember he is the same God with the
Father) is, that he will appear and enter in judgment with them; and for that
end manifest all wickedness against the first and second Table, (whereof he
names some most frequent amongst them) that he may take order with them; and so
by this threatening he refutes their calumny, chap. 2.17. Doct. 1. Albeit
Christ's principal end in his Incarnation and coming in the Gospel, be not to
condemn, but to save; yet by reason of men's corruption, it proves a judgment
to many in the visible Church, and not only by the furnace of reformation casts
them out of the Church, but cuts them off by judicial punishments mediate or
immediate, as an earnest of their eternal judgment; and this may imbitter such
a case, that what is ordained to life should be found to death; I will come
near (whereas ye think I stand afar off, yet I will appear, and come so near as
may reach you) to judgment. 2. However men who are deepest engaged in sin, are
hardest to convince ost-times; yet as Christ sees all sin by his vigilant
Providence, and by the Minstery of the Word discovers and lays open sin in its
colors, and by the power thereof, will make corrupt men by their own practice,
write their naughtiness upon their own forehead: so his Word charging home
guilt, can make the consciences of the most obstinate plead against themselves,
frame their own process, and justify his judgments threatened or inflicted
on them; And I will be a witness, says he, which imports their blindness,
and what the effects of Christ's coming shall be. 3. Sins do ripen quickly under
the Gospel to a measure of impie^y, and speedily fit for judgment; I will be a
swift witness, says Christ. 4. As the visible Church is oft-times guilty of
monstrous abominations, both against the first and second Table, (none being
more corrupt then they who ought to be best, and will not) which call aloud for
vengeance; so the root of all these is, the want of the fear of God; for, here
are sorcerers, adulterers, etc. and all summed up in this, and fear not me,
says the Lord of hosts.

Verse 6. For I am the LORD, I change not: therefore ye sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

The reason of the preceding Prophecy is fetched from Gods unchangeablenesse,
and his immutable grace and constancy in his promise, which preserves Israel,
and brings about these mercies of sending Christ unto them, and his purging and
restoring his ordinances; and is the cause of constant kindness toward the
Elect, who otherwise do so often provoke him to destroy them; and it meets also
with their quarrelling him, that he would not prove a God of judgment; for
that would have consumed them, (considering their temper, as is hinted, v. 5.)
which out of his unchangeable purpose of love to them as his people he had
hitherto forborne. Doct. 1. Men may be quarrelling a dispensation, which yet it
is their great mercy to enjoy; and may quarrel Gods not appearing in a sad
time, whereas if he did appear, it would consume themselves: thus did they
quarrel and complain without cause, as is before explained. 2. God is immutable
in his nature, essence, properties and purposes, as having being from himself,
and being independent on all other who might oversway him, and infinite in
wisdom that needs no after-thoughts; and albeit he may change his
dispensations, yet his purposes stand firm, and are carried on unalterably by
various and contrary means; I am Jehovah, I change not. 3. There is no Church
or people of God, but in themselves they are worthy to be consumed, considering
their inherent sinfulness, their daily provocations and inconstancy in any
good, and the worthlesnesse of their best things: and any forbearance they
enjoy is from a cause without them: for, if the sons of Jacob are not
consumed, it is not of themselves, but of God. 4. Such as God has chosen to
himself of his free grace to be his people, may in the midst of their
inconstancy and failings, (when they are sensible of them, and driven to Christ
by them) comfort themselves in the immutability of Gods love, which alters not
as their condition alters: and whatever the Lords dealing to them be, they may
reckon that it flows from no change of purpose in him, who is still the same,
and that he intends not to destroy or reject them; so did the Church of Israel,
having a peculiar promise find, and so will all the Elect find; I am the
Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.

Verse 7. Even from the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine
ordinances, and have not kept them. Return unto me, and I will return unto you,
says the LORD of hosts: But ye said, Wherein shall we return?

In the second part of the chapter, the Lord challenges them, and contests with
them for several faults, which may prove that it came of him that they were not
consumed. The first sault challenged is their defection, and their rebellion
and impenitency in it. However that Nation had continued in a long trade of
sin, the posterity subscribing to their fathers sins, by following their
footsteps; yet the Lord offered upon their repentance, to be reconciled unto
them, and to grant them the wonted signs of his favor, taking away the tokens
of his anger; but they would not be convinced of any need of repentance, and so
denied the accusation, and rejected the exhortation and encouragement. Doct. 1.
New defections do justly bring former iniquities, and a trade of sin to
remembrance, that men may see the sad fruit of giving once way to sin, and what
a judgment is on them who think little of all these sins, and that they may be
an aggravation of present sins, as filling up the measure of former iniquities:
Even from the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from my Ordinances. 2. As
Apostasy from former professions and engagements by new sin, does add much to
the sin; so Apostasy from the ways of God will easity follow on, not serious
walking in them, as being near a kin to it; Ye have gone away by apostasy,
from mine Ordinances; and have not kept them. 3. It sets out the great mercy of
God, that after much apostasy, he offers reconciliation upon repentance, and
this offer does highly aggravate impenitency: Return to me, and I will returue
to you, says the Lord of hosts. 4. It is an ordinary plague and judgment
upon them who are deepest engaged in sin, that the custom of sin makes them
that they consider not that they do evil, that they see least need of
repentance, and are most hardly convinced; But ye said, Wherein shall we return?

Verse 8. Will a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: But ye say, Wherein have
we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.

The second fault challenged, (which proves the general challenge, and answers
their reply, v. 7.) is their sacrilege in withholding tithes from the Priests,
and offerings from the Temple, whereof the Priests had a share for their
maintenance. This the Lord accounts robbing of him, which no Pagan would do to
his idol. Doct. 1. It is the Will of God, that his public worship be upheld,
and that these who are set apart for the public worship of God, be maintained
thereby: and who so do withhold that are guilty of grossest defection, as
overturning the whole public worship and Ordinances of God at one stroke; for,
he proves that challenge, v. 7. of going away from his Ordinances, by
withholding tithes and offerings. 2. To withhold maintenance from the Ministers
of the Word, is a robbing of God; for, not only where that is withheld, his
service is slighted also, tithes and offerings go together; but it is an
affronting of God, who has commanded the contrary, a depriving him of that
which is consecrated to him, and dedicated to his public worship, and an
affronting of his service, as if it were not worth any expense, and so making
men to faint in it; Ye have robbed me in tithes and offerings. 3. Men may be
doing great injuries to God, when yet they will not see it, nor apprehend how
much God is reflected on by their way, or how deep their iniquity draws; for,
so does their exception to the challenge import; Yet ye say, Wherein have we
robbed thee? 4. The respect that Pagans have to their idols, and their care to
uphold service unto them, will condemn many who profess to serve the true and
living God, and yet neither have respect nor love to him, nor have any care to
maintain and uphold his worship: Will a man rob God? any thing he counts a god;
and yet ye have robbed me.

Verse 9. Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole
Nation.

10. Bring ye all the tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in
mine house, and prove me now herewith, says the LORD of hosts, if I will not
open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall
not be room enough to receive it.

11. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes: and he shall not destroy
the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit before her
time in the field, says the LORD of hosts.

12. And all Nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome
land, says the LORD of hosts.

He declares that because of this sin, God had cursed them with a general want,
and exhorts them to amend this fault, promising to give a proof that his
accusation has been just and that their repentance and amending their fault
should be acceptable, by giving them rain and the influences of heaven, to
cause the earth to bring forth in abundance: and by removing impediments of a
fruitful harvest, by keeping off destroying creatures, and preventing their
trees from untimely casting their fruit. So that Gods blessing should be so
conspicuous upon them, as should take away their reproach of being a Nation
plagued of God. Doct. 1. People never thrive the better, that they neglect Gods
service, and think to increase their stock by withholding what is due from Gods
servants, but are ordinarily served in their own coin, and plagued with as
much want as they drive his servants to; and however, they are certainly
pursued with a curse in all that they have, which can soon overspread a whole
Kingdom; Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, even this whole
Nation. 2. It is the duty of these who would uphold Gods service, not only to
give what is requisite for maintenance of the Ministers thereof, but to do it
voluntarily, and so as Ministers may be free of distractions from their great
work; Bring, says he, the tithes into the storehouse. 3. If men would repent
and amend their sinful courses, they might meet with such proofs of Gods
favor, as would convince them that they had forsaken their own mercy formerly,
though they would not see it; and that much of God is to be found of these who
wait on him in his own way for it: for, the Lord submits to a trial from
experience, if these quarrellers would leave their debates, and put him to it;
Let there be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith, if I will not open
upon you the windows of heaven, etc. 4. Many steps of divine Providence and
care, may be read in our very daily bread and plentiful provision; The opening
of the windows of heaven, and pouring out of a blessing, the rebuking of the
devourer from destroying fruits, when the influences of heaven have produced
them, and keeping of trees from casting fruit before the time, shows how many
ways an angry God can reach sinners in these things, how richly he can provide
for his creatures, and how sufficiently secure it to them. 5. As Gods blessing
upon his reconciled people, will be conspicuous and remarkable; so the very
reproach of being under Gods judgments, ought to affect the sinner, and be a
motive to repentance and reformation, that God may roll away that reproach as
he is ready to do; for, it is an argument to invite them who are under a curse,
to turn from their evil ways: All Nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall
be a delightsome land.

Verse 13. Your words have been stout against me, says the LORD: yet ye say,
What have we spoken so much against thee?

14. Ye have said, It is vain to serve God: and what profit is it, that we
have kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked mournfully before the LORD of
hosts?

15. And now we call the proud happy: yea, they that work wickedness are set
up, yea, they that tempt God, are even delivered.

The third fault reproved, (wherein they showed much presumption) is their
murmuring and wicked blasphemy, accounting it a vain thing to serve God,
because they who pretended to obey God, and walk humbly under sin or judgments
in some ceremonial performances, were not answered according to their lusts;
and blessing the grossly wicked, because when they went the very length of
tempting God in their wickedness, yet they escaped trouble and were exalted.
Doct. 1. It is a presumptuous and bold course, when men dare not only secretly
murmur against God, his Providence and their duty, but dare openly publish and
avowsuch mistakes, and reject conviction for it as a sin; Your words have been
stout: yet ye say, What have we spoken so much against thee? 2. As it is
desperate presumption for men to cast out with piety: so the Lord will have
every one that serves him tried in their sincerity, and whether or not any
thing will drive them on such a snare; for here, these who pretended to much
service, spoke stoutly and said, It is vain to serve God. 3. It is a character
of true piety, when men do indeed cleave close to the revealed Will of God,
and yet are humble for all they do, when they are humbled for their
short-comings, and do stoop and mourn under any corrections, considering the
greatness and power of God with whom they have to do; for, this is true piety
which they pretend to, to keep his ordinance, and walk mournfully before the
Lord of hosts. 4. It is a great evidence of unfoundnesse when men despise
piety and the way of God, because of the want of outward success, as if
piety and a good conscience were not a reward to it self, and as if it were
not fit that God purged his own people, that they might bring forth more fruit:
They accounted it vain to serve God, for, what profit is it that we have kept
his ordinance? etc. 5. It is also a great evidence of unfoundnesse, when men
see too well their own performances, and are proud of them: and this conceit is
the cause of men's quarrelling when their lots please them not; for, these
complainers see their own worth, and what they did, and because of this
complain, whereas men's humility loses the luster where they see it, and swell
with it. 6. It may please the Lord for a snare to sinners, and a trial to
others, and that none may dote on outward things, not only to deliver sinners
out of troubles, but when they come to the height of impiety, as not to own
God, or tempt and put him to it, to make that a means of advancement; for,
They that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God are even
delivered. 7. The prosperity of wicked men in wicked courses is a trial of
sincerity, and will readily draw unfound hypocrites not only to be discouraged
in what of Religion they pretend to, but openly to side with impiety as the
only blessed way; We call the proud happy, etc.

Verse 16. Then they that feared the LORD spak often one to another, and the
LORD hearkened and heard it, and a book of remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the LORD, and that thought upon his Name.

Follows the carriage of the truly godly in that time, and the fruit these
reproofs had on them, together with the encouragements allowed upon them,
whereby these hypocritical boasters are refuted, in that there are truly godly
beside them, who find profit by it indeed. Their carriage is mutual conference
and exhortations to repentance, which the Lord for their encouragement took
pleasure to observe, and to put upon record for their behoof. Doct. 1. True
piety will keep its feet in worst times, and when Atheism most abounds, and in
times of greatest reeling the Lord will still have a remnant to cleave to him;
for, even then there are who fear the Lord. 2. Communion of Saints in mutual
conference and admonition, being held within the bounds of men's station, and
tending to strengthen against the tentations of the time, and not made an
engine to ensnare and draw men to them, is a necessary duty, and an especial
means of life in a declining time; They that feared the Lord, spoke often one
to another. 3. Albeit the Lord do not always openly reward piety, yet he takes
especial notice of his Saints way, yea, even of every word they speak for him,
especially in an evil time, and lays it up to be forthcoming for them: and
it may be encouragement sufficient to the godly man, that the Lord takes so
much pleasure in it, and will not forget it; The Lord hearkened and heard, as
one taking pleasure) and a book of remembrance was written before him for them.
4. Such as would fear God indeed, and be useful in the duties of mutual
edification, ought to have frequent and high thoughes of God in their hearts,
according as he has revealed himself, without which piety will soon become
cold, and resolve in formality; for, They that feared the Lord, thought upon
his Name.

Verse 17. And they shall be mine, says the LORD of hosts, in that day when I
make up my jewels, and I will spare him, as a man spares his own son that
serves him:

The godly are further encouraged from a promise, that they shall be precious
in Gods sight, and shall find the fruit of their piety, and his affection, in
the day of his appearing to set things in order, either within time, or at the
last judgment; and that they shall be tenderly dealt with, and their failings
passed over, as a Parent passes over an escape in an obedient son. Doct. 1. As
the Lord has a peculiar people in the world, who are precious and dear to him;
so he has his appointed time wherein he will visibly manifest this, and prove
his affection by asserting them out of misery, and setting them in a state of
happiness; for, he has jewels, and a day to make them up. 2. It does richly
make up a godly man in hard times, that he has a peculiar interest in God in
his heart and affection, that whatever become of him, he is still precious in
the Lords sight, and that all will end in a public testimony of Gods favor;
They shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my
jewels. 3. Increase of the grace and Spirit of adoption, to serve God
sincerely, is a sweet reward of piety and encouragement to a godly man; for,
they shall be sons that serve him. 4. Remission and forbearance is the most
godly man's choice privilege, without which he could not stand, considering his
manifold infirmities: I will spare them, is their encouragement. 5. Such as
study to walk sincerely and tenderly, may expect (not because of their merit,
but because of Gods love through Christ) to be graciously dealt with, their
iniquities not being imputed but blotted out, and their infirmities passed by,
that what remains of their service may be accepted; I will spare them as a man
spares his own son that serves him.

Verse 18. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

It is further promised, for the encouragement of the godly, and conviction of
the murmurers, that both of them shall know by experience what difference there
is in Gods account, betwixt the godly and the wicked: partly, when the Lord,
within time, shall be pleased to put visible marks of his favor upon the one,
and of his displeasure upon the other, as Psalm. 58.11. Exodus 14.30. but
especially when the eternal felicity of the one, and torments of the other
shall be made manifest. Doct. 1. Albeit the godly may have oft-times their own
fears and mistakes of God and his way, and the wicked their delusions and
false confidences; yet the Lord has a time wherein to bring them to
themselves, and present things in their right colors, and cause the greatest
mistaker and strongest presumer change his judgment of things; Then shall ye
return and discern. 2. However there be great mistakes in the visible Church,
concerning true piety, many pretending to it. boasting of it, and quarrelling
God because he takes not notice of them as such, who are indeed but proud
hypocrites: and however God hide his true Saints in respect of outward
dispensations, that they cannot be discerned from others in the world, but many
a time are most hardly dealt with, whom he loves best; yet in due time the Lord
will distinguish betwixt true and counterfeit godliness, and discover the seen
advantage of piety: and the bitter fruit of ungodliness: Ye shall discern
between the righteous and the wicked. 3. The godly, whom the Lord will own for
such, and put marks of his favor upon, are such as have fled to Christ, to be
righteous by imputation of his righteousness, and study righteousness in
their conversation, and give themselves up to God, to be employed at his
command, as not being their own; They are the righteous and serve God. And
these whom he will plague are such, as rejecting Christ and his righteousness,
continue in their wicked estate by nature, and are given up to bring forth that
wickedness upon all occasions, and do in effect live as if there were not a
Lord over them, whatever they pretend to the contrary; They are the wicked, and
serve not God.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chapter, 1. The Lord confirms yet further, the difference to be
betwixt the godly and the wicked, by showing the judgments to come on the
wicked, v. 1. and mercies to the godly, v. 2. and their victory over their
enemies, v. 3. 2. The Prophecy is closed with an admonition to adhere to the
written Word, prophecy being now to cease, v. 4. and to expect for, and mark
the coming of the Messiah, which should be known by the coming of John the
Baptist, v. 5. the end and efficacy of whose doctrine is held forth, v. 6.

Verse 1. For behold, the day comes that shall burn as an Oven, and the
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly shall be stubble, and the day that comes
shall burn them up, says the LORD of hosts, that it shall leave them neither
root nor branch.

The particle for shows that the Lord is confirming that assertion, chap.
1.18. of a visible difference to be betwixt the godly and the wicked. And
first, for the wicked he threatens that they shall be as easily and totally
consumed, as a fiery Oven burns stubble. This was accomplished upon the body
of the Jewish Nation, shortly after the first coming of Christ, when they were
utterly scattered, their land wasted, and city burnt; and is also of verity in
the particular judgment of every wicked man; and in the second coming of
Christ, when the whole Word has its full and final accomplishment. Doct. 1.
Man by nature is a proud creature, and retains a stamp of Adam, and the devils
sin, that would be as God; Humility is no native plant in fallen man: they are
the proud whom God has to do with. 2. A man's daring to hazard on wicked ways,
which the most high God has prohibited, and guarded with sad threatenings, is
a clear evidence of pride, let him otherwise appear never so humble; the proud,
and all that do wickedly, are conjoined, as being the same, and the latter an
evidence of the former, as chap. 3.15. See, Psalm. 119.21. 3. The stoutest of
creatures will prove but weak, when God reveals his justice, and deals with
them in wrath; The proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be stubble to the
fire, in the day of the Lord that comes. 4. The pure wrath of the living God
is a dreadful thing, leaving neither hope of out-gate, nor present mitigation,
but violently consumes all without recovery; The day shall burn us an Oven,
(where the heat is closed in, and all that is put in it shut up from coming
out,) and shall burn them up, and leave them neither root nor branch.

Ver. 2. But unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun of righteousness arise
with healing in his wings, and ye shall go forth and grow up as Calves of the
stall.

As for the godly, he promises to send Christ unto them, bringing illumination,
righteousness, healing, protection, and increase of grace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. Doct. 1. An infallible character of the truly godly, is their reverence
and holy fear, (presumption being very contrary unto piety,) and that not only
of Gods justice and terrible judgments, which the wicked may tremble at, but
also of his Name, and whatsoever he reveals himself by, his Word being enough
to make them tremble, Isa 66.2. and his goodness to make them fear, Hos. 3.5.
ye that fear my Name, get the promise, 2. Christ is the substance of the
godlies encouragement, as being unto his Church and children in a
super-excellent manner, what the Sun is to this inferior world, in
enlightening all their darkness, illuminating all the inferior lights that
shine in any measure, making all hid things patent, rejoicing, warming,
cherishing, and ripening all fruits; Unto you that fear my Name, shall the Sun
arise. 3. Not only is every man by nature and without Christ, in a dark,
disconsolate condition till he come unto them; but his manifestation of himself
under the Law, was far inferior to that under the Gospel, which is far more
clear, glorious and comfortable, then the legal shadows were: for, where
Christ comes, the Sunariseth after a dark night; and this especially relates to
his Incarnation, which is Sun-light in comparison of the Old Testament, which
had but, as it were, Moonlight. 4. That which makes Christ especially
comfortable to the godly is, that he brings glorious righteousness to them,
whereby they who durst not appear before God, and are vile and menstruous;
become glorious and beautiful in the eyes of the Lord; he is not only
righteousness, but the Sun of righteousness, glorious righteousness unto
them. 5. As these who get good of Christ, will have many sores, and be made to
feel the deadly wounds and diseases which every one by nature has: so Christ
is the only Physician to cure such sores, and deliver his people from all
sickness of sin and misery: He arises with healing. 6. Christ's merit, and his
love and providence is the sweet shelter of sinners, when pursued by their
enemies; and these who would taste of his healing virtue, are to lie near this
Sun, and get in under his beams and rays, which embrace and cherish the sick
till they be healed; He has warm wings to hide us under, and this healing is
under his wings. 7. As every man by nature is but a prisoner, and a slave to
Satan and his own lusts: and lying under the power of a hard heart and spirit
of bondage, and their souls are also wasted with leanness, and feeding upon
the husks: so Christ being fled unto, and enjoyed, and made use of, as the
souls shepherd, brings spiritual liberty, and increase of grace to make fat
and flourishing, and of joy and gladness in the Lord; Ye shall go forth and
grow up as Calves of the stall; who being well fed and set at liberty, do skip
for joy.

Verse 3. And ye shall tread down the wicked: for they shall be ashes under the
soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, says the LORD of hosts.

To make this difference yet more conspicuous, he not only threatens judgments
against the wicked, and promises spiritual comforts to the godly, but promises
to bring the wicked under the godlies feet, and to make them triumph solidly
over all their enemies. Doct. 1. Whatever external excellency be permitted to
the wicked, yet they are, in comparison of the godly, but vile and
contemptible, and will in due time appear so; they are but ashes to be tread
upon by the godly. 2. Albeit the godly are oft-times lying under the feet of
wicked enemies, yet not only are they even then Conquerours over all their
enemies in Christ their Head, and by faith which keeps them from hurt, and
brings them advantage from their troubles, and makes them boast in God over all
of them, and sometime get their hand over enemies even in this world, either by
themselves or by others: But in due time their victory shall be complete and
visible, when they shall be set with Christ on his throne, and all the wicked
made his and their footstool; Ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be
ashes under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this, says the
Lord of hosts.

Verse 4. Remember the Law of Moses my servant, which I commanded unto him in
Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments.

This Prophecy, (as also the rest, he being the last) is closed with some
directions to the Church, whereof the first is, that since there was no other
extraordinary Prophet to succeed him, till Christ and his forerunner should
come, and there being terrible schisms and commotions to ensue amongst them,
therefore they would have recourse to the written Word, therein to seek eternal
life, and instruction how to walk in Gods way, till they come to the actual
possession of salvation. Doct. 1. The written Word of God is to be closely
adhered unto, as that which will direct our course in dark times, which ought
to be the rule of our faith, worship and manners, which will supply the defect
of extraordinary revelations, and to which all extraordinary revelations agree,
and bear witness, and will afford matter of comfort in saddest times, and for
attaining these ends, the Church is to be much in the study thereof; upon
these grounds is this charge given, Remember ye the Law of Moses. 2. The
doctrine revealed by God to Moses, and by him to the Church, contains the
substance of all that is necessary to salvation, and is the foundation of all
the rest of the Scriptures, which are as a Commentary and particular
application of it: upon this ground it is that they are remitted to the Law of
Moses, not to seek justification by the works of the Law, nor yet only to be
led by the Law to Christ, but as containing the sum of all the doctrine of
the Prophets, which they would not neglect who made conscience of Moses law, as
being Gods own Commentary upon it, enjoined as an appendicle to it. 3. That
the Word may have place, and be entertained with due reverence and respect, we
are seriously to consider the authority of God enjoining it, I commanded: our
obligation to it, and our honor in enjoying it, I commanded for all Israel,
and only Israel, secluding other Nations: the Majesty of God at any time
appearing in or about that Word, how dreadful he was in publishing it at first,
what of God has appeared in refreshments by, or judgments and mercies
according to that Word, I commanded it him in Horeb with great glory: and what
authority his servants have to inculcate that Word upon us, and how much their
fidelity in duty will condemn our contempt, Remember the Law of Moses my
servant which I commanded him. 4. Such as make conscience of submitting to, and
walking by the rule of Gods Word, will be far from allowing to themselves or
others, a liberty in some points of truth and practice, to believe or do as
they please, providing they keep right in some chief and fundamental things,
but will be tender of the whole Will of God, of lesser and greater
Commandments, they are enjoined to remember the ceremonial statutes and
political judgments, as well as the moral Law, and in a word, his whole
doctrine.

Verse. 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet, before the coming of the
great and dreadful day of the LORD.

A second direction is, earnestly to expect Christ's coming, and to prevent any
mistake about it, he premonishes them, that he would send John Baptist in the
spirit and power of Elias, immediately before his coming. This is so clearly
expounded in the New Testament, Luks 1.17. Mar. 11.14. and 17.11, 12. that it
is high presumption to contradict it. Doct. 1. Christ's coming in the flesh, and
as a Prophet to his Church, is not only greatly to be reverenced by the godly,
(as when Jacob had the vision, Genesis 28.17.) but indeed terrible unto the
wicked, and may be the occasion of terrible judgments to corrupt visible
Churches, whose measure of sin will be filled up by contempt of such an offer:
It is the great and dreadful day of the Lord. And so the Nation of the Jews
found it. 2. Christ is not easily discerned when he comes to his Church, as not
appearing in such a way as carnal men imagine, but may be mistaken and
rejected, or another taken for him, which because it is the hinge whereupon our
happiness turns, that we have Christ indeed, and mistake him not in his
manifestations, nor embrace a delusion in his stead, therefore we would study
sure and clear light in this truth: Hence it is that the Lord so much guards
this, by showing the marks of the Messiahs coming, and the Evangelist Mark
begins where Malachi leaves off, Mark 1.3. Ministers who would preach
repentance unto a people, and fit them for the Kingdom of Christ, ought to be
men of Elijahs temper, for through zeal and integrity, for courage and
fidelity, to resist a declining generation, to contend with the greatest
decliners, and freely to reprove the sins of the time; such a one was Christ's
forerunner, he was Elijah the Prophet, as coming in his Spirit and power, Luke
1.17.

Verse 6. And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the
heart of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a
curse.

John's doctrine is commended from the end of it, which is to convert the people
to prevent the curse; and from the efficacy of it, that by his preaching for
reformation of the Church, he shall either be instrumental to convert both
elder and younger, and make an harmony in faith amongst themselves, and with
the Patriarchs their Ancestors, from whom they had so far degenerated, as that
they might justly renounce them, Isa. 63.16. and to beget mutual love amongst
them, as a sure fruit of faith; or else they, being unfit to receive and
embrace Christ, the whole Nation should be ripened for the ensuing curse, and
withal, that his Ministry should be blessed to convert some of all ranks, and
bring them to unity in the truth and love, that the Nation be not totally
rejected and destroyed, but a remnant saved. Doct. 1. As the Lord in mercy
sends his Ministry with the doctrine of repentance, to prevent sadder
messengers and messages: so a Ministry will either be effectual to convert, or
ripen for ruin: It is the Lords last Word to his Church, that the lively
Ministry of the Word, will either ruin the corruptions of men, or occasion
men's own ruin, on whom it has no saving effect, as here we may see. 2. True
Conversion, and the fruit of the Ministry of the Word, will show it self in
making all ranks, (both the old that have lived long in a good conceit of
themselves, and the young who may seem not to have gone far astray,) see need
of repentance and reformation, and making use of Christ, in discovering unto
men how far they have degenerated from the rule, and from the piety of
Ancestors, of whom they are ready to glory in a carnal way; and will unite men
in adhering to the truth of Religion, and in the bond of love: He shall turn
the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to
their fathers, does import all these. 3. The great love of Christ toward the
world appears, in that no provocation would hinder him to come and perfect the
work of Redemption, however his coming was occasion of ruin to many; I come,
is an absolute promise made by Christ as God. 4. Such as embrace not the Word
of God to fit them for Christ, nor will admit of the grace offered by Christ
and his servants, are lying under the curse, from which Christ alone can free
men: and do provoke him to let that curse break forth, to the utter ruin of
Nations and visible Churches; for, such is the certification, if John's
Ministry had no place, and consequently Christ's, whose way he prepared, Lest I
come and smite the earth with a curse. 5. As the Lord is always effectual in
some measure, by them whom he calls and sends forth about his work: so faithful
Ministers, (however looked on as turners of the world up-side down) are as
pillars to uphold a Nation, and according to the measure of their being
fruitful among a people, shall the moderation of a judgment on a people be;
for, John shall turn some, his zealous Ministry was a means, if it had been
received, to prevent that curse on Judea, which after followed: and his turning
of some, as also Christ's success, (whose way he prepared) and the Apostles,
was a means of preserving a remnant of that Nation from the curse, as a seed
and first fruit, till the increase and lump of that Nation be saved and turned
to the Lord; Even so come, LORD JESUS. Amen.

FINIS.

