two vine-encircled columns, one on either side of the text

A SERMON Preached to his MAJESTY, At the Court of White Hall. Aug. 8.

BY JOS. B. of EXON.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher, for NOT: BUTTER. M.DC.XLI.

PSALM. 107.34. [He turneth] a fruitful Land into barrenness for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein.


YE have here in my Text as in much of the world, a woeful change, wrought by a
powerful author, and upon a just merit: The change of a fruitful Land into
barrenness; the author, GOD, the almighty arbiter of the world, He turns;
the merit, the wickedness of the inhabitants. These three then must be the
measure of my tongue, and your ears, the change, the Author, the Merit. In the
change you shall see the Act and the Subject. For the first: All these earthly
things have their turns; the whole World is the proper region of mutability. I
know not whether I should exempt heaven it self. Even there I find a change,
of Motion, of Face, of Quality; Motion whether by consistence, or
retrogradation, Sun stand thou still in Gibeon, and thou Moon in the valley of
Aialon, Ios. 12.10. There was a change in not moving. And for Retrogradation,
The shadow went back ten degrees in the dial of Ahaz, Es. 38.8. A change of
Face, the Sun was darkened, Luc. 23.45. when the Sun of righteousness was
eclipsed, and shall be so again ere he break forth in full glory: Then shall
the Sun be darkened, the Moon shall lose her light, the Stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of heaven shall be shaken, Mat. 24.29. A change of
quality; what need I fear to ascribe that to this glorious frame, when the
spirit of God can tell us; They shall wax old as a garment, as a vesture thou
shall change them, and they shall be changed. In the mean time our eyes can
tell us, that the second of these greater lights, the Moon, is the very
emblem of mutability; never looking upon us twice with the same face; there is
no month passes over us, wherein she is not both new and old, to the making
up of a just and common riddle, that not exceeding the age of 28. days, she
is yet no less old then the world; ever filling and waning, and like the true
image of all mutability, never so blotted as in her greatest brightness.

Yea, what need we doubt to ascribe some change to thee material heavens; when
if we look to the inside of them, we shall find that there has been the
greatest change in the very Angels; and for their present condition, that
though the essence of the glorious spirits there, be immutable from within,
having nothing in them that may work their dissolution or change, yet that we
cannot say they are immutable from without, since if that power which gave them
being, should withdraw his hand, they could not be. It is the perfection of God
only, to be absolutely inalterable, and as to work freely, so to be
necessarily: so as our subtle Bradwardine maintains that ens necessarium is
the first attribute of God, that can fall under our notion. And even of this
most glorious, infinite, and only perfect and absolute being, we may safely
(though in all awful reverence) say, with Gregory, Mutat sententiam, non mutat
consilium, He changes his threatened doom, but never his decree. But, how high
are weflowne ere we were aware; me thinks I hear the Angel speak to me as
to Esdras; Thy heart has gone too far in this world, and think thou to
comprehend the ways of the most High?

Cast we our eyes rather down to the lower orbs of elementary mixture; here
is nothing to be seen but in a perpetual gyre of mutation; the elements that
are partners in quality, interchange with each other in substance, the mixed
bodies can no more stand still then the heaven whereby they are governed; for
as that Sun never holds one minute in one place, never day walks the same
round, no more do these inferior bodies continue one moment in the same
estate, but ever altering; either growing up to their ((...)) the vertical
point of their being, or declining toward their corruption; insomuch as
Physicians observe, that every seven years this body of ours is quite another
from it self, and in a continual renewing of supplies, or degrees of decaies.

And if ye look upon the greater bodies, the Sea and the Earth, ye shall see
that the sea is ever ebbing and flowing, and will want waves ere it want
motion; The earth, which of all visible things has the style of co^stancy
[terra quae nunquam movebitur] yet sometimes feels the motion of Trepidation in
her vast body: The earth shook and trembled, and the foundations of the hills
moved, and were shaken, Psalm. 18.7. And always in the surface of it feels the
motion of sensible mutation; the domestiques whereof, as all vegetative and
some sensitive creatures, and the Lords thereof, rational creatures, are ever
as moving, as the earth is still: ever breeding, borne, growing, declining,
dying: And if ye match these two together, ye shall see how the Sea and the
Earth win of each other; it is full tide now, where there was a goodly crop:
and where the ox grazed, there the whale swims; How have we seen steeples to
stand in those liquid cemiteries; in stead of masts, and again the plough to
go, where the ship lately sailed!

And as it is thus in the frame of nature, so of policy too, those great and
famous Monarchies of the world what ever precious metal, their head,
shoulders, wast, have been of; yet their feet have been of clay, and are gone
into dust; Civility, arts, soverainty have, in an imitation of the Suns course,
gone from East to West, and will no where be fixed, till they be overtaken with
the last revolution.

In vain therefore shall we look for constancy upon earth; look how possible
it is for a man that stands, fortune-like, upon a round rolling stone in a
smooth floor to be steady in his posture, so possible it is for us to be
settled in an unchangeable condition, whiles we are upon this sphere of
variableness. Can we think that the world shall move, and we stand still?
Were the Sun the center of motion, and the earth whirled about in this vast
circumference, could we make account of rest? And if in our own particular, we
could either stay our foot, or shift it at pleasure, notwithstanding that
insensible rapture (as the Ant may creep the contrary way to the violent
circumvolution of the wheel) yet we must necessarily be swayed with that
universal swinge of mutability, wherewith all creatures are carried forcibly
about. The most lasting Kingdoms therefore have had their periods; and of the
most settled government, Gods handwriting upon the wall goes so far as to say,
Mean, mean, thy days are numbered. Oh the fickleness of this earthly glory and
prosperity! Oh the glassy splendour of all humane greatness; cracked with a
touch, with a fall broken! who would set his heart upon these unstable
felicities? Do ye not smile at the child, which when he has raised a large
bubble out of his wallnut-shell, joys in that aerie globe, and wonders at the
goodly colors he sees in it; which whiles he is showing his own face and his
play-fellowes in that slight reflection, vanishes away, and leaves nothing but
a little froathy spittle behind it? so ridiculous are we, whiles we dote upon
these fugitive contentments. The captive Prince in the story, noted well when
he looked back upon the charet of his proud victor, that still one spoake of the
wheel went down as another rose; Think of the world as it is, O ye great
ones, it turns round, and so do all things in it. Great Saladine caused it to
be proclaimed, that he had nothing left him but his winding sheet. The famous
General that thrice rescued Rome, came to Date obolu^ Belisario, one single
halfpenny to Bellisarius. Take your turns then for these earthly
preeminences, but look at them still as perishing; and if you aim at rest,
look for it above all these whirling orbs of the visible heavens; say of that
Empyreall heaven, as God said of the holy of holies which was the figure of it,
Hic requies mea in aeternum, Here shall be my rest for ever: there as Bernard
well, is the true day that never sets, yea there is the perpetual highnoone of
that day, which admits no shadow. Oh then overlook all these sublunary
vanities; set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth; seek
those things which are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God;
There only shall you find true rest, and constant glory. This for the act of
the turning, the terms or subjest of it follows; A fruitful land into
barrenness.

Philosophy has wont to teach us that every change is to the contrary; here it
is so, plainly; Fruitful into barren, yea into the abstract Barrenness it
self: Small alterations are not noted; the growing of the grass, the daily
declining into age, though not without a kind of change, are insensible; but
for Aarons dry rod to be budded, blossomed, almoned in a night; for the
vigorous, and curled prisoner to become gray headed by morning; for the
flourishing Pentapolis, to be turned suddenly into sulphurous heaps, and
salt pits, these things fill the eye, not without an astonishment of the heart.
The best beauty decaies by leisure, but for a fleshy Idol at the Court, to
become suddenly a leprous Miriam, is a plain judgment; Thus, when the fair
face of the earth, shall be turned from a youthly and flourishing greenness,
into a parched, and withered deformity; the leaves which are the hayres, fall
off, and give way to a loathsome baldness; the towred Cities, which are the
chaplets and dresses of that head, are torn down, and turned to rubbish; the
fountains and rivers, which are the crystalline humors of those eyes, are
dried up; the surface, which is the skin of that great body, is chopped, and
chinked with drought, and burnt up with heat; those sweet waters of heaven, and
those balmy drops of fatness wherewith it was wont to be besprinkled, are
restrained, and have given place to unwholesome serenenesse, and killing vapors:
shortly, that pampered plenty, wherewith it was glutted, is turned into a
pinching want, this change is not more sensible, then woeful. It is a great
judgment this of barrenness, the curse of the disappointing figtree was but
this; Never fruit grow more on thee; as contrarily, the creature was blessed in
no other terms then Crescite and multiplicamini, Increase and multiply. A
barren womb was Michols plague, for her scoffing at devotion. It was held by
Abimelec no small judgment that God inflicted on him in closing up all the
wombs of the house of Abimelec, Genesis 20.18.
and therefore it is said Abraham prayed, v. 17.
and God healed Abimelec, and his wife, and his maidservants. And surely as the
Jews held this the reproach among women (though ours have not the same opinion,
nor the same reason) Luc. 1.25. (in so much as Canta sterilis had been a
strange word, Ep. 54.1. were it not for that which follows, The desolate
shall have more children then the married;) So this is opprobrium terrae, the
reproach of our common mother, an unbearing womb, and dry breasts, Ose. 9.14.
What follows hence, but miserable famine, leanness of body, languishing of
strength, hollownesse of eyes, dryness of bones, blacknes of skin, wringing of
mawes, gnawing and clinging of guts, and in the end, the pale horse of death
follows the black horse of famine, Revel. 6.8. And Those that are slain by
the sword are better then they that are slain with hunger, Lament. 4.9. Yet
let me tell you, by the way, the earthly and external barrenness is nothing
to the inward and spiritual; where the heart is barren of grace, where the
life is barren of good works, the man is not near to cursing, but is under it;
Ye know who said Give me children or else I dye, Genesis 30.1. It was an over
passionate word of a good woman; many a one lives, and that with less grief
and care, and more ease, without them; she might have lived happy though
unfruitful, but surely a barren soul is both miserable and deadly; God says
of it as the Lord of the soil said of the fruitless figtree, Exscindatur, Cut
it up, why keeps it the ground barren? If then we find our selves in this
condition, let us do as Solomon says the fashion is of the barren womb, cry
Give, Give, and never leave importunate craving till we find the twins of
grace striving in the womb of our souls.

But yet if a dry Arabian desert yield not a spire of grass; or the whitish
sands of Egypt (where Nile touches not) yield nothing but their Suhit and
Gazul (fit for the furnace, not the mouth;) or if some ill-natured wast, yield
nothing but heath and furs, we never wonder at it; these do but their kind;
But for a fruitful land to be turned to barrenness, is an uncouth thing; the
very excellency of it aggravates the shame. And surely God would not do it if
it were not wondrous, he fetches light, not out of glimmering, but out of
darkness; he fetches not indifferent, but good out of evil: We weak agents
(such all natural, and other voluntary are) descend by degrees from an
extreme, by the stairs of a mean, and (that oft-times) sensible mutation;
God, who is most free and infinite, is not tied to our terms, he can in an
instant turn fair into foul, fruitful into barren, light into darkness,
something, yea all things into nothing; Present fruitfulness therefore is no
security against future barrenness. It is the folly of nature to think it
self upon too slight grounds sure of what it has. Non movebor, David
confesses, was his note once, but he soon changed it; and so shall we; Thou
art rich in good works, as that churl was in provision, and say, Soul take
thy ease, let thy hand be out of ure a little through a lazy security, thou
have forfeited all, by disuse, and may expect to hear, Stulte, hac nocte:
Thou art rich in profession of Grace? Was any man more officious then Demas?
yet he soon fell to embrace the present world, with a neglect of the future.
Think not now that I am falling in with our late Excutifidians, to teach that a
true, solid, radicated saving faith may be totally, finally lost; no, I hate
the motion: it is presumption that I tax, not well grounded assurance;
presumption of outward profession, and privileges, not assurance of the inward
truth of grace. Presume not, o vain man, of what thou were, or what thou have.
Devils were Angels, Jerusalem was the holy City. Rome was for her faith
famous through all the world, Romans 1.8. Woe to Ariel, to Ariel the City where
David dwelt, Es. 29.1. Our own once good estate may aggravate our misery, can
never secure our happiness. Son of man, what shall become of the vine of all
plants? (says the Prophet) The more noble it is, the worse it speeds, if
fruitless: Oh let us not be high-minded, but fear. England was once, yea
lately was, perhaps is still, the most flourishing Church under heaven; that I
may take up the Prophets words, Es. 13.19.
the glory of Churches, the beauty of excellency; what it may be, what it will
be, if we fall still into distractions, and various Sects, God knows, and it
is not hard for men to foresee: Surely, if we grow into that Anarchicall
fashion of Independent congregations, which I see, and lament to see, affected
by too many, not without woeful success; we are gone; we are lost in a most
miserable confusion; we shall be, as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah;
Es. 13.20.21.
and it shall be with us, as the Prophet speaks of proud, and glorious
Babylon, The shepherds shall not make their fold here; wild beasts of the
desert shall lie bear, and our houses shall be full of doleful creatures, and
owls shall dwell, and satyrs shall dance there, and the wild beasts of the
Islands shall cry in our desolate palaces: I take no pleasure (God knows) to
ominate ill to my dear nation, and dearer mother the Church of England, for
whose welfare and happiness I could contemn my own life: but I speak it in
a true sorrow of heart to perceive our danger, and in a zealous precaution to
prevent it. Oh God, in whose hands the hearts of Princes and all the sons of
men are, to turn them, as the rivers of waters, put it into the heart of our
King and Parliament, to take speedy order for the suppression of this wild
variety of Sects, and lawless independencies ere it be too late. Thus much for
the subject and terms of this change; The agent follows, He turns.

Never was there any sterility, whereof there may not be a cause given; Either,
the season is unkindly, parching with drought or drenching with wet, or nipping
with frost, or blasting with pernicious aires, or rotting with mildewes; or,
some mis-accident of the place, inundations of waters, incursions and spoil of
enemies, sudden mortalities of the inhabitants, or some natural fault in the
soil, or misdemeanure of the owners; idleness, ill-husbandry, in mis-timing,
neglect of meet helps, unculture, ill choice of seed, but what ever be the
second cause; we are sure who is the first, He turns: Is there any evil in
the City and he has not done it? Alas, what are all secondary causes, but as
so many livelesse puppets? there is a divine hand unseene, that stirs the
wires, and puts upon them all their motion: so as our Savior said of Pilate,
we may say of all the activest instruments both of earth, and hell, Thou
could have no power over me, unless it were given thee from above.

Is Joseph sold to the Merchants by the villainy of his envious brethren? The
Lord sent me before you, Genesis 51. Do the Chaldeans and Sabeans feloniously
drive away the herds of Job, does the Devil by a tempestuous gust bluster
down the house, and rob him of his children? The Lord has taken, Job. 1. Is a
man slain by chance-medly, the axe-head slipping from the helve? Dominus
tradidit. So whether they be acts of nature, of will, of casualty; whether
done, by natural agents, by voluntary, by casual, by supernatural, Digitus
Dei est hic; He turns. What can all other causes either do, or be without
him, who is the original of all entity, and causality?

There is much wisdom and justice in distinguishing causes and giving each
their own; whereof, whiles some have failed, they have run into injurious, and
frantic extrems: Whiles, on the one side, wild and ignorant heretics have
ascribed all to Gods agency, without acknowledging secondary causes; on the
other, Atheous fools ascribe all to the second, and immediate causes, not
looking up to the hand of an overruling, and all-contriving providence; We
must walk warily betwixt both, yielding the necessary operation of subordinate
means, employed by the divine wisdom; and adoring that infinite wisdom, and
power, which both produces, and imployes those subordinate means to his own
holy purposes. Tell me then; art thou crossed in thy designs and expectation?
Blame not distempers of times, disappointment of undertakings, intervention of
crosse-accidents; this is, as some shifting Alchymist that casts all the fault
of his mis-successe, upon his glass, or his furnace; but kiss that invisible
hand of power, which disposes of all these sublunary events, if against thy
will, yet according to his own. Even nature it self will teach us to reduce
all second causes to the first. Behold (says the Lord) I will hear the
heavens, they shall hear the earth, the earth shall hear the corn, wine,
oil, and they shall hear Israel. Lo here is a necessary scale whereof no
staff can be missing: How should Israel live without corn, wine, oil? how
should the corn, wine, oil, be had without the yeeldance of the earth? how
should the earth yield these without the influence of heaven? how can heaven
yield these influences without the command of the maker? Ose. 2.21.

When I meet therefore with a querulous husbandman; he tells me of a churlish
soil, of a wet seed-time, of a green winter, of an unkindly spring, of a
lukewarm summer, of a blustering autumn; but I tell him of a displeased God,
who will be sure to contrive and fetch about all seasons, and elements to his
own most wise drifts and purposes.

Thou art a Merchant, what tellest thou me of cross winds, of Michael-mas
flawes, of ill weathers, of the wafting of the Archangels wings when thou
passest by the Grecian promontory of tedious becalmings, of pyraticall hazards,
of falsehood in trades, breaking of customers, craft and undermining of
interlopers, all these are set on by heaven to impoverish thee.

Thou art a Courtier and have laid a plot to rise; if obsequious servility to
the great; if those gifts in the bosom, which our blunt Ancestors would have
termed Bribes; if plausible suppalpations, if restless importunities will
hoyse thee, thou will mount: But something there is that clogs thy heel, or
blocks thy way; either some secret detractor has forlaid thee by a whispering
mis-intimation; or some mis-construction of thy well-meant offices has drawn
thee into unjust suspicion, or the envy of some powerful corrivall trumps in
thy way, and holds thee off from thine already swallowed honor; There is an
hand above that manageth all this; What are we but the Keys of this great
instrument of the world, which he touches at pleasure, depressing some, whiles
others rise, and others again stand still?

Yea, let me make higher instances of you men of State, that sway the great
affairs of Kingdoms, and by your wise and awful arbitrements decree (under
Sovereignty) of either war or peace, and either take up or slacken the raynes
of Commerce, so framing the many wheels of this vast engine that all may move
happily together; you may rack your brains, and enlarge your foreign
intelligences, and cast in the symboles of your prudent contributions to the
common welfare, but know withal, Frustra nisi Dominus, let your projects be
never so fair, your treaties never so wise and cautious, your enterprises
never so hopeful, if he do but blow upon them, they are vanished. The race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise,
Eccles. 9.11.

What should we do then, but look up to that Almighty hand that swayeth all
these sublunary, yea and celestial affairs? It is the weak fashion of
foolish children to ascribe all their kindnesses, or discontents to the next
cause; If good befall them, it is the Tailor to whom they are beholden for
their coat, the Confectionary for their sweetmeats, not their parents who pay
for all these; Again, if the knife be taken away from them, the Servant is
blamed and beaten with their feeble but angry hand, not the mother that
commanded it; yea it is the brutish fashion of unreasonable creatures to run
after, and bite the stone, not regarding the hand that threw it. We Christians
should have more wit; and since we know that nature it self is no other then
Gods ordinance of second causes, and chance is but an ignorance of the true
causes; and our freest wills are overruled by the first mover, oh let us
improve our reason and Christianity so much, as to acknowledge the secret, but
most certain hand of an omnipotent agent, in all the occurrents of the world;
for certainly there cannot be a greater injury to the great King of heaven and
earth, then to suffer second causes to run away with the honor of the first,
whether in good or evil.

Secondly, what should we do but kiss the rod, and him that smites with it,
patiently receiving all chastisements from the hand of a powerful, wise, just
God? Had we to do with an agent less then omnipotent, we might perhaps think
of him as one said of the Egyptian Magitians, They could hurt, but they could
not heal, they could do evil, but not good; or we might fear something
might betide us against, beside, without his will; finite agents cannot go
beyond their own sphere, were the power of great Princes as large as their
wills, none of their designs should be ineffectuall: Or, had we to do with a
powerful agent that were not also infinitely wise, we might think he might be
over-reacht in his plot: But now that infinite power and wisdom are the very
essence of God; let us, what ever we do, or may befall us, take up that holy
resolution of good Ely, It is the Lord, let himdoe what seems him good, 1.
Sam. 3.18.

But in the mean time let not those wicked wretches, by whose unjust hand the
just God thinks good to scourge his own, comfort themselves with the hope of
an impunity, because they are unwittingly used in his executions: No, they are
no whit the more innocent, because God beats his own with their malice;
neither shall they be less avenged because they have heedlesly done Gods will,
whiles they despitefully do their own; Ashur is the rod of Gods wrath, when
God has sufficiently whipped, and drawn blood of his Israel by him, he casts
him into the fire; the fire of that wrath which Ashur feels from God, is a
thousand times hotter then the fire of that wrath which Israel feels from
Ashur. Shortly, God will have his due honor both in afflicting his own, and in
plagueing those that afflicted them; his agency is equal in both; He turns a
fruitful land into barrenness. Hitherto the agent; now follows the meriting
cause of this change, The wickedness of them that dwell therein.

God is an absolute Lord, Domini est terra; he is not accountable for any
reason of his change: whether of barrenesse or plenty, there needs no other
ground to be given but, Quia voluit; and even so it is in this stirring piece
of earth, which we carry about us; Why this womb, or those loins are sterile,
that fruitful, yea, why this, or that soul is so, he needs not give any
reason but his will, yet so far does he condescend to us, as to impart to us an
account of the ground of his proceedings; Man suffers for his sin, says the
Prophet; and the earth suffers here for the wickedness of the inhabitants:
Evermore, God has some motive for the inflicting of evil; As it is in the main
point of a man's eternal estate, Man's Salvation is, ex mero beneplacito; The
gift of God is eternal life; but his damnation is never without acause in man;
The soul that sins shall die: So it is in this case of lesser good or evil;
when God speaks of turning wildernesses into ponds of water, in the following
words, ye hear no cause assigned but mere mercy, but when he speaks of turning
fruitful lands into barrennes, now, it is for the wickedness of indwellers. This
is a most sure rule therefore, All judgments are inflicted for sin;
Chastisements are out of love, but punishment out of Justice; Yea, so does God
order his judgments commonly, that in the punishment we may read the sin, and
in the sin we may foresee the punishment; and can confidently define, where
punishment is, there has been sin; and where sin is, there will be punishment.

I have heard and seen some ignorant impatients, when they have found
themselves to smart with Gods scourge, cast a sullen frown back upon him, with
Cur me caedis? or with the malecontented mother of the striving twins, Why am I
thus? Alas, what mere, what miserable strangers are these men at home? There is
nothing in the world that they do more misknow then themselves; had they ever
but looked in, if but at the door, yea at the window, yea at the Keyhole of
their own hearts or lives, they could not choose but cry out, with holy Job, I
have sinned, what shall I do to thee, O thou preserver of Men? They would
accuse, arraign, and condemn themselves, and would rather bethink which of
those many thousand sins which they have multiplied against heaven, they are
called to reckoning for, and would have no word in their mouth but mea culpa,
mea culpa. Now as where punishment is, there was sin: so where sin is, there
will be, there must be punishment. If thou do ill, says God to Cain, Sin
lies at the door, Genesis 4.7. Sin, that is, punishment for sin, they are so
inseparable that one word implies both: for the doing ill, is the sin, that is
within doors; but the suffering ill is the punishment: and that lies like a
fierce mastive at the door, and is ready to fly in our throat when we look
forth: and if it do not then seize upon us, yet it dogs us at the heels, and
will be sure to fasten upon us at our greatest disadvantage. Tum gravior cum
tarda venit, etc. Joseph's brethren had done haynously ill, what becomes of
their sin? It makes no noise, but follows them slily and silently in the
wilderness, it follows them home to their fathers house, it follows them into
Egypt: all this while there is no news of it, but when it found them cooped up
three days in Pharaohs ward, now it bays at them, and flies in their faces:
We are verily guilty concerning our brother in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, etc. Genesis 42.21. What should I instance in that, whereof not Scripture,
not books, but the whole world is full; the inevitable sequences of sin and
punishment? Neither can it be otherwise; Shall not the Judge of all the earth
do right, says Abraham, Genesis 18.25? Right is to give every one his due: wages
is due to work; now the wages of sin is death: So then it stands upon no less
ground then the very necessary, and essential justice of God, that where
wickedness has led the way, there punishment must follow: There is more need to
apply then to prove so clear a truth; How then I beseech you, honorable and
beloved, stands the case with us? where is the man that dare flatter us so
much, as to say, there is not store of wickedness found in our hands: Woe is
me, we are in the eyes of all the world no less eminent in Gods favors, then
in our own sinfulness: It is past our power to either conceal, or deny, or
excuse our abominable iniquities: Certainly, if we change not, we are sure God
will not; What can we then expect, from that just hand of the Almighty, but
that he should turn our fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness
of us that dwell in it? I may not be so saucy, to presage by what course he
will do it; That Almighty arbiter of the world has a thousand ways to his
own ends; but it is not an improbable note of the Author of our Fasciculus
temporum; that there is trifarius cursus rerum, Abundantiae, indigentiae,
temperantiae; a three fold course of things; of Abundance, want, tempreance:
From abundance or excess, arises animosity and delicacy: from these arises
discord, and quarrels; and from these want; from want we begin to learn
wit, and compose ourselves to temperance; that thrifty course raises abundance,
In circuitu ambulant impii, as he speaks: Now what shall we say? Of the
abundance and delicacy we have surfeited already too long; we are now in the
quarrelsome part, that arises from our pampered animosity; and what can follow
next, but our miserable indigence and distress? we may please our selves in
the secure condition of our happy union, in the strength of our wooden walls
and our natural Bulwarks; But I remember what I have read of a noble and wise
Captain, who when he was vehemently moved to take upon him the Defense of a
strong City, which was enforced to him by the safe site, strong fortifications,
plentiful ammunition, and inexpugnable walls of it; Yea (says he) but tell me
I pray you, have you any covering betwixt it and heaven? have you any defense
against the vengeance of that God, whom your sins have provoked? If those sins
of yours shall draw down Gods curses upon your heads, to what purpose shall it
be to endeavor to keep your enemy out of your gates? The story applies it
self; In vain shall we think to secure our selves and our state from earth,
if we irritate heaven.

There is no sin that is dumb, there is none that whispers; every one is
vocal, loud, clamorous to solicit heaven for vengeance, but some are more
shrill and importunate then others; God has been pleased to distinguish their
noise: Oppression is one that he hears above the rest; That has two tongues,
both loud ones, both prevalent; The cry of the Oppressed, and the cry of the
Oppression; The Lord will enter into judgment with the Ancients of his people,
and the Princes thereof. Wherefore? The spoil of the poor is in their houses.
What mean you that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces of the
poor, says the Lord God of hoasts? Isay 3.14.

Contempt of Gods Ministers is another, and that is a paying sin wheresoever it
is, Ier. 25.4. Even Moses himself that was mitissimus super terram, yet when
he comes to speak of affronts offered to Levy, can say; Smite through the
loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise
not again, Deuteronomy. 33.11.

What should I particularize? The Lord has a controversy with the land, says
the Prophet Hosea, By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and
committing adultery, they break out, and blood touches blood; Therefore shall
the Land mourn. Hos. 4.2. Does he not speak of our times, think you?

But above all these there is a sin, which wheresoever it is, drownes the noise
of all the rest, and that is Sacrilege, which certainly, in what hand, in what
nation soever it is found, hurries down an inevitable judgment.

It was a fearful word that of the Psalmist, Make their Nobles like Oreb and
Zeeb, yea, all their Princes like Zeba and Zalmunna, who said, Let us take to
our selves the houses of God in possession: O my God, make them like a wheel.
Psalm. 84.11, 12.

Indeed, how can it be otherwise? Will a man rob God, says the Prophet? Ye
are cursed with a curse, for ye have robbed me, Malachy, 3.9.

What should I tell you the stories of Baltasar, of Heliodorus, of Crassus, of
Julian, of the Templars, of Woolsey, and of his Master H. 8. shortly, show me
the man, the family, the nation that ever prospered after sacrilege; I am sure
I have a great Author to the contrary; no less then one of the nine worthies,
Charles the great. Novimus (says he) multa regna, and reges eorum propterea
cecidisse, quia ecclesias spoliarunt, resque earum alienarunt, and militibus
loco stipendii dederunt.

We have known, says he, great Kingdoms, and the Kings of them therefore to
have miscarried, because they spoiled Churches, and alienated their
possessions, and gave them to their soldiers for their pay. If any man have a
mind to feoffe a curse upon himself and his posterity, let him defile his
fingers with the holy things of God: Oh let this portion be to the enemies of
my Lord the King and our dear country; But upon him and his friends, and his
peers and people that abhor this wickedness, let there be blessings from
God even upon them and their seed for ever and ever.

Finally then, since there is no wickedness which does not mainly contribute to
the pulling down of Gods vengeance upon us, and our Land; Let us in the fear
of God join all our forces together against all the reigning sins of the time:
Let us never think we can spend our selves better, then in striving against
the stream of our pressing iniquities: Wherefore has God put the sword into
the hands of you great men, but that you should use it to the effectual
cutting down of all wickedness and vice? Wherefore has God put the two-edged
sword of the Spirit into the mouths of us his Ministers, but that we should
lay about us zealously, in season, and out of season; to the hewing down of
the over-growne abominations of this sinful age? Yea how does it concern
every one of you, who hear me this day, if you would be but wise men, and
good patriots, to put your hand to the work, and to bend your utmost endeavors
to the beating down of your own sins, and carefully to ransacke all the
blind corners of your hearts to find out the cursed Achan in your own
bosoms? Oh that each man would thus undertake to reform one! How sure should
we be that the good God of heaven would divert his fearful judgments, and
graciously continue the blessings of peace, plenty, prosperity, and together
with them of an happy government, and the freedom of the blessed Gospel to us
and our posterity after us: which God vouchsafe unto us for his mercies sake,
and for the sake of the Son of his love, Jesus Christ the Just, etc. To whom
etc.

FINIS.

