A Famous and Joyful VICTORY OBTAINED By the Earl of Stamfords Forces near
Stratford in Northamptonshire, against Prince Robert his Forces, who assaulted
them at one of the clock at night where they were billetted, declaring the
manner of the fight, and how the Earl of Stamfords Forces took 50. of them
prisoners, putting the rest to flight.

Also another happy Victory obtained by the Lord Brooks, September the 8.
against diverse Kentish Cavaleers that were going to the Standard at Nottingham,
with the taking of the Lord Montague prisoner. who was brought to London, Sep.
9.

Signified to the Honorable House of Commons.

September. 10. Printed for H. Blunen.

A True RELATION OF A FAMOUS BATTLE Fought betwixt the Earl of Stamfords
Forces and Prince Roberts near Stratford in Norhamptonshire, September the 7.
1642.
WORTHY SIR,
AFter my best love and respects unto you, I thought it not amiss to acquaint
you with our happy and successful Proceedings in these parts, and of those
Victories which we have obtained, since our setting forth from London, VIZ.

Upon the sixth of this month, we came to a Town called Fenny-Stratford, in
Norhamptonshire, and intended to have billeted there that Night, but they were
disappointed: For about one of the clock in the morning there came a Messenger
to the Town, and informed us, that Prince ROBERTS Troops were marching with
all speed toward the Town: Whereupon we immediately arose, and marched out of
the Town to meet the Cavaleers, where we suddenly espied them coming, and such
was the courage of our men, that they set spurs to their horses, and away they
rid toward them, where having some parley together, and not agreeing, we
discharged against them, and they against us, insomuch that a bloody battle did
ensue, as follows.

Both Armies being set in battle array, they began to discharge with much
courage on both sides, and continued a long time therein, it being very
doubtful on which side the Victory would fall.

Captain Blake, a Dutchman, behaved himself very valiantly in the fight, for he
brought up a Troop of men very valiantly against us with much policy,
assaulting of us both in the Front and left wing.

Then we discharged against him both in the left wing and Front, and at the
last caused him to retreat back, slaying four or five of his men that came
against us on the left wing, and he himself escaped a bullet very narrowly.

Whereupon he withdrew himself and his men to the Rear of their own Army, the
rest of their Troops still discharging against us, being far greater in Number
then we were, and many of them very able soldiers that came from Holland with
Prince Robert.

Yet although their Company was greater then ours we feared them not for had
they bin twice as many more as they were, we was resolved to fight it out to
the last man.

And such is the courage of our men, that although they be but few in Number,
yet will they fight with any that they meet with.

Yet nevertheless, although they did exceed far greater in number, yet they
did not exceed beyond us in courage; for at our first meeting, we cut off a
great many of them, and took fifty prisoners, they being now sent away to
Norhampton Goal, where they now remain prisoners.

And after we had skirmished together for the space of 9. hours, we put them
all to flight, making them run before us like a flock of sheep before their
shepherd, they not daring to withstand us.

There was also a Gentleman came from the Lord Brooks and Collonell Hambdens
Regiments near Coventre, certifying and intimating unto us the Proceedings of
their Forces against the Cavaleers.

And likewise signified, that they had had a great skirmish with diverse
Cavaleers that came out of KENT, being resolved to go to the Standard at
Nottingham, to aid and assist his Majesty against all those that shhuld oppose
him.

Where having for the space of two hours shot very furiously one against
another, the Battle began to cease, and the Kentish Cavaleers began to retreat,
retiring back again with all speed, leaving behind them slain and wounded, near
upon threescore, which came out of Kent with them.

There was also taken in this battle Sir William Butler, Sir Anthony Liger,
Captain Jacob Jackson, and Lieutenant Gilbert, a very able and approved of
Soldier.

The said Forces that are under the Command of the right Honorable the Lord
Brooks, has defeated many more Troops thereabouts.

We are now marching with all speed toward Liecestershire, to clear that
County of the Blood-sucking Cavaleers, that does now so much oppress the
distressed Protestants of that County.

The Dragooners of Northampton have played many brave Exploits, and have
oftentimes fought many skirmishes against the Cavaleers, taking many prisoners,
and putting the rest to flight.

They have also took the Lord Montague prisoner, at Norhampton, the said Lord
being strongly guarded by one hundred men at his own house, where at the first
he defended himself very nobly, but the Dragooneers soon made entrance into
his house, taking great store of Arms, and himself prisoner.

I drank with Abraham Hilt at Dunstable, and I also met Sergeant Fox at
Norhampton.

From Norhampton Sep. 8. Your loving Friend, John Hamblet.

FINIS.

