Imprimatur,

EDMUND CALAMY.

January 1. 1655.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION ON THE XII. Small Prophets; THE FIRST VOLUME CONTAINING AN
Exposition ON THE PROPHECIES OF Hosea, Joel, and Amos.

By GEORGE HUTCHESON, Minister at EDINBURGH.

HOSEA 12.10 I have also spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions,
and used similitudes by the ministry of the Prophets.

AMOS. 3.7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing: but he reveals his secret
unto his servants the Prophets.

Ver. 8. The Lion has roared, Who will not fear? The Lord God has spoken, who
can but prophesy?

London, Printed for Ralph Smith, at the BIBLE in Corne-hill. 165^.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND THE MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL IN THE CITY OF Edinburgh,
And the PROFESSOR of DIVINITY in the UNIVERSITY there. The Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ, that great Shepherd of the sheep, with grace and peace be
multiplied.
Right Reverend,
ALbeit I sufficiently know you are not desirous of such addresses as this is,
nor is the Piece it self, (as to what is mine in it,) of such worth as to
deserve the Patronage of so many Reverend, and Learned men; Yet the reasons
that have moved me to present it first unto you, and under your name to the
view of the world, have been so pressing upon me, that I could not incline to
make any other choice. One of you was the first mover and solicitour of me to
any undertaking of this kind, when I little dreamed of such a matter, and has
continued a constant encourager of me in going about it. Others of you have
been particularly assistant and very refreshful unto me, in your perusing this
and the former pieces before they came to public view, and in your brotherly
and free animadversions upon them, according as ye saw cause, which I do look
upon as a very special kindness and favor. And all of you have been so
indulgent toward me, while at any time I have been necessitate to retire my
self for perfecting what I had undertaken, that I should account my self very
ingrate, if I did not take hold of an occasion to give some public testimony
of my special obligations unto you upon this very account. Next, Seeing it is
the will of God, that the spirits of the Prophets be subject unto the Prophets,
I hold it my duty in this Piece to give you an account of the substance of some
of my labors in the common work of the Ministry with you in this place, as
acknowledging that ye with the rest of the Reverend Presbytery, and other
Judicatories established by CHRIST, are over me in the LORD, and as a testimony
that I look upon subjection and orderly walking, as a very special ornament of
a Minister of the GOSPEL. Withal it is one of my special purposes in this
work, that not only these of my particular charge might have presented to
their view, for their further edification, what they once heard in public: But
that (as our work and charge in this CITY, is in many respects common, so) I
might make what was delivered to one Congregation, common to all. And I could
not think of a more fit mean to render it acceptable to them, then by its
coming to them under your name, and with your approbation. Finally, (that I be
not tedious,) I am much convinced of many obligations laid upon me to
acknowledge the mercy of GOD toward me, that in this dark time of much
confusion and distemper, he has cast my lot in the society of so many faithful
Servants of CHRIST, whose Company, Example, Counsel and Encouragement has been
so often refreshfull and edifying unto me; and that (whatever differences there
are,) the LORD has kept our Society free of many of these woeful and
scandalous distractions which have miserably rent this afflicted Church; and
which are a lamentation, and (if mercy prevent not,) will be for a lamentation,
even to those who for present look upon them with another eye. This mercy has
so often refreshed me, that I could not but upon this occasion leave my
acknowledgement thereof upon Record, as not knowing when I might again have the
like opportunity.

As these reasons, I hope, will plead for your candid interpretation of this
application, and your favorable acceptance of this small token of love and
duty; So I purpose not to insist in prefacing upon any subject unto you, to
whom I rather profess my self a Scholar and Disciple. Only my desire is, that
as hitherto ye have received mercy not to faint in the exercise of this
Ministry, notwithstanding the times that have gone over some of you; so ye may
continue, and abound more and more, in feeding the flock of GOD which is among
you, and being examples to them, in acquitting your selves as his wise and
faithful Servants, whose aim is to advance the KINGDOM of CHRIST, and the
Truth of Piety, and to follow Truth with Peace and Sobriety, without a bias or
selfish and carnal design: And my prayer to GOD for all of us shall be; that
we may be daily more and more rooted and established in the Truth, and in these
ways, that are well pleasing in his sight, and may be made willing and ready
to undergo any lot wherewith it shall please him to exercise us. In which
petition I know you will join with

Your loving Brother, and Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel, GEORGE
HUTCHESON.

TO THE READER,
Christian Reader,
I Have now, through the Lords assistance, finished, and do here present thee
with this Exposition of these three Prophets, which with the Piece: formerly
published, do complete the whole lesser Prophets according to my undertaking,
when I published the first Piece. That I have published these last, when yet
they are first in order, may (I confess) seem somewhat strange to any who
shall not consider, (according as I hinted in the Preface to the first,) that
by a recommendation from a faithful Servant of CHRIST, I was only desired to
undertake Obadiah with some that follow, it being expected that others should
have done somewhat upon the three first, and some of the last of these
Prophets. But finding that they could not, for diverse reasons, prosecute what
they had purposed; I was stirred up to essay first these that followed after
the Prophets I had undertaken, and then these now presented to thee; wherein it
has pleased the LORD to carry me on to this period.

I do acknowledge, that beside the conscience of mine own inability, and the
encumbrance of many diversions from without; I have encountered with two great
impediments in prosecuting this way of writing, especially in this last Piece:
One is, that in these Holy Writings, which run much upon one strain and
subject, (as diverse of these Prophets do,) however the studying of one may
contribute much light for understanding of another; yet I conceive that the
variety of gifts communicated unto empty men, were needful for searching out
the Rich Treasures of Doctrine which are hid up in them, and that one man
(especially being of mean parts,) will on such subjects readily soon wear out,
and either abound in repetitions, or prove but barren in his collections from
Rich Texts. The other is, that so much has been already written on some of
these Prophets, (beside what is done on them all,) and particularly on Hosea,
not only in the Latin tongue for the use of the Learned, but in English also,
that it should seem needless to add any more: Yet when I considered that the
most part of the LORDS people could not make use of Latin Writings, and that
what I have seen in English on Hosea or Joel, is so large, that it may readily
deter many from buying or reading, and withal finding that none I could
learn of, were about to do any thing upon them in short; I have adventured over
these impediments to add them to the former, that there might be an uniforme
mould upon the whole: And albeit these who shall take pains to read larger
Commentaries, will find many sweet discourses and collections, with refreshful
Digressions and Amplifications, which are not to be found here: Yet I hope that
(according to the method propounded,) every Reader may find here, such a
plain and familiar Analysis, such a sound Exposition (wherein the Analysis and
coherence is cleared where it is needful,) and such a collection of obvious
observations, (in deducing whereof, the Exposition is ofttimes further
enlarged, and particular phrases and words not omitted,) as may be helpful unto
him in reading of these Scriptures. And these all done so briefly, as may take
away the excuses of many who please themselves too much in neglecting to
converse daily with the Scriptures, pretending their own incapacity, and the
prolixity of many helps offered unto them.

My desire unto thee (Christian Reader,) is, that not only thou would accept of
this my endeavor, as thou have been pleased to do formerly, beyond my
expectation and deserving; and that thou pray with me that GOD would stir up
others, to undertake some other place of Scripture, in this or the like brief
way; and particularly the greater Prophets, and some of the Writings of the New
Testament, which contain the Marrow of Divinity: But also that in the mean time
thou would make right use of this and the like helps offered unto thee. I need
not make use of Luthers saying, who professed if he thought his Writings would
take up men's time from reading the Scriptures, he would like Saturn, devour
his own children. For thou can not read this, but almost at every sentence it
will lead thee to the Scripture: And it is not only thy duty to give obedience
unto God commanding thee to read and understand, but it adds much to the
obligation, that GOD has not only revealed his mind concerning the salvation
of lost sinners, but has registrate the same in Holy Writing, to prevent
delusion and forgetfulness, and perpetuate his Truth in the World, and has
contrived it so, as with little expense and trouble, thou may have it, and
carry it about with thee; and that he has set apart his Servants daily to open
it up unto thee; and employeth some by writing, to contribute their endeavors
for thy good. It cannot also but commend Scripture unto thee, if thou consider
that it is Gods Charter put in thy hand concerning thy eternal happiness, that
as by prayer thou keeps converse with God in Heaven, so by the Scriptures GOD
converseth with thee, and speaks and daily sends missives unto thee, and that
what thou, who in the sense of thy sin and misery have fled to Christ, finds
there answering thy necessity, comes not unto thee at adventure or by chance;
but is as really intended for thee, as if it had been written to thee in
particular, and by name: And so the Apostle applies that general sentence of
the Proverbes, as spoken to his present hearers under their present pressures,
Ye have forgotten the exhortation which speaks unto you, as unto children, My
son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when thou art
rebuked of him, Heb. 12.5. In a word, If the Law of God be thy meditation and
delight, thou will find God there, it will keep thee spiritual and
heavenly-minded, it will make thee wiser then thy enemies, and recompense thee
with innumerable rich advantages; And on the other hand, thy sleighting of
Scriptures, is an infallible sign of thy woeful condition whatever thou pretend
to, or dream of; and thy neglecting to hear him speak, may justly provoke him
to let thee cry in thy greatest need, and yet not answer thee. Which that it
may not prove the sad lot of too too many in this backsliding generation, is
the prayer of him who is,

Thine to serve thee in the Gospel, GEORGE HUTCHESON.

A BRIEF EXPOSITION OF THE PROPHECIES OF Hosea, Joel, and Amos.
Hosea. The ARGUMENT.
THis Prophet was sent out among the first of those whose writings are recorded
in Scripture, being employed at the same time; at first with Isaiah, and then
with him and Micah in Judah, and with Amos in Israel, as the several Titles of
these Prophecies hold forth. Whether Jonah, (the accomplishment of whose
prediction we read of in the time wherein Hosea Prophesied. 2 Kings 14.25.)
Prophesied with him, or rather a little before him, I will not determine; but
that Prophecy of Jonah, recorded among lesser Prophets; seems to have been
after Hosea began. This Prophets Commission is chiefly to Israel, and therefore
he speaks but little to Judah; and albeit these Tribes, after their rent and
defection from David's Family; did also make Apostasy from the true Worship of
God, sometime following after Baal and other Idols, and constantly cleaving to
the Calves at Dan and Bethel, erected by Jeroboam; Yet the Lord was pleased to
send extraordinary Prophets unto them, yea, and many of them, (who are
mentioned in the History of the Kings and Cronicles,) partly to supply the want
of the ordinary Ministry of Priests and Levits; partly to keep up some face of
a Church among them, during the time of his patience toward them, and to invite
the body of the people unto repentance; and partly, for the encouragement of
the godly among them: If not also with relation to their long and sad captivity
which has since followed; it being usual that there be very fair Sun-blenkes
before such a storm; for which as the body of a people are ripened by the
abuse of such mercies, so the godly are fortified thereby, to endure them with
more patience and hope.

The Commission of this Prophet is delivered partly in Types, Chap. 1, 2, 3 and
parlty in express terms in the rest of the Book. In the first of these, he
more briefly challenges them for their sin, especially Idolatry, denounces
judgments against them, and foretells their rejection; and yet comforts the
godly with predictions of Gospel-mercies, and particularly with promises of the
conversion of that Nation, and of Gods renewing the Covenant with them after
their long rejection and sequestration. In the second, he does more at large
prosecute Gods Controversy against Israel, especially in sharp accusations,
and sad sentences for the many heinous iniquities, committed both by private
and public persons, against both first and second Tables of the Law: His Scope
in all, which is to invite them to repentance, and if they continued obstinate,
that God might be justified in his judgments, and they rendered inexcusable.
This task he performs in such sharp and concise terms, as might testify how
his heart filled with zeal and love to God, stood affected to their way; and
with very little intimation of any hope of future mercy, till toward the end,
wherein he brings forth Gods purpose of love, and in the very close summeth up
all with Evangelical, and ample promises to them.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chap. we have, 1. The Inscription of the whole Prophecy, ver. 1.2. A
typical accusation of Israel for their Idolatry, v. 2, 3. 3. A prediction of
several degrees of calamities to come upon them, under the type of three
children brought forth to the Prophet: By the first whereof is intimated, the
judgment to come on Jehu's posterity, and on the Kingdom thereby, v 3, 4, 5.
By the second is signified a further stroke upon them, in their begun captivity
by the Assyrians, v. 6. In opposition to which, there is a promise of mercy and
deliverance to Judah, v. 7. And by the type of the third child, is held forth
their utter rejection in their final captivity, v. 8, 9. 4. We have subjoyned
unto these threatenings, some Gospel-promises of the increase of the Israel of
God, v. 10. and of the recollections of Judah and Israel, under Christ their
Head, v. 11.

Verse. 1. NHe word of the LORD that came unto Hosea the son of Beeri, in the
days of Vzziah, Jotham, Ahaz and Hezekiah, Kings of Judah, and in the days of
Jeroboam the son of Joash King of Israel.
THe Inscription of the Prophecy holds forth, 1. The Penman of this Doctrine,
described from his own and his Fathers Name, concerning whom, since we read no
more, it were needless curiosity to dip further in it, seeing that is not the
great business to be here looked to. 2. The Divine authority of this Doctrine,
and his calling to publish it. 3. The time of his Ministry, which is reckoned
by the reigns of the Kings of Judah in that time, though he preached unto
Israel; because (as would appear,) the fearful miscarriages of most of these
Kings, and the confusions occasioned thereby, rendered them unworthy of being
taken notice of by God. Only Jeroboam the second, one of Jehu's race, is
mentioned, partly to show that he did not begin to Prophesy toward the end of
Uzziah's reign, but even in Jeroboams time, who began his reign before
Uzziah, (or Azariah,) 2 Kings 14.23. and 15.1. and ended it a good while before
him, 2 Kings 15.8. and so it intimates that he Prophesied long, and continuing
in the days of Hezekiah, it is likely that he saw the captivity of Israel,
which was in the sixth year of Hezekiah, 2 Kings. 18.10. partly, this is
marked, to show that Hosea began thus to Prophesy, not when the declining
condition of affairs under the succeeding Kings, might represent to any these
sad things which he foretold, but when Israel was in a most flourishing
condition, as it was under this King, 2 Kings 14.23, 25. From this Inscription,
Learn, 1. Whoever be the instrument that carries the Lords message, it is
still our duty to study the Divine Authority of his Word and Messages sent by
them, that so we may know whereon to lane; that we may be attentive,
considering we have to do with God, and not with men and vain terrors from
them; and that it may take the envy of any hard Message from off instruments,
as flowing no way from their humors, or desire to disturb the common
tranquillity: For these causes is the Divine Authority of this Prophecy in
particular asserted it is, The word of the Lord to Hosea, the son of Beeri. See
2 Pet. 1.20, 21. 2. As it is the duty of the Lords faithful servants, to preach
only Gods Word to his people; so for performing of this, it is required, not
only that they have abilities and endowments, but authority and a calling also,
which may assure them of assistance and success in some measure, and of
support under any difficulties they meet with; Therefore it is called, The word
of the Lord that came unto Hosea; The Lords Word came unto him to call him to
the Office, and being called, he received the ensuing Messages by Inspiration,
and extraordinary Revelation, and these only be records and publishes. 3.
Such is the goodness and long-suffering of God, as not to give up with his
sinful people at first, but he will pursue them with messages from himself,
even for a long time, and till their case prove irrecoverable; For, so much
does he manifest by continuing Hosea in his Ministry for so long a time,
notwithstanding their Apostasy, The word of the Lord came unto Hosea, in the
days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hozekiah, etc. See 2 Chronicles. 36.14, 15, 16.
4. It may be the lot of the Lords faithful servants, that when they have spent
their time and strength, for a long time among a people, yet they become worse,
and go to ruin; For, notwithstanding Hoseas pains for so long a time, yet
Israel was not converted, but sent into captivity, as his own Doctrine, and the
History of these times bear witness. See Isa. 49.4. 5. It is the commendation
of the Lords faithful servants, that as length of time does not make them weary
of their hard toil, and apparently fruitless labors; so in varierie of times
and changes, they remain the same: For, notwithstanding the many revolutions
in the time of Hoseas Ministry, yet he bears out in his calling, and is
uniforme in his Doctrine. 6. As the Lord may have sad strokes coming on a
people, when they are in the height of prosperity, and have overcome all their
outward enemies; So, however wicked people do abuse their prosperity, and turn
it into a snare for themselves, yet spiritual observers will not be blinded
therewith, but will see sad wrath under all of it, ready to break forth: For,
this message containing sad threatenings, came in the days of Jeroboam, the
son of Joash, King of Israel; when Israel was flourishing, and then the Prophet
saw it. 7. It is in special commendation of faithful Ministers, when the
prosperity of an impenitent people does not tempt them to Prophesy smooth
things, but they denounce wrath most stoutly against a people liable to it,
when the Lords dispensations seem to promise the contrary: Therefore in the
days of Jeroboam, when all seemed to go well, and when therefore faithful
Prophets could hardly be suffered, Amos 7.10, 12. even then does he so freely
plead the Lords controversy*

Ver. 2. The beginning of the word of the LORD by Hosea: And the LORD said to
Hosea, Go, take unto thee a wife of whoredoms, and children of whoredoms: for
the land has committed great whoredom, departing from the LORD.

3. So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, which conceived and bare
him a son.


-- Diblaim.] The first Message wherewith Hosea is entrusted, (and the divine
authority of which is in particular asserted,) is an accusation of Israel for
their spiritual whoredom, or idolatry, and violation of the Marriage-Covenant
betwixt God and them, represented by the Prophets taking a wife of whoredoms;
which however some understand literally, and that Hosea did this, pretending to
justify it by Gods extraordinary command, who might warrant Israel to spoil
the Egyptians, and Abraham to offer up his own Son; yet (beside what difference
may be conceived in the actions themselves, between men's taking of reward and
wages for their long and hard service, and offering up to God what was his own,
and this fact of a Prophet making himself the member of an harlot,) this would
seem probable. 1. That the Prophet took not so long a time in preaching this
one Sermon, as was requisite for marrying a woman, and having three children by
her, she her self giving them suck and weaning them, far less that he should
take yet another, (as he is commanded Chap. 3.1.) either with her, or after her
in so short time, and should multiply such strange facts. 2. That in a time
wherein the Prophets person and calling was already much in contempt, the Lord
would not enjoyne him that as a duty, which might justly add to it, as being
not only specially prohibited unto the Ministers of holy things, Lev. 21.1, 7.
but at the same time wherein Hosea lived, was threatened as a curse upon a
false Priest, Amos 7.17. Therefore I rather understand it typically, that the
Prophet is commanded under this type, to point out the great Idolatry of the
land, and their defection thereby from God; and to declare that the Nation was
such to God, as if after he had taken a wife; she had played the harlot; and
particular persons were such, as if his wives children were children of
whoredoms, that is, suspected to be Bastards, being borne of such a mother,
though going under his name; or given to whoredom in imitation of their
mother. And accordingly the Prophets taking Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, is
his preaching their case under such a type, and the names here used, may either
be taken properly for the name of a famous strumpet in that time, daughter to
such a one, who might fitly resemble Isreal's filthiness; or, they may be taken
appellatively, the first word Gomer, signifying either perfection, or
consumption, and the second Diblaim, being either the name of a great
wilderness, called Diblath, Ezekiel. 6.14. or signifying a cluster, or cakes of
figs, (as a word like this is translated, 1 Chronicles. 12.40. 1 Samuel 30.12.) which
were used in Feasts: Both these may very fitly point out the condition of
Israel, whom God is now challenging, as being brought from an howling
wilderness and desolate condition, and made perfect through his comeliness,
Ezekiel. 16.3, -- 14. but now because of her sensuality, drawing her unto, and
attending her Idolatry, was to be consumed. Doctrine, 1. Such as would profit
by the Word, will find it not enough to acknowledge in general the authority
thereof, unless they have serious thoughts of it in receiving every particular
message, and particularly hard tidings; Therefore beside the general
inscription, v. 1. we have the divine authority of this particular message
twice asserted, it is. The word of the Lord by Hosea, or, in Hosea, to wit, by
divine inspiration; And, The Lord said it to Hosea. 2. Whatever be the Lords
tenderness and meekness, and his allowance that his servants deal so with
such as sin through ignorance and infirmity, and are not hardened in their sin;
yet when a people are obstinate and desperate in sinning, it is the Lords will
they be handled sharply, and peremptorily dealt with; For, this sad challenge,
is the first Message put in Hoseas mouth to this people; It is the beginning of
the word of the Lord, or the first message he got in commission. 3. Albeit it
should be the care of Ministers to gain the affections of people, that way may
be made for their message; yet they would guard, lest in so doing, they blunt
the edge of zeal, and quit their fai^hfulness and a good conscience; but they
would first and last declare their opposition to sin: Therefore also is Hosea
commanded to begin thus, without any previous insinuation to the prejudice of
this duty. 4. Whatever gross iniquities may be in the visible Church, and
whatever Gods controversy may be because of them; yet the great sin and cause
of Gods controversy is, when she corrupts Religion, and especially when she
makes Apostasy unto Idolatry: Therefore does the Lord begin with this, as the
great challenge against Israel. 5. Idolatry, especially in the Church, is
spiritual whoredom, because it strikes at the marriage-tie and relation
betwixt God and his people, and takes in another lover; and therefore is more
heinous in the Church, then among Pagans; and because it is an irreconcilable
fault, as awaking jealousy, which the Scripture calls the rage of a man:
Therefore is it called whoredom, and their sinfulness is represented by a wife
of whoredoms; See Exodus 20.4, 5. 6 As Idolatry is exceedingly aggreaged, by
the consideration of the party whom Idolaters do desert, who is the Lord
Jehovah; and by their obligations unto him, by reason of many favors, being
the land or the people, who were settled in that promised land by his especial
hand, and who enjoyed special dignities and privileges in it, and by the gene
above: flowing of this sin, when it is not some few only, but the land, all of
them, and the body of the Nation who fall in it: So whatever Idolaters may
pretend of cleaving to God, together with their Idols, (as Jeroboam did, 1
Kings 12.28.) yet the Lord will look upon them as rejecters of him and his
yoke, and such as he will have no communion with; Therefore, says he, The land
has committed whoredom, departing from the Lord, or, whoredom from after the
Lord, as in effect renouncing all subjection to him, and casting him off,
whatever they pretend; See 2 Cor. 6.15, 16. 7. It is the plague of God on a
visible Church, that when she renounceth God and his Worship, she is given up
to be exceedingly gross in Idolatry, and corrupting the Worship of God, as not
only the fruit of her inclination, but that Gods judicial upgiving of her may
also be seen in it; Therefore is Israel resembled to a wife of whoredoms, or a
wife eminently and superlatively whorish, as the Original form of speech
imports; See 2 Chronicles. 33.9. Ezekiel. 16.46, 47, 48, 51, 52. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. 8.
Idolatry is also an intangling sin, which when the Church once falls into,
she is still the more enamoured and taken with it, and goes the more
incessantly on, adding one degree of defection to another; to which she is
given up of God, as a punishment for her presuming to debord in the least; so
much also are we taught in the challenge, The land has committed great
whoredom, or, in whoring has gone a whoring, one step has drawn on another,
as the Original imports. 9. A Church making defection from God unto Idolatry,
does bring great prejudice upon her children or particular members, either by
drawing them into defection with her, or by making them share in the sad
effects thereof: Therefore albeit an Idolatrous Church may bring forth children
unto God, so long as he has not given her a bill of divorce, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21.
yet the state of the particular members of the Church of Israel, is here
represented under the type of children of whoredoms; partly, because Idolatry
was not only authorized and enjoined by the representatives of Church and
State, but generally embraced by the people; and partly, because when such an
iniquity overfloweth, it fares the worse with particular members for their
sake, and they do share in the common plagues as children of whoredoms:
Idolatry is a special sin, the sad effects whereof may follow posterity long,
Exodus 20.5. 10. As a people do grow in sin, or draw nearer judgment, they
become the more stupid, and insensible of their sin and danger; for this cause
it is that Israel needs these types to inculcate this Doctrine. 11. Such as God
employeth in carrying his mind to the Church, must deny themselves and their
interests, and be content to be exercised and disposed of, as the Lord sees
may most contribute to make their Doctrine useful and effectual; Therefore must
Hosea apply unto himself this ignominious type, of taking a wife of whoredoms,
even Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, if so be it might convince them. So Ezekiel
must be content to lose his beloved wife by a sudden stroke, and to forbear
mourning under it, if so be it might move the people to hear one Sermon, Ezekiel.
24.16, 17, etc.

Ver. 3. -- Which conceived and bare him a Son.

Verse. 4. And the LORD said unto him, Call his name Jezreel: for yet a little
while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of John, and will
cause to cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel.

5. And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of
Israel in the valley of Jezreel.


Follows from the end of ver. 3. to v. 10. a prediction of the calamities
that were to come upon them by degrees, till they should cease to be a
Kingdom, a Nation, or a Church. This is typically held forth under the
representation of three children, brought forth to the Prophet by this wife of
whoredoms; whereby is signified a threefold period of the ripening of their
sin, and a threefold degree of their ruin and destruction: And in this the
type does suite well, for as children are the fruit of Marriage, or of unlawful
conjunction under cloak of an Husband, so their Idolatry and other sins being
ripe, did at last bring forth that sad fruit.

The first son called Jezreel, did intimate sins coming to an height under
Jehu's posterity; for which the Lord threatens shortly to call them to an
account, and to take vengeance on Jehu's race for his bloodshed committed on
the house of Abab, 2 Kings 9, and 10th. Chap. as accordingly was accomplished
on Zechariah, the son of this Jeroboam, who reigned but six months before he
was slain by a conspiracy, 2 Kings 15.8, 9, 10, 12. This stroke is amplified
from some effects thereof, that by it not only Jehu's race should be cut off,
but the Kingdom should cease, or get such a blow in their fall, and after it,
as it should never recover its former vigor till it were destroyed: And that
their warlike power should be broken, even in the very heart of their Country,
and in the valley lying before Jezreel, which was one of the habitations of
Ahab, 1 Kings 21.1. of which see Josh. 17.16. Judge. 6.33. To all this
prediction does the childs name, Jezreel agree, as being to be punished for
the blood which was shed in Jezreel, as being a den of bloody robbers, as Ahab
made Jezreel by killing Naboth; and being in stead of Israel, to become
Jezreel, or scattered of the Lord, and broken by divisions, as they were after
that time till they were utterly scattered. Doct. 1. Whatever present fruits
men may seem to reap by sin, yet at last, being continued in, it will ripen to
an height, and fit for strokes; for this wife of whoredoms does conceive and
bea^ a son, her whoredoms come to an height, and did draw down the sad fruits
thereof. 2. Notwithstanding that sinners in the Church do conceit of their
privileges; yet God will not only plague them, but make their sin and
judgment as conspicuous, as if it were their very name; For, The Lord said
unto him, Call his name Jezreel, whereby is signified, that however they
gloried in the name of Israel, yet the Lord should make them become a Jezreel
by manifesting of their sin, and by plagues for it. 3. Albeit Idolatry be the
great sin of the Church, and does deserve saddest judgments; yet the Lord
uses to give up such Apostates unto other gross wickednesses, to let them and
the world see the fruit of their departing from God, and by all these sins
together to hasten the judgment: For, albeit the chief sin and cause of Gods
controversy, be Idolatry, v. 2. yet for these causes, are they given up to
murder and bloodshed with it. 4. The Lord is so respective of man made after
his Image, and of justice and equity among men, as the blood, even of these who
are wicked, and deserve destruction at Gods hand, will not be unrevenged on
these who shed it unwarrantably, either for their way, or end in it; I will,
says he, avenge the blood, (or, bloods) of Jezreel, or the blood of Ahabs
house, the Lords requiring whereof, gives ample ground of hope to expect the
like of others, who suffer more innocently; See Genesis 9.6. Ps. 9.12. He names
it bloods, because there were many slaughters, even of all Ahabs family, 2
King. 10.11. together with Ahaziah, 2 King. 9.27. and his brethren, 2 Kings
10.13, 14. And, the bloods of Jezreel, because however some of these were slain
in Samaria, and elsewhere, yet not only did the execution begin, or was most
there, and was done elsewhere by Jehu's authority in Jezreel, but because what
was done there on Jehoram, and Jezebel, seemed to be most justifiable, because
of foregoing Prophecies, 2 Kings 9.25, 26, 36, 37. and yet the Lord will avenge
it. 5. Men may not only be doing that which God in his Holy Providence will
permit to succeed, but even that which is in it self just, and materially Gods
command, and yet be guilty before God, and justly punished for it, when either
they do not the Lords work sincerely, but for their own base ends and interest,
or when they do it not thoroughly, but only in so far as may serve their own
turn: For, albeit Jehu was anointed at Gods command, to execute his judgment
on Ahabs house, 2 Kings 9.6, 7. yea, and temporally rewarded for it, 2 Kings
10.30. yet it is here accounted murder, to be avenged on his house, because he
did it not out of zeal for God, but to get a Kingdom to himself, and because
(which is an evidence of the former) he did only so much as might serve his
ends, and establish him in the Kingdom: For, though he executed Gods quarrel
on Ahab and his house, and on Baals Priests and followers, yet he clave to the
Idolatry of the calves for securing his own interest, 2 Kings 10.31. and so
proved himself more careful of his own affairs and settling, then of Religion.
6. Men may prosper a while in a course, against which the Lord has a standing
quarrel, and will avenge it on their posterity: For, says the Lord, I will
avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, though himself and his next
successors were exempted for a time, which as it may be dreadful to men who
prosper in an ill way, who may be made to rot above ground in plagues on their
posterity; So it may warn men not to follow the sins of their predecessors,
merely because they prospered in their hand. 7. However sinners may bless
themselves; when judgments seem to be afar off; yet they will at last draw
near, and any thing that is measured by time, will soon come about; For,
notwithstanding the promise given to Jehu and his posterity for some
generations, yet now it is, Yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of
Jezreel, etc. 8. As Kingdoms have their periods prefixed by God; so there may
be so much anger against a Nation evidenced in the smiting even of their wicked
Magistrates, and so great commotions in overturning of them, and confusions
following thereupon, as may not only be a presage of the overthrow of a
Kingdom, but will give it such an irreparable stroke, and so break the power
thereof, as it shall never recover, especially continuing in the same sins:
Therefore is it subjoyned to this stroke on Jehu's house, And I will cause to
cease the Kingdom of the house of Israel, for though it endured a while after,
yet this was a presage of it, and they never recovered of that stroke, but
were broken by confusions and distractions, till the foreign enemy came upon
them, as is hinted at in the next verse, and expressed more at length in their
miserable condition, 2 Kings 15. 9 As there is no power nor strength of a
Kingdom able to resist God coming in anger: So the Lords breaking of a
Kingdoms power, and exhausting it totally, is a sad evidence of his
displeasure, and presage of further ruin; Therefore is it added as a part of
the stroke, and the way how the Kingdom came to cease, At that day I will
break the bow of Israel, under the bow (much used among them, and whereof
Jehu made special use, 2 Kings 9.24.) comprehending all warlike power: And that
he will do this in the valley of Jezreel, that is, not so much by any battle
there, (of which we read not elsewhere) as that they should not be broken by
any discomfiture on their borders, which the Kingdom might repair again; but
this decay should reach the very heart of their Country, where their strength
and royal Cities were, and where they thought themselves secure, and therefore
were insolent in oppression and bloodshed, and this exposed them to the
calamities which followed.

Verse. 6. And she conceived, again, and bare a daughter* and God said unto him,
Call her name Lo-ruhamah: for I will no more have mercy upon the house of
Israel: but I will utterly take them away.
The second child is a daughter, called Lo-ruhamah, or, not having obtained
mercy; This type is made use of (as would appear) to point at that period of
their sins, ripening for the stroke of a begun captivity, by Tiglah-pileser
King of Assyria, of which see, 2 Kings 15.29. The Lord declares that this time
should be a time of no mercy, (as the childs name signified,) because he would
not add any more, (as he had done formerly, 2 Kings 14 25, 26, 27.) to
manifest his mercy toward them in their affliction, but would make that
captivity irrecoverable, and a presage of the captivity of the whole Nation,
which shortly followed, 2 Kings 17. and under which they are held to this day.
Doct. 1. Whatever be the Lords prerogative of free grace, in delivering when
and whom he will; and whatever be his pity toward his own, who cry to him
under justly procured afflictions, yet such as continue in sin, after the Lord
has smitten them, may expect that their calamities will not expiate their sin,
but that God will pursue them with stroke upon stroke; Therefore albeit Israel
was plagued and broken before, yet since they continued in their defection from
the true worship of God, and from the house of David, this ripens to a new
birth of judgment; She conceived again, and bare, etc. 2. It is a sad
judgment, when the Lord not only weakens a people outwardly, but takes away
also manly spirits from them, and they became like women either for doing or
suffering. So much may be imported by this type of a daughter; that the estate
of the people after the former stroke, and at the coming on of this, was quite
broken, and themselves effeminate; so that they were content to take any
terms of the Assyrians, who molested them, 2 Kings 15.19. (which is called a
light affliction in respect of this that followed, Isa. 9.1.) and did quietly
stoop under so many murdering Kings, who did rise every one upon the ruins of
another. When men are in such a temper, conscience will readily be trampled on,
through baseness. 3. It is a sad ingredient of an afflicted condition, when
Gods mercy and bowels of compassion are withheld from a people under it, when
they have no assurance of a room in his heart, and sympathy, (which is a fair
advantage,) nor any effects thereof manifested in moderating, or delivering
from it: Therefore says he, Call her name Lo-ruhamah: for I will no more have
mercy upon the house of Israel. The sadness of this condition may be read in
the Churches complaint, Isa. 63.15. and in Gods promise to his children, Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. 4. However the Lord do manifest much mercy toward a
visible Church, and she be ready to presume on that, yet abuse of former mercy,
may bring the exercise of mercy toward a visible Church, to a period; For,
says the Lord, I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, or add no
more to have mercy, as of before; and the sad evidence of this condition is,
that their former rods had not been blessed, but their abuse thereof by their
continuance in sin, had drawn forth this new rod, with this sad note upon it.
5. Where the Lord denies his mercy under affliction, not only will that stroke
prove irrecoverable, but it is an evidence of more strokes to come, till a
people be consumed; for, says he, I will no more have mercy, but I will
utterly take them away, that is, seeing I deny mercy, not only shall this
captivity be without recovery, but more of them, even the whole Nation, shall
follow.

Verse. 7. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by
the LORD their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.
This sad condition of Israel is illustrate from the contrary condition of
Judah, who adhered better unto the Covenant. Albeit Judah was both before and
after this molested by Israel, Isa. 7.1, etc. 2 King. 14.12, etc. and looked on
as forlorn by them; yet the Lord promises to manifest mercy unto them, and
deliver them from their enemies, and that not by ordinary means and ways, but
by his own immediate hand, or by Christ, Dan. 9.17. and by virtue of the
Covenant, Zech. 9.11. This was verified in their deliverance from Senacherib,
when Israel was carried captive, and Judah was very low; and in their return
from the Babylonish captivity. Hosea does thus speak favorably of Judah, whom
their own Prophets dealt more roundly with, not only because he was sent
chiefly to insist on Isreal's condition, but because Judah in his days had none
of the worst Kings, except Ahaz, and especially an Hezekiah, to whose days
this seems especially to relate; and because they were in many things better
then Israel. as Hosea 11.12. and were accordingly better, dealt with. Doct. 1.
Albeit the Lord cut off a sinful people, pretending interest in him, yet will
he not want a Church to whom he will be kind, and whose privilege shall be,
to be the object of his mercy; for, at this time of calamity on Israel, I will
have mercy upon the house of Judah, says he, 2. It will be an aggravation of
backsliders misery to see others who wait on God, well dealt with, when they
reap the fruit of their doings; Therefore is Judah's lot set in opposition to
theirs, to imbitter their cup: I will no more have mercy upon the house of
Israel; verse 6. But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, 3. Great mercy
may be attending a people, who yet may be plunged in great difficulties; for,
so was Judah after this promise, both by Syria and Israel, 2 Chronicles. 28.5, 6,
etc. and by the Assyrians, 2 Kings 18.13. we must not measure Gods purposes of
love by present crosses, without which we could not take up his mercy well. 4.
The mercy of God is a fountain from whence deliverance will flow, according to
the tenor of the Covenant, and the safety and deliverance of the Church is a
thing out of question, though she oft-times fall in debate with God about the
way and means of it; for, upon this, I will have mercy, it follows, I will
save them, and it is an absolute promise, I will save them, though he will not
take these ways to do it, that the Church usually looks most unto. 5. The Lord
needs not creature-helps, nor is he so tied to means, as that he cannot work
greatest things without and above them; yea, he oft-times delights to act more
immediately for his Church, and to take her as the forlorn into his own hand
for, says he, I will save them by the Lord their God, that is, (as is before
explained) by his own hand, through Jesus Christ, and by virtue of the
Covenant; and thus he saves them, though he will not save them by bow, etc. 6.
The Lords laying aside probable means and instruments in delivering his
people, is for their double advantage; for not only are they certainly
delivered, but their deliverance that way, does assure them of their interest
in God, through Christ by virtue of a Covenant standing firm in the midst of
all their afflictions; for, the God by whom they are saved is then seen to be
the Lord their God. 7. Albeit deliverance of the Lords Church from her
troubles, be a sweet mercy, and call for praise, whatever way the Lord be
pleased to send it; and albeit the Lords people, having his calling, may by
war assert themselves into freedom: yet it is a special mercy, when the Lord
not only saves by his own hand, but without war, and bloodshed, not only
because he humbles them so far, and so advances their spiritual good; but
because war, even when it brings safety, is a terrible lot, and in effect a
scourge, and produces such distempers and effects, as may leave matter of
humiliation in the midst of greatest deliverances; so much also may be gathered
from this, that the Lord will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen, that is, neither by military preparations
nor actians, how promising soever, but by his own hand, answering the mournful
prayers of his people, as in Hezekiah's days.

Verse. 8. Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived and bare a son.

9. Then said God, Call his name Lo-ammi: for ye are not my people, and I will
not be your God.


The last period of their sins ripening for Gods judgments, is represented
under the type of the third child, called Lo-ammi, or, not my people; pointing
at the time of their utter captivity by Shalmanesor, 2 King. 17. whereby God
made void the relation betwixt him and that people, scattering them among the
Nations, and making them cease from being his Church and people, to wit, as a
Nation, for otherwise remnants of them did cleave to Judah; Whence learn, 1.
Such is the long-suffering patience of God, especially toward the visible
Church, that he is not only slow to anger, and to manifest the same by
judgments; but even when he has begun to strike, he yet waits patiently to
see what use they will make of present judgments, to prevent future and sadder
strokes; and in particular, it is very long ere the Lord come to unchurch a
people that have been in Covenant with him; So much are we taught in this type,
that this stroke came not till the birth of the third child, and that this
child was not conceived till after she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, which took up a
longer time, then if she bad given it suck by another. 2. However the Lords
long-suffering patience be great and admirable, yet it will not last always
toward a sinful people, especially after he has begun to plead with them, but
will at last come to a sad period: For, at last she conceived and bare a son,
typifying their utter rejection. 3. Albeit no limits ought to be set to the
freedom and efficacy of the grace of God, who can and does sanctify
afflictions unto the Church, and make them a mean to turn her, and cause her
cleave faster to him: yet it does also oft-times prove too true, that when the
Lord begins to contend with her, she proves so obstinate in sin, and so
incorrigible and incessant in defection, that nothing ends it but her utter
rejection, at least for a time: For, such was the issue of his former
dispensations with Israel, as is to be seen till this day. 4. The capestone of
all judgments upon a people, (and in which they will resolve, if not made use
of,) is their unchurching, and cutting off the relations betwixt God and them;
For, this is the sad and final stroke on Israel: Ye are not my people, and I
will not be your God, or, not be yours, as it is in the Original, See the like
form of speech, Ezekiel. 16.8. Thou becamest mine, or my people. 5. Whatever may
follow upon Gods smiting of a people in severity, and their not making use
thereof, yet his relation and interest in a people, is not always to be
measured by his severity in striking, or denying any expression of his
compassion and sympathy under it; For, under the former strokes they were
Lo-ruhamah, and yet came not to be Lo-ammi, till this stroke. See Isa. 63.15,
16. 6. When ever the Lord gives up with a people as to being their God, he will
make it appear that the breach began on their side, and that they first
voluntarily rejected him, and choosed that state and condition sinfully, to
which, and the effects thereof, he gives them up judicially: So much does the
order of this sentence import, ye are not my people, and therefore it is reason
he subjoyne, I will not be your God. 7. A people may seem to be on the
recovering hand for outward strength, yea and possibly seem not to be so ill as
formerly, when their utter captivity is even at hand: So much seems to be
represented to us, in that the type of this last stroke is a son, (whereas in
the former it was a daughter,) pointing at their condition about the time of
their captivity; partly, in that they recovered some little strength, making
them attempt to free themselves of the Assyrian yoke, 2 Kings 17.4. Hereby
teaching how little cause impenitent sinners have to trust to outward
appearances, even albeit they seem to have wrastled out of many difficulties,
and to be upon the amending hand. And partly, in that they were not so ill as
formerly, neither their King, 2 Kings 17.2. (who, it may be, let all that would
go up to Jerusalem and worship, as some conceive that Passover, 2 Chronicles. 30.
was before their final captivity,) nor yet were the people, at least some of
them so ill; For, they did their wickedness secretly, 2 Kings 17.9. and yet
then they went into captivity. Hereby warning all that smaller sins of a
present age, joined with the grosser abominations of predecessors will soon
fill up a cup; and that any seeming reformation, when it is not through, nor
former defections mourned for, and any liberty a people enjoy after bondage,
when it is not improven, do but hasten on judgments. Withal, it may be the
Lord did this that he might send them away with some sense of God and his
Worship, for their use in their captivity.

Ver. 10. Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the
Sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered, and it shall come to pass, that in
the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people, there it shall be
said unto them, Ye are the sons of the living God.
Unto these threatenings are subjoyned some Gospel-promises, for the comfort of
the godly who should taste of these calamities. The first Promise is, that
though Israel should be rejected as a Nation, yet the true Israelite of Jews
and Gentiles, should be increased under the Gospel, as the sand of the Sea: And
though their being cast out of their Land should be an evidence of their
rejection, as well as the Gentiles, were; yet in all places throughout the
World, where they and the Gentiles should embrace Christ, they should enjoy the
dignity and the privileges of the Sons of God. This Prediction is so
expressly applied both to Jews and Gentiles, Romans 9.24, 25, 26. and to the
scattered strangers, 1 Pet. 1.1. with 2.10. that there is no doubt to be made
of it. Doct. 1. In a time of greatest severity, the Lord remembereth mercy, and
does not alter his purpose of being great, and getting Worshippers in the
World: For, so much does this Promise teach. 2. Albeit the godly in their days
and generation should meet with nothing but hard lots; yet it may be a comfort
unto them, under present hard dispensations, that there are promises of better
days to be accomplished in after-ages: and in particular, the Prediction of
Gospel Times and dispensations, was the comfort of the godly under the Law,
much more should the accomplishment be so to us: Therefore does the Lord by
Hosea, comfort the godly in his time with these promises; See Luke 10.23, 24.
Genesis 48.21. 3. Believers of all Nations are Abraham's seed, and the true Israel,
and consequently, whatever became of Isreal's temporal privileges, yet their
spiritual privileges were not lost, when they were cast out, but distributed
among Believers of them, and the rest of the children; For, they are called,
The children of Israel, and come to be the Sons and People of GOD: See Romans
4.16, 17. Gal. 3.7. and 6, 16. 4. The increase of the Church is a great mercy,
and does richly make up the dispersion and scattering of any visible Church;
Therefore is it held out as the encouragement; The number of the children of
Israel, shall be as the sand of the Sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered.
5. The Lord is still mindful of his Covenant, and so careful of performing the
same, that whatever appear to the contrary, yet he will still make it good one
way or other; and in particular the promise to Abraham, concerning the
multiplying of his seed, is richly accomplished under the Gospel, though his
seed after the flesh be rejected for a time; Therefore does he repeat that
promise to Abraham Genesis 22.17. as a thing that would not fail, and to be
accomplished under the Gospel. 6. The privileges of the people of God under
the Gospel and better Covenant, have an advantage of the times under the Law;
and the privileges of the truly godly, are far above these of any visible
Church whatsoever, Therefore in opposition to their being not my people, it is
promised, not only that they shall be my people, but Sons. And it is thus
expressed, partly, because however the Covenant under the Old and New
Testament, be the same in substance, yet the privileges are more ample, clear
and distinct now then before: Though his people were then children, yet they
were kept under the condition of a servant, whereas now their Sonship is more
clear. Gal. 4.1, 7. and partly, because the external state and privileges of
the Nation of Israel, come far short of the dignities of the Israel in the
Spirit, who are not only people and subjects, but Sons by virtue of
Regeneration and Adoption. 7. As it is an high dignity to become children, Sons
and Heirs unto God, so this dignity does appear more distinctly, by
considering that God, to whom they have relation, is not a dumb idol, but the
living God, who has life in himself, who is the Fountain of all life, and the
Author of eternal life to all his children; For, it is their dignity, Ye are
the sons of the living God. 8. Grace in God can, and does make choice of such
to be his children, as had no relation to him, or such as had forfeited all
their relations and privileges; and they who are thus advanced, ought not to
forget what they were without it: For, these who were not my people, (either
Gentiles, without God, or Israelites rejected and put from their privileges,)
are made sons of the living God, and this is put in the promise to mind them
of it. 9. It is a comfortable and refreshful mercy, when Religion is taking
place in the World where it was not before; and it is the advantage of
Gospel Times, that the Church is not confined to one Nation or Country, but in
all places God may be served, and our interest in him avowed: For, they get
this dignity, in the place where it was said unto them, Ye are not my people;
that is, throughout the World where the Gentiles lived without God, and the
Israelites dispersion there, was an evidence of their rejection, and so their
condition said it to them, beside the verdict of the Word against them; See
John 4.21. 10. It is also a great advantage, when the Lords goodness to his
Saints and their way, does convince the World of their excellency, and neither
their afflictions nor carriage does make them a reproach, nor cause the World
to stumble at them: So much may be gathered from this, it shall be said unto
them, Ye are the sons of the living God, not only shall the Gospel call and
bring them to this dignity, and pass such a sentence in their favors, but
others shall be made to acknowledge and admire it in them; Isa. 61.9,

Ver. 11. Then shall the children of Judah, and the children of Israel be
gathered together, and appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out
of the land; for great shall be the day of Jezreel,
The second Promise seems to relate more especially to Israel in the letter,
holding forth their future recollection and union with Judah under Christ their
Head, and their coming up out of their forlorn condition, to enjoy the
privileges allowed upon them. The same Promise for substance is also held
forth, Isa. 11.13. Jer. 3.18. Eezek. 27. from ver. 16, to 26. As for this part
of the promise, They shall come up out of the land, albeit it be spoken with
allusion unto the Babylonish captivity, from whence Judah came up to Judea,
which lay higher, yet it was not then accomplished; for neither did there at
that time any such number of Israel come up, nor can Zerubbabel be the head
appointed here, but only Christ, Ezekiel. 34.22, 23. and 37.24, 25. And albeit
this may be understood spiritually, of converted Judah and Israel, (as all the
godly) their gathering themselves out of the World to the Church, and moving on
toward their heavenly Canaan, which was typified by Isreal's coming out of
Egypt, and Judah out of Babylon; yet the parallel places speak also expressly
of their coming up from the land of their dispersion to the land which their
Fathers inhabited, Ezekiel. 37. 21, 22, 25. Jer. 3.18. Doct. 1. Albeit the Lord
have now for a long time rejected the body of Judah and Israel, and filled
their room with Gentiles, the branches of the wild Olive; yet his gifts and
calling toward them, are without repentance, as does appear in his reservation
of a special portion of Gospel-blessings for them, as this Promise holds forth.
2. The salvation promised to the seed of Abraham in the days of the Gospel, is
not peculiar to the Jews only, who were rejected for their crucifying of
Christ, but common to Israel also, who shall be converted and made again one
body with Judah, after all the rents that have been betwixt them, since their
defection from the house of David, and their corrupting of Religion: For, The
children of Judah, and the children of Israel shall be gathered together; See
Romans 11.26. 3. The day is coming, wherein all Israel shall acknowledge the true
Messiah, when Judah shall look unto him whom they have peirced, and mourn, and
embrace him; and when Israel shall embrace him for their King, and the true Son
and Heir of David, from whom they have made so foul defection, and in him
shall they be united: For, he is that one head, in embracing of whom they shall
be converted, and in whom they shall be united. 4. As union amongst the people
of God, is a choice Gospel-mercy, considering (among other things,) the
violence of the contentions of Brethren; So, true union needs never be
expected, but where Christ is made our Head, with whom communion is holden, and
set up as a King to govern, and men are not suffered to walk after their own
imaginations: This general instruction may be gathered from this particular
instance, Judah and Israel shall be gathered together, their union after so
great dissensions, is a great mercy, and they attain to it when they have one
head. 5. Albeit Christ be a King set by his Father over Zion, Psalm. 2.6. yet it
is the duty and privilege of the Church, voluntarily to embrace, and
acknowledge, and submit unto him: Therefore it is said, they shall appoint
themselves one head. 6. The happiness of choicest Gospel Times, consists not
so much in what the people of God enjoy for present, as in their moving forward
toward their heavenly rest, joining themselves to the Church, that they may
have the use of means for that end; and a time of love will make difficulties
in the way easy, and loose the bonds of earthly affections, or spiritual
slavery wherein men are held, or retarded by them; So much does this promise
spiritually understood, teach, they shall come up out of the land; See Cant.
8.5. 7. When Israel and Judah shall be converted, the Lord will remember his
Covenant, and restore them to their promised privileges; and in particular,
there will not only be converts of them scattered here and there among the
Gentiles, but their conversion will be accompanied with the recollection of
them as a Nation, and (as would appear) with a restitution of their captivity,
and bringing them back to their land: So much appears to be in this promise,
They shall be gathered together, and they shall come up out of the land, as is
before explained: And this is the tenor of the Covenant with them, Deuteronomy. 30.1,
2, 3, 4, 5. 8. Whatever be the difficulties of the children of God in their
journey toward Heaven, or may be the trials of Israel after their conversion;
yet herein is ground of comfort, that they are under Christ their Head, who
has influence to assist and refresh them, and power to protect and support
them: For, they shall appoint themselves one head, and they shall come up out
of the land; See Cant. 8.5. Mic. 2.13.

As for that reason subjoyned in the end of the ver. For, (or because, or
albeit) great shall be the day of Jezreel; If we take Jezreel, to signify, the
scattered of the Lord, as v. 4. the meaning will be, as if the Lord said,
because there will be such a dreadful day of Iezreel, therefore I will make it
up by this restitution; as indeed in a time of love, his compassion flows out
the more abundantly, as calamities have been sad and unsupportable, Ier. 31.20,
21. or it may be taken thus, Albeit there has been such a great day of
Jezreel, yet this mercy shall also come to pass; neither the irreparablenesse
of his stroke, nor his anger inflicting it shall make his promise of mercy
void. But we may as well here take Jezreel for the seed of God, as it is
alluded to Chap. 2.23. to intimate (by way of confirmation of the promise,)
that as seed when it is sown in the ground, does hereby multiply, and bring
forth increase; so they being increased and multiplied in their dispersion, it
should make the day of their recollection, to be a great and remarkable day.
And it teaches, 1. In a time of love, the Lord can and will turn his peoples
hardest lots into mercies; Jezreel scattered of the Lord, becomes Jezreel the
seed of the Lord. 2. Days of the Lords manifesting mercy toward his people,
are indeed great days, and worth the marking, as affording mercies above any
mercies beside; For, such a day shall be a great day. 3. As all the times
wherein God is kind to his people, are remarkable times; so in particular, a
time of his love after sad calamities, his bringing forth the fruits of their
afflictions, and of his love after a long interruption, will make a refreshful
time: whereof the state of Israel shall be a clear instance, the time of whose
conversion will be a remarkable and glorious time: For, great shall be the day
of Jezreel, when God shall regard them as his seed after their scattering, and
make them increase thereby.

CHAP. II.
IN the first part of this Chapter, 1. The Lord charge the godly remnant to
contend with the Church of Israel, because of her defection, and to exhort her
to repentance and reformation, v. 1, 2. lest he plague her and her children, v.
3, 4. 2. For confirmation of this, the Lord lays before her, her sin and the
judgments that were to follow thereupon; Threatening, that since she
impudently followed Idols, because of advantage (as she supposed) by them, v.
5. therefore he should stop the course of her prosperity and whoredoms till
she should find her error, v. 6, 7. and threatening that since she
acknowledged him not for her prosperity, v. 8. therefore he would take it from
her, v. 9. make her vileness appear, v. 10. deprive her of her mirth and
solemnities, v. 11. and lay her land waste, v. 12 And in a word, he threatens
to take course with her gross Idolatry, v. 13. In the second part of the
Chap. the Lord promises unto Israel under the Gospel, conversion and
manifestation of his kindness under affliction, verse. 14. restitution to her
former enjoyments, ver. 15. an exact and through reformation, v. 16, 17. the
blessing of peace, v. 18. the renovation of the Covenant, v. 19, 20. outward
means of subsistence, v. 21, 22. and increase and many satisfactory proofs of
interest and love, after their rejection and hard usage, v. 23.

Verse. 1. SAy ye unto your brother, Ammi, and to your sister, Ruhamah:

2. Plead with your mother, plead: for she is not my wife, neither am I her
husband: let her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her
adulteries from between her breasts:


In this Chapter we have an enlargement and application of the former Doctrine,
wherein the accusation and threatenings that were typically propounded, are
insisted on by way of Exposition, to ver. 14. and the promises which were
briefly propounded, are more fully branched out to the end of the Chapter. In
these verses, there is a charge laid upon the godly remnant, that they should
enter in a contest with the Church of Israel, their mother, concerning her
Idolatry, whereby she had forefaulted her privilege of being Gods wise, and
that they should stir her up to duty, and to forsake this spiritual whoredom.
Whence learn, 1. In times of greatest defection of a visible Church, the Lord
may, and does keep unto himself a remnant, for whose sake he continues his
presence with a corrupt Church, or they prove witnesses for him, and these to
whom he will be good, however it go with the body of the Church; For, so is
imported here, there are brethren and sisters to plead, which can never be
understood of the Church, which was to be in the days of the Gospel, chap.
1.10, 11. as if they were brought in by the Lord, to shame present Israel from
her whoredoms, nor yet of Judah called unto to plead with Israel; For, the
present Church of Israel could not be called a mother to either of these: But
it is to be taken of a remnant among themselves at that same time; See 1 Kings
19.18. 2. The great privileges of the truly godly is, that the privileges
offered to the visible Church, are ensured to them, even when she is rejected;
And in particular, that they have interest in God as his peculiar people: which
as it flows from Gods free mercy allanerly; so it proves the Fountain of much
mercy, and tender dealing toward them; So much may be gathered from their
names, Ammi, or my people, and Ruhamah, or having obtained mercy, which names
are given to them, when the body of the people are (for present, or shortly to
be) Lo-ammi, and Lo-ruhamah, Chap. 1.6, 9. Yet it would be considered, that we
are not to look on these names as to be given, one to the brethren, the other
to the sisters only; but both of them as common to both, though because of the
Original construction they be thus distributed. 3. It is the duty of the godly
to be much in cherishing mutual love among themselves, especially in times of
general defection, and of approaching calamities; Therefore are they designed
as brethren and sisters one to another. 4. It is the commendation of the truly
godly in an ill time, to be careful of others and of the public good; and when
their sense of their great privileges, and of Godstender mercies toward them,
makes them compassionate and active for the public weal of the Church, in
their stations; So much is imported in the charge laid on Ammi and Ruhamah, in
reference to their Mother Church. 5. Whatever be the activity of the godly in
their duty, yet they need upstirring by the Ministry of the Word, and to be
mutual encouragers and sharpeners one of another, especially in declining
times, when duty may be full of hazard, success, hopeless, and themselves
under some degrees of the spiritual plagues of the time: For, this exhortation,
Say ye to your brethren, etc. imports not only that it is their duty which is
here given them in charge, say it who will unto them, but that Hosea and the
rest of the Prophets are to say it to them; and that they are to say it one to
another. 6. As a Church may be very far declining, and yet cover it with fair
pretenses, excuses and justifications, requiring that she should be pleaded
with, to put her from them; So it is the duty of every true child of God, to
plead for him and his truth against all, even if it were a whole Church, and to
plead with their mother, or the body of the Nation, who were a visible Church,
and brought them forth to God: And they are bound to insist in this duty
without discouragement, though they be alone, and a Church against them, and
albeit they seem to have no success; Therefore is the exhortation doubled,
plead with your mother, plead. 7. Open pleading for God against a Church, is
then lawful in private persons, when not only they have truth on their side,
and have essayed other more peaceable means before, but in vain: But more
especially when the corruption pleaded against, is Idolatry striking at the
marriagetie, and she is not my wife, as to the merit of her way, which is here
given for the reason of their pleading; and when she is entreated, though
faulty, with reverence, and as a mother, plead with your mother, yet as with a
mother. And if she was to be so dealt with, so long as God gave her not a bill
of divorce, though an harlot, how much more is it required, when faults
reproveable are nothing such? This would make men in acquitting of their
consciences, mourn more, and be more orderly, and less turbulent. 8. It is no
sure ground for a visible Church to rest upon, that she has once given up her
name to God, and was married to him, unless she also persevere: seeing a
visible Church may decline so far as to make void the marriage-Covenant on her
part, and to deserve rejection, and a bill of divorce. Of this the Church of
Israel is a sad and evident instance, she is not my wife, her carriage was such
as became not a wife, neither am I her husband, that is, she deserves to be
rejected, though as yet the bill of divorce be not given. 9. Such is the
long-suffering patience of God, as that he does not at first give up with a
Church, even when her disease is desperate, but by contending with her, calls
her to amendment, upon which there is a door of hope left open; Therefore does
he subjoyne this to the challenge, as his scope in it, Let her therefore put
away her whoredoms and adulteries: and it is only upon neglect of this that
the sentence comes forth, v. 3. 10 God will not accept of fair undertakings
from a declining Church, but he requires that her Reformation be real, and
especially of idolatry and corrupting of Religion and his worship; for, says
he, let her put away her whoredoms, etc. 11. God requires of his declining
Church, that she be sensible of the ill of her activity in idolatrous worship
and of her own impudence in following it, and that she renounce it with
detestation; for, says he, let her put her whoredoms out of her sight, or,
from her face, and her adulteries from between her breasts, alluding to the
pomp and open impudence of harlots, who paint their face and deck their
breasts, and make them bare, to follow filthiness and to engage and allure
others: See Jer. 2.33. This she is to be so sensible of, as to put them out of
her sight, or to have them so in abomination, as she cannot endure to look on
them: See Isa. 30.22. 12. This similitude; pointing at the practice of
idolaters, by the carriage of lewd harlots, teaches that the Lord abhors
painting and lascivious decking of the body, and that the practicers thereof
cannot be free of whoredom in the sight of God; for whoredom is in their
face, and adultery between their breasts.

Verse. 3. Lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born,
and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and slay her with
thirst.

4. And I will not have mercy upon her children, for they be the children of
whoredoms.


Unto this exhortation a certification is subjoyned, that if the Church of
Israel hearkened not unto it, he would destroy her self, v. 3. and deny mercy
to her children, or particular members of that Church, as being involved in the
same guilt with her, v 4. The judgments threatened against her self, are held
out under many similitudes, 1. Of an adulterous wife, spoiled of all her
ornaments, and set naked as when she was born; whereby is signified the
depriving her of all spiritual and temporal favors, which she enjoyed by
virtue of the Covenant, and leaving her as he found her, see Ezekiel. 16.4, 59.
and 23, 26, 29. 2. Of a desolate and barren dry land, signifying, that she who
was as a watered garden, should become as a wilderness, and as a land wanting
moisture, both in her spiritual estate, and outward enjoyments. 3. Of a
traveller, who being cast into a solitary wilderness, is slain through want of
drink and refreshment; so should she be left under scorching wrath, and
destitute of all comfort in her extremities. Doct. 1. However the Lord may for
a time spare sinners, and they be ready to sleep, because of this; yet at last
when their cup is full, and they have proven themselves incorrigible, judgment
will certainly come; so much does this certification subjoyned to the
exhortation, teach us. 2. However a carnal Church may be ready to swell with
conceit of her own enjoyments and excellencies; yet the Lord needs no more to
make her miserable, but take away what he has given her, and leave her as he
found her: and he will do so to the incorrigible; I will strip her naked, and
set her as in the day that she was born. 3. Sin will prove a wasting plague
to souls, or Countries and enjoyments; for, so is imported in that he will make
her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land? see Psalm. 107.34. 4. It is
the great and insupportable misery of wicked men, that their guilt does leave
them destitute of succor or comfort, in their greatest extremity, to be
consumed thereby; therefore does he add, and slay her with thirst. 5. As
particular members of a Church do ordinarily run wrong with her, when she in
her Rulers or Judicatores, does decline, so however such may think to escape,
when the Church or body of the Nation whereof the Church consists, is brought
into bondage, or destroyed in their powers, and want the face of a Church; yet
God pursuing for sin, will not only break a Nation, but cause judgments
reach particular persons also; for, the children of this mother be the children
of whoredoms, and therefore are threatened also. 6. It is the sad sting of,
and an addition unto trouble, when mercy is denied, either for preventing,
moderating, or removing of it; such is their doom here, I will not have mercy
upon her children. Where this is not denied, deserved strokes may be kept off,
Hos. 11.8, 9. and irreparable strokes may be made up, such as are naked and in
their blood, may be bid live: in wildernesses men may meet with gracious
leading, and get water even out of flinty rocks.

Verse. 5. For their mother has played the harlot; she that conceived them,
has done shamefully: for she said, I will go after my lovers, that give me my
bread and my water, my wool and my flax, mine oil, and my drink.
To clear the equity of this sentence, the Lord does repeat their sin, in sad
challenges, and the judgments deserved by it, in sharp threatenings. Their
sin may be comprehended in this general, of their idolatry in, and because of
their prosperous condition; but since the Lord does branch it out in several
challenges, and subjoynes threatenings to every one of them, I shall follow it
in that method.

The first branch of the challenge, is, that in her prosperity she would follow
the idolatry of the calves, and her confederates and their idols, because she
thought they upheld her, and were the cause of her prosperity, and so followed
any course which might bring her profit and pleasure. This the Lord
challenges, as being not simple whoredom, which may be done in the dark, but
avowed, effronted adultery. Whence learn, 1. Such is the stupidity of grossest
sinners, that they neither see the ill nor danger of their way, unless it be
much and frequently inculcate; therefore does the Lord insist so much again
upon both, and subjoynes this challenge to the former sentence, with the
particle for, that he may yet let her see how justly he accused her as being
not his wife, and threatened her because of that, For their mother has played
the Harlot. 2. A visible Church declining, will readily turn impudent in
sin, in regard, the more corruption has been hemmed in by the external bonds
of order, it swells the more over all banks and bounds; and God justly gives
such up to be filled with their own devices; for not only has the mother
played the harlot, but she that conceived them, has done shamefully, and
impudently, which may also be imported in her going after her lovers, or
pursuing of them, as Ezekiel. 16 33, 34. 3. It is a great aggravation of the sin
of idolatry, that idols do become lovers, and do bewitch and draw the heart
from God; Therefore does she call (not only her confederates, by joining with
whom she thought to prosper, but chiefly) her idols my lovers, in regard they
drew her heart from God. See Jer. 50.38. 4. As it is a great sin to depart
from God and his true worship; so especially it is a shameful way of departing
from him, when men's ends are so low and base, that they will follow any way of
Religion for interest and advantage, and account the thriving way best; for,
herein did she shamefully, that she went after her lovers, and why? they give
me my bread, and my water, my wool and my flax, etc. she thought she thrave
best in and because of her idolatry. Albeit it was her mistake and sin to
father her prosperity so, as we will find, v. 8. yet supposing it had been as
she said, it was still her great sin to make that the rule whereby to try
true Religion, and not to love the way of God, whatever disadvantage followed.
See Jer. 44.17. 5. It is also a great evidence of impudence, when men do not
sin through infirmity or tentation, but deliberately, and do wilfully follow
their resolutions, whatever be said to the contrary; for, herein also she did
shamefully, in that she said, I will go after my lovers, etc. She avowed it,
and was obstinate in it against all warnings. See Jer. 44.16, 17. Ps. 81.11.

Verse. 6. Therefore behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and make a
wall, that she shall not find her paths.

9. And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them, and
she shall seek them, but shall not find them: then shall she say, I will go
and return to my first husband, for then was it better with me, then now.


Because of this impudent and base wilfulness, the Lord threatens that as a
wanton and wandering adulteress is curbed by hard usage, and shut up by her
husband; so by afflictions, and captivity, he would daunton her wantonness and
stiffnesse, and make her following of idols as unpleasant and difficult, as if
an harlot would essay to creep through a thorn hedge, and climb over an high
wall to get to her paramours, v. 6. And if that should not yet reclaim her,
but she would obstinately follow Idolatry, as hoping yet to prosper in it, he
threatens still to disappoint her, till she should renounce them, and turn to
him, confessing she had fated the worse for leaving him, v. 7. As for this
effect of her affliction and disappointments, albeit this far it might be true
of the wicked, that affliction may let them see, and convince them of their
folly in forsaking God, as we find the body of Judah convinced of the truth of
Gods Word, which they contemned, Zech. 1.6 yet taking this prediction
altogether, it holds out their true conversion, which was verified in the Elect
among them, and will be more conspicuous, when that Nation shall turn to the
Lord. Doct. 1. Where God is not acknowledged in prosperity, not looked upon as
the giver of it; he will be seen in adversity, and prove himself God, by
overturning these resolutions wherein men have never so much of will; Therefore
in opposition to their mistake and wilfulness, v. 5. he subjoynes, Therefore
behold, I will hedge up her way, etc. Though she should follow her lovers he
will cross her way; though she saw not him as the giver of prosperity, he will
be remakably seen in removing it. 2. It is righteous with God, that nothing
that draws the Churches heart from him, should prosper in her hand; and it
speaks mercy, if well emproven, when the way of sin is made difficult to a
people: Therefore, because prosperity drew her away, he threatens to remove it,
and to hedge up her way with thorns, and make a wall, that she shall not find
her paths, that is, to make her have a bitter and difficult time of it, while
she adheres to Idolatry, and all this in order to her reclaiming. 3. Albeit
afflictions from the Lord should point out sin, and prove as hedges and walls
to hem us in it from it; yet of themselves, and without the grace and blessing
of God, they will never discover sin, nor change our nature, but rather
irritate it the more. For, She shall follow after her lovers, and seek them,
imports, that the thorne-hedge should but irritate her to be more eager in her
pursuit, and that she should be so far from thinking these afflictions came for
her Idolatry, as on the contrary, she would reckon the only way to be freed of
them, were to follow Idols more. 4. Sin (and particularly Idolatry) becomes
very ensnaring and entangling, where it is given way unto; and albeit men may
be allured to it by reason of prosperity, which seems to attend it; yet it
begets such a stiffe-neck, as affliction will not drive from it: For, though
she followed her lovers for bread and water, etc. v. 5. yet now when her way is
hedged up, she will not abandon them; She shall follow after her lovers. She
will digest more affliction in a wrong way, then in cleaving to God: Affliction
will easily make her stumble at the true Religion, but will not drive her from
Idolatry. 5. It is just with God, the more eager that men be on sin, and on
advantage by it, to let them meet with the more disappointments; and he will do
so especially where he has a purpose of love toward any; For, says he, She
shall follow after her lovers, but shall not overtake them, and she shall seek
them, but shall not find them; that is, she shall reap no expected advantage
by multiplying Idolatries under affliction; and this the Lord does that he may
reclaim her. 6. As turning unto God and his way, is the kindly and blessed
fruit of affliction, so even such as have been incorrigible in Idolatry, and
become the worse of many rods, God can yet bless affliction, to reclaim them:
For, so much does he undertake for Israel at last, then shall she say, I will
go and return. 7. Even Apostate Idolaters when they repent, are allowed to lay
hold on God as heirs, and on the relation of an husband, as standing still in
force, to encourage them: Therefore is she allowed to say, I will return to my
first husband, called first, in relation to many Idols whom she had put in the
place of husbands since God choosed her, though they were not husbands indeed.
See Jer. 3.1. 8. Such as embrace God and his way, would take him up as the best
of choices; and his way, as the shortest cut to do well and be well: and would
be sensible of their own disadvantages by forsaking him: So much is imported in
the reason of her return, for then was it better with me then now: See Jer. 3
22, 23, 24, 25. Hosea 14.3.

Verse. 8. For she did not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, and
multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for Baal.
A second branch of the challenge, (which clears and adds to the former, and
shows a reason why she should find her self a loser by forsaking God, v. 7.)
is for her gross and affected ignorance, in not acknowledging that the good
things she had, was from God, but fathered them upon her Idols, and therefore
employed them in their service. Whence learn, 1. The Lord is very liberal to
his own, keeping his way, when it is for their good; and he does not at first
withdraw his bounty in their declining, that thereby he may reclaim them: For,
He gave her corn, and wine, and multiplied her silver and gold, even after her
begun Apostasy 2. God manifests much kindness whereof little notice is taken,
and wherein his hand is not seen nor acknowledged, and this is ground of a sad
challenge: For, here the Lord challenges, She did not know that I gave her
corn and wine, etc. but acknowledged her Idols for it, v 5. 3. Much light will
not discover to sinners their duty, or the ill of their way, but they will
either remain grossly ignorant, or will affect ignorance, and not ponder what
they know; For, albeit this was the Church who might be abundantly informed and
convinced that all things were of God; yet she did not know it, she was
grossly and affectedly ignorant. 4. Where God is not seen nor acknowledged in
men's prosperity, it is a sure token they will employ it ill, and to his
dishonor; For, so did they here, they prepared it for Baal.

Ver. 9. Therefore will I return, and take away my corn in the time thereof;
and my wine in the season thereof, and will recover my wool and my flax given
to cover her nakedness.
Because of this sin, the Lord gives out sentence against them in diverse
particulars. And first, that he will take these things from her, which were
given for necessary use, and which she abused, and that he will do this in a
time when she expects most from them. Whence learn, 1. However the Lord
communicate of his bounty with the children of men, yet he still retained the
dominion of all the creatures in his own hand, that he may dispose of them at
his pleasure: For, says he, it is my corn and my wine, my wool, and my flax,
though she called all her own, v. 5. 2. Men's abuse of prosperity, especially to
uphold a false Religion, does justly forefault their right thereunto before
God, and does provoke him to take away abused mercies; For, Therefore will I
take away my corn, etc. 3. As Gods former bounty, will not secure prosperity
to the abuser of it; (For, he will return and take away, or change his dealing,
and take again his benefits,) So he will take it away, even when it promises
fairest, in the time and season thereof, when it is come to the harvest. 4. As
outward mercies are given for the supply of necessity, (as to cover nakedness)
and not for fostering of luxury; So it is a special cause of Gods stroke that
men do so far miscarry, because of that, without which they would be so vile:
For, these things were given to cover her nakedness, and she would be vile
without them, and yet she abused them; and therefore God will take them away.

Ver. 10. And now will I discover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and
none shall deliver her out of mine hand.
Secondly, he threatens that by plaguing her, he should make her vileness
appear, in despite of all her lovers, idols, or confederates, and in their
sight. Whence learn 1. How right soever sinners may appear to themselves or
others in their prosperity, yet God will by judgments make it appear how lewd
and vile their way has been: For, I will discover her lewdness, or villiany
and folly, says he. 2. God is so strong a party, as when he contends with
sinners, all their confidences, in Idolatry, false worship, or confederates,
will fail them, and not be able to help them; For, I will discover her
lewdness in the sight of her lovers, (not being afraid that they will avenge
her quarrel, as an husband may be of his adulterous wise her paramours; for,)
and none shall deliver (...) out of my hand. 3. Idolatry, and abuse of
prosperity to uphold that, does ripen a visible Church for very speedy
destruction; For, Now, says he, I will discover her nakedness, etc.

Ver. 11. I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast-dayes, her new
Moons, and her Sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts.
Thirdly, he threatens to cut short her mirth, and all her solemnities of
worship, which were set up in imitation of the feasts appointed by God in
Judah; See 1 Kings 12.32. Whence learn, 1. Sin and mirth will not last long
together, but were there never so much of it, sin will cut it all short: For, I
will also cause all her mirth to cease, whether her rejoicing at her prosperous
condition, or at these solemn feasts in paarticular. 2. God will not be mocked
with external performances of solemn worship to him, (especially being of men's
own invention.) when they join gross Idolatry with them; but he will send on
wrath to cut all short together: For, says he, I will make to cease her
feast-dayes, her new Moons, and her Sabbaths, and all her solemn feasts, as
came to pass in her captivity: Her Sabbaths were every seventh day from the
creation, which she observed as well as Judah; and her feast-dayes seems to
be a general, comprehending the two followiag, of new Moons, and other solemn
feasts.

Verse. 12. And I will destroy her vines, and her fig trees, whereof she has
said, These are my rewards that my lovers have given me: and I will make them a
forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.
Fourthly, he threatens to destroy, not only their fruits, but the trees they
grew upon, and so to leave their land desolate as a forest for wild beasts:
and that because they looked on these things as the reward of their Idolatry.
Whence learn, 1. Spiritual judgments and deprivation of Ordinances, will have
but little weight with wicked men, unless (...) other rod be with them;
Therefore after that threatening, v. 11. of depriving them of their
solemnities, must this again be added, I will destroy her vines, etc. 2. Such
is the desperate stupidity and obstinacy of declining sinners, as no cutting
off of present enjoyments will affect them, unless their future expectations
be cut off liikewise: For, he must destroy, not only her present fruits, but
her vines and her fig trees, and make them a forest, that the beasts of the
field may eat them, before she be sensible of it as a stroke. 3. As God does
not cut off enjoyments from sinners, but when they do abuse them; So we would
take head of forgetting Gods quarrel under calamities, and particularly, the
abuse of prosperity, in not acknowledging God, but stregthening our selves in
an ill way, because of it; Therefore is the challenge repeated, he destroys
her vines, etc. whereof she said, These are my rewards that my lovers have
given me; or, the fruits of my Idolatry, and the benefits I reap by that which
the Prophets call my whoredom; For, the speech alludes to the hire given to an
harlot.

Verse. 13. And I will visit upon her the days of Baalim, wherein she burnt
incense to them, and she decked her self with her eare-rings and her jewels,
and she went after her lovers, and forgate me, says the LORD.
The last branch of the challenge, (and the height of all the sin formerly
challenged,) is for her Idolatry, particularly of Baal, which she followed with
much sumptuousness, forgetting God; For this the Lord threatens in due time to
punish. Whence learn, 1. The capestone and height of sin, and abuse of mercy in
the visible Church, is Idolatry, when all her care is to set up a false
Religion, and to uphold it by her prosperity: and in particular, when not only
the true God is worshipped in a wrong way, but when an Idol is set up to be the
object of worship; This is the substance of all the former challenges, her
burning incense to Baalim, (or several Idols under that name, or that same Idol
under several shapes in diverse places,) and going after her lovers. 2. Such as
admit of one step of Idolatry, may be given up to more; and such as set up
their own devices in worshipping the true God, are justly given up to take an
Idol in his room, and would do so, if they had a tentation: For, they who at
first worshipped the calves, do now embrace Baalim. 3. Idolatry is a way to
which our hearts incline by nature, and much external pomp is no evidence of a
true Religion: For, she burnt incense to them, and decked her self with her
eare-rings and her Jewels, and she went after her lovers: Her pomp and
superfluity in upholding that Idolatry, (as an harlots decking when she
prostitutes her self,) declared the inclination of her heart, and this pomp
proclaimed the unsoundnesse of that way. 4. As Idolatry in the visible Church
proclaims great forgetfulness of God, what he is in himself, and has been
unto them; So the Lord will take notice of this as an aggravatiun of that sin:
Therefore is it added, and forgot me, says the LORD; See Deuteronomy. 32.6, 7, 15,
16. 5. Albeit the Lord may seem to look on for a time, when his people depart
from him; yet he is a jealous God, who will not suffer Idolatry to go
unpunished, but will in due time come and take order with it, and repay all
their obstinate continuance in it: For, says he, I will visit upon her, (or
come to take order with her for) the days of Baalim, or the long time she
continued serving them, and that albeit these days had ceased since Jehu's
reformation.

Ver. 14. Therefore behold, I will allure her; and bring her into the
wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her.
In the rest of this Chap. the Lord for the comfort of the Elect Israelites
that were then living, or should live afterward, brings forth his purpose of
mercy in several Gospel-consolations, which however they belong spiritually to
all the Israel of God, yet are here expressed with a peculiar eye to Israel
here threatened, and in particular, with an eye to their future conversion as a
Nation, Romans 11.25, 26.

The first ground of consolation, or promise in this ver. has three branches,
1. It being supposed in the former threatenings, that Israel is rejected for
sin, and driven in exile, and under bondage, as when they were in Egypt, (to
which the allusion is;) The Lord promises, even when she is in that condition,
to allure and persuade her by the voice of the Gospel, and efficacy of his
Spirit, to turn to him, and come out of her spiritual bondage to follow him;
which answers to their call out of Egypt, by the Ministry of Moses and Aaron,
Hos 11.1. 2. As Israel after their coming out of Egypt, were brought into a
wilderness, where they were made to walk long, (as the word here will read,)
amidst many difficulties, and yet as their journey toward Canaan, wherein they
were supported and provided for; so he promises that Israel, after their
conversion to God, should walk on through the wilderness of this world, toward
their heavenly Canaan; or more particularly, it may relate to some great
difficulties converted Israel may meet with before their recollection from
exile, and in their bringing up from the land of the North, Jer. 16.14, 15. 3.
He promises, that in this their wandering through the wilderness, he will
speak comfortably to their heart; which answers to the entering in Covenant with
them; and the many proofs of love they met with during their forty years
pilgrimage. Doct. 1. As a visible Church may become so desperately sick, as
there is no remedying of her, but by utter undoing of her for a time, (as here
it is supposed Israel will be;) so free grace in God may take advantage of such
incorrigiblenesse, and such an undone condition, to manifest and magnify it
self upon her, and unto her, even to admiration; Therefore do these promises
come in with a Therefore by way of conclusion upon the former purpose,
intimating, that since they had given a proof what they could do, and that
there was no other remedy, but they would be undone for ever; therefore he
would take occasion of this to manifest what grace could make of such a
desperate case and people. And this has a behold prefixed to it, as being
indeed admirable and remarkable. 2. Conversion to God, is the great proof of
the love of God toward sinners, and the first step to their happiness; and it
will be the way of God with Israel to turn them to him, before they taste of
any other fruit of the Covenant, and while they are yet in exile: For, I will
allure her, or persuade her, is the first promise. The form of speech alludes
in part, to what their idols did of old, they did allure them away from God,
now the Lord shall outbid all their lovers, and gain their heart from them: and
to the Lords dealing with the Gentiles after Israe^s rejection; he did
persuade, or allure them, (it is the same word that is here,) to dwell in the
tents of Shem, Genesis 9 27. Now he will persuade Shem to return to his own tents.
3. Albeit the efficacy of conversion be not suspended on the liberty of ^ans
will, but God interposeth so in it, as he may certainly undertake that it shall
be: (as here he infallibly promises he will allure and persuade her,) yet
herein his way is very sweet and taking with the sinner; the efficacy of his
grace being conveyed in and by the sweet voice of the Gospel, and his
allurements and offers so sweet and rich, so that the soul is made most willing
in this choice; So much may be gathered from this description of conversion, I
will allure her, or gain her heart to my self by the sweet allurements of the
Gospel. 4. Such as are converted to Christ, ought to reresolve on a journey and
progress, as having more before them, both of duty and exercise, and of
enjoyments; For, after she is allured, she is to remove and come to a
wilderness, whether we understand it of the godlies progress toward Heaven,
or Isreal's in particular toward her wonted enjoyments. 5. As unto the
converted, the world and all things therein, will look with another face; and
whereas they looked on it as their rest, they will now see it to be but the
place of their sojourning and pilgrimage; What they accounted a Paradise, they
will judge but a wilderness; and that which smiled upon them, as being of the
world, will now frown upon them: So in particular, it may please the Lord,
after the conversion of his people, to bring them into sad troubles and
exercises for their use and profit; For, as he did so to Israel of old after
their deliverance out of Egypt, so he will do to Israel after their conversion,
I will allure her, and bring her to the wilderness. Such a lot as this serves
to stir up yet more to repentance, is the way to true rest, and fits them for
it, as Israel found of old; See Deuteronomy. 8.15, 16. 6. Whatever may be the lot of
the Lords converted people, yet it is their advantage that they are in his hand
and guiding, who as his sweet allurements and comforts may invite any to follow
him, though it were even to a wilderness; so his carving out of their lot, and
going before them, and being with them in it, will render even the saddest of
it tolerable and easy; For, so is imported here, it is upon his alluring, she
follows him, and he brings her to the wilderness, which is her mercy. 7.
When the Lord brings his people into a wildernesse-condidition, it is out of a
purpose of love to them, that it may endeer them to his heart, may make way
for, and render them capable of much mercy and many proofs of love; For, when
he brings her to the wilderness, he speaks comfortably to her, or deals
kindly with her. So Israel of old found her time in the wilderness, a rich
time, Jer. 2.2, 3. 8. The consolations of the people of God within time, and
under trouble, do consist much in promise, and they must be content of promises
till performance come; considering that not only promises are sweet in
themselves, and will not fail in performance, and that exercise by delay is
useful; but that the only sure token of a blessed condition, is not outward
enjoyments, but the words speaking peace; Therefore his allowance to his people
is, I will speak comfortably to her. 9. How tastlesse and empty soever promises
may seem to carnal hearts, or to Saints in their distemper; yet as they are
cordials in themselves, so when God accompanies and speaks them by his Spirit,
they will satisfy and support: So much does the Original expression import, I
will speak to her heart.

Verse. 15. And I will give her, her vineyards from thence, and the valley of
Achor for a door of hope, and she shall sing there, as in the days of her
youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.
The second ground of consolation, (wherein he insists in the allusion to their
coming out of Egypt,) is, that as of old Israel had an end put to their toil
in the wilderness, and got the possession of a fruitful land, (here signified
by vineyards, a part for the whole;) and as they at first entered into the
possession of that fruitful valley near Jericho, as a pledge of their future
success, and of the fertility of their land: So the Lord will put an end to
his peoples toil and wandering, by giving them complete rest in Heaven, or
particular deliverances from particular troubles within time; and more
particularly, Isreal's toil after their conversion, shall end in restitution to
wonted enjoyments, and (as would appear) to their land, which will be made
fruitful to them; And further, till this full enjoyment come, he will give unto
them such beginnings and tastes of his bounty, as may be a pledge and ground of
hope of getting more. This promise is amplified from an effect, that Gods
bounty should make them rejoice and sing, as of old at the red Sea, Exodus 15.1,
etc. Doct. 1. The Lord will comfort his people, not only with ample promises,
but in due time also with real effects of his love in performing promises;
Therefore is this promise subjoyned to the former of speaking comfortably, v.
14. 2. The Lord can, and will make the troubles of his reconciled people have a
notable end, and restore them to their enjoyments which were lost, by reason of
sin: For, I will give her, her vineyards from thence; albeit these were cut off
for sin, v. 12. yet now they are recovered, and they are given from thence, or,
from the wilderness, out of which they entered into the possession of these.
3. Albeit the Lord do not at first satisfy his peoples expectations and
desires, nor give them all he promises, when he begins to appear for them; yet
he will not fail to let out pledges of his love, which may support them, and
be a pledge of what is coming, and whereof they should make use for that end:
For, he will give them the valley of Acho^, (of which, Josh. 7.24, 25, 26) and
that for a door of hope, as discovering ground of hoping for more, and allowing
them to do so, as 1 Samuel 7.12. This valley (though it got the name from Achans
troubling them, yet) was a door of hope, because it was the first place they
possessed after they passed over Jordan, and was given them as a pledge of
possessing the whole. And the fruitfulness thereof, (of which, Isa. 65.10) was
a pledge to them what the whole land should prove: Thus the godly have the
Spirit as the earnest of their inheritance, and some help from some straits as
a pledge of the sweet issue of all of them; and converted Israel will be
restored to some beginnings of Gods wonted bounty, assuring them of more. 4.
The Lords dealing with his reconciled people, is such as will furnish them
cause of joy, and the Lord will refresh them by it; For, it is his promise, she
shall sing. 5. Not only ought Gods people to rejoice when all things are
performed according to promises, but (beside what is required of glorying in
tribulations, Romans 5.3.) when the Lord gives any pledge of his love, or begun
evidences of it, they ought to cherish it by joy and praise, though full
fruition be wanting; For, even there, on the border of her wilderness, in the
valley of Achor, she shall sing. 6. The Lords ancient kindness, and the
Churches joy of old, is recorded in Scripture as a pledge of what she may yet
expect, when she is reconciled to God; and the joy of Israel after their
conversion, shall come behind with no song that at any time they have had;
For, she shall sing as in the days of her youth, (that is, in the day when he
first married her, and entered in Covenant with her, Jer. 2.2, 3 Exek. 16.60.
and so it is expounded in the following words,) and as in the day when she came
up out of the Land of Egypt. 7. That vocal singing to the Lords praise, is a
Gospel-ordinance, may appear in part from this place, wherein it is promised as
a Gospel-practice, and the practice of converted Israel, that they shall sing
as of old at the Red Sea: Though musical instruments and dances, (which wera
used then also,) are abolished, as being ceremonial.

Ver. 16. And it shall be at that day, says the LORD, that thou shall call me
Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali.

17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall
no more be remembered by their name.


The third ground of consolation, is held out in a promise of through
reformation, making them so to cleave to God in the exercise of the true
Religion, as they shall renounce all corruptions, even the very names that had
been abused to Idolatry. And this the Lord himself undertakes to effectuate,
and to root out Idols. Albeit the names Baali, and Ishi, signify both of them
an husband, (though the first signify chiefly an husband under the notion of
authority, and the other of love,) And albeit Baali might be said of God, as
for any thing in it self, as it is Isa. 54.5. yet since it had been abused and
given to Idols, he will have it no more used. Doct. 1. When the Lord delivers
and is kind to his people, it is their duty to prove their thankfulness, by
embracing of Christ, and cleaving to him and his pure service and by zeal in
Reformation, and deliverance is then blessed, when this accompanies it:
Therefore is this promise subjoyned to the former. 2. The Lord will be unto his
people what a faithful husband is unto his wife, and they are allowed to
expect, and in the faith thereof, to profess and avow him in the exercise of
true Resigion; For, thou shall call me Ishi, or avow me for thy husband, as
thou art warranted to do. 3. The Lord is so tender of the matter of his worship
and service, that he will allow no mixture in it, nor halting betwixt it and
Idolatry; yea, not so much as names of Idols are to be remembered with their
worshipping of him, nor an abused name to be made use of in his religious
worship; For, thou shall call me no more Baali, nor use that name, though in my
service, and the names of Baalim, must be taken away out of her mouth, and they
no more remembered by their name, to wit, in any Religious State especially.
She must be so far from her former Idolatry, as their very names must be
forgotten. 4. Our hearts are naturally so averse from true Religion, and so
prone to what is wrong, that it is Gods work alone, to draw us to the true
Religion, and root out the false: and he will so do to his people, and in
particular to Israel being converted: For, it is a promise, Thou shall call me
Ishi, etc. for I will take away the names of Baalim, etc.

Verse. 18. And in that day will I make a covenant for them with the beasts of
the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the creeping things of the
ground: and I will break the bow, and the sword, and the battle out of the
earth, and will make them to lie down safely.
The fourth ground of consolation, is outward peace; Gods favor and Covenant
shall secure them from hurt by any of the creatures, as if a Covenant were made
with them for that effect; and shall give them peace, and security from wars.
As for the extent of this promise, we may compare what is observed on Mic. 4.3,
4. It seems to have a special relation unto the state of converted Israel, of
which, Ezekiel. 38.8. Doct. 1. All the creatures of God are justly at enmity with
man, and armed against him, so long as he is not reconciled with God their
Creator: So much may be gathered from this promise following on their
reconciliation. 2. Reconciliation with God brings peace with all the creatures,
so far as is for the reconciled man's good, though there must be an exception of
needful trial; and however, none of them shall mar his true peace and
happiness; So much is held ont in this promise, I will make a covenant for
them with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven, and with the
creeping things of the ground; See Job 5.23. 3. That which secureth the godly
man from trouble from the creatures, is Gods dominion over all of them, who can
ensure his peoples tranquillity for them; For, says he, I will make a Covenant
for them, etc. that is, not only send this mercy to them by virtue of the
Covenant, (which makes it sweet) but makes it as sure, by reason of his
dominion, as if there were an express Covenant for that effect. 4. As peace
and deliverance from war is a great blessing; So it is the Lord only who puts
an end to war, and gives peace: For, I will break the bow, and the sword, and
the battle, (that is, all other instruments of war, or the war it self acted by
these weapons, which is broken, when the weapons are broken,) out of the earth;
See Jer. 47.6, 7. 5. When a people study reconciliation with God, and are
cordial in following a through Reformation, they arr in Gods way for attaining
outward peace; For, it is upon the accomplishment of the former promises, and
particularly that, v. 16, 17. that this promise follows, In that day I will
break the bow, etc. otherwise it may be said as Jehu said to Joram, 2 Kings.
9.22. See Judge. 5.8. 6. When the Lord has given peace, it is he only who must
maintain it, and can give quietness of mind to make people enjoy quietness
and tranquillity by it; For, it is a new promise, I will make them to lie down
safely, or in confidence. Unless he give peace, outward tranquillity will not
afford it; and if he give that, we have no cause to complain, though we be in
the midst of trouble.

Verse. 19. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever; yea, I will betroth thee
unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and in loving kindness, and in
mercies.

20. I will even betroth thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall know the
LORD.


The fifth ground of consolation, and fountain of all these blessings, is the
renewing of the Marriage-covenant with them: which because they had turned it
of old into a Covenant of Works to themselves, and had been plagued for the
breach of it; Therefore he promises now to renew it on such terms, as should
make it sure and comfortable. Doct. 1. Whatever may be Gods dealing at first
with his own people whom he calls, yet his calling of them imports, and tends
to an advancing of them to a Marriage-communion with himself, whereby they are
made one with him, and reap the fruits of this conjunction in communication of
estates, and much love to them; For, I will betroth thee unto me, says he; and
it is called betrothing, not only because his affection continues still fresh,
as of new betrothed persons, but because our enjoyments here, are but as a
betrothing in order to a Marriage to be consumnat in Heaven, Revel. 19.7. 2.
The Lords renewing his Covenant with his penitent people, after their
backslidings, will be without any upbraiding of them for former debordings,
whereof now they are ashamed; For, his covenanting with converted Israel, is
not a taking her again as an adulterous and divorced wife, but a betrothing of
her as a pure Virgin. 3. Albeit there may be many vicissitudes betwixt Christ
and his confederate people, as to their conditions, his dispensations and
manifestations; yet the Marriage-tie will remain unviolable for ever: And thr
Covenant being renewed with Israel as a Natton, will endure for ever, for the
good of the Elect among them; For, I will betroth thee unto me for ever, It is
so well ordered that it must be sure, 2 Samuel 23.5. See Psalm. 89.30, -- 34. 4.
As for the first property of the Marriage-Covenant, that it is in
righteousness, it may import that this bargain shall be made and performed in
reality, and not in show only, Jer. 32.41. (for thus Gods righteousness
seems to be taken for his integrity in promising, and his reality and
constancy in performing what he undertakes, as Mic. 7.9. and is the same with
that uprightness, and opposite to that unrighteousness, of which, Psalm.
92.15.) But it seems to hold out yet more concerning this Covenant, that God
will communicate the imputed righteousness of Christ, to the confederate,
whereby he shall stand in Covenant for ever, nothing being to be objected
against him, but what is abundantly answered and satisfied in his Cautioner,
Romans 8.33, 34. And that the Lord by doing this, shall do them good in
righteousness, as being satisfied in his Son, 1 John 1.9. and without any
imputation to his righteousness and justice against sin, having received such
a ransom, Romans 3.25, 26. 5. The second property (in judgment) teaches, 1.
That as for his confederate people, the Lord will have a tender respect and
consideration what they are, and what their mould is with whom he makes the
bargain; and therefore will not cast the bargain for after-failings, seeing he
knew what they would prove whom he choosed, and he will moderate his dealing
with them, as considering what they are able to bear: This discreet
consideration and moderating of dispensations is held out under the name of
judgment, as Psalm. 99.4. and elsewhere. Secondly, it teaches, that as for
enemies, he will not fail to execute vengeance on these of them who are
incorrigible, and will right all wrongs done to her; Thus judgment is
frequently taken in Scripture. 6. The third property ( in loving kindness, or
goodness, or bounty) teaches, that the Lord will not only keep Covenant
because he is tied; but as of his love and bounty, he entered in Covenant, so
he will constantly delight in the confederates, as a Bridegroom in his Bride,
Zeph. 3.17. he will do them good freely and bountifully, will be easy to be
entreated, and answer all objections that can be moved, with his own goodness
and love. 7. The fourth property, ( in mercies, or bowels) teaches, that as
the confederate will be far from perfection, and will daily need much
compassion, both as to his sin and miseries following upon it, and yet be
confederate for all that: So the Covenant does ensure unto him the tender
bowels of Gods compassion, to sympathize with him in his afflictions, and
graciously to pardon acknowledged and repented of guilt; and that there shall
be many, even bowels of them, to answer to the greatness of his sin or
trouble, and his frequent falling in the one or the other. 8. The fifth
property, (in faithfulness) if we take it more generally for firmness and
stability, and real truth of a thing, (as it is, when joined with mercy, as
Psalm. 57.3.) it teaches, that however there be many impossible like things
promised in the Covenant, and all of it depending on free-mercy; and however
the confederate may be oft-times ready to fail, and does fail on his part;
yet considering the fidelity of God, and that he undertakes for both parties,
it shall prove a firm and stable Covenant. But if we understand the word more
particularly for faith (as it is used, Hab. 2.4.) then it teaches, that the
condition required on man's part in this Covenant, is true faith, whereby he
renounceth himself, and lays hold on the offer, and by resting on the Word
wherein the offer is made, comes at length to real performance of what is
promised in the Covenant, as Luke 1.45. 9. That which is subjoyned, (and thou
shall know the Lord) may comprehend both Gods undertaking to work in them what
the Covenant requires, (whether faith, as this word imports, Isa. 53.11. or all
other Covenant-dispositions, or fruits of saving faith, as Jer. 31.34.) and the
effects of their embracing the Covenant, in experimental tasting what he is.
And so it teaches, 1. God is the undertaker for, and worker in his people of
all that is required on their part for entering in and keeping Covenant with
him; It is his promise, thou shall know the Lord. 2. A right and sanctified
knowledge of God, is the root and companion of all sanctified graces, and
Covenant-dispositions; Therefore all are comprehended in this, to know the
Lord; Faith gets that name, not only because of the certitude and evidence it
brings with it, but because it is begotten by his Word and knowledge of him in
it, and is cherished and confirmed by taking him up still more, as he is
revealed there, as Psalm. 9.10. 2 Timothy 1.12. and other graces flow from this
faith, and are cherished by studying to know him with whom we have to do. 3.
When sinners get grace to close with God in the Covenant, then he will
communicate himself, his hid Manna, and rich love unto them; the nearer they
come to him, they shall know the more of his excellency and fullness, and they
shall experimentally know what a party he is with whom they are confederate,
how like himself in his dealing, and how far above their shallow conceptions;
For, then they shall know the Lord indeed; See Number. 23.19. 2 Samuel 7.19. Isa.
55.8, 9. Hosea 11.9.

Verse. 21. And it shall come to pass in that day, I will hear, says the LORD,
I will hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth.

22. And the earth shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they
shall hear Jezreel.


The sixth ground of consolation, is a promise of plenty and outward means of
subsistence, which is a fruit of Marriage, when he communicates (as it were) of
his estate with her whom he betrotheth. The Lord promises that all the
creatures should (so to say) concur to seek to be employed to furnish Israel,
and God should so bless the order and influence of second causes, as they
should evidently see God blessing them, who had been Jezreel, the scattered of
the Lord, but will be then Jezreel, the seed of the Lord, as the next verse
intimates. Whence learn, 1. While the Lords people are within time, they may
read their own frailty in needing so many things to uphold even their outward
man; For, they need a blessing upon heaven and earth to furnish food to them.
It were good so to be comforted by the promises, as to read them still speaking
humility to us. 2. Outward mercies do so far follow on the Covenant, as the
confederate may be free of fear and anxiety about them; For, so much does this
promise assure all, beside what it may promise to Israel after their
conversion, or what the Lord may give to his people at some time. Albeit the
Lord do not always see it meet to heap plenty of corn, and wine, and oil
upon his people; yet they get still as much, as with godliness and contentment
makes them not only subsist, but be as well as when they have most; and they
may be as free of anxiety in greatest wants, as if they had greatest plenty:
For, when they seek the best things, other things will certainly be added,
Matthew. 6.33. when God has given them his own Son, he will not deny lesser
things, when they are needed, Romans 8.32. and his providence in hearing the need
of creatures, may ease them. 3. God is so tender a respector of necessities,
that he has an ear to hear the dumb cries of very insensible creatures in
their need, and that they may be useful one to another, especially for the good
of his people; For, when the heaven is made iron, it has a cry which he will
hear for the good of inferior creatures, and of his people: I will hear; says
the LORD, I will hear the Heavens. The repetition holds forth the certainty
of it. 4. Gods reconciled people are to read, not only Gods love in their
plenty, but that all the Creation (which groan under man's sin,) do in their
kind, with a good will, concur to serve him who is now at peace with their
Maker: So much may be gathered also from their calling one to another in their
order, and to God, that they may be blessed for the good of his people. 6. The
Lord sets a mark of excellency upon man, and especially on his Church, in that
so many things concur to serve them, and provide for them; For, here heavens
and earth, concur for this end. 6. Whatever it be that one creature affords
unto another, or may be in the course of nature expected from it; yet every
creature in it self is empty, and must be supplied by God before it satisfy
any; For, let the Earth call to the Heavens for ordinary rain and influence,
yet they cannot afford it till God hear them. 7. As the Lord is not to be
tempted, but waited on in his established order, for any thing, (as here, they
must expect to be fed, by corn, and wine, and oil, coming in Gods established
course of nature;) So we are not to rest on any such order or course of nature,
but to see Gods hand in it, who establishes and blesses it for such ends;
For, the corn, and wine, and oil, hear Jezreel, (not answering any prayers
made to them, but supplying these necessities, which they are appointed for,)
and the earth does bring forth these, and the heavens give influence for that
end, yet so as it is God who makes all these so to do, and he is to be seen
doing so. Not that he hears only the heavens, and then they hear all the rest
of second causes, but that beginning at the heavens, he blesses their plenty in
all the steps of second causes, even to the putting a blessing in it, when it
is produced; For it remains still in his hand to bless or curse it, even when
it is in the basket and store, and in men's mouths. 8. The Lords former sad
dispensations toward his people, will not hinder him to change his dealing, but
he will be kind and do them good so much the more; and thoughts of this will
make his kindness so much the sweeter: For, albeit they had been Jezreel in
respect of their scattering, yet he would turn that into a name of blessing,
and do them good so much the more.

Verse. 23. And I will sow her unto me in the earth, and I will have mercy upon
her that had not obtained mercy, and I will say to them which were not my
people, Thou art my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God.
In the seventh ground of consolation, the Lord promises that (according to
the comfortable signification of their name Jezreel) he will make them to
increase as seed that is sown does multiply, that he will give them many
proofs of his mercy after their hard usage, and confirm them in their
interest in him, after their rejection, which they should embrace and acquiesce
into: See chap. 1.10, 11. The Apostle does apply this also, Romans 9.25. to
Israel in the spirit both of Jew and Gentile, who were brought in to Christ,
even in his time, because the Covenant is the same with all the confederates,
and there was then some accomplishment in part of this prediction. But the full
accomplishment thereof is reserved for Israel (of whom this Chapter speaks most
expressly) at their conversion as a Nation. And if we still take it up as
comprehending Jew and Gentile; yet the full accomplishment thereof is reserved
for that time, wherein the conversion of Israel shall be accompanied with the
coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, and be as a life from the dead to
the world. Romans 11.15, 25, 26. Doct. 1. The increase and growth of the Church,
and of Converts, is a sweet fruit of a time of love, and an evidence of it;
For, when all these promises are fulfilling, I will sow her in the earth; that
is, make her to increase as seed which is cast into the earth; or make Israel
to increase in their own land, or make the Church to grow on the barren earth,
that they may ripen for Heaven. 2. It is God only who makes his Church to
grow, and to be forthcoming to his service and praise; For, I will sow her to
me, says he. 3. None of the Lords people are so rejected, nor their condition
so desperate, but mercy and a Covenant can reach them, and recover them; For, I
will have mercy, even upon her that had not obtained mercy; and I will say to
them which were not my people, (or to Lo-ammi, Chap. 1.9.) Thou art my people.
4. Proofs of the Lords mercy in his dispensations, will not be sufficient to
assure and comfort his people, unless they be assured of an interest in him,
which is the chief of mercies; and which can only persuade them, that there is
mercy in his dealing: Therefore after this, I will have mercy, is subjoyned,
Thou art my people, to make the comfort full and sure. 5. As it is the duty of
the Lords people to set their seal by faith to Gods offer, and acquiesce in him
as an alsufficient portion: So these whom he chooses, he gives them grace to
choose him, and their embracing of, and cleaving to him, is an evidence of an
interest in him; For, it is subjoyned as an evidence and effect of Gods owning
of them, and they shall say, Thou art my God; And as it is God who must work
this in his people, according as here he promises it; so it is a sweet and
blessed condition, when there is such a correspondence betwixt him and them: He
publicly owning and avowing them, and they avowing and rejoicing in him; He
proclaiming, Thou art my people, and they resounding, Thou art my God.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chapter we have a new type propounded, with a declaration thereof;
wherein is held forth, 1. Gods love continued toward adulterous Israel,
although she be repudiate, v. 1. 2. The low estate wherein she should be kept
for a long time, because of her sin. 3. The hope and assurance given her of a
future marriage. These two are first propounded in the type, v. 2, 3. and then
repeated by way of explanation; the first of them, v. 4. and the other, v. 5.

Verse. 1. THen said the LORD unto me, Go yet, love a woman, (beloved of her
friend, yet an adulteress) according to the love of the LORD toward the
children of Israel, who look to other gods, and love flagons of wine.
THis Chapter contains a new typical Sermon, of the same nature with the
former, but differing somewhat in scope, as holding forth more distinctly the
Lords method in performing these promises made to Israel, chap. 2. especially
that promise of betrothing her again, v. 19, 20. To wit, that though Israel
should not be finally cast off, but be again betrothed unto Christ; yet they
should for a long time be kept in a low estate, to fit them for the marriage
which should certainly be in due time. This Prophecy cannot be understood of
Israel in the Spirit, seeing Hosea here speaks of Israel his charge, that had
been married, and was now to be sequestrate for a long time, which is only
proper to the ten Tribes: Nor is it to be understood of Judah, nor of their
return from the captivity of Babylon; seeing Israel are named to whom Hosea
preached, and their seeking of Christ under the name of David, and that in the
latter days, is foreprophesied, v. 5. So it is to be looked on as a clear
prediction of the present condition of the ten Tribes, and of their future
conversion, of which, Romans 11.

The first particular in this Sermon, is first propounded in the type, and then
explained: In sum, we may conceive it thus; The Prophet was to propound this
type, that the case should stand betwixt the Lord and the Nation, and Church of
Israel after their rejection, as if the Prophet were a lover, and that of his
adulterous wife, whom he continued to love, though she were justly repudiate
for her adultery, even so the matter stood here: The Lord had been her husband
and loved her, she had ingrately followed Idols and sensual pleasures; for
which, albeit he was to repudiate her as not his wife, yet he would continue
his purpose of love toward her, in order to a second betrothing. Unto this does
the title of a friend here used, agree rather then that of an husband: For in
this, the former marriage is dissolved, and the new is not yet made up, only he
has a friendly affection to her, in order to it. And this title of a friend,
and loving her as such, with a purpose of marriage, seems to be an allusion,
(not so much to heathen customs, where there was some special lover under
whose protection the harlot was, and who upon her good behavior, would promise
to marry her. As) to the custom of an Israelites marrying the Heathen Virgin,
Deuteronomy. 21.10, -- 13. Doct. 1. As it is matter of sad challenge against the
Church, that she ingrately sins against loving kindness, and is an adulteress
unprovoked; (for so may be imported here, that this adulteress had been
beloved, and yet played the harlot; See Jer. 2.5. Mic. 6.3.) so loving kindness
does not always give up upon sad provocations, nor upon saddest dispensations;
for so is expressly held out here, the repudiate adulteress is yet beloved of
her friend, and this sets out the love of the Lord toward the children of
Israel, etc. This holds true of the Nation of Israel to this day, Romans 11.28,
29. and there may be toward all the Lords people, many sweet purposes lying hid
under sad dispensations, Jer. 29.11. 2. Such is men's stupidity in taking up
their own case, and their superficialnesse in pondering of it, that it needs to
be much and sensibly inculcate; Therefore is this matter twice told, first in
the type, Go yet, (after that former type, chap. 1.2.) love a woman, etc. and
then in the explication, according to the love of the Lord, etc. 3. This
outward gross Idolatry with other gods, (as they judged them to be gods) which
Israel was guilty of, and for which she was repudiate, may teach; That
corrupting the Worship of God, and declining from him and his way, is the great
sin for which the Lord does plead, and may at last reject a visible Church: and
albeit tentations to such courses may be removed from a Church; yet the
dispensation and way of Israel may warn us, that the hearts of all men are
prone that way, if they had a tentation, that we incline more to false worship
then true, that naturally we have false ways to heaven and happiness; and
that idols, and not the true God, are chief in our hearts. And when God and his
way of service are not delighted in, we may charge all these upon our selves;
So much may we gather from this challenge against Israel, they look to other
gods, or, turning their back on God, they placed their affection, confidence,
dependence, respex on Idols; For, looking does import this, Ps. 123.1, 2. Isa.
45.22. See Ezekiel. 20.16, 24. 4. The challenge joined with this, that they love
flagons of wine, or sensual pleasures, does teach, that as idolatry and false
worship are plagued with sensuality and delight in it, (as witness the feasts
of Idolaters, Exodus 32.6.) So sensual men bewray their own inclination, that
they are ripe for being Idolaters, if they had the trial: Therefore are they
conjoined in the challenge, as having much affinity, and drawing on one another.

Verse. 2. So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and for an homer
of barley, and an half homer of barley.

3. And I said unto her, Thou shall abide for me many days, thou shall not
play the harlot, and thou shall not be for another man, so will I also be for
thee.


In these verses, the type of the second and third parts of the Chapter is
propounded; As if the Prophet should purchase this adulteress out of the hand
of all her lovers, for so much money and barley, and sequestrate her from
himself and them, to live on this sober entertainment, in hope of marriage, if
she carried her self well; So should it be betwixt the Lord and Israel, as is
explained in the following verses. Albeit this type be expounded by the Lord
himself; yet since his speaking of the matter twice, invites us to look on it
again and again; I shall observe somewhat on the type, And first, the Prophets
purchasing the adulteress for so much money, is not to be strained to signify
the Lords redeeming of his Church, for the price is given to her self for
maintenance, and to purchase her good will, though she be his own, in order to
second marriage; But it teaches, that as a common strumpet being bought from
all her lovers, and a slave bought with money, are at the buyers disposal; So,
however Israel followed many idols, yet the Lord would prove that he alone had
dominion over her, to set her in what condition he pleased, where none of her
lovers should help her. Secondly, the price given for her, fifteen pieces of
silver, (whereby we are to understand so many shekels,) being but half a
servants worth, Exodus 21.32. and half the estimation of a woman, Lev. 27.4. may
teach, how little worth they are, and how base and contemptible they make
themselves, who despise the Lord, and corrupt his Worship; as may be seen on
the Jews to this day, and much more on Israel, who are in a manner lost in the
World; See Amos 9.7. Thirdly, this small price with the barley joined with it,
and given her, being but little and sober fare, and unfit food, especially for
women, may teach, 1. That sensuality provokes God to send pinching penury; For,
she who loved flagons of wine, v. 1. comes to this fare. 2. That we must be
much stripped of all things, before we be sensible and weaned from our idols:
For, this adulteress must be thus pinched, before she give over her
wantonness: Our hearts are so mad on Idols, that they will be fed so long as
we have any thing to our selves. Fourthly, his charging her to abide many days
sequestrate, not playing the harlot, nor enjoying him, (for so the Original
has it, Thou shall not be for a man, either me or any other,) but having hope
of marriage if she did well, may teach. 1. That cutting short of outward
mercies, should cut off sin, and humble us that we may be ripe for mercy; and
whatever our frame and carriage be, yet by affliction God will cut short
occasions of sin; For, as an adulteress shut up and dieted, is secluded from
her lovers; so Israel by Gods dispensations, is made to abide, and not be for a
man. 2. The Lord may intend much good to them whom he brings in contempt, and
to a low condition: For, he sequestrates and shuts up Israel thus, with an eye
to marrying of her. 3. Such as God intends this mercy for, may yet continue
long in a sad condition; partly, to show the greatness of his displeasure
against his people, when he is provoked to reject them; and partly, that they
may see the ill of their ways, and may cleave to God the faster, when he
restores them; For, Israel is to abide many days, whereof we have seen a sad
accomplishment from the time of their captivity to this day; whereof though
they get no use in the time of their rejection, yet it will be otherwise when
they turn to God. 4. As it is a choice mercy in affliction, not to forsake
God, nor cleave to other idols, though he seem to reject us; So it is a token
for good to Gods people, when by affliction he cuts short their sin; For, so
this sequestrating her, is expounded to be, an abiding for him, abide for me.
Although she be rejected from being the Lords wife, and have little mind or
expectation of him; yet the Lords sequestrating her from idolatry, (to wit, in
a national way) in her captivity, is a proof, that he will make it an abiding
for him, whatever she intend, or expect in it. Fifthly, this typical promise of
his abiding for her, as she does for him, (so will I also be for thee,) is not
to be strictly pressed, seeing God has since the time of their rejection,
chosen the Gentiles; though it may be thus constructed, 1. He choosed none till
the Messiah, under whom they are to be converted, came in the flesh. 2. All
whom he chooses must put this respect upon the elder brother, (though now gone
out of the house) that they become Israel, before they lay claim to Isreal's
Covenant. 3. Whomever the Lord has chosen, yet he has a room in his heart for
them, and will have them married to him, and this exhausts the scope. 4. Their
conversion will be indeed as his solemn marriage-day, and a resurrection from
the dead to the world, Romans 11.15. and that day will evidence what respect he
had to them in their lost condition. And so it may teach us, 1. Notwithstanding
the glorious days of the Son of man, that appear in the world by the
conversion of the Gentiles, and their marriage to him; yet his ancient people
are not forgotten by him: But as of old when the Jews were his Church, yet he
minded the Gentiles, and purposed their conversion, John 10.16. so his heart is
on Israel, till they be brought in. 2. Not only is it a token that God has
reserved comfort for them, who will not have any comfort in trouble without
him, but as a shut-up adulteress, do renounce all lovers till their husband
embrace them again: But when the Lord makes his peoples affliction continue
sad, without any outgate beside himself, it is a pledge that he has thoughts
of peace toward them in that trouble; For, he abides for her, who is made to
abide, and not to be for a man, or secluded from any comfortable condition, as
a shut-up harlot. This is the condition of the Jews and of Israel at this day,
who are kept in so low a condition beyond all Nations, that they may never
flourish till God turn them to him, and he embrace them. Sixthly, the Prophets
doing all this in obedience to that command, v. 1. to love the woman, may
teach, 1. That as tender husbands do shut up, and pinch their wanton and
treacherous wives, for their good; So the Lords love may oft-times be visible
in hard usage, and denying indulgence to his incorrigible people; and his love
be ordered by prudent and wholesome severity to tame them. 2. That not to be
cut off, but made to subsist in the saddest condition, in hope of future mercy,
is a rich expression of love; For, so does his love toward Israel appear, in
that he preserves them, however scattered or lost in men's eyes, with a purpose
to do them good in the latter end. See Lam. 3.22, 26, 29.

Ver. 4. For the children of Israel shall abide many days without a King, and
without a Prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an
Ephod, and without Teraphim.
Here we have the second thing in the Chap. and an Exposition of the first part
of the type, concerning the adulteress her being sequestrate in a base and
poor condition; This the Lord expounds to signify, that albeit he was to cast
Israel out, yet for the Elects sake in her, and because of the Covenant made
with her Fathers, he would testify his love to her, by making her to subsist
during the long time of her captivity; though in a sober and mean condition,
wanting a civil State, and without the use either of a true Religion,
(signified by sacrifices, and an Ephod,) or a false; signified by Images and
Teraphim, which were a peculiar sort of Images, representing (as is conceived)
their Idols in humane shape. This prediction cannot be understood of particular
persons of Israel, nor of all of them taking them distributively, for certainly
at all times where ever they are, they have some Religion, either true or
false; But it is to be taken of Israel collectively, that as a Nation they
could neither set up, nor perform true or false worship, as they had done
before their rejection; and so it is opposed to their national conversion.
Further, when the Lord foretells that they shall be deprived of true Worship
under the name of a sacrifice and Ephod, (comprehending under this, all their
Priestly garments, and their Priests who used them in public worship,) it is
not his purpose to justify their borrowing of these from Judah, and making use
of them in the worship of the calves, as true and acceptable worship; but being
such as they supposed true, and came nearest to it, yet they should be deprived
of it. Or, the words are to be taken absolutely, without restriction to what
they had before, to signify that they should have no true worship at all. From
this we may (beside what is held out in the type.) further Learn, 1. As the
Lord may make the fruits of sin very bitter and sad, and of long continuance,
even to his own people; So, such a condition may have mercy in it, and may yet
end in mercy; For, albeit what is here held out, be very sad, and of
continuance for many days, yet they abide under it, and are made to subsist
till better come. 2. The want of a face of Government of a Nations self, is a
misery to be laid to heart, either when a people are scattered from being a
Nation, or are ruled over by strangers; and yet it is a misery under which a
people may be preserved for much mercy; For, it is foretold here as a part of
Isreal's misery, that they shall be without a King, and without a Prince,
without any face of Authority, less or more, over them of their own Nation,
being scattered among the Nations, and under the Government of others where
they come: and yet in this case, they abide till the marriage come. 3. As the
public Worship of God is a sweet cordial in affliction, and the want thereof a
judgment, which the Lord will bring on his dearest people, when they provoke
him: and as it is a sad judgment to want the face of a visible Church, even
albeit there were some corruption in it; So, corrupting the Worship of God,
provokes him to give up a people to have no worship at all: For, this
prediction, they shall abide without a sacrifice, and without an Image, and
without an Ephod, and without Teraphim, does not import that simply it is a
judgment to want corrupt worship, (though whorish Israel in Hosea's time might
think so, as an harlot would do to be shut up from her Paramours, which is
indeed a woeful temper,) nor does it here import so much a mercy to deprive her
of corrupt worship in her trouble, (though it be so in it self, and he intend
mercy in all of this;) But the scope is, to show, that whereas the people of
God may gather comfort, either from the enjoying of the pure Worship of God in
sad times, or from the continuance of some face of a Church, though corrupt, as
a token that God has not yet totally rejected; yet Israel (though God have a
purpose of good to her, and do preserve her for it,) should enjoy none of
these. She shall neither have the true Religion, nor the face of a Church and
Worship as they had it, to assure them that they were not quite divorced; and
this is the fruit of their corrupting the Worship of God, and serving of Idols.
4. It is a judgment and token of Gods severity, (whatever love be intended in
it) when a Nation are given up not to be wholly the Lords, nor do serve him in
a national way, nor are a national Church to him: For, such is the misery of
Israel to this day, that they are deprived of Worship and any Church State as a
Nation; and if their conversion and Worship, and Church State under the Gospel,
shall be national, (as the opposition must carry it,) then certainly a national
Church is no Paradoxe under the Gospel.

Verse. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel return, and seek the LORD
their God, and David their King, and shall fear the LORD, and his goodness in
the latter days.
Follows the last part of the Chap. and an Explication of that part of the
type, v. 3. I will also be for thee; containing a Prophecy of Gods mercy in
bringing about the national repentance and conversion of Israel in the latter
days: and their renewing of the Covenant, and taking Christ the Son of David
for their King, and constantly serving and fearing the Lord, even because of
his goodness. Whence learn, 1. Albeit Israel as a Nation, has been, and yet
is rejected and lost; yet they will certainly return to God; For, so is here
prophesied expressly, afterward shall the children of Israel return, and this
we are much to long and pray for. 2. As true repentance and conversion will
appear in men's being sensible of their great distance from God, and in their
seeking to make up this distance, (albeit they cannot as yet prove much
enjoyment,) and seeking him chiefly and only, in place of many things which
natural hearts lust after; so, all this is a sweet and blessed fruit of
affliction: For, such shall be the result of Isreal's being in a low condition,
they shall return and seek the Lord. 3. The Covenant stands still to be
forthcoming for Apostates, when they repent and turn to God, renouncing false
ways and worship; For, so will Israel find; when they return, they are
allowed to seek the Lord their God: and any who seek the Lord, ought not to
make themselves an ill answer, but come, and they will find him their God. 4.
There is no right seeking of God, nor finding of him, or the comforts of the
Covenant, but through Christ, whom converted Israel shall acknowledge and
embrace; For, they shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King. 5.
Christ is here named David, and their, (or Isreal's) King; so also, Jer. 30.9.
Ezekiel. 34.23, 24. and 37.24. not only because he is David's Son and Heir, Rev.
22.16. and because David was a type of him: But 1. Because in their conversion,
they will have a deep sense of their sinful revolt from the house of David,
which began their woe and Apostasy; true penitents will trace back their
defection to the very fountain and beginning of it, with much sorrow and
resentment. 2. Because Christ the substance will be eminently such a King unto
them, (as he is to all his people,) as David the type was unto Israel of old.
3. Because Israel shall so embrace Christ, as to acknowledge him in all his
offices; and particularly, shall submit to him as a King, which is the duty of
all true Converts. Doct. 6. True conversion will appear in its constancy and
perseverance; and particularly, in the Converts entertaining an holy fear and
aw of God: For, when Israel shall return and seek the Lord, they shall also
hold on, and shall fear the Lord. 7. As God is always good to his own people,
whatever they think to the contrary, Psalm. 73.1, 2. so much of his goodness
will be manifested in the time of that life from the dead, when all Israel
shall be saved: For, so is imported here, the Lords goodness will then be
matter of holy exercise. 8. The goodness of God will not make a true Convert
presumptuous; but will be unto him matter of reverence, and holy fear and
trembling: For, they shall fear the Lord and his goodness. 9. Albeit Israel be
long in gathering and converting; yet we are firmly to believe, that before
time end, it will certainly come to pass: For, all this shall be in the latter
days: Which albeit it often signify all the time of the dispensation of the
Gospel; yet in this prediction is to be taken for that period of time more
immediately preceding the end of the World.

CHAP. IV.
IN this Chap. Israel is cited to Gods tribunal, to hear his controversy
pleaded, v. 1. -- In prosecution of which controversy, 1. The Lord accuses
them more generally for their gross violation of both Tables of the Law, both
by omission, and commission, v. -- 1, 2. and threatens because of this, to send
extreme desolation, ver. 3. 2. He accuses them for their desperate
incorrigiblenesse, v. 4. Threatening therefore to destroy such, and the false
Prophets, and the body of the people and Church, v. 5. 3. He accuses the
Priests in Israel, that through their fault; the people were kept in ignorance,
threatening to cast them and their posterity off, v. 6. Likewise he accuses
them for ingratitude toward him, for which he threatens to make their glory
turn to ignominy, v. 7. Lastly, he accuses these Priests for their
sensuality and covetousness, rendering them unfaithful in their calling, v. 8.
and threatens to plague both Priests and people, according as they deserved, v.
9. and to take away the blessing from their provision, and to deprive them of
issue, because they slighted God, v. 10. being stupefied by their sensuality,
v. 11. 4. He accuses the whole people for their gross idolatry, v. 12, 13. --
and threatens to give up their wives and children to bodily filthiness, v. --
13. and not to restrain that sin by corrections, for a time, till for that,
and all the sins of all together, they be utterly destroyed, v. 14. 5. He
accuses them for the Idolatry of the calves, from which he disswades Judah, v.
15. as being an evidence of Isreal's wantonness, and the cause of their ensuing
exile, v. 16. 6. He accuses Ephraim their Kingly Tribe, for their
incorrigibleness in idolatry, v. 17. for their intemperance, filthiness, and
corruption of justice through covetousness, v. 18. for which he threatens them
with sudden and violent destruction and captivity, where they should be ashamed
of their corrupt worship, v. 19.

Ver. 1. Hear the word of the LORD, ye children of Israel: for the LORD has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth nor
mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.

2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery,
they break out, and blood touches blood.


HItherto this Prophet, in the Lords Name, has denounced the final
destruction, and prophesied of the future conversion of Israel, making use of
some types for that end. Now in a great part of this ensuing Prophecy, he
proceeds in more plain terms, to rip up, and lay open the iniquity of this
people, and to reveal and denounce future judgments, if so be there might be
any hope of reclaiming them, or any of them; at least, that they might be left
without all excuse. In this Chap. we have Gods controversy pleaded against
them, wherein is contained an accusation for diverse sins, drawn up in several
articles, to every one of which the sentence, or threatening, is subjoyned.

In these Verses, First, they are cited to the Tribunal, to hear the
controversy discussed. Then, the first article of the accusation is subjoyned,
which is more general, laying to their charge the violation of the Law in many
omissions and commissions against both Tables; Namely, that there was no truth
nor tenderness in their dealing, no spark of the knowledge of God shining in
their way; but on the contrary, perjury, and rash swearing, lying, murder,
stealing, and adultery were committed without moderation, and sin heaped upon
sin. Whence learn, 1. Albeit the servants of the Lord may oft-times have little
or no ground of hope, that their Ministry shall have any success among a
people, yet it is their duty, having Gods call, not to give over while they
have any opportunity; For, albeit in the former Sermons the matter be so
closed, that Israel was certainly to go into captivity, yet Hosea does not give
over pleading, as God does put them to it, when they are laid by, Jer. 20.9. So
their Ministry will have its own success one way or other, Isa. 55.10, 11.
and their labors will not be lost before the Lord, Isa. 49.4, 5. 2. As they
who are nearest to God for outward relations, may have their own gross faults,
which their titles and privileges will not cover; So the Lord will especially
contend with them, because of these: For, so is verified here in the children
of Israel, against whom this procedure is. 3. When men look on sad and
unpleasant messages, as coming from God, it will call on them, to receive them
with other respect then is given, when men are only seen; for this end does he
begin with, Hear the word of the Lord. 4. When people (and especially the
Church) do sin, they must expect a process to follow it; and when people do
not make right use of better tidings from the Word, they must expect sad
challenges and sentences from it; And when the authority of God contending by
his Word, is not heeded, the Lord is provoked to plead the controversy more
immediately: For, the Lord has a controversy following on sin, and this is
pleaded partly by the Word here, and (that not succeeding) by the judgments
here threatened. 5. Sin is so much the more odious, and does provoke God, when
it is universal, and committed by these who have found him true in his promise,
and rich in his bounty to them: For, it is a controversy with the inhabitants
of the land, or with the body of the people now corrupted, and with the people
who were settled in that good land which he had sworn to their Fathers, to give
it them. 6. It does commend the Lords mercy, and clear his justice, when it is
manifested on his sinful people, that he does not strike before he has warned
them of their danger, and debated the matter with them: For, here he warnes
them by the Prophet, and before he execute the sentence, he does plead the
cause, that they may consider of it. 7. As the visible Church not walking with
God, may become monstrous in sinfulness; so the Lord does not contend with her
without cause, or for lesser faults and ordinary infirmities, (though these do
justly provoke him to anger,) but for gross debordings in omission or
commission: So much does this accusation teach in the general. 8. The Lord will
not be mocked or deceived with any pretenses of Religion, when men neglect the
duties of the second Table; Therefore does he begin the challenge with these,
and insist most on them. 9. Whatever secret mourners there may be in a corrupt
Chuch, yet when the contagion becomes general, and rises to an height, the
Lord will take no notice of them; as to holding off a common calamity: For,
albeit there were (no doubt) some good men in the land, yet he says, there is
no truth, etc. in the land, because they might get their souls for a prey, but
would not turn his anger from the land. See Ezekiel. 9.4, 5. and 14.14, 16, 18.
10. The Lord abhors flattery in his people, their want of ingenuity, their
politic and subtle carriages, and unfaithfulness and deceit in bargains and
trusts; That may be the cause of Gods sore controversy, which men look on as
an handsome conveyance: For, the Lord has a controversy, because there is no
truth, 11. Such as cast off bowels of mercy, and exercise oppression, (either
where the cause is unjust, or a just cause cruelly prosecuted, and affliction
added to the afflicted,) may expect judgment without mercy, if they persevere
in it; For, the Lord has a controversy, because there is no mercy. 12. As the
true knowledge of God, is the fountain and root of true Religion; and as men's
ill carriage in duties one to another, does prove them void of the knowledge of
God and of Religion, profess what they will: So ignorance of God continued in
and affected, and appearing in such effects, is the matter of a sad
controversy against the Church; For, he challenges, that there is no
knowledge of God in the land, that is, they are void of any Religion, which
flows from saving knowledge of God, and accompanies it, and in their way
toward others, they walked as if there were no God in heaven; and this is a sad
challenge when it is in the land, where he may, and especially should be known,
and acknowledged; Psalm. 76.1. See Ps. 14.1. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. 13. Not only perjurie
and false swearing, but vain and rash swearing, (wherein men bewray their high
presumption in profaning the Name of God, and violating his command, without
any the least appearance of profit or advantage,) will be pleaded against, when
the Lord prosecutes a controversy against a land, Therefore is swearing put in
the catalogue of the causes of this controversy. 14. As lying is a sin
inconsistent with humane society, and does provoke the Lord to just wrath: So
such as are rash swearers, will readily make no conscience of lies; Therefore
is lying subjoyned to swearing, as frequently conjoined with it, and as another
cause of the controversy. 15. God has fenced the lives, estates, and chastity
of men by his Law, which when it is transgressed, God will reckon with men for
blood, cheating, idleness, oppression, filthiness, and other ways whereby
they violate these and for the least as well as the greatest of them, as
drawing on wrath; For, he contends, because of killing, stealing, and
committing adultery, all of them as causes of this controversy, though not all
alike heinous. 16. It is a great aggravation of sin, when men in committing of
it, do break over all banks of Law, moderation, or civility, and do sin without
remorse, shame or fear; For, he challenges that in all these, they break, or
burst out, as a torrent of waters do burst through the banks which are set to
keep them in. 17. Ordinarily one sin given way unto, or entertained, does draw
on another, till there be no end, and till the measure be filled up; For, blood
touches blood, or their bloody crimes are heaped one upon and after another;
or their murders were so many, that dead carcases lay by heaps one upon
another.

Verse. 3. Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwells therein,
shall languish with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls of heaven,
yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.
The Lords sentence or threatening for these sins, is, that extreme desolation
shall come, not only on the people, but on the land, and all the creatures for
their sakes, even on the fishes which were in lakes or ponds in the land.
Compare Zeph. 1.2, 3. Doct. 1. The judgments of God upon the visible Church
will be very sad and grievous, when they are inflicted, and as universal as sin
has been; For, it will be on every one that dwells in the land, and they
shall languish, and the land and creatures with them. 2. Albeit the Lords
judgments on sinful and impenitent people do at first utterly consume them;
yet that will be only that they may live a while to feel their own miseries,
and then be consumed by them, if they repent not: For, they shall languish, or
pine away till they be consumed and cut off, as the word also signifies. 3.
Sinful man is a great enemy to all the creatures, as well as himself, he makes
both himself and them to mourn and pine away, because he will not mourn
indeed; For, The land mourns, the dwellers languish with the beasts of the
field, etc. who are taken away. See Genesis 3.17, 18 4. As the glory of all the
creatures is but a flower, which God will soon make to wither and languish when
he pursues for sin; So the creatures will not help man when God is angry at
him, but as these draw him from God, so God is provoked to cut him short in
them, as here they are consumed with him.

Ver. 4. Yet let no man strive nor reprove another: for this people are as they
that strive with the Priest.
The second Article of the accusation, contains a challenge for their
desperate and incorrigible impenitency; that albeit they were guilty of these
gross sins mentioned, v. 1, 2. and of many others, yet it was to no purpose to
reprove or seek to reclaim them: For, they would admit of no admonition,
private or public, and if any did essay to do it, they would reject and
oppose, though it were even their teachers urging the sentence of the Law. He
says, as they that strive, which as in Scripture Language is not only a note
of similitude, but a declaration that certainly they did so. See Job. 1.14. We
saw his glory, as the glory, etc. that is, not like unto it, but certainly the
same which became the Son of God. Or it may be conceived, that many of their
Priests did not rebuke them, but the people were so obstinate as to strive with
them, if they did: Or, he speaks so of their striving with their Priests set up
by Jeroboam, because they were not true Priests; but though they had been so,
yet the people would have contended, and they held them to be such, and yet
contended with them. In sum, the challenge is that their case was so
desperate, as use of needful means would rather irritate then amend them.
Whence learn, 1. Albeit decliners may seem to be little engaged at first, yet
when sin is given way unto, it is not easily removed, nor without much strife:
For, so is imported here, that any who hoped to reclaim them, behoved to
strive. 2. Every man in his station is bound to oppose the growth and
continuance of sin, albeit he should meet with much opposition and strife; and
to keep peace with God in doing duty, albeit he should incur the hatred of
all the world; For, it is imported, that it is the duty of every man to strive,
and reprove another. See Lev. 19.17. 3. It is an heinous aggravation of sin,
when men become incorrigible, and much more when they rise against these who
would reclaim them, and become their enemy who tell the truth: For, this is
the express challenge, Let no man strive, etc. that is, it is to no purpose to
deal with them, for they not only amend not, but grow worse, and strive again,
as is usual, that where means are not blessed, men become worse. 4. As it
renders men base, and thy people, when they turn incorrigible, and haters and
persecuters of the light, and such as bring it to them; so then they are to be
left to God to take course with them; For, it is then, The Lord has a
controversy, v. 1. and then, let no man strive, etc. that is, albeit the
Prophet here give out Gods doom, yet in ordinary they were dogs and swine,
before whom pearls were not to be cast, Matthew. 7.6. 5. Albeit Ministers be not
infallible, and when they err, may be opposed by any; yet it is an heinous
impiety when they become the eyesore of a time, because of their opposition
unto iniquity and defection; For, it is in this respect they are challenged to
be as they that strive with the Priest; See 1 Kings 22.8.

Ver. 5. Therefore shall thou fall in the day, and the Prophet also shall fall
with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother.
The sentence or threatening for this, is that destruction should come upon
such sinners, and on the false Prophets who scattered and soothed them up in
this course; yea, he would cut off the Nation and Mother Church, and so destroy
the Dame and all. Whence learn, 1. Men's opposing of the Word, their rejecting
of reproof, and blessing themselves when they are rid of it, will not avail
them, nor hold off wrath, but rather hasten it; For, albeit they were not to be
reproved, v. 4. yet what gain they by that? anger is not the further off, but
rather, Therefore shall thou fall, etc. 2. How high soever men exalt themselves
in their opposition to God and his truth; yet that guilt will bring them down,
and when God begins to reckon, he will reach every sinner particularly; For,
his height will bring a fall, and the higher up the greater fall, and the
threatening is directed against every one in particular, thou shall fall. 3.
Vengeance can reach sinners in the height of their prosperity, and can ruin
them suddenly, and inavoidably; For, Thou shall fall in the day, that is, not
only shortly on this day, but in a time when none would expect it, as there is
no cause of stumbling in the day. 4. It is a plague upon sinners, that when
they go furthest wrong, and oppose the faithful Servants of God, yet they will
never want corrupt men pretending to come in Gods Name, to bolster them up in
their evil way; and God has a sad controversy against such seducers. For,
there is the Prophet who is threatened also. 5. This sentence of falling in the
night with them, threatened against the false Prophet, does teach, not only
that the one and other shall be cut off in a continued tract of judgments, as
the night follows upon the day; or that their calamity shall turn their day
into night, wherein they cannot choose but fall; or that the Prophets, whatever
light they pretend to, shall yet be in the dark, and ignorant of this calamity
till it come: But chiefly, it teaches, that when calamities come, such as have
been seducers, and soothers up of others, shall fall with greater horror then
any, as having been the cause of the ruin of so many; It shall be night with
them, and day with others in comparison of them. 6. However sinners shelter
themselves under the privileges of a visible Church or State; yet the Lord may
let them find that their sin does not only undo themselves, but bring utter
desolation also on he Church and Nation whereof they are; Therefore it is
suboyned, and I will destroy thy mother.

Verse. 6. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge: because thou have
rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no Priest to
me: seeing thou have forgotten the Law of thy God, I will also forget thy
children.
The third Article of this accusation, is against the corrupt Priests and
teachers, and is intended not so much against these Priests of Aarons family,
and other Levites, who after the rent and defection of the ten Tribes, staid
still in Israel because of their inheritance; as against Jeroboams Priests, who
whatever they were before God, yet since they took the name and office on them,
the Lord threatens them for not walking answerably. This Article has several
branches, in the first whereof, he reprehends them for the ignorance of the
people, occasioned through their negligence, and their rejecting and sleighting
of the means of knowledge which might enable them to teach others For which he
threatens to cast them out of the office they seemed to have, and to reject
their posterity that they should not exceed them. Whence learn, 1. As ignorance
is a very rise and destroying sin in the visible Church; so the guilt thereof
does oft-times lie in great part at Preachers doors, with whom God will reckon
according to the privileges of his people, whatever they be in themselves;
For, says he, My people perish for lack of knowledge, and this the Lord
challenges the Priests for, and as being the occasion of it in those who were
his people, though they deserved not the name, as, v. 4. 2. Such as would be
able to teach others, ought to take much pains that they may be instructed
themselves from God in his Word: Ignorant Ministers are great plagues, their
private idleness is the cause why they do not edify in public; and when the
Lord does not teach them, they will not reach others to purpose; Therefore it
is a challenge against them, and a cause of the former ill, thou have rejected
knowledge, to wit, of the Law, as is after cleared. 3. The more familiar
occasion of converse men have with holy things, wanting holiness, their
contempt and dislike of them will be the greater, and their opposition to light
have the more of perversity, and less of infirmity in it; For, these Priests
do reject knowledge, or wickedly, and with contempt, despise it. 4. Such as do
for a time reject and resist means of knowledge, when it bears it self upon
them, may at last come to forget it without a challenge, to lose the light they
had, and to be nothing moved with any stamp of authority that is in what God
says; Therefore it is added to the former, thou have forgotten the Law, that
is, not only lost any small knowledge of it they had, but they had as little
mind of it, and it as little authority in their hearts, or bred them as little
disquiet, when they neglected it, or went otherwise wrong, as if they had never
heard of it. See Psalm. 50 17. 5. The more relation any pretend to God, by
virtue of their general or particular calling, the Lord will make use thereof
to aggreage their sin and unanswerable walking; Therefore does the Lord name
himself thy God, because they pretended so, and to show that if they got not
benefit by such a relation, it should add to their woe. And so the blind
presumption of many will but make their ditty the greater, while they pretend
to much interest in God, and yet their way looks nothing like such a pretense.
6. Unfaithfulness in offices, (especially in the Church) will cast men out of
it as unsavory salt, with much guilt; which is a sad judgment, service to
such a Master being honorable, and especially to minister to him in holy
things; For, it is his sentence, I will also reject thee, that thou shall be no
Priest to me, to wit, as they pretended they were. However men may spare such
who by neglecting duty, prove that they keep the office injustly, yet God will
not. 7. However the posterity of godly Ministers may oft-times meet with hard
measure from an ingrate world, as well as Ministers themselves; yet it is the
righteous judgment of God on unfaithful Ministers, that as they neglect and
forget Gods children committed to their charge, so God suffers their posterity
to be neglected; For, I will also forget thy children, who it seems succeeded
to them, in imitation of the order established by God in Aarons Family.

Ver. 7. As they were increased, so they sinned against me: therefore will I
change their glory into shame.
In the second branch of this Article, the Lord accuses them of ingratitude,
that the more they prospered, or increased in number or glory, they were the
more bold on sin; Therefore he threatens them with ignominy to come in place
of that glory which made them to miscarry so far. Whence learn, 1. Such as do
provoke God highly, may yet in his long-suffering patience, not only continue
as they are, but increase in prosperity, issue, and glory for a time; For, They
were increased. 2. As there is no outward mercy conferred on wicked or
unrenewed men, but they do make it a snare to draw them to sin, and harden them
in it; So this abuse of Gods goodness does aggravate sin exceedingly; For, it
is a challenge, that as they were increased, so they sinned against me. 3. Any
glory or splendor which men abuse to harden themselves in sin, neglecting
that which is their true honor, will certainly end in ignominy; and especially
when Ministers glory of worldly state, or riches, as their chief excellency,
neglecting that true honor of being faithful in their station; For, therefore
will I change their glory into shame.

Ver. 8. They eat up the sin of my people, and they set their heart on their
iniquity.
In the third branch of this Article, they are accused of monstrous greed and
luxury, neglecting their duty. They were so far from deterring the people
from sin, or pointing out the true use and end of sacrifices when they came to
offer for sin, that they minded nothing but to fatten themselves with the
portion of the sacrifices which fell to them. And therefore they were desirous
and glad to have the people fall in many sins, that so they might get many
sacrifices whereof to share. Whence learn, 1. Albeit livelihood be due to
faithful Ministers, and they who serve at the Altar, should live of the Altar;
yet it is the fearful sin of Ministers, when they mind only the benefit or
profit of their calling, neglecting the duty; when they are so addicted to
their belly, as they can flatter, or be silent from reproving sin, so they may
gain and have to eat; For, this a challenge, They eat up the sin, (or,
sacrifices for sin) of my people, (called so, as, v. 6.) and this is all they
mind in that public service. The speech alludes to the Law, (which the
Priests in Israel did imitate) wherein the Priest got a portion of some
sacrifices, Numb. 18.8, 9, etc. 2. It is yet a more fearful iniquity, when such
as would be accounted Ministers, not only care not for the sins of the people
committed to their charge, but do desire and delight in it, so it may tend to
their gain and advantage: For, they set their heart on their iniquity, or
earnestly long to have them sinning, that they may bring sacrifices to them. In
a word, Covetousness is the bain and cutthroat of Religion, and especially in
Churchmen, and when they stand upon nothing but gain.

Ver. 9. And there shall be like people, like Priest: and I will punish them
for their ways, and reward them their doings.

10. For they shall eat, and not have enough: they shall commit whoredom, and
shall not increase, because they have left off to take heed to the LORD.


Because of this, the Lord threateneth, 1. That both People and Priests should
be punished alike, according to their deserts, v. 9. 2. That since they had
contemned and slighted God, he would take away the blessing from their meat,
and deprive them of issue, even although that beside their wives, they should
take concubines and whores that they might have many children, v. 10. Whence
learn, 1. Evil Ministers are a chief cause of sin and misery upon the people
they have charge of; Therefore are the people threatened, as being made
obnoxious to wrath by the Priests carriage formerly mentioned. And this is an
addition to the Priests judgment, that they draw so many with them into it. 2.
Albeit naughty Ministers be great plagues and snares to people, yet that will
not excuse a peoples sin, nor exempt them from judgments; Therefore are the
people threatened also, notwithstanding he challenged the Priests. The sending
of evil Ministers may be so much the fruit of peoples former sins, and they may
be so well satisfied with it, Jer. 5.31. as may justly ripen them for a stroke.
3. As Pastors and people are ordinarily like other in sin, and mutual plagues
each to other, so will they be joined together in judgments: For, There shall
be like people, like Priests, that is, both involved in judgment, (though
possibly in different measure, according to the degree of their sin,) and none
of them able to help or comfort another, Isa. 24.2, 4. Albeit the Lord may
spare for a time, and seem to let things lie in confusion; yet he has a day of
visitation, wherein he will call men to an account, and recompense them, not
according to their pretenses, but their real deeds and practice; and wherein
as they regarded not his will in choosing their way, so he will not ask their
consent in returning a meet recompense of reward; For, I will punish (or,
visit upon) them for their ways, and reward them (or return unto them) their
doings. 5. When men have made no conscience of sin, so they might compass
these delights, which they think will make them up; yet it is easy for God to
prove that the blessing of these delights are only in his hand, and that men
gain nothing by enjoying them, but a sad disappointment of their expectation
from them, and an ill conscience beside; For, (says he, explaining that
general of rewarding, v. 9.) they shall eat, of these sacrifices which they so
sinfully longed after, and yet not having enough. 6. As no means can prosper
where God deserts and withdrawes his blessing; so what a man prosecutes
unlawfully, he cannot look it should be blessed; For, They shall commit
whoredom, and shall not increase; either they should not have issue for all
that, (which was a curse especially among that people,) or they should not
increase by their issue, in regard they should be cut off by the sword. 7. As
the true cause of all men's debording, is their not serious (...) ^he Majesty
of God with whom they have to do, that (...) consider how to serve and observe
him as becomes; (...) is, he cares not for any external form, o^ (...) ^cially
he is provoked, when men make (...) this (...); For, it is challenged as the
cause and root of their miscarriage, and of his judgments, because they have
left off to take heed to (or observe) the Lord, or, they have made apostasy
from that temper that sometimes was among them.

Verse. 11. Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart.
This general sentence subjoyned, may be understood of the judgments to come
upon them, and that they shall meet with such stupidity under them, as uses to
attend these sins; as indeed trouble will confound sinners, especially such
as have been unfaithful and given to luxury, as these Priests and the people
were. But it seems rather to be a general sentence, pointing out the cause of
all their miscarriage challenged both before and after, and in particular, of
their neglecting God, v. 13. to wit, that their sensual pleasure and
filthiness had besotted them, so that they waxed wanton, and considered not
what they did. Whence learn, 1. In times of defection, it is good to be well
acquainted with, and scene in the causes of it, and what distempers draw men to
that height they go; Therefore does the Prophet here point at it. 2. It is a
great plague on men, that they cannot guide prosperity well, and know no way
how to use it, but to feed sensual lusts by it; for, all the use they made of
Gods bounty, was Whoredom and wine. 3. Sins go seldom there alone, but are
linked together, and draw on one another; and particularly, Whoredom and
intemperancy go often hand in hand together; Therefore are they conjoined,
Whoredom, and wine, and new wine. He mentions wine, and new wine, because (as
drunkards use to do) they tried all kinds of it, or the latter is by way of
explication, because new wine makes soonest drunk. 4. It is a great plague on
unclean and sensual men, that thereby they not only abuse their bodies, and
become guilty of self-murder, and do wear out any spark of conscience that
they had; but that by following these brutish lusts, they renounce even
humanity, and turn brutish without sense and common understanding, so that
they know not what they do, nor can discern, or be ashamed of any ill course,
nor fear any threatening of danger, and do render themselves unuseful either in
Church or State, and effeminate and unable to encounter any trouble: for,
Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take away the heart, or sense and
understanding. The word signifies oft-times to take by force, or by industry,
to show that however at first there may be some wrastlings betwixt lust, and
men's sens sense and principles of reason, yet at last lusts given way unto,
will carry it. 5. As it is Gods judgment on unfaithful Ministers that they are
given up to sensuality; so that will soon besot them, and make them saplesse
in their doctrine, and careless in their duty; for, in particular, it is true
of them whom he had challenged before, Whoredom, and wine, and new wine take
away the heart.

Verse. 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and their staff declares
unto them: for the spirit of whordomes has caused them to err, and they have
gone a whoring from under their God.

13. They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the
hills under oaks, and poplers, and elmes, because the shadow thereof is good:
therefore your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit
adultery.


The fourth article of this accusation is general against the whole people for
their gross and heathenish idolatry (which is as adultery, a forsaking of God,
and their duty of subjection to which they stand bound by the
marriage-Covenant;) This is instanced in their consulting with their stocks of
Images, and their staves, or arrows, (which flowed from their strong
inclinations to Idolatry, cherished by Satan) and in their sacrificing openly
to Idols on mountains, under the shade of groves, esteeming that heathenish way
best: for this the Lord threatens to give up their daughters, and daughters in
law, (and others, whom they would have chaste) to bodily filthiness. Whence
learn, 1. When ever the visible Church forsakes God, he will not forget his
kindness to her, to aggreage her sin, and to prove that she has done it
without provocation; Therefore again the title is my people, to show that he
had entreated them as such; and that he having chosen them from among all
people for himself, and as his portion, Deuteronomy. 32.8, 9. Isa. 43.21. it was a
greater sin in them then in any, so to behave themselves. 2. Albeit Idolaters
will not take with it that they worship stocks and sticks, yet in reality they
do so; and hereby they prove their own madness in subjecting themselves to
these creatures that are inferior to them; and the baseness of their Religion,
in that they have so poor ways to know the minds of their Idols; for, they
ask counsel at their stocks, (and so consult with them as their gods, and
perform religious worship to them; that they may know their mind) and their
staff declares unto them, that is, any illusion they get, they take it for a
divine response. For the way of divination by a staff, or arrows, See, Ezekiel.
21.21, 22. It seems, that when he doubted which City to assault first,
several staves or artowes having the names of the several places on them,
being shaken together in a quiver that which was first drawn out determined the
question. And so Idolaters resolved other cases. 3. The backsliding and
Idolatry of the visible Church is not to be looked on lightly, or as an
infirmity, but as flowing from the power of Satan, working upon that strong
inclination that is naturally in all men (and specially in these who have not
received the love of the truth) to follow error; Therefore is it given as a
reason, For the spirit of whoredoms has caused them to err, which is to be
understood both of their own inclinations, and of the working of the evil
spirit, 2 These. 2.9. which makes them so bent and zealous in it, and warnes us
not to be taken up with every zeal, nor with every religion wherein men seem
to be zealous. 4. They who commit Idolatry, and follow false Religions, and so
do renounce subjection to God, and put themselves from under his directions,
they do also put themselves from under his protection; for, in both these
respects it is true, they have gone a whoring from under their God, renouncing
that subjection due to him, by violating the Marriage-Covenant, and so
depriving themselves of that protection which was ensured to them by the
Covenant. 5. Sin is then come to a great height and very ripe for judgment,
when men cast off all veiles of pretenses or shame, and do openly and avowedly
commit it; for, he challenges when they sacrifice upon the tops of the
mountains, etc. avowedly, without shame, and not in corners only. 6. It is
high presumption in frail men to think to invent finer ordinances of worship
by their wit, then what God has appointed, or that they can put holiness on
things or places; for, it was their sin to choose mountains and hills and
shadows of trees and groves, in imitation of he Patriarchs (whom the heathen
did also imitate) as if these places were more sacred; and to do this as good,
and better and more apt to strike men with reverence then what God had
appointed, 7. It is no strange thing, that men in choosing their Religion, be
led by their own fleshly lusts, and that they account that best, which pleases
these most; for, in this respect also they accounted the shadow good, that is,
more delectable to their flesh. 8. Sin may be very sadly punished when no
strokes are inflicted, but the sinner given up to more sin, and particularly,
spiritual adultery may be punished with bodily filthiness; for, Therefore
your daughters shall commit whoredom, and your spouses shall commit adultery,
to which they were tempted by wandering from their families into these solitary
and retired places. And this should warn all professors to beware of straining
the true Religion by such blemishes as are a plague upon Idolaters. See, Rom
1.21, 25, 26, 27. 9. God may justly punish the sins of parents in their
children, and may make us sensible of our unfaithfulness to God, in the ill
carriage of others who are bound to us; for, he punishes their sin in their
daughters, and lets them see their whoredom against God, in the lewdness of
their daughters and spouses, injuring and bringing reproach on them and their
family.

Ver. 14. I will not punish your daughters when they commit whoredom: nor your
spouses when they commit adultery: for themselves are separated with whores,
and they sacrifice with harlots: therefore the people that does not
understand, shall fall.
The Lord threatens further because of this sin, that albeit whoredom in
virgins and adultery in married women, be by the law punishable with death; yet
for a time the Lord would not by any corrections; restrain the wantonness of
their daughters and spouses; and that because they themselves were separate
from God by their Idolatrie^, and did commit the like lewdness with harlots,
when they came to their Idolatrous sacrifices. For which as he did punish them
in giving up their daughters and spouses to uncleanness, so his forbearance of
that fault for a time, was only because he had a greater quarrel against them
for their Idolatry, which drew on the other; and for which, and their affected
ignorance in it, he would at last when it came to an height, certainly destroy
the Nation. Whence learn, 1. It is one of the sore judgments of God, and
tokens of his anger, when he takas no wains by needful corrections, to
restrain the course of a peoples sin, but loses the rains, and lets them run
on for a time; for, it is a threatening, I will not punish your daughters when
they commit whoredom, nor your spouses when they commit adultery. See Psalm.
89.30, 31, 32, 33. Heb 12. 6, 7, 8. Rev. 3.19. 2. When the Lord lets particular
sinners go on unpunished, it is not because they shall still be spared, (for
the text says, they shall certainly fall;) But first, because sin becoming
general, is passed over in particular persons, till it ripen for a national
stroke: Secondly, his sparing of them and others for some sins, is because he
has a greater quarrel and cause of controversy, for all which together, he
will in due time reckon: Both these are imported in that reason subjoyned to
the sentence of not punishing their daughters, for themselves, (that is, not
only their daughters and spouses, but the parents and husbands: He speaks of
them, and not to them, as formerly, to testify his indignation against them,)
are separated with whores, and they sacrifice with harlots; where by whores and
harlots, we are to understand not only spiritually, their Idols and Paramours
with whom they committed spiritual adultery, but even literally their harlots
whom they feasted and courted in the time of their sacrifices in the groves,
committing both spiritual and bodily adultery together. And so the force of the
reason is, That sin of uncleanness is more general, and more are guilty of it
then their daughters and spouses, and therefore they are spared till the people
or Nation fall together; and that it is no wonder he spare them, seeing he has
a greater quarrel because of their Idolatry; for which, when by reason of his
indulgence, they have added bodily filthiness to it, he will certainly punish,
and the people shall fall. 3. False worship is very licentious, in that not
only God plagueth it with looseness, but in that it does allow and foster much
fleshly liberty; For, they sacrifice with harlots, not only continue they
avowed harlots, and yet follow that form of worship; but in their solemn
sacrifices, they stand not to join with harlots, in feasting them with the
sacrifices, and courting of them. 4. Let Idolaters join never so many fleshly
pleasures with their worship, yet God will have no communion with such, but
will plead with them as renouncers of his Covenant, and of all communion with
him; For, they are separated, (to wit, from God) with whores, etc. 5 Idolaters,
how learned soever they pretend to be, or really are, yet in effect they are
but brutish and ignorant. It is great brutishness to put so base an object, as
ofttimes men do in the place of God, Psalm. 115.8. and it is great ignorance, to
think that true Religion must be made subservient to men's politic interests,
(which was the rule that Jeroboam walked by;) or to think that Rulers will must
give the Law in this matter, (which might be the peoples pretense) or that
pomp wanting institution, will make a worship acceptable: for these reasons it
is said, they are the people that does not understand. 6. Ignorance,
(especially when it is affected) will not excuse the visible Church her
declining in the matter of Religion, but that she is ignorant (as well as her
idolatry, which she would excuse by it) will be the cause of her total and sad
overthrow; for, the people that does not understand (and so run on to these mad
courses) shall fall. The original word, (used only here, and, Prove. 10.8, 10.)
signifies such a fall as shall so confound them, as they shall not know what
they are doing.

Verse. 15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend: and
come not ye unto Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, The LORD
lives:

16. For Israel slideth back as a backsliding heifer: now the LORD will feed
them as a Lamb in a large place.


The fifth article of the accusation is, for the idolatry of the calves in
Gilgal and Bethel. It is contained in an exhortation to Judah, not to join
with them in that harlotry; however it be palliate under the pretense of
worshipping God that way, v. 15. and that because, 1. (Which is his accusation
and aggravation of this sin in Israel,) it is not only harlotry, v. 15. but a
mark of Isreal's wantonness against God, and of her love of carnal liberty, and
therefore not to be imitated. 2. (Which is his sentence against them for this
sin,) because the Lord will drive them shortly into exile for it, where they
shall be as a solitary Lamb in a wilderness, not knowing where to find a
flock, or its dam, and exposed as a prey to all wild beasts. And therefore it
were madness in Judah to run on such hazards: for clearing this text a little,
Consider, 1. That in this prohibition, the Prophet does not mention Dan, which
was one of the two places, wherein Jeroboam erected the calves for public
worship, 1 Kings 12.28, 29. because Gilgal and Bethel being on the South-border
toward Judah, the Jews might easily be drawn and come thither, but Dan was
remote and on the Northmost border of Israel, and so Judah was in no hazard of
going there: for albeit the first portion of Dan was near the tribe of Judah,
and taken (at least in part) out of it, Josh. 19.40, etc. yet either (because
it proved too little, or because for their sins they were not able to drive out
the inhabitants, Judge. 1.34.) they removed to the very Northmost border, and
gave the name of Dan to this City, where one of the calves was set up. See
Josh. 19.47. Judge. 18.1, 2, etc. with v. 26, 27, 28, 29. Consider, 2. That
albeit Jeroboam set up the Calves only in Dan and Bethel, yet here Gilgal where
Joshua renewed Circumcision, and kept the Passover, Josh. 5. is ranked among
the places of their idolatrous worship, because it seems, (though the history
record it not) Jeroboam erected the same idolatry there also, (as at other
places,) for the case of the people and fame of the place, that so they might
have many places on that border, to divert them from going to Jerusalem, and
therefore we have not only Gilgal mentioned here, and Amos 4.4. and Hos. 12.11.
but Beersheba also on the South-border, Amos 5.4, 5. and (as would appear,)
Gilead also beyond Jordan, Hos. 12.11. where it is also remarked, that the
people out of their superstition, and for their own ease, multiplied altars for
private devotion in all places. Doct. 1. Not only do men commit spiritual
whoredom, when they worship an idol, or that which is no god: but when they
dare pretend to worship the true God, in or by images or ways of their own
devising; for Isreal's worshipping the calves is called harlotry; thou Israel
playest the harlot. 2. When men once decline from the rule of Gods Word in
choosing a way of worship, they are readily given up to be endless in
multiplying defection by such devices: the same vanity of mind, and the same
principles of policy that lead them wrong in one step may draw on more: beside,
that they felt insufficiency of all false ways, to quiet the conscience,
draws men to a restless multiplying of these courses; therefore it is that
Israel do add Gilgal to the former places of their public worship, and other
places also, as is before explained. 3. As it is no warrantable rule to follow
the example of any in matters of Gods worship, where a warrant from the Word is
wanting: so men had need to guard against contagion by such examples,
especially when the contagion is near, when the example is given by brethren,
and they flourishing in their evil way, and when their way comes nearest of
any to the true worship; for, thus stood the case with Judah in reference to
Isreal's calves, and therefore are warned to guard against it; Though thou
Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend. 4. The Lords most peculiar
people their sinning against him is more sad and heinous then the sin of any
other, considering what unkindness, unfaithfulness, and dishonor to God
there is in it; and especially that they have fewer tentations then others, and
that they being left alone to cleave to the true God, it were horrid iniquity
to abandon him; for these causes it is, that Judah, (who clave to the Temple
and true worship of God, and were much better then Israel) is so pressed upon
when Israel is given up as desperate, and is shortly to be quite rejected;
though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend; Though he gave up
Israel, yet he could not endure that Judah should follow them, for they only
now were left for God, they were not so accustomed to this defection as Israel
had been for many years, they had the Temple and wanted these politic
pretenses for abandoning thereof, that the Kings of Israel had. 5. Whoever make
defection from God and his way, yet he will not want a people to embrace him
and his way; so much also may we learn, in that this exhortation, however
directed to Judah, yet is spoken to Israel at first; Though thou Israel play
the harlot, etc. as defying her to deprive him of a people when she had done
her worst, and when he should at last make her Lo-ammi, because of her sins;
for albeit some in Judah might make defection to their way, and sometime his
worship was interrupted there by their wicked Kings; yet they should have the
face of a true Church, and warrantable Ordinances, during the time of his
patience toward them, as is more expressly held out, Hos. 11.12. 6. No
pretense will serve to justify or cover an unwarrantable way of worship, nor
does the Lords manifestation of himself in a place, by any special act of power
or favor, warrant men to make use thereof as more holy then others, or, under
that pretext abuse it to superstition; for, it was upon these grounds Israel
made use of Gilgal and Bethel for the place of their worship, and yet Judah is
dissuaded from it, as one of the sinful courses of Israel; Come not ye unto
Gilgal, neither go ye up to Beth-aven or Bethel, which stood on some height,
and therefore they did go up to it. 7. Places and things do lose all their
honor and eminency when they are abused to idolatry; Bethel, the house of
God, becomes Beth-aven, the house of vanity, or of iniquity; which is a name
taken from a place near to Bethel, Joshua 7.2. 8. Such as would be free of
idolatry or infection thereby, ought to abstain from coming to the very places,
where there is danger of infection, unless that absolute necessity, and a
clear call draw them; for, so is Judah's duty; Come not ye to Gilgal, neither
go ye up to Beth-aven. 9. The Lord will not have his worship mixed with
idolatrous courses, nor is superstition or idolatry the more warrantable or
imitable, that it is done under the pretense of serving God thereby; for,
albeit swearing, The Lord lives, be lawful, and a part of his worship, and
sometime put for all of it: yet it is forbidden Judah, nor swear, The Lord
lives, to wit, in these places, and the meaning is, pretend not to mix my
worship with the rites used there, nor be ye taken up with their way, though
they pretend to worship the true God, as Aaron did when he made the golden
calfe, Exodus 32.4, 5. 10. As men's presuming to prescribe ways, and be
changelings in the matters of Religion, is a fruit of wantonness and idleness
of mind, having little to do: so the consideration of men's wantonness in
sinning, may deter others from it if they be of sober spirits; for, it is an
argument to dissuade Judah from this way of Israel: for, in this Israel slideth
back as a backsliding heifer; that is, this course is an evidence of Isreal's
rebellion, as a wanton heifer that casts the yoke, and therefore is not to be
imitated. 11. Such as are so bent on liberty and licentiousness, as they can
endure no yoke of God, may meet with liberty enough little to their profit: God
can give them the world to wander through in exile, who would not be bounded
with the Law; he can lay them open to felt and feared dangers, who placed all
happiness in being rid of his yoke; and he can make them weak and
faint-hearted in trouble, who were strong and stout-hearted to sin; for, the
Lord will feed them, (not by taking care of them, though that in some respect
be true; but in place of their residence in their own land, he will drive them
into exile, and make their pasture to be) as a Lamb, (not any more a wanton
strong heifer) in a large place, where by its bleating alone, it shall bewray
its own solitude, danger and fear, and where it shall be exposed as a prey, and
not know where to turn it. 12. When defection from God comes to the height of
wantonness and rebellion against him, and rejecting of his yokes, then
judgment is not far off; for, now the Lord will feed them, etc. that is,
shortly. 13. Whatever may be the present condition of back-sliders, which might
tempt others to join with them, yet a serious consideration of the certain
consequents of such a course, may break that snare; therefore, however Judah
for present, might be tempted by reason of Isreal's success, yet the Lord
propounds this as an argument to dissuade them, that now the Lord will feed
them as a Lamb in a large place,

Verse. 17. Ephraim is joined unto idols: let him alone.
The sixth and last article of the accusation is against their Kingly tribe,
called by the name of Ephraim, because the first, and many of their following
Kings were of that tribe, and it is conceived that Samaria their chief city
stood in that tribe. The accusation has two branches; in the first whereof,
they are charged with being so mad on idolatry, that they are become desperate
and irrecoverable. Whence learn, 1. As men's greatness has its own snares to
sin accompanying it; so however they think themselves above the reach of any
challenge or censure; yet the Lord will not spare the sins of the greatest, as
being ordinarily ringleaders and chief masters in the sins of a land;
therefore does he challenge Ephraim, especially for idolatry, which he actively
carried on by reason of his State interests. 2. Idolatry is a very bewitching
sin, and does keep where it gets a grip; for, Ephraim is joined to idols, or
glued to them, that he cannot any more be divided from them: for, albeit his
politic interest drew him that way at first, yet being engaged, not only that,
but a spirit of whoredom and Gods judgments keeps him to it, as a way most
agreeable to his own heart. 3. As the Lord will at last give up desperate and
incorrigible sinners to themselves and their own ways, so to be thus left is
the chiefest of miseries: Men need no more to make them miserable, but to get
leave to want a check from conscience or the Ministry of the Word, or from
Providence; for, says he, let him alone, that is, not so much, thou Judah have
no converse with him; of which sufficient has been spoken on v. 15. as, let
him go on without any further reproving of him.

Verse. 18. Their drink is sour: they have committed whoredom continually: her
rulers with shame do love, Give ye:
In the second branch of this article, their sins against the Second Table are
laid to their charge; namely, 1. Their intemperance in drinking till it
corrupted in their stomach, which made them to vomit it up again. 2. Their
incessant filthiness. 3. Their covetousness and corrupting of justice
thereby. Whence learn, 1. It is the great madness of the children of men, that
if they attain to any greatness, they make it shine in nothing but in eminent
beastly sins, as if all grandour consisted in this, as here we see in these
great ones in Israel. 2. Men's abusing of the good creatures of God, and
distempering their own bodies through intemperance, is an iniquity for which
God will reckon with the greatest; for, it is a challenge, their drink is
sour, or gone, to wit, from its native savor and taste, being putrified in
their stomach, so that they cannot digest it. 3. As uncleanness is a sin not
easily shaken off, when once men are engaged in it, but it will be their
Master, far beyond their first resolutions; so such obstinacy in it is odious
before God, when men become devoted and incessant slaves to their own lusts;
for, it is a cause of anger, They have committed whoredom continually. 4. It
is a shameful sin in rulers and men of power especially, to be covetous, and to
love bribes and reward, and such cannot but pervert justice, and they do come
to the height of impudency, when they are so affected with it, as they dare
avow such a course, and command bribes to be brought to them; for, her rulers
with shame do love, Give ye: or, it is a shame that they who should be shields,
(as it is in the Original) to protect the people from oppression, should
oppress the people with taking of bribes, and corrupting of justice thereby,
and that they should love not only to take, but to seek and command them to
give.

Ver. 19. The wind has bound her up in her wings, and they shall be ashamed
because of their sacrifices.
The Lords sentence because of these sins is, that suddenly, and as with a
tempest they should be carried into captivity, where they should be ashamed of
all their corrupt worship. Whence learn, 1. The Lords long-suffering toward a
wicked and impenitent people, will at last end in speedy and sudden judgments
which shall surprise them, and shall be violent and dreadful to compense the
delay; for, the wind has bound her up in her wings, that is, they shall be as
speedily carried into captivity, as if they were carried on the wings of the
wind, and with as great violence and suddainty, as if a tempestuous whirlwinde
surprised them: he speaks of this as a thing done, because of the certainty of
it, and names the whole people her, in the feminine gender, either with an eye
to the wanton heifer, v. 16. or to show that as they were effeminate by reason
of their sins, so they should prove such under their trouble. 2. Wicked rulers
by their sins against the first and second Table, have great influence on the
ruin or captivity of a Nation: as being ordinarily set over a Nation appointed
to destruction to hasten it, and as drawing the Nation into the same sins with
themselves: for, this threatening against the Nation, comes out as a sentence
because of Ephraims sins. 3. Men's following of corrupt worship will be matter
of shame and confusion, and not of comfort in a day of distress; in that not
only it will be reproachful in the eyes of all the world, that Gods people
should have forsaken him: and so provoked him to make them an astonishment, 1
Kings 9.7, 8, 9. but also in that all comfort from their courses, wherein they
glory in prosperity, will disappoint them, and their false religion will fail
them in straits, when they have most need of comfort, Deuteronomy 32.37, 38. Judge.
10.13, 14. therefore is it threatened, they shall be ashamed because of their
sacrifices.

CHAP. V.
IN this Chapter, (which with the two following, are conceived to be one
Sermon) the Lord proceeds in the same method, and prosecutes the same
controversy, which was begun in the former chapter, only with this difference;
1. Judah is here joined with Israel, because that defection had flowed from
Israel to them, and chiefly, because that under Ahaz, (to whose times this
prophecy agrees best) they had made some defection. 2. The threatenings here
are sweetened with a prediction of their being drawn thereby at last to
repentance, v. 15. which was not mentioned in the former chapter.

In the first part of this chapter, (which relates to Israel especially,) the
Lord having called all ranks to hear his process and sentence, v. 1. -- does
accuse their rulers and teachers especially, for ensnaring the people in sin,
v. -- 1. and all ranks for their subtilty and deep rootednesse in oppression,
notwithstanding all admonitions and corrections, v. 2. for their idolatry and
pollution, (which God knew, however they covered it) v. 3. for their obstinacy
and impenitency in sin, by reason of a spirit of whoredom, and their affected
ignorance of God, v. 4. and for their great pride under all this sin, v. 5.
-- because of which, the Lord threatens to destroy the Rulers and people of
Israel, and Judah with them, v. -- 5. at which time, multitude of sacrifices
should not avail them, v. 6. but God should shortly consume them and all their
wealth, who had so perfidiously violate the Covenant, and propagate idolatry to
their children, v. 7. should alarm them with enemies coming against them, v. 8.
and should utterly destroy the Kingdom of Israel, according to his irrevocable
sentence revealed to them, v. 9. In the second part of the chapter, the Lord
comes to deal with the two Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, more distinctly. And
first, he speaks to them severally; accusing Judah, and especially their Rulers
for the violation of all laws, for which he threatens them with a deluge of
wrath, v. 10. and accusing Israel for their voluntary defection in Religion for
the which they were and should be justly oppressed by their own Princes, v. 11.
Secondly, he speaks to them conjunctly; accusing them for the ill use they made
of corrections; that whereas the Lord did by insensible ways consume them for
their sins, v. 12. they run to humane helps, v. 13. -- which as they had and
would disappoint them, v. -- 13. so the Lord was hereby provoked to deal more
severely with them, v. 14. and to abandon them till they should turn and seek
him; as he promises they shall do, v. 15.

Verse 1. Hear ye this, O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel, and give ye
ear, O house of the King: for judgment is toward you, because ye have been a
snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.
In this verse, we have first a citation of all ranks to come to judgment, or
to hear Gods judicial process and sentence against them. 2. The first article
of his accusation, which concerns chiefly their Priests and Rulers, that they
had been as snares and nets on Mizphah and Tabor. The first of which places,
(though there were cities of that name, Josh. 15.38. and 18.26.) seems here
to have been an hill in Gilead, and near Hermon, See, Josh. 11.23. Judge. 11.29.
and the other was an hill in Galilee, Judge. 4.6. the sense of the accusation is
not so much, that they laid wait to entrap any who would go up to Jerusalem to
worship; none of these places being fit for that enterprise; nor yet that they
ensnared innocents to take away their lives and estates, of which, v. 2. but
the plain meaning is, that as fowlers and hunters lay snares and nets for birds
and beasts on these mountains; so their Priests and Rulers by their erroneous
doctrine, fraudulent counsels, subtle edicts, their profane example and
countenancing of sin, did deceive the people, and ensnare them to follow
idolatry. Doct. 1. There is no rank, but they will be found to have guiltiness
to lay to heart, in a time when God pleads a controversy with a land, which is
a very sad case; for, the Priests, such as they were, the House of Israel, or
body of the Nation, and the house of the Kings are called to hear; and albeit
the Princes and Priests drew away the people, yet that does not free them. See,
Isa. 1.5, 6. Jer. 5.3, 4, 5. 2. As the Word of God does reach and oblige all
ranks of persons, be in what eminency they will; and as the Lords faithful
servants must preach against the sins of all, without respect of persons; so
the general over-spreading of sin, (however it harden every particular sinner,
yet) is no way to escape judgments, but rather to hasten them; therefore does
Hosea challenge all, as being obliged to hear and obey, and to show how justly
God was angry, when all ranks had corrupted their way. 3. When God is coming
against a people in judgment, it concerns them to be very serious in
considering what he says from his Word, and he will at last force audience and
attention from the most stubborn; so much may we gather from these many calls,
to hear, hearken and give ear, with the reason subjoyned, for judgment is
toward you, or to be pronounced and executed against you, as showing, it became
them to hear, and however they should be made to do it. See, Zech. 1.4, 6. 4.
The Lords contending with his people by his Word, is not an ordinary challenge,
as of one displeased only, but the judicial procedure and sentence of the
Supreme Judge, which will end in execution; for, his controversy is judgment
toward you, that is, a judicial process and sentence, making way for due
execution. 5. God may testify much of his anger against a people, in the
Teachers and Rulers he gives them, as being fit means to ripen them for
judgment; for, so proved the Priests and Rulers to Israel. 6. Subtle snares
and insinuations are more dangerous for drawing men wrong, then open violence
is: for, thus did they mislead Israel, they were a snare and a net spread. 7.
It is a great sin in men, and cause of Gods controversy, when they prove a
snare to others, or by their insinuations, example or policy draw them to sin
against God; for, judgment is toward you, because you have been a snare on
Mizpah, etc.

Verse. 2. And the revolters are profound to make slaughter, though I have been
a rebuker of them all.
In the second place, (which may comprehend all ranks) he accuses them, that
they were most subtle in their projects and devices to compass; and in their
pretenses, excuses and distinctions, to cover their bloody oppressions and
facts, and that they were deeply rooted in them: This he aggravates, in that it
was done notwithstanding the Lords free admonitions given to all ranks, by the
Prophets that had lived among them, such as Ahijah, Elijah, Elisha, and others,
and notwithstanding his warnings by lesser corrections. Whence learn, 1.
Oppression is in Gods account bloody cruelty and slaughter, for, all of it, and
every kind of it, is here called a making slaughter. 2. Men's ability or parts in
compassing and defending ill courses, does not extenuate, but rather aggrege
them, and make them the more odious, that they seem to convey them handsomely,
and make them seem plausible; for, it is a challenge, that they are profound to
make slaughter; or, as robbers who lie in wait, they lay their plots deep, that
they may compass them handsomely and plausibly. 3. As men's subtle conveyances
in sinning, and their parts in palliating of it, prove snares to themselves to
harden them so much the more in it; so to be deeply rooted and engaged in a
course of sinning, is an aggravation thereof; so much also may be imported in
that they are profound to make slaughter, or have taken deep root in that
course; as, Hosea 9.9. Isa. 31.6. which is in part occasioned by their subtle
way of it, 4. Apostates and revolters from God, are ordinarily given up to be
grossest in their course; to be bloody and cruel without a check or scruple, to
be plagued with abilities to compass their ends, and to defend their ways,
and to be most deeply plunged in ill courses; for, it is the revolters, who are
profound to make slaughter. 5. As it is of the Lords great mercy, that he gives
free warning to his Church of her danger, and sends out lesser corrections to
reclaim her: so sin after such dealing becomes very sinful; for, it is an
aggravation of their way, that they went on, though I have been a rebuker, (or
correction, as the word also signifies) of them all. 6. When men once breed
themselves to contemn the Word of God, and to despise instruction by his
corrections, it is not only an evidence they are deeply engaged in gross sin,
but then certainly grossest courses will follow on it; for, they are then
profound to make slaughter, when he had been a rebuker or correcter, but
without effect.

Verse. 3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim,
thou committest whoredom, and Israel is defiled.
Notwithstanding all their policies and pretexts, (for which he has challenged
them) the Lord declares that he perfectly knows all of them, both rulers
(called Ephraim) and people (called Israel;) In testimony whereof, (which is
the third ground of challenge or accusation) he pronounces them idolaters and
polluted thereby, and by their other conversation. Whence learn, 1. It is no
strange thing to see wicked men ignorant of themselves, deceived with their own
hearts, and hardened in their sin, by reason of the false glosses they put upon
it, to blind themselves and others: for, this assertion, I know Ephraim, etc.
supposes that they were not known to themselves, and that they dreamed to
blind others as themselves were. 2. However men may mistake themselves, may
wilfully hide light from themselves, or put a veil on their ways to deceive
others: yet the Lord sees through all pretexts, and how things are in truth:
for, I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me, let him mask himself as he
will. 3. God will prove his omniscience and knowledge of men, as by other
means, so in particular by his Word discovering their ways, and setting them
before them in their colors: which men would look upon, as warning them of an
eye of God upon them; therefore, does he prove his knowledge of them by this
challenge in the mouth of his servant: for now, (thou art come at length to
that degree of defection, or I take thee in the very fact notwithstanding thy
pretenses, and do challenge thee, that) O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom,
etc. See, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Heb. 4.12. 4. Idolatry and corrupting of Gods
worship, is spiritual whoredom and a pollution before God; and error or
superstition is so small a friend to piety, that it tends to pollution in
conversation, and it is a proof of Gods omniscience when he is not mocked with
men's plausible pretexts, covering such ways, but does discover, and teach his
servants to discover them to be so vile; for in testimony of his knowledge of
them, he sends out his Prophet to declare, that their well marked ways were
whoredom, and that thereby all Israel is defiled, both with these ways in
themselves, and with the effects of them.

Ver. 4. They will not frame their doings, to turn unto their God: for the
spirit of whoredoms is in the midst of them, and they have not known the LORD.
A fourth challenge, (which is also an aggravation of the former) is, for their
being obstinately impenitent and incurable in their sin, through long custom
in it, through a spirit, or strong inclination to whoredom or idolatry, and
through their affected ignorance of God. Whence learn, 1. It is a great
aggravation of sin, when men not only do fall in it, but do impenitently and
obstinately persist in it; for, it is a challenge and aggravation of all the
former, that they will not turn to God. See Jer. 8.4, 5. 2. It does yet more
aggreage men's impenitencie, that God, to whom they will not turn, has been
their God by their Profession, and by his tender care of them, and that he
offers yet to prove himself their God if they will return; for, it adds to the
challenge, that they will not turn to their God; and indeed despised and
abused mercy will be one of the bitterest ingredients in the challenges against
the Church. 3. A people are yet the more inexcusable in their impenitencie,
when they will not so much as think on endeavoring or using the very outward
means, which might tend toward repentance; for, they will not frame their
doings to turn: they might have sought, and yet not come speed, because of
their unsoundnesse and formality in their way, but they were either so
ignorant, or malicious and impious, as they did not so much as endeavor to
bend their course that way. 4. Custom in sin is a great slavery, and cause of
impenitence, and is a judgment, to which such as delight in sin are given up;
for, so the words will also read, their doings will not give (or suffer) them
to turn; which is the first cause of their impenitencie, flowing from what
follows. See, 2 Pet. 2.14. Jer. 13.23. 5. It is just with God to give
Apostates up to the violent inclination of their own spirits, and to a spirit
of Satan to possess their hearts, which will drive them on to follow sin
madly, and render them incorrigible; for, it is another cause of their
impenitencie, and that from which the former flows; for, a spirit of whoredom
is in the midst of them, or has possessed their heart and very inwards;
whoredoms may be understood here either generally for these unlawful courses
to which men's lusts drive them, and to which the incorrigible are given up, as,
Psalm. 81.11, 12. or more particularly, for their frequent and multiplied
idolatries, (as, chap. 4.12.) from which flowed their other debordings, and
because of which they were given up to them. 6. Such as do depart from God, and
persist in that way, do proclaim their ignorance of God, either of what beauty
and excellency is in him above all choices, or of his goodness toward his
people, or dreadfulnesse against back-sliders; and whatever knowledge of these
things men seem to have, yet custom in sin, and a whorish spirit will soon
banish it; for, it is added as another cause of their impenitencie, following
upon the former; and they have not known the Lord.

Verse. 5. And the pride of Israel does testify to his face: therefore shall
Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity: Judah also shall fall with them.
A fifth challenge, (and yet a further aggravation of the former) is, for their
notorious pride under all this sin, of which they are elsewhere noted as
guilty, Isa. 28.1. Hereunto is subjoyned Gods sentence for these sins; to wit,
that both the Kingly tribe and Nation of Israel, should be ruined according as
their iniquities do deserve, and that Judah should also share with them in that
judgment; which though in its full accomplishment, it do reach to their
destruction by the Caldeans, if not further, as may be gathered from v. 15.
where it seems to take in all the calamities that shall come upon them,
previous to their future conversion; yet in this place it seems chiefly to
point at the calamities that were to come on Judah, when Israel should fall,
and they with them; that as when Ahabs house was cut off, Judah who had
affinity with them, tasted of the stroke, 2 Kings 9.27. and 10.12, 13, 14. so
Judah having joined with Israel in their sins (as may in part be gathered from
Mic. 1.13.) should also smart at the fall of Israel, by the same Assyrian, as
is recorded in the history, 2 Kings 18.9, -- 13. and pathetickly lamented, Mic.
1. and thus in regard Judah has not yet been challenged in this chapter, we
are to look on this threatening as laid on Isreal's score, who drew Judah to
this sin and ruin. Doct. 1. It is a great aggravation of sin, when men are
swelled with conceit under it, so that their thoughts of themselves are nothing
lessened, but they dare defend sin, please themselves in it, and rise against
such as do reprove it, and be filled with proud impatience under corrections
inflicted because of it; for, such was their temper, there is the pride of
Israel, notwithstanding all they did. 2. As pride is a sin that will not
conceal it self, so this sort of pride is a notorious proof of men's guiltiness
which will justly condemn them, and plead for God in so doing; for, the pride
of Israel does testify to his face, or plead him guilty, let him deny it as he
will; and for God, however he quarrel him; See Isa. 3.9. 3. Sin will certainly
bring on ruin, especially when men are not only obstinate in it, but swelled
with pride for all that; This however men think to be great by it, yet it will
bring them down from their grandour; For, Therefore (because of the former
sins, and particularly their pride,) shall Ephraim and Israel fall. 4. Gods
judgments will be universal on all ranks, according as they have sinned; and
when he pleads, none will be able to help another; nor will they who were
snares to others, either secure them, or themselves against Gods stroke; nor
will the ensnared be able to plead exemption: For, both Ephraim (the Kingly
tribe, who misled the rest,) and Israel (or, the misled people,) shall fall. 5.
As iniquity is the cause of men's coming down from an eminent and flourishing,
to a base condition, and should be observed to be so: So calamity will discover
what a filthy course sin is, when men shall be plunged in the effects thereof;
For, they shall not only fall because of their iniquity, as the words will
read, but in their iniquity, or in a puddle of judgments flowing from it,
whereby they shall see what a filthy course sin was, and how it abased and made
them fall, though they would not see it before. 6. Even such as the Lord has
most special interest in, and given special promises unto, will not get free
more then others, with whom, or after whose example, they fall in sin; For,
notwithstanding the promise made to Judah, chapter 1.7. yet upon these grounds it
is threatened, Judah also shall fall with them. 7. It may justly add to the
misery of sinners, that they are not only plagued themselves, but that they
have been a snare to draw others to the same sin and ruin with them; Therefore
it is added to Isreal's calamity, that Judah also shall fall with them.

Verse. 6. They shall go with their flocks, and with their herds to seek the
LORD: but they shall not find him, he has withdrawn himself from them.
The Lord having thus accused and sentenced Israel, there is subjoyned to the
tenth ver. some amplification and enlargement of the sentence and causes
thereof, wherein more of their sin, and of the misery to follow thereupon may
be seen. The first amplification is, that the heap of their sacrifices should
not recall this sentence, nor bring any mitigation of their trouble, nor procure
access to God or his favor, who had justly deserted them. Whence learn, 1.
Greatest contemners of God, and despisers of repentance, may at last stand
sensibly in need of him, and their straits may drive them to make some fashion
of repentance, who yet were never put to it by any true sense of sin; For, even
they who would not frame their doings to turn to God, v. 4. are now brought to
go seek the Lord. 2. As superstitious and corrupt men will spare no cost in
external performances in their corrupt way, Mic. 6.6, 7. So impenitent sinners
may make offer of many things, when yet they do not give themselves to God;
For, They shall go with their flocks, and with their herds to seek the Lord;
they will let him carve upon these, and let him take as many as he pleases of
them, and yet we find no offer of themselves, or to cut off one lust. 3. As
external ordinances are appointed not to be rested on, but that God may be
found in them; so it will be the sad plague of such as seek God in a wrong way,
or are too late and unsound in seeking, not to find God in their straits, For,
they shall go to seek the Lord, in and by these sacrifices, but they shall not
find him, as being but superstitious worshippers, and such as are unsound and
too late in beginning. 4. As it is a very sad stroke, when the Lord is not only
away, and not to be found to a peoples sense, but he has really deserted them,
1 Samuel 28.6. So however men cannot easily discern, nor lay to heart Gods
judicial deserting of them, while they are hot and eager in sinning, yet in
straits they will be made sadly to feel it; Therefore it is added, he has
withdrawn himself from them, to show that they were really deserted, and that
they should find it so in straits, however they felt it not before, as Samson
knew not his case, when he slept in Delilahs bosom, till the Philistines were
upon him, Judge, 16.10.

Ver. 7. They have dealt treacherously against the LORD: for they have begotten
strange children, now shall a month devour them with their portions.
The second amplification of their guilt, and the sentence following thereupon,
is, that since they had perfidiously violate the Covenant betwixt God and them,
and had propagate their Idolatry to their posterity, and so made them strangers
to God; therefore in a short time he would consume them and all their wealth.
Whence learn, 1. The Churches defections are against so many obligations,
engagements and professions to God, that justly treachery may be charged upon
them; For, They have dealt treacherously against the Lord: not that any can
betray him, or disappoint his expectation, but that they do contrary to what in
all reason might be expected of them. 2. It is a peculiar point of treachery
against God, to pervert and corrupt our children who are his by Covenant, and
who are committed to our charge, that they may be forth coming to him;
Therefore this is given as an instance of their treachery, for they have
begoteen strange children, or strangers to him, being educate in Idolatry. 3.
The corrupting of young ones, and poisoning of the succeeding generation, is a
sad presage and token of approaching vengeance and utter desolation; For, upon
this the threatening of being devoured is given out. 4. As the earth and things
thereof, is all the portion that wicked men either get or crave: So the Lord
can (and being provoked will) in a short time reach the enjoyer and his
enjoyments, and cut them off: For, now shall a month, (or short time, as,
Zech. 11.8.) devour them and their portions, or what befell every one of them
as a portion at the dividing of the land, which now they rested on. He ascribes
that to the time as done by it, (a month shall devour them,) which God did,
and caused to be done in that time.

Ver. 8. Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah; cry aloud at
Bethaven: after thee, O Benjamin.
A third amplification, especially of the sentence, is contained in a
representation of the enemies approaching to particular places, who should get
the alarm, and go to arms, and be pursued by the enemies, as is said of
Benjamin. These cities Gibeah and Ramah, seem to be these who were near to
other in the Tribe of Benjamin, Judge. 19.13, 14. and to have been
frontier-strengths in Judah, (though sometime the Kings of Israel attempted to
fortify one of them, 1 Kings 15.17, 21.) and Bethaven, (either a place so
called, or Bethel near unto it, Josh. 7.2. the name thereof being now changed
into this, because of the Idolatry practiced there, as, chapter 4.15.) was on the
border of Israel: And so the meaning is, that from both their borders they
should get the alarm of the enemies coming to pursue them; or rather (seeing
only Benjamin is alarmed here with the pursuit,) that the enemy having overrun
and subdued Israel, as is expressed in the next ver. the alarm should come
from the border of Israel, to the border of Judah, that the enemy was coming to
pursue them and Benjamin who joined with them. Compare Isa. 10.29. where
Senacheribs invading of Judah is spoken of. However it teaches, 1. As
neglecting of Messengers and Messages of peace will end in war; and as the
despised threatenings of Ministers, will at last come to real executions: So it
is the duty of Ministers to preach judgments, and represent them so
effectually, as they may take some impression; Therefore does he bid them Blow
the cornet and trumpet, and cry aloud, to give warning of the enemies approach,
that he may show them that it will come to that at last, and may by this
representation, make them sensible of it at present. 2. Gods alarmes against
impenitent sinners, will prove real, and their endeavors against them will be
in vain; For, it is subjoyned to that comamand, after thee, O Benjamin, to wit,
the enemy comes, or pursues thee, whereby they are given to understand, the
alarm given should be no false one, but the enemy should come, and that for
all the alarm to prepare themselves, yet they should turn their back, and the
enemy pursue after them. 3. Instruments of wrath pursuing guilty sinners, will
put them to terrible confusion and destraction in their minds, as not being at
peace with God, by trusting in whom the heart is fixed: So much does this
abrupt speech testify, after thee, O Benjamin, not telling what is after him,
showing that then they shall be in such fear, as shall put them to confusion in
their expressions.

Verse. 9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of
Israel have I made known that which shall surely be.
The fourth amplification of the sentence, is, that the Kingdom of Israel
should be utterly consumed in that day, for which he had revealed unto them his
irrevocable sentence. Whence learn, 1. The Lord has a day, wherein men who
will not hear nor regard challenges from the Word, shall be made to know the
force of his rebukes in a language which they will understand; For this cause
is Isreal's overthrow called the day of rebuke, or arguing. 2. When the Word, or
moderate corrections will not avail, it is just with God to put an end to the
course of sin, if it were with the utter desolation of the incorrigible: For,
Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke; That alarm, v. 8. should
neither prove false, nor a momentanie oppression only, as it was on Judah; but
should end in their utter desolation. 3 As it is of the Lords goodness, that
he warnes sinners of their danger: So it is their duty to lay to heart the
truth of that warning: And however the Word be but little heeded when it
threatens, yet men continuing in sin, will find the truth of it by effects:
For, this seals up all, among the tribes of Israel have I made known that
which shall surely be, that is, I have given to all warning and intimation of
this, which they should look upon as certain, and (however they despise it)
they will find it certainly come to pass.

Verse. 10. The Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound: therefore
I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.
In the second part of the Chap the Lord comes more expressly to speak to both
the Kingdoms of Judah and Israel, and that both severally and conjunctly. And
first, as for Judah, whom he had threatened before, he accuses their Rulers
especially, for violating all Laws, divine, and humane, which set bounds to
men in the matters of Religion and righteousness, which being a great sin, (as
it is to remove ancient landmarks, and enter upon the possession of others, of
which See Deuteronomy. 19.14. and 27.17:) does justly provoke the Lord to threaten
them with wrath in great abundance and violence, as a deluge of water
overflowing and overturning all. This sin was eminently to be found in Ahaz his
practice, as is to be seen in the History. Doct. 1. God in his absolute
Sovereignty has set bounds and limits to men in the matter of their estates,
Religion, and duties of righteousness, which it is not lawful to transgress;
For, so much does this challenge, with the allusion to the removing of
land-markes, teach. 2. Men are naturally so perverse, that strictest bounds set
by God will be so far from keeping them in, that they are thereby irritate to
break them the more, and the words prohibitions do but put an edge on their
humors to run the more violently wrong: For, they are like them that remove
the bound; though Laws be set down more sacred then land-markes, yet they will
encroach upon them. 3. Albeit great men think they may make bold with Gods Law
above others, and so are ill examples to all others; yet their greatness gives
them no allowance, nor will shelter them in so doing; For, it is held out as a
challenge, that the Princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound. 4.
When great ones do sin, and cannot be reached by others, God will prove himself
the avenger of such transgressors: For, therefore I will pour out my wrath. 5.
Whatever the stroke on sinners be, yet when wrath is seen in it, and that the
wrath of an infinite God, it will be dreadful; Therefore the stroke is held out
under this name, my wrath. See Ps. 90.11. 6. It is righteous with God to let
out wrath without bound or moderation, and in great violence on these who will
not be held in by any bond or Law prescribed by him: For, therefore, because
they remove all bounds, I will pour out my wrath on them like water, or
largely, like a deluge which violently overflowes all banks. The word also
rendered wrath, being borrowed from among men, does signify such indignation as
passes bounds.

Verse. 11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment: because he willingly
walked after the commandment.
Secondly, as for Israel, he accuses the body of that Nation (under the name
of Ephraim, not here taken only or so much for the Kingly tribe) for their
obeying the injunction of their Rulers in changing of their Religion, and that
they did it willingly and without compulsion. For which he threatens that their
Rulers should be (as already they were) their oppressors, and overturners of
public justice. Whence learn. 1. Such as usurp unto themselves power in the
civil state, have ordinarily woeful injunctions in the matters of God, and of
Religion; partly, that they may (as they think,) mould it so as may tend to the
safety of their affairs; and partly, that in Gods judgment they may more
eminently engage him against them for all their iniquities: For, such was the
commandment of Jeroboam and his successors here mentioned. 2. No command of
men, even of Rulers, will excuse sin, especially in matters of Religion, but
obedience to what they command may oft-times be the cause of Gods controversy
against a people; For, it is a challenge against Ephraim, because he walked
after the commandment, and gave obedience to it. 3. Albeit it be enough to
prove a course sinful, that it is against Law, whether it be expressly
voluntary or not, yet God looks on men's willingness as a great aggravation of
sin, particularly of Apostasy: For here it is the challenge, he willingly
walked, and. 4. Albeit it be a most heinous and eminently voluntary sin, when
men fully consent to it of their own inclination; yet a sin does not cease to
be altogether voluntary, even when commands of men attended with present
dangers and terrors, draws them to consent; far less when the simple
command of men obtaines their full and free consent; for, albeit there was a
commandment, because of which they might pretend terror, yet as it was not
terror that prevailed with them, so the Lord sees that, and that they did it
willingly, notwithstanding all that; for it was of their own consent, that the
generality of Israel made defection at Jeroboams beck. 5. The body of a people,
as they are naturally most prone and willing to what is ill; so are they easily
misled, and carried any way that it pleases these who have power over them;
For, so is here laid to the charge of Ephraim, or the generality of them,
though some did otherwise, 2 Chronicles. 11.16. 6. Such as do corrupt the worship of
God for their carnal ends, are ordinarily great oppressors; and however they
may flatter people till they gain their ends, yet then they will crush them;
For, albeit Jeroboam carried on the rent, under pretense of ridding the people
of great oppressions, and invented a way of Religion, pretending the peoples
ease, yet by him and his successors, Ephraim is oppressed and broken in
judgment, not only in the righteous judgment of God, but in the
administration of justice, they were crushed and oppressed by their corrupt
Rulers, who were great bribers, c. 4.^8. This is spoken of in the present time,
because they had already sadly felt it, as a pledge of more of that usage. 7.
As corrupting of the worship of God is a ready way to shorten a peoples
prosperity; so it is righteous with God, to make any whom men study to please
by offending of him, prove saddest scourges; For, so did the Rulers prove to
Ephraim, who followed their command, neglecting Gods. 8. As the sad fruits of
sin and defection will not always be suspended, but be really felt by the
transgressors; So when strokes are on, it is the Lord alone who must discover
the cause thereof: For, now Ephraim may feel his smart, he is oppressed, etc.
and yet he must be told that it is, because he willingly walked after the
commandment.

Verse. 12. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth: and to the house of
Judah as rottenness.

13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound: then went Ephraim
to the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb; yet could he not heal you, nor cure
you of your wound.

14. For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of
Judah: I, even I will tear and go away: I will take away, and none shall rescue
him.


In the next place the Lord comes to deal with Judah and Israel conjunctly,
challenging and threatening them for the ill use they made of his corrections.
We may take up this purpose thus; when the Lord did punish them for their sins,
especially by more sensible rods, like a moth in cloth, and rottenness in a
tree, that so they might be drawn to repent, v. 12. they on the contrary, when
they felt their disease, did seek to humane helps to assert them out of
trouble, but were in justice disappointed, v. 13. because God was provoked by
their abuse of the rod, and miscarriage under it, to deal more severely with
them, as accordingly he threatens to do, v. 14. The Original in v 12. has
only, I unto Ephraim as a moth, etc. but whether we supply it, I will be, by
way of threatening for the future, or I have been, (which agrees best with the
next ver. where he challenges them for their miscarriage under such a
dispensation already committed,) all comes to this, that whether the Lord had,
or would inflict such a stroke, yet this their miscarriage would certainly
follow on it, to the drawing down of more wrath upon themselves. It is likewise
to be considered, that v. 12. does not begin in the Original with Therefore, as
if it contained a sentence for the former sin, (though indeed the stroke be the
fruit of sin,) but with and, which in that language is only a transition to a
new purpose, as here it begins a new challenge. From v. 12. Learn, 1. The Lord
needs no more to undo a people, but a very insensible curse, whether of inward
dissensions, or blasting men's spirits, counsels and estates in a secret unfelt
way; Therefore did he only send a moth to Ephraim, and rottenness, or a worm
to the house of Judah, whereby we may understand the many intestine confusions,
and foreign invasions of Israel, antecedent to their overthrow, and the many
troubles of Judah, partly from Israel, and partly from the Syrians and
Assyrians, which are recorded in the Sacred History, which whatever impression
they made, yet seemed but little, as to the utter overthrowing of these
Kingdoms. He compares his stroke on Ephraim to a moth, and on Judah to a
worm or rottenness, it may be because Ephraim was sooner to be destroyed, as
a moth does eat cloth, and Judah was to subsist longer, (as a tree does,
albeit it be worm-eaten,) though it was to be destroyed at last. 2. Whatever
judgments be inflicted on a people, it is their duty to look upon them as the
fruit of their own way, and coming of themselves; For, the moth breeds of the
cloth it consumes, and rottenness, or the worm, of the tree. 3. God is to
be looked on in judgments inflicted, not as an idle spectator, or a simple
permitter only, but as an active worker, and inflicter of what we deserve; For,
says he, I will be, or have been as a moth, that is, I will inflict a stroke
like to that. 4. As the Lords mercy may be read in the midst of consuming wrath
when he begins with moderate strokes, and does consume but slowly; so the study
of this mercy ought to invite such as are so stricken to repentance: For, this
is the scope of this purpose, to aggreage their sin, who being thus moderately
smitten, and not totally, and in a moment consumed, yet they did not make right
use thereof, but went further wrong. From v. 13. Learn, 1. Albeit the Lords
judgments do bring on sad trouble, yet this is not soon seen or laid to heart;
For, When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, imports that they
saw it not at first, albeit they were sick and wounded. It is a peculiar plague
accompanying insensible judgments inward or outward, that they are not soon
laid to heart. And under any judgments men's selfishnesse will hide the sight
of common strokes, and their stupidity and obduration make them little
consider their own or a Lands case; See Ex. 10.7. Isa. 42.15 Hos. 7.9. 2. It
will be but to little purpose that men see their cas^, when they see only their
distress, but not the causes thereof; for this was the cause of their
miscarriage, that they saw their sickness and wound, and no more. Such a
temper will rather resolve in bitterness; pining away under judgments, Ezekiel.
24.23. and more provocation, then in turning to God. 3. Where men get not the
right sight or use of corrections, they will become the worse for them, and
such as feel trouble, but take not up the cause of it, will readily run to ill
shifts, neglecting the true remedy, and so increase their own guilt; For, so
was it here, Ephraim (not secluding Judah) added to his sin, and went to the
Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, he went, when he sent Ambassadors. This name
Jareb, used here, and chapter 10.6. (and signifying one that shall plead, or
avenge, or assert out of trouble) seems either to have been a common name to
all the Assyrian Kings, as Pharaoh to the Kings of Egypt, or that this was the
designation given by them when they sent to him; they acknowledged him their
Protector, and he whom only they trusted to plead their cause, and assert them
out of their miseries. Of this see what is recorded both of Judah and Israel, 2
Kings 15.19. and 16.6, 7. 4. It is a special proof of the naughtiness of men's
hearts, and of the little use they get of corrections, when they dare have
recourse unto, and rest upon humane helps, neglecting God who is pursuing a
controversy for sin: For, herein was Ephraims miscarriage, he went to the
Assyrian, etc. 5. True repentance is so difficult a path, and so contrary to
men's nature, that they will rather essay any mean, then come to God under
trouble; For, so much does the practice of this people teach. 6. Where God is a
party, and pursuing for sin, humane helps will prove useless so long as he is
slighted, and they rested on: For, the Assyrian could not heal you, nor cure
you of your wound. From ver. 14. Learn, 1. Humane helps do prove useless in a
day of trouble, not only because of their own emptiness and insufficiency, but
because God is provoked to anger by men's leaning to them; Therefore is the
reason given why they could not cure, For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and
this is to be seen chiefly in such disappointments. 2. When men make no use of
lesser corrections, but neglecting true remedies, do seek to sinful remedies,
and rest on creature-helps; they do hereby heighten their own guilt and
trouble, and do provoke God, not only to let former troubles lie on, and to
disappoint their expectations, but to increase their calamities; For, it is
added, that not only the Assyrian could not cure them, but the moth turned into
a lion; I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of
Judah. It is not very needful, to make a distinction betwixt the lion, and
young lion, as if Judahs stroke were compared to tearing by a young lion,
because it continued not so long as Isreal's: For, (though that proved true,
yet) the scope in both is simply to point out a stroke that should utterly for
once destroy them. 3. However it be the great sin of men, to turn brutish in
their oppressing others; yet Gods providence is holy, and his hand is to be
seen in all of it: For, says he, I will be as a lion, albeit it was the
Assyrians and Caldeans who were instruments of that beastly cruelty; and again,
I, even I will tear, etc. 4. God being provoked, is an invincible and sore
party, he will tear as a lion, go away with his prey without fear, when none
dare or can rescue; For, I will tear and go away: I will take away and none
shall rescue.

Verse. 15. I will go, and return to my place, till they acknowledge their
offense, and seek my face; in their affliction, they will seek me early.
The Lord insists in the sentence, threatening that he will not only destroy
them as a Lion, but (speaking after the manner of men) will withdraw his
gracious presence, and leave themselves, till in their exile they be humbled
for their sins, and turn to God; which he promises and undertaketh they shall
do: As was verified, not only in Judah after their captivity, Dan. 9. Ezr. 9.
and 10 but will be more fully accomplished in the future conversion of all
Israel, Zech. 12.10, 11, etc. Whence learn. 1. It is a very sad addition to an
afflicted condition, when the Lord not only strikes a people in great
severitie, but does desert them also under the stroke, not manifesting any
tokens of his favor to them; Therefore is it subjoyned, I will go and return
to my place, that is, speaking after the manner of men, he will manifest no
more of his care of them, nor of himself to them, then if he had shut up
himself in heaven. See Deuteronomy. 32.20. Isa. 57.17. and 64.7. Ezekiel. 22.20. 2. Gods
sore strokes, and especially his sad desertions, do call men to repentance, as
being that which may be attained then; that which the godly (if the sense of
their condition be blessed to them) will be stirred up unto; and that which can
promise a blessed issue of their condition to them: For, this is Gods end in
all this, to draw them to the true remedy, I will return, till they
acknowledge their offense. As the Lord will make trouble pursue his own
especially, till they come to the right use of it; So where his people are set
on work this way by his withdrawing of himself, it is a token the desertion is
not total, but that the Lod has left somewhat behind him, that draws them
after him; whereas to be deserted in trouble, in respect of duty, (when men
either neglect means in such a case, as, Dan. 9.13. or become more estranged
from God that he deserts them, as, Zech. 11.8.) is more sad then to be deserted
as to the want of sensible comfort and manifestations of God, when yet they are
pursuing duty, as, Psalm. 88.13, 14. 3. Repentance is then true, when men are
indeed convinced of sin, and driven to confess and plead guilty before the
Lord; and without this, much show of prayer and service by a sinful people,
will be but little worth: For, that is here expected, to acknowledge their
offense, or, to be guilty, that is, that they not only make a show of
confession, but that really before God, they be convinced of guilt, and look
like a people who have such a burden upon them. 4. Such as are really humbled
under the sense of guilt, ought also to turn real seekers of God, that is, to
be such as would not only be rid of present guilt, that they may get ease of
trouble; but such as set themselves for time to come, to press after communion
with God, and walk in his way; and for that end, they must make God himself,
and not sinister ends, their scope in this course; they must be sensible of
their distance from God, and pursue when they do not enjoy; yea, whatever they
enjoy, they must still be on the pursuit of more, while they are within time;
All this is imported in that the Lord says, they shall seek me. 5. Such as do
seek God indeed, ought to be ardent and instant in it, taking hold of all
opportunities, and pursuing after God, as him whom they may not want; and
especially former negligence ought to be made up with doubled diligence, by
such as turn to God: So much is imported in that they will seek me early, and
be betimes at it, when they are turned to God. 6. All these duties required in
right seeking of God, ought to be especially set about in sad times. Times
wherein affliction press men hard on all hands, ought to be times of seeking
God indeed, and ought to put an edge on diligence and duties, otherwise it may
draw to a sad account. For, in their affliction they will seek me early. 7.
Such as look toward God, ought not to be discouraged, that afflictions drive
them to it, who sought him not before: and albeit afflictions first set us on
duty; yet if when we come, God give us other earrands, it is a sufficient proof
of soundness; For, it is foretold as the sound conversion of Israel, that in
their affliction they will seek me early; albeit they sought not before, and
the cross drove them to it, yet it is sound, since their erarand is to seek
God. 8. Repentance is not only our duty, to endeavor it, but it is Gods
promise who undertakes to work it in his own: And such as mind repentance,
ought to set about it in the faith of a promise, and eying him who only can
produce it: For, it is a promise, they will seek me early, which though it
relate particularly, to Isreal's future conversion; yet all the Lords people, as
they are pressed with need, may lay hold on it, and come to him who is exalted
to give repentance unto Israel, as well as remission of sin, Acts 5.31.

CHAP. VI.
THe Lord having in the close of the former Chap. foretold the repentance of
Israel; he does in the first part of this Chap. enlarge and confirm the same
prediction, by bringing them in practicing what he had foretold of them, and by
prescribing a form wherein they shall express their repentance. This consists
of a mutual exhortation to that duty, ver. 1. -- and of encouragements drawing
them to it, namely, that being penitent, God will bind up their wounds and
sores, ver. -- 1. That he will restore and raise them up out of their deadly
calamities, ver. 2. And that he will manifest himself, his kindness and
favor to them after all their trouble, causing them thereby to grow in piety,
ver 3. In the second part of the Chap. the Lord clears himself from being the
cause of Isreal's destruction, and that he could do no otherwise to them then he
did, ver. 4. -- Considering their inconstancy in any seeming good, ver. -- 4.
And the ill fruit of the Word among them, who were but slain by the efficacy
thereof, ver. 5. -- And did desperately sin against the clear light thereof,
ver. -- 5, 6, 7. Which he proves from the wickedness that was to be found in
particular places, as Gilead, ver. 8. And particular ranks of persons, as
Priests, ver. 9. And in the whole Nation, both of Israel, ver. 10. And of
Judah, who though they should be punished, yet their trouble should end in
restitution, ver. 11.

Ver. 1. COme, and let us return unto the LORD: for he has torn, and he will
heal us: he has smitten, and he will bind us up.
IN this first part of the Chap. the Lord insists on the future repentance of
Israel, and brings them in as doing what he had promised of them, Chap. 5.15.
Partly for the encouragement of the godly in that time, to whom these sad
messages and dispensations published by the Prophets, and performed before
their eyes could not be insupportable, unless they had this ground of future
hope: And partly to prescribe unto the present generation, a pattern of true
repentance in the practice of these, who after them should obtain mercy; that
so they might not please themselves with their own way of repentance, but might
let about the duty in earnest, if so be there might yet be hope.

This verse contains the mutual exhortation, and up-stirring one of another
to repentance, and their first ground of encouragement, which is; that though,
while they were impenitent the Lord had smitten and torn them sore, Chap.
5.12, 14. yet now upon their turning to him, he would, as a tender Surgeon,
bind up and heal all these wounds. Doct. 1. Wherever there is true
repentance, there will be a returning unto the Lord, which imports, 1. That a
true penitent will be sensible not only of straying from God which has made a
distance betwixt God and him; but that his straying has begotten an
averseness, and turned his back upon God; so that he needs to return. And
particularly, he must be sensible of further straying under afflictions, which
were sent to reclaim him; as was their case, Chap. 5.13. See Isa. 1.5. 2. A
penitent must have a deep sense, that all other courses he has essayed in his
straying from God, are but vanity, that he has been a loser thereby, and that
the Lord is only worthy to be chosen and embraced; and therefore he returns
to him, as the only excellent of choices. See, Hos. 2.7. And 14.3. Jer. 3.22,
23. etc. 3. A penitent must have a through endeavor to make up this distance
not being moved by affliction only, or by sin as it draws on affliction; but
by the want of God, whose favor he desires to enjoy, and to come under his
yoke; and not contenting himself with motions or fits in this endeavor, but
studying to follow it forth till he come to a real enjoyment of God, and so
return unto the Lord indeed, which these penitents are yet endeavoring, albeit
already there be such an edge upon them, as makes them stir up one another.
Doct. 2. As there is great need of upstirring, for the right performance of the
duty of repentance, which is a duty far above our reach, Isa. 64.7. So however
love may prevent the Lords people in their very dead condition; yet the
ordinary forerunner of a time of mercy, is the Lords stirring up his people to
seek him; for, here they are excited, and exciting one another to this duty,
come and let us return, and this is their temper in a time of love. See, Ezekiel.
36.37. Zech. 12.9, 10. 3. As it is a sure evidence of true repentance, when men
are deeply convinced of the need of repentance, and would have all to set about
it, (as here they are;) and as true repentance and brotherly love, exciting one
another go together, and want of love argues much impenitency: So it is a sweet
thing when the Lords people join hand in hand, and by their example and
encouragement stir up one another to seek God; and times of mercy will be
joining times, and unite the Lords people in the duties of repentance; for such
will be their way in this time, Come, and let us return. See, Zeph. 3.9. 4.
When a people once begin to decline from God, ordinarily they become desperate
in sin, and are near undone before they become sensible, or be drawn to God;
for, so is supposed here they are torn and smitten before they are brought to
need repentance. See, Lev. 26.18. -- 39. Amos 4.6, -- 11. Apostasy once given
way unto, is not easily recovered, sense of calamities and of sin procuring
them, is not soon attained, the blessing of afflictions is not taken up at our
foot, our ill humors raised by afflictions, in swelling against Providence,
doting after ruined Idols, etc. are not soon laid. So that it is no wonder
matters draw to this height. 5. God is a severe pur^urer of sin, when once he
begins to prosecute a controversy with a visible Church; for, he will both
smite and tare, and deal severely before they return not. He is a consuming
fire, Heb. 12.29. not to be provoked, Heb. 10.31. His provoked love will end in
jealous rage, Hos. 13.8, His sovereignty and power will not endure that men
should refuse to receive correction from him, or think to prove stronger then
he, in walking contrary to him, Lev. 26. And his love will not want his people,
though he should pursue them with never so great severity. 6. Sad strookes
which have been long inflicted on the Lords people, and yet they have continued
stupid under them, may at last be blessed, and work upon them, to make them
sensible and seek to God; for, now they not only feel, but are driven to seek
the true remedy of their afflictions, which they did not before, Chap. 5.13.
Albeit our hearts, and afflictions of themselves will never produce this, yet
the Lords free grace and blessing, accompanying afflictions will bring it
about. See, Lev. 26.40, 41, etc. 7. As the afflictions of the Church are from
God, and to be taken as from his hand; so the healing thereof must come only
from him; for, He has torn and he will heal us, etc. God will not proceed in
such a way of judgment toward his people, as to deliver them from trouble,
when yet they are not led to him thereby, or to obscure his own love which
does for them; but will blast all probable means, till they come to him, and
be left on him, and then he will cure what is otherwise incurable, and for
which there is no balm beside. 8. It is the duty of such as mind to set about
repentance and conversion to God in earnest, to do it with encouragement and
hope; and as we are to believe that the Lord not only sends cleanly trials
that he may get work, and give proofs of his art; but even corrections for
sin, as minding our good, and that he may draw us to repentance; and allows
us to take even a stroke inflicted in wrath, as an errand to come to him with,
and sent to drive us to his mercy, when we want another argument: So we ought
to encourage our selves, expecting that God, who minds our good in affliction,
will give a good issue to it, when we are made to feel it, and driven to him
by it; for, thus do they proceed, Let us return, for he has torn, and by so
doing invites us to return, and he will heal; and so our endeavors will not
be in vain. Where men have not these right constructions of God, and this hope
in some measure, their convictions will but drive them further away, and their
discouraging exercise will but impede their repentance; whereas apprehension of
mercy under the sense of anger, will draw the heart to turn to God. See, Ezekiel.
10.2. 9. All the afflictions and diseases of a penitent will in due time end in
through healing, and in the mean time the Lord will handle him tenderly and to
his profit: He will be a tender Surgeon to give him a room in his heart and
sympathy, and will not lance his wounds, but when it is in order to his cure
and profit, and when he has balm and oil to pour into them; for, all this
do they expect; He has torn, and he will heal us; he has smitten, and he will
bind us up.

Verse. 2. After two days will he revive us, in the third day he will raise us
up, and we shall live in his fight.
This ver. (containing the second ground of their encouragement) is by many
applied to the resurrection of Christ on the third day, (which will be
acknowledged by Israel in the time of their conversion) as if it were the
Scripture the Apostle points at, 1 Cor 15.4. And thus the sense is, that the
penitents fetch the ground of their hope of recovery from the resurrection of
Christ, in whom and through whom it is that his people do live and recover out
of their miseries and troubles. And indeed this interpretation has these
truths in it, 1. That Christ and promises concerning him, is the usual and
ordinary ground of the Churches comfort in troublous times, as, Isa. 7.14. 2.
Penitents apprehending Christ by faith, in his sufferings and resurrection,
will find ample ground of comfort in all their troubles; for, 1. Through him
the sting is taken out of all their trouble, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. 2. As he is
their head, so all their troubles are accounted his, not only what is
expressly for his truth and cause, but even all of the penitents troubles are
his in respect of sympathy. 3. They are sweetened to the penitent, by Christ's
essaying their lots in his own person, and so sanctifying them unto them. 4. As
believers are made conform to him in sufferings, so in his deliverance he is a
pattern of their victory, Romans 8.17. 5. He is the purchaser of believers
deliverance, having paid a price for it. 6. His resurrection and victory is a
pledge of their deliverance, being judicially raised up in him, Ephesians. 2.6. All
which should invite afflicted sinners to close with Christ, as being a
compendious way to a sweet issue from all troubles.

But the drift of this context seems not to speak so expressly of his
resurrection, as of the raising up of penitents themselves, which does indeed
flow from his resurrection, and that may be hinted at here. And so this
encouragement is an amplification of the former, meeting with the deadliness
and continuance of their trouble; wherein they expect that albeit their
troubles were so great and of such continuance, as that they seemed to be dead
and buried under them; yet the Lord, in due time, would not only revive and
raise them up from their graves, but make them live a comfortable life in his
presence and favor. As for the time to which this restitution is limited,
after two days, in the third day, it is diversely conceived, by some for a long
time, that neither at present, nor for some time after, were they to meet with
this mercy; others understand it of a short time. We may take in both in
diverse respects; that the time of their restitution after their conversion,
may be somewhat prolonged, and seem so to sense, and yet it may be justly
accounted short, if they reckon right. Doct. 1. Such oft-times is the
obstinacy of the visible Church in her sin, and her stupiditie under
judgments inflicted for sin, and such is the Lords severity in prosecuting a
begun controversy, That she may not only be smitten, and sore wounded and
torn, but in a manner quite dead and buried under trouble; for, so is here
imported, she needs to be revived, and raised up. See, Ezekiel. 37.2, 3, etc.
Psalm. 14.1.7. 2. True penitents are allowed ground of hope of recovery, were
their condition never so desperate and deadly; for, here they profess their
hope that it will be so. Penitents do but wrong God, and themselves, when they
draw hard conclusions on their lots, and do not leave a latitude to Gods love
and omnipotency, and answer all their inextricable doubts with, O Lord, thou
know. Ezekiel 37.3. 3. It may seem good to the Lord, not to deliver penitents
at their first seeking of him, but may keep them under exercise for a time that
he may sharpen them yet more in that duty, and try the reality thereof for, it
is after two days, and not at first they expect it. 4. Albeit length of time
under trouble, joined with the greatness of it, and the Lords seeming to
neglect prayer and repentance for a time, be a sore trial, as, Psalm. 22.1, 2.
and 119 82. yet the penitent is allowed to believe, that however he delay, till
it come to that complaint, Jer. 8 20. yet deliverance will come, and that no
length of time ought to bring the truth of the Word in question: for, so do
they reckon, that though it be not till after two days, yet he will revive.
See, Hab. 2.3. 5. How long soever the Lord delay, a penitent is still bound to
avoid fainting, and to account the time short, by comparing it with eternity,
and by his resolution, patience, and making use of the delay; for, in these
respects, this form of speech, after two days, in the third day, may import a
short time. 6. Albeit the Lord in delivering his people, do proceed usually by
degrees, because our narrow vessels can receive his mercies, and observe them
but by parts; yet where he begins, he will complete deliverance, how small
soever the beginnings be: for, here his Word is held out in several branches,
of reviving in their graves, raising up out of their graves after they are
revived, and causing them to live and walk after they are revived and raised
up; and all these together, make a complete deliverance. 7. The Lord will not
only, in due time, recover the desperate and hopeless outward condition of his
people; but will also refresh and revive their dying spirits thereby, which may
be so broken, that outward deliverances will not cure them; for, so much may be
imported in that when they are revived, and raised up, they shall live, that
is, their hearts shall be encouraged and refreshed thereby, and enabled to
improve that mercy. 8, As much and long continued trouble, may give a sore
crush to piety, and weaken hands in the duties thereof; So mercies and
encouragements are then blessed, when they make men active and lively in
walking before God; for, so much also is imported in that, being revived and
raised up, they shall live, or walk in newness of life. 9. As they who would
approve themselves in duty, ought to walk singlie as before God; so his
delivered people, improving their deliverances for that end, may expect to
enjoy the favor and countenance of God, and to live under his protection and
care; for, both these may be held out in this, we shall live in his fight: or,
walk as before him, and be refreshed in his favor and care.

Ver. 3. Then shall we know, if we follow on to know the LORD; his going forth
is prepared as the morning; and he shall come unto us as the rain; as the
latter and former rain unto the earth.
In the third ground of encouragement, (which is an enlargement of that living
in his fight, ver. 2.) they promise unto themselves that by repentance and
turning unto God, they shall attain unto, and grow in the saving knowledge of
God, which is the root of true piety, and in the experimental knowledge of the
favor and love of God in Christ, as the fruit and cherisher of piety. The
certainty and sweetness of this encouragement, is further confirmed and
illustrate from two similitudes, showing that unto the penitent there is a time
of Gods manifesting himself, like the morning light that comes after the dark
night, and the rain that comes after the drought: So the knowing of God is to
be understood here, as comprehending true piety and godliness, whereof this is
the root. See, ver. 6. Jer. 22.15, 16. Hos. 4.1. and 5.4. and likewise the
experimental knowledge of the favor of God. It is also to be observed that in
the original, this promise is not conditional, We shall know, if we follow on
to know, (though that be true also in some respect) but absolute, we shall
know, we shall follow on to know. Doct. 1. The great encouragement of a true
penitent, is the hope of attaining to true piety, which is an encouragement and
reward unto it self; and such as begin a true repentance, may expect not to be
disappointed in this; for, Then (to wit, when we return, and he has revived)
shall we know, to wit, the Lord, as is after expressed: This is their sure hope
and sweet encouragement. 2. The sum and root and life of true Religion
consists in the saving knowledge of God in Christ: for, so do they comprehend
it, we shall know the Lord. See, Joh. 17.3. It is not only a principal part
in Religion, 1 Cor. 2.2. but more does flow from it; for, if God were better
known in his power, fidelity, beauty, terror, and in his other attributes, and
his love in Christ, it would produce more confidence, encouragement, obedience,
fear to offend, and would allure hearts more unto him. See, Psalm. 9.10. Isay.
51.12, 13. 2 Timothy 1.12. Heb 12.28, 29. and elsewhere. 3. The Lord is for the
most part an unknown, or mistaken God in the world, by reason of our natural
darkness, the distance bred by desertion, the power of tentation, our looking
through the prospect of our own guilt, and the want of sensible need of what is
in him; for, here it is held out as a special privilege of penitents, We
shall know the Lord. 4, The true penitent pursuing after piety, shall not only
attain thereunto, but shall experimentally taste of the excellency and
goodness of God, to encourage him in his course; He shall experimentally know
how good God is, and that it is not in vain to seek him, Psalm. 34.8. Isai.
45.19. He shall know his fidelity in keeping Covenant, notwithstanding sad
dispensations; He shall be confirmed that his wisdom and power overrules all
dispensations for his good, and that he has thoughts of peace toward him, in
times of saddest trouble; So much also does this import, we shall know the
Lord. 5. Piety and the knowledge of God, and the experimental manifestations
of him, is an infinite and growing subject, which cannot be all taken up at
first; Every step of our way may discover more of our short-coming and
ignorance to us, and when we have tasted most of his bounty, there is still
more to be communicate; for, when men know, there is need to follow on to know
the Lord. See, Job. 42.5. Prove. 30.2, 3. 1 Cor. 8.2. 6. As true and sanctified
knowledge of God will be growing, and make men desire more of it, both for
securing their own good condition to them, Joh. 8.31, 32. and that they may
taste more of the sweetness of it, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. So such as thus press on to
know God, do prove that indeed they do know him, how little soever they seem
to have: For; it is added, We shall follow on to know the Lord, both as an
effect, and evidence of their knowing of him. 7. When penitents have done all
they can by way of duty, yet their living, their knowing and enjoying of God,
must flow from his gracious and active manifestation of himself, without which
all their endeavoures would be useless; for so much is held forth in the
confirmation, it is his going forth, (or manifestation of himself, opposite to
his going away, Chap. 5.15.) and his coming to us, that is the cause of all
this. 8. The manifestations of God toward his penitent people, are certain and
in readiness as being decreed of old; for, his going forth is prepared, and
ready. See, 1 Cor. 10.13. Psalm 31.19. 9. This similitude taken from the morning
does teach, 1. That refreshment and deliverance is as certain unto penitents,
after their trouble, as it is certain in the course of nature, that the morning
follows the night. Hence it is, that these vicissitudes in the course of
nature are brought in the Churches plea for the change of her sad condition,
Psalm. 74.16, 17. 2. That the Lords manifestation of himself to his people,
will be as refreshfull after their trouble, as the clear morning is after the
dark night, especially to a wearied Centinell, Psalm. 130.6. Doct. 10. The
second similitude from rain, etc. Teaches. 1. The presence of God to his
people parched with trouble and tentation will be as refreshfull, as the rain
can be to burnt up ground. See, Jer 31.12. 2. Gods refreshing of his people
will produce fruitfullnesse also, and cheer up their decayed, discouraged and
blasted graces, as the rain does the fruits of the ground. 3. The
manifestations of God to his people, will be seasonable, when they are most
needed, and may be most useful; for, so is the former and latter rain,
dispensed on the earth. See, Heb. 4.16. 4. His manifestations will also be
constant to his people, to begin and carry them on to perfection; for, in this
also does the resemblance hold in the former and latter rain. 5. Albeit the
Lord see it fit oft-times to delay and suspend the manifestation of himself,
yet it is his peoples duty not to weary; but they ought to testify their
estimation thereof, by their eagerness and unwearied patience in expecting it;
for, to this end also is this similitude made use of in Scripture; That as men
wait for this rain with great earnestness, as being of singular use, Job.
29.23. and as the husbandman patiently waits for it, that he may at last have
a fruitful harvest to recompense his labors: So should the Lords people
earnestly and yet patiently wait for him, as knowing that his coming will make
up all, Jam. 5.7, 8.

Ver. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto
thee: for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew which
goes away.
Follows the second part of the Chap. wherein, after this sweet digression,
foretelling their future repentance, the Lord returns to his former challenges
against these two Kingdoms and clears himself that he was not the cause of
that destruction that was to come upon them before these joyful days. So that
this purpose does not come in by way of exception against their repentance,
formerly described as unsound; for that contains a pattern of true Repentance,
and of what they will do at their last conversion. But the dependence may be
conceived thus; That on the one hand, the Lord having comforted the truly godly
by this prediction, he now turns himself to the body of the people, and his
affection (if we may speak of him after the manner of man) being kindled with
the thoughts of that sweet time of love that was to be betwixt Israel and him,
he expostulates with them that they were nothing like this pattern here
prescribed, and that themselves being Judges, he could do no other then destroy
them. On the other hand, whereas they might object, how could he destroy them
toward whom he had such a purpose, and they were still ready to accuse his
rigor and severity toward them: Therefore he puts them to instruct any cause
they could, wherefore he should deal otherwise with them.

We may take up the purpose in these, 1. An assertion that he was not to blame
for their destruction, but their own condition, which was so deplorably
desperate, that he propounds the matter to themselves, to show upon what
grounds he could do otherwise with them then he did, considering their way. 2.
Some confirmations of this assertion, whereof the first (in the rest of this
v.) prevents an objection taken from their seeming goodness at some times, as
we find several reformations in Judah, and in Israel, we have Ahabs
humiliation, Jehu's zeal, and others of their Kings not so bad as the rest of
them, 2 King. 17.2. Concerning this the Lord declares, that (whatever real
good was in some persons, yet) any work of repentance or reformation the body
of the people attained to, was empty and in constant, and could no more endure,
nor abide the touchstone then the morning-cloud and dew can endure the rising
Sun. And therefore this could not hinder, but rather hasten their destruction.
Doct. 1. When the Lord proceeds in severity against his people, he is not to be
looked on as one who takes pleasure in such a way, or who delighted in it, if
their condition did not unavoidably call for it; for, so much does this
expostulation (wherein he puts on the affections of a perplexed creature) teach
us. See, Hos. 11.8. 2. The disposition and way of the visible Church is
oft-times so desperate, that no dispensation will better them; and however the
Lord take no pleasure in their destruction, and their privileges seem to call
for another lot; yet there is no remedy, but their carriage draws it on; For,
O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? etc. imports that he had essayed all
other means, but in vain, and that now he could do no otherwise with them. See,
Mat. 11.16, 17. Isa. 5.4. Jer. 9.7. Ezekiel 5.13. with. 6.9. and. 24.13. 3. The
consciences of the Lords people may plead for God, proceeding in greatest
severity, if they were awaked; and it is their duty to justify him in judging;
and for this end to be sensible of their desperate incorrigiblenesse; for, this
question, What shall I do unto thee? does not import any ignorance and
perplexity in God, but puts the matter to their own consciences, which being
well informed (as they ought to be) would justify him in his greatest
severity. 4. As oft-times a people enjoying purer worship, may be as ripe for
judgment, and in as desperate a condition as they who have made fouler visible
defection; so the universal overspreading of sin contributes to make a peoples
case more irremediable; Therefore is Judah put to it with Ephraim, who yet
seemed to be far better then they; and this is an evidence of their desperate
case. 5. A people may have some show of goodness, at least at some times, who
yet are little the better, and their condition nothing the less desperate;
for, so it is supposed this people had, your goodness, which comprehends any
show of piety toward God, or of goodness, bounty and mercy toward men, which
they had at any time. 6. Men's goodness, when it is only in show, and not in
reality, proves ordinarily a great snare and neck-break to them, as hiding the
sight of their deserving from them, being a ground of exceptation against
challenges, and of swelling against corrections; Therefore must the Lord here
take off this objection, and clear what their goodness was. 7. Whatever
goodness men seem to have, yet it will not avail to exempt them, when either
it is but empty, and wants a firm root, or proclaims its own unsoundnesse by
its inconstancy, and being but at fits; for, so much does this comparison teach
us, Your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away.
Whatever use may be made of these similitudes elsewhere, to point out what is
really good, yet in this place they point at the emptiness of their goodness
(as a cloud that has no rain in it, and the dew that enters not into the
ground, to moisten it) and at its inconstancy, and evanishing.

Ver. 5. Therefore have I hewed them by the Prophets, I have slain them by the
words of my mouth, and thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.

6. For I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God, more then
burnt-offerings.

7. But they like men have transgressed the Covenant: there have they dealt
treacherously against me.


The second confirmation of their desperate condition, is, that the Word did no
good unto them. Albeit the Lord by his Word dealt effectually and sharply with
them, as men do with rough stones and knotted timber, to square them, yet all
this did but slay them, v. 5 -- And albeit their duty was held clearly out in
the Word, as the light of the morning, v. -- 5. And particularly they were
informed that God was not pleased they should rest on their ceremonial
performances, which ought only to have the second place, neglecting moral
duties of the first and second Table, which should be their chief work, v. 6.
yet they made ill use of all this clear light. And whereas God had not only
enjoined their duty clearly, but entered in a Covenant with them, that they
seeing and embracing the Messiah, who was pointed at in these sacrifices, might
worship him in faith and love, (as is enjoined, v 6. They on the contrary brake
the Covenant, and dealt treacherously in it, while they obtruded Ceremonies and
sacrifices upon him for expiation of sin, and so turned it in a Covenant of
works, and even in these neglected the moral and substantial duties, v 7.
Doct 1. Such as are not wrought upon and bettered by the Word, are in an
hopeless condition, and not to be wrought upon by any other thing; for, this
is a proof of their desperate condition. See, Luke 16.29, 30, 31. 2. As it is
the Lords mercy that he yet continues his Messengers with his sinful people,
who provoke him, if so be they may yet be reclaimed; so it is their duty to
take up what they speak either by extraordinary revelation, or according to the
Word, as spoken by God, and not to slight their Message, nor contradict their
authority in carrying of it; for it is a witness for God against them, that
they had the Prophets, and they carried the words of my mouth, says the Lord.
See, 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. Jer. 5.12, 13. 3. As all men by nature are unfit for
any good, as rough stones and knotty timber for a building, till the Word work
upon them, and be effectual in its reproofs and directions; So a desperately
incorrigible people, or a people inconstant in any good, do provoke God to
deal more sharply with them by his Word; and such are not to be soothed up by
Ministers, and this is a part of Gods care of them: for, upon what is laid to
their charge, v. 4. it follows by way of conclusion, Therefore have I hewed
them by the Prophets, etc. See, Tit. 1.12, 13. 4. As the Word of the Lord is of
such efficacy, that it will either cure and rectify a people, or else undo
them; So this ordinary result in the most part, that the sharp reproves and
directions of the Word, do but make them worse, and tend at last to their ruin;
Therefore it is subjoyned to his hewing, I have slain them by the words of my
mouth, which is not to be understood only of the sharp edge of the convictions
of the Word which did so cut upon them, as they thought themselves slain by it;
nor yet only of the final event of this preaching, that many were cut off
according to the certain threatenings of the Word, as, 1 King. 19.17. Isa.
11.4. Jer. 1.10. But of some nearer accidental effect tending to that; to wit,
that all his sharp reproves and great pains, did but make them worse, and put
out what life or activity they seemed yet to have in any good. Hence it is
elsewhere said, that the Word does but harden, Isa. 6.9. does make men worse,
Hos. 11.2. and exasperate them the more it is inculcate, Mar. 7.6. Act. 7.54:
Amos 7.10. 5. The Lord has so clearly revealed his will concerning men's duty,
as may justify him, and make sinners inexcusable whatever they do pretend;
For, it is another argument against them, thy judgments (or, the righteous
ordinances, wherein thou art commanded to walk) are as the light that goes
forth; that is, as clear as daylight, which breaks out in the morning. It may
be he alludes to the ordinary hour, wherein the Prophets were sent out, to
hold forth this light, which seems to have been in the morning, Jer. 7.13.
Zeph. 3.5. 6. Such as yield sincere and Evangelicall obedience to what the Lord
requires, may expect that it will be accepted, and themselves in doing of it,
with pleasure and acquiescence; For, I desired mercy, etc. says he, not only
commanded, but desired it, as a thing wherein I take pleasure, as the word
signifies. 7. The rule of true Religion requires, that as all that God
commands should be respected, and obedience endeavored, So that moral and
most substantial duties (as a fruit of faith in Christ) be chiefly made
conscience of; which as they ought to take place of ceremonial observances; So
without them, the other are of no account in Gods sight; For, this was the
subject matter of the doctrine, which was so clearly pressed, (and therefore
comes in with a for, as an illustration of that general in the end of v. 5.) I
desired, mercy and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then
burnt-offerings: Where, under sacrifice and burnt-offrings, is comprehended all
their ceremonial performances, and spoken of not as they related to Christ the
substance of all of them, but as they were external performances rested on by
that people. In which respect, his not desiring sacrifice, is not to be
understood simply, as if the Lord did not approve, even of the external
performances, which were enjoined by himself; but comparatively, that he
desired moral duties more then burnt-offerings, as it is in the next sentence.
To which may be added, that in some cases, when moral duties come in
competition with ceremonials, the Lord does not desire ceremonials at that
time, but moral duties even of the second Table take place of them, or other
positive commands concerning the externals of Religion: As, Mat. 9.11, 12, 13.
and 12.2, -- 7. Yea further, let men submit never so much to the external
injunctions about worship, or think to satisfy their own consciences
therewith, yet where Christ is not closed with to enable and make men willing
and active in moral duties, they will not be approven in the other at all. As,
Isa. 1.11, -- 13. and 66. 3. See, 1 Cor. 12.31. 8. Such as would approve
themselves to God, ought to make conscience of moral duties both of the first
and second Table of the Law; and particularly, the saving knowledge of God,
whereby we may regulate the rest of our obedience, and showing of mercy in
cases wherein we seem not to be so strictly bound, will prove our reality in
Religion; Therefore he puts in both the knowledge of God, of which before, and,
Psalm. 14.1, 2. and mercy, of which, Jam. 1.27. Though Christ indeed extend it,
as comprehending mercy toward our selves, as the rule of our duty toward our
neighbors, Mat. 12.1, 2, 7. And mercy toward the souls of lost sinners, Mat.
9.11, 12, 13. 9. As it is of the Lords great mercy and condescendence, that he
will not only enjoyne sinners their duty, but enter in terms of a Covenant
with them; So he is a faithful Covenant-keeper, on whose part no breach will
be found; for, here all this doctrine is held out in the Covenant, as it is
before explained, wherein they only, and not he, are transgressors. 10. As
neither clear light, nor Covenant-offers or obligations will tie sinners to
their duty; So it is a great sin, and a perfidious and treacherous
prevarication, for men to violate Covenant with God; For, they have
transgressed even the Covenant there (to wit, in the Covenant) have they dealt
treacherously against me. 11. Men may seem to do many things in Religion, and
external worship, and yet be but Covenant-breakers, when neither they are led
to Christ in and by external performances, nor do they seek after what is most
substantial; for, albeit they omitted not sacrifices and burnt-offerings,
wherein Christ was held forth, yet they have transgressed the Covenant, because
they looked not to Christ in these, nor proved their communion with him, by a
conscientious care of performing moral duties; as is before cleared. 12. Their
breaking of the Covenant, like men, is not to be understood so much of their
resembling Adam in his violating of the Covenant of works, and so proving
themselves children of such a father: But it contains these aggravations of
their fault. 1. That (as the words may also read) they had broken the Covenant,
as if it had been but the Covenant of a man, and he their fellow creature;
Covenant-breakers do bewray the mean thoughts they have of God, which he will
resent and avenge. 2. Albeit he had chosen them to be his peculiar people, yet
they broke the Covenant as if no such encouragement had been given, or
obligation laid upon them, more then any men in the world. When singular
privileges do not tie men to duty, they will aggravate the violation thereof.
3. As he proved himself to be God in his keeping Covenant on his part, so they
proved themselves to be corrupt and weak men (whose nature is facil and
inconstant in good) in breaking of it on their part: When we see our actual
transgressions rightly, we will be led up to be sensible also of our original
and nature, from which such practices flow. 4. Whereas men ought to prove
themselves men in acts of lawful valor. 2. Sam 10.12. and to quit themselves
like men in being faithful in the midst of difficulties, 1 Cor. 16.13. they on
the contrary, played the men, and proved their manhood in nothing but rebellion
against God, and violation of his Covenant, which was their high presumption;
Gallantry in sin, being an aggravation thereof.

Verse. 8. Gilead is a city of them that work iniquity, and is polluted with
blood.
In the third place, whereas the former confirmations of their desperate case
might seem to hold out but more general challenges against them: Therefore he
comes to a more particular demonstration of the iniquities, that abounded in
particular places, among particular sorts of persons, or of the whole Nations.
Whereby also he proves their breach of Covenant, and transgression of moral
commandments. The first challenge is against Gilead, whom he accuses to be
given up to a trade of sin, and particularly, that they were polluted with
blood, or cunning in circumventing men, to shed their blood craftily, or (as
the word may also bear) so bloody, as if their footsteps might be traced, by
the blood dropping from them, which they had shed. By Gilead here we may
understand that land beyond Jordan, given to the two tribes and half tribe,
Number. 32. the inhabitants whereof were combined as one incorporation in these
wicked courses, or every city there was bent that way; and therefore they got
the first stroke by the Assyrian, 2 King 15.29. But it seems rather to be
understood of Ramoth in Gilead, which was a city of the Priests, and appointed
to be a refuge for the manslayer, Josh. 21.38. And so it is to be taken as
comprehending all the rest of that kind in these bounds (which it seems
Jeroboam and his successors had still continued for that use for which they
were at first appointed,) And the sum of the challenge is, that they who by
reason of the Priests dwelling there, and that they might be exemplary to such
as fled thither for refuge, ought to have been holy, were devoted to iniquity,
and that they whose city was appointed to prevent the shedding of innocent
blood, were polluted with blood, either by committing murders among
themselves, or by the Priests their receiving in of wilful murderers, or
secluding or delivering up these who ought to have been protected, if they
might have any gain thereby. This interpretation is strengthened and confirmed
from the following verse. Hence we may Learn, 1. In judging of the matter of
Covenant-keeping, and the straightness of a land, the Lord has an especial
eye to persons or places which are especially obliged, and have most advantages
to keep them right; Their miscarriage being a sad evidence, that the rest of
the land is not right. Therefore does he begin the instancing of their
desperate condition, at Gileads wickedness, where the Priests dwelt, and
therefore ought to be an holy place. 2. As the naughtiness of men will soon
corrupt the best of Gods Ordinances; and as no excellency and privilege will
in such a case plead men's innocence, or allow them matter of gloriation; so
such decliners prove readily worst of any; for, Gilead, who might pretend that
they were once adorned with eminent privileges, are now accused that all that
was perverted, and that now the inhabitants did work iniquities, which is not
to fall in infirmities, but to commit grossest sins, and make a trade of it,
and therefore is the character of grossly wicked men, Psalm. 6.8. and 92 7. and
elsewhere. 3. Bloodshed is a very heavy charge and sad matter of challenge;
for, it pollutes, they are polluted with blood. And this is singled out as the
particular instance of their gross iniquity, and a sin that would trace, and
find them out at last, See, Psalm. 51.14. Isa. 26.21. 4. Sin, and particularly
bloodshed, will be aggravated by the place, where it is committed, and by the
warnings and documents men have gotten to avoid it; and when God makes
inquisition for blood, not only actors, but concurrers with bloody men will be
found guilty however they conveigh it; Therefore he challenges Gilead of
blood, which should have been a Sanctuary from oppression, and where they might
have seen the fruit even of casual slaughter, in the manslayers restraint. And
he challenges the Priests as accessory to bloodshed, (as is before explained)
though they wanted not their own cunning conveighances in it.

Verse. 9. And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of Priests
murder in the way by consent: for they commit lewdness.
Secondly, the Priests, (which is to be understood especially of these in
Israel) who were indirectly accused, v. 8. are now expressly challenged, that
they conspire together with one consent to commit murder, as bands of robbers
use to do. This the Priests did not only by slaying peoples souls, and
fostering them in their sin; but rather by their joining with bloody
murderers, in giving shelter to them, as is expressed in the former verse. And
by their slaying or causing to murder them who went up to Jerusalem to
worship, or others also who were traveling about their lawful affairs, to
which aggreeth their murder in the way: Concerning which (whatever the
particular way was) the Lord pronounces that it is committing of lewdness.
Whence learn, 1. Of all societies of men, none are more vile then Ministers
when once they become corrupt, they will be given up to act grossest evils, and
be accessory to all the gross abominations in a land; for, in these respects
their Priests are compared to troops of robbers, and charged with murder. 2.
Corrupt Ministers also by their being actors, or occasions of the sins of a
land, come to have a chief hand in the drawing on of general judgments;
Therefore their sins are brought in as an instance of the peoples desperate
condition, and a reason why the Lord could do no other with them, but destroy
them. 3. Such as do intrude or suffer themselves to be intruded on an office to
which they have no calling from God, especially these who usurp the office of
the Ministry, may expect never to do good in it, but that they will be given
up to such courses as will draw plagues on themselves, and the land; for, such
were these Priests, who are especially challenged here. They were of the lowest
of the people, whom Jeroboam advanced, rejecting the Priests of the Lord, 1
King. 12.31. 2 Chronicles. 11.14, 15. 4. General concurrence in sin, and especially
of corrupt Ministers in defection, is so far from extenuating, that it
aggreageth sin before the Lord; for, it adds to the challenge, that they murder
by consent, or with one shoulder, as the word is also taken, Zeph. 3 9. 5. It
is not sufficient simply to see or speak of sin, but it would be looked upon
over and over again, till it be seen in its colors; Therefore does the Lord
give a new sight of this sin, showing that in it, they commit lewdness. 6.
Sins in the visible Church, for which God pleads with her, when they are
rightly seen, will be found to be lewd and vile, and particularly, it is an
heinous provocation, when men dare come to that height and obstinacy, as not
only rashly to fall in sin, but to plot and contrive it, and persist till they
act and perfect it; for, they commit lewdness is his verdict, and the words in
the original will read, they act, or perfect their contrived and plotted
wickedness. See, Ezekiel. 24.13: And for this cause, it may be it is that they
are charged with murder, and compared with bloody robbers, because they
contrived what they made others to act; For (which imports a reason of the
former) they commit, (or act, or cause others to act) projected wickedness,
and so are as desperate as they.

Verse. 10. I have seen an horrible thing in the house of Israel: there is the
whoredom of Ephraim; Israel is defiled.
Thirdly, the whole Nation of Israel is accused, that however they covered
their course, yet God was certain of their horrible wickedness, in that
Ephraim, or their Rulers, brought in the Idolatry of the calves, and other
defections of that nature, which being received, defended, and propagated among
the people, had polluted them to that day. Compare Chap. 5.3. Doct. 1. Albeit
the Lord may have much to say against corrupt teachers in a time of general
defection; yet that does not free people before the Lord, but he will set their
ways in order before them; For, here after his challenges against the Priests,
the whole Nation also is accused. 2. However men labor to prove strange
palliaters of sin, as if they could do it undiscerned, and so make their own
wit and parts a plague unto themselves: yet let men cover their way, and dig as
deep as they will, God does still see them impartially; For, I have seen, or, I
see an horrible thing, says the Lord. 3. The corrupting of true Religion, and
defection from it, is a very horrid and abominable sin, and does pollute, let
men pretend to what purity they will; For, their whoredom is an horrible thing,
and so Heathens would account it, Jer. 2.10, 11. and thereby Israel is defiled.
4. Beside the inclination, that is in every man's heart by nature, to Idolatry
and false Religion, it cannot but add much to the tentation to decline, when
the wrong course is owned and carried on by authority, and prevailing powers;
Their corrupt defections do very readily overspread and pollute all; For, it is
the whoredom of Ephraim, whereby Israel is defiled. Their defection did easily
prevail with the people.

Verse. 11. Also, O Judah, he has set an harvest for thee, when I returned the
captivity of my people.
Lastly, somewhat is said to Judah, as well as to Israel, to make good this
proof; in interpreting whereof, there is some difficulty: For an harvest may
either signify a peoples ripening for judgments, as, Rev. 14.15. and so the
sense is given, that Judah did so ripen in communicating with Israel in their
courses, and in other sins, that the LORD (who speaks of himself here, both
in the third and first person, as also, Isaiah 22.19.) did send a sharp stroke
upon them, cutting them down as a ripe harvest, at that time when by the
Ministers of Oded, he brought again their captivity, of which see 2 Chronicles.
28.5, -- 9, etc. Or, an harvest may be taken for a ripening for deliverance,
and restitution of captivity, as, Psalm. 126.5, 6. And so the whole ver. is a
promise of restoring their captivity in due time, which yet imports a sentence
of banishment for sin, to be inflicted before. This seems to be the surest
interpretation, because it takes in both; being in sum, a declaration that
God would send them into captivity for their sin, which is a proof of their
desperate condition, and that yet he would mitigate this stroke by restoring of
them, according as Judah got the peculiar promise, chapter 1.7. Doct. 1. The Lords
smiting of his people, is sufficient to prove them guilty, he being the Just
and Holy One who does it; and when he puts in his sickle, it is a clear proof
that their harvest is ripe; For, thus does he prove Judah^s desperate
condition, by the sentence of captivity imported here. It is true indeed, the
Lord may sharply afflict his own dear children for their trial; but when after
a process deduced from the Word, he proceeds either to correct his children
for their miscarriages, or to plague the wicked for their iniquity, it should
silence all their pleading of innocence, unless they would reflect upon his
holiness and justice. And such is the case here with Judah, who are
challenged, ver. 4. etc. and now the challenge is confirmed by the stroke, 2.
Captivity and scattering is one of the fruits of the Churches sin, which so
long as the Lord keeps off, she is bound to acknowledge that he remembers mercy
in the midst of wrath: For, this is the stroke which is supposed to be
inflicted on Judah here. 3. In saddest judgments, the LORD intends mercy to
his peculiar people, and conveighs threatening in the bosom of promises to
them, allowing them when they feel the one, to comfort themselves in the hope
of the other; For, this sentence is only supposed in the bosom of a promise, I
will return the captivity of my people, giving them the first sight of their
trouble in a promise of deliverance from it. 4. As sin does ripen a Nation
for strokes, and an harvest of calamity; So trouble on the Lords people,
however it do not presently resolve in an issue, yet (besides that there is a
vicissitude in all lots under the Sun,) in due time, by the Lords blessing of
the use of it to his people, and through his sympathy remembering them in their
low estate; it will ripen, not only to a restitution, but an harvest of
advantage: For, it is an harvest for Judah, when I return the captivity of my
people, an harvest for which we are to wait patiently, James 5.7. and wherein
the sower will not only get his seed, but increase with it, Psalm. 126.5, 6.

CHAP. VII.
IN this Chap. the Lord goes yet on with that particular demonstration of this
peoples desperate case, which he had begun, chapter 6.8. Only having spoken his
mind to Judah in the bosom of a promise, chap. 6.11. he does now leave them,
and deal only with Israel, who were in justice to meet with harder measure. And
by laying before them the many and gross sins of Court and Country, he
makes good that charge, chapter 6.4. that their case was desperate, and that they
could look for nothing but destruction, which is also held forth here in that
geneneral accusation, v. 1. (which may comprehend all the rest,) and in the
sentence, v. 13, etc.

The Chap. may be taken up in these two parts: First, He propounds an
accusation for many sins (mixed with some threatenings,) and namely their
obstinate incurablenesse in sin, as appeared in their deceit and violence, v.
1. their profane security, and stupid atheism, which God will refute, v. 2.
their pleasing of their Rulers with their wicked and lying courses, v. 3. their
pronenesse to spiritual and bodily adultery, v. 4. their temperance, especially
in the Court, v. 5. their fraudulent carrying on of their wicked projects to a
maturity, v. 6. (as appeared in their frequent conspiracies, without employing
God in their calamities, v. 7.) their mixture with the Gentiles, v. 8. their
stupidity under afflictions, v. 9. their great pride in not seeking unto God,
notwithstanding their afflictions, v. 10. and their folly in seeking to
creature-helps, v. 11. wherein they shall be disappointed, and be punished for
it, according as he had threatened, v. 12. Secondly, He pronounces their case
to be irrecoverable, because of these sins, and declares that woe and
destruction is coming on them, because of their Apostasy and rebellion, v. 13.
-- the equity whereof appears in considering their great ingratitude in
sinning against God, v. -- 13. their brutish sense of trouble, neglecting to
seek God rightly, yea, and rebelling against him, v. 14. their ingrate
presuming, and growing more bold in sin, when at any time he repaired their
broken strength, v. 15. and their hypocrisy in repentance, v. 16. -- for all
which, and their blasphemous outrages, the sentence is again repeated, that
even the greatest of them should perish by the sword, to the derision of their
confederates, v. -- 16.

Verse 1. WHen I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria: for they commit falsehood: and the
thief comes in, and the troop of robbers spoileth without.
The first challenge is directed chiefly, (though not secluding others) against
their Rulers under the name of Ephraim, and against the chief City; wherein
they are accused for their obstinacy and incurablenesse, in that when the Lord
applied remedies to cure the people of their sins and judgments, they
discovered that their sin was incurable, as might appear from their deceit, and
their violence and oppression in City and Country: all which made it evident
that there was no remedy, but they must be destroyed. Doct. 1. As sin is of
it self the great sickness and wound of a people, affecting the soul and
conscience, and drawing on sad wounds of afflictions. So it is God only who can
cure these wounds; For, I would have healed Israel, says he, as a Physician
offering his help. See 2 Chronicles. 7.13, 14. Psalm. 60.2. Jer. 17.14. 2. As the
Lord only can cure his people, so he is willing to offer his help, and essay
means for that end, before he give up with them; For, I would have healed
Israel. This the Lord did, and in all ages does to his people, sometime by his
Word sent out to reclaim them from sin, as there were many Prophets raised up
in Israel. See 2 Chronicles. 36.15, 16. sometime by giving breathings of prosperity,
(as under Jeroboam the second, Joash, and others,) to see if that would draw
them to cease from their course of sin; sometime by sending lesser afflictions,
(whereof Israel had many essays) as medecin to purge out sin, and prevent
more sad fruits thereof. See Isaiah 27.9. Ezekiel. 24.13. and sometime by cutting
off eminent ringleaders in Apostasy, and giving opportunities of a
Reformation, if so be that might work on them. As when he cut off Ahabs house,
and raised up Jehu, who pretended zeal for the Lord. In applying these means
of cure, the Lord does not always work according to his Omnipotency, but
offers only sufficient external means; yet mercy would be seen in the Method,
and such lots would be improved as medicinal. 3. When God applies means of
healing, it is usual for men to prove worse, and to make it evident that they
are incorrigible; The Word may but irritate corruption, 2 Chronicles. 36.16. an
opportunity of Reformation may discover heart-enmity against the ways of God;
mercy and respite may embolden to sin, and rods make men worse, Isa. 1.5. Ezekiel.
24.13. For, When I would have healed Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim was
discovered, and the wickedness of Samaria, as a Physician by attempting a
cure, may find it worse then at first it appeared, and the disease may break
out worse: So did it fare with them, the means applied did not only discover,
but was an occasion of their incorrigible temper. He calls their course
iniquity, and wickedness, or many evils, because they brake out in more and
more gross ills, or because lesser ills after such means, are indeed worse
then greater ills were before. 4. Rulers and these that are in eminent places,
do ordinarily prove most incorrigible in their evils, most unfruitful under
means of healing, and great obstructers of a Lands happiness; For, says the
Lord, When I would have healed Israel, it was Ephraims and Samarias sins that
brake out and hindered it. 5. Deceit and falsehood in men's dealings, is a sad
evidence of an incorrigible time, as testifying how little place the fear of
God has among men; Therefore it comes in as a confirmation that they would not
be healed; for they commit falsehood. See Mic. 7.1, 5, 6. 6. It is also an
evidence of such a sad time, when injustice and oppression prevail, and men
are still so in love with the world, that all injust courses, secret or open,
are followed, that they may compass it; For, it is another proof, and the
thief comes in, privately into the house or City, and the troop of robbers
spoileth without, that is, no place in City or Country, in the house or
fields, is free of secret stealth, or open robbery.

Ver. 2. And they consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness: now their own doings have beset them about, they are before my
face.
The second sin for which they are challenged, (and which, as all the rest, are
so many proofs of their incurablenesse, which he had laid to their charge, v.
1.) is, their profane security and stupid atheism, in that they did no more
think of giving an account of their ways, then if there were not a God, or
they had never heard of him. Because of which the Lord declares, that as he is
a Judge who sees all their ways; so they should shortly find themselves so
involved in the fruits of their own sins, as if they were in a net, and should
not flee his judgments. Whence learn, 1. It is men's duty to be much with
their own heart, in considering their case, and how it is with them; For, it is
a challenge, they consider not in their hearts, etc. or, say not to their
hearts, that is, they put not their own hearts to it, to ponder how matters
stand with them. 2. It ought especially to be considered by men in examining
their own condition, that sin unrepented of is remembered by God, how long
soever it be since it was committed; For, it is specially laid to their charge,
that they consider not that I remember all their wickedness, but since they
were spared, and prospered after their sinning, they thought God took no
notice, or had forgotten all; whereas he was but putting it up upon their
account. See Deuteronomy. 32.34, 35. 3. When men give over consideration of their
case, they turn in effect Atheists, denying unto God a providence, and by this
they are more and more emboldened to sin; For, not to consider that God
remembers all their wickedness, is in effect to deny a God, to deny that ever
he will punish sin, and consequently, that he knows or takes notice of it,
or has power to redress it. And this is laid to their charge as an evil which
loosed the raines in them to all sin; For, then they had all wickedness. See
Psalm. 14.1, 2, etc. and 94.3, -- 7. 4. As God knows and observes all the
ways of the children of men, whatever they imagine to the contrary; So he will
bring Atheists to know so much, by giving them the fruit of their own ways;
For, their own doings have beset them about, (that is, their guilt in the
effects thereof, shall lay hold on them on every hand, that they may not
escape;) they are before my face. This he subjoynes to the former, though they
were before him, before they beset them, because they shall be made to know
they were observed by God, when they shall beset them. See Prove. 5.21, 22. 5.
When men, especially within the visible Church, turn practical Atheists, and by
forgetting and denying of God, take courage in sin, it is a token that God will
very speedily refute that error, by taking order with them for their sins;
For, says he, Now, that is, shortly, their own doings have beset them, where
he speaks of it in the by-past-time, because of its certainty and celerity. 6.
Man needs no surer fetters and ties to bring him to judgment, then his own
guilt, which will surround him, sometime in his own conscience, and always
pursue him in effects, till it leave him in the hands of justice; For, their
own doings have beset them about. See Psalm. 49.5. Numb. 32.23.

Ver. 3. They make the King glad with their wickedness, and their Princes with
their lies.
The third sin challenged, is, that the people did please their King and Rulers
with their wickedness, (that is, they gave obedience to them in their wicked
commands, especially concerning Religion, chapter 5.11. which they expected would
not have been taken so well by the people; and they studied to make them more
and more glad by their wicked behavior, since they saw them so pleased with
it.) And with their lies, whereby we may understand their false worship, which
is a lying and a deceiving course, Isa. 44.20. and a lewd lie, to father it on
God, as true worship performed to him, as, 1 Kings. 12.28. Exodus 32.5. Or, we
may understand it of their malicious slandering of such as were opposite to the
course of the Court, and of the times; or of their flattering their Rulers, to
comfort them when their consciences vexed them; or generally that they gave
them occasion of joy that was deceitful. Whence learn, 1. Let men rejoice or
glory never so much in sin, yet wickedness is but a poor sport, and will prove
so in end; For, it draws God to be against them, that they were made glad
with wickedness. 2. It evidenceth the sad case of a Land, when they who should
advance piety and virtue, and punish vice, are on the contrary rejoycers at the
wickedness of their people, and glad to get them drawn to it: For, it is the
challenge, that the King and Princes are made glad with their (that is, the
peoples) wickedness, that they have a people who will obey their wicked
commands, and are not so tender and scrupulous, as to make question of right
and wrong, especially in the matter of Religion, but will run whither they are
driven by a supreme command. 3. It is also a sad case when men, and especially
great ones, have such designs, as cannot be compassed but by wickedness; and
when they are so far given up, as to be glad to attain their end, by whatsoever
means it be; For, so much also does the challenge import; Their Rulers could
not carry their business, unless their subjects were embarked in a wicked
course; and they were so far from making scruple of that, that they were glad
the people were so, that they might gain their point. 4. It is the usual
disposition and woeful sin of a people, that they are still upon the prevailing
side, and do follow the example and will of their Rulers, if it were even to
sin; For, it is laid to their charge, They make the King glad with their
wickedness, etc. they will make no bones of sin, if they know it may please
him; yea, they will prove more pliable and forward, then could have been
expected of them. See Prove. 29.12. 5. As Idolatry and false worship is a
deceitful ground of comfort, and will not be owned by God, whatever men
pretend; and as the calumniating of upright men is an usual way of promoting a
false Religion; So a deceitful lying comfort is a dangerous snare, and it is
the great sin of any to be instrumental in applying of it; For, so much is
imported in that part of the challenge, They make the King and Princes (for
both are understood in every one of the branches,) glad with their lies.

Verse. 4. They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker: who cease
from raising, after he has kneaded the dough until it be leavened.
The fourth sin challenged, is, their pronenesse to adultery, bodily or
spiritual, or both, of which they were generally guilty. This is illustrate
from the similitude of a Baker heating an Oven, and kneading Dough; who cease
to raise himself or others to put in the Bread, till it be leavened, and the
Oven hot. In application whereof, we need not restrict it particularly to this,
that Jeroboam and his faction were hot upon the Idolatry of the calves, of
which he was the contriver and Baker, but yet did cease to put it in practcie,
till by emissaries the people were leavened and prepared. Nor yet to this, that
they were mad upon sin, and yet insensible and careless of their case because
of it, as a sleeping Baker. But it seems rather to hold out this general, That
they opened their hearts so to Satan's fiery tentations, as an Oven is to fire,
and were so inflamed and fitted thereby, as presently on an occasion they acted
the sins, as an hot Oven will bake the Bread when once it is leavened, and put
into it; and as an Oven continues heating, till the Dough be leavened and ready
to be put into it; so their heat of lust and tentation, was not extinguished
till it was satisfied; And further as an Oven into which fire and fuel is put,
keeps the heat, and leaven goes through the lump, though none watch about
them, but the Baker and others sleep; so their hearts being once pestered with
sin, did feed themselves therein. Doct. 1. A visible Church not receiving the
love of the truth, is justly given over to vile uncleanness, both in worship
and manners, and to be monstrously enflamed thereunto, by Satan and his
firebrarnds; For, such was Isreal's condition, They are adulterers, as an oven
heated by the baker, where the Baker may cast in what fire and fuel he will,
and where the heat is most violent, as being kept in compact together. See Romans
1.21, 24, etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. 2. The more universal sin be, it does
add to the Lords controversy against a Land; For, They are all adulterers,
that is, they are generally guilty, though not every one, and this is a part of
the challenge. 3. Whatever men may pretend without themselves, as an excuse for
their corrupting their ways; yet upon true trial, they will find it to flow
from their own hearts polluted by Satan; nor will it suffice to acknowledge
some infirmity and inadvertencie in their sin, unless they see it deeper
rooted in their hearts; For, whereas they might pretend they followed these
courses only to please their Kings,, and obey their commands, the Lord lets
them see it was their own hearts enflamed with lusts, and Satan's tentations,
like an oven heated, that drew them to it, and that this was no sudden fit, but
the fruit of deeply corrupted hearts, as an Oven that has been long heated
with much fuel. 4. Albeit that wicked men do not always break forth in actual
wickedness, yet are they not the more innocent for that; For, 1. Their spirits
are pestered and haunted with sin, though they do not act it, as the Oven is
still heating, and the Dough still leavening, though the Baker and others
sleep. 2. It is not of them that they do not act sin, it is only through the
want of a tentation and occasion; as the hot Oven cease from baking Bread,
and the Baker from putting it in, only till it be leavened and ready. 3. Their
heat of lust is never extinct, nor do they labor to mortify it, but it
continues restless and furious till it be satisfied; as the Oven still heats
and burns, till the Bread be leavened and put in. Doct. 4. Albeit good
motions, when they are most fervent, need frequent cherishing, as being no
native plant of our hearts; yet when evil once gets footing, it will entertain
and feed it self, and grow upon our hand; For, the Oven will heat, and the
Dough leaven, though all should sleep after they have put in the fire and the
leaven.

Ver. 5. In the day of our king the princes have made him sick with bottels of
wine, he stretched out his hand with scorners.
The fifth accusation is for Court-intemperance, in King, Princes and
Courtiers, without any respect to honesty or shame. In so much that on the
Kings birthday, or the day of his Coronation, or some other solemnity, yearly
observed by him, the Princes did draw the King to be drunk; whereby, 1. He
contracted sickness. 2. It made him forget and prostitute his place and
authority, joining in society with scorners, or men eminently dissolute, and
look rather like such in his drunkenness, then like a King. Doct, 1. Days
which men will have observed as days of festivity and solemnity, do ordinarily
prove days of great miscarriage and provocation against God: For, it is in the
day of our King, that they contract very eminent guilt; In the Original it is,
the day of our Kings, wherein the Lord by his Prophet repeats their words, as
proclaiming and boasting of it, and therefore loosing the rains to
intemperance. See Exodus 32.6. Job. 1.5. Eccles. 7.2, 3. 2. Drunkenness and
sensuality is an heinous crying sin, and particularly in Rulers; For, it is a
sad challenge, that they should be given to bottels of wine. See Prove. 31.4.
Eccles. 10.16, 17. Isa. 28.1. 3. Nobles and Princes, and great Courtiers, are
ordinarily great plagues and snares to Kings, who having their ear and
countenance, do make use of it for no other end, but to draw them to sin
against God; For, it is the Princes who have made him sick, etc. 4. It is the
height of sensuality, when men not only become brutish themselves, but dare
invite and tempt others to the same excess of riot, and by all means draw
them to drunkenness: For, it is the sin of the Princes, that they draw the
King to drink. See Hab. 2.15, 16. Est. 1.8. 5. Men by their intemperance, do
not only draw on the guilt of misspending time, and abusing the good creatures
of God; but of self-murder, and abusing their own bodies also: For, they make
him sick with bottles of wine, either by making him drink whole bottles, or
drink wine, which in these parts they kept and carried in bottels. 6. Days of
feasting and intemperance, do also ordinarily prove days of great insolence
and boldness in all other sins: When men's hearts are up with carnal pleasures
and joy, and benumbed with sensuality, they care not what they do, they stand
in aw of none, and they will scorn all that contradict them, or are not of
their mind and way; For, it is imported here, there are scorners in the day of
their King, that is, either mockers of all such as applaud not their way, as,
Psalm. 35.16. or such as are come to an height of impiety, to scorn and defy
God and his threatenings, and therefore are called the scornful, Psalm. 1.1. 7.
It is also the great sin of drunkards, that by their sensuality, they deprive
themselves of the use of reason, and render themselves contemptible and like
beasts, that they can neither know their place nor duty; For, the King in his
drunkenness stretched out his hand with scorners, that is, debased himself to
keep society with such lewd persons, and looked liker one of these then a King.
8 It is the sin of Kings and Rulers, or any in lawful power, to prostitute that
authority wherewith God has stamped them in their office, and to render it
contemptible by their own miscarriage, by countenancing insolent sinners, whom
they should suppress; and by conversing with base and vile persons, and
joining with them in base courses unbeseeming their station and dignity; For,
herein did their King sin, in stretching out his hand with scorners.

Verse. 6. For they have made ready their heart like an oven, while they lie in
wait: their baker sleeps all the night, in the morning it burns as a
flaming fire.
A sixth challenge, is, for their fraudulent carrying on of wickedness to a
maturity. He makes use of the former similitude, shewimg, that as a Baker
heats his Oven by putting in fire and fuel enough, and then sleeps on till it
be ready, at which time it will burn up in a flame, though he had been
sleeping; so they did subtly, with leisure and length of time, premeditate
and plot their wickedness, and did dissemble it, as if they were sleeping,
till they had an opportunity, and then they were all on fire to execute that
which they had been so hot and serious in contriving. Whence learn, 1. Raging
and lustful sins are nothing the less discerned by God, nor the less odious
that they are managed with policy, and subtly conveyed; Therefore, says
he, for (or, certainly, as the word will also import,) they have made (or
applied, and fitted) their heart like an oven, violent, hot, and raging, and
that whiles they lie in wait. 2. Men who are wicked and subtle, may seem to be
lying by and doing nothing, when yet, 1. Their hearts are very bent on their
course; their Oven is heating while they sleep. 2. Their designs are still
going on, the heat is tending to burning as a flaming fire, while the baker
sleeps. Doct. 3. Iniquity that is hatched through abundance of lust, is most
violently executed, when an opportunity offers, and the more violently that it
has been long delayed; For, this Oven, it burns as a flaming fire, and the
more violently, that their baker sleeps all the night.

Verse. 7. They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their Judges: all
their kings are fallen, there is none among them that calls unto me.
An instance is given of this challenge, showing that these plots which were so
general among them, gr^w to the height of frequent conspiracies against their
Kings and Judgess, that every one might set himself upmost, according as we
find it was among them after Jeroboam the second, in whose days Hosea first
began to prophesy. See 2 Kings 15. Their condition under all these confusions,
is amplified from the great and universal stupidity that was among them, in
that they called not on God, nor employed him in all these distempers. Doct. 1.
An ill ordered Church is ordinarily plagued in justice with an ill ordered
State: and when men inflamed with lusts get leave to rage over all bounds in
the matters of God, and in other things, it is righteous with God to let them
loose to the overturning of policy, and humane society; For, they who were as
an heated oven in adultery bodily or spiritual, v. 4. are now hot as aen oven,
and devoured their Judges, etc. 2. Sedition and conspiracies against authority,
are in effect but the fruits of strong and raging lusts, let them have what
pretext soever men please to put upon them, and the actors pretend to what they
will; For, They are all hot as an oven, and upon this follows, and have
devoured their Judges, all their Kings are fallen, that is, many or most of
them are cut off by violent deaths. And by Judges, we are to understand, either
the Kings themselves, or inferior Officers their creatures, who were cut off
by these who made the change, to establish their own faction. 3. Profane and
corrupt men, their fawning upon, or seeming to comply with the humors of these
in authority, even in every thing, and without any respect to the commands of
God, is yet no assurance, but they may, when they have opportunity, turn
disloyal: And they may take as little notice of Gods Law subjecting them to the
higher powers, as they did of his other commands, in their sinful compliances
with Rulers humors; For, they who make the King glad with their wickedness,
v. 3. and who observed their Birth or Coronation-dayes with much riot and
sensuality, v. 5. now, they have devoured their Judges, etc. 4. These violent
lusts and turbulent effects of them, are the fruit of not calling on God, who
being sought unto, would subdue these lusts, and correct these evils, which
lust leads men to apply violent remedies unto. When God gives up a people to
such courses of sedition and conspiracy, it is a token that neither the Land,
which is in such a distemper, nor the actors in these courses are given to
prayer, at least in a right and sincere way; For, where these courses are, it
may be said, there is none among them that calls unto me, or, generally they
neglect it. 5. It is an evidence of great stupidity, and the cause of a
controversy from the Lord, when greatest commotions, alterations and
confusions will not make a people sensible, nor stir them up to look to God and
call on him: For, the words may import also this challenge that all these
overturnings of the state did nothing at them, the people never thought on
turning to God, or employing of him, there is none among them that calls unto
me.

Verse. 8. Ephraim, he has mixed himself among the people, Ephraim is a cake
not turned.
The seventh sin for which they are challenged, is their mixture with the
Heathen Nations, (carried on especially by Ephraim or their Rulers,) whereby
they became a cake not turned: by which I do not understand so much a
threatening, that the hungry enemy (of whom, v. 9.) shall cat him up as a
hungry man would eat a cake lying on the fire, not staying till it be baked: as
a declaration of the sinful effects of this mixture, that they became (as we
say) neither raw nor roasted, neither a people who had wholly quit God, nor who
cleaved to Gods way; yea, they became hot on the Idolatrous side, and cold in
the matter of true Religion. For clearing of this mixture, and wherein the
sinfulness thereof consisted, Consider, 1. The parties with whom they mixed,
were not any profane company, or persons among themselves, but the people, or
Heathen Nations and Idolaters about, with whom it was not lawful for
Israelites, so much as to converse familiarly, or to marry, (but if they had,
they behoved to divorce) far less to join in a Congregation with them, as
members of the visible Church. 2. The mixture condemned was not so much local,
or in place, nor only in confederacies, or marriages; But the mixture was
chiefly moral, in embracing their false Religion, and becoming like unto them,
as is cleared in the end of the Verse. 3. This mixture and conjunction as it
related to confederacies, had not so much as a pretense of necessity, there
being no former ties betwixt Israel and them, nor common interest, as of one
incorporation, necessitating them to this mixture; but God had set a
partition wall betwixt Israel and them: and so Ephraims conjunction with them
was voluntary, and sinfully chosen by him; And therefore this mixture, and all
other circumstantiate, are to be condemned. Doct. 1. The visible Church is
obnoxious to great hazard in the world, by reason of wicked societies and false
Religions without, which (beside her snares and dangers from enemies in her
bosom,) are ready to corrupt her; For, there are the people, and Nations
about, who drew them from God. 2. The great hazard of corruption of the visible
Church, even by these who are without, is not so much from them or their
endeavors, as from her self, who has by nature such a principle, as will
soon draw her to the wrong way to join with others, whereas they have no such
principle to set them right: For, Ephraim mixeth himself among the people, and
that is his undoing. 3. The declinings of the visible Church, and her
debordings after the customs of Idolaters, and the rest of the world, is
oft-times justly put upon the account of the Rulers, who upon their politic
designs do thus entangle and mislead her: For, Ephraim, or the Kingly tribe is
charged with this; and it was their Rulers who drew on these confederacies and
conjunctions. 4. Such as once begin to decline, and go wrong in the matters of
Religion, cannot set bounds to themselves, nor be assured, but they will go
further wrong: For, Ephraim rested not at the Idolatry of the calves, but mixed
himself among the people. That same policy that pleaded for the calves, served
also to urge their conformity with Heathen Idolaters. 5. Wicked societies are
dangerous, and so contagious, that as we are to guard against infection by
reason of necessary conjunction with wicked men, when we are united with them
in place and common interests, (which is our affliction, and not our sin,) so
especially we are to beware of voluntary conjunction with them, when no such
necessity can be pretended; For, this also was a part of Ephraims mixture, his
joining in converse and confederacies with them, drew on mixture with them in
their Religion. See Psalm. 106 35. 6. Mixtures in Religion turns men mungrels,
and halters in the matter of Religion, 1 Kings 18.21. and so worse then the
very Heathen, who are zealous and fervent for the Religion they own, and
against that which is opposite to it; yea, mixtures will soon resolve in
furious frowardness in that which is wrong, and coldness in and averseness
from the true Religion. Both these are imported in this effect of their
mixture, Ephraim is a cake not turned, as is before explained. And it is like
at first they pretended to a respect to both, and that they would not abandon
God nor his Worship, whatever other course they followed. But at last their
corrupt courses did first abate their zeal in Gods way, and then put it to the
door. See Matthew. 15 6.

Ver. 9. Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knows it not: yea, gray
hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knows not.
The eighth sin for which they are challenged, is their stupidity under rods
and afflictions. Their case is held forth, first, in proper terms, that all
their warlike power and riches was consumed by strangers, by these to whom they
sought, and others, 2 Kings 13.4, 7. Then it is held forth in figurative
terms, that they were like a man beginning to overspread with gray hairs,
that is, either their great trouble had suddenly altered and wasted them, and
made them look like their grave, or they had been long under troubles, even to
old age; and yet the challenge is, that they considered not all this, to make
right use of it. Whence learn, 1. The visible Church never makes defection, and
changes from the true Religion, but to their own prejudice. Even such as they
join with, and study to please by corrupting of Religion, prove ordinarily
their scourge; For, strangers (these with whom they mixed, v. 8. or some like
unto them) have devoured his strength. 2. Whatever strength or power a Nation
may seem to have, yet when God is angry, and blows upon it, and deserts them,
it will soon be swallowed up; For, when God is provoked to desert flourishing
Israel, then strangers have devoured his strength. 3. When sin is once
entertained, men become so stupid, that they will not heed difficulties in
their way, nor be impeded by them to follow their course; For, he knows it
not, or does not regard it. A little trouble would discourage them in a good
way, but nothing will break off the course of their sin. 4. When men become
stupid in sin, they will reap no profit by their afflictions, be they never so
sore, or of so long continuance; For, let gray hairs be here and there upon
him, yet he be knows it not. 5. Albeit sinners may, and will feel the smart
of afflictions, yet God does not take notice of that, so long as they are not
led in to see the fountain and cause of their trouble, and to get the right use
of it; For, it is in this respect the Lord says twice, he knows it not,
because whatever they felt and knew, yet they regarded it not so, as to tremble
at Gods anger in it, and to abandon the course of defection. See Isa. 42.25.

Verse. 10. And the pride of Israel testifies to his face, and they do not
return to the LORD their God, nor seek him for all this.
The ninth sin for which they are challenged, (which is also a cause of their
stupidity) is, their pride in standing out against God, and that they will not
abase themselves for all their trouble, to turn to God or seek him. See chapter
5.5. Doct. 1. Pride is an horrid and detestable sin, especially when it drives
the sinner to stand it out against God, and when he persists in it,
notwithstanding that afflictions make him bear the badges of his baseness; For,
under all this trouble, there is the pride of Israel, which the Lord here
challenges as an heinous sin. 2. Men's guilt, and particularly their pride
under affliction, does convincingly bear witness against them, not only by
bewraying it self, but by testifying their desperate condition because of it;
For, the pride of Israel testifies to his face, in both these respects. 3. It
is a sufficient evidence of men's pride, and rising against God and his
dispensations, when they are not drawn to God by their rods, however otherwise
they should seem to walk never so crushed-like under them; For, pride
testifies in this, they do not return to the Lord for all this. 4. When the
Lord sends affliction upon his people, it does call for, and the Lord may
justly expect, that they should not only seek to him for help, but should seek
himself and his face, rather then their own ease, and that (to the end they may
come speed in seeking) they should endeavor conversion, and turn from their
evil way; For, all this is imported in their duty which the Lord misseth under
their trouble, they should return to the Lord and seek him. 5. As no outward
dispensations will of themselves prevail with impenitent sinners, nor
afflictions, if they be not sanctified, do any good; so in particular,
afflictions meeting with unsubdued hearts, will not better them, nor convince
them of, or drive them from sin to God; For, proud Israel do not return to the
Lord; nor seek him for all this. Such a carriage is a sign of
stout-heartednesse. 6. The offer that is made to sinners under the rod of love
and of acceptance, if they will turn from their evil way, does much aggravate
the sin of obstinacy; Therefore, it is put in the challenge, they do not
return to the Lord their God, who offers upon their returning, to prove
himsel to be so.

Verse. 11. Ephraim also is like a silly dove, without heart: they call to
Egypt, they go to Assyria.

12. When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them, I will bring them down
as the fowls of the heaven: I will chastise them, as their congregation has
heard.


The tenth sin for which they are challenged, (and which is a branch of their
mixture, v. 8.) is, their folly in not seeking the help of God, but of
strangers, in their sttaits, herein resembling Doves, whose simplicity makes
them run on hazards, v. 11. for which the Lord threatens to involve them in the
punishment of their sins, and (alluding to the flying Dove) to bring them down
as a bird in a net, according to the predictions of the Prophets in their
Congregations, v. 12. From v. 11. Learn, 1. It is an undeniable evidence of
men's not turning to God, not seeking him in trouble, when their hearts are bent
on wrong courses, and seeking to other refuges; So much does the dependence of
this challenge upon the former, teach. They do not return to God, who call to
Egypt, etc. however they may pretend to do both. 2. As the Lord does not
approve of all sorts of prudence, especially that wherein the wisdom of the
flesh bears sway; So every simplicity is not commendable, especially when it
is not armed and guarded with spiritual prudence; For, it is a challenge,
Ephraim is like a silly dove without heart, or prudence, though it be
commendable when joined with serpentine wisdom, Matthew. 10.16. 3. Whatever
wisdom or policy may seem to be in men's forsaking God and his way in trouble,
yet it is in effect great simplicity, and will prove so; and whatever humane
helps may promise, yet it is folly to think that men can help, when God in
anger is a party, or that, when God is calling us to seek him by trouble, men
should deliver us without our owning of God; For, herein Ephraim is like a
Dove, they call to Egypt, they go to Assyria, to wit, for help when they are in
distress. 4. Whatever folly there be in such courses, yet they are the usual
way which men take; yea, not only do they essay some of them, but they will
rather be endless in seeking after carnal confidences on every hand, then they
will turn to God; For, Ephraim proves such a Dove, and they call to Egypt, on
the South, and will be at pains to go to Assyria on the North, rather then seek
to God. 5. Men's simplicity, and being thereby misled and abused, will not plead
excuse for their sin before God; For, this is laid to Ephraims charge, though
herein he was like a silly dove. From v. 12. Learn, 1. Men's not acknowledging
of God in the use of means, or their using of unlawful means, provokes him to
become their party, and to be against them; For, so does this threatening
following on the former challenge, teach. 2. Such as turn away from God and his
way, do justly meet with snares in the ways they follow, from which they
cannot extricate themselves; For, when they go, I will spread my net upon them,
or cause them to be ensnared in unavoidable inconveniences. 3. Men's prospering
for a time in an evil way, gives no assurance but they will get a sad fall, nor
will it hinder God to reach them for that end; For, I will bring them down as
the fowls of heaven, that is, as the Dove and other fowls do fly high, and
yet they come down and are caught in a net; So though they soar high, yet I
will abase them. 4. Gods sad Word against sin and sinners, will at last take
effect, and resolve in sad chastisements; For, I will chastise them, as their
congregation has heard. See Ezekiel. 1.6. 5. It may add much bitterness to the
judgments that are inflicted on men, when they shall consider how heinous it
was in them to sin so grievously, who heard God speaking to them in their
Assemblies, and that they would not believe their danger from the Word laying
it before them, till now they are made to feel it; For these causes is their
chastisement amplified that it will be as their congregation has heard.

Ver. 13. Woe unto them, for they have fled from me: destruction unto them,
because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed them, yet
they have spoken lies against me.
The Lord having thus laid so many sins to their charge (mixed with some
threatenings expressed or insinuate) whereby he makes it clear that their case
was desperate, and that there was no healing of their backslidings: Now he
proceeds to take away from them all hope of pardon, or exemption from
judgementst, and to declare he behoved to destroy them, as was insinuate in
that challenge and expostulation, Chap. 6.4. And for this end, he pronounces a
sad sentence against them, and demonstrates the equity thereof, from several
aggravations of their sin, which takes away all pretenses and excuses from them.

In this ver. the sentence is pronounced in a threatening of woe and destruction
to come upon them, for their Apostasy and rebellion, unto which is added the
first confirmation of the equity of this sentence, taken from their horrid
ingratitude against God, who had redeemed and delivered them from many troubles
since the time of their deliverance from Egypt, and yet they lied against him,
both in profession and practice. Whence learn, 1. The sins of the visible
Church are odious, in that they are not simple sins, but Apostasy and
defection; as here is laid to their charge. 2. Apostasy is in this horrible, in
that the Apostate not only like a vagabond, runs away from so excellent a
Master, contrary to his duty; but that he labors to bring an ill report on
God, by fleeing from him, as if he were an enemy; for, they have fled from me,
is the aggravation of their guilt. 3. Departing from God will soon draw men to
most wicked and rebellious courses; for, unto this is subjoyned, they have
transgressed, or, rebelled against me, not only by their Apostasy, breaking
all bonds, but this drawing on more insolency in sin. 4. As Apostasy and
rebellion, is of it self a condition sufficiently plagued and miserable,
though no calamities followed upon it; So it will also at last draw on
desolation and destruction, and Gods curse with it; for, woe and destruction, or
spoil, a destruction with a woe in the bosom of it, follows on their course,
to confirm what a woeful course it was of it self. 5. However the Lord in
mercy bestow many notable deliverances on his sinning people, yet that will not
stop the course of their defection, and this does highly aggravate their sin;
for, though I have redeemed them, yet they have spoken lies against me. See,
Psalm. 106.43. 6. The visible Church does lie against God, having been delivered
by him, either when she denies him in her practice, Tit. 1.16. Psalm. 14.1. or,
when being delivered, she does belie these professions and promises she made in
trouble; or, when she cleaves still to false doctrine and corrupt religion,
pretending it to be the truth, and constructs of Gods delivering her, as if it
were a testimony that he favored her way; or, when in her prosperity she
forgets God, ascribing all her deliverances to her Idols, as all her
afflictions to him, as, Chap. 2.5. Jer 44.17, 18. In all these respects, it was
the sin of Jsrael, that when God redeemed them, yet they spoke lies against him.

Ver. 14. And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled
upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine, and they rebel
against me.
A second confirmation of the equity of the sentence, is taken from their not
seeking God syncerely under trouble, but only howling because of outward
wants; and that however they seemed to make solemn applications to God, yet
they continued in their rebellion. Whence learn. 1. Every show of seeking even
the true God, will not be accepted of him, and may be so far from preventing
wrath, that it may haste it on; for, this their defect in seeking God is one
cause why woe and destruction comes upon them. 2. Men's prayers how instant
soever they seem to be, yet are nothing before God, when the heart is not
engaged in the duty, nor affected with that which is men's true misery and the
cause of their trouble, nor sincerely engaged to God from whom they expect
help; for, it is a challenge, they have not cried unto me with their heart when
they sought to him under trouble, albeit no doubt they were affected with the
stroke, and seriously desired to be rid of it. 3. As men who employ not God
under trouble, will soon be broken and crushed with it; So the cries of such,
which flow only from sense of pain and want, and from spirits not humbled
under Gods hand, are not only inacceptable to God, but rather like the
carriage of beasts, then even of rational men, much more of gracious men; for,
in their cries, they but howled upon their beds, that is, their troubles cast
them, as it were, on sick beds, and there they do not cry to God syncerely, but
howl like dogs, who can feel and resent pain as well as they do. 4. Men may
make very solemn addresses to God, and keep very public humiliations, who yet
are not soundly exercised nor accepted of God; For, they assemble themselves,
to wit, for solemn prayer, and yet in all this they but add to the
controversy. 5. God does justly reject these prayers, how solemn soever,
wherein men are only driven by outward necessities, and their first and only
suit is their own particular, never minding better things, or greatet wants:
For, they assemble themselves for corn and wine not seeking Gods favor and
grace, and therefore are rejected. 6. Men's solemn worship is also justly
rejected, when they never give over their stubborn and rebellious dispositions
against God: But whereas men's calling on God should engage them against sin,
they on the contrary, whatever they seem to be in immediate worship, yet they
run presently after it to their old courses in their ordinary conversation;
and when they obtain their will at Gods hand, they presently slight God, as if
they had no more to do with him; For, this is another cause of his condemning
their way, they assemble themselves, and they rebel against me, that is, they
retain their rebellious dispositions, and albeit in the mean time they act no
gross rebellion, yet they never purpose to give it over, but to be as they
were, so soon as they have done with the duty, or God has granted their desire.

Verse. 15. Though I have bound, and strengthened their arms, yet do they
imagine mischief against me.
A third confirmation of the equity of the sentence, (and a further evidence of
their ingratitude) is taken from this, that when ever the Lord did in any
measure restore the strength and power of their State, which had been broken by
many troubles (as he did by Joash, 2 Kings 13.25. and Jeroboam the second, 2
Kings 14.25, 26, 27.) then they conspired the more boldly against God, and
plotted as if they would have cast him out of the possession of a Kingdom
among them: That thus the binding, or strengthening of their arms, is to be
interpreted, appears from the contrary threatening, Ezekiel. 30.20, 21, 22, 23.
Doct. 1. The visible Church does oft-times cast herself into many dangers,
which would ruin her if God interposed not: and particularly, her abuse of
power, does justly make her power to be broken, as here is imported. 2. As God
in his pity and long-suffering toward his sinful Church, does interpose for
restoring her out of her desperate distempers: So it is her great fault, that
kindness does not gain her, but she requites him with evil for good, as here
we are taught, Though I have bound and strenghened their arms, yet do they
imagine mischief against me. 3. The power and strength and authority which the
Lord conferres upon his people, ought to be employed for him, especially when
he has recovered it after many sad breaches upon it; and it must be heinous
guilt, when instead of being so, it is employed against him, and when a peoples
recovery makes them more bold on sin, and in casting off his yoke, and
contemning of his authority; For, such is their sin here, they plotted treason
and rebellion against God, when their power was recovered. 4. Sin is so much
the more heinous that men do fall in it not of ignorance, but of purpose, and
do deliberate and devise upon it: In which case the Lord will reckon with
sinners as if they could or had acted all that they project; For, they imagine
mischief against me. He that takes notice that all they attempted against
him, was imagined, or devised and plotted, and charge all these designs
against him, upon them, albeit they could not effectuate any thing to his
prejudice.

Verse. 16. They return, but not to the most High: they are like a deceitful
bow: their princes shall fall by the sword, for the rage of their tongue; this
shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.
The last confirmation of the equity of the sentence, is held forth in a new
challenge of their hypocrisy; that their repentance at any time, was nothing
but a show, and they aimed at nothing in it, but to deceive God, like a
deceitful bow that sends the arrow rather any where then to the mark. Upon
all these confirmations, the Lord closes with a repetition of the sentence,
threatening that (for these sins, and for their blasphemies, in defending their
false worship and courses, and boasting of their own strength when the Prophets
threatened them with judgments) even their Princes should be cut off by the
sword, much more the meaner sort of people, and that in their calamities, they
should be mocked by Egypt their confederate. Doct. 1. Such as are very wicked,
may yet have some shows of repentance; and that they are so, is a great snare
to themselves: For, They return, and this might be a ready objection against
the Prophets challenges. 2. Whatever length men may come in external shows;
yet they will not be approven, unless they be through in their conversion, and
turning to God, not putting on hypocrisy or formality in place of prophanity,
or a less odious vice in place of a grosser, nor pleasing themselves with any
less then a through and real change, from sin to God, and a closing with God
in Christ; For, it is their fault, they return, but not to the most high. See
Jer. 4.1. 3. Such as would indeed repent and turn to God, ought to take up God
rightly in his greatness and excellency, that so they may tremble to dally
with him, and offend him, that they may be humble in their approaches, and may
be encouraged to come to him, who is so far above all things they can choose
beside, and who can make them happy, oppose it who will; Therefore is he here
described to be the most high. 4. Men's short-coming in the matter of repentance
and conversion to God, flows from their want of straitness in not intending
what they pretend to, which is also a great sin; For, therefore it is added,
they are like a deceitful bow, that is, as a bow that has a throw in it,
does never direct the arrow to the mark, however it seem to aim at it; so
however they pretend true repentance, yet they do not intend it, but only to
deceive and flatter God till they might get out of trouble, and then return to
their wonted courses; and therefore it was that they returned, but not to the
most high. 5. As the sword is one of Gods scourges whereby he chastises his
sinful people: So great ones need not think to be exempted, when God draws
it, nor need people place their hope of safety in their Rulers, who by having
chief hand in the defections of the time, do provoke God to have a special
controversy against them; For, their Princes shall fall by the sword. 6. Men's
blasphemous insolency in defending sin when God by his servants reproves it,
and glorying in their own strength, when God threatens, is an heinous
provocation, especially when they dare utter and express it, and it is a
provocation that will not escape vengeance; For, this seems especially to
have been the rage of their tongue, which is put in the sentence, that it might
not be forgotten as a chief cause of their stroke. 7. Such as forsake God and
join in confederacies with wicked men, are justly not only disappointed of
help by them, but left destitute of all pity in their extremities, and meet
with derision, in stead of comfort, from these they confided so much in; for,
this (to wit, their calamities for sin) shall be their derision in the land of
Egypt, whither many of them fled, chapter 9.6.

CHAP. VIII.
THis Chap. is of the same subject with the former, as containing denunciations
of sad judgments to come upon Israel, for sin; Only a word is subjoyned
against Judah, which was not in the former Chap. And by these repetitions of
reproves and threatenings, the Lord would inculcate upon them what was their
duty, would vindicate his own justice, clear his long-suffering and patience,
terrify them from sin, and put them to silence who were ready to murmur
against his proceeding.

In the Chap. there is; First, A general proposition of speedy judgment to
come upon Israel for their sin, verse. 1. notwithstanding any thing they could
pretend to the contrary, verse. 2, 3. Secondly, The causes of this judgment are
specified, and the judgments for these causes particularized. The first cause
is, their sinful change of civil government, ver. 4. -- the second cause is
the Idolatry of the calves to maintain this change, which should be their
ruin, v. -- 4. Seeing thereby, and by their continuing therein, they provoked
God to anger, ver. 5. And since the calves were their own vain invention;
therefore God would prove the vanity of these Idols by the destroying of them,
ver. 6. And would cause Israel to reap the fruit of their ways with sad
disadvantages, ver. 7. and drive them into exile where they should live in a
low and contemptible condition, ver. 8. The third cause of the judgment is,
their seeking to the heathen for help, to uphold them in that their Kingdom
and Idolatry, ver. 9. For which God will plague them, and give them greater
cause of sorrow then any they felt by reason of the Assyrian tribute, ver. 10.
The fourth cause, is their further corrupting of worship, by multiplying
Idolatry and superstition, ver. 11. by contemning of the written Word, ver. 12.
and by their prophanity and selfishnesse in what worship they pretended to
offer to God, ver. 13. -- For which the Lord rejects them, and threatens to
send them into exile, verse -- 13. Thirdly, in the close of the Chap. Judah is
taken in with Israel, as being as busy in multiplying and trusting in fenced
Cities, as Israel was in setting up Idolatry; for which the Lord threatens to
destroy that which they took so much pains on, ver 14.

Verse. 1. SEt the trumpet to thy mouth: he shall come as an eagle against the
house of the LORD, because they have transgressed my covenant, and trespassed
against my Law.
IN this general proposition, they are accused for violating the Lords
Covenant, and sinning against the written Law; and therefore the Prophet is
commanded, as Gods Herald, to denounce that the Assyrian shall come speedily
and violently against them, as an Eagle does on the prey, and that
notwithstanding they were Gods people. Whence learn. 1. The clear purpose of
God concerning his people and their courses, is to be had from the Word;
Therefore the Prophet is to denounce it, and to give the most certain sound
concerning it. 2. As the Lords Ministers, ought freely, fully, and boldly to
publish in his Name, a peoples sin, and danger thereby, Isai. 58.1. So
denouncing of judgments in Gods Name against sin, will prove a dreadful sound
in end, especially when it comes to execution; for, set the trumpet to thy
mouth, alludes to the custom of Heralds denouncing war, and of a Centinell
giving an alarm of a present enemy, which use to be terrible. 3. However a
visible Church do not presently cease to be a Church, when they fall in sin
against God: (for Israel here continues to be the house of the Lord, For it is
spoken of them, and not of Judah and the Temple there) yet their fair titles
and privileges of being a Church will not keep off a stroke, when it is
procured by sin; For, albeit Israel be Gods people and house and family still,
and they glory in that title, yet he shall come against the house of the Lord,
the Assyrian shall come. See, Jer. 12 7. and 22.24. 4. When a people are ripe
for judgment, no distance of enemies can secure them; and enemies will be
fitted for executing vengeance; for, albeit the Egyptians their confederates
were near, and the Assyrians far off, yet he (as Nebuchadnezzar also did
against Judah, Ezekiel. ^7.3,) shall come as an Eagle, for swift approach and
certain obtaining of the prey, and violent tearing thereof. See Deuteronomy. 28.49.
Isa. 5.26. 5. God does not threaten nor strike his people, but when he is
provoked by their heinous sins; for, so much do the causes subjoyned to this
threatening, teach us. 6. As no b^nds will hold men who are mad upon sin; So it
is an aggravation of sin, that God condescends to bind our duty upon us, not
only by his supreme and absolute authority, but by Covenant and mutual
stipulation, and yet we rebel; For, albeit there was a Covenant, importing
their own consent, and Gods gracious promise to reward their endeavors; yet
they have transgressed my Covenant, called his, because it came of him, that
they were treated with in these terms, and to aggravate their impiety, who
dealt so in Gods Covenant, as could not be justified in a Covenant with very
equals. 7. However the Lord condescend to enter in a Covenant with his people,
and crave their consent to their duty, yet men will not assoile themselves from
sin, by renouncing their own consent, being bound by the Law of a sovereign
Lord, as well as by an agreed upon Covenant; Therefore it is added, and
trespassed against my Law. 8. The visible Church can have no pretense of
ignorance to excuse or extenuate her sin, For, she has not only a Covenant,
but a Law to clear the duties of the Covenant.

Ver. 2. Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee.

3. Israel has cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall pursue him.


This sentence is further confirmed by refuting what Israel might have to say
against this threatening, or to plead for deliverance, when it should be
executed. For whereas they would allege in their distress, that they had
interest in God by Covenant, and did acknowledge and profess him, ver. 2. the
Lord answers, that since in their practice, they renounced every good thing,
therefore the enemy should go on to pursue them, ver. 3. Whence learn. 1. As
God can make trouble drive the stoutest sinners to see their need of him; So an
hypocritical, formal and corrupt Church may be so plagued with delusion, as
that neither threatenings nor judgments will drive them from a conceit, but
that they are good enough, and will be owned of God as such; For, Israel shall
cry, etc. and go to God with their claims, expecting to be regarded. See
Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. 2. It is a great snare and occasion of delusion to a
people, when they lean upon a standing visible interest in God, and trust to
their external professions, and to what they know or acknowledge in their
judgment, without respecting their practice, or studying to make that interest
sure unto themselves in the Court of conscience; For, this is Isreal's snare and
pretense, My God, we know thee. 3 A true and real interest in God, and
acquaintance and communion with him, is of real worth and use in straits; For,
so much does their practice teach, who find a pretending to that their only
refuge in distress. 4. God will not be deluded or mocked with men's professions
or pretense of interest, but will examine them by what they are in practice;
For, he puts them to it, and tries what they have cast off. 5. As God is the
only and chief good, and his ways good, and ought to be seen to be so; So it
will aggreage men's guiltiness, that they do reject him and his way though they
be such; For, it is his challenge, Israel has cast off the thing that is good,
that is, God, his way of worship, and obedience to his Law. 6. Men are
naturally ignorant of, and opposite unto their own true good, and all who
forsake God and his way, will find in end, that they forsake their own mercy;
For whatever Isreal's hopes were in their defection, yet they have cast off the
thing that is good. See Psalm. 73.28. 7. When men once begin to turn their back
on their own happiness, and on the way of God, they will still grow more
averse from it, till they come to abominate and abhor it; and this fills up
the measure of their iniquity; for, the word in the Original imports, he has
cast off with abomination, or detestation, the thing that is good, and
therefore the Lord threatens. 8. When men (and especially the Church) leave
off, and abhor the way of duty, God will not let sin thrive in their hand,
but will send on judgments, and let them feel their loss in their strokes,
who would not see their prejudice in forsaking what was a good; For, upon this,
Israel has cast off the thing that is good, it is subjoyned, the enemy shall
pursue him. 9. It is a very sad plague, when men cleave so to their delusions
and pretentions to interest in God, that they will never see their error, till
judgments and Gods rejecting of them and their requests in trouble, refute
them; For, this is the answer to what Israel says, ver. 2. that for all they
can pretend, the enemy shall pursue them, and this shall refute their
mistakes. See Mat. 7.22, 23.

Verse. 4. They have set up kings, but not by me; they have made princes, and I
knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them Idols, that
they may be cut off.
Follows a more particular enumeration of Isreal's sins; procuring this
judgment, and a more ample and express declaration of their calamities,
because of these sins. The first sin and cause of judgment, is, their civil
Apostasy, whereby we are neither to understand the election of Saul, which was
not the peculiar fault of the ten tribes only, who are here challenged; nor yet
the rising up of some particular conspiratours in Israel, who long after the
rent from Judah, did now and then usurp the Kingdom; For, that was not so much
the fault of the whole people, as of particular men, who made the people suffer
under these alterations: But in this place the whole Nation is challenged for
that rent from the house of David from the very first beginning of it, in the
days of Jeroboam, who made the golden calves, of which the Lord speaks next
in the same ver. The sin charged upon them in this civil Apostasy, is, that
however the Lord foretold the renting of the Kingdom from the posterity of
Solomon, and that he would give ten tribes to Jeroboam; yet the people and he
not consulting with God about the time and way of it, nor waiting for his
command and approbation, did rent the Kingdom from David's house, and set up a
King and Rulers (or, a State conform to their intended Monarchy) of their
own. Whence learn, 1. However men be ambitious of sovereignty and rule, and
may think themselves absolute and free in civil things, to do and dispose in
them as they list; yet change of Government is a matter of great importance
before God, and usually is attended with much guiltiness, and sin against him;
For, so much is clear from this instance. 2. It is of absolute necessity that
men have a command from God to warrant their actions, without which men may do
that which God in his secret providence, would have done; yea, and foretells he
will have done, and by his permission suffers to go on, and yet in all this,
sin hainously; For, Notwithstanding God had foretold this change, and did let
it succeed; yet because they wanted a command, it is laid to their charge, They
have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes, and I knew it not,
that is, I approved it not. See 1 King. 15.28, 29. with Chap. 16 7. 3. Whatever
may be amongst men, yet length of time will make no prescription in the matter
of sin before God, but it lies still upon the guilty and impenitents
account, were it never so long, till God come and reckon with them about it;
For, though they stood, and prospered long after this defection, yet the guilt
remains, and is laid to their charge, now when they are going into captivity.

The second sin, and cause of their ruin, is, the Idolatry of the calves,
invented to uphold this defection from the house of David. This is summarily
propounded in this, ver. both in the sin thereof, that they liberally employed
their riches for that end, and in the punishment thereof, that hereby they did
undo themselves. Whence learn, 1. Sinful alterations in civil matters, bring
ordinarily sinful changes in Religion with them, and it is a black mark upon
usurpers, when they need a false Religion to uphold them, and make no bones to
prosecute their end, though by such wicked means; For, here the one change
followed the other, as is more at length held out in the History, 1 King.
12.26, 27, 28. 2. It is the great sin of men that they not only employ the
wealth given them of God against him; but that they who were most sparing and
niggardlie in maintaining the true Religion, will yet be lavish in upholding a
false and corrupt way of Religion, as suiting best with their hearts; For, of
their silver and their gold, have they made them Idols. 3. The making and
setting up of Images in religious state, upon whatsoever pretense, is a sin
against God, bewraying men's carnal dispositions, who cannot take up God
spiritually, nor conceive him present and near unto them, unless they set up
a carnal representation; For, it is a challenge, they have made them Idols;
wherein they conceived no Deity, but that they were a representation, or
visible symbol of the presence of the true God among them, who delivered them
out of Egypt, 1 King. 12.28. 4 Men's expense and labor in setting up, or
upholding a false Religion is nothing else but pains and charges to undo
themselves; For, the jealous God will not let the corrupting of Religion escape
unpunished; yea, he will not stand to ruin the authors and countenancers of
such a course, were it even a whole Nation, before it be not plagued; For, of
their silver and their gold, they have made them Idols, that they may be cut
off. 5. Men will not get a corrupt course, especially in Religion, excused upon
pretense of good intentions; but all the evil that follows on it will be
charged upon them, as if they had no other intention, or aim before them, but
to draw it on; Therefore it is charged upon them, that they do all this, that
they may be cut off, as if they set themselves of purpose to seek their own
ruin. See Prove. 8.36.

Verse. 5. Thy calfe, O Samaria, has cast thee off: mine anger is kindled
against thee: how long will it be ere they attain to innocence?
This Apostasy in the matter of Religion, and the punishment following on it,
are amplified in this and the three following verses. And first, (which relates
chiefly to the sinfulness of their course) he cleares how the calves should be
their ruin, and the cause of their rejection; to wit, because that sin
provoked God to anger against them, and that justly, seeing he had so long
forborne, expecting their repentance, but to no purpose. Whence learn, 1. Such
as abandon the true Religion, and do not acknowledge and worship the true God,
as he has revealed himself, will soon bewray their brutishness, and what a
reprobate sense they are given up unto, by their changing the glory of God into
a vile and base representation; For, whatever design Jeroboam had in this
device, either to imitate Isreal's practice in the wilderness, Exodus 32.4. who
had it from the Egyptians, or to gratify the Egyptians, among whom he had
found shelter in his exile, 1 King. 11.40. or because of the great benefit
which men reap by this creature, yet it was his brutishness, that he would
represent the glorious God by a calfe. See Psalm. 106.19, 20. Romans 1.23.^ He
mentions only one calfe, though there were two of them, 1 King 12.28, 29. and
belike, many petty ones afterward; because they were like other, and the same
thing, and did but represent one and the same thing, though they were
multiplied for the peoples ease. 2. Corruption of worship and Religion is
enough to ruin a State and Nation, were there no other controversy; and will
at last draw on sad and inevitable judgments; For, Thy calf has cast thee
off, or, provoked God to abandon thee with detestation. 3. Men who follow a
false Religion had need of fair weather, for it will prove empty, and abandon
its followers in their greatest need, without peace or comfort; For, so the
words will also bear, thy calfe will abandon thee. See Chap. 10.6. Jer 2.28.
Deuteronomy. 32.37, 38. 4. No strength or power of any place, will avail to hold off
judgments, especially when the inhabitants thereof are chief in carrying on
ill courses; Therefore albeit the calves were at Dan and Bethel, yet it is
called Samaria's calfe, as, Amos 8.14. Not only because it was the chief City,
and so comprehends the whole Nation, but because their power and riches
maintained that Idolatry, and therefore God threatens, were they never so
strong, Thy calfe, O Samaria has cast thee off. 5. As God is angry, and that
in great measure, (as the word imports) against Idols and corrupt Religion and
worship; So his anger against any sinful course, will soon make it vain and
ineffectuall, as to any thing the sinner expects from it; For, Thy calfe has
cast thee off, because mine anger is kindled against them. 6. Idolaters and
corrupters of Religion, can never be innocent, pure nor justified of God, while
they continue in that sin, pretend to what they will beside; For, so is here
imported, that they have not attained to innocence. 7. Whatever may be men's
thoughts of an inveterate custom in sin, taking away all sense of it; yet in
Gods account, continuance in sin is no excuse, but an aggravation of it, as
making men's case the more irrecoverable; For it is a ground of expostulation,
how long will it be ere they attain to innocence? that is, how long shall I
wait; expecting they will reform this evil, and yet they do it not? 8. Albeit
the Lord be long-suffering toward sinners, yet his patience will have a period,
and then wrath will be the hotter; For, this adds to the sin, and kindles his
anger against them, that he has cause to complain, how long will it be ere
they attain to innocence?

Verse. 6. For from Israel was it also, the workman made it, therefore it is
not God: but the calfe of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
In the second place, (which also insists chiefly on the sin of the course) he
confirms yet the justness of his anger against their calfe, and them because
of it, by showing the vanity of that Idol, in that it was their own invention,
and not Gods institution, and in that it could not be a God to help them, being
only the work of men: and therefore he threatens to prove its frailty, by the
breaking thereof. Whence learn. 1. Men's following humane inventions, neglecting
divine institution, is enough to corrupt all Religion: and it is sufficient to
condemn any thing that is intruded in Religion, that it is but of men; For,
from Israel was it also, imports not so much that they learned this from Israel
in the wilderness, or that they learned it not from Pagans, but devised it of
themselves (which yet is not certain) as simply it it a challenge that it was
their device, and not appointed of God. 2. Apostates are so sottish, that
albeit themselves be the inventours of Idols, and they know what they are, yet
they will set them up as relative objects of divine worship; For, albeit it was
from Israel, and the workman made it, yet they cleave to it, and give it so
high a room. 3. Albeit such as make, and set up Images in religious worship do
pretend that they acknowledge the true God only, yet such is the judgment of
God, and the bewitching power of Idols, and the deceitfulness of men's hearts,
that they will be found to ascribe some Divinity and Deity to them; Therefore
must the Lord prove that it is not God, which imports their hearts were
somewhat bewitched that way, though they pretended to honor the true God in
and by them, Exodus 32.4, 5. 1 King. 12.28. 4. Whatever estimation men have of
Images, or whatever excellency or Divinity they conceive in or represented by
them; yet it is sufficient to refute them, that themselves, who are but vain
and empty things, gave them all the excellency they have; For, thus does the
Lord argue, the workman made it, therefore it is not God. 5. As Images and
other instruments of Idolatry ought to be destroyed and broken: So the Lord by
a calamity on them will prove their vanity, to the conviction of all these, who
would not see it otherwise; and this will be the issue of all other things that
are too much deified; Therefore it is added as a confirmation of the vanity of
their calfe, but (or, for) the calfe of Samaria shall be broken in pieces,
alluding to what was done with Aarons calfe, Exodus 32.20. as the just fruit of
such courses.

Ver. 7. For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind, it
has no stalk, the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the strangers
shall swallow it up.
In the third place, the punishment for these sins, which was briefly spoken of
before, is amplified and enlarged in a twofold sentence or threatening. The
first is; that as their ways were vain and naught, as if a man had sown the
wind, so their hopes thereby should not only be disappointed and their Labor
vain, but it should prove hurtful; their harvest should be a whirlwinde and
tempest. This is again illustrate from a new similitude of an harvest, which
though it may be true literally, that their corne-harvest should prove so; yet
it seems here rather to be a Metaphor, showing that it should be with them, as
if the seed they sowed should either not grow to a stalk, or if it did, yet it
should want a blessing and prove no food, or if there were any increase, yet it
should be eaten up by enemies: So they should reap no benefit by their
Idolatrous courses, or if they seemed to prosper, yet it should not be blessed,
but the enemies should ruin all of it. Whence learn, 1. God is so jealous an
avenger of Idolatry and corrupt worship in his Church, that he will undo a
whole Nation, before he do not ruin these courses, which they will not reform
themselves; For, this sentence comes in as a reason and confirmation of his
sentence against the calves, ver. 6. the calfe of Samaria shall be broken in
pieces, for they have sown the wind, etc. that is, I will destroy the calfe,
and for that end, I will destroy you, that it may come into the power of
enemies, who shall break it in pieces. 2. However many men do undertake courses
with great hopes, (for men do sow in hope) yet they do oft-times employ their
pains to no purpose or profit; For, they have sown the wind. All such as
follow Idolatry, or any sinful, unprofitable, or ambitious course, their very
sowing and undertaking promises no good event, it being but like wind and
empty. See Prove. 11.29, Eccl. 5.16. Hos. 12.1. 3. Not only may men expect to
reap as they sow; but sinful and vain courses will bring further
disadvantages, and raise a violent tempest either in the undertakers
conscience, or outward condition, or both; For, they have sown the wind, and
they shall reap the whirlwinde, which is a tempestuous wind, 4. Albeit the
Lord do not alike soon discover the vanity of all sinful courses, by his
judgments; yet in due time he will do it, and make it the saddest judgment of
all, that men seemed to reap profit for a while in their way, and then all is
blasted; For, some get not so much as a stalk of their sowing; Some get that,
and yet the bud shall yield no meal; and some whose success is more promising,
yet are met with and get it saddest of all, that after their hope and probable
expectations, the strangers shall swallow it up.

Verse. 8. Israel is swallowed up, now shall they be among the Gentiles, as a
vessel wherein is no pleasure.
The second sentence or threatening, holds forth more expressly, that they
shall be totally consumed from being a Nation as a beast swallows up the prey,
and shall be driven into exile, where they shall live scattered and condemned,
as a broken and filthy vessel that is employed only in base uses. Whence
learn. 1. Sinful courses persisted in by the Church, may at last utterly
consume them, and satisfy the cruel and hungry desires of their enemies upon
them; For, Israel is swallowed up, to wit, by enemies, who would greedily
devour them, Psalm. 14.4. He says, he is swallowed up, because it was both
certainly and shortly (now) to come to pass. 2. Exile and banishment is a very
sad stroke, especially to the Church when they are scattered and deprived of
their societies and assemblies, and cast to live among heathen and profane
men; For, it is a judgment, now shall they be among the Gentiles. And though
somewhat in it was peculiar to them; yet in many things it is common to others.
3. Albeit the Lord allow much honor and many privileges upon his Church; yet
when they decline, and contemn God, by giving his glory to Idols, and by
corrupting of Religion, they are justly made contemptible before all the World;
For, they shall be among the Gentiles, as a vessel wherein is no pleasure.

Verse. 9. For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself:
Ephraim has hired lovers.
The Lord by his Prophet proceeds to lay forth their third sin, and cause of
these threatened judgments, which is, Their seeking help from the Assyrian or
other heathens (as it is, v. 10.) to uphold them in their civil defection, and
in their Apostasy from the true Religion. This is illustrate by a twofold
similitude, 1. A wild ass alone by himself, a beast noted for solitariness
and shunning the society of men, and for fierce wildness, that it will not be
tamed nor bred to a yoke. See Isa. 32.14. Job. 39.5, -- 8. Jer. 2.24. This may
be applied either to the Assyrians, that they were a selfish people, who cared
for none but themselves, and so it was Ephraims folly to seek to such. Or, to
Israel, who by this running from God, proved themselves brutish, feirce and
wild. 2. The second similitude points them out (and especially Ephraim, or
their Rulers who led them on these courses, as is before marked) as an impudent
harlot hiring these paramours. This challenge is joined with the former
threatening by the particle For, to show that it comes in with the rest of
their sins, as a cause of these former sentences, as well as of that which is
subjoyned to it. Doct 1. When men betake themselves to sinful courses, one of
them will still draw on another (for, their rebellion from the house of David,
and Apostasy from the worship of God, draws on more sin to uphold them in
their Kingdom and State) and when a people have gone far from God by their
sin, their straites will readily drive them yet further away; as is here seen
in Israel. 2. As the people of God readily never go further wrong, then in the
matter of seeking help in straites; So it is their great sin, not to seek to
make their peace with him when he sends trouble; to be diffident of his help
and care, if they would seek in earnest to him; to put confidence in the
creature, neglecting him, or to seek to wicked Nations in their extremities;
all these concurred in this sin, they are gone up to Assyria. Where to go up,
which usually in Scripture is said of them who go from other places to the land
of Israel, which lay high, is in this place no more then simply to go to
Assyria, as in Scripture a man is said to answer, when he but begins to speak.
3. Let men essay what means of help they please in trouble, yet they will no
where find that tender kindness and respect that they will feel in God, when
he is employed, and sought unto in sincerity: and particularly, potent and
wicked States will never be cordial to the interest of any, especially such as
have any profession of the Name of God, further then may be subservient to
their own ends; For, it proved very true of Assyria, he was in their need but a
wild ass alone by himself. 4. The people of God, do, especially by the
sinful shifts they make for help in trouble, bewray so much brutishness, and
lawless wildness, as may discover much of their nature; and be matter of deep
humiliation, if it were well considered; For, in this Israel also is a wild
ass, etc. by doing this, he fiercely casts off the yoke of Gods prohibition,
and he takes these shifts, that he may not be necessitated to stoop unto, or
employ God. 5. For this hiring of lovers, it teaches, 1. That in employing
sinful helps, and confiding in them, there is a kind of adultery and
spiritual Idolatry, as well (though not in the same measure) as in corrupting
the worship of God; Therefore these helps are called Lovers, as Idols are
elsewhere, with relation to them as an harlot. 2. The visible Church in her
defection, may be so violent, and deserted, as to go further wrong then other
transgressors; For, they are so bent that they hire lovers, and are at charge
to sin, wherein (especially as to the Idolatry they fell in by this
conjunction,) they are beyond other harlots, Ezekiel. 16.33. 3. The Church
declining from God, is justly contemptible in the eyes of all; Her interest is
little regarded, and her love of no worth to any, unless she hire them. 4.
Departing from God, and employing sinful helps and means, is very prejudicial;
not only in the event and issue, but even in the work it self; For, whereas
they might have had real and effectual help from God, if they had turned to
him, without money and without price; now albeit their other helps did stand in
no stead, yet they must hire lovers.

Verse. 10. Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather
them, and they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the King of princes.
The Lord threatens because of this, that their endeavors to hire help among
the Nations, should not avail them, but God should gather them, that is,
either their hired friends, to be employed against themselves; or, he will
gather themselves among the Nations in heaps, as dead corpses; or, whereas they
were wild and untameable, v. 9. he will reclaim them from this humor, and
make them endure his yoke of judgments, as, Jer. 2.24. This stroke is
amplified from an effect, that however the taxes imposed upon them by the great
King of Assyria, 2 Kings 15.19, 20. and 17.3. were very heavy, and a cause of
that revolt, 2 King. 17.4. yet they should find cause to grieve little at
that, in respect of what followed, when part of the Nation was carried into
captivity. 2 Kings 15.29. and then all of them, 2 Kings 17. Doct. 1. It will be
but to small purpose, what means men use, so long as they do not make matters
sure with God, and do not consider how he will dispose of them, or their helps;
For, so it proved here; Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will
I gather them. 2. When God is provoked to anger, he can employ the means of our
help, to ruin our selves, and can bring the wildest under sad rods; So much
does his gathering them, as is before explained, teach. Now, or, shortly, will
I gather them. 3. When the Lord has his Church to try, or them and the rest of
the world to scourge, he can and may let wicked men prosper to a very great
height for that end: For, the Assyrian is the King of princes, having so many
Kings and Princes subject and tributarie to him, Isa. 10.8. and 36.13. 4. A
people who have suffered under lesser trouble, and yet have made no right use
of it, to prevent more, or have used sinful means to be rid of it, may expect
no other issue, but that the Lord will send a greater trouble to make them
forget the former: For, this had been their carriage under their tribute and
burdens, and they are therefore told, they shall sorrow a little for the
burden of the King of princes. See Matthew. 24.7, 8. 5. Taxes and burdens under
the feet of oppressors, are but easy in comparison of captivity and exile,
and therefore ought to be the more patiently born; For, they sorrow a little
for the burden, etc. as being easy in respect of what followed.

Verse 11. Because Ephraim has made many altars to sin, altars shall be unto
him to sin.
Follows the fourth sin, and cause of their judgment, wherein their further
corrupting of worship, is laid to their charge, and aggravated in three
branches: whereof the first (which is charged on Ephraim as the misleader of
the people,) is, that whereas God had appointed only one Altar for his Worship,
and their Fathers of old had made a great stir, when there was appearance of
erecting another, Josh. 22. Now they had not only set up one in Dan, and
another in Bethel, beside that which God had appointed at Jerusalem, but had
multiplied them on every hill, as, chapter 4.13. and almost every where, as, chapter
12.11. This they did to sin, that is, not so much that they did this to offer
expiatory sacrifices for sin, as that the nature of their work was sin: And
therefore the Lord threatens that they should have their fill of sin by it, and
feel it. Whence learn. 1. Albeit the Lord be justly provoked to anger by all
the sins of his Church, yet their corrupting of Religion is his chief and great
quarrel; and is the sin in following of which, men contract so much stupidity,
as they need to be frequently charged with it: Therefore does the Lord fall
again upon their corrupt worship, as his great quarrel, and the sin wherewith
they were most blinded. 2. When men once leave God, and the true way of his
Worship, there will be no satisfaction in any other way of Religion they
follow, and therefore no end of defection. For, Ephraim has made many altars,
not contenting himself with these he set up at first. 3. However men may buske
up a false Religion, to make it plausible, and may seek to color and excuse it
with good intention; yet not only does the follower and promoter of it, sin,
but God looks upon him, as intending all the sin that is in it: For, he has
made many altars to sin, as if he intended all the sin that is in that course.
4. As men are then most fearfully plagued, when they are given up to go on in
their sin, and perish: So when men do not stand in aw of the sin of their
course, it is righteous with God to make them feel what sin is, and how ill he
is pleased with it; for, altars shall be unto him to sin, imports both these,
that they shall be given up to that sin; and as they sinned and cared not, so
the Lord should make it be seen to be sin indeed, and make them feel how sad
that is.

Verse. 12. I have written to him the great things of my Law, but they were
counted as a strange thing.
The second branch of the challenge, is, that in their defections, and
specially in this sin in corrupting the Worship of God, they contemned the Law
or Word of God, written to them by God, looking on its directions as of little
importance, and little concerning them. Whence learn, 1. The Word of God is the
true touchstone whereby men's ways, and their Religion is to be tried and
approven, and neither Traditions nor Revelations; Therefore, to prove the sin
of their corrupt worship, he charge them with contempt of the Law, or Divine
Doctrine in that matter. See Isa. 8.20. 2. It was the great mercy and
privilege of Israel of old, to have the Word and Oracles of God, for
instructing them in the way of salvation; and it is so still to any who enjoy
it, and they ought to find and esteem it so; For, it is an aggravation of his
sin, as the abuse of a very great privilege, that it was written to him. See
Psalm. 89.15. and 147.19, 20. Rom 3.1.2. 3. As it is a great mercy that the Lord
has caused to registrate his Will in writing, to prevent delusion and
mistakes; So, he is the Author of the written Word, whoever be employed as
Penman; For, I have written my Law, says he, which is true, not only of Moses
writings, but of the Prophets Doctrine, the sum whereof was at Gods command,
left registrate. 3. The subject matter of the written Word is great and
excellent, far above the subject of all humane sciences, as revealing God, the
way of his Worship, and of man's salvation, and so making them great who embrace
it; For, it is, the great things of my Law, not to be slighted nor contemned.
5. It is the great, though usual sin of the visible Church, to live strangers
to the Word of God, and little conversant with it; to look upon its directions
as of little moment, and that there is little hazard in not walking according
to them; and to look upon them as very strange and contrary to our
dispositions, and having little reason for what is enjoined; all these
concurred in their way, in that they were counted as a strange thing. They of
Israel made little use of the Word, they thought it a small matter to stand so
much upon the place of Worship; and they thought it an unreasonable thing to
urge that way of Worship, which would be so destructive to the State of Israel,
if they went up to Jerusalem. And therefore they looked on all these things, as
little concerning them.

Ver. 13. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and eat
it: but the LORD accepts them not: now will he remember their iniquity, and
visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt.
The third branch of the challenge, is, that in these sacrifices which they
pretended to offer to God, they were both life-lesse, and destitute of all
spiritual service, and selfish: Therefore the Lord declares their service to
be rejected, and threatens that he will call them to an account for their sin,
and send them into bondage, like that they had suffered in Egypt, or make them
flee thither from the fury of the Assyrians. Whence lear, 1. External worship
without life and spiritual dispositions, and particularly, ceremonial worship
without an eye to the substance and thing signified, is nothing else but a dead
carkase in Gods account; For, they sacrifice flesh for the sacrifice of mine
offerings, that is, their sacrifices, which they pretend to offer to me, if
there were no other fault in them, of offering them in a wrong place, and by
unlawful Ministers, etc. yet they are but flesh, in respect they mind no more
but the outward work; See Isa. 66.3. Jer. 7.21, 22, 23. 2. Most part of
worshippers follow the external duties of Religion no further then their own
ends lead them, and men's own advantage is the upholder of all false Religion;
For, they sacrifice, and eat it, that is, they observe no rule of
burnt-offerings, wherein all the sacrifice is offered up to God, but of all of
them, they must eat a part, as was allowed in peace, or thanksgiving-offerings;
and so they regard their own bellies most. 3. However men cry up their own way,
yet they will find that want of a divine approbation will undo all; For, it is
a judgment sufficient, but the Lord accepts them not; See 2 Cor. 10.18. 4.
God will not forget unrepented of iniquity, though for a time he spare it, but
will call sinners to an account when it is least expected; and particularly,
corrupt and formal worship justly brings all a peoples sins to remembrance, and
ripens them for judgments for all of them; Therefore, it is added, now will he
remember their iniquity, and visit their sins. 5. When men have forgotten
their old bondage, and walk so as if neither such a stroke nor deliverance had
been, the Lord is provoked to bring it to remembrance, by a new captivity; For,
they shall return to Egypt. Assyria shall be made a new Egypt to them, and many
of them shall run to Egypt, the place of their old bondage, to meet with new
bondage.

Ver. 14. For Israel has forgotten his Maker, and builds temples, and Judah
has multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his cities, and it
shall devour the palaces thereof.
In the close of the Chap. Judah is joined with Israel, and challenged, that as
Israel multiplied Idolatry, and Idol-temples, so they multiplied fenced Cities;
For which God threatens to destroy the Cities and stately Palaces thereof. This
sin challenged here, seems to have fallen forth in the days of wicked Ahaz,
who considering the incursions of Assyria into Israel, made it all his care to
secure Judah, by fortifying many Cities, as we find them challenged, Isa.
22.8, 9, 10, 11. And the judgment was executed by Senacherib, after the
captivity of Israel, Isa. 36.1. Doct. 1. When the Lord is challenging grossest
provocations, he will not for all that forget lesser sins, and pass them
over as nothing, especially in his people; Therefore he forgets not Judahs sin
of carnal confidence, when he is reckoning with Israel for Idolatry; For (or,
and, as it is in the Original; joining this with the former challenges,) Israel
builds temples, and Judah has multiplied fenced cities. 2. The setting up of
Idols, and of carnal confidences in Gods room, are the usual byasse of men's
hearts, who when their hearts are not delighting in, and relying upon God, will
not want somewhat beside to supply that want; Therefore are building temples,
and multiplying fenced cities, joined together here, as setting up somewhat in
Gods room. 3. Idolatry in worship, and carnal confidences, do bewray men's
forgetfulness of God, whose authority prohibits these things, and whose
kindness to his people, should engage them not to abandon his Worship, nor
trust in any thing beside him; and particularly, how much soever men pretend to
remember God by setting up Idols and temples to them, yet in all this they do
but bewray forgetfulness of God; For, Israel has forgotten his Maker, (who
not only created him, but advanced him to that dignity he enjoyed) in his
sinning, and the like is to be understood of Judah. 4. Men's placing their
confidence in outward means of defense and safety, when yet they little mind
the wrath of God against sin, is an iniquity to be joined in some sort, with
Idolatry in worship; For, this was Judahs sin in multiplying fenced cities,
which is held forth to be of the same nature with Isreal's building temples,
because both draw the heart from God. 5. As judgments inflicted in Gods anger,
will easily (like fire) consume most stately places; so the Lord is provoked to
inflict these, when men put confidence in these things. Any thing a people and
especially the Church, put confidence in, will surely be plagued; For, because
Judah has multiplied fenced cities, and made this his confidence, (otherwise
it is no sin to use means of defense,) I will send a fire upon his cities, and
it shall devour the palaces thereof.

CHAP. IX.
THe Doctrine of this Chap relates to a time wherein Israel flourished much by
reason of outward plenty, victories, confederacies with their neighbors: and
therefore did harden and please themselver in their sins, whatever the
Prophets said to the contrary; Therefore the whole Chapter contains a large
description of the miseries that were to come upon them for their sins; which
(according to the several repetitions of challenges for sin,) may be branched
out in four parts. 1. There is a description of the desolation to come upon
them, to silence their presumptuous and carnal joy; wherein he declares they
had no cause to be insolent, thinking to prosper in sin as other Nations,
seeing their sin, (especially their Idolatry) was more heinous then the sins of
other people, v. 1. for which the Lord would send famine, v 2. would drive them
into exile, where they should not be able to observe the rules of the
ceremonial Law, v. 3. and where they should be deprived of public Ordinances,
v. 4. and of solemn feasts, v. 5. and should miserably perish, v 6. In the
second place, this desolation is declared to be near, whereby the Lord would
discover the folly of their false Prophets, and their sin, in procuring such at
Gods hands, v. 7. who, whatever they pretended to, were but snares to the
people, and causes of Gods anger, v. 8. 3. They are charged with the sins of
their fathers, whom they imitated, hereby provoking God to call them to an
account, v 9. and particularly, with ingrate forsaking of God, ver. 10. for
which they are threatened, that God would cut them off without hope of
posterity, and abandon them, v. 11, 12. and that notwithstanding their strong
and flourishing condition, ver. 13. and that this judgment should be so sharp,
as it were rather to be wished they should not bring forth children, or that
they died from the womb, v. 14. 4. Their superstition and Idolatry, wherein
their Princes had chief hand, is again laid to their charge; for which they are
threatened with Gods anger, and rejection, and exile, v. 15. and with cutting
them off root and branch, ver. 16. To which sentence the Prophet subscribes,
that such despisers of Gods Word should be rejected, and made to wander in
exile, 17.

Ver. 1. Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou have gone a
whoring from thy God: thou have loved a reward upon every corne-floore.
This Verse contains the ground of all the subsequent threatenings, that
Israel, because of prosperity, was insolent in sin, thinking to carry out as
Heathen Nations did in their Idolatry; whereas they had less ground to think
they should thrive, then any people: for their Idolatry wherein they
persevered, because of their prosperity, was more heinous then the Idolatry of
others, as being a breach of the Covenant of Marriage betwixt God and them, and
like the carriage of an impudent horlot, who prostitutes her self for meat,
wherever the occasion is offered: So they followed Idols that they might have
plenty, as the Heathen had, and did confirm themselves in their Idolatrous
course, because they enjoyed plenty, as, Jer. 44.17. Doct. 1. Men may have much
seeming matter of joy, wherein they please themselves, little inquiring whether
God allows of it, which yet has a worm in the root of it: For, so much does
this prohibition import, Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, that is, there is no
cause why ye should be so excessive in your jollity, as to rejoice for joy. 2.
Much prosperity affords but little cause of joy, when the favor is only
outward, and God is angry for sin; For, such was the matter of Isreal's joy, and
their case when they are prohibited to rejoice for joy. 3. However the Lords
people delude and harden themselves in their defection, by considering the
prosperity of the profane world about them; yet they need not expect to thrive
in sin as others do, but that they shall be sooner and more certainly punished,
and that it shall be ill with them, though all other sinners should prosper;
Therefore are they prohibited to rejoice as other people, whose Idolatry and
defection seems to prosper in their hand; See Ezekiel. 20.32. Amos 3.2. 4. The
greatness of the Churches sin, and of Gods anger against it, is not to be
measured only by the act it self, but by other circumstances: And the same sin
is more heinous in them then others, considering their relations and
engagements, and the multitude of means which they enjoy for setting and
keeping them right; Therefore it is subjoyned as a reason why they should not
rejoice as others, for thou have gone a whoring from thy God; That sin which in
the Heathen was ignorance, Acts 17.30. and a sticking by their principles,
though corrupt; is in them Apostasy and whoredom, renouncing the true God
whom they had acknowledged, and to whom they were engaged; and therefore it
could not be spared in them as in others. 5. It is an heinous and abominable
sin, when men measure their Religion by outward advantages, and do ascribe Gods
bounty to wrong causes, to harden themselves in sin; For, thou have loved a
reward on every corn floor, imports so much: As an harlot prostitutes her self
in time of harvest, for some corn to live on, so she followed the Religion
which she thought gave her plenty of corn in her floores, (and this was her
first fault;) and she took pleasure in her prosperity, and delighted in it, as
a reward for her spiritual adultery, and this was her second sin and mistake.
See Hos. 2.5.

Verse. 2. The floor and the wine press shall not feed them, and the new wine
shall fail in her.
Their misery because of this sin, whereby God threatens to mar their joy, is
held forth in several branches and particulars; Whereof the first is, that
whereas they doated so much on plenty, and fathered it on their Idols, it shall
be found that their Idolatry draws on famine, and want of bread and wine.
Whence learn, 1. There is nothing which men run out of Gods way, to seek after
it, but it is righteous they find the contrary; For, they left God, seeking
plenty, and they find famine. 2. It is just with God to take away outward
blessings, when men are only bent on them, and idolize them; When men measure
and choose their Religion by them, and see not God, nor are confirmed in his
way, by his bounty toward them: For, it is for these causes that the floor and
the wine press shall not feed them, etc. 3. God has the blessing of men's
provision, from the first to the last step, in his hand, and can make the
creatures disappoint men's expectations, even when they have them among their
hands in abundance; For, when it is in the floor and wine press, (as is also
insinuate, v. 1.) yet it shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail,
(or, lie, and disappoint) in her.

Verse. 3. They shall not dwell in the LORDS land: but Ephraim shall return to
Egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria.
A second branch of this threatened misery, is exile from the Land which was
the Lords in a peculiar way, as being his dwelling place in his Church, and
given to them as a type of Heaven, and that they should be scattered into
Egypt, whither many of them fled, and into Assyria, whither they were carried
by the Conqueror: where by reason of want, they should not be able to observe
the distinction of meats prescribed in the ceremonial Law, (which it seems they
had still observed in that particular, notwithstanding their defection in other
things,) or, should be constrained to eat unclean meat, to the reproach of
their Religion, or should voluntarily conform themselves to the customs of
the Heathen. Whence learn, 1. Captivity and exile are an addition to the stroke
of scarcity, or any other want at home in a peoples own country; Therefore it
is added to the former, as a further degree of misery, They shall not dwell in
the land, but return to Egypt, (where they were in bondage before, to meet with
new misery,) and Assyria. 2. Albeit now there be no land that is typical, and
the earth be the Lords to all exiles, who walk in his way, yet this threatening
of driving them from the Lords land, may teach; That it is the saddest of
calamities, to be deprived of mercies which were given in special favor; and
particularly, to be deprived of the mercy of being in Gods Church and Family:
For, so much mercy was imported in this type, which is now to be taken from
them. 3. As for this effect of their exile, that they shall eat unclean things,
it may be understood diversely; As, 1. That many of them were necessitate to eat
forbidden and unclean meats in their exile, because they could get no other. In
which case, albeit it was no sin to prefer the moral duty of preserving
their own lives, to the ceremonial Command about distinction of meats; as is
clear in David's case, and in the matter of the Sabbath, Matthew. 12.1, -- 7. yet
this should have been a very humbling case unto them, and it should have been
looked on as the fruit of much voluntary sin, and neglecting of the Laws of
God, when they were put in that condition, which laid such an humbling (though
not sinful) necessity upon them, as they could not stick to these observasions,
which were a part of their glory above all Nations. And, so ought men to reckon
when they are put to flee, or to be taken up with confusions and distractions
through tumults on the Sabbath Day, or in the like cases: For, though to flee,
or be disturbed when God calls men to it, be not their sin, yet it may be the
fruit of much former sin. 2. It may be conceived that their oppressing
Conquerours, put many of them to eat meats which were forbidden by the Law, or
polluted by being offered to Idols, that so they might trample on their
Religion, and draw them by that practice, to renounce the profession of it. In
which case as it was not lawful to give obedience, as is clear from the
practice of Daniel, Dan. 1.8. (and after that the zealous Jews, as is
mentioned in their Records, refused to eat swines flesh at the command of
Tyrants;) So their being put to this trial, and their giving obedience, may
teach; That it is the great misery of men, and the just fruits of their
despising the rules of the Word, and of wounding their own consciences, and
contemning the checks thereof, when they are put under the power of such cruel
task masters, as have no respect to men's consciences in things concerning which
the Word of God is most clear; And it teaches further, that they who
voluntarily slight the Word of God in their ordinary walking and practice,
will never be honored to bear witness to it or the truths therein, in a day
of trial, but will much more transgress, when they are put to it by terror
from men; For, albeit this was the height of tyranny and cruelty on their
oppressors part, yet that can no way assoile them, either as to their sins
procuring this judgment to come upon them, or as to the guilt it self of
sinning against the Law, and renouncing of their profession, and of fitting
themselves for defection by their voluntary transgressions. But, 3. This seems
to be rather true of most of them, that as they were not humbled under any
necessity they were driven to: So they voluntarily, and without any necessity,
did conform themselves to the practice of the Heathen among whom they lived.
And the Lord, by driving them into exile among the Heathens, gave them up so to
do, that so they who in their own Land did too much participate with Idolaters
in most substantial parts of worship, and were in reality as bad as they, might
not deceive themselves or others with the observation of external rites, but
might lose the very external profession of their Religion, and become
altogether like the Heathen. And so it teaches; That when men do inwardly
pollute themselves, and do make defection from the substance of Religion, the
Lord does not respect an outward show of purity, but will give them up to such
further defection, or such calamities and snares, as may make them appear
outwardly as they are before him inwardly and in reality; For, his giving them
up to eat unclean things, was but the fruit and just reward of their inward
pollution, and of their former defections from his true Worship. It does also
further teach; That whatever noise men may make abour the profession or
external shows of Religion; yet such as have lost the reality thereof, will
soon cast off the very external show, if they have a tentation; For, when they
came to live among the Heathen, they gave speedy proof (by their conformity to
their way) of how little worth all their former pretenses were, of cleaving to
Gods way in many external rites, when yet they had made so foul defection.

Verse. 4. They shall not offer wine- offerings to the LORD: neither shall they
be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of
mourners: all that eat thereof, shall be polluted: for their bread for their
soul shall not come into the house of the LORD.
A third branch of their misery, (and a further effect of their exile,) is the
want of public Ordinances in their scattered condition: These are held forth
under the names, of wine offerings, sacrifices, and bread for their soul, or
offerings for their sins, as Mal. 1.7. And concerning them the Lord declares,
that they shall not offer them to the Lord, nor shall they be acceptable to
him, but rather pollute them, as the bread which is used in funeral
solemnities, Deuteronomy. 26.13, 14. Nor should they come into Gods house, or that
which they accounted so. The meaning of all which is, that as their sacrifices
before their Idols, were never accepted of God, but polluted them, however they
boasted of them; So the Lord would declare this, by depriving them thereof in
their exile, where it was undeniable they could not use them, (however they
pleaded for Dan and Bethel within the holy land,) or if they did, it should be
yet more abominable. Whence learn, 1. Want of public Worship is one of the
rods wherewith the Lord plagues a visible Church, when they corrupt worship,
and become formal, and rest on it; For, so did Israel find, as is here
threatened. Though in this the Gospel Church have an advantage, that public
worship is not confined to one land or place, as it was in Israel. 2. Whatever
be the mean estimation wicked men have of Ordinances, yet God can make the want
thereof a scourge unto them, when distress is upon them; For, this is a
threatening against all, when their sacrifices should be bread for their soul,
and trouble should let them see their soul and life to be in peril, and yet
they could not get a sacrifice offered to God. 3. Whatever be the sin of
wicked instruments, in depriving the Church of Worship or other Ordinances; yet
God permitting them so to do, is a declaration that he is not pleased with the
Churches way in using of them, and they have been either so corrupt, or so
formal, as provokes him to seek to be glorified rather in their calamities,
then in their service; For, if they shall not offer to the Lord, nor their
bread for their soul come into the house of the LORD, it is because they did
not indeed please him before, and were not pleasing unto him, etc. 4. As the
Lord takes no pleasure in any service, but what is seasoned with cheerfulness
and humble joy; (for, he approved not of the bread of mourners in their public
service, signifying that he likes neither heartlesse wearying, nor faint
dejection in serving him.) So disapproven worship does but render the
worshipper more and more polluted; For, their sacrifices are but as the bread
of mourners, which does pollute.

Ver. 5. What will ye do in the solmne day, and in the day of the feast of the
LORD?
A foutth branch of their misery, (and yet a further effect of their exile, and
an enlargement of the former, v. 4.) is, the want of public solemnities of
public worship, (which they observed in imitation of Judah; keeping the same
titles with them, and) which were matter of joy to them in their own land, and
now the want and remembrance of them should be sad. Whence learn, 1. As all
occasions of public worship, so in particular, the extraordinary and solemn
times of Worship and other divine Ordinances, ought to be esteemed of as
special favors bestowed on the Church: Therefore does he instance their
judgment in the matter of Ordinances, as being especially conspicuous in the
want of the solemn day, and the day of the feast of the Lord, as they called
their solemnities, in imitation of Judah. See Psalm. 42.4. and 122.1. 2. The
want of these solemnities should be sad unto the Church, and God will follow
forth his controversy till they be found so, and till men in their consciences
lay to heart the guilt that provoked him to take them away, and they remember
them in their desolate condition, with grief and affliction of heart; For, this
question, What will ye do in the solemn day, etc? imports this, that the
thoughts of these solemnities, when the time of them recurred in their exile,
should be bitter, and they should spend that time in perplexities, and anxious
thoughts.

Ver. 6. For lo, they are gone, because of destruction: Egypt shall gather them
up, Memphis shall bury them; the pleasant places for their silver, nettles
shall possess them; thorns shall be in their tabernacles.
A fifth branch of their misery, (clearing yet more of their exile, and how
they should be deprived of these Ordinances, and therefore comes in with the
particle, for) is, that they should not only go into exile, but should
miserably perish there. When they should seek to run away from the destruction
of their own land, by going to Egypt, with whom Hosea was confederate, 2 Kings
17.4. their exile there should be of long continuance; For they should die and
be buried in Egypt, and the Cities thereof, and their own pleasant places,
where they had laid up their treasures, should be desolate, and overgrown with
nettles and thorns. He instanceth the condition of the exiles only in these
who thought it best to flee to Egypt, rather then be carried to Assyria; that
he might show, that if this were the case of them who took the best course, (as
they thought,) what should be the lot of others? And to show in particular,
what ill issue their course took, who thought they would do well enough for
themselves, even when the utter most extremity had befallen their own Land.
Doct. 1. A people against whom God is angry, when they seek to avoid one
calamity, will readily run upon another: For, lo, (says he, warning men to
behold the issue of their course) they are gone, that is, they will not
certainly flee because of destruction in their own land, and yet they meet with
it in Egypt, and Memphis, a chief City in Egypt. 2. When a people have entered
into trouble and captivity, they are not to resolve to have presently done with
it, (especially, when as God in hot anger has sent it on, so the sins
procuring it, do continue,) but that they may have much more to go through, and
may die in that coniditon; For, Egypt shall gather them up, (to wit, for
burial, as is after explained,) Memphis shall bury them. 3. Though the earth
and fullness thereof be the Lords, and he will prove so to all his own; yet not
only to be driven into exile, but to die there without restitution, is a sad
affliction, and an affliction the Church may look for, when she provokes God
till there be no remedy; For, so much does this instance teach us. 4. Albeit
the Lord ought to be acknowledged for men's pleasant habitations, and for their
treasures, yet these ought not to be much doated on: For, when men do place
their delight in them, and the Lord is provoked, he can drive men far from
these comforts, and lay them desolate, as a spectacle of his anger: For, the
pleasant places for their silver, nettles shall possess them, etc. whereby it
appears that the Nations whom the Assyrians sent into their rooms, 2 Kings
17.24, etc. did not at first people all that Country.

Verse. 7. The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come,
Israel shall know it: the Prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the
multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred.
The Lord having, by these threatenings of misery to come upon them, abundantly
cleared how little cause they had of joy in their present prosperity; yet lest
they should slight all this, and put an evil day far from them; Therefore the
Lord, in the second place, foretells the nearness of this calamity, and
withal holds out more of their sin procuring that it should be so. In this
verse. the Lord threatens, that this misery and desolation was near, which is
ampliefied from an effect, that Israel should feel it, and should then be made
to know the folly and madness of their false Prophets, who deluded them with
vain hopes, and should know that they were given up to such, as a punishment
of their iniquities, to render the stroke the sadder, and that it might
surprise them. Whence learn, 1. However wicked men, being threatened, do put an
evil day far away from them; yet at last it will certainly draw near, and the
time will come, wherein God will make an impartial trial of men's ways, which
he seemed not to regard, and will recompense accordingly; For, The days of
visitation are come, the days of recompense are come, or, are now near
approaching. 2. Near approaching or incumbent trouble will be dreadful,
especially to the wicked, and (beside that it will refute their vain dreams of
ease,) will be more sad then they in their security could dream of; Therefore
is this prediction added to the former threatenings, that they may have more
weight, since the days are come. 3. They who will not hearken to God, speaking
in his Word, are justly sent to the rod, as a more severe Schoolmaster, to
teach them what they so much neglect; For, in these days, Israel shall know
it, that is, shall feel the rod, and be made to know these things under it,
concerning Gods thoughts of them and their way, which otherwise they heeded
not. 4. It is the height of madness and folly for men to be doting on
pleasant dreams and delusions, and to be devising such to themselves or others,
when yet God has other thoughts and purposes; For, the Prophet, or he who
pretends falsely to that office, is a fool: the spiritual man, or he who intends
to be inspired by the Spirit, is mad, in suggesting other things to a sinful
people, then they will really meet with at Gods hand. 5. When delusions are
rise in the Church, and men do vent their unsound Doctrine, and this is readily
received; then ordinarily the Lord will refute these delusions by real
judgments. Such a temper does prognosticate plagues and strokes, and these
will convincingly refute them, and let these men see the folly of them, and
their own folly in leaning to them; For, it is in these days, that the false
Prophets will be known of all, to be what indeed they are, and this also
Israel shall know, that the Prophet is a fool, etc. 6. The Lords giving up a
Church to the delusions of false Prophets and Teachers, is a fruit of their
many sins, and a sharp punishment thereof, previous to other calamities; (for,
that they have mad Prophets, it is for the multitude of thine iniquity, and a
fruit thereof, to draw on the days of visitation;) And it does speak much of
Gods anger against a people, and of their hatred against the true Prophets, and
their Doctrine; For, of both these it may be understood, that this plague is
for the great hatred. See 2 Thessalonians, 2.10, 11, 12.

Ver. 8. The watchman of Ephraim was with my God, but the Prophet is a snare of
a Fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God.
In this Verse the same purpose is further amplified, showing that however
these false Prophets pretended to be inspired of God, and to keep communion
with him, (as is the duty of all true Prophets,) and the people gloried in them
as such: yet they did nothing but ensnare the people with their juggling and
delusions, and they were hateful objects provoking God to anger. Whence learn,
1. Things that are in reality most abominable and vile, may yet appear to the
world masked with fairest pretenses and titles; For, The watchman of Ephraim
was (or, is, for the Original expresses no time,) with my God, is the pretense
of these Prophets, which Hosea propounds as their alleadgeance, that he may
refute it. This people loved to have some who speaking in Gods Name, might be
for them and their way; and they got such as pretended, for office, to be
watchmen, the watchman of Ephraim, and for qualification to be inspired by God,
and have near communion with him, with my God. 2. Deluded men and deceivers,
their pretending to interest and nearness with God, ought to endear him so
much the more to the hearts of these who are his own indeed; that so they may
make that sure in reality, which others pretend to, and that they may testify
their indignation that such courses should be fathered on him who is so dear to
them; Therefore, says the Prophet, repeating this pretense, my God. 3. Deluded
and deluding Teachers, are the most dangerous plagues that can befall a people,
and will most effectually ensnare them in sin and judgments; For, but the
Prophet, (whatever he pretend,) is a snare of a Fowler in all his ways. His
Doctrine, carriage and undertakings will entrap them, as a Fowler does birds.
4. As false Teachers are hateful in themselves, that they should have any room
in what is, or is accounted to be Gods house; and as their being permitted to
infest the Church, is a fruit of Gods anger: So are they causes an^ instruments
of Gods anger against his Church, ripening them for wrath; All these may be
imported in this, that he is hatred, (hateful, an effect of wrath, and cause of
more wrath) in the house of his God, that is, in the Church of the true God, to
whom he pretends to belong, or in these places which Israel set a part to be an
House of God.

Ver. 9. They have deeply corrupted themselves as in the days of Gibeah:
therefore he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins.
In the third part of this Chap. they are threatened yet further with misery,
for their own sins and the sins of their Fathers, whom they did imitate. The
accusation and challenge for sin has two branches, whereof the first is, That
they were deeply rooted and engaged in abominable sins, as the Inhabitants of
Gibea, (of whom Judge. 19.) were. And therefore since they had followed their
example since their days, the Lord would not spare them more then he did
Gibea, but make them pay for all together. See Chap. 8.13. Whence learn, 1.
Contempt of true Prophets, and delighting is deceivers and their delusions,
will draw men upon abominable wickedness; For, so much does the connection of
this challenge, with the former sin, of being taken up with false Prophets,
teach. 2. As men once giving way to gross sins, will soon involve themselves
so, (as in a deep mirie pit) that they cannot recover themselves; so it is a
dreadful condition to be entangled in sin without hope of recoverie, and for
men to be active in hardening themselves, till neither the Word, nor mercy, nor
judgment will work upon them; For, it is a challenge, they have deeply
corrupted themselves, as a man plunged in a deep pit, out of which he cannot be
recovered. 3. As there is no wicked course or measure of sin, wherein men have
fallen, but the Church departing from God, may fall in it again; So the sins of
progenitors will be put upon the account of the present generation who imitate
them; and this will draw to a great account: Therefore is it added, that they
did this, as in the days of Gibeah, not only to show that they followed their
example, in committing lewd and abominable filthiness, and obstinate defending
of it, or the like gross abominations; but to show that since they did imitate
them, and continue in these courses, they should make an account for all
together. 4. Whatever be the Lords suffering and patience, yet sinners in one
age may expect the same measure that these of another age have met with, and
that Gods long-suffering will be sadly compensed, when he begins to reckon;
For, as he spared not Gibeah, so he will punish them; and he will remember
their iniquity, he will visit their sin, that is, in that day of visitation,
he will bring them to an account for all these sins which they had forgotten,
and might think he had taken no notice of them, since he forbear them so long.

Ver. 10. I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness: I saw your fathers as
the first ripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to Baal-peor,
and sepraated themselves unto that shame, and their abominations were according
as they loved.
The second branch of this challenge, is, that of old, when God delighted to do
Israel good, and took pleasure in them, as an hungry traveller would do in
grapes in a wilderness, or a man in the first ripe figs, when the tree brings
them forth first, before the full season: yet they proved ingrate, and
shamefully committed spiritual whoredom with that shameful Idol of
Baal-peor, Numb. 25 3. Yea, and they gave way to their own lusts and desires,
and satisfied them in choosing and following of Idols. In all which it is to be
understood, that Israel, their posterity, had imitated them, and ingrately
revolted from God: For which they are threatened in the following Verses. Doct.
1. Gods rich and free love can put singular worth upon the worthless, and make
them honorable by their being precious in his sight; For, that Israel was
found by God, like grapes in the wilderness, and as the first ripe in the
fig tree, at her first time, it flowed not from any worth in them, but from his
love that condescended to esteem them so, and deal with them, as if they were
such. 2. No external proof of Gods kindness in delivering or adorning with
peculiar Church Priviledges and ordinances, will engage corrupt men, but they
will ingrately despise his goodness, and turn their back upon him; For,
whatever be the effect of the manifestation of his special love toward his
elect, yet such was the carriage of the body of Israel, to their condescending
Lord. 3. Gods ancient kindness toward progenitors, ought not to be forgotten
by posterity, and it will be put on their account, who notwithstanding both
that, and kindness to themselves in particular, do imitate the sins of their
predecessors; For, therefore is ancient kindness mentioned here, to aggravate
Ephraims present sin. 4. The shamefulness of sin will not contain such as are
despisers and abusers of mercy; For, they went to Baal-peor, and separated
themselves (forsaking God, who will not be joined with Idols) unto that shame:
They did forsake God, and without shame or blushing, did cleave to a shameful
Idol, the manner of whose worship was abominable. 5. It is a dreadful and
dangerous case, when men give way to their affections and lusts, and let them
rage after any abomination they please, without any respect to conscience, or
not enduring any controulment: And particularly, it is a dreadful case, when
men choose their Religion by their affections, liking that best which pleases
lusts best; Therefore it is added, and their abominations were according as
they loved, whereby we are not only to understand that in that particular of
Baal-peor, their love to the Midianitish women drew them to worship that
abomination, Numb. 25. But in general, that they let loose the rains to their
own lusts and affections, to choose what Idols they pleased.

Verse. 11. As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a bird, from the
birth, and from the womb, and from the conception.

12. Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them, that there
shall not be a man left: yea, woe also to them when I depart from them.


The particular sentence and threatening because of this sin, is that albeit
Ephraim gloried in their multitude, (according as was prophesied that they
should be many, Genesis 48.19.) yet judgment should almost consume them all
without any hope of posterity. Either their children should perish in the
conception, or womb after the conception, or birth; or they should be cut off
by the sword, if they grew up. And to put the capestone upon all these plagues,
God threatens to forsake them, which should bring on these, and many other woes
upon them. Doct. 1. Posterity and offspring is in it self a blessing, and
matter of glory, though not to be boasted of against God, or to confirm men in
sin; For, so is here imported, that this was Ephraim's glory. See Prove 17.6. 2.
Men's mercies which in appearance seem to be surest, may be suddenly and
irrecoverably plucked from them, when God pleases; For, their glory shall flee
away like a bird, which suddenly gets out of a cage, and cannot be recovered.
3. God has advantage of men, at every turn and step of their life, to destroy
them when he pleases; For, he can reach from the birth, and from the womb,
before that, and from the very first conception. 4. Such as God is angry at, he
can make their preservation from one stroke, prove but a reservation for
another sorer stroke; For, though they bring up their children, (to wit, such
as perish not in the birth or before) yet will I bereave them that there shall
not be a man left, that is, the most part of them shall be cut off; For,
certainly some were preserved. 5. As it ought to be looked on by sinners as a
sad and just fruit of their sins, when God smites their children, though it
were by miscarrying in the conception and birth; So in particular, the pulling
away of children by the sword, or other untimely deaths, after they are, with
much pains, brought up to maturity, is a sad stroke, wherein sinners ought to
read the displeasure of God: as here we are taught. 6. Outward afflictions are
not all that a wicked and impenitent people may expect, but that God also will
leave them, by depriving them altogether of a Church State which they have
corrupted; by deserting them, and by taking away all sense and evidences of his
favor, the blessing of afflictions, grace to come to him in trouble, or
acceptance and audience when they come; Therefore this is added to Ephraim's
judgment, I depart from him See 1 Samuel 28.16. 7. Gods forsaking of a people is
in it self the greatest of miseries, it speaks a woe with every affliction
that is on, and threatens with more, till the sinnner find it so; For, Yea, woe
also so to them, when I depart from them.

Verse. 13. Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: but Ephraim
shall bring forth his children to the murderer.
A twofold amplification is subjoyned to this sentence. The first is, that
their strong and flourishing condition, even like Tyrus, (of which, Ezekiel. 27.)
should not hinder the execution of the former sentence, of cutting off their
children. Whence learn, 1. Prosperity is one of the great bucklers whereby men
would ward off Gods threatenings, that they may not move nor affect them; For,
this comes in as an exception against the sentence, that Ephraim, as I saw
Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place: that is, he flourishes, as ever the
Prophet or any saw Tyrus do, or (as some read) as they saw a tree planted in
the pleasant places of Tyrus. 2. However when God is even departing from a
people, they may be in a more prosperous condition then ever; yet all that will
not make his threatenings void; For, so was Ephraim, and yet the former sentence
stands. 3. The Idolatry of parents, is a special cause of judgments on their
posterity; For, such was Ephraim, who shall bring forth his children to the
murderer, or slayer; For, they are called murderers, not so much because the
Assyrian had not a lawful authority, as to point at the cruelty of their
execution like murderers.

Verse. 14. Give them, O LORD: what will thou give? give them a miscarrying
womb, and dry breasts.
The second amplification of this sentence, is held out in the Prophets
intercession, who fore seeing this misery, would rather wish that the children
came never to maturity in the womb, or that they died from their cradles for
lack of suck, then that they should live to be cut off in ripe age. Whence
learn, 1. It is the lawful and necessary duty of Ministers, and other godly
men, to commiserate and condole the miseries of a visible Church, and to pray
for them, though they be most wicked and going to ruin: For, so much does the
Prophets practice teach. 2. It may put godly men to a great stand and
perplexity, what to pray for in outward things, when they consider a peoples
sin, and the certainty of judgments, that justice calls for strokes, and that
yet these are sad and will undo them; and when they consider that in times of
calamity, there is no lot we can pitch on, but it may be made sadder then what
appears more formidable: So much does the Prophets perplexity in his suite
teach, Give them, O LORD, what will thou give? as wishing the peoples
deliverance on the one hand, and yet pondering their sin and justice pursuing
on the other, which he could not but subscribe unto; and as foreseeing that
however their childrens growing up seemed a greater mercy at present, yet
afterward it would produce a sharper trial. 3. The fruitlesseness or
barrenness of the womb, and breasts, is from God, and he is to be seen and
acknowledged in it, whatever second causes there be; For, the Prophet supposes
here it is Gods gift, give them a miscarrying womb, etc. 4. A Nations sin may
draw on such sad times, that in many respects it were a mercy, if parents had
no children borne, or they died in their infancy, then that their children
should live to see these times, and be exposed as a prey to slaughters,
tyranny, false Religion, Apostasy, etc. So soon can God imbitter the cup of
sinners mercies, and make the sad private afflictions of some, in loss of
children, be seen to be a mercy afterward; For, so much does this wish import,
that considering the slaughter that was to be of their children, v. 13. and
other miseries they were to endure, it were a mercy to give them a miscarrying
womb, and dry breasts. See Luke 21.23.

Verse. 15. All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for the
wickedness of their doings, I will drive them out of mine house, I will love
them no more: all their princes are revolters.
In the last part of the Chap. the Lord (as it were, answering to the Prophets
intercession, ver. 14.) accuses them for their Idolatry, especially of the
calves, which they used in Gilgal, among other places, Chap. 4.15. and, 12.11.
and that all their Princes who led them on these courses, were Apostates from
the first to the last. And therefore he proceeds to threaten, declaring that he
hates them, and that he will cast them out of his land, and from being a
Church, and will withhold the former effects of his kindness. While he says,
all their wickedness is in Gilgal, the meaning is not, 1. That they had no
other wickednesses but that of Idolatry, but that as their Idolatry was their
chief and greatest sin, and the fountain whence their other wickedness did
spring; so that whereas they pretended to cover all their wickedness with
these Idolatrous sacrifices which they obtruded on him; the Lord declares that
this was the chief and height of their wickedness. Nor, 2. is this the
meaning, that they had no other place of public worship but Gilgal; But
whereas they had chosen (and possibly now frequented most) this place as holy,
and more famous then Bethel, because of more recent favors there, in rolling
away their reproach, giving them the first fruits of the land, and the first
passover after they came out of the wilderness. The Lord declares that this
adds to the sin, and their sacrifices were more abominable there, then any
where. Whence learn. 1. Not only is Idolatry and corrupting of Religion a
peoples chief sin, and opens the sluice to other wickedness: But peoples
think, ing to cover their other sins, and stop Gods mouth with external
performances of worship, (espcially in an unlawful and unwarranted way of
worship) does exceedingly add to the sin, and become their chief guilt; For,
thus all their wickedness is in Gilgal, as is before explained. See Jer. 7.9,
10. 2. The fairer pretexts and maskes men have for a corrupt way of serving
God, and in corrupting Religion, it is still the more odious, and the more men
would wash such a course, it will be still the blacker; For, so was all their
wickedness in Gilgal, which they thought the best place, and made u^e of what
God had done of old there, as a plausible pretense to make their Religion ta^e
with others, 3. It is a chief sin in people, to meet Gods mercies with ingrate
and corrupt service, and to abu^e them to render a corrupt religion acceptable;
For, thus did they in Gilgal, return Idolatry for all the mercies they had
received there, and made a pretense of these, to make it pass current. 4.
Rulers will not be able to assoile people from sin, by their commanding it, but
may well get themselves challenged as chief Apostates; For, so are they here,
all their Princes are revolters. 5. Iniquity does then become National and
land-destroying, when it gets up upon the throne, and from thence by authority
and example, infects the people; For, such was Isreal's case, when they are to
be cast off, their Princes are revolters. 6. Gods judgments may be very sad on
a people, in a succession of ill Rulers, who keep up ill courses till
destruction put a period to them; For, thus was Israel plagued, all their
Princes are revolters. 7. It is but small matter what men think of their own
way, or how they mask it, if God hate it, as he will do wickedness, whatever
men pretend for it: so does he prove their wickedness in Gilgal, which they
made so plausible, from an effect; For (or, therefore) there, or, for the sins
done there, I hated them. 8. Whatever be the Lords pity and compassion through
Christ, toward his own under their infirmities and daily escapes; yet Idolatry
and corrupting of Religion will meet with hatred and indignation; For, there I
hated them. 9. As God is provoked to take away his partition wall, and unchurch
them, who dare bring corrupt and humane inventions in the matter of worship,
into his house: So this stroke is the capestone of a peoples misery, and
speaks Gods great anger; Therefore it follows, I will drive them out of mine
house. 10. As the former effects of Gods love in outward things, may be cut off
from a visible Church without hope of restitution: So the want of these will be
sad, however his love in them was little seen or acknowledged, while they were
enjoyed; For, it is a part of the stroke, I will love them no more, that is,
give them no more outward proofs of it; for he speaks in their terms, who
would never think but God loved them, so long as they prospered.

Verse. 16. Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no
fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved fruit of
their womb.
They are further threatened again with cutting off of the Nation, fathers and
children, as a tree that is withered in the root, and has no fruit or
branches: or if there be any issue as twigs rising about the root, yet he
threatens that it shall be destroyed This was accomplished on them as a Nation,
in their captivity, in that however many of that Nation survived these
calamities; yet they were no more a people nor incorporation in their own land.
Doct. 1. Gods anger and judgments to come upon impenitent sinners find but
small credit with them and therefore must be often inculcate, as this repetition
of former threatenings, teaches. 2. Such as would have the right use of
threatenings, would look upon them in their certainty, and as already performed;
Therefore says he, Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up. 3. As the Lord
can as easily root out a whole Nation, as men do a tree; so he is oft-times
provoked so to do, even to his own people, who will be bettered or reclaimed by
no milder rod; For, so does this example, applied to Ephraim, teach. 4. The
natural affection of parents to their children, will plead for no pity to them
at Gods hand, when they despise the offers of his love, but will help to make
the calamity upon their children, sadder to them; For, I will slay even the
beloved fruit of their womb, or, the desires of their womb; that is, their
children, which they desired to have, and delighted in.

Verse. 17. My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto him:
and they shall be wanderers among the nations.
The Prophet concludes all this doctrine, with subscribing to Gods sentence,
and recapitulates it, showing that they should be rejected, and made to wander
in exile, because they rejected Gods Word, inviting them to return to him.
Whence learn, 1. Albeit it be the duty of godly men to intercede in behalf of
a sinful and perishing people, yet they ought also to subscribe to the equity
of Gods judgments, and acknowledge his justice shining therein; For, so does
the Prophet here^, after his former intercession, verse. 14. 2. It is the
commendation of men to cleave to God and his way, and be zealous for him,
though they should do it alone, and to make sure an interest in God, when
common calamities are imminent; And God will manifest his interest in such, in
hard times; Therefore does Hosea name him My God, whom he had owned and been
zealous for, when Israel had rejected him, whatever they pretended, and who
would prove so to him in that sad time which followed. 3. God will abhor even
his confederate people, when they corrupt them selves, and will prove it is so,
by rejecting them from enjoying his presence or favor in Ordinances, or wonted
mercies; For, my God will cast them away; the word in the Original imports his
abominating of them, and (upon this) his rejecting of them. 4. It is righteous
with God, that they who will not rest nor acquiesce in him, should find no
rest otherwise, or in other things, and that they become vagabonds among
Heathens, who do not prize the communion of Saints, or of the visible Church in
her pure Ordinances; For, upon these grounds it is threatened against Israel,
they shall be wanderers, (or vagabonds) among the Nations. 5. As the contempt
of the Word is a fountain of sin in men; so it fills up the measure of
iniquity, and makes it incurable, when people will not hearken to the Word
inviting them to repentance, and conversion from their evil way; For, it is the
controversy here, because they did not hearken unto him, that is, they
contemned his Word and directions, and so walked as they listed; and
particularly, they would not hearken to the many messages of the Prophets, sent
to reclaim them before the stroke came. 6. The Word of the Lord is therefore
much contemned, because men will not see God speaking in it, but do only eye
instruments; or will not ponder the authority and power of God, albeit they
pretend to acknowledge him: And all the indignity offered to the Word in the
mouth of his Servants, he interprets it as done to himself; Therefore is their
contempt described, they did not hearken to him, who spoke in and by that Word.

CHAP. X.
THis Chap. tends to the same scope with the former, consisting of accusations
and threatenings against Israel, for their sins: only they are sweetened with
some more express exhortations to repentance, upon hopes of mercy which in the
former doctrine, had only been implied in the accusations, and sentences. We
may take up the Chap. in four heads or articles of accusations, unto every one
of which, threatenings are subjoyned. 1. He accuses them for fruitlessenesse,
and bringing forth fruit to themselves, and employing their prosperity to the
advancement of Idolatry, verse. 1. and for their many divisions of heart, v. 2.
-- for which he threatens to take them with the crime, and destroy their
instruments of Idolatry, v. -- 2. and to deprive them of any help by their
King, and to let them see the folly of relying on him, v. 3. 2. He accuses
them for deceitfulness and perjury in all their Covenants, whereby
unrighteousness abounded among them v. 4. for which he threatens to destroy
their Idol-calves, to the terror and grief of their chief City, and all the
Worshippers and Ministers of these Idols, v. 5. to send the calves into
captivity, whereby they should have shame of all their enterprises on their
behalf, v. 6. to cut off their King, v. 7. and to lay the places of their
Idolatrous worship desolate, and to fill the people with horror and despair,
because of these evils, v. 8. 3. He accuses them for their continuance and
excess in sin, since the days of their fathers, though he had spared them,
when he plagued others, v 9. for which he threatens to punish them, and expose
them as a prey to their enemies, however they set themselves to prevent the
stroke, v. 10. And that, however Ephraim was so delicate, as not to endure the
yoke; yet God would put both them and Judah to trouble, v. 11. upon which he
exhorts them to repentance and amendment upon hope of mercy, v. 12. 4. He
accuses them for their diligence in sin, wherein they were bolstered up, by
their confidence in their own projects, and their valiant men, ver. 13. for
which he threatens to confound their people, and expose their fortresses to a
cruel sacking, whereof they had seen a late example, v. 14. and to plague them
thus severely for their sin in the matter of worship, and suddenly to cut off
their King and Kingdom, ver. 15.

Verse. 1. ISrael is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself:
according to the multitude of his fruit, he has increased the altars,
according to the goodness of his land, they have made goodly images.
This Verse contains a part of the first accusation, wherein Israel is
challenged for fruitlessenesse, and bringing forth fruit to themselves and not
to God, and that they multiplied instruments of Idolatry, according as they
increased in wealth. Whence learn, 1. As the Church in many things does
resemble a Vine, and particularly, in that they are good for nothing when they
are not fruitful, Ezekiel. 15. and that God takes great pains upon them, Psalm.
80.8, etc. Isa. 5.1, 2. So emptiness is her great and usual sin, having not
only no fruit, or ill fruit, but emptying, evanishing fruit: For, Israel is an
empty vine, and thus also are they (as some read the words) an emptying vine,
which pour out their strength and the fruits of Gods bounty in empty and vain
fruits, as a vine that brings forth nothing but branches and leaves. 2. When
men improve all Gods pains upon them, and dispensations toward them, only in
seeking of themselves or their own interests, it is their great sin, and a
proof of their fruitlessenesse; Therefore it is subjoyned, he brings forth
fruit unto himself, that is, they consume all the fruits of Gods dispensations
and care toward them upon their own lusts: Men are then indeed empty before
God, and (as some read the words) their fruit is equal, or, like to themselves,
when the honor of God is not so much eyed in their way, as themselves or their
name; when dispensations are not improven to make them more for God, and when
they are not publick-minded, rather then seeking their own things, 3 It is the
great ingratitude of men, and a peculiar proof of their emptiness and
selfishnesse, when they are not the more for God, that he is good to them, but
do increase in wickedness, because of Gods bounty; For, it follows as a
proof of the former, according to the multitude of his fruits, he has
increased the altars, etc. that is, when God sent him plenty, and made his land
fat, he erected yet more Altars to his Idols, and bestowed more cost upon his
images. 4. Prosperity meeting with wicked dispositions, is very ill to guide,
and readily proves a great snare, drawing men to these sins, which either want
or slavish fear, kept somewhat at under in trouble; for, so much also does this
challenge teach. And therefore it is a mercy when the Lord withholds such a
snare from his afflicted people, till their dispositions be more renewed.

Ver. 2. Their heart is divided: now shall they be found faulty: he shall break
down their altars; he shall spoil their images.
This Verse contains yet more of the accusation, that they were divided in
their hearts, partly betwixt God and their calves; partly, in the matter of
their idolatrous worship, some being for the calves only, others for Baal also,
as appeared in Jehu's days; and partly, by civil commotions, as, 2 Kings 15.
Unto these accusations the Lords sentence is subjoyned, whereof this is a part,
that God would shortly convince them of their sin, and take them with the
crime; This he was about to do by his judgments, when he should destroy their
altars and images. Doct. 1. As the heart is a vital part, which cannot be
divided without death; so men can have no life of God, nor acknowledgement of
him, when they are not solely and thoroughly for him and his way, nor will he
endure any halting betwixt him and Idols, 1 King. 18.21. For, it is his
challenge, their heart is divided. 2. When men do fall from Gods way, it is
just with him to give them up to start and multiply divisions without end in
their own way; For, thus also, their heart is divided. 3. Civil dissensions and
commotions are the just fruit of men's halting, and declining from Gods way, and
of their divisions in the matters of God and his Worship: For, this dividing of
the heart, followed upon the rest. 4. It is no strange thing to see men, when
they commit grossest ills, yet be very hardly convinced of it, considering
their wit to defend, and their pretexts to palliate their courses; and that men
by continuing in sin, do still become more and more stupid; For, so is imported
here, in that God must take a course to find them faulty, or, guilty. 5. God
has a school of judgments and afflictions, wherein he will teach and
convince the most obstinate of their sin against him; And this should be looked
on as near approaching, when men will not see their guilt from the Word; For,
now shall they be found faulty, or, made to know their guilt shortly, when God
shall smite them. See Jer. 2.35. 6. As monuments of Idolatry ought to be
destroyed; so where men will not do it, but either maintain them, or are
negligent in suppressing them; God will take the work in his own hand, and get
it done by his judgments upon their expense; For, he shall break down their
altars; he shall spoil their images, to wit, by the Assyrians, as is cleared
in the rest of the Chapter.

Verse. 3. For now they shall say, We have no king, because we feared not the
LORD, What then should a king do to us?
Follows yet more of the Lords sentence, wherein it is declared, that however
they would not abandon their evil way, but looked to their King, whose
authority they followed in their defection, and whose power to defend them,
they leaned unto; yet their King should not help them, being shut up in
Samaria, or destroyed, and then (as was threatened, v. 2.) they should see
their sin procuring this, and their folly in looking to him when he was at his
best. Doct. 1. Wicked men will still get somewhat to oppose against the terror
of Gods threatenings, and to embolden them to be secure, whatever he say; and
particularly, the countenance of great men, and confidence in their power, is a
great snare to them who follow them in sin; as their King proved to them here.
2. Men's authority and power will prove no help, nor shelter against an angry
God, and God will prove that it is so, by taking them away, when men have most
need of their help; For, now, we have no King, say they. See Ps. 146.3, 4. 3.
As to be without Rulers, is a very sad stroke; so it is the just fruit of
peoples sin, and of their not fearing God: This not only the godly should see,
but even the very wicked may be brought to some sense of, Now they shall say,
We have no king, because we feared not the LORD. 4. When men see God angry,
they will also see that no change in their outward condition will avail them
in trouble, so long as their sin, and Gods anger do continue; Therefore they
add also, What then should a king do to us? that is, not only are we deprived
of a King, because of our sin; but though we had one, yet he could do us little
good, so long as we fear not God.

Verse. 4. They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus
judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.
The second accusation, is, that in their pactions both with God and m^n, they
used but empty words, and false oaths, observing none of them. This is
amplified from an effect, that judgment springs up as hemlock, which however
it may be understood of the judgments and punishments to come, that they
should be bitter and rife, and this weed is in the fields; yet it seems more
clear, (by comparing it with Amos 5.7.) to understand it thus; That from their
corruption and unfaithfulness it flowed, that instead of judgment and
justice, the bitter and deadly fruits of unrighteousness did spring up in all
the Land. Whence learn, 1. God cannot endure men's empty words and professions,
whether in Religion, or in their private commerce, when they have no more; For,
They have spoken words, and but words. 2. As wicked men's oaths and Covenants
with God or men, are no more to be trusted then their words; so it is the cause
of a sad controversy, when it is so; For, it is a challenge added to the
former, swearing falsely in making a Covenant. See Lev. 26.25. Ezekiel 17.15.
Psalm. 15.4. 3. When men dare hypocritically dissemble, and make no conscience
of oaths and Covenants, they are then ripe for all unrighteousness, and will
be given up to produce such and so many fruits thereof, as will not only be
bitter and deadly to the oppressed, but God will account it bitter and
intolerable: For, thus judgment springs up as hemlo^k, both for nature and
for the abundance of it. 4. As men's professions, and feigned pretenses, will
not hide the true nature of sin from the All-seeing eye of God; so the pains
taken on a people, to make them righteous, renders their injustice so much the
more odious: For, notwithstanding they professed fair, and seemed to take
pains, as on a plowed field, to bring forth good fruit; and notwithstanding God
had manured them, as men do their fields for corn; yet God sees, and lays
to their charge, that judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the
field, and not in the common and wild places only.

Verse. 5. The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear, because of the calves of
Beth-aven: for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and the Priests
thereof, that rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is departed
from it.
Follows the Lords sentence for this sin, wherein all their confidences are
taken from them, in a threatening consisting of several branches. The first
branch is, the destruction of their Idol-calves, which should be sad news and
matter of fear to Samaria, which was last a taking; and matter of sorrow to the
followers and Priests thereof, who gloried in them, when they should see them
so ignominiously used by the enemies, and no more reverenced and worshipped as
gods. He mentions the calves of Beth-aven, (or Bethel, as, chapter 4.15.) though
there was but one there, either because Bethel was the eminent seat of the
calves, though there were but one in it; or because both Bethel and Dan were
now Beth-aven, or, a place of vanity, or, iniquity, because of that idolatry;
or because at Bethel, beside the calfe publicly erected, they made little ones
in their houses like it also, and the Lord declares all that, should not
avail. Afterward in the Verse. he mentions only one in the singular number,
(shall mourn over it, etc.) to show that they were all of one nature and
kind, and that one should avail even as much as many. Doct. 1. Idolatry is
matter of ignominy to any place or interest that ownes it; for, it turns
Bethel into Beth-aven. See chapter 4.15. 2. It does prove the vanity of Idols, that
their worshippers cannot trust in them, but must be solicitous and anxious
about them in straits; For, so were they about the calves of Beth-aven. This
solicitude differs far from the fear of Gods people about his Worship and
Ordinances in times of danger, (as, 1 Samuel 4.13.) which does not flow from
their diffidence in God, but from the sense of their guilt, especially in
abusing these Ordinances, whereas they are afraid for their Idols, when yet
they omitted nothing of their worship. 3. Any thing that men place their
confidence in beside God, will prove matter of fear and terror; For, so did
the calves prove to Samaria, in the time of their siege, The inhabitants of
Samaria shall fear, because of the calves of Beth-aven: it should increase
their terror in enduring the siege, when they should hear that their gods in
whom they confided, are destroyed and not able to help themselves. 4. Albeit
corrupt Worship and Religion may seem strange at first, to them who have been
bred up in the truth; yet in process of time, and being attended with
success, it may take with them who are not well rooted; For, whatever Israel
thought of the calves at first, yet now there are the people thereof, (men
devoted to them, who) shall mourn for it. 5. Such as are eminently employed
in, and greatest gainers by corrupt worship, have a sad day abiding them;
Therefore it is added in special, that mourning is abiding the Priests, (or,
Chemarims, of whom see Zeph. 1.4.) thereof, that rejoiced on it, or because of
it, that is, who led a merry life, because of their attendance on this Idol.
See Rev. 18.11, etc. 6. The glory of Idolatry and of a false Religion, (being
but borrowed and having nothing to commend it, but novelty and success,) will
at last evanish and depart; And God will bring about this by judgments, when
no other mean will effectuate it; For, so much is imported in this reason of
their sorrow, for the glory thereof, because it is departed from it. This will
be the lot of all false ways, whereas truth, however men loath it for a while,
will still at last be found to be lovely, and to have a native unstained beauty.

Verse. 6. It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present to King Jareb:
Ephraim shall receive shame; and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.
In the second branch of the sentence, it is further threatened, that their
calves should not only be taken, and so be dishonored at home, but should go
into captivity, as a present to the King of Assyria, who had conquered them,
and in whom they placed so much confidence formerly: Whereby they should have
much shame of all their mad counsels to worship them, and enterprises to uphold
them. Whence learn, 1. It is a further proof of the vanity of Idols, which men
set up in Gods place, that they cannot secure themselves against captivity, and
from being disposed of, and triumphed over by Conquerours; For, It shall also
be carried unto Assyria for a present, etc. See Isa. 46.1, 2. The difference
betwixt this and the captivity of the Arc, is very great; for, (beside what is
marked on v. 5.) neither was the Arc God, nor did God, the sign of whose
presence it was, lose any thing by its captivity, but did sufficiently
vindicate and assert his own glory. 2. As the Lord has all Nations ready to be
a scourge to his sinful people; so in particular, they may expect that these
whom they look most unto, and confide most in, neglecting God, shall prove
their sharpest affliction; For, it is Assyria, and King Jareb, (of whom see chapter
5.13.) that triumphs over them and their Idols. 3. It is one of the saddest
ingredients of a conquered peoples affliction, when Conquer ours take occasion
to triumph over their Religion, because they are subdued: So much may we learn
from this, that it is a part of their misery that their gods whom they worship,
shall be carried for a present to King Jareb. 4. Men's following of their own
counsels in the matter of Religion, and their thinking to uphold themselves in
ill courses thereby, will at last end in the shame both of projectors and
concurrers; Nor will policy hold its foot in Gods matters, or in bearing out
men against God; For, Ephraim (the great contriver) shall receive shame, and
Israel (who concurred with him) shall be ashamed of his own counsel.

Verse. 7. As for Samaria, her king is cut off as the some upon the water.
In the third branch of the sentence, it is declared that their King,, in whom
they confided, should be as easily destroyed at the taking of Samaria, as the
foam upon the water is blown away and evanisheth; See v. 3. Learn, 1. A stroke
upon authority, is a judgment upon a people, and will prove so; For, here
again it is threatened as a judgment on them, As for Samaria, her King is cut
off. See Lam. 4.20. 2. The greatest of men, and all their endeavors to uphold
themselves, will prove but an empty and vain show, when God begins to plead;
For, her king is cut off as the foam upon the water, which seems to bulk
much, and yet evanisheth suddenly and easily, as being without substance. See
Psalm. 62.9. And that will be found true of them, which is the general condition
of all, Jam. 4.14

Verse 8. The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel shall be destroyed,
the thorn and the thistle shall come upon their altars; and they shall say to
the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall on us.
The last branch of this sentence, is partly against the places of their
idol-worship, (chiefly Bethel) and their Altars, which the enemy should pull
down and destroy, and they should be desolate and not frequented; as being the
place of Isreal's sin, and not of Gods Worship; And partly, against the whole
body of the people, whose misery shall be so great, as they will rather wish to
be smothered, then endure the incumbent and imminent evils. Whence learn, 1.
The inventions of men in Gods Worship, are wicked vanity, and ought to be
rooted out, and not purged; and God will see it done, if men will not; For, The
high places also of Aven, (that is, chiefly Bethel, which is become vanity and
iniquity; because of them,) shall be destroyed. 2. Corrupting of Religion, and
of the Worship of God, is the crying sin of a visible Church, and therefore he
will not spare it; for it is a reason of the sentence, that these places are
the sin of Israel, their eminent and singular guilt. 3. God will not spare to
lay a Country desolate, that he may put an end to corrupt worship, and make
the places thereof desolate; For, the thorn and the thistle shall come upon
their altars, to wit, when there shall be no people left to frequent that
service. 4. Not only can God, by sending many miseries, cause men to weary of
their lives; but when God pursues sin in hot displeasure, and the fury of
instruments executing his vengeance, is let loose, times and lots will be so
hard, that to die, though in a violent way, would be an ease; For, so much is
imported in this threatening, they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and
to the hills, Fall on us, which is also the language of men in other times of
calamities, Luk 23.30. 5. However men think little of guilt in their secure
condition; yet when God pleads against them by judgments, it will be no wonder
to see them overwhelmed with horror and despair, as having no place of
refuge, and it being their greatest terror to think on looking to God or
Christ, whom they have so much despised; For, this also is imported in this
woeful wish, that they have no refuge, but what is desperate, and horrible; See
Rev. 6.14, 15, 16, 17.

Verse. 9. O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they
stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity, did not overtake
them.
The third accusation is, for their constancy and excess in sins That they
were guilty of the sins of their wicked fathers since the days of Gibeah, (of
which, Judge. 19.) whose manners they imitate; or, (as the Original also will
bear,) they are guiltier than in the days of Gibeah. This challenge is
amplified, that albeit God made their fathers, (at least the body of Israel,)
to stand, and spared them, when yet they were guilty of as gross abominations
as these for which they did pursue Benjamin: (witness their Idolatry in Laish
and elsewhere, Judge. 17. 4, 5, and 18.30, 31.) yet they repented not, nor
kept the impression of that battle, and of Benjamins lot in memory for that
end: And so was it now with them; they went on in their fathers ways, and
would not be reclaimed by the punishment of others. Whence learn, 1.
Continuance in sin through many generations, is a sad aggravation thereof, and
matter of a sad challenge; And the sins of a present generation, will bring the
former sins of a Nation to remembrance, to be put on their account; For, O
Israel, (says he by way of expostulation and challenge,) thou have sinned from
the days of Gibeah. See Ezr. 9.7. 2. The longer sin be continued in, it
grows still the greater and worse; as being the more heinous, when it is
against so many frequent admonitions and experiences; and sinners growing still
the more impudent the more they sin; In these respects the other reading holds
true, thou have sinned more then in the days of Gibeah. 3. The carrying of a
people through trouble, and their success and preservation in a good cause, is
no mark of divine approbation of their persons, being guilty of gross sins;
For, there they (that is, their fathers) stood: or fought against wickedness,
and were preserved, and the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity,
(the Benjamines) did not over-take them, that is, they escaped the danger, and
were victorious, though many of them fell; And yet they sinned then, wherein
their posterity did imitate them. God may make men scourges of sin in others,
who yet are but vile themselves; may carry through a good cause in a peoples
hand, with whom he is not pleased; and may spare a people, not because they are
holy, but because he will not destroy the face of a Church, which would be, if
he proceeded according to their deservings. 4. It is a very great aggravation
of sin, when people persist in it, without being bettered either by the
punishment of others, or by their own sparing; For, so is imported in this
challenge, that though Israel escaped, when Benjamin fell, yet neither the one
nor the other prevailed with their fathers; and they, their children, were as
incorrigible as they. See Zeph. 3.6, 7.

Verse. 10. It is in my desire that I should chastise them, and the people shall
be gathered against them, when they shall bind themselves in their two
furrows.
Unto this a sentence is subjoyned in two branches; and first, The Lord
declares that he has a purpose now to punish them, by exposing them as a prey
to the Nations. The amplification subjoyned in the end of the v. is made
obscure by the different acceptations of the Original text; They who read it,
when I shall bind them for their two iniquities, or eyes, (that is, their two
calves, which were dear and precious to them as their eyes,) do indeed hold out
these truths; That their idols were the great cause of their ruin; and that
delectable and sweet iniquities will draw out the bitterer plagues; But the
Original construction and pointing will not bear that translation. Therefore I
adhere to that signification of furrows, which is insisted on in the following
verses, not secluding that of habitations, which may be also pointed at under
that Metaphor of furrows: and so the reading is, when they (that is, Israel,
or the enemies who shall be gathered) shall bind themselves in, or against
their two furrows. Both these come to one purpose, that the Lord will thus
punish them, when they shall unite all their strength, and fix themselves for
their own defense, as a yoke of Oxen are coupled together, every one in their
own furrow to draw; And more particularly, when they shall unite their strength
in their two furrows, or habitations, to defend their Country, and the two
portions of land which they possessed on both sides of Jordan, which were
destroyed by two several invasions of the Assyrian, 2 Kings 15.29. and c. 17.6.
And so on the other hand,, the people and Nations did thus destroy them, when
they bent their forces against these two furrows, or habitations, and drew
deep furrows of trouble upon them one after another, by making them
tributaries, 2 Kings 15.19. and by captivating first that part beyond Jordan, 2
Kings 15.29. and then the rest, 2 Kings 17. Doct. 1. Though God spare the
wicked long, yet at last he will punish the incorrigible, and bring them under
the yoke; For, albeit they were spared before, v. 9. yet now he will chastise
them. 2. When God is provoked to anger, he will not only notwith-hold a stroke,
but will make it bitter, by iflicting it so, as one that takes pleasure in it;
For, it is in my desire that I should chastise them, imports, not only that he
had irrevocably purposed it, but that being weary with repenting, and suffering
their manners, he would now show no proof of pity, but many evidences of his
being well pleased with their ruin; See Prove. 1.26, 28. 3. God has all
Nations at his command to convocate and let them loose against whom he will,
and to make an holy use of their inveterate malice against his people, when
they provoke him; For, the people shall be gathered against them, says he,
when he would chastise them. See Isa. 7.18, 19. 4. Men's conjunction of strength
and forces to uphold themselves in sinful courses, and against Gods wrath and
the instruments thereof, will not avail them nor hinder the success of
enemies; For, all this shall be, when they shall bind themselves in their two
furrows, when they shall use all endeavors, men's enterprises against them
shall succeed. 5. A sinful Nation may expect that God will pursue them in every
corner, and give them alike success every where: For, they shall meet with
this in their two furrows, and come as ill ^peed on that side of Jordan where
the bulk of the Kingdom lay, as they did in the other.

Verse. 11. And Ephraim is as an heiser that is taught, and loves to tread out
the corn, but I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make Ephraim to ride:
Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods.
The second branch of the sentence, is, that albeit Ephraim bred themselves
delicately, and could not endure trouble or Gods yoke, (as an heifer would love
to tread out the corn, (as was their custom) because it was easy work, and
wanted a yoke, and afforded abundance of food, Deuteronomy. 25.4.) yet God would put a
yoke upon them, and would put both Judah and Ephraim to trouble, and to endure
bondage and captivity, as an horse that is tossed, and ridden upon in long
journeys, and as an heifer made to plough and harrow. Whence learn, 1. It is a
fault incident to our nature, to be much addicted to our own ease, and that
which brings present content and comfort, and to abhor any lot, or way of
Gods service, which proves contrary to that; for, Ephraim is on heifer that
loves to tread out the corn. 2. It is a great snare to men, making them to
dote on an easy way, when they have been accustomed in Gods providence to such
a lot, and by taking too well with it, become effeminate; For, Ephraim is
taught, and loves to tread out the corn, that is, has been tenderly dealt
with, and has accustomed his own heart to that way. 3. God has an indignation
at such as are too delicate and take too well with ease, and is provoked to put
them to trouble; for, I passed over upon her fair neck, that is, I brought her
under the yoke, who kept her self so dainty, as if a man put a yoke upon the
fat and found neck of an undaunted heifer. 4. Let wicked men tamper as they
will, yet they will not get trouble always shifted, but God will bring
captivity and bondage, or other trouble upon them; for, I will make Ephraim to
ride, etc. that is, he shall be tossed into captivity, as a man makes his horse
carry him in far journeyes. 5. The Lords sentence is universal against all
secure and delicate sinners, that he will send toil and trouble upon them, be
they less or more corrupt; Therefore does Judah, though more pure in many
things then Israel, come in in the sentence, Judah shall plow, which is an hard
labor but seems to be distinguished from riding, because however Judah was
oppressed in these times, yet they went not so soon into captivity, as Israel.
6. The hard lots of sinners, may yet through Gods blessing, prove useful and
profitable to them, however they may be ill satisfied with them; Therefore does
he express their lot thus, Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods,
which is the useful labor of husbandmen, as is further insinuate in the next
verse. I conceive that Jacob in this place is all one with Judah, distinguished
from Ephraim, or the ten Tribes, who are made to ride. Their name is doubled,
to show that no title of their interest in the royal Tribe of Judah, or in holy
Jacob will hold off the sentence, And their trouble is termed plowing, etc.
because they were to attain to the fruit and issue of their trouble more
speedily then Israel.

Verse. 12. Sow to your selves in righteousness: reap in mercy, break up your
fallow ground: for it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain
righteousness upon you.
These threatenings are sweetened with an exhortation to repentance and
reformation of their way in terms borrowed from v. 11. The exhortation is
twofold, to every one of which an encouragement is subjoyned, by way of
argument pressing the duty. He exhorts them that they would sow the fruits of
righteousness, promising to make them reap the fruits of his mercy. 2. That
for this end they would cleave up and manure the hard and wild ground of their
own heart, which they had neglected so long, and so impeded their own seeking
of God; Upon the amendment whereof, he promises liberally to perform
promises, to absolve them from sin, and to cloth them with Christ's
righteousness. Whence learn, 1. When the Lord is most severe in threatenings,
we are bound to look on them as containing exhortations to repentance, and
promises to the penitent, in the bosom of them; for, so is here cleared. And
if this were hearkened unto, who knows what mercy would make of the most
desperate person or people in the world? 2. The fruits of righteousness of the
second Table, are the true evidences of repentance, and of conversion to God
through faith in Jesus Christ; Therefore does he require sowing in
righteousness, or the duties of righteousness, not as if that were all their
conversion, but as evidences and fruits thereof. 3. Albeit God be not bound to
our pains, yet he requires diligence in penitents; And they must be content to
perform duties, without looking for present fruit of recompense; Therefore is
their duty expressed in terms taken from the painful calling of husbandry,
and particularly of sowing, wherein men must wait for the recompense of their
labors. See Ps. 97.11. James 5.7. 4. Albeit the Lord does condescend to have
his glory manifested in a peoples obedience, and do also freely reward it, as
if it were of worth to him; yet God does not seek service, because he needs
it, but all the advantage of it, is the man's own who performs it; For, sow
to your selves, says he. See Ps. 16.2. 5. However men's walking in ways of
righteousness, seem oft-times to be long forgotten, and lie like seed under
the clod, which might seem lost; yet in due time, it will resolve in an harvest
of comfort and free reward; For, says he, sow and reap; See Ps. 126.6. Gal
6.9. 6. Whatever be the boisterous and proud complaints of hypocrites, as, Isa.
58.3. Mal. 3.14. yet such as are righteous walkers indeed, and do flee to
Christ in a Covenant of Grace, and draw strength from him for the duties of new
obedience, they will look only to Gods mercy, and not their own worth, for
obtaining any reward; for, they look to reap in mercy. 7. Such as are thus
brought in mercies reverence, mercy will be bestowed on them; and mercy will be
the carver of their portion, and its out-lettings will be like it self, and
according to the promise; For, it is a promise, reap in mercy, or according to
the mouth of mercy, that is, according to its verdict and sentence, and
according to the proportion it shall carve out, and according to the promises
which God in his mercy has made and spoken. 8. Men can reap no fruit of any
seeming diligence, till their hearts, which are hard and unaccustomed to any
good, be manured and changed, and put in a new and fruitful frame; Therefore
is the other exhortation subjoyned, break up your fallow ground, where, in a
Metaphor borrowed from plowing, they are tought, that their hearts are as wild
and unaccustomed to any good work, as land that is not in use of being plowed*
is hard and ill to plow; and that therefore the more pains must be taken upon
them, by humiliation, repentance and mortification, to get them put in a frame.
9. Misspent time in neglecting or refusing to seek God, ought to be redeemed
and will be so by all them who are sensible of their own case; For, it is a
reason of the exhortation, for it is time to seek the Lord, considering how
long ye have neglected it. See 1 Pet. 4.3. 10. So long as sinners are
preserved, and invited to repentance, it is yet an acceptable time, if sinners
will hearken; and such opportunities should not be neglected: Both these also
are imported in this reason, that it was yet time, and that the opportunity
would be laid hold on. 11. As sincere seekers, do seek God only, and to enjoy
him, as their chief scope; So they will not give over, till he come; for they
seek the Lord, and that till he come. 12. As they who seek the Lord sincerely
and constantly, will not only find him, but he will come over all impediments
that they could not get over: (for, he comes, and that makes up the distance,
notwithstanding all their seeking;) So his dispensations to them will be
liberal and refreshful; For, he comes and raineth righteousness, that is,
liberally pours out blessings, and refreshes them after all their toil, in
their wanting and pursuing after him. 13. God will especially manifest his
refreshful liberality toward his people, in performing his promises which they
wait for, and many of them in a shower together, to compense long delays; and
in refreshing them under the shadow of Christ's righteousness, (which is their
chief hope,) and in the rich and ample fruits thereof; for, both these are
imported in this righteousness, he will rain righteousness upon you, both
his righteousness in faithful keeping of promise, and his imputed and gifted
righteousness, which is witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, Romans 3.21, 22.

Verse. 13. Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity, ye have eaten
the fruit of lies: because thou did trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy
mighty men.
The last accusation in this Chap. (which also is another argument pressing the
former exhortation,) is, for their great diligence in serving sin. Whereas the
Lord by his Prophets, had frequently inculcate that exhortation, v. 12. to take
pains on their own hearts, to bring forth the fruits of piety and
righteousness; They on the contrary took pains enough in serving sin, wherein
they wanted not fruit, though it should disappoint their expectation. This
challenge is further amplified and enlarged, by showing what was the fountain
and spring of all this wickedness: to wit, their carnal confidence in the
sinful ways and courses they followed, both in matters of State and Religion,
and their confidence in their many valiant men. Doct. 1. Many are so perverse,
as they are not only content to live in sin, neglecting their duty, but they
will be at pains and industrious to promote sin, and will trouble themselves
to undo themselves; So much is imported in this challenge, Ye have plowed
wickedness, or taken great pains about it, which ye would not do in your
duty, v. 12. 2. Sin is a very fertile weed among the children of men; such as
are bent upon it, will soon get their hearts desire of it, and God will give up
such as are diligent that way, to an height of impiety as a plague upon them;
for, upon their plowing, it follows, ye have reaped iniquity, whereby we are
not to understand Gods causing them reap the fruit of sin in judgments,
(though that be truth also, and follows in the sentence,) but that their
labors in sin came to a ripe harvest of grown-up iniquity. 3. Whatever fruit
sin seem to promise to its followers, or whatever present comforts or success
men seem to have by it; yet it will prove but vain, and disappoint them: For,
ye have eaten the fruit of lies. Sin, as it promises any thing to the sinner,
is but a lie, and the fruit of it which men seem to enjoy, is but lying fruit,
and such fruit as beseems a vain and deceiving course. 4. Men's carnal
confidences are great snares to draw them upon sinful courses, and are
promising fruits which will disappoint them: Therefore it is added, because
thou did trust in thy way, etc. Their confidence to bear out in a sinful way,
made them painful in it; and this is instanced as one of the fruits of their
course, which should prove the fruit of lies; and no wonder; for, it is a trust
not only in an object beside God, but in what is sinful. 5. There is no
confidence that more readily ensnares men, and will disappoint them sooner,
then their own witty projects and devices in matters civil and sacred, without
respecting the Law of God; and their seeming to have power enough to manage and
uphold them in these contrived ways; for, such is their snare here, which will
disappoint them, Thou did trust in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty
men, that is, when they saw their counsels in Religion and State-changes, like
to stand, and their Kingdom abound with valiant men; then they began to trust
that such a course would still bear out, and so were tempted to draw more
furrows of that iniquity, though it was but with cords of vanity, Isa. 5.18.

Verse. 14. Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy
fortresses shall be spoiled, us Shalman spoiled Beth-arbel in the day of
battle, the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children.
Follows the Lords sentence, wherein again he threatens all their
confidences, and clears how they shall prove vanity and lies. And first, for
their mighty men, he threatens that they shall be surprised with the invasion
of the enemies, and so confounded with fear, that they can do nothing orderly.
This is amplified from an effect, that not only the land should be overrun, but
their very fortresses should not hold out, but be spoiled and sacked, according
as they saw in some late example of Shalmans cruelty against Beth-arbel, which
being no where else mentioned in Scripture, we ought not to be curious in
enquiring further about it. Doct. 1. Whatever men dream of their power and
courage in a calm day, yet a provoked God will make a day of tumults and
confusions discover their folly; For, Therefore (because of thy carnal
confidence) shall a tumult arise among thy people, a tumult of invading
enemies, and of confounded people, 2. Albeit that the dear people of God may
have their own fits of fear and confusion in times of calamity; yet not only is
that not their allowance from the Lord: but to be given wholly up to that
distemper, (as the wicked are) is a judgment from the Lord because of sin, and
the fruit of carnal confidence, as this threatening teaches. See Luke. 21.26,
28. 3. The Lords sad dispensations toward Nations about, are documents to his
people, and warnings of what they deserve and may expect as well as others,
when they provoke him; Therefore does he set before them that sad example,
which, as appears, was recent in their memory, assuring them it should be so
with them, as Shalman spoiled Beth arbel in the day of battle, when he overcame
them in fight, and pursued his victory. 4. Impenitent sinners, who contemn God
because of carnal confidences, do provoke him not only to pursue them with the
sword against their armies in the fields; But to give up their fortresses to
the spoil, and expose their wives and children to the cruelty of bloody
enemies; For, all thy fortresses shall be spoiled, and they are threatened with
such a lot, as when the mother was dashed in pieces upon the children. See Genesis
32.11. The speech imports great cruelty, in that they spared neither mother nor
child, and in that they dashed the children against the stones, as, Psalm.
137.9. before the pitiful mothers, and then dashed the mothers to death, and
laid them in heaps above their children.

Ver. 15. So shall Bethel do unto you, because of your great wickedness: in a
morning shall the King of Israel be utterly cut off.
Secondly, as for their confidence in their way of Religion, and settled State,
the Lord threatens, First, that that sore calamity mentioned, v. 14. should
come upon them, because of their great sin of Idolatry at Bethel. Secondly,
that their King and Kingdom should fall by a sudden and speedy blow. Whence
learn, 1. Idolatry and corrupting of Religion, is the great wickedness of a
visible Church, and the cause of saddest judgments, For, So (as is before
threatened) shall Bethel do unto you, because of your great wickedness, to wit,
which is committed there, and under Bethel, the other place of their corrupt
worship are comprehended. 2. As we are ready enough to see instruments in our
calamities, and ought to acknowledge Gods hand in them: So we should see the
great influence of our own sin in procuring them; For, So shall Bethel do unto
you, to wit, by your provoking of God there. 3. Impenitent Rulers and their
Kingdoms may not only be sore afflicted and wasted, but it may draw at length
to utter cutting off, even though they be Gods people in visible Covenant with
him; for, the King of Israel, (and the Kingdom with him) shall utterly be cut
off. 4. God can very speedily and suddenly bring about great revolutions and
overturnings of Kingdoms; And he would have the greatness of their sin, and
of his displeasure seen in such a dispensation; for, in a morning shall this be
done; which imports a short time, as a morning before the Sun rise; and a
sudden stroke, as if in a morning before men were awake, an Army or City were
surprised. And it seems that albeit Samaria endured a three years siege, 2
King. 17.5. yet some one morning it was surprised, and so their King and
Kingdom came to an end,

CHAP. XI.
IN the first part of this Chap. the Lord continues to accuse and give out
sentence against Israel, And, 1. He accuses them of ingratitude, in that
albeit he had loved them in their Infant-condition, and delivered them out of
Egypt, ver. 1. and had sent Prophets to them to teach them their duty, v. 2. --
yet they walked contrary to their directions, and served Idols, v. -- 2. And
albeit he did carry them through the wilderness, yet they did not consider nor
acknowledge this, v. 3. and that notwithstanding he did gently draw them to
their duty, and provide for them, v. 4. For this the Lord threatens, that they
should find Egypt no refuge to them, but should be carried to Assyria, v. 5.
and that the sword should abide upon their Towns and Villages, till it
consumed them, according as they deserved, v. 6. 2. He accuses them for their
pronenesse to Apostasy, and ill intertainment given to the messages sent from
God unto them, v. 7. In the second part of the Chap. the godly are comforted
against the judgments imminent and deserved by their sins; wherein is held
forth, the mercy of God interposing to hold off the judgments deserved by
them, v. 8. and his express promise to moderate the execution of his just
displeasure, in not consuming the Nation utterly, v. 9. and to convert and
restore them, after their rejection and exile, v. 10, 11. In the third part of
the Chapter the Lord rejects all their pretenses, wherewith they would cover their
faults, and shows how much they were worse then Judah, ver. 12.

Ver. 1. WHen Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of
Egypt.

2. As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto Baal^m,
and burnt incense to graven images.


THis Chap. begins with a challenge of Isreal's ingratitude. And for this end,
the Lord brings to remembrance his favor, and his benefits conferred upon
them, and subjoynes what their ingrate carriage had been. In these Verses, he
calls to mind his love toward them in their infant-condition in Egypt; his
preserving and delivering them out of Egypt, as his adopted children, and as a
type of Christ; and his sending Prophets (particularly Moses,) to call them to
obedience, and to entertain fellowship with him in the use of his worship;
which trust these Prophets faithfully discharged: All which does aggreage their
sin, and convince them of ingratitude, who walked so cross to the directions
of the Prophets, and multiplied Idols and Images which they worshipped. Doct.
1. Ingratitude and walking unanswerably to many received mercies, is the great
and crying sin of the Lords people and Church, as this challenge teaches.
Unfruitfulnesse under rods will not be rightly mourned for, till this sin be
begun at. See Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48. 2. The Church and people of God, are in
themselves very unlike the great dignities, to which he advances them: And
particularly Israel was in a very mean and low condition, till God did form
them both into a distinct and potent Nation, and into a visible Church for
himself; For, Israel was a child, or, in an infant-condition, not as yet grown
up. No more like to the condition God put them in, when he increased and
delivered them, and when he exalted and established them in the promised land,
then a child is like a grown up man. And at that time, they were not formed in
a Church State, till after their deliverance from Egypt; Which may put us in
mind of the mercy of a grown up Church State, under the Gospel, and what
obligations a perfected reformation lays upon them who attain to it. 3. Gods
love to the Church is her first and great privilege, which prevents her in her
lowest condition, when she is unworthy and base, and which is the fountain of
all his bounty, and so makes it comfortable; For, when Israel was a child,
witless and worthless, then I loved him, and this is the fountain of all his
bounty after mentioned, Deuteronomy 7.7, 8. 4. The Lord will make his love to his
people conspicuous in their preservation in a low condition and under much
trouble, when he sees it not fit to deliver them from it; For, so is supposed
he dealt with Israel in Egypt, preserving them from being extinguished by the
fury of Pharaoh, till he called them out of Egypt. See Exodus 1.12. 5. The Lord
also will magnify his love in their deliverance from trouble and bondage, not
only spiritual, but outward also, in so far as is for their good; For, I
called my Son out of Egypt, or brought him out with my invitation, by the
Ministry of such as were sent to speak to Pharaoh and them, which I made
effectual: And this was not only a type of the Churches delivery from
spiritual bondage, but a pledge also of his doing great things for his people.
See Exodus 12.42. Psalm. 34.19. 6. As the Lord does oft-times manifest his love,
and put special honor on his people, by putting them to sufferings and
trouble, Jer. 31.20. Heb. 12.5. So he will especially make his delivering of
them, proclaim his love and estimation of them, and his peculiar interest in
them: For, says he, I called my Son out of Egypt, that is, he delivered them
as his adopted children above all Nations, which he not only caused intimate to
Pharaoh, Exodus 4.22, 23. but made manifest to all the world by his asserting
them into liberty, by an outstretched arm. 7. This calling out of Egypt is
applied unto Christ, and his coming out from thence, Matthew. 2 15. because the
Lord, in delivering Israel, did also bring forth Christ. 1. As the head of his
body the Church from whom he is inseparable. 2. As the blessed seed of Abraham,
descending in the loins of his parents, and to be manifested in due time; And
so as Levi paid tithes in Abraham's loins, Heb. 7.9, 10. So he came out of
Egypt in the loins of his progenitors. 3. As in a type, The carrying of Israel
into Egypt, and their deliverance from thence, being a type of his exile there,
and his return from thence to perfect the work of man's Redemption. It teaches,
1. That the Scriptures are a great and unsearchable depth, containing far more
then our shallow judgments can reach or discern in them, as appears in that
the lot of Christ in his own person, is couched under this type. So likewise in
the Apostles inferences on very words, and their being expressed in this or
that way, as, Gal. 3.16. And from his doctrine on Abraham's Sons, and of mount
Sinai, Gal. 4.22, 23, 24, 25, etc. and in many other instances. And albeit this
be no warrant for men curiousty to dip into Scriptures, and multiply types and
allegories, neglecting the literal sense; yet it ought to humble all in their
making use of such a treasure, and lay the pride of these who either contemn
the simplicity of the Scripture, or conceit of their own skill and insight in
it. 2. The Lord has a great respect and eye to Christ, in all his great works,
especially in his Church; And as this deliverance was great and notable, not
only in it self, but chiefly as it pointed at Christ: So should we learn to
esteem of every thing, according as we see Christ in it, and as it leads to
him. 3. It is a great evidence of the love of Christ to his Church, that not
only as her head, be sympathizeth with her in all her troubles; but that in the
days of his flesh, he would in his own person essay what had been her lot, and
what she might meet with, that so he might experimentally know the heart of a
stranger, and be a merciful and faithful high Priest; Therefore did he
undergo exile in Egypt. See Heb. 4.15. Doct. 8. It is a great addition to a
peoples mercies, when they not only get deliverances, but have Messengers sent
unto them by God, to point out their duty, to direct them how to make use of
mercies, and to put them in mind when they go out of the way; For, it is
supposed here, as a further mercy, that they had men who called them. ^. The
true touchstone and trial of a peoples thankfulness for mercies, is by their
obedience to the Word, and their subjection to God speaking in it; Therefore is
this the first challenge and evidence of their ingratitude, they called them,
and they went from them. 10. As God speaking in his Word, does oft-times get
little obedience, even from his own people, to whom he has been especially
kind, (as this instance teaches;) So when a people do not profit by the Word,
their corruptions will be irritate, and themselves grow so much the worse as
pains is taken on them; For, as they called, so they went from them, that is,
they went openly, and of purpose, and in contempt, the quite contrary way. 11.
It is Satan's great engine to draw men to contemn God and his Word, under
pretext of disrespect and prejudice against the Messengers only; And however
men palliate their sin that way, yet in Gods account, that same very disrespect
and hatred of Ministers, is an evidence they are wrong, and a snare to lead
them further wrong; For, so they went from them, to wit, from these that were
sent unto them, as Israel murmured against Moses and Aaron, but indeed against
the Lord, Exodus 16.8. 12. The contempt of Gods Ministers and their Ministry
and Message, is a forerunner of Idolatry, and of defection from the true
Religion; Such a temper of it self is ready to go wrong, and God justly
plagues such, with giving them up to wild courses; For, upon this it
follows, they sacrificed to Baalim. See Joh. 5.43. 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11, 12. 13.
When men renounce the true God and his way of worship, and turn Idolaters,
they renounce also their own happiness and tranquillity, which they do
proclaim by their multiplying of Idols and confidences; For, they had Baalim,
in the plural number, many Idols under that name. 14. Beside the sin of
grossest Idolatry, in choosing a false god for the object of worship; the Lord
cannot away with Images, put in any religious State, for representing him, or
to worship him in and by them; Therefore it is added as another challenge, and
burnt incense to graven Images, a notable instance whereof we have in the
golden calfe, wherein they pretended to do service to God, Exodus 32.4, 5.

Verse. 3. I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms: but they
knew not that I healed them.
In this v. the Lord records a further benefit conferred on Israel, (which
seems to relate to his leading them in the wilderness) in that he directed
their way, and tenderly conducted them in it, as a tender parent or nurse leads
a child by the hands, and lifts it up by the arms, and carries it over a rough
piece of way. See Deuteronomy. 1.31. and, 32.10, 11, 12. Unto this he subjoyneth, by
way of challenge, what their ingrate carriage was, to wit, that they considered
not that he did all this, and that he healed them, that is, when they by their
sins, had made breaches on themselves, he recovered them, Psalm. 106.23. Yea,
and saved them from all dangers, whereinto they might have fallen in that
wilderness. Whence learn, 1. Deliverance from bondage and distress is not all
that the Church needs at Gods hand; but her way, being delivered, may be so
dark, and so rough, (as usually Gods way is to flesh and blood) that she
neither knows it, nor can walk in it, more then a child in a rough way; For,
so is here imported, that they needed God to guide the way, and to enable them
to go in it. 2. It is the Churches great advantage, that God who delivers her,
will not leave her so, but will guide and carry her; For, after the former
mercy, v. 1. it is added, I taught Ephraim also to go; By Ephraim, he
understands the ten tribes, and albeit all Jacobs posterity tasted of this
mercy in the wilderness, yet here he speaks only of these whom he is
challenging for the abuse of it. 3. Such is the Lords tender mercy, as that
abuse of former kindnesses, does not always prevail to withhold what further
mercies a people need; He will not always cast off a delivered people, but add
new mercies, to make their deliverance complete, albeit they have not made
right use of what they have received; For, notwithstanding their ingratitude,
v. 2. yet he added this mercy. 4 When Gods people are weak, and their way dark
and rough, Gods guiding and tender respect to them, may yet give them very
little to do, and make their lot very easy; For, I taught them to go, taking
them by their arms; Their being always in his hand, and lifted over
impediments, might make their path easy. Some have found even sad trials more
easy then their ordinary walking. 5. It is the usual sin and great ingratitude
of a people, either to mistake their own mercy, and account it evil and a
cruel lot; or not to see and acknowledge Gods hand in it, when they are
satisfied that it is good; For, but they knew (or considered and acknowledged)
not that I healed them. Many choice mercies they quarrelled, (witness their
murmuring at their deliverance from Egypt, their loathing of Manna, and their
repining at almost all their lots in the wilderness. See Numb. 17.12, 13.) And
they did not observe nor acknowledge Gods hand, as became them, in these
mercies they were convinced of. 6. The Lords recovering of his people after
their crushes for sin, and his preventing of other dangers, are both rich
mercies; and the one ought to be acknowledged as healing, as well as the other,
Therefore both get this name, I healed them.

Verse 4. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was to
them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto them.
To aggravate their ingratitude, the Lord mentions yet further kindness
manifested to them; in that he drew them to their duty, not by violent means;
but by persuasions, encouragements and other dealing suitable to reasonable
creatures, and by many proofs of his love; And that, as a tender husbandman
eases his beast, by loosing it from its labor, and bearing the yoke when he
takes it off, and laying meat to it; So he had eased them and gave them
breathings and rest; after some short trials from their oppressors, and
provided necessary refreshment for them. All which kindness they had abused,
as here is to be understood, and is expressly charged upon them in the reasons
of the sentence, v. 5, 6. Whence learn, 1. Naturally man is so averse from God,
and from holiness, that he needs to be drawn to it, and to have his
inclination wrought upon; as here is imported, I drew them. 2. The Lords
dealing with his Church, whether by his Word or dispensations, is fitted and
suitable to man, as he is a rational creature; and singularly obliging, except
men do even renounce humanity; For, I drew them with cords of a man, that is,
such as are fitted to man's temper as he is a reasonable creature, such as
exhortations, promises, threatenings, etc. And such dealing as men use to
oblige others to them thereby. 3. The love of God, whether offered in the Word,
or manifested in dispensations, does lay on strong bands obliging us to duty,
and it is an heinous aggravation of sin, when it is committed against love;
For, it adds to the challenge, that he drew them with bands of love, evidenced
in his revealed Covenant, and many sweet dispensations; and yet they would not
be persuaded. See Cant. 8.6. 2 Cor. 5.14. 4. The Lords people are not to
expect, that because he loves them, therefore he will keep off trouble, when
they need it, nor ought troubles to hide a sight of his love from his people,
whatever fatherly displeasure they read in them; For, so is supposed, that
notwithstanding those bands of love, they had sometime a yoke on their jaws,
which yet did not prove that his love did cease. 5. The Lord will also manifest
his mercy to his people, in giving them ease after their toil, and breaking
the yoke of their oppressors, whatever be in the way; For, such was his great
mercy here, I was to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, or
above their jaws, that is, by lifting it off their neck, and over their head
and jaws. See Psalm. 12 5.3. 6. It is also a very obliging and convincing
mercy, that our food and other necessaries, are provided and prepared of God
for us, from day to day; and that the burden of our anxieties may be laid over
on him and his providence; For, I laid meat to them, (as the owner to the Ox)
and brought it to their hand. See Psalm. 127.1, 2.

Verse 5. He shall not return into the land of Egypt. but the Assyrian shall
be his king, because they refused to return.
Follows the Lords sentence for this their ingratitude, in two threatenings.
First, having supposed their being invaded, he threatens that it should be in
vain to think on Egypt (with whom they were confederate, 2 King 17.4.) for a
refuge or retiring place. For they should be subdued by the Assyrian, and
carried to live in his territories; And that because they would not return to
God, when he reproved and invited them. Doct. 1. Whatever confidences or
expectations men have, which harden them in their evil ways, in hard times;
yet it is folly to lean to them: For when men walk contrary to God and his
will, he will walk contrary to their will, and blast their expectations; For,
they would not hearken to God, because they thought Egypt would either releeve
them, or be a retiring place unto them; Therefore it is threatened, he shall not
return into the land of Egypt, where by naming it a returning, he puts them in
mind of their former bondage there, to check their folly in making it now
their refuge. 2. As it may be expected by all, in a time of trial, that they
shall be put to the exercise they have least will of, because that is a trial
indeed: So in particular, whatever lot wicked men are most averse from, it is
just with God to put them to it; For, Israel could not endure Assyria, either
to be subject unto, or be in exile there, and the Lord threatens, the Assyrian
shall be his King, that is, he shall subdue and bring them under his dominion,
and shall carry them into his own territories. 3. Simple sinning is not so
great a quarrel against men, as impenitency and persisting in it, after
mercies showed and offered, and means used to reclaim them: And it is not so
heinous, simply not to return, (which may be for a time, through infirmity, or
the violence of tentation) as to slight repentance, and invitations to it: All
this is included in this reason of the sentence, because they refused to
return, they not only returned not, when they had gone astray; but they openly
and avowedly refused, when they were seriously invited. See Jer. 8.4, 5.

Verse. 6. And the sword shall abide on his cities, and shall consume his
branches, and devour thee, because of their own counsels.
Secondly, the Lord threatens them with an abiding sword upon their cities, and
their villages, which as branches, spring out from the cities, (or, on their
bars, that is, their strong holds, Rulers, and valiant inhabitants) and that
because of their following their own ways and counsels, rejecting the Lords.
Of this See Chap. 10.6. Doct. 1. The sword ought to be looked on, as one of the
Lords scourges because of his peoples ingratitude and abuse of mercies, and
their trusting to their own counsels, and not regarding Gods Word; For, because
of these provocations it is threatened here. 2. The sword is then a most sharp
scourge, and speaks much of Gods displeasure, when it rages not only amongst
armies in the fields, but falls in upon Cities; when it is universal, upon
Cities and branches, or villages, or Forts, or Rulers, and other inhabitants;
and when it continues long thus, and abides till it consume and devour. See
Jer. 47.6, 7. 3. However men trust much to their own inventions and projects,
neglecting God and his way, as here is supposed; Yet all this their wit and
policy, will be so far from holding off a judgment, that on the contrary, it
does draw it on; For, it is added as a reason of the sentence, because of their
own counsels.

Verse. 7. And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called
thee to the most High, none at all would exalt him.
The first part of this v is by many taken as a further threatening, that they
should be in suspense, and anxiety, being pressed on every hand because of
their backsliding from God. Which though it be a truth in it self, Deuteronomy.
28.66. and the word does also signify to be in suspense; yet the Original
construction will not bear this interpretation, for it is not because of, but
to backsliding. Therefore I understand it, with the translation, as a second
accusation against Israel, for their backslidings, to which they were so prone,
that their inclination and course did still hang, sway and bend toward it. And
if they were at any time in suspense and doubt about their course, (as the word
also imports) yet all that but tended to more Apostasy, and testified their
inclination to it in that no such hesitation stopped their course. This
general challenge is more particularly confirmed in the end of the v. from the
ill entertainment they gave to the Messages sent by Gods servants to them.
Doct. 1. Backsliding and Apostasy is the great sin of the visible Church, to
which she has a strong inclination naturally, even in her best frame; any
other course she follows, being but a motion against nature; For, it is a
challenge, that they not only backslide from what they attained, but are bent
to backsliding. See Chap. 6.4. 2. Men's hanging sometime in suspense, and having
some inclinations to return, will neither double out their point against the
power of corruption within them; nor will it extenuate, but rather aggreage
their backsliding, that it overfloweth such banks: So much does the other
reading teach, they are in suspense, and yet it tends but to backsliding. 3.
The great backsliding of Gods people, is their backsliding from God and
communion with him; which draws on all other Apostasies and defections: And
every backsliding of the Church, in duty or worship, is a backsliding from God,
in so far as men thereby, do renounce his prerogative to be the sovereigne
Lord, to prescribe their duty, and the way of his own service; and do renounce
these ways and means, wherein only communion with God is to be found and
entertained. In these respects it is challenged that they backslide from me,
says the Lord. 4. God will not forget a backsliding peoples interest, and
pretenses of interest in him, to aggravate their sin; For, it adds to the
challenge, my people are bent to backsliding. It cannot but grieve God, when
these whom he has choosen to be his peculiar people, and has put them in
possession of special favors, and gained their consent in part, do recede
from him as unworthy, and do choose husks whereon the world feeds, as the only
desirable portion. And it is a sad case, when all a peoples privileges and
advantages, serve only to make their ditty the sadder. 5. As it is of the Lords
great mercy, that he cease not to follow backsliders with Messages from his
Word, (as here it is supposed that yet there were, and that diverse and many
who called them;) So by the entertainment that is given to the Word men may
try whether they have backsliden or not, or whether they be persisting in it,
or turning from it; For, by this is the charge of Apostasy and bentnesse in
following it, proven, in that they obeyed not the call, though they called
them, none at all would exalt him 6. When the Lord by his Word reclaimes his
people from their backsliding, it is not because he needs them, who is glorious
and high in himself, but for their own advantage; For, he called them from
these base things which drew them away, to the most high. 7. We are never free
of backsliding but when God is most high to us, and in our estimation; and when
he is exalted in our hearts, and in our respect to his commands and directions,
and conscience made of his praise, the neglect whereof is an evidence of
Apostasy, and portends more of it; For, so is imported, in that they are called
from their backsliding, to come to him as the most high and to exalt him. 8.
Backsliding is by so much the sadder, and the cause of a greater quarrel, that
it is universal; For, none at all would exalt him, but all refused the call.
Though it may be also understood and read, together they exalted not, that is,
not only with one consent they refused, but they joined not in that work; as
indeed want of union is a special mean of carrying on backsliding and
defection.

Verse. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee, Israel?
how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? mine heart is
turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.
In the second part of the Chap. the Lord comforts the godly against the
imminent and deserved judgments, with some blenks of his mercy. And first, in
this v. the mercy of God is held forth in coming over their provocations, to do
any thing for them, and interposing to hold off the extremity of judgments
deserved by them; wherein, 1. It is insinuate (by way of sentence for their
Apostasy) that their sins deserved hard things, even such calamities as befell
Sodom and the neighboring Cities, of which See Genesis 19.24. Deuteronomy. 29.23. But
(2.) in the execution, the Lord was willing to make a stand, and not let it
out. And here the Lord speaks to our capacity, that as a father greeved with
the disobedience of a son, is ready to avenge it sharply, and yet out of
fatherly affection represseth his anger, and does not let all of it out in
execution; So the Lords bowels of compassion are such, as not to execute his
just wrath, as if he repented, and as men who repent use to do. Doct. 1. The
provocations of the visible Church may be, and oft-times are so great both in
themselves and by reason of many aggravations of ingratitude and backsliding,
as to deserve utter extirpation, like Sodom and Gomorrah; For, so is imported,
that it was just to make them as Admah, and set them as Zeboim. See Isa. 1.10.
Ezekiel. 16.48. It is but a needless curiosity to enquire why he mentions these
two Cities, and not Sodom and Gomorrah, and therefore I pass it. 2. Not only
does the Churches sin deserve much; but it is no easy matter to hold off the
extremity of execution, when after long forbearance sin is still continued in;
For, so is imported here, that only strong afflictions in God prevented the
extremity of desolation; They were at this brink of misery, though they little
considered it. 3. Whatever be the desert and danger of the sinful people of
God, yet no trouble can take effect against them, unless God permit and let it
out, and actively concur in it; For, whatever their sin was, yet they could
not be plagued, till he give them up and deliver them, to the will and power of
enemies; yea, till he make them as Admah, and set them as Zeboim. See Deuteronomy.
32.30. 4. When the Church has put her self in a woeful plight by sin, there
is nothing to step in and interpose for preventing what is deserved, but only
mercy in God; For, there is no other impediment to this sad sentence, but how
shall I give thee up, etc? mine heart is turned within me, etc. And this he
lays before them, that at least, they would study to see their need of mercy.
5. Mercy in God toward his sinful people, as it cannot be hindered by the
greatness of their sin; So it can put a stop to deserved judgments; For how
shall I give thee up, etc. Says he, mine heart is turned within me, etc. He
can find reasons against his own proceeding in justice against them, taken
from himself, when they have nothing to plead, and there is no cause of it in
them: And can argue that mercy is free, and goes not by the rule of deserving,
and therefore may be extended to the most unworthy. And albeit it be an act of
his sovereignty in free grace, thus to respect a people going on in sin; and
therefore ought not to be presumptuously rested on by the impenitent: Yet as
that cannot hinder it to be showed even to them; So it may be an encouragement
to them who are driven sensibly to need his mercy. 6. The greatness of Gods
mercy toward his people, is such as all the affections of parents toward their
children, are but shadows of it, and he who is the unchangeable God, will do
all for them that can be expected from a parent, whose anger is overswayed and
changed into pity; For, so much do all these expressions point out, How shall I
give thee up? does import, that his fatherly affection could not think of
putting Israel into the miserable condition they deserved, and that he looked
on it, as not beseeming his love, and interest so to deal with them, mine heart
is turned within me, (or overcome with motions of love striving against that
severity) and my repentings are kindled together, (which are terms borrowed
from among men) do import what abundance of stirrings of love are in his heart
toward his ill-deserving people; and how all things that might prevent that
sentence, were kindled and mustered up within him, that it might not come to
execution and effect. 7. It is a special evidence of Gods magnified mercy
toward Israel, that whatever condition they be put in, yet they are never dealt
with as Sodom and Gomorrah, nor totally consumed, without hope of restitution
or recovery; For, that is the scope of this whole v. which is further explained
in the following purpose.

Verse. 9. I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return
to destroy Ephraim, for I am God and not man, the holy One in the midst of
thee, and I will not enter into the city.
In the next place, the Lord comforts them by express promises, pointing out
what this his mercy, which had interposed for their good, had purposed
concerning them. The promises are two. In the first whereof (in this v.) he
promises to moderate that punishment, which he in just anger might inflict,
and that he will not deal with them like an angry man, who after he has
stricken, returns and strikes again, till he destroy and undo them he is
angry at: or as soldiers, who spoil and spoil again, so long as there is any
thing to take; but he will deal like a merciful conqueror, who having
subdued his rebellious subjects, and brought them at under, does not come with
an army to destroy their c^ty; So he will plague them for sin, and yet will not
utterly destroy and cut off that Nation. This he confirms from some reasons.
1. Because he is not an implacable man, but a merciful unchangeable God. 2. He
is in the midst of them as his elect and chosen people, and holy in his promise
to perpetuate the elect of the seed of Abraham, throughout all generations.
Whence learn, 1. Gods mercy interposing on the behalf of sinners, does produce
not only good wishes, but real effects unto them; For, here unto the former
stirring of his bowels, an express promise is subjoyned, to show that he not
only (as is usual with men) pitied, and could not help them but that his
pity produces real help. 2. Gods mercy toward his sinful people does not
see it fit to keep off all effects of his displeasure, or leave them altogether
unpunished; For, the promise is only, I will not execute the fierceness of
mine anger, which imports he will execute it in measure. See Jer. 30.11. Albeit
the Lord do pity them, yet it concerns him to vindicate his own holiness,
and to promote their good, by afflicting them in measure. 3. When a sinful
people are under saddest temporal judgments, yet so long as they are in the
land of the living, they are bound to reckon that their condition might be yet
worse, if all Gods just displeasure were let out: For, notwithstanding all that
was to come on Israel, as we see it accomplished this day, yet it is imported
it had been worse, if he had executed the fierceness of his anger, and
returned (with stroke after stroke) to destroy Ephraim, and entered into the
city. See Lev. 26.18, 21, 24, 28. Isa. 9.12, 17, 21. 4. The Lords moderating of
deserved judgments, if it were but to preserve a people from being utterly
consumed, is a great proof of Gods mercy, and ought to be acknowledged as such;
For, this is held out as a fruit of his kindled repentings, I will not execute
the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy Ephraim, etc. See
Lam. 3.22. That this may be well discerned, 1. We would not only see what we
suffer, but consider what we deserve. 2. We would take up the dreadfulnesse of
the fierceness of anger against sin, and how much mercy it speaks, and how it
proves him to be God, that he does set any bounds to it, and that he does not
pursue with stroke after stroke, till he cease to be, but lets us subsist under
our saddest condition. 3. Though we be readily imbittered under present
troubles, and that we are not rid of them, even by cutting off when there is no
other present issue; yet that is but our pride, and our case would appear
otherwise, if we considered that preservation may portend much future good to
be laid up for a people, or for the Elect among them, as the Lord here
manifests afterward. Doct. 5. It is the great mercy and advantage of the Lords
sinful people, that they have to do with God, and not with man in their
miscarriages: For, man's pity and mercy may be exhausted, were it never so
great, but God is infinite; pitiful and merciful, men may for a time be so
totally transported with anger, as to do that which afterward they will repent
of; but he is the Lord, not subject to such perturbations: Man may change, and
his love turn into hatred; He is the Lord and changes not: Man may think it
dishonorable to agree with, or spare an inferior, when he stoops not to him;
God is so far above the creature, as he may when he will, think him below his
indignation, and magnify his mercy upon him: and man in his executing justice,
is a creature, and bound to a Law which he may not transgress; but God is
Sovereigne, and has mercy on whom he will: Upon these considerations it is
that this is subjoyned as a reason of the promise, and ground of their
encouragement, for I am God and not man. 6. The Lords relation to, and interest
in a people, may stand unaltered, when yet he does because of sin, smite them
with sore judgments, drive them into exile, and keep them long so under sad
distress; For, so is held out to Israel, that notwithstanding all he was to do
unto them, yet he still is the Holy One of Israel (or, God of Israel) in the
midst of thee, as to the standing of the Covenant-right, to be manifested in
due time, Romans 11.28, 29. 7. God is so pure and holy, that not only his anger
against his people is without all mixture of any thing that may be an
imputation to him; but there shall be no cause of imputing to him any breach of
promise, however he afflict, Therefore it is added, the Holy One of Israel, who
can be charged with no blemish, and who has given his Holiness as a pledge of
the stability of his Covenant, even when he afflicts most sharply, Psalm. 89.35.

Ver. 10. They shall walk after the LORD: he shall roar like a lion: when he
shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the West.

11. They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land
of Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, says the LORD.


In the second promise the Lord undertakes further, that not only he will not
consume Israel under their troubles; but that after their rejection and exile,
he will convert them to follow him; that the Lord will declare himself so
terrible, as none shall dare to hinder their return, and themselves shall
tremble to resist the call of God, bidding them return, but shall go as
affrighted sparrowes and doves from all the places where they are scattered;
And that God will place them not only in the Church, but (as would appear) in
their land and houses, to serve him in peace. And this is a promise to Ephraim,
or the ten Tribes, v. 8, 9. Doct. 1. The Lords preserving of his people, how
long soever rejected and scattered, may at last end in much good to them; as
this promise to Israel subjoyned to the former, does teach. 2. Conversion unto
God is the dawning of this fair day, and here his purpose of good begins openly
to manifest it self toward these whom he has long preserved; For, this is the
first visible effect of his mercy toward Israel, They shall walk after the
LORD, or be converted. 3. Such as are truly converted, will take God for a
teacher, to follow his directions; and for their captain, to be employed
wherever he commands, in doing or suffering; and he will be a guide and
captain to such; For, so is their conversion described. They shall walk after
the LORD. 4. When a people turn to God, and follow after him, he will manifest
himself terrible to all who would stand in the way of their felicity; For, he
shall roar like a lion, not only by the voice of the Gospel working upon
Isreal's hearts; but shall manifest himself to the terror of the world, who
will be alarmed by the conversion of Israel, and their appearing on the stage
again. 5. The dreadfulnesse of God ought to work even upon his converted
people, to affright them from neglecting duty, and to make them tenderhearted
before him; For, when he shall roar, the children shall tremble from the West.
They shall tremble as a bird, and as a dove, that is, the dreadfulnesse of God
shall not only make them with reverence flee to him, but shall make them afraid
to sit Gods call, inviting them to return, (as appears) to their land, whatever
difficulty there be in the way. 6. The Lord will not lose his scattered people,
and especially Israel, but will seek them, and find them to do them good, in
whatsoever corner they are; For, from the West, out of Egypt, and out of the
land of Assyria, that is, in all quarters* he will find and bring them to
restore them. 7. The Lord is sufficiently able to settle his people in their
wonted enjoyments, after long tossing; and for this, Gods undertaking and
promising of it, is ground of hope sufficient; For, I will place them in their
houses, says the LORD.

Ver. 12. Ephraim compasses me about with lies, and the house of Israel with
deceit: but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Saints.
In this Verse (which agrees best with the beginning of Chap. 12.) we have the
third part of the Chap. Wherein the Lord rejects Isreal's and their Rulers
excuses, whereby they thought to cover their faults in Religion and
conversation. These they made a pretense of before God, that they might prevent
plagues, and they did cast them up to the Prophets when they threatened; but the
Lord declares them to be but false and deceitful pretenses. And to aggreage
their sin, and vex them the more, he commends Judah, at least for having a
lawful Kingdom in David's posterity, wherein they ruled with Gods approbation:
And that in the matter of prescribed worship in Religion, they were faithful as
became Saints, keeping the faith and Religion received from their religious
ancestors, and keeping the true Priesthood. This commendation is given to
Judah, not only because they still clave to their lawful Magistrate, but even
in the matters of Religion, though at some times they revolted in much, yet
they were so yet, to wit, when Israel revolted, they had not corrupted
Religion, whatever were the failings of Solomon: See 2 Chronicles. 13.4, -- 12. and
sometimes thereafter they were so also, and in all the days of Hosea's
Ministry, their Kings excepting Ahaz, were none of the worst friends to
Religion, and some of them zealous Reformers, in whose time it may be this was
preached; yea, in the times of their foul defections, they for most part
carried still some respect to the Temple and Priesthood. Doct. 1. Whatever
mercy the Lord manifest to be in his heart toward sinners, yet that gives no
warrant to them to please themselves in sin, or to think that the Lord takes
less notice of it, or abhors it the less; To prevent this, the Lord
returns to wonted challenges after the former promises. 2. Evil courses in a
land, ordinarily begin at the Rulers, and what they are, that the people do
prove; For, what Ephraim is guilty of, that the house of Israel join in. 3.
When men go furthest wrong, readily their courses will not appear to themselves
in their worst colors, nor will they let them be seen so to others, but will
palliate and cloak them over the best they may; For, it is charged upon them
here, that they used lies and deceit, that is, false pretenses and excuses,
wherewith they thought to justify their course. 4. Such pretenses are
dangerous plagues to men, and a cause of Gods controversy; especially when
they dare present them to God, as such as he will approve, and because of them
not plague their courses, and when they hinder the Word from taking effect;
For, it is a challenge, they compass me about with lies, which may be
understood, either as Gods speech complaining that by these they would (as it
were) besiege and keep him in from plaguing of them; or the Prophets, whom they
would hinder from uttering threatenings against a course which they endeavored
to render so plausible. 5. Whatever pretenses men betake themselves unto; yet
God does see through them, and his Word will call them what they are; And he
has declared, that all pretenses for justifying a sinful course, are but men's
deceiving of themselves; and as they bear no weight before God, so they will
disappoint the sinner in end; Therefore whatever they accounted these courses
to be, yet God by his Prophet pronounces them lies and deceit. 6. As it is the
commendation of people to stand fast when others do decline, (as here Judah is
commended;) So it will be a great addition to a peoples sin and ditty, when
they go wrong, and yet are so far from being seduced by others, that they have
a contrary example from them; For; this adds to Isreal's sin, that they did all
this, when Judah yet rules with God. 7. The holding up, and continuing of civil
government according to Gods appointment, and the rules of his Word, is a
commendable duty; and it is a peoples great sin when it is otherwise; For, it
is Judahs commendation, he rules with God, not only many of his Rulers act for
God, (which is a presage of good to a Land:) but the way of Government is
lawful and approven, wherein Israel failed. 8. It is the duty of such as do
embrace the true Religion, to be in reality Saints, that they may reap the
fruit of Religion, and adorn their profession; For, it is the commendation of
their progenitors, who transmitted the truth to Judah, that they were Saints.
9. Whatever may be the other failings of a people, yet it is matter of
commendation, to keep even external Religion pure, as it is transmitted from
pious Ancestors according to the Word; For, such is Judahs commendation, he is
faithful with the Saints, whereby Hosea would not cover their other faults,
which he elsewhere reproves, and leaves to be reprehended, especially by
their own Prophets; Only he shows that this was commendable in it self, and
that in this they had out-stripped Israel. And when he says, he is faithful
with the Saints, his meaning is not to justify every thing as imitable,
because it is in a Saint, or Saints, as if their infirmities were all to be
licked up: But his meaning is to show that Judahs Religion, as it was in the
first place aggreeable to the rule; so it was followed by their progenitors,
and transmitted by them as such: neither of which Israel could allege for
their way, though they gloried in their Progenitors, as much as Judah.

CHAP. XII.
IN this Chap. the Lord insisteth to accuse Israel especially for sin,
seconding the challenges with exhortations and threatenings. And, 1. Having
accused Ephraim for following empty and vain courses, to his own prejudice, v.
1. and threatened both him and Judah, v. 2. He sets before them the example of
their Father Jacob, in his carriage and success, v. 3, 4. inviting them to
follow his footsteps, in hope of like success from him who is an unchangeable
God, v. 5, 6. 2. He returns to challenge them for being so unlike Jacob in
their way; And particularly, he accuses them of covetousness accompanied with
deceit and oppression, v. ^. and of pleasing themselves in their way, v. 8. for
which he threatens them with exile, yet promising to restore them, v. 9. Next,
he challenges them for contempt of the Word, v. 10. for increase of Idolatry,
and excusing of it with vain pretenses, v. 11. for causeless boasting of their
Original and Predecessors, v. 12, 13. and generally, for their bitter and
ingrate provoking of God, v. 14. -- for which he threatens them, v. -- 14.

Verse. 1. EPhraim feeds on wind, and follows after the East-winde: he
daily increases lies and desolation, and they do make a covenant with the
Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt.
In this Verse the ten Tribes are challenged for their empty and vain hopes and
shifts; and particularly, for their hunting after humane helps and confidences,
and their making Covenants, and sending presents on every hand for that end.
This the Lord pronounces to be not only an unprofitable, but an hurtful
course: which he expresses partly in borrowed terms, of feeding on wind, (an
empty thing, which may fill, but cannot feed,) and following the East-winde,
which was tempestuous and noisome in these Countries, Genesis 41.6. Isa. 27.8.
Jon. 4.8. and partly, in more proper terms, calling their courses lies and
desolation. Whence learn, 1. It is no unusual thing to see men abound in empty
and false hopes, whereby they may (as they think) hold up their own hearts
against wrath and the threatenings of the Word; For, so does Ephraims example
teach. 2. Carnal confidence in humane helps and confederacies, is one maine
hinderance of the words working upon people, and a prop to deluded and wicked
men; For, such was Ephraims hope in particular. 3. Men are naturally so averse
from God, that they will spare no pains or expense to keep them out of his
reverence, and will turn them to all hands, to prevent any necessity of
seeking to him; For, therefore does Ephraim make a Covenant with the Assyrians,
to his own great expense, a Kings 15.19. and 17.3. and to secure himself yet
more, oil (which was very excellent in Judah, 2 Kings 20.13.) is carried into
Egypt, on the other hand, to buy their peace. And all this is, that he may
secure himself without turning to God. 4. Upon due consideration, men may find
that they have no less pains by going out of Gods way, then if they had kept
in it; but that Gods way, as it is undoubtedly the surest, so in many respects
it is even the easiest course; For, when Ephraim goes wrong, he must follow
after, and earnestly pursue his course; he must daily increase, though it were
but lies, and he must hire Egypts kindness with oil, and the Assyrians not
without a present. Whereas turning to God, however it be altogether contrary to
nature, yet it does not impose such bondage and toil upon men. 5. When men are
given up to place their rest in sinful confederacies and carnal confidences,
ordinarily they prove also perfidious in their pactions and Covenants; For,
such also was Ephraims way, They do make a covenant with the Assyrians, to be
servants to them, as it is, 2 Kings 17.3. and yet oil is carried into Egypt,
in a clandestine way, to borrow help in proving false to the Assyrian, as is
cleared, 2 Kings 17.4. 6. Whatever carnal hopes men do rest upon, yet they are
but empty and deceitful, and will prove so, let men esteem of them as they
will; For, they are but wind and lies. That which is said of Idols, Isa. 44.20
will prove true of all such confidences. 7. Such as would deceive God with
fair shows, and vain pretenses, are justly plagued with disappointment in
these courses they choose unto themselves; For, they who compassed the Lord, or
his servants with lies, chapter 11.12. do now feed on wind, and increase lies. 8.
Carnal confidences will not only deceive men, but draw on more plagues, and be
the occasion and cause, if not also the mean of their ruin; For the wind
proves the East-winde, and their lies, desolation. And so it was verified, for
not only did they impoverish themselves with presents and gifts; but the
Assyrians were Ephraims ruin, and the Egyptians not only helped them not, but
their seeking to them drew the Assyrians upon their tops, 2 Kings 17.4, 5.

Verse. 2. The LORD also has a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob
according to his ways: according to his doings will he recompense him.
To terrify Israel the more, he declares that he has a controversy with
Judah also, though better then they; which he will plead, as well as he will
punish Israel (who descended from Jacob, and gloried in that title) according
to their ways and doing. Whence learn, 1. Such as do promise unto themselves
impunity, because sin is general, and others embarked in it with them, will
meet with a disappointment; And all the advantage that the general
over-spreading of sin affords, will be that it provokes God the more, and that
every sinner shall get more company in the calamity; For, this was one of
Isreal's refuges, that Judah also was not very good, and in particular, that
they were now and then following these confederacies, as the Scripture makes
clear. And this the Lord refutes by this threatening. 2. Whatever God approve of
in people, that is right, either in public managing of affairs, or external
way of Worship; yet he both sees, and will punish the sins of their
conversation, which are not answerable to these; For, albeit Judah be
commended, chapter 11.12. yet because of their failings in daily practice, The Lord
has also a controversy with Judah. 3. The Lord is so impartial and tender, as
that however every sin deserve extremest judgments, and he will not spare
any; yet he will measure out his strokes and dispensations according to the
degree of peoples sin, and their obstinacy in it; For, he has a controversy
with Judah, which imports that the process was but yet in pleading, by the
Word and more gentle corrections, and that he would not so suddenly destroy
them; whereas for Israel, he will punish Jacob, etc. 4. The Lord will not be
deceived, nor cease to prosecute a controversy, because of fair titles which
men pretend to, when yet their ways are not answerable; For, though they were
Jacob, all whose children were of the blessed seed, (as it was not with Abraham
and Isaac,) and therefore as good as Judah; yet the Lord will punish Jacob
according to his ways, according to his doings will he recompense him.

Verse. 3. He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength he
had power with God.

4. Yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and made
supplication unto him: he found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us.


Having mentioned Jacob in whom they gloried so much, he takes occasion to
relate what was Jacobs deportment and success; partly, that he might invite
them to imitate him, in hope of like favors; and partly also, that it might be
seen how justly he did accuse and sentence them, for being no way like to him,
as appears from the rest of the Chap. In this relation he points at three
Histories concerning Jacob; The first is that of his conception and birth, Genesis
25.22, 26. where in the very womb, he took his brother by the heel, (whence
also he got his name,) as striving by a divine instinct, for the blessing. It
imports, 1. A divine instinct and inclination put in Jacob in the very womb,
to strive with his brother for the Birthright and Blessing. And teaches, 1.
The favor of God and his grace are so far from being conferred according to
men's merits and works; that the Lord not only chooses his own from eternity,
and before they have done good or evil; but does also sometime prevent them
with his sanctifying grace in the very womb; as here appears in Jacob. See
Jer. 1.5. Luke 1.44. 2. It is a great blessing, and a double mercy, when the
Lord not only conferreth grace upon a sinner, but does it timely, and makes
them his from the womb to the grave: as here he did to Jacob. This does
prevent much bitterness for many slips before conversion, and for being (as it
were) borne out of due time. 3. It is the commendable evidence of grace, when
it stirs up men to labor, that none outstrip them in desiring spiritual
blessings, For, it was about this that Jacob was moved by instinct, to contend
with Esau. 2. It imports, that however Jacob was not able by struggling to
prevent Esau's being the firstborn, and so likely to get the Birthright and
Blessing; yet this strife in the very birth, presaged, that in Gods purpose he
was preferred, and that he should be advanced to be the root out of which the
Church and blessed Seed should spring. And it teaches further, 1. Where our
endeavors fall short, yet they are not to be given over, expecting that
free grace will make it up; For, Jacob strives still, even when Esau is coming
forth before him, as an evidence that grace would make up his disadvantage. 2.
As Jacob had his dignity and privileges by gift; so it beseemed his posterity
ill to boast of it, and abuse it; And as grace bestowed that on him after much
wrestling, so it was their duty not to rest formally upon it, but to entertain
it as he got it: So much would he teach Israel from this example of their
Father Jacob.

The second History pointed at, is recorded, Genesis 32. wherein, being afraid of
danger from his brother Esau, he wrestled with God by prayers and tears,
striving for a blessing, and obtained it. It teaches, 1. The choicest mercies
of the people of God come oft-times unto them after sad afflictions, wrastlings
and terrors; for, so does Jacobs experience teach. 2. Difficulties, when they
encounter us, would not be given way unto, but set against; for, so does Jacobs
practice teach, who fell a wrestling when he was in danger. Discouragement and
lying by, will serve for nothing, but to make difficulties more insupportable.
3. The best way of managing difficulties, is to see Gods hand in letting them
out, and to begin at him, by wrestling with him for his favor and blessing, as
the compendious way to prevail with men in what trials they may have a hand
in; For, so did Jacob overcome all his difficulties by having power with God,
etc. See Genesis 32.28. 4. God will give unto his weak servants strength in
striving with him, answerable to the task he puts upon them; yea, he who is
Omnipotent and invincible, will condescend so far, as to let them prevail
over him in his own strength, when he seems to resist and be opposite unto
them; For, by his strength (to wit, which God had given him,) he had power with
God, yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed. Gods appearing as a
party does not portend a foil to the poor sinner who wrastles with him,
though he be Omnipotent, and they weak. 5. God is therefore easy to be
prevailed with, because his people have not to do with God, simply considered
in himself, and in his distance from the creature, but with God in the
Mediator Christ; For, it is with the Angel (or Messenger of the Covenant, Mal.
3.1.) who is also God, that Jacob had to do, and therefore had power, and
prevailed. 6. Supplications and prayers are the great prevailing Ordinance with
God in wrestling; For, thus did Jacob prevail, he made supplication unto him,
and thus did Christ leave us a pattern, Luke 22.44. 7. Such as wrestle with God
by prayer, must have their heart broken and melted before God, and pressed with
their great need; For, it was Jacobs true magnanimity, that he wept and made
supplication.

The third History, (wherein chiefly Gods mercy and gracious bounty toward
Jacob, appeared) is, Gods appearing to Jacob at Bethel, first when he fled from
his Fathers house, Genesis 28.11, 12, etc. and again after his trouble at Shechem,
Genesis 35.1, 2, etc. At both which times God manifested his mind to him in
things concerning not only himself, but his posterity, and namely, in making
promises concerning the Church to come of him. Whence learn, 1. The Lord will
find, and be found of his people, when they are little expecting it, as, Genesis
28.16. and when they are in great distress, as Jacob was by reason of the
slaughter of the Shechemites, Genesis 34.3^. with 35.1. yea, and when they came to
him after they have failed in duty, and forgotten their former vows and
obligations; as Jacob had forgotten his vows made to God the first time, Genesis
28.20, 21, 22. till upon occasion of his distress, God calls him to go again,
Genesis 35.1. In these respects it is said, he found him in Bethel, which may be
understood both of God, who prevented Jacob by a vision the first time, and
with a call the second time; and of Jacob, who found God there, when he sought
unto him. 2. Gods comfortable interview and intercourse with his people, is by
his Word, wherein he is to be sought and found; For, there he spoke. 3. Gods
manifestations and revealing of his mind of old, serves for the use of the
Church in all ages; For, says he, there he spoke with us, as if they had been
there present, because what was spoken concerned them. This was especially true
in Jacobs case, to whom the promises were not personal only, but chiefly for
his posterity. But it is also of general verity, that as the Church is much
concerned in mercies and preservation granted in former times, whereby they
also are preserved, who otherwise had not been; and therefore ought to rejoice
as one body with the Church, and as if they had been there, Ps. 66.6. So the
promises made to the Church of old, belong to the present Church, and
particular persons in their need, as if they had been first spoken to them,
Josh. 1.5. with Heb. 13.5. Heb. 12.5.

Verse. 5. Even the LORD God of hosts, the LORD is his memorial.
To the end he may apply this to the present purpose, to stir them up to
their present duty; He describes God who did all this, and spoke thus to Jacob,
as the true God, and God of armies, and that he did this to be a memorial of
himself throughout all generations, who is still the same. And it teaches, 1.
Christ is without all controversy true God, the same in Essence, and equal in
Power and Glory with the Father; For, this Angel, ver. 4. is even Jehovah the
God of hosts, 2. Great is their advantage, and their dignity, who have
converse and keep communion with God, who has being of himself, and who has
all creatures ready as Hosts at his Command, as there is need; For, this sets
out Jacobs advantage, that in his wrestlings and other intercourse, he had to
do with the LORD God of hosts, whereof he got a proof; Genesis 32.1, 2. 3. God is
unchangeably still the same, as kind, able, and exorable to his people as ever
he was at any time, if they would come and make use of him; For, he did all
that to Jacob, not only for present use, but that proving himself to be
Jehovah, this might be his memorial, for the use of his Church in all
generations; and upon this ground it is, that in the next v. they are exhorted
to turn to him; See Exodus 3.15. 4. The Lord needs no Images to keep up a
memorial of him; but his Name and Nature manifested in his Word and Works, is
sufficient to keep them who converse with these in remembrance of him; For,
Jehovah, and his manifesting himself to be so, is his memorial.

Verse. 6. Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment; and wait
on thy God continually.
Upon what has been said of Jacobs carriage and success, and of Gods being
unchangeably the same; he gathers an exhortation that they would take a proof
of God by their conversion to him; and would prove the sincerity thereof by
duties of the second Table, and by their constant dependence upon, and
entertaining of communion with God. Whence learn, 1. When the Lord makes offer
of his favor, by declaring what he is, and what he has been to others, it is
our duty to make use of it, unless we would draw on more guilt: So much does
this inference from the former Doctrine, teach, Therefore turn thou. 2. Such as
have made Apostasy, would not only be convinced that it is so; but ought not
to lie still there, without thinking of recovering themselves; For, this
direction, turn thou to God, insinuates they had made defection from what
Jacob had attained, and that they ought to amend it. 3. The Lord makes offer of
himself, even to his Apostate people, and they are allowed to claim a
Covenant-right in him, if they desire to return; And Apostates their pretending
to an interest in God, obliges them to amend their faults; For, turn thou
unto thy God, imports an argument, both from his offer, and their own
pretenses. 4. The Lord will not be deceived with shows and flourishes of
repentance, but requires that by duties of the second Table, both of mercy and
justice, we should prove the sincerity thereof, and especially by mercy in the
first place; Therefore, it is subjoyned, keep (or, carefully observe to do, and
take opportunity of doing) mercy and judgment. See Mat. 3.7, 8. 5. Such as
indeed turn to God from their Apostasy, will be careful for the future, to
walk in close dependence and communion with God, to prevent the like defection;
and as being diffident of their own strength, to do it of themselves;
Therefore, it is also subjoyned as another evidence of their turning, wait on
thy God continually. 6. The fruits of obedience, ^s they must flow from
conversion and renovation so they must be cherished, and kept up, by much
communion with God, and followed with much self-denial; Therefore, it is also
more immediately subjoyned to the former exhortation of keeping mercy and
judgment, that they should wait on God continually, that though they were
indeed turned to God, yet they would still depend on God for influence to every
good word and work; and having done all, yet they would not trust on it, but
still wait on God. 7. Communion with God, and self-denial, is evidenced and
improven by much needy dependence and waiting on God, which has still hope in
the bosom of it; For, wait thou on God, says he. Waiting on God under seeming
want, is a more real proof of communion keeping then many enjoyments are,
whereon men would rest, and it tends to much enjoyment. And the word also
signifies, hope in God, or expect God, because a man by his waiting on, proves
that his hope is not quite crushed, though he discern not that it is so, (for,
if it were quite gone, he would wait no more, 2 Kings 6.33.) And whatever he
think or feel, yet it is a clear proof that there is great ground of hope to
one in such a condition. 8. Interest in God would be laid hold upon for
encouraging to dependence; And such as cleave to him, and wait on him, do prove
an interest, For, wait on thy God, says he; If any cannot lay hold on this to
begin their waiting, yet by waiting they prove it. 9. Dependence on God, and
keeping communion with him, is a duty that admits of no Vacation or Tearm-day;
Our best condition must not interrupt our needy dependence, and our saddest
desertions and rejections, do not warrant us to give it over; wait on thy God
continually.

Ver. 7. He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loves
to oppress.
The Lord having thus exhorted them, he proceeds in the rest of the Chapter to
show how little these exhortations had taken, and how unlike Jacob they were,
for all their glorying of him. This he does in two articles of accusation, to
every one of which a sentence is subjoyned. The first article has two
branches, whereof the first is, that Ephraim, or Israel was such a merchant, or
follower of the world, as looked liker a Canaanite then an Israelite, as did
appear in his deceit in merchandising, and his delight in violent oppression.
Whence learn, 1. The members of the visible Church may so far degenerate, as
whatever their titles and prerogatives, and their boasting of them be; yet in
reality they become as vile as the vilest of the people, and God will so
account of them; for, he is a Canaanite, (or, as it is in the Original, Canaan!
by way of abrupt indignation,) The word usually signifies a merchant, because
the Canaanites were great traffickers, and insinuating stonpers, (as the word
imports,) that they might deceive; and such merchants were they, resembling the
ancient possessours of that land. See Amos. 9.7. 2. The love of riches is a
great snare upon men, and draws them on courses contrary to their professions
and obligations, for, being a merchant, by covetousness in that calling, he
became a Canaanite. See 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. 3. Men are then excessive in the love
of riches, when they will not wait on God, expecting his blessing on the lawful
use of a lawful calling, but do use sinful shifts; And particularly, when they
dare use deceit in bargaining, and in weights and measures; for, in this he is
a Canaanite, the balances of deceit are in his hand, that is, he perpetually
studieth to deceive, and not only likes it, but dares practice it. 4. Such as
dare u^e deceit, will not spare to oppress where they have power, and when
secret deceit does not bring in gain enough; yea, even in deceitful trading
there is oppression, by taking advantage of these they deal with, their
necessity, or want of skill, to take from them what is not right. In these
respects, deceit, and to oppress are joined together; and the same word
signifies both. 5. Love to sin is a great aggravation of it, and it is horrid,
when men not only deceive and oppress out of love to wealth, (though as they
pretend, unwillingly, if they could be rich otherwise,) but use of oppression
draws to the love of it also, as well as of wealth by it; as accounting it
their grandour to be terrible, or on the like considerations; Therefore it is
added, he loves to oppress.

Verse. 8. And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out
substance: in all my labors they shall find none iniquity in me, that were
sin.
The second branch of the accusation holds forth Ephraims impudence, pleasing
himself in his deceit and oppression, whatever the Prophets said against it, as
being made rich, and full of substance thereby; As for that which follows in
the Verse. it may be understood, 1. As an argument drawn from success, that
since he was rich, therefore there was no iniquity in his way; or that (as the
word will read) there is no punishment of iniquity to prove that there was sin
in his labors, and therefore, why would they condemn what God countenanceth?
And indeed, prosperity in sinful ways is an old snare, hindering men from
heeding challenges, or Gods anger because of them. 2. As confirming his
innocence with a profession of detestation of sin; They shall find no
iniquity, for that were a sin, or, I abhor it as a vile sin. And indeed, some
may be so grossly hypocritical, as to pretend to great hatred of that, which
they act with delight: and others, by going on in some sins, may be drawn to
act that which formerly they abhorred, and may be doing that upon the matter,
and in practice, which they think they abhor much in contemplation. Many
would startle much at the charge of Atheism, or denying of God, who yet in
practice do so daily, Psalm. 14.1. Tit. 1.16. But the word in the Original is
not so emphatick, as to bottom this interpretation. Therefore I look upon it
with the Translation, as an extenuating of his fault, which was challenged,
that however possibly in attaining to riches, he had used some fine and
handsome tricks and conveyances, yet the Prophets should find no gross
iniquity, to be charged as express sin, or that they needed to keep such a
stir about it. Doct. 1. Wicked prospering men ordinarily add unto their
oppression and deceit, a glorying in themselves, not acknowledging God in what
they acquire; For, Ephraim said, I am become rich, I have found out substance.
2. Gainful sins are such as men will not easily be convinced of, nor turn
from, so long as they have carnal comforts to stop the mouth of conscience, and
to be a buckler against the importunities of Gods Servants; For, when they were
challenged, Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, though they boast me with Gods
displeasure. 3. Wicked men their great estimation of riches, makes them very
sticking to what may acquire them, and to please themselves therein, though it
be sinful; For, he accounted it substance, and found out as a precious jewel,
and with much pains; and therefore not to be slighted. 4. It is also another
cause why men take not with challenges for the ways of their acquiring wealth,
that they look on these courses as their calling and occupation, which
therefore none ought to reprove, as if a lawful calling could justify every
miscarriage in prosecuting of it; For, this is another pretext, it is my
labors, the word signifies toil unto weariness, and Ephraim thinks that his
diligence in his calling, ought not to be reprehended. 5. Wicked men are so far
from eying of God, or putting their own consciences to it, to judge of their
way, that if others cannot see nor accuse them of a fault, they think they are
well enough; For, so reckons Ephraim, they shall find none iniquity, etc. that
is, the Prophets, and these who challenge them; which though it had been true,
(as it was not,) had been but small ground of peace, so long as God or their
own conscience might challenge them of sin. 6. Handsome conveyances of sin, by
finenesse of wit, is a great snare to many, by concurring with other causes, to
hide the ill of their way from them; For, so does Ephraim ward off all
challenges, they shall find none iniquity that were sin. 7. It is also a
dangerous snare, and an evidence of a corrupt disposition, when men make
distinction of sins, so as not to be troubled so long as they avoid what is
more gross and palpable sinful; For, so does Ephraims apology insinuate, that
so long as they could find none iniquity that were sin, he would not be
troubled for lesser things.

Ver. 9. And I that am the LORD thy God, from the land of Egypt, will yet make
thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feasts.
Follows the Lords sentence for these sins so defended, which is conveyed
in the bosom of a promise of mercy to the godly; Wherein he declares that as
of old he sent them into Egypt, and did keep them in a wilderness, after he
had delivered them from thence; and yet gave them such an issue at last, as was
worthy of a yearly remembrance in the solemn feast of Tabernacle: So, since
they had forgotten that mercy, he will again cast them out of the land; and yet
at last will gather and bring them back again, and make their preservation and
restitution then, furnish as much matter of joy as of old. See Jer. 16.14, 15.
Doct. 1. Whatever be the miscarriages of the Lords people toward him; yet he
has sufficient evidence to plead for him, that he has been good to them: And
in particular, his dealing with them may abundantly refute their glorying in
themselves and condemn them for making ill purchase; For, whatever their way
was, yet I am the LORD thy God, from the land of Egypt, says he; and therefore
it was a fault in them, to exalt themselves as the authors of their prosperity,
(as they do, v 8.) seeing it slowed all from his bounty, or his indulgence or
long-suffering toward them; and it was a fault to take themselves to ill shifts
for purchasing wealth, having to do with him who hitherto had proven so
liberal. 2. Defended sin, and particularly ill purchase, when men will not see
the evil of it, shall be refuted by strokes; and taking away not only of ill
purchase, but what they had beside with Gods approbation: For, so much does
this threatening of exile, and casting them out of the land, teach. 3. As Gods
peculiar interest in his people, is the cause why he will not spare their
faults, Amos 3.2. So he would not have saddest and justly deserved strokes
looked on as his renouncing of his interest, but that he minds to keep it
still; For, I that am the Lord thy God will do this, because I am thy God; I
will smite, and will be thy God though I strike. 4. The longer God has
manifested an interest in a people, and the more gloriously he has appeared
for them, the more cause has he to strike when they sin, and the more
confirmations have they, that he will not cast off when he strikes: For, says
he, I am thy God from the land of Egypt, gloriously delivering thee from
thence, and proving my self thy God since that time. And therefore justly do I
correct thy ingratitude, when thou sinnest, and thou have ground to expect that
I will not cease to be thy God for all that. 5. Where God has an interest in a
people, his strokes will be all dipped in love; and ought to be looked on as
making way for, and ending in new proofs of love; For, says he, I will yet
make thee to dwell in tabernacles, where he gives them the first sight of
their exile and dispersion, in a promise of making them keep feasts in
remembrance of their deliverance from it. 6. The Lord, when he afflicts his
people, undertakes not only to give a sweet issue from it, (which can be
expected only from him;) but that he will satisfy them therewith, and cause
them to rejoice because of it; For, I will make thee to dwell in Tabernacles,
holds forth Gods undertaking to give the deliverance, and that they should be
satisfied and keep feasts, or have joy like unto what they had during these
typical feasts. 7. God has given ancient proofs of his love to his people,
which as forgetfulness of them, draws on new trouble; so being in trouble,
they give ground of confirmation of faith for what he further promises: For, I
will make thee to dwell as in the days of the solemn feasts, imports not only
that the former mercy now forgotten, behoved to be revived by a new mercy after
a stroke, but that the one might be a pledge to the other.

Verse. 10. I have also spoken by the Prophets, and I have multiplied visions,
and used similitudes, by the ministry of the Prophets.
Follows the second article of accusation and challenge, which has four
branches: Whereof the first is, their unfruitfulnesse under the dispensation of
the Word. The Lord who by delivering them from Egypt, and by his kindness
since, v. 9. had laid an obligation upon them to serve him; had also sent
Prophets to them, who frequently and clearly had revealed his mind, and what
their duty was, to which they were obliged by his kindness: and yet (as is to
be understood,) they remained ignorant and disobedient. Whence learn, 1. Pains
taken on a people by the Word, as it does not always prevail with them; so it
is so special a benefit, and does so clearly hold out duty, as it draws on
great guilt, when use is not made of it: For, the scope of this challenge and
aggravation of their sin, from the clear light held out unto them, teaches so
much. 2. As it is God who speaks by his Messengers, and who is either received
or contemned in men's carriage toward them; so this will greatly heighten
despisers guilt: For, I have spoken by the Prophets, says he, and yet have
been slighted. 3. The eminency of Messengers employed, and the excellency of
their Message, and of the way of their receiving it, does yet further plead for
God, and against despising sinners: For, they were extraordinary Prophets, and
rehearsed visions, and what they received in an extraordinary way. And though
the Church have not such Messengers now, yet it may let us see their guilt who
despise most eminent ordinary Messengers, who labor to stand in Gods Counsel,
and to depend upon him, that they may find out his mind in the Word, and
bring it out with evidence and power to people; and it does also witness
against them, who have the visions of the same Prophets recorded in Holy
Writing, and explained to them by such ordinary Ministers, and yet do despise
them. 4. It is but a false pretense for men to reject the Messages of the Word,
because the Messengers are ordinary, and may err; For, they who are of that
temper, would use Prophets and Visions no better, as Isreal's carriage does
teach us. 5. The frequency and continuance of a Ministry, and Messages from
God by them, as it argues the Lords care and long-suffering toward a people;
so it gives them the more to reckon for: Therefore it is added, I have
multiplied visions. 6. As the Lord looks to the manner, as well as to the
matter of Preaching, and must be the enabler for both; so even the manner and
plainness of the way of Preaching, will yet further condemn the disobedient;
For, it is a part of his praise in furnishing his Prophets, and of their ditty,
I used similitudes, (which is a plain and familiar way of Preaching,
representing divine things in some sort, to the very senses,) by the ministry
of the Prophets.

Verse. 11. Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity, they sacrifice
bullocks in Gilgal* yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the
fields.
The second branch of the challenge (in this Ver.) is by some thus understood;
That iniquity was not alone in Gilead, though now they are become vanity, being
carried into captivity before the rest, as these beyond Jordan were, 2 Kings
15.29. but the like evil was in Gilgal, and commonly in all places; and so they
should not be spared either. But the Text runs better thus; Whereas they
doubted if there could be any sin in their worship in Gilead relative to the
calves, it being masked with so many pretenses: Therefore the Lord declares
that all these were but vanity, and that both there, and in Gilgal, and
elsewhere, their sacrifices were but profane bullock-flesh, and their many
alt^rs no better then so many heaps of stone gathered from off the land, and so
many testimonies (as heaps of stone were made use of for witnessing of old) of
their departing from Gods appointed Worship. Whence learn, 1. Idolatry and
corrupt worship may be so busked up, as the practiser of it will not readily
see the ill of it; For, Is there iniquity in Gilead? say they, as not convinced
of it; or the Lord by the Prophet, as challenging their conscience for such a
profane thought. 2. It is one deceitful pretense of corrupt worship, when men
set it up as a memorial of somewhat done by God for his people; and accordingly
they choose either time or place, (as they have opportunity of either) wherein
that was done to perform their worship in: For, therefore did they choose
Gilead, where Jacob got a proof of love in his deliverance from Laban,, Genesis
3^.47, 48. and Gilgal, where they entered the promised land, Josh. 4.19. and
where the Covenant was renewed, Josh. 5.2, -- 9. 3. Let men pretend what they
will for palliating Idolatry and corrupt worship; yet in truth, and before God,
their pretenses are all but vain and deceitful, and will prove so: Surely,
says he, they are vanity. 4. Most solemn administrations and ordinances,
wanting an institution, are but common things, and so much the baser that they
are so abused; For, they sacrifice but bullocks, and they are so still. 5.
Idolatry and corrupt Religion will never satisfy the minds and consciences of
men; as their endless multiplying of these courses, when they forsake the
rule, witnesses; For, their altars are as heaps, or many of them. 6.
Multitudes of Altars, or services will not render them the more acceptable,
where an institution is wanting: For, were their altars never so many, yet they
are but as heaps in the furrows of the fields, because they had but one
Temple, one Altar, and one Priesthood appointed of GOD.

Verse. 12. And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for a
wise, and for a wife he kept sheep.

13. And by a Prophet the LORD brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet
was he preserved.


The second branch of the accusation, is a challenge for their vain gloriation
in their Original, while they slighted the grace of God which exalted them.
They looked on themselves as excelling all Nations for Nobility of kind
according to men, and to the flesh, forgetting what root they did spring from:
and that Jacob their Father being a stranger with his Fathers in the promised
land, was made to flee into Syria, and was there so poor, that he had no
portion to pay for a wife, but sold himself to be a shepherd to pay it. His
posterity likewise were but in a mean condition, being driven out of Canaan by
famine; made slaves in Egypt, and delivered from thence, and preserved in the
wilderness only by the Ministry of Moses, who though a Prophet, yet was not
famous for carnal prerogatives, but a banished man, and a shepherd in his
exile. And by this also the Lord would again set before them the carriage of
their forefathers, which they did not imitate, and his great kindness in
delivering, preserving and advancing them, and that by the means of a Prophet,
to aggreage their ingratitude toward him, and their contempt of present
Prophets. Whence learn, 1. Scripture-Histories and examples are recorded for
our use, and they are profitably read, only when use is drawn from them: For,
so does the Lord hold out this History of Jacob and Israel, not as a naked
History, but as containing challenges and documents for the present generation.
See Romans 15.4. 2. Albeit the Church, when she is exalted by God, and honored
with great privileges, do readily swell with conceit, as if God could not get
a people beside her: Yet if she keep her Original in mind, she will see cause
to glory in nothing but in grace alone; For, so much do these examples teach.
3. The Lord may lay them very low by afflictions, whom yet he will advance, and
may train them up under the rod, and prepare them for these intended mercies;
For, so much did Jacob find in his flight and hard service, (when Esau who had
sold his birthright is prospering,) and Israel in Egypt, and the wilderness.
See Deuteronomy. 8.14, 15, 16. 4. A good wife is one of the chief of men's external
blessings, and a favor that cannot be dear bought; And it is the duty of wives
so to carry themselves, as they may not be esteemed of only for the great
portion they bring with them, (which they may soon misspend, and more with it,)
but for their being a comfortable help to their husbands: So much is imported
in the Law among some Nations, of paying dowry for a wife, Genesis 34.12. 1 Samuel
18.25. 2 Samuel 3.14. which Jacob paid by hard service, Israel served for a wife,
and for a wife he kept sheep. 5. God by very small means can deliver his people
out of extreme dangers, and can preserve them (as they will need preservation)
after deliverance, that so they may glory in him only: For, by a Prophet
(without any visible power) the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a
Prophet was he preserved. 6 Whatever estimation secure and profane men may have
of a Ministry, yet they are Gods notable instruments for the good of his
Church, as they always find in a day of distress: For, by mentioning a
Prophet, as the instrument of Isreal's deliverance and preservation, he does
upbraid their sleighting of Prophets now, though of old they had stood them in
so great stead.

Verse. 14. Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly; therefore shall he
leave his blood upon him, and his reproach shall his Lord return unto him.
The last branch of the accusation, and the sum of all the rest, is, that by
their sinful ingratitude, and their own inventions, they provoked God
grievously, and as it were, of set purpose. To all which is subjoyned the Lords
sentence, that he will give them up to reap the fruit of their bloody crimes,
whereof themselves only should bear the blame; And that he will cast on their
own faces the fruit of that reproach and dishonor which they offered to do to
God by their sins. All which he will do according to his right of dominion over
them. Whence learn, 1. Gods people cannot prove that he takes up a controversy
needlessely against them, but he is only angry when they put him to it by their
sin: For, Ephraim (who misled all the rest) provoked him to anger. 2. As all
sin flows from a bitter root, and does provoke God to let the sinner feel it
bitter in end; so the provocation of his people is most bitter, especially when
they forsake him, and embrace idols, and when they carry themselves ingrately
toward him, and yet will pretend to an interest in him: For, it was by these
and the like sins that Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly, where he
speaks after the manner of men who are imbittered by undutiful and gross
miscarriages toward them; and it imports that their provocations were
intolerable, and that they should find by the bitter fruits of them, how much
he is provoked. 3. God needs no more for taking course with men, but leave them
to their own guilt, to reap as it deserves; And it is a sad judgment, when
our guilt (and not Gods mercy) gets the measuring out of strokes; For, it is
his sad sentence, therefore shall he leave his blood upon him, that is, God
will leave him under the guilt and power of his bloody crimes, and cruel sins
against the second Table, that they may draw vengeance upon him. 4. When God
threatens and strikes his sinful people, he is innocent of their ruin, and
only sin is to be blamed: For, he shall leave his blood upon him, may import
also, that his blood and destruction for these bloody crimes, was upon his own
head, and not to be charged on God. 5. Wicked men within the Church, do by
their miscarriage, reproach and raise an ill report upon God, as if he were not
an all-sufficient God worthy to be served, as if he should be guided by them in
the matter of duty and Religious performances; and accept what they offer, and
not what himself commands; and as if he were a liker and approver of their
sin, because he continues his favor toward such: And all this they do,
beside the reproach cast upon God by the Heathen, because of their
miscarriages: For, there is a reproach to be returned, which consequently
imports, they had cast it upon him. 6. A reproached Lord will vindicate his own
glory, by causing all the reproachful effects of sin to return upon the sinner:
For, his reproach shall his Lord return unto him. 7. When God is provoked to
anger, neither a real nor pretended interest will hold off strokes; And albeit
presumptuous sinners do reject God, his authority and yoke; yet he will
exercise dominion over them whether they will or not: For, says he, his Lord
shall return it upon him, whereby he shows that no interest will avail to
plead for exemption; and particularly, that his people whom he chooses, he
will let them find that he choosed them on these terms, to be Lord over
them, (as the Name here is a Name of dominion,) and will prove it to be so when
they sin.

CHAP. XIII.
THis whole Chapter may be taken up as a probation of that conclusion, v. 9. of
the ch that their destruction came of themselves, whereas God was their help.
This he proves two ways; First, that it was their own sins which had changed,
and would change their good condition into which he put them, into calamities
and miseries, and had drawn on former plagues, and would draw on more, till
they were rejected and driven into exile; And namely, 1. That by the Idolatry
of Baal, they were despoiled of authority, and their State broken, v. 1. 2.
That their perseverance and growth in the Idolatry of the calves, after their
State was again something recovered from that decay, v. 2. did provoke God
suddenly and violently to consume them altogether, v. 3. 3. That their
ingratitude toward God, recompencing him who had been good to them, v. 4, 5.
with swelling pride and forgetfulness, v. 6. did provoke him to take vengeance
in a dreadful manner, ver. 7, 8. Unto these challenges and evidences, he
subjoynes the inference and conclusion, v. 9. Which, (Secondly,) he proves yet
further, by promises of mercy and moderation to be manifested by him, when thus
they had destroyed themselves, and drawn on a deluge of miseries. Of this we
have these evidences and promises, 1. He would prove a King to them, when their
Kings and Princes, whom they sinfully sought, and whom he had given in anger,
were to be cut off in his displeasure, v. 10, 11. 2. When he should reckon with
them for their treasured up and marked iniquities, and they should be brought
into greater extremity, v. 12, 13. yet he would at last raise them up as it
were out of their graves, v. 14. All this the Prophet closes with assuring
them, that notwithstanding his being their help, yet there should be a
desolation first, both of the Nation and chief City, v, 15, 16.

Verse. 1. WHen Ephraim spoke, trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but
when he offended in Baal, he died.
In the first part of this Chap. the Lord demonstrates that their own sins had
procured all the desolation that had come, or should come upon them, and that
he had been good unto them, till they by their sins had overturned their own
good estate. The first sin which he mentions as destroying them, is their
Idolatry in worshipping Baal; Concerning which the Lord clears for his part,
that Ephraim was not only made a distinct tribe (though he was but the son of
one of the twelve Patriarchs who had another, at least beside him) and
preferred to Manasseh the elder brother; but was so dignified, numerous and
potent, that he was formidable to the rest, (as appeared in the person of
Joshua, who came of that tribe, Josh 4.14. and in the whole tribe, Judge. 8.1,
2.) Yea, and that tribe was exalted to authority in Israel, Jeroboam the first
King of Israel being come of it; So that they had great authority above the
rest. But now having brought in the pagan Idolatry of Baal in the days of
Ahab, Ephraim was become like a dead man, despoiled of authority, many of his
subjects cut off, and so broken in his former estate and dignity, that he is
not far from utter ruin, though yet he be as one unburied. He mentions only
the Idolatry of Baal as the cause of this ruin, because however they had the
golden calves before, and these tended to their destruction; yet it was the
cape-stone of their defection, when beside these (in serving of which they
pretended some acknowledgement of the true God) they brought in pagan Idols,
renouncing him. And after this they began to decay by the invasion of
foreigners, having, for most part, had to do only with Judah before. Doct. 1.
As honor and respect is due to superiors; So their power and authority over
subjects is of God, and to be held of him; For, so is here imported, that God
made trembling or reverence, when Ephraim spoke, or gave out his commands. See
Psa. 18 47. 2. Such as God has made very eminent may yet go very far wrong;
yea, and greatness may embolden men to sin; For, it was Ephraim, who when he
spoke, made trembling, and who exalted himself in Israel* or was set in high
dignity, that offended even in Baal. 3. When men do thus decline, and abuse
Gods bounty toward them, his kindness will stand as a witness against them;
For, therefore is Ephraims former dignity recorded, to witness against their
way, and to clear that God was free of the consequences of it. See Dan. 5.19,
20. 4. Sin will undoubtedly blast the eminency, either of persons or Nations,
and will lay them low in their repute, estimation, and power, and make them
like a dead carcass above ground; For, even glorious Ephraim, when he offended,
he died, that is, he looked no more like what he was before, then a dead man
has the activity and vigor of one that is living. 5. Idolatry and corrupting
of Religion, is, above all sins, a cause of corruption and decay to States and
Nations; For, when he offends in Baal, he died. 6. Albeit God be angry at all
sorts of Idolatry, yet he is more especially provoked, when a people do
altogether renounce him, and choose an Idol in his place, for the object of
their worship; And when men will not repent for other Idolatry, they are justly
given up to this gross defection, to put the certainty of their destruction
out of all controversy; For, whatever Israel thought of their calves, and
whatever was Gods controversy against them, for them; yet now when he offends
in Baal, it is undeniably just that he died, as being under an abominable
defection.

Verse. 2. And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten Images of
their silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all of it the
work of the crafts-men: they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice, kiss
the calves.
The second sin that destroyed them, is their Idolatry, in worshipping Images
and calves notwithstanding this decay of their State, and Gods preserving of
them yet from utter destruction. For albeit Jehu destroyed Baal and his
worshippers, and God did in some measure uphold the State of the Kingdom under
his posterity; yet the golden calves were still adhered unto; yea, they grew
worse in following that sin, and multiplied Images according to their own
pleasure and fancy. And the Rulers commanded, and the people encouraged one
another to kiss the calves, as a certain sign of reverence performed to them.
This multiplying of Images more and more, points at the growing superstition of
the people, who albeit at first they had the calves only at Dan and Bethel, yet
afterward they not only choosed Gilgal, Gilead and Beersheba, (as is before
marked,) to be places of solemn worship; but they multiplied little images and
calves, (as well as altars, chap. 8.11. and 12.11.) for their private devotions
at home. Doct. 1. Idolatry is a sin not soon abandoned, especially where it
seems to serve and uphold an interest; for, therefore do they still cleave to
the calves and their images, when Baal is put down. 2. Idolatry may in process
of time become universal, and a peoples choice who were not so willing to it
before; for, they, that is, all the people with Ephraim, do this. 3.
Impenitencie after corrections, and Gods moderating of them does highly
aggravate sin; for now, after they are in a manner dead, and yet God has kept
them from being quite taken away from off the earth, they sin. 4. Lesser sins,
for which God will not destroy a people till they grow worse, will be grievous
and heinous, when continued in after corrections; for, albeit Ephraim at first
died not till he sinned in Baal, yet now their images and idols, (which is
understood of the calves, as appears from the end of the verse) become a
land-destroying sin. 5. Whatever it be that men pretend to represent by their
images as the object of their worship, yet images are idols in themselves, and
do not represent the true God, (as their worshippers pretend and give it out)
but an idol fancied by the deviser, and will prove matter of sorrow and terror
in the end; for, their molten images are idols, and do represent or bring to
remembrance no other thing, however they pretended to make them in remembrance
of the Lord who brought them out of the land of Egypt, 1 Kings 12.28. and the
same word that is rendered idols, signifies terrors also, because they prove
so in end. 6. Such as are not reclaimed from idolatry by corrections, but do
persevere in it, will readily grow worse and worse; for, now they sin more and
more. Not only do they bewray more obstinacy and maliciousness in following
that sin, which before might be masked with a pretense of ignorance and
infirmity; but they multiply that sin, and have made them molten images,
besides what they had before. 7. It will also aggreage the sin of idolatry,
that they are so hot upon it as they will spare no expense to promove it; for,
they made them molten images of their silver, and were lavish enough that way.
8. Men's leaning to their own skill and prudence, rejecting Gods counsel and
revealed will, is the false principle and rule that begins and carries on all
corruption in Religign; for, they made idols according to their own
understanding. They followed their own fancy and skill in making and
multiplying of them to further their devotion, as they thought. 9. It does
bewray the brutishness of idolaters, that they do worship these things,
whereupon themselves, or others inferior to them, confer all the excellency
they have; for, all of it is the work of the Craftsmen. Mean artificers do put
the stately shape upon their idols; and yet they do worship them. 10. Commands
of authority do not take away the sinfulness of idolatry, but it does rather
add unto it, that such iniquity should possess the throne; for, this
challenge, that they say of them, Let the men that sacrifice, etc. may be
understood of their Rulers enjoining this sign of reverence, when men came to
offer sacrifice; See, Psalm. 94.20. 11. Men's open avowing of idolatry within the
visible Church, and their encouraging of one another to it, does yet make it
more odious before the Lord; for, this also may be understood of the peoples
mutual up-stirring one of another to perform this, as an addition to the sin.
And this may very well consist with the former, that as their Rulers gave out a
wicked command, so the people yielded prompt and ready obedience, and
strengthened one another in it. 12. God does not judge of idolatry only by
considering men's intentions and heart in what they do; but there is an external
idolatry which he abhors also, when a religious act of worship is performed
immediately, to some object set up in a religious State, however the worshipper
pretend to direct it by that mean unto God; for, here he condemns kissing of
the calves, (which was a sign of reverence, either when they kissed the object
it self, or brought their hand to their mouth and kissed it, in token of
religious observance, 1 Kings 19.18. Job 31.27.) as an idolatrous act, whatever
they pretended their intentions were.

Verse. 3. Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew it
passes away, as the chafe that is driven with a whirlwinde out of the floor,
and as the smoke out of the chimney.
The destruction threatened for this sin is held forth under four similitudes,
of a cloud, and the dew evanishing before the Sun, as chafe driven away before
the whirlwinde, and of evarishing smoke. Whereby is pointed out that they
should be driven out of their land and consumed, till they should (in a manner)
come to nothing. Whence learn, 1. Where strokes inflicted do not amend a
people, the Lord has yet more to let out, even till they be utterly consumed;
for, beside all that had been inflicted, v. 1. he has yet more here. 2.
Nothing will be able to stand out against an angry God; all that the creature
can oppose may be compared to frailest things; yea, and many similitudes are
little enough to point out this frailty; for, therefore are all these
similitudes borrowed from evanishing things, gathered together to point out
what they should prove. 3. Great appearances and shows of a flourishing
condition, will not guard against Gods hand; for, so much also do these
similitudes teach, a great cloud over-spreading the sky, and abundance of dew
watering the earth, seem to promise much, but they soon pass away before the
Sun, chaste lying secure among grain, is soon driven by a whirlwinde, and great
heaps of smoke going out of a chimney, do soon scatter and evanish; and so
should their condition prove. 4. Judgments on impenitent sinners; will come
swiftly and violently, and will bring utter desolation; so much further do
these similitudes teach; the cloud and dew is swiftly gone, the whirlewinde
violently drives the chafe, and all of these do utterly evanish.

Verse. 4. Yet I am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know
no God but me: for there is no Savior beside me.

5. I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.


The third destroying sin, (and an aggravation of the sin of their idolatry, as
appears from the way it comes in, Yet I am the Lord, etc.) is, their
ingratitude. Concerning which he records, 1. What had been his carriage toward
them, v. 4, 5. 2. What had been their part, v. 6. 3. What destruction this drew
on, v. 7, 8. As to the first, the Lord declares that however now they had
chosen their idol-calves; yet before ever they knew them he had been good to
them, and better then they had found their idols since; for in their
deliverance from Egypt, he had proved himself their God by many signs and
wonders; yea, that Covenant made with Abraham, was after that deliverance
solemnly renewed with them as a Nation, wherein he instructed and obliged them
to their duty, and to the true Religion, by closing with him, who only could
prove a God and Savior to them, v. 4. and to confirm them in this, he did
solemnly own them for his people, providing for them in the wilderness, where
their meat could be furnished only by miracle, v. 5. Doct. 1. Whatever course
the declining people of God follow, yet upon due trial they will find, that
never course thrave with them so well as Gods way; for, so much does this
rehearsing of ancient kindness, being laid in the balance with their present
condition, teach. 2. The greatest of blessings that can be conferred on a
people, is to be owned as Gods peculiar people in Covenant with him: for, this
is the fountain of all, I am the Lord thy God. 3. When God is confederate with
a people, he will prevent them in their low estate, and will prove his interest
by deeds, as their need requires. for, I am thy God from the land of Egypt,
not only since that time, but then in a remarkable manner, when he respected
them in their bondage, and by a glorious deliverance proved that he was their
God. 4. God who is confederate with his people, will also renew his Covenant
when they have forgotten it, and fore-faulted their right to it; for, his being
their God from the land of Egypt, does also point at the renewing of the
Covenant on Mount Sinai, shortly after they came out of Egypt, which was Gods
great mercy, considering what they had been in Egypt, Ezekiel. 20.7, 8. 5. When
mercies are manifested, and a Covenant renewed with a people, it lays many
obligations to duty upon them, and they need many instructions how to behave
themselves in relation to such dispensations; for, this part of the verse, And
thou shall know no God but me, is not only a declaration that essay whom they
would, they should find none to prove a God unto them, but he: but it relates
chiefly to the instructions given them upon Mount Sinai, and to the Law
published with the Covenant, the first command whereof is the same with what is
here. 6. The great duty that lies on a confederate people, and these who have
reaped the fruits of Gods bounty, is to be engaged to God as the only true God,
their only delight, and refuge in all necessities, and engaged to the true
Religion wherein his Name is professed and acknowledged; for, this is the sum
of that direction, Thou shall know no God but me, or acknowledge none but him;
See, Psalm. 81.8, 9, 10. 7. God does not seek a people to acknowledge him,
because he needs them, but because they will never do so well; they will
find no God but him, and they will find him delighting to be a Savior; which
none else can do, nor any thing without him; for, so much is imported in this
reason of the direction, to acknowledge none but him; for, there is no Savior
beside me. 8. When God has entered in Covenant with his people, he will prove
his all sufficiency, and engage them yet more to be his, by his constant care
of them in their progress; for, so did he engage them in the wilderness,
after he had entered in Covenant with them; I did know thee in the wilderness,
etc. 9. Mercies are therefore sweet (how common soever) to the Lords people,
because they come to them by special providence, and are an evidence of his
owning them as his; and this doubleth the obligation on these who are so dealt
with; for, it is the sweet and obliging sight he gives them of his dealing in
the wilderness, I did know thee, or take special care of thee as my people.
See, Psalm. 31.7. 10. Gods care and providence is most conspicuous to his
people, in their straits and wanting condition, that so mercies received at
such a time may be yet more obliging; for, so is declared here, I did know thee
in the wilderness, in the land of great drought; where not so much as a drink
of water could be had but by miracle

Verse. 6. According to their pasture, so were they filled: they were filled,
and their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me.
In the next place we have their part and carriage toward God who had been thus
kind to them, to wit, that being brought out of the wilderness to the good
land, they were swelled with pride and forgot God. Whence learn, 1. Gods owning
and caring for his people will end in a good issue, when he sees fit, for,
these whom he knew in the wilderness, v. 5. come at last to get a pasture. 2.
It is the fault of Gods people, that they take too well with prosperity and
deliverances; and do fat themselves therewith, and let loose all their lusts to
satiate themselves; for, according to their pasture, so were they filled, which
imports not only Gods bounty in giving them abundance, but that they minded no
more but to fill themselves with it. See, Deuteronomy. 32.15. When this is considered,
it needs not to be thought strange, if God oft-times withhold such a lot from
his people, Prove. 30.8, 9. 3. The great sin and evidence of abused prosperity,
is pride and loftiness of mind, and that men do not become the more humble
that mercy is let out unto them; for, they were filled, and their heart was
exalted: See, Deuteronomy. 8.12, 13, 14. Psalm. 73.6, 7, 8, 9. 4. Pride under
prosperity, is then at the height, when God is forgotten in our prosperity,
either what sensible need sometime we have had of him and his help, or what he
did for us, or for what end, and what engagements his bounty lays upon us to
seek him; for, their heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me; See,
Deuteronomy. 6.10, 11, 12. and 8.10, 11. Psalm. 10.4.

Ver. 7. Therefore I will be unto them as a Lion, as a Leopard by the way will
I observe them.

8. I will meet them as a Bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rent
the caul of their heart, and there will I devour them like a Lion; the wild
beasts shall tear them.


In the third place we have the destruction which this ingratitude drew upon
them from God, to wit, that his dreadful vengeance, and all his creatures
should be armed against them utterly to consume them. His vengeance and the
enemies executing it, shall deal with them as the most fierce and cruel beasts
deal with a man when they get him in their power; and belike also he would send
wild beasts upon them. Whence learn, 1. Ingratitude and proud forgetfulness
of God, do draw on violent, mortal and deadly strokes of destruction; for, he
will because of these sins rent the caul of their heart, (after which a man
cannot live) and devour them there, (that is, presently after he has killed
them) or swallowed them up, as a beast does his prey; so that they shall not be
to be found as a Nation. 2. All the dreadfulnesse of the creatures put
together, is but a shadow and resemblance of the fierce anger of God against
incorrigible sinners; for, look what is in a Lion, a Leopard, and a Bear and
it is all here, and much more. 3. It is one sad fruit of sin, and making God an
enemy, that he will, as it were, lie in wait to take all advantages of sinners
to undo them, which is not only sad, that he who watches over his people for
good, should be provoked thus to do, but he will soon reach the creature, when
he thus lets out his displeasure; therefore, says he, as a Leopard by the way,
(as they use to do, Jer. 5.6.) will I observe them, to wit, that I may take all
advantages against them to destroy them. Hence it is that an angry God can
inflict a curse upon sinners in every step of their life, Deuteronomy. 28.16, 17, 18,
19. 4. Sinning against the love of God, and wronging of manifested affection to
his people, will make wrath against them bitter; for, I will meet them as a
Bear that is bereaved of her whelps: as her being bereaved makes her more
cruel to any she meets with, Prove. 17.12. so should they find the bitter fruit
of bereaving him of themselves, to whom he had let forth so much love. 5. The
wrath of God can arm all creatures against sinners, and make men cruel like
heasts in executing his vengeance; for, the wild beast shall tear them, may
be understood, both that enemies should be beastly cruel against them, and that
even wild beasts should be let loose upon them, either in their own land, or
when they were going from thence into exile.

Verse. 9. O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine hope.
This verse is both a conclusion inferred from the former purpose, wherein he
has proved that he had been their help, and yet they had destroyed themselves:
and a ground of what follows, wherein he undertaketh to appear for their
help, when they had thus undone themselves. Whence learn, 1. Even a visible
Church and an Israel may come the length of being destroyed and undone, as here
we are taught. 2. Albeit God as a Sovereign Judge be the principal efficient of
all calamities, yet a peoples destruction is of themselves, and their own
procuring; for, O Israel, thou have destroyed thy self. 3. God has many
testimonies of his kindness to plead for him, that he is not to be blamed for
his peoples destruction, however they oft-times quarrel; therefore does he
add, but (or, because) in me is thy help, that is, I dealt bountifully with
thee, till thou by sin provokedst me to do otherwise, and therefore thy
destruction is of thy self. 4. It may add to a peoples guilt and misery, that
they have not only undone themselves, but have overturned a glorious and happy
condition wherein they were put by God, so much also may this, as it relates to
the preceding purpose, import, and may be looked on as a challenge, that they
brought all that good condition wherein he had put them to so sad an issue. 5.
As all the help of lost and destroyed people is only in God; so there is no
misery on men, but there is help in God for it, and so he will prove to his
people; for, so much also does this hold out, as it relates to the following
purpose, that he (who alone could) would yet help them after they had destroyed
themselves.

Verse 10. I will be thy King, where is any other that may save thee in all thy
Cities? and thy Judges, of whom thou saidest, Give me a King and Princes?

11. I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath,


Follows the second way of proving that conclusion, v. 9. which is taken from
his moderating their deserved strokes; his showing mercy under them, and
giving an issue from them. And this does prove, that however they had undone
themselves, yet he would help them. The first proof and evidence hereof is in
these verses, wherein he promises, that when their Kings and Princes, (whom
they sinfully sought, and whom God gave in anger, and had and would take away
in displeasure) should be gone and unable to save them so much as in any one
city, yet then he would prove himself a King and Helper. This that is related
here has indeed some allusion to that of the peoples seeking a King, 1 Samuel
8.5, 19, 20. When God gave them Saul, who was afterward cut off: wherein yet
the fault was not simply in desiring a King, since they had a warrant to expect
a King, from Deuteronomy. 17.14, 15. but that they waited not on God, but prescribed
the time and manner to him. But seeing this matter was afterward settled in the
Lords choosing of David and his race: and the Lord is now only speaking to the
ten tribes; therefore it seems rather to point at Isreal's defection from
David's race, and their getting Kings in anger, which were (for most part, and
particularly the last of them) cut off for a judgment on that people. Doct. 1.
Men may sin very hainously against God in the matter of change of Civil
Government, when his prescribed rule is not followed; for, so did Israel when
they said, Give me a King and Princes, or let me have a State of my own,
rejecting David's posterity. 2. When men are following their wicked enterprises,
God may in his holy providence and permission let it succeed with them, and may
seem to second them in it, though without all imputation to his holiness; for,
I gave thee a King, to wit, when he did intimate his purpose concerning
Jeroboam, and let them succeed in their course of defection, yet no way
approving of it. 3. Men may get their will in much wrath, and particularly, God
can let out much of his displeasure in giving of Rulers to a people; for, I
gave thee a King in mine anger. 4. When men once are out of Gods way, they will
meet with wrath in every condition, whether they have or want their Will; for,
I gave thee a King in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath. It was wrath
still whether they had or wanted him. 5. A way which is accursed in the
beginning, will be yet more accursed in its end, for there was anger in giving
a King at first, but wrath or hot displeasure in taking him away; Partly,
because the removal of one, did but make way for a worse oppressor: and
partly, because the cutting off of many of them was accompanied with the ruin
of many of the people: and the Nation was cut off with the fall of the last
King. 6. All the courses and carnal policies that men can follow, will not
avail them in the least against Gods displeasure; for, though they sought a
King and Princes, that they might be a stately Monarchy, yet where is there
any other that may save thee in all thy Cities? they could find none any where
that might so much as help in one City. 7. When all refuges have failed the
Lords sinful people, yet he remains able and willing to supply what other means
cannot, and will take advantage to do for them, because there is no other to do
for them; for, I will be thy King, or, I will be, to wit, unchangeably still
the same, and the help as I have been, Where is thy King that may save thee?
seeing there is no other help, therefore he will appear.

Ver. 12. The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up: his sin is hid.

13. The sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him, he is an unwise
son; for he should not stay long in the place of the breaking forth of children.


The second proof and evidence of his assertion, v. 9. is, that his help shall
be forthcoming when they are redacted to greatest extremities. The extremity
is in these verses, and his promise of help is, v. 14. The sum of these two
verses is, that their sin, though yet spared, was laid up on record, as a
sealed bond put in a coffer to a day of payment, and was treasured up as a
growing sum, to be counted for altogether in due time: and that this long
forbearance should end in sudden and bitter sorrow, wherein they should perish
because of their stupidity, and their not extricating themselves by repentance.
Whence learn, 1. Albeit a people may continue long sinning, and God in the mean
time forbear them, yet their sin is but growing and heaping up to a day of
vengeance; for, the iniquity of Ephraim is bound up: his sin is hid, like a
thing that is safely laid up out of the way, that it be not lost. See, Job
14.17. Romans 2.4 2. The Lords long-suffering and patience toward impenitent
sinners, will at last break forth in sudden and extreme sorrow; for, the
sorrows of a traveling woman shall come upon him: and these are both sharp
and sudden. 3. The greatest extremity of trouble upon the Lords people, is
traveling with mercy to them, if they by repentance would labor to bring
forth that birth; for, it is the sorrows of a traveling woman, and there is a
birth, if they would endeavor to make it break forth. 4. It is an usual plague
upon impenitent sinners, that they lie stupid under judgments, not bestirring
themselves to get the use and issue of them, by conversion unto God; for, it is
supposed he stays long in the place of the breaking forth of children, like a
child that sticks in the very birth, and does not struggle and move for its
own relief. 5. Stupidity under judgments is a great evidence of madness and
folly, and a very deadly token, and an evidence of an hopeless condition in it
self; for, he is an unwise son, who does this, and it is like the staying long
in the place of breaking forth, etc. which is a deadly token both to the mother
and child, and so their stupidity proved to them, as is insinuate in the
following promise.

Verse. 14. I will ransom them from the power of the grave. I will redeem them
from death: O death, I will be thy plague, O grave, I will be thy destruction;
repentance shall be hid from mie eyes.
Gods helping of them in their extremity, is held forth in a promise of
delivering them, when they shall be as men dead and in their graves: and of his
triumphing over death and the grave, to the utter undoing of their power; of
which purpose toward them he declares that he will never repent: This promise,
(together with Isa. 25.8.) is applied to Christ's giving a complete and full
victory to his people at the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55. Partly, because
this deliverance is a notable pledge of that; and partly, because that
spiritual promise is included here, to be performed (as well as the other) to
penitent Israel, who flee to Christ for reconciliation and salvation, as many
of them will do, when the Lord shall open their graves, and bring them out to
embrace the Gospel. Doct. 1. The troubles that come upon Gods people for sin,
may bring them so low, as to make them like dead men lying in their graves;
for, so is imported here, that they are under death, and the power of the
grave; See, Ezekiel. 57.11. all this is but little to the full desert of sin, if
God should pursue it in strict justice, and even the Lords people may be driven
to this, before they be put from their carnal confidences to draw to God. 2. A
peoples being dead and buried under calamities, is neither an argument that God
will not help them, nor any impediment to his Omnipotency to do for them, but
they may be as near help then, as when their trouble is less; for, I will
ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from death. See,
Ezekiel. 37.22. John 11.25, 40. 3. The Lords mercies and deliverances granted to
the visible Church, do flow from a purchase, made of the Elect among them, and
so these mercies come to them, and to the visible Church for their sake; for,
so much is imported in that he will ransom and redeem them from the grave and
death, that is, because a real ransom is paid to divine justice for the elect
among them, and because he has a purpose to give unto these a complete victory
over death at last; therefore he redeems or delivers all of them from their
deadly difficulties, that they may participate of the means which do promove
these spiritual ends. Compare. Mic. 4.10. 4. The Lord will not only preserve a
people in whom he has interest, under trouble; or simply give them deliverance
from it, but will deliver them by the utter destruction of the means and
instruments of their trouble, if it were even death and the grave; for, O
death, I will be thy plagues, O grave, I will be thy destruction, imports so
much, as it relates to Isreal's deliverance, that God will destroy all that may
stand in the way of it. 5. Temporal deliverances are then sweet, when with them
men by fleeing to Christ, have assurance of spiritual and eternal mercies also;
for, so much does this promise in its full extent import, that not only the
Nation of Israel should be delivered from their deadly calamities, but the
Elect among them should at last be raised up to enjoy eternal salvation. 6. It
is the special comfort of such as flee to Christ, that they will at last
solidly triumph over all their enemies. And particularly, this death and the
grave will be so destroyed at their resurrection, as they shall neither have
sting nor victory over them; for, so much does this promise concerning the
grave and death, (which is the last enemy, 1 Cor. 15.26.) as it is held out
here, and explained, 1 Cor. 15. teach us. 7. The mercies which were showed of
old unto Israel, and more particularly to be fulfilled at their Conversion are
not able evidences and pledges of Gods power to perform what he has promised
to perform to his own at the resurrection; therefore are both held out in one
promise, the one being as a pledge of the other: for, their Conversion will be
as life from the dead, not only to themselves, but to the world, Romans 11.15.
which will notably confirm faith, and the hope of a future resurrection. 8. As
Gods purposes of mercy toward his Elect are immutable and unchangeable: so also
are his purposes concerning the raising up and Conversion of Israel as a
Nation; therefore is it subjoyned to this promise concerning them; repentance
shall be hid from mine eyes; that is, not only will he plague death without
pity, but generally he will never repent nor change this purpose of raising
them up. See, Romans 11.28, 29.

Ver. 15. Though he be fruitful among his brethren, an East-winde shall come,
the wind of the LORD shall come up from the wilderness, and his spring shall
become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up: he shall spoil the treasure of
all pleasant vessels.
The Prophet closes this chapter with assuring them, that however he would
help them; yet they should once be laid desolate, which if it be joined with
the promises in chap. 14. does make up another ample proof of that assertion,
v. 9. This assertion is held forth, first in a threatening against Ephraim,
(whose name is alluded unto here) who is threatened here in borrowed terms,
that however both for number, power and riches, he was above other tribes; yet
God should send the enemy like a tempestuous wind, which parcheth up the
moisture of the earth, and makes it barren, to cut off his prosperity to the
very root, and to bereave him of what he delighted in. Whence learn, 1. God
has all lots in his hand, to make one person or people increase and be
fruitful above another, as he pleases; for, Ephraim (as his name imports) is
fruitful among his brethren, according to Jacobs prophecy, Genesis 48.19. See,
Psalm. 75.6, 7. 2. Such as are most advanced by God in outward things, do
ordinarily ripen most for strokes; for, fruitful Ephraim by his carriage
draws this judgment on himself. 3. Men's prosperous condition, or Gods bounty
toward them of that kind, will not avail them, when they ripen for judgments;
for, though he be fruitful among his brethren, an east-winde shall come. 4.
Judgments for sin will look very boisterous and dreadful-like, especially to
the guilty conscience; for, it shall be an Eastwinde, which was tempestuous in
these parts, and a wind from the wilderness, where winds rage most, or,
whence the Assyrians came. 5. Judgments will be the more sad, when God is seen
a party in them, and that this tempest is the wind of the Lord, not only a
great wind (as this phrase often imports the greatness of a thing) but raised
by him to pursue them. 6. Though the prosperous condition of sinners may seem
to be such as will never fail, as if it were a stream fed from a springing
fountain, yet wrath from God will soon reach the bottom of all these, and
utterly strip the sinner; for, his spring shall become dry, and his fountain
shall be dried up. 7. Pleasures will not secure against wrath, nor need men
think that pleasures and pleasant things at used to sin will continue with
them; for, he (that is, Ashur and the Lord by him) shall spoil the treasures
of all pleasant vessels, or, stuff: He shall take away what they treasured up,
as of most worth, and to be kept in greatest safety.

Ver. 16. Samaria shall become desolate: for she has rebelled against her God:
they shall fall by the sword: their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and
their women with child shall be ripped up.
Secondly, the same sentence is given out in more proper terms, against
Samaria the chief City: wherein is threatened, that because of sin, it should
be totally laid desolate by the cruel enemy, and sacked by the sword, without
any mercy, even to Infants and women with child. Whence learn, 1. Chief and
eminent places are ordinarily chief in provocations, and exemplary in
punishments for them; so much does Samaria's example teach. 2. Sin given way
unto, may lay strong and flourishing Cities even utterly desolate; for, Samaria
shall become desolate. 3. The great cause of Gods controversy against the
visible Church, or particular persons and societies therein, is their rebelling
against a received yoke, and their declining after engagements; for, this is
the quarrel here; for, she has rebelled against God. 4. The nearer that God
draws to any in relations and offers, and they to him by Professions, the more
heinous is their sin; for, this adds to the quarrel, she has rebelled against
her God, See, Isa. 58.1, 2. 5. It is righteous with God not to rest satisfied
with spoiling the wealth, or laying desolate the habitations of impenitent
sinners, but to pursue their persons also, therefore it is added, they shall
fall by the sword. 6. Impenitent sinners do provoke God to cut off themselves
and their posterity also, and that he should give up enemies to be destitute of
all humanity and compassion in their dealing toward them; for, their infants
shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.
Infants, even in their mothers belly have in themselves sufficient guilt to
deserve such judgments, and so they may be inflicted without any imputation to
God. But in this stroke, the Lord would have us chiefly look to the desert of
that present generation, and their Parents.

CHAP. XIV.
IN the close of this Prophecy, the Lord gives ample hope of the future
conversion of Israel, undertaking to stir them up unto it effectually, to
direct them in doing of it by giving them the spirit of supplication, and then
graciously to answer them. The parts of the Chapter are, 1. An exhortation,
wherein Israel are invited to repent and turn to God, v. 1. together with a
direction how to go about it, by calling on God, and engaging themselves to
him, v. 2, 3. 2. Gods gracious answer to that prayer which he shall put in
their hearts and mouths: wherein he promises to pardon their iniquity, and be
reconciled with them, v. 4. to make them flourish through his blessing and
influence, v. 5, 6. and to bless them who shall come in under their shadow, v.
7. So that they shall see, that there is no need to have recourse to Idols, but
they shall renounce them, considering what they find in God, v. 8. 3. There is
a conclusion subjoyned to this whole Prophecy.

Verse. 1. O Israel return unto the LORD thy God; for thou have fallen by thine
iniquity.
This exhortation does hold forth, partly, the original and rise of Isreal's
conversion and repentance, which is Gods effectual upstirring of them unto it;
for which end he leaves the exhortation on record, to take effect in due time.
And partly, a description of their repentance, together with the reasons and
motives thereof; some whereof are imported in their name, and the names and
titles which God takes to himself here; and some are expressed, taken from the
prejudice they had sustained by their sinful ways. Doct. 1. Kindness betwixt
God and his people, does always begin on his side, even after they have provoked
him; For, here he follows them with an exhortation to return, before they
repent. 2. One special mean whereby God brings about his purposes of converting
his people, is doctrine and exhortations, by and with which he communicates
efficacy and life; for, these exhortations do neither import that they have
power of themselves to return, nor do they leave the matter uncertain; but they
are in effect a Prophecy and promise, that in due time he will stir them up
effectually, and make these arguments and motives effectual upon them, as
appears from the promises that are subjoyned: And therefore they who are not
wrought upon by this mean, would consider how desperate that speaks their
condition to be. 3. In the practice of repentance, there would be a stop made
in our sinful courses, considering whither they tend; and a turning home even
to God, and a closing with him by faith, for that end; for, so much is imported
in this exhortation, return (which imports they should go no further on in
their former course, but should come back, and that) to the Lord, and that they
may do this, they ought to lay hold on God as their own by Covenant, and in
Christ thy God. 4. When men consider what they are, and what dignity is
conferred upon them by God, it may make them ashamed to lie still in sin
without repentance; For, O Israel return, they who are Israel and exalted to be
a peculiar people, should be ashamed not to obey this command. 5. It may invite
sinners to repentance, that God to whom they are invited, is the only fountain
of all good to them that come to him; For, says he, return to J^hovah See
Jer. 2.13. 6. It may also encourage to this exercise, that such as turn to
him, will find that their sin, and a long tract of judgments upon them, has
not made void a Covenant Interest in God; for, says he, return to thy God,
that relation stands still. 7. Such as do rightly believe an interest in God,
will be kept from presuming, and will be afraid to provoke him to forefault
their right; For, so also does the argument run, if be be thy God, then
return. 8. Sin does abase a people, and bring them down from their dignity,
both in it self, and in the sad and miserable effects that follow upon it; For,
thou have fallen by thine iniquity. See Psalm. 106.43. 9. Such as are convinced
of their sad condition by sin, will seriously think on repentance, and
returning to God, who only can recover their lost condition; And will be
encouraged so to do, when they consider that there is yet any hope for such
forlorn ones as they are; For, it is an argument, return to the Lord thy God,
for thou have fallen. Thoughts of a fall will make them think of rising, and
coming to God who only can raise them up: and it ought to affect them, that
such an invitation and offer is given to them, who have fallen so foully.

Verse. 2. Take with you words, and turn to the LORD, say unto him, Take away
all iniquity, receive us graciously: so will we render the calves of our lips.

3. Ashur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say
any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless
finds mercy.


Follows a direction from God how to prosecute repentance, and what to say
unto him when they turn to him. They are directed, 1. To pray for removal of
sin, and for gracious acceptance, or getting of good. 2. To engage themselves
to offer praise, and to renounce their former carnal and sinful confidences. 3.
To profess their persuasion of Gods mercy to the needy and afflicted, as the
ground of their prayer, and of their engagement unto God.

From the general direction, [Take with you words, and turn to the LORD, say
unto him, etc.] Learn, 1. The Lord requires that a penitent and turning people
make much use of prayer, as the mean to remedy and find ease of their
grievances; Therefore does he direct them here to that exercise. 2. The Lord
requires that not only a penitents inward man should be exercised before God
in prayer; but that he should employ his mouth and words also, as a mean
appointed for stirring up affections, and as a testimony of his devoting the
whole man to the service of God; Therefore does he require that they bring
words, and say to God. 3. Our words in prayer ought not be such, nor so ordered
as we please; but God is the prescriber of our prayers, whose directions we are
bound to follow; For, so much does this direction given by him, teach. 4. It
may be the condition of Gods humble and exercised people, that they cannot
command their own dispositions, nor get their hearts brought in frame before
God; In which case, however he abhor these who draw near him with their lips,
when they remove their heart far from him, Isa. 29.13. yet they woe are
sensible of the backwardness of their heart, ought not to stay away because of
that, but should come if it were but with words to God, to seek of him that he
would give them more to bring unto him: So much may be gathered from this, Take
with you words, albeit they could command no more. 5. Gods humble people may be
also so perplexed and confounded, that they will not know what to speak or say
before him, till he come and guide them; So much also may be imported, in that
God must teach them what to say, Take with you words. See Josh. 7.8. Job 6.2,
3. 6. When the Lord intends good to a people, it is his usual way to give them
the spirit of supplication, and set them about prayer: And he is so willing to
be reconciled with humbled sinners, that he will furnish them who want
furniture to call on him; For, says he, Take with you words, say unto the
Lord, which is in effect a promise, that in due time he will furnish repenting
Israel with supplications to call on him. 7. Whatever weak endeavors in
prayer, the Lord accept in his people; yet such as would pray aright, ought to
have their face toward God, and in their practice endeavor still to be turning
more and more to him; For, says he, Take with you words, and turn to the
Lord, say unto him.

From the first branch of the petition, [ Take away all iniquity, wherein they
pray for removal of sin] Learn, 1. The true penitents care and solicitude is
chiefly about sin, how to be rid of it; Therefore they complain of it in the
first place as the chief burden. And indeed where guilt remains, the removing
of calamities would not be in mercy, but would still tend to worse; and where
sin is pardoned, though calamities continue, yet they change their nature, and
are blessed. 2. The zeal of true penitents is not partial, but strikes against
all sin, greater or lesser, more or less beloved; For, they pray, take away
all iniquity. 3. Men may be truly penitent for sin, when yet they cannot get
themselves rid of it; yea, when a penitent is most convinced, he cannot remove
either the guilt, or power, or penal effects of sin, till God interpose;
Therefore are they put to God with it, take away all iniquity 4. God is
alsufficient to remove sin, and will do so to the penitent, according to his
promise. He will pardon the guilt of it, will subdue the power, and purge the
pollution of it by degrees; till once for all he give a complete victory, and
he will remove the penal effects, or plagues that follow upon sin, when he
has done his work by them, and when it is for the penitents good to want them;
For, this direction to pray, take away all iniquity, does not only import Gods
power to do this, but is in effect a promise, that he will grant this suite,
which himself puts in their mouth, as the following promises make clear.

From the second branch of the petition, [ and receive us graciously, or give
good] Learn, 1. It is of Gods graciousnesse that the penitent sinner is
pardoned, and when sin is pardoned, it is still grace that receives the
penitent; Therefore it is subjoyned according to the translation, and receive
us graciously. 2. Man is an empty creature of all good, and any good he has is
from God; So much does the other reading teach, and give good. The word does
indeed signify to take, or receive good; but being understood of God, it
imports to take it that he may give it, as a man takes his gift in his hand,
and then bestows it. And it is most clear of Christ, who receives gifts or
good things, that he may bestow them upon men, as the Apostle, Ephesians 4.8.
explaineth the same word of Psalm. 68.18. which is here used. 3. Till a people
become penitent, and flee to God through Christ for the pardon of sin, they
cannot expect any good thing at Gods hand, or that any thing they get will be
good unto them; Therefore it is subjoyned to the former suite, as following
upon it, Take away all iniquity, and do good. 4. When a penitent has fled to
God through Christ for remission of sin, they may expect that then all Gods
dealing toward them is good, and will tend to their good; For, when the first
petition is granted, then will he hear this suite also, and do good.

From the first engagement, to offer praise, being heard in their requests, [so
will we render the calves of our lips] Learn, 1. Praise offered up through
Christ, from an humble heart, is the substance of the ceremony of
thank-offerings; Therefore is it called the calves of our lips, as being the
substance of these calves and other beasts that were offered up. See Psalm.
69.30, 31. Heb. 13.15. 2. Gods hearing and respecting of penitents lays upon
them an obligation to praise, and they ought to entertain their good condition
by such an exercise; For, say they, so will we render the calves of our lips.
3. When people in their low condition have an inclination to praise, and to
glorify God by mercies when they shall receive them, it is an argument that
God will hear and grant; For, so are they taught to plead, Take away all
iniquity, etc. so will we render, etc. See Psalm. 9.13, 14. 4. As men must
employ their tongue as their glory, as well as their heart in Gods praise; so
they who make conscience of praise, will esteem but meanly of their performance
before God, as being but the poor fruit of their lips, when it is at the best;
for these causes do they call it the calves of our lips.

From the second engagement, [Ashur shall not save us etc.] wherein they
renounce carnal confidences in foreign helps, under the name of Ashur; and in
military preparations, under the name of horses, (of which, See Isa. 31.1. and
do renounce Idols, both as an argument of hearing, and an obligation being
heard; Learn, 1. The zeal of penitents, though it be universal and impartial,
yet it will be especially bent against particular sins, such as they have been
most addicted unto and guilty of; so much appears in their resolving against
these courses, which had so often misled them. 2. Praise must be joined with new
obedience, and a thankful sense of Gods mercies will excite men thereunto;
Therefore is it subjoyned to the former engagement, Ashur shall not save us,
etc. 3. Men are naturally endless in false refuges, when they renounce God;
For they run to Ashur, multiply horses, and say to the work of their hands, Ye
are our gods. 4. All these are but vain confidences when these who lean to them
have most need; And a penitent will see them to be so, and renounce them as
such; For, they engage themselves to renounce all of them, neither to seek nor
expect safety from Ashur, or confederacies with heathen and profane Nations,
nor to rely upon horses or military preparations, nor to put Idols in the room
of the true God, but that they will reject them, never to be looked on any more.

From the reason of their prayer and seeking to God, renouncing all other
confidences, [for in thee the fatherless finds mercy.] Learn, 1. It is the
Churches lot to be very desolate and Orphan-like in the world; For, they are
driven to look to the lot of the fatherless. The cruelty of men puts them
oft-times in this condition, and God permits it to be so, that they may be
fitted for mercy. 2. Gods compassion and the sweet manifestations thereof, are
especially reserved for the time of his (...) low condition, and their greatest
need; For, as it is of general verity, that God has a tender respect to
Orphans; so when his Church is low, she has cause to look that in him the
fatherless will find mercy. 3. The confidence of Gods respect to his humble
people, would be cherished by the needy and penitent, to encourage them to come
to him, and call upon him; For, it is a reason why they thus come to God, for
in thee the fatherless finds mercy: wherein they are directed to have, and
profess their trust in him. 4 Such as would comfortably lay hold on God in
their need, ought to make mercy their claim; Which as it is let out to the
unworthy, and such as do deserve ill: So the faith and apprehension of it may
sweeten their thought and meditation on all his other attributes unto them;
Therefore albeit they be in an Orphan-condition, yet that which they look to is
only mercy. 5. Such as do apprehend and believe the mercy of God toward his
needy people, will renounce all carnal and sinful confidences; as knowing that
God is alsufficient of himself, and that he will not have any communion with
Idols, nor will he help them who look to any refuge beside him: Therefore also
is this a reason why they renounce their former courses, for in thee the
fatherless finds mercy.

Verse. 4. I will heal their backsliding, I will love them frerly: for mine
anger is turned away from him.
Follows Gods answer to this prayer which he will put in the mouth of
converted Israel; wherein he removes and answers all their doubts, in several
promises. And first, for the matter of iniquity, (for the removal of which they
had prayed,) he promises to heal their backsliding, in its guilt, pollution,
and effects, (though the last of these be more expressly spoken to in the
following promises:) And that he will do this for them, out of his own free
love to them; from whence also it is, that he turns away his justly manifested
anger, and is pacified toward them. Whence learn, 1. Gods giving of a spirit of
prayer, is a sure pledge of a good answer; for, what he directed them to seek,
v. 2. now he grants. See Romans 8.26, 27. 2. The great sin of the Church, is
Apostasy and defection from her professions, resolutions and yokes which she
has taken on, and submitted unto; For, it is backsliding, or turning away. 3.
Albeit they had prayed against all iniquity, v. 2. yet now he mentions only
backsliding; partly, because Apostasy has a complex of many sins and
provocations in it; and partly, to teach, that if the worst of ills do not
hinder Gods help, nor are above his cure, far less will smaller sins stand in
his way. 4. Sin does bring a wound and sickness upon the sinner; It is a
loathsome disease which debilitateth strength, causes pain and anguish, if
the sinner were sensible; and being continued in, it tends to death; For,
backsliding must be healed. 5. The wound of sin is above the sinners own cure,
till God take him in hand; For, it is God who must heal backsliding. 6.
Apostasy requires not only the power of God to cure it, and to reclaim the
sinner from his wandering, and establish him being reclaimed; But it requires
also no small art, and a Physicians hand to recover it; And so to lance the
sore, as the back-slider may see the evil of his way, and not be secure or
presumptuous though God recover him; and yet so to support the patient with
cordials and encouragements, as a sight of his case make him not heartlesse,
and drive him further away; For, the word imports to play the skilful Physician
in healing backsliding. 7. God is an able and skilful Physician for such
diseases; and to the penitent he will give a proof of his skill in curing
backsliding; the guilt of it, by a pardon; the pollution and power of it, by
sanctification, and putting his fear in their heart, Jer. 32.40. the anguish
and pain of it, by giving them his peace; and the effects thereof, by removing
judgments in his time and way; For it is his express promise, I will heal
their backsliding. 8. Such as are truly convinced and penitent, will see no
worth in themselves, wherefore God should do them any good; But the more
penitent they are, the more will they see the need of free-love; Therefore do
they need this promise, I will love them freely, to secure all other promises
unto them. 9. As the love of God is the great encouragement of the humble
sinner, and the fountain of Gods bounty toward him; So it is his great
advantage, that this love is free in it self, and in its effects, as being the
love of an alsufficient God, who needs not, nor can be hired by the creature:
So that no objection of worthlessenesse in the creature, can hinder him to look
for that which is free; Therefore it is held out for their encouragement, I
will love them freely, ingenuously, without guile, and liberally, as it
beseems a rich and infinite God to communicate himself. 10. Where sin is
unrepented of, there is anger from the Lord which should be chiefly looked to
and laid to heart in afflictions; for, so is imported, that anger had been upon
them, under which all their afflictions are comprehended. 11. The Lords former
displeasure manifested in sad effects, will not hinder the manifestation of his
free-love to the penitent; and upon repentance, anger will be turned away out
of every lot by Gods free-love: Therefore it is subjoyned, for mine anger is
turned away from him; where he gives this both as an evidence and assurance of
his love toward them, because the controversy is now ended; and therefore they
need not doubt of his love. 12. Israel, to whom these promises are made, is
sometime spoken of in the plural number, them; sometime in the singular
number, to him; not only because a People or Nation, is sometime spoken of
collectively, as one, and sometime distributively, as many: But further it may
teach, that what God is to one, he will be also to all penitents; and his
favor to a penitent Church, gives ample ground of encouragement to every
particular penitent; yea, in his turning away of his anger from a Church, he
will have a particular respect to the grievances that every one have endured,
to see them richly recompensed.

Verse. 5. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lilly, and
cast forth his roots as Lebanon.

6. His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and
his smell as Lebanon.


In the next place, God answers their suite concerning doing of them good, and
receiving of them graciously. And first, he promises, through the influence of
his grace and blessing, to make them flourish, as flowers and trees of all
kinds do by dew and rain. What this may point at of the temporal prosperity of
Israel, and their being so rooted and fixed in it, as no opposition shall
prevail against them, I leave to the Lord by his performance to expound. But
certainly it holds out the flourishing, beautiful and sure estate of the
Church of converted Israel, and the blessed condition of the converted among
them, (who will be very many) in their spiritual estate. Whence learn, 1. God
can easily when he pleases, alter the disconsolate and desolate estate of a
Church, or particular persons; For, all these promises are opposite to former
curses denounced against them, (as, chapter 9.16. and 13.15. and elsewhere) which
now he promises to turn into contrary blessings. 2. God answers the prayers
of his needy people richly, and so as may commend his love and fullness; for,
in answer to their short petition, do good, all these promises are made. His
knowledge of our case, and his love to us, is infinitely beyond any skill or
love that is in our selves. See Ephesians. 3.20. 3. Israel will yet be made to
revive and flourish, and Gods blessing will make that Nation not only become a
Church, but prosper in that state; For, this promise is expressly made
concerning them, who have now so long time layn under the sad effects of the
formerly denounced threatenings. 4. As all the prosperity of a Church or
particular persons, flows from divine influence and blessing, and so they
have nothing to boast of in themselves; So a penitent and pardoned people may
expect that God will make them to revive and flourish through his blessing;
For, unto Israel, unto whom the former promise is made, v. 4. it is likewise
added, I will be as the dew to Israel, to make him fruitful and flourishing, as
trees and flowers are through dew and rain. 5. Such is the complete and perfect
blessedness of a people or person who abides under the drop of Gods influence
and grace, that no one similitude can express it; Therefore are so many
conjoined here, because no one of them could set it out fully; for, a lilly,
though it set out their amiable condition, by its beautifulness, yet it is but
fading, and so comes short; and this want must be made up by another similitude
of casting forth his roots as Lebanon, or, taking deep root, as trees do there,
that so they may endure: Again, though the trees of Lebanon, which have deep
roots, may point out their stable condition with their beauty, yet possibly
rooted trees may not grow up; therefore another similitude is requisite, his
branches shall spread. And because such as have abundance of branches and
leaves, may not be fruitful, nor still green; Therefore it is added, his beauty
shall be as the olive tree, which is fruitful and still green, Jer. 11.16. And
because the fruit of the Olive has not a pleasant savor; therefore it is
subjoyned, his smell shall be as Lebanon, where variety of trees and flowers
cast a fragrant smell. In a word, to be under the influence of Gods grace and
favor, makes completely blessed. 6. In particular, these similitudes pointing
out the blessed condition of the Church of converted Israel, and of the Elect
among them, may teach, 1. God by his grace and blessing can make his Church and
people singularly beautiful and pleasan^; For, they shall grow as the lilly,
which surpassed the glory of Solomon, Matthew. 6.28, 29. 2. Beauty or apparent
excellency* is little worth, unless there be some root of stability, which God
only can effectuate; Therefore it is added, and cast forth his roots as
Lebanon. See Matthew. 13.20, 21. 3. No pretext of rootednesse, sobriety or
stability, should hinder the visible appearance of the fruits of grace; but
where God works the one, he works the other also; for, it is subjoyned, his
branches shall spread. 4. The visible appearances of the grace of God in people
must not consist in ostentation or empty shows; but in real and green fruits;
For, his beauty shall be as the olive tree. 5. The Church and people of God
would also so endeavor to be fruitful, as that they study to be savoury, and
to have their way not only accepted of God, but gaining also upon others; for,
this closes all, his smell shall be as Lebanon, which is refreshful and
alluring to them who find it. 6. Albeit these things be the duty of Gods
people to endeavor them; yet they are also Gods promise, who undertakes to
make them such, in the faith whereof we ought to set about the duty; For, all
these are promises made to Israel.

Ver. 7. They that dwell under his shadow, shall return: they shall revive as
the corn, and grow as the vine, the sent thereof shall be as the wine of
Lebanon.
Next, the Lord promises that not only shall they prosper, but others shall
join themselves unto them, and that their shadow shall be vivifick and
enlivening, to make these who join, fruitful and savoury. Whence learn, 1. The
Church of Israel, when they shall turn to the Lord, and taste of his bounty,
will be the occasion and instruments of bringing in many to God; For, there
will be who dwell under his shadow, that is, Isreal's, (represented by a goodly
tree with many boughs,) or Gods shadow who dwells in Israel See Romans 11.15. 2.
The Church, or Christ dwelling in it, is the only safe and refreshful shadow,
for men to rest under in an evil world: For, they dwell there as under a
shadow. See Cant. 2.3. Isa 4.5. and 32 2. 3. They who are under the shadow of
the Church, and enjoy the influence of Gods blessing on her, will be made
fruitful, and recover out of their dead and frozen conditions wherein they lay
before: For, They that dwell under his shadow, shall return: that is, not so
much shall they return who fled from him, when that tree was cut down, as that
they shall recover and revive, as corn does after it dies in the ground, and
so the word often signifies to be restored and recreated, and so it is after
explained, they shall revive, etc. 4. No afflictions or improbabilitie, will
hinder their riches in fruitfulness, who join with the Church of Christ; but
as one grain of corn sown, and dead in the earth, brings forth many; and one
pruned stick of a vine brings forth many clusters, and every cluster many
grapes, so will their case be: For, they shall revive as the corn, and grow as
the vine. 5. To be fruitful under the Churches shadow, is very savoury and
acceptable, both to God and men: For, the sent thereof shall be as the wine of
Lebanon.

Ver. 8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? I have heard
him, and observed him: I am like a green fir tree, from me is thy fruit found.
The first part of this v. as it is in the Original, seems to be the Lords
speech, posing Ephraim what need he had of Idols, to help him to do them good?
since he is able and willing to do all to them that is here mentioned in the
end of the v. The translatours with many others, take it as Ephraims speech.
But both may well go together; and so the v. is a confirmation and
amplification of the former promises; showing that God by doing these things to
them, will convince them of the uselessenesse of Idols; and make them who began
to renounce them, v. 3. grow yet more in detestation of them, considering that
God is ready to hear, observe, protect and bless, and make them fruitful.
Whence learn, 1. When God takes his people in hand, he can soon let them see
the vanity and uselessenesse of Idols, considering what he is; For, says he,
Ephraim, what have I to do any more with Idols? or, what need is there, thou
should have recourse to them, when I deal so well with thee? 2. As repentance
ought still to be on the growing hand; so the more a people taste of Gods
goodness, they will loath their former ways the more, and will be sensible of
their too long continuance in them: For, so do the words, as they are in the
translation, teach; when God shall deal thus with Ephraim, as is promised, then
Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more (having too long continued in
another opinion) with Idols? 3. As God is the hearer of his peoples prayers; so
this is a special mean to convince them of the excellency of God above Idols.
They who pray much, and get proofs of Gods hearing, will easily see the
emptiness of all things and courses, in comparison of God; for, this is one
proof, I have heard him, and therefore may the Lord pose Ephraim; and he should
say, what have I to do any more with Idols? 4. The Lord does not only encourage
his people to close with him only, by hearing of their prayer; but by his
observing of them, that is, by turning his face, being now reconciled toward
them, by his tender eye and care upon them and their condition, Psalm. 121.4, 5.
And (which follows upon the former) by his doing for them, above what they
ask, even all that he sees them to need; I have observed him, says he, and
that is another argument. 5. As Saints in returning from sinful courses, may
meet with many scorching blasts; So in God there is sufficient protection
against them, to keep his people from missing Idols; for, it is another
confirmation, I am like a green fir tree, which being fruitless, spends it
self in perpetual greenness, and so is a refreshful shadow. 6. The Lord is
also unto his people, a fountain and spring of blessings, which other refuges
cannot give, and he will make them fruitful in every good word and work; for it
is another encouragement and confirmation in their resolution of renouncing
Idols, from me is thy fruit found, which is to be understood not only of
blessings poured out upon them, which come only from God, without whom they
would be barren: but of their fruitfulness in duty, which as it is their duty,
so it is his promise: And as he ascribes it to them in his free rewarding of
it; so they are bound to make use of him through faith, for enabling to it, and
to ascribe it all to him, by self-denial, (both when they go about it, and when
it is done) and by praise.

Verse. 9. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things? prudent, and he
shall know them? for the ways of the LORD are right, and the just shall walk
in them: but the transgressors shall fall therein.
The Prophet subjoynes a conclusion to the whole Prophecy: where, by the ways
of the Lord, we are to understand not only the directions prescribed by him for
us to walk by, but that generally it relates to his whole preceding doctrine,
both concerning man's duty, and Gods dispensations in threatenings and promises,
judgments and mercies; These he invites all who would prove themselves to be
wise indeed, seriously to consider, and draw them to use and practice; as being
right and straight in themselves, and such as godly men will walk in, though
the wicked fall and come to ruin by them. Whence learn, 1. When the Lord takes
pains to inculcate divine doctrine by his servants, it is our part not to let
it be lost, through want of application and use-making; for, this is the scope
of this conclusion. 2. The use that should be made of divine Doctrine, is not
only simply to take up duty and dispensations; but prudently and practically to
ponder and consider of what moment they are to our eternal well and woe, what is
called for at our hand, and how necessary and important it is that we give
obedience; for, so much is implied in this understanding and knowing these
things. 3. However men do pretend to much policy and prudence in their
sleighting of God, and his mind and will, both in duty and dispensations; yet
it is only true wisdom that leads men to the Word to take up duty, and Gods
mind in his dealing, and seriously to ponder on them as becomes; And for the
right performance hereof, there is a gift of wisdom requisite, even the
opening of the eyes of our understanding to see the marvells of the Law, and
for taking up what his Word says in every condition, and under every
dispensation; For, the wise and prudent shall understand and know these things,
as he has published them from the Lord by his Mystery in the former Doctrine.
4. This divine and true wisdom will be found very rare, even in the Church,
the most part living by their sense, passion, will, or carnal reason, not
regarding duties as they are enjoined in the Word, nor laying weight on
promises or threatenings, nor looking on dispensations as they are expounded in
the Word; For, who is wise and prudent? says he, which is not only an
excitation to all to seek after it, but a regrate, that so few did mind it, or
attain to it. 5. However carnal men do condemn, and load the ways of God (in
prescribing duty, or in his dispensations) with prejudices; yet they are all
right and straight, and not to be quarrelled; as being his who may prescribe
what he will, and give the Law to the creatures, and not they to themselves;
and may do what he pleases, and not according as men would limit him: and his
ways being such as tend to the good of such as obey the command, and walk as
beseems under dispensations; for, the ways of the Lord (wherein he enjoyneth
us to walk, and wherein he walks toward us) are right. 6. However many will not
submit to this verdict of Gods ways; yet he will not want witnesses to
justify him and his ways, by walking in the way of duty, whatever they meet
with, and bearing out, and living under all dispensations, and that not for a
fit only, but constantly and uniformely; For, the just shall walk in them. See
Job 17.8, 9. Such as would thus glorify God, must first be just and righteous
by fleeing to Christ for renovation of their nature, that they may have a
principle of new obedience; and for daily influence, to carry them on in
obedience; and for peace and reconciliation with God through him, that this may
be an encouragement to obedience, and may guard their hearts against sad
dispensations: They must also study to be single and sincere, that unsoundnesse
and by-respects do not turn them out of the way; For, they are the first, in
both these respects, who shall walk in them. 8. Such as instead of walking, do
stumble at duty, accounting of every moat in the way as if it were a mountain,
and are offended with dispensations when they are not such as they would; they
do prove themselves to be wicked transgressors, and any stumbling they have,
is a plague upon them, and a presage of more neck-breaks they have to meet with,
both by their own further sinful stumbling, and by Gods breaking of them in
pieces in due time: For, but the transsours shall fall therein, by their own
sinful stumbling at Gods Word and dealing, Luke 2.34. 1 Pet. 2.8. and by Gods
causing them to fall in end, and come to miserable ruin.

Joel. THE ARGUMENT.
THE time wherein this Prophet lived, and exercised his function, is not
specified here, nor any where else in Scripture: Nor can it certainly be
determined when that stroke of famine spoken of by him, was inflicted. That in
the days of Jehoshaphat, which came upon Israel under Joram, according to the
prediction of Elisha, 2 Kings 8.1. cannot be it; For here there is no word of
Israel, but only of Judah. And upon the same ground it can hardly be conceived
to be that which Amos spa^^ of, as came upon Israel, Am. 4.6, 7, 8, 9. And
therefore it may more probably be conceived to relate to that famine under
Josiah, Jer 14.1, 2, etc. However it be, this may suffice us; that as the Lord
in wisdom points at the time of the Prophets their exercising of their
calling, when the Prophecy could not be so well understood without the
knowledge of the History of that time; So in this Prophet the determination of
that question is not so needful, seeing the purpose may be understood without
it: For, in sum, he denounces and points out a grievous famine to come
upon Judah; exhorting them to make right use of it, by repenting and turning to
God; and subjoyning many promises for encouragement of the penitent, both
concerning their deliverance from that present rod, and concerning the
spiritual benefits of the Kingome of Christ, and their recollection and
restitution under the Gospel.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter, (after the Inscription, v. 1.) First, the Prophet propounds
and describes the anger of God which was manifested, or shortly to be
manifested in a terrible judgment of famine: He propounds it, and that as
singular and to be observed, v. 2, 3, 4. and then he describes and amplifieth
it, from several effects, to affect them the more: as namely, that the scarcity
should be such, as should make drunkards to howl and weep, v. 5, 6, 7. that
want of public services, should be matter of bitter lamentation, v. 8, 9. that
the desolate face of the land shall be a sad sight, v. 10. and that the
Husbandmen should be disappointed of their hopes, and of the fruits of their
labors, v. 11, 12. Secondly, the Prophet prescribes the right use, and true
remedy of this calamity, which is, that they should humble themselves before
God, and deprecate his anger; and therefore, he exhorts the Priests to observe
private fasts, v. 13. and to call the body of the land to a public
humiliation, that they may call on God, v. 14. considering that that dreadful
day was near at hand, v. 15. that their meat and sacred solemnities were to be
cut off, v. 16. that it was but lost labor to sow, v. 17. that beasts and
herds were made to groan out their life, v. 18. and that the Prophet behoved to
cry to God about it, when he looked upon the desolate condition of the fields,
and how the beasts were put to cry to God, v. 19, 20.

Verse 1. THe Word of the LORD that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
This Inscription, wherein the messenger is designed, and the authority of his
message asserted, teaches, 1. What Gods servants deliver in his Name is not
their own, but should be looked on as Gods Word; for, it was the Word of the
Lord that came to Joel. He did not seigne this, nor is it less the Word of
God, that God sent it by a weak man. 2. The mind of God is not to be sought
nor enquired after in the fanatic revelations of wild spirits; but in what he
has mediately delivered to the Church by his extraordinary officers, and has
registrate in his Word; for, the Word of the Lord came to Joel the son of
Pethuel, and by his Ministry to the Church in all ages. 3. It is Gods great
mercy toward his Church, that when strokes are on, or coming on them, he
leaves them not without his Word, which may expound his dealing toward them,
and direct them how to carry under it; for, in or about the time of this sad
stroke, the Word of the Lord came to Joel; See, Psalm. 94.12. 4. The Lords
sending diversity of messengers, either at the same time, or after other, (as
here Joel is after many others, and it may be with others, and others also
coming after him) does not only teach the alsufficiency of God, to furnish many
instruments, and to raise up instruments to fill their room, who are removed;
but it tends also to confirm the doctrine, which is testified by so many
witnesses, and to convince the Church of obstinacy and incurablenesse if she
contemn them, and be not prevailed with by such variety of tempers and
instruments. See, Matthew. 11.16, 17, 18, 19.

Ver. 2. Hear this, ye old men, and give care, all ye inhabitants of the land:
Has this been in your days, or even in the days, of your fathers?

3. Tell ye your children of it; and let your children tell their children, and
their children another generation.

4. That which the palmer worm has left, has the locust eaten; and that
which the locust has left, has the cankerworm eaten; and that which the
cankerworme has left, has the caterpiller eaten.


The Prophet does here propound this terrible judgment, inflicted by the means
of small insects, or devouring vermin, who coming in great multitudes one
kind after another, did devour the fruits of the ground, so as little was
left for man and beasts. This he does not propound nakedly, but as singular,
and to be observed as such; it was so singular, that none of the eldest in
Judah, either by themselves, or by report from their Progenitors, had ever
known the like; and their posterity even to the fourth generation should never
see the like, but as the history of it should come to after ages, they should
think upon it as a prodigious judgment. For clearing of this a little,
Consider, ^. Albeit these insects be only named here as the cause of their
famine; yet it seems also, that either before, or with, or after them, there
was rotting unseasonable raines in seed-time, v. 17. and a drought likewise
causing it, which is expressed under the name of withering, v. 12. and of fire,
v. 19, 20. which that it cannot be understood only of these creatures devouring
all, as fire does, is clear from v. 20. where it is, the rivers of water are
dried up. 2. It is not necessary for us peremptorily to determine whether the
Prophet speak of this as a judgment already lying on, or shortly to be
inflicted; seeing it is usual with the Prophets to set out approaching
judgments, as if they were present, and it is certain that some of these (at
least) were only near and at hand, v. 15. 3. As for the continuance of these
plagues, it is certain they lasted for some successive years, chap. 2.25. but
it is neither safe nor needful to determine, whether the first came and spoiled
one year, and the second the next year, spoillng what had been reserved the
former year, and so on for four years; or whether in every one of the years
they came all, every one after another. It is likewise needless to determine,
whether the drought was a new plague, after these were over, or was sent with
them or before them. 4. The setting out of this stroke as singular, does
nothing contradict what is said of the plague of locusts on Egypt as singular,
Exodus 10.14. for that on Egypt was singular for the great number of one kind
of insects, and their doing so much in so short a time; but this is singular
for the great numbers of diverse kinds, succeeding one another, and their
continuing so long to be a scourge. Doct. 1. When men become incorrigible, and
sin ripens to an height, then the Lord will reprove and plead against it by
judgments, and not by his Word only; for, whereas the method of other Prophets
is, first to reprove sin, then to threaten for it, and then to subjoyne
exhortations to repentance with encouragements and promises; This Prophet does
at first point out their sin and guilt as to be read in visible judgments. 2.
Famine is one of the rods whereby the Lord pleads against his Church for her
sin, and strippes her of abused mercies, and of tentations to wantonness and
rebellion; for, such is his rod here. 3. God can, when he pleases, arm very
mean and contemptible creatures to execute his judgments, and particularly to
deprive man of the fruits of the ground; for, here he sends out the
palmer-worme, the locust, the cauker-worm, and caterpillar, and they eat up
all, It were a needless labor to describe every one of these little
creatures, and show the difference of each of them from another, it being
sufficient in general to know that they were such as Gods Omnipotency shined in
doing so great things by them, accordding to the threatenings of his Law, Deuteronomy.
28.38, 39, 42. 4. As God has still one scourge after another, wherewith to
plague a sinful and incorrigible people, who will not repent, but think to
escape with the plagues that have come on them, Lev. 26, 18, 21, etc. So it
speaks sad things when one calamity stints not the controversy, but he
pursues still with one judgment after another, and with breach upon breach;
for, so is it here, what one left another did eat up. See, Isa. 9.12, 17, 21.
5. Albeit the Lord in every age be testifying his displeasure against sin, yet
at some times, and when sin is come to a great height, he may make one age a
remarkable spectacle of justice, and bring judgments on them, the like whereof
have not been in many generations; for, such was his dealing with this
generation, their fathers, past memory of man, rhad not seen the like, nor
should the like be seen for many generations to come. 6. Such dispensations
ought to be especially observed and remarked for use, and that not only by the
present, but by succeeding generations, who also are not to let them die and
wear out of memory; for, Hear this ye old men, and give ear all ye
inhabitants of the land; Tell ye your children of it. It is men's duty to be
wise observers of Gods judgments, especially when they are singular; and such
as forget what has been done on others, may be taught the same lesson on their
own expenses; See, Ps. 28.5. and 64.9. 7. Albeit the Lords singular judgments
be very loud and speaking, yet such is man's natural dullness and stupidity, his
unprofitable astonishment (usually) under the rod, and his forgetfulness if
once delivered from it, that he needs to be stirred up by the Word, to consider
or inculcate them on others; for, Joel is sent out with this message, Hear, and
give ear, tell ye your children of it, etc. 8. Even men of greatest age and
experience have still somewhat more to learn, while they are within time,
especially when their lot falls in times of extraordinary dispensations, for
old men are to observe and make use of this, as well as all the rest of the
inhabitants of the land. 9. It is the duty of Parents to be communicative of
good and spiritual instructions to their children; and it is the duty of the
present generation to transmit to posterity the truth of God, and what they
have found of him in their time: and for this end, they ought frequently to
inculcate the remembrance of it upon their children, that they may do the like
with their successors; for, so is commanded here, Tell ye your children of it,
and let your children tell their children; See, Genesis 18.18, 19. Deuteronomy. 6.7.

Ver. 5. Awake, ye drunkards, and weep: and howl all ye drinkers of wine,
because of the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouth.

6. For a nation is come up upon my land, strong and without number, whose
teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he has the cheek-teeth of a great lion.

7. He has laid my vine waste: and barked my fig tree: he has made it clean
bare, and cast it away, the branches thereof are made white.


That this calamity may affect them the more, and stir them up to make right
use of it, the Prophet to v. 13. insists to amplify it, and to set forth
several effects thereof. The first effect is, that there shall be such scarcity
of wine, as should make drunkards to howl and weep; for swarms of these
creatures (for their number and coming in troops compared to a Nation, as Prove.
30.25, 26.) should invade the Lords land, and being armed with his displeasure,
should without resistance eat the fruits, and bark the trees, leaving only
peeled branches meet to be cast away, and so should cause that scarcity to
afflict the drunkards. Whence learn, 1. Weakest instruments being employed by
God, and armed with his vengeance, will prove invincible and dreadful, and make
great havoc; for, this is a Nation whose teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he
has the cheek-teeth of a great lion, and therefore lays the vine waste, etc.
without resistance. Gods being a Party will make a small scourge heavy, and his
judgments executed even by such will prove irresistible. 2. As the smiting of
the fruits of the ground is for men's sin; so such is the stupidity of men, that
present strokes will not do at them, so long as there is any hope of recovery,
and till all probable ground of hope be cut off; therefore must not only the
fruit be eaten, but the trees be made white with peeling, and meet to be cast
away to affect them; he has laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree, etc.
3. In intimating this judgment, the Lord (or the Prophet in his Name,) calls
the land, my land, and the trees, my vine, my fig tree, to teach, 1. That
interest in God, especially if it be but in an external way, and by reason of
visible interest in privileges, will not hold off deserved strokes; for,
albeit all these were the Lords, because the people were his, and he had given
them the land, and all that was in it, and had a special respect to them, and
to what was theirs; yet a Nation is come up upon my land, he has laid my vine
waste, etc. 2. It does aggreage the guilt of sinners, that they do provoke him
not to spare even what he has interest in ^ for, it was their great sin that
made him smite his own land. 3. The greatness also and severity of Gods
displeasure against sin, may be read in his pursuing it, even to the smiting of
what is his; for, so much also is held out here. Doct. 4. As there are many men
so gross, even in the visible Church, as to live for no other end but to abuse
themselves and the creatures by intemperance; so when the Lord sends famine
upon a land, he intends to plague such in a special manner thereby; therefore
are drunkards and drinkers of wine; first alarmed with this rod, for, not only
is their sin visible in such a rod, and so their guilt may make it bitter, but
it will especially afflict them who cannot endure want so well as others who
have lived more soberly. 5. Albeit that drunkards do besot themselves, and do
make themselves a merry jovial life, yet God by famine can both rouse them up,
and mar their mirth, Awake, says he, weep and howl: and if they will not
repent nor be sensible of their provocations, or of the want of Gods favor; he
will cause their abuse of the creatures, end in lamentation for want of
occasion to feed their lusts, and will make them howl in trouble, like beasts,
whom they resembled in their conversation; Awake, says he, weep and howl,
because of the new wine, for it is cut off from your mouth; The command does
not import any approbation of such a carriage, but is only a prediction of what
he should drive them to by calamities.

Verse. 8. Lament like a Virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her
youth.

9. The meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the House of the
LORD: the Priests, the LORDS Ministers mourn.


The second effect of this stroke is, that it shall be matter of bitter
lamentation, to see the interruption of the public worship of God, through the
want of offerings, and of the Priests maintenance, by reason of the scarcity,
and to see the Lords Priests mourning, for both these causes. Whence learn, 1.
The Lord is so severe an avenger of sin, that he will not spare it, though the
stroke should reach even his own worship and ordinances; for, by this stroke
for sin, the meat offering and the drink offering is cut off from the House of
the Lord. Under these two all other sacrifices and oblations are to be
understood, which could not but be restrained when the beasts were consumed as
well as the fruits of the ground, v. 18, 20. and these are named because they
were sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, and therefore the joyful days they
had in offering them, are chiefly missed, as v. 16. 2. Calamities and
judgments are then sad, when they reach the Lords public worship and
ordinances, and (however it fare with men in their own case) do bring an
interruption to them one way or other; for, it is to be lamented, when the
meat offering and drink offering is cut off, and so there is no public worship
nor allowance for Priests to wait upon it. See, Zeph. 3.18. 3. Men ought to be
so far from selfishnesse, and minding their own things only in times of
calamities, that they should be most affected with the sufferings that are on
Gods interests; for, this consideration calls them to lament like a virgin
girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth, who being newly married, or
betrothed only, (and therefore called a virgin) is deprived of him by death,
and that in the time of her youth, when affections are more violent and ready
to resent crosses. 4. As the Lord has appointed and set apart officers to
minister to him in his service: and as it is their duty to be affected and
mourn for the interruption of his service; so it is a sad token of anger, and
matter of lamentation, when they are made to mourn for neglected ordinances,
and want of livelihood and maintenance; The Priests, the Lords Ministers mourn,
holds forth both their office and duty* and is a reason of that lamentation, v.
8. It could not but be sad to see them mourn, who otherwise were not allowed
to mourn, even for matters of great concernment to themselves, Lev. 10.6, 7.
and 21.1, 2, 8. etc.

Verse. 10. The field is wasted, the land mourns; for the corn is wasted: the
new wine is dried up, the oil languisheth.
A third effect of this stroke, (and another cause of the lamentation, v. 8.)
is, that the land shall look with a desolate and mournful countenance, being
despoiled of corn, wine and oil, and that partly (as would appear from the
words) by drought. Whence learn, 1. The earth when it is blessed of God with
increase and variety of fruits, is a very pleasant and refreshful sight;
whereby, as it were, it rejoices in Gods bounty, and inviteth us to rejoice in
him, who makes his creatures to smile on us, therefore it is said to mourn,
when these things are taken away; See, Psalm. 65.12, 13. 2. When sinners will
not mourn for sin, it is righteous with God to reprove and punish that fault,
by making the earth to mourn and look sorrowful like under judgment; for,
because of their sin it is, that the field is wasted, the land mourns, etc.
See, Jer. 12.11.

Ver. 11. Be ye ashamed, O ye Husbandmen; howl, O ye vine-dressers, for the
wheat and for the barley, because the harvest of the field is perished.

12. The vine is dried up, and the fig tree languisheth, the pomegranate-tree,
the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field are
withered: because joy is withered away from the sons of men.


The fourth effect is, that the Husbandmen and Vine-dressers should be
ashamed, and disappointed of their expectations, through the barrenness of
land and trees; yea, and the decaying and withering of all sorts of trees; And
so they should be made to lament, and their joy (which was usual in harvest,
Isa. 9.3. and 16:10. Jer. 48.33.) should cease with the ceasing of the fruit of
their labors. Doct. 1. Albeit men are bound to labor for their daily bread;
yet except God bless, their labor will be in vain, and their expectations by
it, end in sad disappointments, and God is provoked so to deal with sinners;
For, Be ye ashamed, O ye husbandmen: howl, O ye vine-dressers, for the wheat,
and for the barley, etc. shows that the issue of their labors, should be but
shameful disappointment and sorrow: See Ps. 127.2. Sin does procure great
desolation, and does provoke God to destroy whatsoever is pleasant or
profitable to the sinner, and leave him under confusion and sorrow; for, so
much is imported in the first reason of their shame and howling, because the
harvest of the field is perished. The vine is dried up, and the fig tree
languisheth, the pomegranate-tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree,
even all the trees of the field are withered. See Ps. 107.34. 3. Albeit men
ordinarily count little of the mercy of their daily bread, and of the increase
of their labors; yet the want of it would soon be felt as a sad stroke, and
will overturn much of their joy and cheerfulness; For, so much does the other
reason of their howling, (which is an effect of the former) import, Be ashamed,
and howl, because joy is withered away from the sons of men; that is, by the
withering and decay of the occasion of it, it also cease. 4. The matter of
men's joy is Gods gift, to give or take it away as he pleases; and whatever
joy, warrantable or unlawful, men have about any thing beneath God, it is but
uncertain and fading, and ought to be looked on as such: For, here when God
pleases, he makes joy to wither away.

Ver. 13. Gird your selves, and lament ye Priests: howl ye ministers of the
Altar: come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the
meat offering and the drink offering is withheld from the house of your God.
The people being thus stirred up to consider their condition under this
stroke; The Lord proceeds to prescribe by the Prophet, the true remedy, and
right use to be made of all this: which is, that all should take with guilt,
and humble themselves before God, to deprecate his anger. And first, the
Priests are exhorted to fast and mourn in private, to fit them for observing a
public humiliation. Whence learn, 1. As men can do nothing rightly under
calamities, till first they be sensible of them, and of the hand of God in
them: So where there is a right sense of trouble, it will be poured out to God
in private and public humiliations; So much does the dependence of this
purpose on the former, teach: When first they are made sensible of the stroke,
now they are stirred up to pray and mourn. We come but ill speed in prayer
under trouble, either because there is no sense of the trouble to put us to
prayer; or because we let any sense we have overwhelme us, and do not go to God
with it. 2. As conscience ought to be made by all, of private mourning and
humiliation under calamities: So especially by the Lords public Messengers and
Ministers, whether we consider their special dignity in being employed about
holy things, or their obligation to be more sensible then others, (especially
where the stroke reaches to Gods interests;) or their own peculiar guilt in
drawing on the stroke; or, their obligation to be examples to others; or, the
necessity they have to be stirred up themselves, that so they may stir up
others; for these causes are the Priests, the ministers of the Altar, (who
attend upon the public worship there) and the ministers of God (devoted to him
and to his service) called to this duty. 3. Such as have faith of an interest
in God, and (following upon that) affection to him, will not only be active in
duty themselves, but in stirring up others also in their stations; For, Joel
presses this upon them, as being ministers of my God, where not only their
relation calls for this duty, but his interest and affection sets him on edge
to stir them up. 4. It is necessary for right humiliation, that peoples
hearts be affected with the sense of their case, and with contrition under it,
and that they have much affection to God, that so they may be affected with the
stroke as it lights upon what relates to him; For, it is required, they lament
and howl; as an evidence of deep sense and great contrition, and that they
take up God as their own, your God. 5. It is also requisite that they testify
their abject condition before the Lord, and renounce carnal delights, who would
deal with him effectually under calamities: For, so much did their sackcloth
signify, Gird your selves, (to wit, with sackcloath, or, as the speech will
also signify, set quickly and nimbly about this work. See 2 Kings 4.29. and
9.1.) lie in sackcloath. Compare Jon. 3.8. 6. Such as are truly sensible of
public calamities, will find the grief and burden of them come sometimes
betwixt them and their nights rest; and especially it will be so with faithful
Ministers; for, come lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: And
albeit this be a practice enjoined in their private mourning and humiliation;
yet it is of general verity, that in all fasts, men should not find pleasure,
Isa. 58.3. 7. Humiliations and Fasts would be observed and kept, especially for
public causes; for, this is the cause of their sorrow; for the meat offering,
and the drink offering is withheld from the house of your God.

Verse. 14. Sanctify ye a fast: call a solemn assembly: gather the Elders, and
all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the LORD your God, and cry
unto the LORD:
In the next place, the Priests are commanded to appoint a solemn and public
Fast, that so all ranks of persons, both Rulers and people, being called to the
Temple, may solemnly pour out their prayers to God. Whence learn, 1. Private
mourning and humiliation is not enough under public calamities, but the^e
ought also to be general Humiliations, by the solemn convening of all ranks, to
mourn in a public way; and Ministers ought to be instrumental and active in
setting this duty on foot: for, to them the charge is given, Sanctify ye a
fast: call a solemn assembly: gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of
the land into the house of the Lord. 2. Fasts and Humiliations, especially such
as are public, would not be rashly gone about, but with due preparation and
upstirring for so solemn a service, for, says he, Sanctify a fast: or, set
apart some time, wherein to observe it, and prepare for it. 3. For the right
discharge of such a duty, it is requisite that men be sensible of their former
abuse of mercies, and their not deserving to have the use of them continued,
and that they shake off whatever may impede their serious dealing with God, and
do set about it in earnest; For, so much is imported in this commanded
abstinence and fasting, and that this is not to be a work in the by, but they
are to keep a solemn assembly, or as the word signifies, a time of restraint
from all other employments and diversions, that they may seriously go about
this work. 4. All these other ingredients of fasting, such as setting apart
some time, and convening in public,) which are required in solemn
humiliations, are but preparations to the great duty, which is serious and
fervent prayer to God, wherein men should express their instancy and
earnestness, according to the greatness of the distress; Therefore it is
subjoyned, and cry unto the Lord. 5. All other exercises of humiliation will
not prosper in our hands, nor be acceptable unto God, unless they be seasoned
and managed with faith and affection to God: Therefore are they commanded in
performing this duty, to come into the house of the Lord your God, and there to
cry.

Verse. 15. Alas for the day: for the day of the LORD is at hand, and as a
destruction from the Almighty shall it come.
All the people being thus excited, and called to mourn and cry to God; the
Lord by his Prophet does furnish them, (not with a directory or pattern of
prayer, but) with several arguments and motives to humiliation, which might
excite them yet more to the duty; And so he describes yet further the
greatness of the calamity, and their cause of mourning. Which he speaks of
partly as to come, and partly as lying on, (as was before marked on v 2, 3, 4.
because it may be, it was inflicted in part, and more was yet coming on: or
though it were all to come, yet it is not unusual in the Prophets, that they
set out approaching judgments as if they were present, that so they may affect
the more.

The first argument exciting them to humiliation and calling on God, is, that
this doleful day of inflicting vengeance, wherein Omnipotency would make a
great desolation, was near at hand. Whence learn, 1. Albeit men ordinarily look
lightly on trouble at a distance; yet it will make them tremble and cry alas,
when it comes on them: and the thought of this should move them to repent in
time; for, alas for the day imports not only the Prophets sense of it at a
distance, but by this he would show them that it will be their language when it
comes; and so uses it as an argument to persuade them to repent. 2. The day
of particular vengeance on impenitent sinners, is the day of the Lord, not only
because he is the Author of that vengeance, and does determine the time of
inflicting it, whether sinners will or not; but because thereby he will
manifest himself to be the Lord, even to them who would not acknowledge him
otherwise; Therefore is this stroke to be inflicted, called the day of the
Lord, The propinquity (and much more the presence) of judgments should be a
pressing argument of repentance; And it is the wisdom of sinners not to put an
evil day far away, that so they may be stirred up to repent; Therefore does he
press them with this, for the day of the Lord is at hand. 4. The Lord who is
omnipotent, not only can bring on utter desolation when he pleases, and no
creature-help can ward off his blow; But his sinning people may expect that his
stroke will be irresistibly desolating and wasting: And thoughts of this should
invite them to repent in time; for it is an argument of repentance, setting out
Gods Omnipotency, and his severity against them, as a destruction from the
Almighty shall it come.

Verse. 16. Is not the meat cut off before your eyes, yea, joy and gladness
from the house of our God.
The second argument exciting to repentance, is, that unless God spare, not
only shall their meat be taken away by the famine; but the sacrifices and
public worship also: And particularly, these solemnities of worship, wherein
they used to rejoice, as in their feasts and peace offerings. By meat here we
are to understand, both their daily food, and their sacrifices, which get this
name, Mal. 1.7. And particularly their meat offerings, (which were a kind of
thank-offerings,) wherein fine flower was offered, Lev. 2.1, etc. and which are
called food or meat, Lev. 3.11. Ezekiel. 44.7. And so the latter part of the v. is
but an amplification of the former, that the meat being cut off from the House
of God, joy and gladness was also cut off from it. Doct. 1. When no other
thing will invite sinners to repentance, God can do it by withholding very
food from men, and by threatening to cut them off by want, who will not serve
him; For, it is an argument to repentance that the meat is cut off. See Deuteronomy.
28.47, 48. 2. The interruption of the public worship of God is large as sad as
the want of necessary food; considering that our interest in God as our God, is
confirmed and avowed thereby; and that much joy and gladness, which has been
found in and by these Ordinances, does then cease; Therefore is it joined with
the former argument, that the meat is cut off from the House of God, and so joy
and gladness is cut off from the house of our God. See Job 23.12. Psalm. 42.4.
3. Whatever may be said for men's not laying to heart judgments when they are
far from them; yet it is undeniable madness to lie stupid, when they are
either imminent or incumbent; for, says he, is not the meat cut off before our
eyes, etc? and yet we will not cry to God. This it may be, was already true in
part, or it was presently to come to pass in a sad manner.

Verse. 17. The seed is rotten under their clods: the garners are laid desolate:
the barnes are broken down, for the corn is withered.

18. How do the beasts groan? the herds of cattle are perplexed, because they
have no pasture: yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.


The third argument is, that not only should these insects devour what was
sprung up, but it should be to no purpose to sow, for the seed should rot: And
therefore there should be no need of Garners and Barnes, seeing there should no
corn grow; or if any escaped that stroke, and came up, yet it should wither.
This rotting (as appears) proceeded from some unseasonable raines in
seed-time; and then what escaped that stroke and grew up, was withered by the
drought which followed; From whence also, (which is the fourth argument) it
should come to pass that beasts and herds should be in distress, and groan
out their life through want of pasture; yea, even the very flocks of sheep, who
use to seed on most dry and desert places, should suffer by this. Doct. 1. God
has many ways and means whereby to plague man, and reach his contentments;
and all of these concurring, are little enough to stir him up to repentance;
For, here beside the devouring creatures, he is also pursued with rotting
unseasonable raines, and scorching drought. 2. God can plague men's mercies,
either in the very bud, or when they are come a further length that he may
disappoint their hopes; And the concurrence of these dispensations, ought to
invite to repentance: For, both are here as arguments persuading to it, the
seed is rotten under the clod, and the corn is withered 3. Such as make it
their study, and place their happiness in having not only present means of
subsistence, but in laying up great store beside them, (as, Luke 12.18, 19.)
may meet with a sad disappointment, because of their sin: For, the garners are
laid desolate: the barnes are broken down, as serving for no use in this time
of scarsity. 4. God can easily reach any or all of his creatures, and is
provoked to plague them, because of men's sins: For, it is an evidence of his
Sovereigne power and providence, and of his controversy against that people,
that the beasts groan, etc. 5. The destruction that comes upon the creatures,
and their perplexities under want, should invite sinners (for whose cause they
are plagued) to repentance: For, their groaning, perplexity, and desolation is
an argument, pressing on Judah to cry to God.

Verse. 19. O LORD to thee will I cry: for the fire has devoured the pastures
of the wilderness, and the flame has burnt all the trees of the field.

20. The beasts of the field cry also unto thee: for the rivers of waters are
dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.


The fifth argument is, that the Prophet foreseeing, and laying this stroke to
heart, could not but cry to God, considering how these insects, or the drought,
had like a fire consumed all the pastures, even in the deserts; how the trees
were burnt up; and how the beasts were made to cry through want of drink and
pasture. Whence learn, 1. They who invite others to mourn, would essay it
themselves, and Ministers would be affected with the judgments which they
denounce in Gods Name, that so their example may be a mean to affect others;
Therefore the Prophet draws an argument to repentance from his own practice,
O Lord, to thee will I cry. 2. The Lords anger is a dreadful party, and can
easily consume all creatures, to ruin the sinner that will not repent; for,
here it makes pastures and trees be burnt up as with a fire, and dries up
rivers of waters. 3. As the cries of beasts in their necessity, is expounded by
God, as directed to him, Job 38.41. Psalm. 104.27, 28. and 147.9. that so he may
much more encourage needy sinners to come to him: So the distress and
perplexity of beasts, should stir us up to be sensible, and their cries to God
in their kind, when they are in want, should make men ashamed to lie behind
in their duty: for, says the Prophet. O Lord, unto thee will I cry, because
the beasts of the field cry also unto thee. 4. This smiting of all creatures by
God, and their crying to him in straits, may also teach us, what the
alsufficiency of God is, from whom the ordinary and daily provision of all
creatures comes, and who can take it away, or restore it at his pleasure. See
Psalm. 104.27, 28. and 145.15.

CHAP. II.
IN this Chapter the Lord prosecutes what he had propounded in the former Chap.
setting before them the sadness of the calamity to stir them up to repent;
and withal he promises to respect them upon heir repentance. And so, in the
first part of the Chapter having exhorted them to solemn humiliation and
fasting, because of that dreadful day of vengeance, that was approaching, v. 1.
he does for their upstirring, set forth at large the greatness and
dreadfulnesse of that judgment; showing that the number of these insects
should be so great as to over-cloud the sky, and overspread the land, to the
great perplexity of men, v. 2. that they should lay the land desolate, v. 3.
that they should have courage and celerity like horses, and be terrible like
armed chariots, and armies of trained soldiers, v. 4, 5. and so should bring
an universal terror on the people, v. 6. that they should not only destroy the
fruits of the ground, but should vex cities and houses, v. 7, 8, 9. that they
should bring such a calamity, as if the course of nature were overturned, v. 10
and that they should be thus dreadful and successeful, because they are
employed by God to execute his threatenings, v. 11. In the second part of the
Chap. the Lord exhorts them to sincere repentance, v. 12, 13. -- considering
the graciousnesse of God, v. -- 13. and what hope there is of mercy and
moderation, v. 14. And he resumes and presses the former exhortation to the
Priests, to stir up all sorts of people to public and solemn humiliation, v.
15, 16. wherein the Priests themselves are to be eminently active, v. 17. In
the third part of the Chap. they are encouraged to repentance by many promises
of great things to be done for them being penitent, and these both temporal
relating to their present affliction, and spiritual. The temporal promises
are, that Gods compassion and pity shall be manifested toward them and their
land, v. 18. that he will provide liberally for them, to the taking away of
their reproach, v. 19. and that he will take away these insects that had
consumed their land, v. 20. By all which the land will have allowance to
rejoice, and the beasts not to fear, v. 21, 22. and the Church shall be made to
rejoice in God, who will give them plenty, v. 23, 24. and make up their losses
by the former famine, v. 25. so that they shall have the use of this mercy to
their satisfaction, and shall praise God for it, v. 26. -- and he shall by this
his dealing convince them of his relation to them, and confirm the godly that
they shall never be ashamed, v. -- 26, 27. And this is the first spiritual
promise; unto which is added further, that in the days of the Gospel, he will
pour out of his Spirit largely, v. 28, 29. and that, albeit many calamities
and commotions shall follow on the back of that, v. 30, 31. yet such as cleave
to God shall be saved, and there shall still be a remnant to get the
performance of the promise, v. 32.

Verse. 1. Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy
mountain; let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the LORD
comes, for it is nigh at hand.
Whatever other calamities to come upon Judah, may be allegorically pointed at
under the type of these locusts and other insects which wasted their land,
(which yet it is not safe to follow too far;) yet in the letter he here speaks
of the same calamity of which he spoke in the former Chap. as may appear from
the whole description, and particularly from the promises made of deliverance
from it, and specially these, v. 20, 25. And the Prophets scope in the two
first parts of the Chap. to v. 18. is to press that exhortation, chapter 1.13, 14.
yet so as in the first part, after he has propounded the exhortation again, he
digresseth to describe the greatness of the calamity, and then in the second
part, from ver. 12. he resumes and inculcates their duty upon them.

In this Verse the Lord by the Prophet repeats the exhortation to the Priests
that they by sounding of the trumpet, should call the people to solemn
humiliation; and he exhorts the people to tremble at this alarm of his
appearing in judgment. Unto which is subjoyned a general intimation, that the
dreadful day wherein God would infflict these plagues, was at hand; And this is
brought in as an argument to make the exhortation effectual, and is prosecuted
and enlarged in the following Verses. See chapter 1.15. This blowing of the trumpet
in Zion, or the holy mountain of the Temple, is according to the direction of
the Law, Number. 10.3, 9. wherein the Priests were to convocate the people, and to
sound an alarm in war, by blowing of the trumpets. And both of these are
pointed at here; They are to alarm the people, and give them warning of the
approaching judgment, and to call a convocation for fasting, as it is, v. 15.
Doct. 1. Whatever the Lord say to sinners by his rod, when it is imminent and
incumbent; yet such as would have good use of it, have need of the help of the
Word and Ordinances with it, either for preven^ion, preparation, or use of it;
For, the trumpet must be blown, either to warn them before it come, or to
stir them up to be sensible, and to do duty when it comes. 2. Whoever be
asleep in times of threatened or incumbent dangers; yet Ministers ought
especially to be awake, that they may stir up others; For, on them is this
charge laid, Blow ye the trumpet. 3. Ministers must be faithful in discharging
their trust, as becomes watchmen, and they must not set themselves to please
men, but should faithfully point out their danger procured by sin; For, they
must blow and sound an alarm. 4. It is not enough for Ministers to point out
dangers by sin, unless they point out remedies also; nor is it sufficient for
people to be sensible of the one, unless they be stirred up to the other; For,
they are to blow the trumpet, and call to fasting, (as it is expounded, v. 15.)
as well as to sound an alarm; yea, this is but subservient to the other. 5.
The consideration that a people are Gods Church, and do enjoy his presence, is
a special argument to move them to be sensible and study duty, in times of
calamity; For, all this is to be in Zion, and my holy mountain, not only
because it was the place where the Priests sounded; and where the people were
to meet for solemn worship, but that all this calamity being on a Church,
(whereof Zion and the mountain of the Temple was a type,) therefore they
should be sensible, and hearken to these alarmes and invitations. 6 When God
threatens or inflicts judgments, it becomes all to be deeply sensible, and
not to please themselves with formality, or trifle with outward shows, but
they should quake at the heart, at the tokens of Gods anger; and it is great
courage not to harden our selves, but to tremble before an angry God; for, the
inhabitants of the land are to tremble, upon the alarm and call to humiliation
and repentance. See Isa. 66.2. Jer, 5.22. 7. Albeit the Lord may keep off
temporal judgments upon the repentance (even hypocritical) of Rulers, as, 1
Kings 21.27, 28, 29; And albeit some few godly may sometime hold off wrath from
a Nation as, Psalm. 106.23. Ezekiel. 22.30. yet it is the duty of all to be
afflicted and humbled under common calamities; and where this is wanting, the
piety and repentance of some few, will not always avail; Therefore is the
direction general, let all the inhabitants of the land tremble. See Ezekiel. 9.3,
4, 5. and 14.13, 14, 15, 16, etc. 8. It is not to be slighted, but seriously
laid to heart, how sad it is when God makes alarmes real, and strokes to
follow upon them; (when the day follows upon the alarm,) how strong a party
God is, and how he will prove himself God by his judgments upon them who would
not otherwise take notice of him; and how dreadful a stroke will be when it is
near, whatever men think of it at a distance: all this is imported in what is
here repeated from chap. 1.15. as an argument to affect them, for the day of
the Lord comes, for it is nigh at hand.

Verse 2. A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness, as the morning spread upon the mountains: a great people, and a
strong, there has not been ever the like, neither shall be any more after it,
even to the years of many generations.
That the thoughts of this sad day may take deep impression, and stir them up;
a description of it is held forth at large, in several branches, as so many
arguments pressing them to repent and tremble before God. The first branch of
the description, is, that this troop of devouring creatures, (called a people
or Nation, as, chap. 1.6.) being armed with Gods power, should come in so great
a number as to cover and hide the sight of the sky and heavens: (as also to
put the people in great trouble and perplexity, which is figuratively pointed
at by a dark day, Isa 5.30. and 8.22. Ezekiel. 32.7, 8. Amos 5.18.) And they
should so swiftly overspread the country, as the morning light or clouds
overspreads all the mountains, Amos 4.13. Joh 38.12, 13. And they should be so
numerous as the like had not been seen before, nor should be afterward for many
ages. Whence learn, 1. As it is the Lords way to make a time of calamity for
sin, very uncomfortable and full of darkness and perplexity; So this should
serve to affect sinners, and to humble and stir them up to repentance; For,
so much does this day of darkness, etc. figuratively taken, import: and it is
propounded here as an argument to make that exhortation, v. 1. effectual. 2.
When God is provoked to punish a people for sin, he can easily multiply
instruments of vengeance; he can make them (though small and weak of
themselves,) prove strong; he can make them swiftly and suddenly execute all
his counsel; and can make them hide and take away all comfort from sinners,
which they might expect from heaven or earth; For, these small creatures make
this time, A day of darkness and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness, as hiding any sight of the sky or heaven, by reason of their number;
they swiftly cover the earth, to waste it all, and deprive men of comforts from
thence, as the morning spread upon the mountains; and in Gods hand they prove a
great people and a strong. 3. As the Lord will inflict singular calamities, e^e
he be not avenged on impenitent sinners; So such singular judgments ought to
affect sinners much: For, it testifies Gods just and severe pursuing of sin,
and the necessity of trembling before God, that they are a great people and a
strong, there has not been ever the like, etc. 4. The Lord is so gracious,
that albeit he be so provoked in every age, as does deserve saddest strokes;
And albeit he does pursue sin with judgments, which may be called his strange
work, Isa. 28.21; Yet he but seldom inflicts singular and extraordinary
calamities, that so ordinary corrections may work the more kindly upon us, that
they are but ordinary; and that we may rather learn from their example who have
smarted in an extraordinary way, then be put to feel them our selves;
Therefore albeit he was frequently provoked in Judah, yet this is a stroke at
this time, that there has not been ever the like, neither shall be any more
after it, even to the years of many generations. And albeit this be spoken only
of one kind of plague, and Judah after this was punished with singular
judgments of another kind, Dan 9.12. yet the general holds still true, that
many times their sins deserved most remarkable and rare plagues, when yet they
were either spared, or their corrections moderated.

Verse. 3. A fire devoureth before them, and behind them a flame burns: the
land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate
wilderness, yea, and nothing shall escape them.
A second branch of the description, setting forth the terriblenesse of this
judgment, is, that the land should be laid desolate by these creatures. As for
that, A fire devoureth before them, it may be understood of a burning drought,
which, together with these insects, should consume the land; or rather, that
(as the Original bears) at their face, or coming, they shall devour all like a
flame, which (as the following words have it,) should be clearly seen when they
are gone by. This great desolation is amplified, 1. That though the land they
infest, be as a Paradise, yet they shall leave it like a wilderness. 2. That
no place nor thing shall escape this desolating stroke. Doct. 1. Weakest
instruments, being armed with divine power, will do all that execution that
could be expected from the strongest; For, these creatures are as a fire which
devoureth without mercy, A fire devoureth before them. 2. Whatever men be able
to see, or take up of a calamity, when they are under the heat of it; Yet the
sadness of it will more clearly appear upon a review and after-thought of it;
Therefore it is added, behind them a flame burns; that is, when they are
passed by, men will clearly see what havoke they have made, as if all were
burnt up. 3. Most fruitful and pleasant countries may, through man's sin, be
made liable to a curse: And men's pleasant enjoyments will not keep off wrath,
but rather contribute to make it sadder to them; For, a land as the garden of
Eden may become a desolate wilderness. 4. Men by comparing their case before a
calamity, with what it is after, may both read the sadness of their stroke,
to affect them, Lam 1.7. and may be convinced of the goodness of the Lord
toward them, till they provoked him to send a change; Therefore are both
compared here, the land is as the garden of Eden before them, (as Judea was in
many respects a pleasant land, Zech. 7.14.) and behind them a desolate
wilderness. 5. Times of calamities, and of judgments for sin, will be
universal; Nor is there place, person or thing, but we may expect it will be
reached, and an affliction fastened upon it, in one measure or other; For, yea,
and nothing shall escape them.

Ver. 4. The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses, and as
horsemen, so shall they run.

5. Like the noise of charets on the tops of mountains shall they leap, like
the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble, as a strong people set
in battle array.


The third branch of the description, is, that for courage and celerity they
shall be like horses, of whom, see Joh 39.19, etc. And that they shall be no
less terrible, and their sound no less dreadful, then armed charets making a
noise on the mountains, by leaping from place to place; or then the noise of
fire burning up stubble, or then an army of trained soldiers, and these not
scattered, but standing in battel-ranke. Whence learn, 1. Ordinarily men's
stupidity is so great when judgments are imminent, that multitudes of
upstirrings, and representations of their woeful condition, is little enough to
affect them: So much does this insisting and multiplying of similitudes, teach.
2. It becomes men to adore and dread the Omnipotency of God, who can make the
weakest strong, and do great things by them; So that he may be terrible to
impenitent sinners, so long as he has small insects at his command, as if he
were employing horses, charets, fire and armies: For, so much do these
comparisons teach, that he can make the small creatures, as dreadful as any or
all of these. 3. Men's guilt will not only make rods sad when they are
inflicted; but the very noise at distance, and the sight, though of a weak rod,
will be dreadful; For, to the impenitent Jews, the noise of these creatures,
while they are coming afar off, will be like the noise of charets, leaping upon
tops of mountains, whence they may be heard from afar, and of a flame of fire;
And the sight of them coming near, will be as terrible as any thing may be.

Verse. 6. Before their face the people shall be much pained: all faces shall
gather blackness.
The fourth branch of the description, and an effect of the former, is, that
the noise of the approach of these creatures in troops, and the sight of them,
shall breed a general and universal terror among men, accompanied with
blackness of face, not so much through the famine which shall follow after,
(as, Lam. 4.8.) as through deadly fear and terror striking them to the heart.
Compare, Nah. 2.10. Doct. 1. However men may despise judgments, when they are
threatened from the Word; Yet judgments executed will put them to it, to give
proof of their courage, as here we see. 2. Whatever may be the Lords dealing
under cleanly trials; yet times of judgment will be full of discouragement and
terror; For, Before their face the people shall be much pained, or sick with
anxiety and terror. 3. Though men, for most part, lie secure under an evil
conscience; Yet when God puts it to it, and pleads effectually with it by
judgments, then it will succumb, and breed much terror to them; For, so is
here threatened against impenitent Judah. 4. It is a sad condition, and an
evidence of much displeasure, when terror and distress is universal, and none
to comfort, but all discouraging one another, even by their very countenances;
and it will be thus in times of common calamities among the wicked and
impenitent, beside what even the godly may drink of this bitter cup; For, the
people shall be much pained: all faces shall gather blackness. 5. Peace and
reconciliation with God is not only good for the soul, but even for the body.
For not only is God provoked to plague the body for sin; but the terror of an
ill conscience will waste and consume it in a day of calamity; For, here it
makes all faces gather blackness. See Prove. 14.30. and 17.22.

Verse. 7. They shall run like mighty men, they shall climb the wall like men
of war, and they shall march every one on his ways, and they shall not break
their ranks.

8. Neither shall one thrust another, they shall walk every one in his path:
and when they fall upon the sword, they shall not be wounded.

9. They shall run to and fro in the city: they shall run upon the wall:
they shall climb up upon the houses: they shall enter in at the windows like
a thief.


The fifth branch of the description, is, that these creatures shall not only
waste the land, and destroy the fruits and herbs, but shall vex cities and
houses: And as a strong and numerous army does assault a City in order without
breaking their ranks: So shall they invade Cities in orderly troops, and shall
enter men's houses by secret passages. Yea, they shall be beyond armies in this,
that they shall not fear the sword or any resistance, but shall go through all
impediments, without either fear or hurt. Doct. 1. The sovereigne and wise Lord
can order the motions of irrational creatures to his purpose, as if they were
reasonable, and trained and disciplined men in an army; For, so much does this
large description of their orderly march and assault, in terms borrowed from
Warriers, teach us. Of this also he gave proof in directing the motion of the
Kine who brought the Ark from the land of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 6.12. 2. Men
may expect, when God is angry, to have no shelter from his judgments; but they
will pursue them into their walled Cities and closed houses, even when they are
executed by creatures who usually do flee from men: For, so is here held out.
3. Whatever be men's duty to defend themselves from injury, even when God
thereby is pursuing a controversy; Yet where divine vengeance pursues,
resistance of the instruments thereof will be to small effect; For, walls and
houses will not hold them out, nor will the sword wound them, which also holds
true of other instruments, that such means will not overturne their projects,
so long as God has service for them.

Verse. 10. The earth shall quake before them, the heavens shall tremble, the
Sun and the Moon shall be dark, and the Stars shall withdraw their
shining.
The fixth branch of the description, is, that the calamity shall be so
dreadful, as to work a great alteration in all the creatures. This may indeed
be understood of extraordinary signs accompanying this plague, such as
thunder, (whereby the heavens seem to tremble,) earthquakes, ecclipses and
darkness hiding the shining lights. But it seems rather to point at the
greatness of the calamity, which should be such as if it were the day of
judgment, and dissolution of heaven and earth, (as it is usual in Prophets to
describe great calamities, so, Isa. 34.4.) and that it should lo change the
order and condition of the creatures, as men shall have no quiet in them, or
consolation by them, more then if they hid themselves and their influences. The
Sun, Moon and Stars should be either hid by reason of their multitude; or
their light should be as uncomfortable as if it were dark, and serve only to
let men see their calamity, and their influences should be made void by the
destruction of whatsoever they produce. Doct. 1. Times of calamity for sin,
serve to show how unworthy man is of the earth for an habitation to him, or of
heavens to cover him; and to show what a disturber he is of the whole creation;
So much is pointed out by the earths quaking, and heavens trembling. 2.
Whatever may be the issue of particular calamities; yet they serve to put
sinners in mind of a day of judgment and dissolution of all things, wherein
they will not escape, however they wrestle through temporal judgments;
Therefore also is this calamity thus described. 3. Times of calamity will make
a strange shake and overturning of delights which seemed to be very settled,
even as heaven and earth, and which seemed to be of constant continuance, as
the Sun Moon and Stars their light and influences are. 4. All created
comforts, and what men rest on beside God, will fail a sinner when God pleads
with him; For, neither earth nor heaven, nor Sun, Moon nor Stars will give
quiet or comfort to him, they will quake and tremble, and be dark, and
withdraw their shining.

Ver. 11. And the LORD shall utter his voice before his army, for his camp is
very great, for he is strong that executes his word, for the day of the LORD
is great, and very terrible, and who can abide it?
The last branch of the description, (which is by way of conclusion) shows
that all this dreadfulnesse and success of these creatures is of God, who will
make it manifest that they fight under his Banner as General, who gives them
the word to encourage them, and to fall on upon his enemies; and that they are
so strong, because they execute vengeance in his Name, according to his
threatenings, against them who provoke him; and they shall demonstrate his
power and terror which none shall be able to resist. Whence learn, 1.
Judgments will be then rightly seen for our use, when the Lord is seen in them
as chief, and as employing all instruments; Therefore is the description closed
with this, that the Lord is General of this Army. 2. When the Lords people will
not hear his voice, he is provoked to speak against them as an enemy, attended
with instruments of vengeance excited by him: For, The Lord shall utter his
voice before his army. The speech may relate to a voice of thunder, Psalm.
18.13. or to the dreadful noise made by these creatures, intimating that he
sent them out to do execution; or it may be understood simply, that as a
General on the head of his Army, encourages his soldiers, and exhorts and
commands them to fall on: so the Lord would animate this his Army, and send
them out with fury. 3. Albeit the Church that should be for God, would not only
ly by, but provoke him to be an enemy; yea, albeit there should be no men to
appear in his quarrel; Yet he can easily when he pleases, raise a numerous and
strong army, beseeming such a General; Therefore it is added, for his camp is
very great, so as he may own them for his Army, and send them out on service.
4. The strength of any instruments of vengeance, and their success, is to be
ascribed to God, who is so nuchangeable in his holy justice, as he will execute
his threatenings against the impenitent; And who is Omnipotent so to do by any
instruments he pleases; for, it is a reason of the strength of his Army, for
he is strong that executes his word. 5. Divine wrath will be found
intolerable, when it comes to be executed; and whatever sinners dream, yet
there is no resisting nor abiding of a day of vengeance, nor any refuge against
it, but by turning to God by faith and unfeigned repentance; For, so much is
held out in this further confirmation of the reason of the strength of this
Army, for the day of the Lord (and not of the appearing of these creatures
only,) is great and very terrible, and who can abide it?

Ver. 12. Therefore also now says the LORD, Turn ye even to me withal your
heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.

13. And rent your heart, and not your garments; and turn unto the LORD your
God: for he is gracious and merciful, flow to anger, and of great kindness,
and repents him of the evil.


Follows the second part of the Chap. wherein the Lord calls upon them to
make right use of this calamity, and of the warning given them. This he does in
two exhortations; whereof the first (in these verses,) is, That they should set
about sincere repentance and humiliation, testified by holy private fasts and
unfeigned sorrow, and so prove that they are really converted to God, and
reconciled to him through faith in the Mediator, v. 12. and that they should
study to be rather afflicted in spirit for sin, then by performance of
external ceremonies, to pretend to it only, v. 13. -- Unto this exhortation,
two reasons are subjoyned, the first whereof (in the end of v. 13.) is taken
from the properties of God, who is merciful and gracious, not easily provoked,
rich in kindness, and who upon sinners repentance, is ready to recall his
threatenings that they be not executed. Doct. 1. Were there never so many
plagues on sinners, yet God is not bound to take notice of them, so long as
they repent not; And were there never so much terror and affliction of spirit
upon men, under feared or felt judgments; Yet all these serve to no purpose,
if they stir not up to repentance: and they must be mad who being in such a
condition, yet do not set about that duty: Therefore after all the
representation of plagues, and of terror upon men, they are called to this as
the only remedy and way to an issue, and as the duty which they cannot but
mind who are seriously affected with such a condition; Therefore, turn ye.
See Psalm. 106.44. Jer. 31.18, 19, 20. 2. When God is threatening most sadly,
and proceeding most severely, he would be still understood, as inviting by
these to repentance, and willing to accept of it, For, the Lord, who threatens,
does exhort, and he brings it in with a therefore, or upon the back of the
former discourse, to show that this is his scope in all of it, Therefore, says
the Lord, Turn ye. 3. Such as have been so long abusers of Gods patience, as
matters seem irremediable, and strokes are either imminent or incumbent,
should not for all that look upon the exercise of repentance as too late and
out of season, but ought to judge that it is good even then to set about it,
and that it will do good however matters go: Therefore notwithstanding they
were in this sad plight, yet the Lord exhorts them even now also to turn. 4
Such as do mind repentance, especially when God declares himself angry, would
not linger nor delay to set about it; So much also may be imported in that now
also they should turn. 5. Whatever doubts such as are humbled under judgments
may have, that their repentance will not be accepted; yet they are bound to
answer all these from Gods naked Word who gives the invitation to such;
Therefore is the exhortation given to such in his Name, to remove all doubts,
Turn ye, says the Lord. 6. Repentance for particular sins under sad
judgments, will neither be right nor acceptable, so long as men do not mind
conversion to God, and a change of their state by regeneration; that so the
tree being good, the fruits may be answerable; Therefore does he begin with
turn ye to me; where the exhortation does not import any power in man, but
only points out his duty, and shows that exhortation is a mean which God
blesses to his Elect, and not only deals thereby with them as with rational
creatures, but therewith imparts strength that they may obey. 7. In turning
unto God, men would beware of being faint or feigned, but would study to be
sincere and single, since they cannot attain to perfection; For, this in a
Gospel-sense is to turn even to me with all your heart. 8. As men would begin
at conversion to God, so they would therewith study to be deeply affected for
sin, and bygone evils, and under the judgments procured thereby; and would
evidence their affliction of spirit, by sorrow and humiliation suitable (in
some measure) to their condition: Therefore is it added as an evidence and
companion of the former, turn ye with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning, or with such sorrow, as is usual in mourning for the dead; and
expressed not only by wailing, but by smiting on the breast, and the like
gestures. It is a change to be suspected where men please themselves with their
present good condition, and do lightly pass over their former miscarriages.
And albeit signs and expressions of sorrow be not always at command when men
are most afflicted, yet repentance for gross and long continued in iniquity,
and under extraordinary judgments, would not be past over in an ordinary and
common way. 9. It is our duty in performing repentance, and a good evidence of
it, when our stout hearts are broken and afflicted with the sense of sin, and
of Gods displeasure for it; Therefore it is subjoyned, and rent your heart, or
every one his own heart, which is not to be understood literally, but that they
should be afflicted in spirit, as, Ps. 51.17. 10. We are prone to hypocrisy,
and ought to beware of dallying with God, even when we are in greatest
distress, and making fairest shows of repentance; Therefore is it needful to
qualify this exhortation, rent your heart, and not your garments. 11. God is
not pleased, nor will a true penitent be pleased with external performances
and ceremonies, neglecting substance; For, says he, rent your heart, and not
your garments. However they made frequent use of this sign in times of great
sorrow, (as, Genesis 37.34. 2 Samuel 13.19. Job 1.20. and frequently,) yet God does
not allow of it when it is alone, or preferred to the other, (as is said in
another case, Hos. 6.6.) though we are willing to do many things, rather then
bow and afflict our hearts before God. 12. In all these exercises of
repentance, we would again and again take heed that we deceive not our selves
in the matter of our conversion, and pretend only to it till our particular
distress be removed; and though we find our selves real, yet we are to look
on it as a work wherein we should still make progress; Therefore after the
former exhortation, v. 12. it is again subjoyned, and turn unto the Lord. As a
matter whereof they should be sure, and grow in it, that they may go on in
repentance. 13. Repentance and conversion would neither be gone about in our
own strength, nor managed with discouragement, nor any inherent change wrought
in us, be rested on as sufficient to make up our peace with God. But our chief
care should be to embrace God by faith, as ours through Christ, and to draw
strength out of him for the duty, and by faith set against all our crushing
discouragements, which may be ready to arise upon our affliction of spirit, and
sense of sin; Therefore are they commanded in this repeated exhortation, turn
unto the Lord your God, wherein all these are included. 14. Whatever the Lord
be, or will say and do to the impenitent; yet there is nothing in him to be
terrible to a convert and a penitent; And without the sight of this,
conviction, or contrition would but end in despare; Therefore notwithstanding
all the former threatenings, to this is subjoyned to the exhortation, by way of
reason and encouragment, Turn ye, for he is gracious, etc. 15. These many
encouragements taken from Gods properties, and put together, may teach, 1. How
hard it is to raise up truly cast down sinners, and overcome their diffidence,
how presumptuous soever they had been before. 2. It may teach what infinite
fullness (not easily expressed) there is in God, to answer all the doubts and
fears of a penitent. 3. It teaches how willing the Lord is, that penitents be
encouraged, as may be evidenced by his laying out that fullness of comfort that
is in him, for that end. Doct. 16. Gods graciousnesse and readiness to show
mercy freely without our deserving, and his tender bowels of compassion and
sympathy, are such as may assure the afflicted penitent, that he will be
respected; And a serious study of this may invite sinners to set about their
duty in hope; For, Turn ye, for he is gracious and merciful. 17. Gods long
forbearance, and waiting for the repentance of sinners before he strike, albeit
it may make the stroke sad when it comes; yet it is an evidence and argument
that he is willing to embrace a penitent, Turn ye, for he is slow to anger.
18. Gods great bounty and kindness which is over all his works, and fills the
earth, Psalm. 33.5. may assure the penitent that he will meet with special
kindness, and with a liberal Lord and benefactour: So much does the other
property teach, he is of great kindness, or bounty. 19. It needs not affright
nor discourage the penitent, that God has denounced wrath against his sin, and
(it may be) has begun to execute it; for he has to do with a Lord who so
delights in mercy, and is so affected with his peoples distresses, that upon
their repentance, he will willingly recall his sentence from being executed,
and withdraw his hand from striking: For, so much is held out in this argument,
he repents him of the evil, or changes his dealing, as repenters use to do.

Ver. 14 Who knows if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing
behind him, even a meat offering and a drink offering unto the LORD your God.
The second reason of the exhortation, is, that as God is gracious in himself,
so it is possible, and to be hoped that upon repentance, he will avert the
judgment so far as the people shall subsist, and the public worship not be
altogether interrupted during the famine; And that after these plagues are
over, they shall have plenty. This phrase of leaving a blessing behind him;
(or after these devourers are past by, and God past by with this his scourge
and army) is to be understood partly, that after every one of these have
devoured in their course, as, chap 1.4. somewhat may possibly be preserved, for
the peoples subsistence, and the public worship: and partly, that after all
these plagues are over, plenty may come. As for that doubtful phrase; who
knows, etc? We may for further understanding of it, compare what is said on
Jon. 3.9. and Zeph. 2.3. Doct. 1. When sinners are most exercised in the duties
of repentance, yet the true penitents hope is only fixed on God and his turning
and change of dealing, and not on his own turning and repentance; for, so are
penitents directed to look to Gods turning and repenting. 2. Albeit God will be
certainly reconciled with sinners upon their repentance and faith in Christ;
And albeit God will mitigate his plagues unto penitents, at least so far as
that judgments are turned into fatherly chastisements to them: Yet repentance
will not always hold off; or take off a temporal stroke, when either sin has
come to a great height, calling on God to vindicate his glory in punishing it,
or when he would have the penitent yet more quickened up in his repentance,
which readily he would fall slack in, if the rod were away. And albeit the Lord
may intend to prevent or remove calamities, yet he will make the penitent more
solicitous, diligent and humble, by keeping him in suspense about it, for these
causes it is, that there is so incertaine like a promise concerning their
preservation under, and issue from this rod, who knows if he will return,
etc? 3. No incertainty about these things, should discourage a penitent in his
duty, as knowing that better promises are sure enough to him; That Gods
exercising him with incertainty, is no evidence that he will not do even that
for him, And that (however it go) he is in Gods way for attaining these things,
as they may tend to his good; Therefore is he encouraged to repent upon this
same, who knows if he will return, etc? 4. Outward benefits and means of
plenty are in themselves a blessing, however we abuse them; They flow in their
growth and preservation from a rich blessing of influences; They do us good,
because God puts a blessing in them for that end; And they are given to the
penitent wi^h a special blessing; for these causes are the fruits of the ground
here called a blessing, as, Isa. 65.8. because as they are given to mankind,
(especially in any measure of plenty) they are a common favor to all (though
the wicked make them a snare and plague to themselves) and a special blessing
to the godly. 5. Gods correcting will not hinder his blessing to penitents, and
there may be rich mercies waiting for them, both in the time of affliction, to
make them subsist; and after them, to make them up: for, there is hope that,
upon repentance, he will leave a blessing behind him in both these respects,
as is before explained. 6. As true penitents will be most affected with what
concerns God and his worship in times of calamities and will be encouraged
when he holds up his public worship and ordinances among them (whereby their
interest in him is avowed and confirmed) whatever become of their outward
conditions So it gives ground of hope to penitents, that he has an house and
Ordinances among them, and therefore they shall subsist in trouble, till they
come to an issue; Therefore it is added as a peculiar end of Gods leaving a
blessing, even that there may be a meat offering, and a drink offering unto the
Lord your God. And this is added as a peculiar encouragement to the penitent
who missed the comfort of public worship, and as a ground of hope that he
would give them meat, that so they might have wherewith to make oblations to
him.

Verse. 15. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,

16. Gather the people: sanctify the congregation: assemble the Elders: gather
the children, and those that suck the breasts: let the bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.


The second exhortation (repeated from ver. 1. and chap. 1 14.) is to public
and solemn fasting and humiliation to be indicted by the Priests, who, after
due preparation for that work, were to convocate old and young, even babes, and
newly married persons, to the Temple, to afflict themselves before the Lord.
Whence learn, 1. Sincere humiliation in secret is not enough in Gods account,
but when calamities are general, there should be a public profession of
repentance, and a restraint from delights, and lawful callings for that end
and time: and Ministers ought to set this work on foot; for, the Priests are to
blow the Trumpet in Zion, that there may be a fast, and solemn assembly; or
time of restraint from other employments. 2. Care would be had both by
Ministers and people in their stations, that such a duty be not profanely gone
about, nor external formalities and performances rested on; But that it may be
performed in a spiritual and sanctified manner; And for this end, there should
be due preparation for it; Therefore, says he, sanctify a fast, sanctify the
congregation, that is, when ye Priests intimate the fast, stir them up to come
prepared (as the word also signifies) and purified according to the Law that
so they may fast in a sanctified manner. 3. Public humiliations under
calamites should be universally joined in by all, that all may concur to
quench the fire which their sins have kindled, and every one may tremble to
lie by in such a need; Therefore is the command, Gather the people. 4. It is
the duty of such as are above others in age or authority, to be eminently
active and examples unto others in times of humiliation; Therefore is there a
peculiar command concerning them, Assemble the Elders, to acquit themselves as
becomes in this work, And by Elders we are not only to understand these that
were in office, but even old men, as appears from the opposition of children,
etc. that is subjoyned. 5. Children and sucking babes were brought out with the
rest, in solemn humiliations under the Law, not because they can repent, but,
1. That parents seeing their childrens affliction, might lay to heart their
own sins, for which their babes are afflicted. 2. That love to their
children, and care of their welfare might stir them up to repent. 3. That
considering that their children had so much sin in themselves, as justly made
them obnoxious to these judgments; they might be led to see their own
provocations, to be far more heinous. 4. That this sad sight on young and
old, might contribute to stir them up to the duty for which they we^e
convened. These were the reasons of this command, Gather the children and those
that suck the breasts. And albeit this be ceased under the Gospel, yet all
these considerations may be of good use to stir up to repentance in sad times.
Doct. 6. Even delights, otherwise lawful, ought to be for horn in times of
humiliation under calamities, and ought to be laid aside, that humiliation may
be seriously set about. Therefore it is commanded, let the bridegroom go forth
of his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.

Ver. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the LOLD, weep between the porch
and the Altar, and let them say; Spare thy people, O LORD, and give not thine
heritage to reproach; that the heathen should rule over them: Wherefore should
they say among the people, Where is their God?
The Priests are further exhorted to be eminently active in this exercise, and
that privately and publicly they intercede for the people in these
humiliations; praying, that God by sparing of them, may prevent their reproach,
and the heathens ruling over them, and the reproach of his own Name who had
interest in them. As for this place of their weeping and praying, between the
porch, where the people met, (of which, 1 Kings 6.3.) and the Altar of burnt
offerings where they offered sacrifice, we need seek no mystery in it, as a mid
place betwixt God and the people; for, the porch was the ordinary place where
the people prayed, when incense (and belike other sacrifices) were offered,
Luke 1.10. And the Priests having offered came toward the porch from the Altar,
and there prayed for and with the people, and blessed them; for which end it
seems the people waited for Zacharias, Luke 1.21, 22. Yea, this place betwixt
the porch and the Altar, was the place where Prophets (at least such as were of
the Priests lineage) preached unto the people; And so we find Zechariah was
slain there in the exercise of his calling, Matthew. 23.35. And so the meaning
is only, that after solemn sacrifices, they should come to the public and
ordinary place, and there weep and pray with and for the people. Doct. 1.
Ministers ought to be eminently exemplar for sense and diligence in times of
humiliation; And it is a part of their calling to be the mouth of the Lords
people in public prayers; wherein they are to express such tenderness and
affection, as may witness their sense of the public condition, and may be an
example and means of upstirring the people: for, let the Priests, the Ministers
of the Lord, weep between the porch and the Altar, and let them say, etc. 2.
The humble penitent has no refuge left him, but God and his mercy only; And
he is allowed to lay hold on this, when he has no other claim; for they are
warranted to say, Spare, O Lord, which is an act flowing from mercy
withdrawing and moderating deserved judgments. 3. Interest in God, and the
perpetuity and unchangeablenesse thereof, is not to be quited by the penitent,
but to be made use of as a ground of (...) Therefore are they directed to
plead, spare thy people, and (...), wherein a standing right is held forth,
notwithstanding they by sin had procured such sharp dispensations. 4.
Reproach is a sad addition to the calamities of Gods people, and an argument
why God will pity, when the reproached are penitent, and come to him with it;
Therefore are they to make use of this also, give not thine heritage to
reproach, that is, do not, by thy dispensations, expose them to the insolent
scorn of the Heathen, who are waiting for such an advantage. 5. It is also an
argument of pity, and ground of pleading to the penitent, that enemies are
lying at wait to take advantage of their distress, and that trouble may drive
them on tentations, and put them to hard shifts; Therefore is it pleaded as
another inconvenient following on their reproachful trouble, that the Heathen
should rule over them. Which though some read it (as an explication of that
reproach) to use a byword against them: yet as it is translated, it signifies
that their want did not only give the Heathen occasion of reproach against
them, but they might be ready also to take advantage of their weakness, to
invade them. And they might be ready to sell themselves into bondage to get
meat, or to wander among the Heathen as, Ruth 1.1. 2 Kings 8.1, 5. And
therefore, they pray that God wousd prevent this. 6. Affliction will be yet
sadder to the penitent, when it seems to reflect on God and his honor, as if
he were not willing or able to supply his people: And this reproaching of God,
is an argument of pity, especially when it becomes the penitents affliction;
for, it is another ground of pleading, that they say among the people, Where is
their God? and that they are affected with this, as a chief ingredient in their
distress, Wherefore should they say among the people, Where is their God?

Ver. 18. Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people.
Follows, in the third part of the Chapter, the encouragements unto
repentance held forth by God, wherein he promises that upon their repentance
and seeking unto him, he will bestow upon them many blessings, and these both
temporal relating to their present affliction, and spiritual. The temporal
promises are, first, propounded, to v. 21. then they are applied and amplified
to v. 28.

In this verse we have the first promise, wherein they are assured that upon
their repentance, Gods affection toward them and their land shall appear in
compassion and pity, as the cause of staying further vengeance, and of the
blessings following. Whence learn, 1. Penitents will undoubtedly find good
acceptance at Gods hand, whatever their deservings have been; for, upon their
performing what is enjoined before, it is subjoyned, then will the Lord be
jealous. 2. Penitents are allowed to plead an interest in God, and will be
owned and confirmed in so doing, by God; for, whereas they had pleaded
themselves thy people, v. 17. now the Lord confirms that, declaring that they
are his people. 3. Gods people are not only dear to him being penitents; but
all their enjoyments and concernments will be respected for their sakes, and as
coming to them by Covenant; for, not only his people, but their lands distress
is considered, as being his land, given them by Covenant. Which though it was
true of the promised land in a peculiar way; Yet it is still of general verity,
that the Lord has a special respect to what belongs to penitents. 4. A room
in Gods affection is the first and chief mercy conferred on penitents; for, it
is here the first promise, from whence all the rest do flow, 5. Affection in
God toward his people, and their enjoyments for their sake, will do whatsoever
can be expected from marriage or parental affection in distress; His
affliction will resent injuries done to them, as an husband does in behalf of
his wife, and will pitied stresse, and upon that, will spare, as the word
imports; for, the Lord will be jealous for his land, and pity his people. See
Psalm 103.13. His jealousy for the land, relates to what is said of its being
married, Isa 63.4. Which was a pledge of their being married to him.

Verse. 19. Yea, the LORD will answer and say unto his people, Behold, I will
send you corn, and wine, and oil; and ye shall be satisfied therewith: and I
will no more make you a reproach among the heathen.
The second promise shows, that in answer to their prayers, he will provide
liberally for them in things of this present life, to their satisfaction, and
the taking away of their reproach. Whence learn, 1. God will prove his
affection to penitents by real effects, and may answer them in the very
particular which they seek, when it good for them; And particularly, he may
give plenty to them, to let them see that piety is the shortest cut, even to do
well, outwardly; for so much is held out in this promise subjoyned to the
former, wherein he satisfies their desire, and evidenceth his jealousy and
pity. I will send you corn, and wine, and oil. 2. Mercies unto penitents and
supplicants are twice mercies, both in themselves, and in that they are the
answer of prayers, and do evidence his love to them, and interest in them; for
so this mercy comes, the Lord will answer and say, and that unto his people.
3. Mercies are also sweet, when we see Gods hand in them; And it is especially
to be remarked, when he who formerly had smitten, begins to deal favorably,
and when his hand makes an admirable change from great distress and want, to
great abundance. Therefore does he own this mercy, and prefix a behold to it;
Behold I send you c^rne etc. 4. Penitents get their mercies first by promise,
that so their faith may be tried, and they may have the advantage of spiritual
exercise, even about temporal favors; And that the mercy, when it comes, may
be so much the sweeter unto them: Therefore is their plenty first held out in a
promise, I will send, (or, I am sending) you corn, etc. 5. Penitents mercies
will be satisfactorie, by their getting abundance of them, or a blessing with
what they get, and by their contentment and quiet of mind with what they
enjoy, which the simple favor of it self could not produce, for, and ye shall
be satisfied therewith. 6. As reproach is a very sad affliction, especially
when it arises upon Gods hard dealing, giving occasion to enemies to be
insolent; So however the Lord will smite his impenitent people, and see to his
own glory another way; Yet in due time, he will take away the visible marks of
his displeasure from penitents, and so remove the occasion of their reproach;
Therefore, albeit before this time, he had justly given them over to the sad
trial of reproach, yet now he promises, I will no more make you a repraach
among the heathen.

Ver. 20. But I will remove far off from you the Northern army, and will
drive him into a land barren and desolate, with his face toward the East-sea,
and his hinder part toward the utmost sea, and his stink shall come up, and his
ill savor shall come up, because he has done great things.
The third promise (which secureth their plenty, v. 19. and removes the great
cause of their fear,) is, that he will drive away these devouring creatures,
who were driven upon them as a great army by a North-winde; and that he will
kill them, so that nothing shall be left of them, but their noisome stink; and
this he will do, because, or though they had done great things against Gods
people. As for that which is said; and will drive him to a land etc. with his
face toward the East-Sea, etc. it may be either understood thus, that though
they were so many as to fill the breadth of the land, from the East or Dead
Sea, to the West or Mediterranean Sea; Yet he would drive them to the
Wilderness and kill them there; or rather, that the main bulk and body of them
should be driven into the Wilderness, their fore-party into the dead sea, and
their reere into the West-sea, there to die; However it teaches, 1. Scourges
and hurtful things, were they never so dreadful; yet God who sends them, can
drive them away, and consume them when he will; for, I will remove far off
from you the Northern army, which had been dreadful before; And he can make
use of Wildernesses and Seas, even the useless dead Sea, to help his people
against their enemies, I will drive him into a land barren and desolate etc. 2.
God can let scourges be seen how contemptible they are when he has done with
them; for, this formidable army serves for nothing but to stink above ground,
his stink shall come up, and his ill savor shall come up. 3. Instruments of
Gods vengeance against his people will gain nothing by their pains, but
strokes; And though they have acted much, yet God will reach them; for, all
this done, because (or, although) he, the Northern army, has done great
things.

Ver. 21. Fear not, O land, be glad and rejoice: for the LORD will do great
things.

22. Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness
do spring: for the tree bears her fruit: the fig tree and the vine do yield
their strength.


These promises are (for more assurance and comfort) applied and amplified. And
first, application is made to the land, that it should not fear, but rejoice,
seeing God was to do great things; and to the beasts, that they should lay
aside their fear, since the earth was to be blessed with pasture and fruit.
This speaking to the land and beasts does not import them capable, but God by
this would speak to the comfort of the penitent; And it teaches, 1, The Lord
would have his promises and comforts applied by them to whom they are given,
for their refreshment; So much does this application of the former promises
import. 2. Gods kindness to penitents will be such, as not only to refresh
themselves, but to gladden and refresh their land, their beasts, and all in
their kind; for, so is held out here. 3. Penitents are instrumental to draw
down blessings on themselves, and on what they enjoy; for, now the mourning
land, chapter 1.10. and the crying beasts, chapter 1.18, 20. are made to rejoice. 4.
Gods care of the earth, and of very cattle may assure penitents of his respects
to them; If he respect the lands affliction, and the beasts, how much more
theirs? See Matthew. 6.26, 30. 5. God when he pleases, can make fears end in
joy, and the hope thereof should bring joy, when fear is yet on; for, so much
is held out in the command to the land, Fear not, be glad and rejoice, and that
in hope. 6. Gods great power who promises, and who has given proof thereof in
executing threatenings, may guard against fear, and afford ground of hope, were
the thing promised never so great and difficult; for, so is held forth in the
reason of joy that the Lord (who had done great things by that Army, v. 20.)
will do great things. 7. God can, and in due time will remove the fears of his
people, by giving actual proofs of his love; for, so are they encouraged by
the promise made to the beasts for their sake and good, v. 22. Be not afraid,
ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wilderness do spring, etc.

Ver. 23. Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and rejoice in the LORD your God:
for he has given you the former rain moderately, and he will cause to come
down for you the rain, the former rain, and the latter rain in the first
month.

24. And the floores shall he full of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with
wine and oil.

25. And I will restore to you the years that the locust has eaten, the
cankerworme, and the catterpiller, and the palmerworme, my great army which I
sent among you.


Secondly, the promises are applied to the Church, whom he exhorts to
rejoice, And that because, 1. He will give them (which he speaks of as done,
because of real certainty) rain in due season, and measure, and make the
effects prove it a real blessing, v. 23, 24. 2. Because by succeeding plenty,
he will make up the loss they sustained by the years of famine, v. 25. Whence
learn, 1. Whoever miss of joy, yet God will have his penitent Church and
people to rejoice; and they are allowed to have as much and as solid joy as
any, and more; Therefore are the children of Zion called to it. 2. The Lord
must not only afford matter of joy and comfort to his people, but must speak
and apply it to their heart, and stir them up to rejoice in it before it work:
Therefore is this exhortation and application needful, Be glad then, ye
children of Zion, and rejoice. 3. Common favors and benefits, should be unto
the Lords people, but as a step leading them up to rejoice in God, and not to
be rested on themselves; Therefore, though the promise be of plenty, yet they
are to rejoice in the Lord their God, and because of a special interest in him.
See Jer. 9.23, 24. Luke 10.19, 20. 4. Common favors given so a people upon
repentance, do warrant them to rejoice in God as evidencing his respect unto
them, and interest in them, even by these; For, so the penitents here, are upon
this promise commanded, rejoice in the Lord your God. 5. As man needs many
things for his subsistence, and for furnishing the means thereof, (as rain at
several seasons to make the earth fruitful;) So the Lords measuring and timing
of outward mercies, is that which makes them mercies indeed; for, though rain
be needful, yet it is the blessing of it, that he gives it moderately, and
that he sends the former rain, and the latter rain in the first month, which
was the season, as appears, of the latter rain, concerning which it is not
needful to make further inquiry. Only what is here said of rain holds good in
all outward mercies, that it is the great advantange of Saints, that the
disposing of them is in the hand of their only wise Lord. 6. Promising mercies
will not prove unuseful, nor disappoint the expectation of penitents, as the
Lord in justice deals often with the wicked; For, as moderate and seasonable
rain promises a good harvest, so it shall prove so, the floores shall be full
of wheat, and the fats shall overflow with oil. 7. The Lord can, and will make
up the losses of penitents; And when ever sinners do turn to God, he will
convince them in due time, that they have been no losers by their afflictions:
of this truth we have a particular proof and instance in this promise, and I
will restore to you the years that the locust has eaten, etc. 8. Our seeing of
God and his hand in saddest scourges and losses, will assure us that he can
soon and easily make them up; For, says he, they were my great army which I
sent among you, and if he sent them, and made them able to make such havoke,
then certainly he can not only remove them, but send as remarkable plenty.

Verse. 26. And ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the Name of
the LORD your God, that has dealt wonderously with you: and my people shall
never be ashamed.

27. And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am the LORD
your God, and none else: and my people shall never be ashamed.


These promises and causes of their joy are amplified from some effects. As, 1.
That they shall have the use of this plenty to their satisfaction. 2. That they
shall praise God for it. 3. That by this his dealing, and his other mercies
toward them, he will convince them of his relation to them, who is God only;
and will confirm them and all the godly, that they shall never be disappointed
of their hope in him; which he asserts twice for further confirmation. And this
is the first spiritual promise, whereby he encourages them to repent. Doct. 1.
It is an addition to the mercy of plenty, when men are allowed the use of
creatures to satisfaction, without challenge of conscience, and are not denied
a blessing upon, and with them, nor are others permitted to take them away
after they are grown up; as, Isa. 62.8. For, it is a promise, Ye shall eat in
plenty, and be satisfied. 2. It is the duty of such as receive the good things
of this life, to make conscience of thankfulness to God, whose providence
supplieth their wants; And true penitents, and such as are turned to God, will
make conscience of this duty, considering (especially) that these common
favors come to them in special love, and from their own God in Covenant with
them; Therefore it is added to their eating and satisfaction, and shall praise
the Name of the LORD your God. See Isa. 62.8, 9. Deuteronomy. 8.10. 3. It is our duty
to stir up our selves to praise in this, by considering the wonderfulnesse of
the providence of God in providing continually our daily bread: And especially
in his sending great plenty after famine, in which change of dealing, both his
providence and mercy shines; For, it is added as an argument of praise, that
he has dealt wonderously with you, both in his ordinary providence, and
especially in that great change. 4. The chief blessing and advantage of
temporal benefits unto the godly, is, that by receiving and using of them, they
reap some spiritual benefit and advantage by confirmation of their faith, and
discovering of the love of God unto them; so much are we taught by subjoyning
this spiritual promise, containing an effect of conferring this temporal
favor. 5. Gods dealing kindly with his Church, or any one of them, in any
particular according to the Covenant, may be a pledge that none, be who they
will, that are his people, will ever find it in vain to seek him, or be
ashamed or disappointed of their hope in him according to his Word; For, this
is a general conclusion drawn from this particular proof of his love, and my
people shall never be ashamed. 6. An interest in God by virtue of a Covenant,
and his manifested presence following upon that, is the choice of mercies; And
it is sweet when this maybe read and seen shining in his mercies, as a penitent
is allowed to do; For, it is held out as the sweet effect and consequent of his
bounty toward penitents, ye shall know, not only that I am the Lord your God,
but that he has not withdrawn himself, though the interest stand, but that I
am in the midst of Israel, or these who are now left of Israel to be a people
to him. And however the Lord here promises prosperity to evidence this; yet if
the Lord clear it any other way, it is sufficient. 7. It is also a great
addition to the Churches mercy, that he who alone is her God, is also the only
true God; and therefore is the only portion, and above all the opposition that
can be made to her felicity; For, I am the Lord your God, and none else, none
beside him to prove a God unto her, let her choose never so many. 8. However
the people of God may be often put to pray against that sad affliction of being
ashamed of their confidence, as, Psalm. 119.116. Yet it is to be believed, and
again and again inculcate, that not only now, but for ever, Gods people have no
cause of fearing disappontment; and that God will by actual performance of his
promises, put them from all cause of fear; Therefore in opposition to the
recurring of such tentations, it is again repeated, and my people shall never
be ashamed. Where it is given them as a ground of hope, that God who chooses
and calls them to be his peculiar people, will not raise such an ill report
upon his own love, or service, as thus to entertain them; Nor will he make his
own purpose and grace in election and calling void, albeit they be worthless.

Verse. 28. And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit
upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy: your old
men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions.

29. And also upon the servants, and upon the handmaids, in those days will I
pour out my Spirit.


The second spiritual promise is, that under Christ and in the days of the
Gospel, (as it is expounded, Acts 2.16, 17, etc.) he will pour out his Spirit
more amply then before, upon all sorts of persons of all Nations, both old and
young, sons and daughters, bond and free, whereby they shall be endued with
such knowledge of the mysteries of salvation, as may be compared with the
knowledge of the ancient Prophets. For clearing this a little, Consider, 1. By
the Spirit here promised, is not to be understood any natural or moral
endowments conferred upon men; But partly, the spiritual common gifts conferred
upon men for the edification of the Church; And partly, the saving graces of
the Spirit conferred upon the Elect in order to their eternal salvation. 2. By
all flesh, on whom the Spirit is to be poured out, we are not to understand all
and every one; for this promise is made only to these within the Church, and to
these who (at least) by visible Covenant become the Lords, as it is expounded
of the servants and handmaids, Acts 2.18. But it is to be understood of all
sorts of persons of whatsoever Nation of these who embrace Christ; and that
there should be many of them, in comparison of the times under the Law, who
should participate either of the gifts or graces of the Spirit, or of both. 3.
As for the effects of the pouring out of the Spirit here mentioned, that there
shall be prophecies, dreams and visions; it is true, that in that signal
accomplishment of this promise. Acts 2. and afterward in these primitive times,
there were such extraordinary ways of manifestation of God and of his will;
for many did prophecy then, even women, as is instanced in the daughters of
Philip, Acts 21.9. Paul and Peter had visions. 2 Cor. 12.1, 2, etc. Acts 10.10,
11. And God appeared to Joseph in a dream, Mat. 1.20. But this was but a
partial accomplishment of this promise, and a mean to carry on the full
accomplishment thereof. And therefore we are to conceive that the Prophet speaks
of Gospel Times and mercies, in terms borrowed from the times of the Old
Testament; and the meaning is, that as of old the excellent way and measure of
the knowledge of God was by prophecy, vision, and dreams, Numb. 12.6. So under
the New Testament, beside what was extraordinary, all who get the Spirit of
God, may for knowing the mysteries of salvation, be compared with these ancient
Prophets. And as of old by these ways of manifestation, men attained to the
knowledge of the mysteries of God; so should they by the Spirit of God, in the
use of ordinary means. 4. This may also serve to clear, that the Prophet is not
foretelling that, under the Gospel, all who receive the Spirit and know the
mysteries of salvation thereby, are therefore warranted to exercie the office
of Prophets or Ministers; For, Prophecy being so strictly taken, is not given
to all upon whom the Spirit is poured out, as is clear from, 1 Cor. 12.29. 5.
It is also clear that the Prophet is not here speaking of any revelations to be
given unto men, without or beside the Word, or which are not to be tried
thereby; for, (beside what is alrerdy said for exposition of this promise,) if
we look to the most solemn and signal accomplishment of this promise, we will
find the conceit refuted. For in the very first Sermon of Peter after the
Spirit is poured out, he leads the hearers all along to Scripture, both to
justify the strange change wrought upon them, and to justify the doctrine
which being thus endowed, he preaches, Acts 2.16, 17, 25, 30, 31, 34. Doct. 1.
The times of the Gospel are the times of letting out spiritual encouragements,
and wherein men ought to be more spiritual, and made up with spiritual
advantages, however it go with them outwardly; Therefore the Prophet entering
upon spiritual promises and refreshments, after these temporal promises, for
the comfort of this people, does remit them to what shall come to pass
afterward, or in the last days, as it is expounded, Acts 2.17. 2. The Lords
letting out of his Spirit in gifts and spiritual graces, is the great
Gospel-refreshment and encouragement; as making the mysteries of God known, and
applying all Christ's purchase to Believers; So that all who would find the
advantage of the times of the Gospel, ought to seek much of the Spirit; for,
this is the promise, I will pour out my Spirit. 3. The letting out of the
Spirit, is God and his Son Christ's free promise and gift, and therefore to be
sought of him, and expected from him by these who are in themselves unworthy;
For, it is a promise, I will pour out my Spirit, which Christ did perform,
Acts 2.33. See Luke 11.13. 4. Albeit the Spirit of God was communicated unto
the Church under the Law; yet it is the advantage of the times of the Gospel,
1. That the Spirit is let forth in more ample measure then formerly, being
poured out largely, and not dropped out only: So that we may seek largely, and
not be content with little, nor be straitened in our own bowels. 2. That this
gift is not restricted now to one Nation of the Jews with their proselytes,
and but to a few of them; but is free to all sorts of persons and Nations, and
to many of them; For, it is upon all flesh the Spirit is poured out. Doct. 5.
Whatever be the abundant measure of the Spirit that is poured out; yet there is
still infinitely more in God to communicate, as need requires; Therefore does
Peter, Act. 2.17. expound it, I will pour out of my Spirit, or but some
portion of that fullness that is in him, Which is not only true in respect of
Christ, who has the Spirit without measure, John 3.34. but also in respect of
the infinite fullness that is in God. 6. God, in pouring out his Spirit, will
not disdain men because of their frailty, or felt sinfulness: And where the
Spirit is given, it will keep men still sensible of their condition, and what
they are in themselves; Therefore are they designed flesh, or, frail and
sinful creatures, upon whom the Spirit is to be poured out, showing that their
being such, does not hinder his bounty; and his bounty will not make them
forget that they are such. 7. It is a special advantage reaped by the enjoyment
of the Spirit, that not only does he water and refresh, and fructify the
barren spirits of these in whom he dwells, (and therefore is said to be poured
out like water on the ground. See Isa. 44.3.) But that also he does illuminate
men with the knowledge of God; He does make known the mysteries of salvation,
furnishes instruments to carry the glad tidings of salvation, leads into all
truth, and makes known the things that we have freely received: Therefore
does he cause to prophecy, and to dream dreams, etc. as is before explained.
See John 16.13. Acts 1.8. 1 Cor. 12.7, 8. and 2.12, to 15. 8. The knowledge of
the mysteries of salvation, which is communicated by the Spirit under the
Gospel, is comparable to any measure of knowledge attained by ancient Prophets
of old: Not only does extraordinary revelation under the New Testament in the
primitive times, parralel what they had then; But even the gifts of light and
knowledge, conferred in ordinary upon men, and the saving knowledge conferred
upon Believers, may be compared therewith; for whereas these revelations were
but at fits and times only, this is constant; and these, albeit they were
singular in the manner of communicating, yet the truth conveyed thereby, was
but more darkly held out, and under a veil, whereas now truths are seen with
open face; Therefore as is before cleared, are the names of prophecy, visions
and dreams, given to this knowledge. So that the ignorance of men under the
Gospel, does speak but little enjoyment of the Spirit. 9. Whereas he is not
content to say only in general, that all flesh shall receive of the Spirit, but
does instance it in sons and daughters, old men and young, servants and
handmaids; It may teach, 1. No rank, or sex or condition of persons are
secluded from the promise of the Spirit, ^e they old or young, male or female,
bond or free. 2. The efficacy and fullness of the Spirit of God is such, as to
refresh and prevail with all these sorts of persons; young ones who are not
capable of man's teaching, yet are not secluded from his teaching, Mark 10.14,
16. Luke 1.15. The Spirit has virtue to illuminate and subdue young men,
notwithstanding all the power of their corruptions, 1 John 2.13, 14. to keep
men fresh and lively in old age, Psalm. 92.13, 14. and to make servants happy in
their condition, 1 Cor. 7.22. 3. It is Gods sure promise to the Church of the
Gospel, that the knowledge of him, and of his truth, shall be continued and
propagated therein from generation to generation; For, therefore is it put in
the first place, your sons and daughters, (rising up to succeed you) shall
prophecy. Doct. 10. As for these ways of revealing the will of God of old, by
prophecy, visions and dreams, albeit they point all at one thing, and seem to
be named all here, to let out the fullness of Gospel-knowledge, answering to
all of them; and therefore seem to be comprehended all under prophesying, as it
is attributed to his servants of all sorts and ages, Acts 2.18. Yet seeing they
are distinctly named, and attributed to several sorts of persons, as
prophesying to sons and daughters, visions to young men, and dreams to old
men; We may from it take up some steps and degrees of the knowledge of God,
wherein they grow up who are under the Spirits teaching. As, 1. By prophesying
attributed to sons and daughters, we may understand simply the knowledge of
divine things. 2. By visions attributed to young men, we may understand their
clearer insight, and uptaking of these mysteries, then they had in their
younger days: For vision does represent the thing revealed more sensibly. 3.
By dreams, wherein men have their senses shut up from the world, and which are
attributed to old men, we may understand a further degree of illumination, when
light received does take hold on the affections, to sanctify and subdue them;
So that men's hearts are taken off the world, and filled with the things of God.
And so this gradation will teach, That the knowledge of God which is
communicated unto men by the Spirit, will be on the growing hand, till from a
common notion and remembering of it, it come to be more seriously pondered and
laid to heart, and till it take hold upon the affections, and conquer the whole
heart to God.

Ver. 30. And I will show wonders in the heavens, and in the earth, blood, and
fire, and pillars of smoke.

31. The Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, before
the great and terrible day of the LORD come.


To prevent all secure and carnal thoughts, as if upon embracing of the Gospel,
and receiving of the Spirit, men should be rid of all outward trouble; The Lord
foretells of great commotions which were to be in the world after the pouring
out of the Spirit. Whereof though there were some particular accomplishments in
these primitive times, and before that dreadful day of the destruction of
Jerusalem; Yet the prediction stretches forth to all ages after the pouring
out of the Spirit, till the second coming of Christ to judgment, which is here
called the great and terrible day of the LORD. The expressions pointing out
these commotions, of wonders in heaven and earth, etc. may be understood either
literally, that there shall be signs of blood, fire, darkness, and eclipses
of Sun and Moon, going before these calamities as presages thereof, or
figuratively, that there shall be such commotions, and such signs of Gods
anger for sin, such judgments and calamities, of sword, famine, and
sicknesses, such persecutions, desertions, tentations, heresies, schisms, etc.
as if heaven and earth were going through other, the course of nature
overturned, and the world full of dreadful fights of blood, fire and
darkness, and neither Sun or Moon affording wonted light or comfort. To dip
further into what may be connceived to be figuratively pointed at under every
one of these, I conceive is not very safe. Doct. 1. Whatever breathing times
God may allow upon his Gospel Church; yet it is her duty to look for commotions
and troubles, especially after times of pouring out of the Spirit, and times of
much light and reformation: For upon the one hand. Satan will bend all his
power to oppose the progress of the Gospel, and will set the world in
opposition to the Church; and on the other hand, God will pour out all sorts
of calamities upon the visible Church, to punish them who contemn his rich
offer, and do not walk answerably to such dispensations; and to try the graces
of his own, that they may aspire toward spiritual happiness in heaven: And he
will punish secret and open enemies, for the injuries they do to the Church;
For these causes is this prediction subjoyned to the former promise. 2. It is
the Churches duty, not only to look for troubles, but to expect that they will
be great and very dreadful, such as may testify the greatness of Gods
displeasure against sin, and of men's fury against the Church, such as may
thoroughly try the godly, and bring about Gods deep counsels: For, there will
be wonders in the heavens, (or, the firmament and several regions of the air,)
and in the earth, blood and fire, etc. 3. Whoever be employed in raising these
great commotions, and whatever be the designs and malice of men in them; yet
it is the Churches good and safety, to see a supreme hand of God in all of
them; For, says he, I will show wonders, etc. 4. Though the Church in several
ages, may get times of breathing and tranquillity, yet these will not be
permanent, but interrupted with sad blasts, till the second coming of Christ,
which as it is certainly approaching, so it will put a period to all storms
wherewith the godly are tossed; For, these things will be before the great and
terrible day of the Lord come, that is, in all ages till that time, and belike
very violently immediately before, Math. 24.29, 30. 5. The day of Christ's
second coming, will be great and terrible, and (as it is, Acts 2.20) a notable
or illustrious day; A despised Christ will be seen great there, great things
will be done in that day: He will then reach his full and final end of all his
works; All things will then be revealed and made patent, the glory of God will
be seen face to face, the secrets of hearts, the glory of Saints, and the truth
of promises and threatenings will then be made manifest; And though the godly
will then be free of all terror, yet it will be in it self a day of much state
and majesty of the Lord, and of great terror to the wicked: For, it is for
these causes it gets this name.

Verse. 32. And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the Name of
the LORD, shall be delivered: for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be
deliverance, as the LORD has said, and in the remnant, whom the LORD shall
call.
To confirm the godly against these calamities, he subjoynes the third
spiritual promise, which is; That all true Israelites and Converts of the
Gentiles, who cleave to God and worship him sincerely, shall find deliverance
by preservation under trouble, till they come to full deliverance and salvation
at last. This he confirms in a general promise, that of the Jews and
Gentiles called of God, there shall be deliverance according to Gods promise,
or some remnant to escape, to preserve a people to God upon earth, and at last
to inherit salvation. Doct. 1. Were the condition of the visible Church, or of
the world never so deplorable and desperate; yet it should not drive men from
God, his truth and pure worship, but rather make them cleave to it more, and
evidence this by frequent and earnest calling on him; For, this is the duty
required under these calamities, to call on the Name of the LORD, under which
is comprehended all outward and inward worship of God, (whereof this is a chief
part,) and men's cleaving to it. 2. As God is able to save in greatest
extremities; so he will undoubtedly save and deliver them who cleave to him,
and seek him, be of what Nation or people they will. He will either hide some
of them from trouble in great tempests, or preserve them under it, till he give
an issue from it here, or hereafter, and at last will completely save them;
For, whosoever shall call on the Name of the LORD, shall be delivered, or
escape. See Romans 10.13. 3. The Church is the place of greatest safety, and
where deliverance may most readily be expected of any; and however it fare with
particular persons in times of commotions; yet the Lord will still preserve a
Church and remnant in the world, yea even a remnant of Jews, till their full
conversion; The efore says he, for in mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall he
deliverance, and in the remnant, Where he names Zion and Jerusalem, not only as
a type of the Church, wherein safety is to be found, and the remnant are to be
preserved, but to point out that of the Jews belonging to these places, he
would keep still a remnant, Romans 11.5. till that day come whereof he speaks in
the next Chapter. 4. God has past his word for the preservation of a remnant
under trouble, and this is to be trusted to, whatever our sense say to the
contrary: For, says he, there shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said,
frequently in the Holy Scriptures. 5. As the true Church is but a remnant in
comparison of the rest of the world; So times of trouble cutting off some, and
tempting others to Apostasy, may draw them to a very small number, who cleave
to God, and shall partake of promised salvation; Therefore it is added by way
of explication, that deliverance shall be in the remnant, or among them, though
some of them escape not the stroke of trouble. 6. It is Gods effectual calling
and election of grace that makes a difference among men, and makes them seek
and cleave to him; And this is also a pledge that he who has called and
engaged them in that service, will give them deliverance, and an issue from it:
Therefore, it is added both by way of reason how it comes there is a remnant,
and by way of confirmation that they shall be delivered, they are the remnant
whom the Lord shall call. See Romans 11.4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.

CHAP. III.
IN this Chap. the Lord does prosecute and confirm that promise in the close
of the former Chap. concerning the preservation and deliverance of a remnant,
especially as it relates to the Jews; and therefore the dependence and
connection is expressed by the particle for, which intimates that what follows
is an explanation and confirmation of what is there said. In this confirmation,
1. He promises to return the captivity of Judah, v. 1. 2. He promises to
punish all the enemies of the Church, especially of the Jews; And that for
this end, he will convocate them, to plead the cause of his people against all
of them, v. 2, 3. and particularly against some of their nearest neighbors, v.
4, 5, 6. and having pleaded with them, he will pass sentence against them, v.
7, 8 and see it executed, by convocating all of them, as he will also bring his
prepared executioners, v. 9, 10, 11, 12. who at Gods command, v. 13. will do
great execution upon them, v. 14. In which case they shall be left destitute of
all comfort, v. 15. and God will be terrible unto them, v. 16. -- 3. He closes
these promises with comfortable applications to the Church, particularly to
Judah and Israel, showing what proofs of love they shall meet with in these
dispensations, and what shall be the sweet consequents thereof: and namely,
that when he shall be thus terrible to enemies, yet he will be their hope and
strength, v. -- 16. that he will confirm them in their interest in him, and
that they shall be holy and secured from the invasion of st^angers, v. 17. that
they shall have abundance of temporal benefits, together with spiritual graces
and refreshments, v. 18. and that when their enemies shall be utterly
destroyed, yet he will establish and perpetuate them, v. 19, 20. and will
cleanse them from their pollution, that he may evidence his presence with them,
and may continue it, v. 21.

Ver. 1. FOr behold, in those days, and in that time when I shall bring again
the captivity of Judah, and Jerusalem.
Albeit this Verse. does expressly hold out only the time of Gods sentencing
and punishing Judahs enemies, of which he speaks in the following purpose: Yet
it does import further, 1. That there was to come a captivity and dispersion of
the Jewish Nation, both in City and Country, and that under the Gospel, and
after the pouring out of the Spirit, of which chapter 2.28. for all the ensuing
predictions do follow upon that. It has been already declared that after the
performance of that promise, great troubles were to follow, chapter 2.30, 31. and
that in the midst of these troubles, not only should the truly godly attain to
eternal salvation, by cleaving to God and his Worship, but the Lord should
preserve a remnant for himself, who should escape these troubles, v. 32. And
this (as the connection imports, and has been said before,) is but a
confirmation and particular instance given of that general promise, in the case
of the Jews. So that it cannot at all relate to the captivity of Babylon. 2.
It imports, that a restitution and return of their captivity was to follow
upon their dispersion, at which time he will perform what is after spoken of.
And this is the first promise which is made to Judah, as a pledge of the
spiritual deliverance of his Church, and all his people, and of temporal
deliverance also, in so far as it is needed. Doct. 1. When the Lord gives
general grounds of encouragement from his Wo^d, he is able to instruct and make
them good by particular evidences of his love, to the consciences of his own;
Therefore having given that general promise, chapter 2.32. he does here subjoyn a
particular and convincing evidence thereof, For I will bring again the
captivity of Judah. 2. Gods dispensations toward his Church and people, whether
in mercy or judgment, are very admirable; And men ought (instead of their
sleepiness, carelessenesse and astonishment when great things are in doing) to
stir up themselves to observe them much. Therefore is a Behold prefixed to this
(wherein their captivity is supposed, and their restitution promised,) and to
what further shall be done at that time. 3. Greatest spiritual mercies
manifested to the Church, may be seconded with saddest outward afflictions,
even with captivity and restraint of liberty, driving them from their interests
and acquaintance, and putting them under the power of others; And that (as for
other reasons, so) because they contemn and make no use of these spiritual
mercies: For, so is imported here, that after Christ came in the flesh to the
Church of the Jews, and the Spirit was poured out among them, yet because they
despised and opposed all this, therefore there is a captivity of Judah and
Jerusalem. 4. Deliverance and restitution according to the tenor of the
Covenant, will certainly follow upon the captivity of the Lords people, even to
admiration and the astonishment of all: And particularly Judah's second and
long captivity will have a remarkable issue: For, Behold, I shall bring again
the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem.

Verse 2. I will also gather all nations, and will bring them down into the
valley of Jehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for my
heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations, and parted my land.

3. And they have cast lots for my people, and have given a boy for an harlot,
and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.


Follows the second promise, concerning the punishment of all the enemies of
the Church, and of Judah in special, as a pledge of what he will do for others.
The time of performing this promise being propounded, ver. 1. We have here
further, 1. The convocation of these enemies, and the bringing of them to
judgment; Their conspiring against the Church, and particularly against Israel
about the time of their conversion and recollection, shall be the Lords work to
gather them to the place of judgment and execution of vengeance. 2. The place
of judgment is here called the valley of Jehoshaphat, which some take for some
valley lying in view of Jerusalem, to intimate that these enemies may surround
the Church, and bring her into great straits, before that Gods issue come. (as,
Rev. 20.9.) And that the execution of this vengeance will be in view of the
Church, to her full satisfaction and contentment, when her eyes shall see her
desire upon her enemies. But it rather seems to point at that valley, where
Jehoshaphat got that notable deliverance, 2 Chronicles. 20.22, -- 26. And albeit it
were needless curiosity to determine that that same should be the place of
this notable judgment and execution; yet the allusion intimates, that the
plague on these enemies should be like that which befell Edom and his
confederates then, when the Lord stirred them up to slay one another, and they
became a prey to the Jews. The word also being taken appellatively, does
signify the valley of Gods judgment, and so it will be, let the particular
place be where it will. 3. We have the form of procedure which (that the
certainty and equity of the judgment may appear the more) is set down by way of
judicial process, wherein God the Judge does plead the cause of his people
against them, to v. 7. gives out sentence, v. 7, 8. and sees it executed, v
9, -- 16. -- In these Verses, we have Gods pleading against all these enemies
in general, for their scattering his hereditary people, their parting the land
that was proper to him, and for that, with cruelty and contempt, they divided
his people and children by lot among themselves, to be so many slaves, and gave
boys and girls to satisfy their lusts. Doct. 1. God will not only restore
and deliver his people, but will give them a seen and satisfactory amends for
all the wrongs they have received from men, and will make the time of their
restitution, prove sad days to enemies: So much does the connection of this
with the former Verse teach, in that time when I shall bring again the
captivity of Judah and Jerusalem, I will also gather all Nations, etc. 2.
Albeit that enemies will be on foot, when ever God appears for his people, and
particularly at the conversion and recollection of Judah and Israel, to oppose
and bear them down; Yet God will not only frustrate their designs, but will
bring his own purposes to pass by their enterprises: For, the Nations
gathering of themselves to oppose the Church, is Gods gathering them to
judgment, I w^ll gather all Nations, and bring them down, etc. 3. Albeit they
are not few, but many who do conspire against the Church on all occasions, and
will gather together at the conversion of Israel; yet their multitude will not
make Gods purposes void; For, I will gather even all Nations, etc. 4. God has
even the very place prepared and foreordained in his counsel, wherein he will
plead with, and execute vengeance upon enemies, and wherein he will manifest
his justice and power, and his love to his people as of old. Therefore does he
point at the place, putting them in mind of what he had done of old, and
assuring them of his righteous judgment, to be executed on their behalf, I
will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat. 5. The injuries done to
the Church are such as God will certainly plead with men for, albeit none else
should regard them; and he will so revenge their quarrel as equity and justice
shall shine in it; For, I will plead with them there for my people. And albeit
his pleading here be by strokes, yet he gives it the name of pleading, and
frames a process, to show how conspicuous his justice shall be in that
procedure. 6. Albeit Gods people be in themselves worthless, yet his interest
in them is sufficient ground of hope that he will plead against their enemies;
And albeit his dealing seem oft-times to obscure this interest, yet he will
again make it conspicuous, and prove it by his pleading for them; yea, whatever
he have to say against them, yet he will never lay aside this interest when he
pleads against enemies, but will recompense them as if his people had never
provoked him: In all these respects this is their title when he pleads for
them, I will plead with them for my people, and for my heritage. His interest
will make him plead, and he will prove them to be so by pleading, and he will
not deal with enemies as plaguing a sinful people, (as. Jer. 50 7.) but as
oppressing his people. 7. Albeit that in Christ Jesus there is neither Jew nor
Greek, but Christ is all in all; and albeit that Israel and Judah be now
rejected, as a Nation, and enemies for the Gentiles sake: yet not only are they
still beloved, as touching the election, and the gifts and calling of God
toward them, without repentance; Romans 11.28, 29. But in due time, God will make
them become an hereditary people unto him, as a Nation under the state of the
Gospel, whereby he will revive their ancient right to the Covevant; For, in
that day of their conversion, he will plead for them as his people and
heritage, for my people, and for my heritage Israel. 8. The present enemies of
the people of God are the true heirs and successors of their former enemies,
and therefore must pay for all their cruelties and oppressions; Therefore in
that day will he reckon with them who shall then conspire against them, as if
they had lived in former times, and had captivated and scattered them, because
they do then oppose them, and hinder their restitution. See Matthew. 23.34, 35.
9. Such as the Lord chooses to be his people, both they and their interests
are dear to him, and are his in a peculiar manner, for respect and protection,
and for asserting thereof out of the hands of oppressors; Therefore not only
are they my people, and their condition resented, but the land is my land, he
will assert his right to what belongs to them, when they cannot prosecute their
own right. 10. Scattering of the people of God, and especially the dissipation
of their Church-society, is a quarrel which the Lord will not forget, when he
pleads with enemies; For, it is laid to their charge, they have scattered my
people, and that among the Nations, where they could not enjoy public
Ordinances. 11. What the Lord has impropriate to himself for the use of his
people, it is but folly for men to expect a blessed possession of it; Therefore
does a challenge, and Gods severe pleading follow upon this, they parted my
land. 12. When the Lords people do slight and provoke him, it is just he give
them up to get base and contemptible usage, and that they and their children be
at the disposal of enemies; That so they may know the difference betwixt his
service, and their imperious dominion: For, such in Gods justice was Judahs
lot, the enemies did cast lots for them, and divided them with the rest of the
spoil, to be slaves to them; And they gave boys and girls to harlots for
satisfying their lusts, and for drink, that is, either they gave the Boys and
Girls to be slaves to their harlots, and such as would furnish them drink, or
they sold them, and gave the price of them for these ends. See 2 Chronicles. 12.8.
13. Whatever be Gods justice in afflicting his people, yet he will reckon with
men for their immoderate use of victories, and for their insolency toward his
subdued people, their putting them from their privileges, and using them
unbeseemingly: And especially, he will reckon with them when they only serve
their lusts with all their purchase and conquests, as is their usual way: For,
God pleads with them here, that they have cast lots for my people, (made slaves
of them, and divided them as common prey,) and have given a boy for an harlot,
and sold a girl for wine, that they might drink.

Verse. 4. Yea, and what have ye to do with me, O Tire and Zidon, and all the
coasts of Palestine? will ye render me a recompense? and if ye recompense me,
swiftly and suddenly will I return your recompense upon your own head.

5. Because ye have taken my silver, and my gold, and have carried into your
temples my goodly pleasant things.

6. The children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold unto
the Grecians, that he might remove them far from their border.


In these Verses, the Lord does more particularly plead their cause with the
Tyrians and Zidonians, and the rest of the inhabitants of the Sea coast, (under
which name all the nearest neighbors of Israel are to be understood,) who had
done such injuries to his people, as could not be recompensed but by their own
destruction, v. 4. This challenge he instanceth, showing that they had injustly
taken away the goods belonging to his people, or the Temple, and put them in
their Idol-temples, v. 5. And that they had sold the Jews unto strangers, that
so they might never return again to their land, v. 6. It is like that as the
inhabitants of these places did of old fall in with the Caldeans, Ezekiel. 25.15.
and 26.1, 2. so did they afterward with the Romans, and shared in the spoil;
for which the Lord does challenge their successors in opposition to the people
of God, as an injury that could not be compensed. Whence learn, 1. Such as by
reason of propinquity in place, may know most of God, who reveals himself in
and to the Church, and so ought to be friends to her, may readily prove her
greatest enemies, especially if they be addicted to the love of the world, and
greedy of gain; For, so did Tire and Zidon, and all the coasts of Palestine
prove, being great traffickers, and so set upon gain. 2. Such will find that
God is their party, who will resent the injuries they do, and will be avenged;
For, what have ye to do with me, etc. says he, and this he brings with a yea
also, as being especially offended at them for it. 3. God will put enemies to
give an account what their quarrel has been, upon which they did trouble his
people: and will reckon with them according as they voluntarily, and
maliciously imbarqued in that course; and will let them know how base they are
in his account because of it; For, says he, what have ye to do with me? or,
wherein have I offended you? and so some understand that, will ye render me a
recompense? will ye requite any injury done by me to you, by afflicting my
people? but I have given you no provocation. The first words will also read,
what are ye to me? that is, what interest can ye pretend to in me, or of what
worth are ye to me, that I should pass over this great injury? 4. Though
enemies do account basely of Gods people, and think little of the injuries done
to them; yet they are so precious in Gods eyes, that enemies cannot recompense
him, nor make restitution answerable to the damage done by them; for, albeit
they think in easy to recompense, (and if ye recompense me,) yet says he,
will ye render me a recompense? he speaks of it as a thing impossible. 5. As by
the Law such as had not wherewith to make restitution, did suffer in their
persons, Exodus 22.3. So the Lord by sad plagues, will let enemies know that no
less then their destruction can repair the damage done by them to his people;
For, says he, I will return your recompense upon your own head, that is, as a
man being offered an unworthy recompense, does in anger cast it at them again
who presume to offer it; So the Lord will let them know what the recompense
must be, and will return upon their own head, according as their injuries
deserved. 6. Albeit the Lord seem to delay long from avenging the injuries done
to his people; yet it does not only certainly come at last, but it does
surprise enemies; and after he once begins to appear, he will make a short
work, and so execute judgment as one hasting to be avenged: In this respect it
is that he says, swiftly and speedily will I return your recom^ence. 7. It is
an horrid injury which God will avenge, when men do spoil Gods people of the
wealth he has given them, that so they may enrich themselves by their
calamities; or when they dare take away, and intervert that which is devoted to
him and his service; for, this is one part of the quarrel, Because ye have
taken my silver and my told, and my goodly pleasant things: whereby we may
understand both the wealth and precious things bestowed upon his people, which
now in avenging the quarrel, he owneth as his; and these things that were laid
up for his service in the Temple. 8. This sin is yet more odious, when men not
only injustly take away what does not belong to them; but when all this
purchase is consecrated to advance and cry up a false Religion; For, says he,
ye have carried into your temples my goodly pleasant things. Not all which they
had injustly taken away, but these things that were most excellent, (and
belike, what they got of that which belonged to the Temple,) as an oblation to
their Idols. 9. As God hates cruelty, especially against his people, and that
men should not only spoil them of their goods, but bring themselves into
slavery and bondage; So it is an iniquity which he will avenge, when men labor
to make the condition of his people desperate, and without hope of restitution,
that so they may possess their rights: For, it is another branch of the
quarrel, the children also of Judah, and the children of Jerusalem have ye sold
unto the Grecians, (with whom the Tyrians had commerce, Ezekiel 27.2, 13.) that ye
might remove them far from the border.

Verse. 7. Behold, I will raise them out of the place whither ye have sold them,
and will return your recompense upon your own head.

8. And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the
children of Judah, and they shall sell them to the Sabeans, to a people far
off; for the LORD has spoken it.


In opposition unto, and for a recompense of this their cruelty, the Lord
passes sentence in favors of his people, and against these whom he has thus
pleaded with. Wherein he undertakes to gather his people, and bring them from
under that bondage, and to reward these enemies, by bringing them under the
power of the Jews, who shall sell them for slaves to the remotest Arabians,
according as he has determined. Whence learn, 1. Whatever men's projects be
against the Church, yet they will never gain their point against her; For
though they would have had the Jews so far removed, as they might never
return; yet says he, I will raise them up. 2. The Lord can restore his people
when he pleases, and when his time comes, neither his former rejecting of
them, nor their desperate condition will hinder it; For, though they sold them,
that they might never return; yet says he, I will raise them out of the place
whither ye have sold them. 3. God can deliver his people, though their
condition were as hopeless, as that dead men should be raised, Ezekiel. 37.11,
12. and though they were as little minding deliverance, as men that are asleep;
For, says he, I will raise them, or awake them, as the Original imports. 4.
The wonderfulnesse of what God promises, should be no impediment to our faith,
for God both can and will bring about the deliverance of his people in an
admirable way; Behold, says he, I will raise them. 5. The triumphing of
enemies for a long time, is no ground of assurance that they shall still
escape; But God in due time, and at the deliverance of his people, will repay
them for all they have done; for, when God does all this for his people, it is
also added, and will return your recompense upon your own head. 6. God will
repay enemies in the same measure they have measured to his people, and he may
make his Church instrumental in it; And however the judgment be executed, yet
he is still the principal agent in it: For, I will sell your sons and your
daughters into the hands of the children of Judah, (or, deliver them over into
their hand, and put them under their power, to be at their disposal; For, so to
sell is to be understood, Judge. 2.14. and frequently,) and they shall sell them
to the Sabeans, to a people far off. For the Sabeans were on the remote coasts
of Arabia, or, it may be understood that these Sabeans should sell them to a
people yet more remote: In which sentence we ought to read the justice of God,
in dealing with them as they dealt with Judah. 7. Gods Word is sufficient for
the Church to rest upon in expecting greatest things; And it may be sufficient
ground of terror to enemies, that the Word has spoken sad things against
them; Therefore it is added by way of confirmation, for the Lord has spoken it.

Verse. 9. Proclaim ye thus among the Gentiles, prepare war, wake up the
mighty men, let all the men of war draw near, let them come up.

10. Beat your plow-shares into swords, and your pruning-hookes into spears,
let the weak say, I am strong.

11. Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen, and gather your selves
together round about: thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O LORD.

12. Let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat: for
there will I sit to judge all the heathen round about.


Follows the way of executing this sentence thus pronounced. In recording
whereof, first, (in these Verses) we have again the convocation of these
enemies for that effect. It is declared that they shall be gathered together by
the effectual providence of God to fight against his people, v. 9. That they
shall prepare armor as much as they can, and shall encourage one another to
war, wherein there shall be no vacation, but even the weak shall take courage
to go on in this enterprise, v. 10. And that they should convene not a few, but
as many on every hand as might enclose the people of God; and yet the Lord
should have his mighty instruments for executing vengeance there also, v. 11.
and should make all this their enterprise but a convocation of them to the
place which he has appointed for judging them, and executing vengeance upon
them, v. 12. Doct. 1. The enterprises of enemies are but service of divine
providence, and they are but doing that which he stirs them up to do for
bringing about his holy ends; For, this proclamation to prepare war, wake up
the mighty men, etc. tends to show, that their enterprizing of this, is of God,
to bring about his purposes. See Acts 4 27, 28. 2. God is not afraid of men's
attempts, nor of the courage of the mighty, nor of their vigilance, activity,
numbers or preparations; nor needs he steal a stroke upon them, but can let
them do their utmost, and then work his point thereby, and make their purposes
void: For, what they will do, he calls upon them to do it, and to use all
endeavors, that his glory may shine in defeating thereof. See Isa. 8.9, 10. 3.
Men may have much resolution, and great undertaking; there may be much courage
and eagerness, even among the weakest; and they may be encouraging one another
to work, and laying aside other employments that they may prosecute this work
seriously, when yet they are but running on their own destruction; For, they
are waking up, or exciting themselves, they are coming up against hilly Judea,,
the weak are saying, I am strong, and they are laying aside husbandry, and
beating their plow-shares into swords, etc. when yet God is convening them for
judgment. 4. War is a scourge full of evils, and an enemy to profitable
callings and husbandry; For, then they beat their plow-shares into swords, and
their pruning-hookes into spears, whereas in peace it is contrary, Mic. 4.3.
5. Whatever be the Lords end and purpose in convocating enemies, yet the Church
may have much exercise with it, and may be environed on all hands with
difficulties and dangers thereby, before she get an issue, and before his
purposes do appear; For, Assemble your selves, and come all ye heathen, and
gather your selves together round about, imports that these enemies shall first
enclose the Church on every hand, before that God appear against them. See Rev.
20.9. 6. The Lords distressing of the Church by enemies, calls on her to pray,
and look to him who only can secure her; and as she should not rest on her
being afflicted, as if that were enough to plead pity, when yet she cries not
to God; So she should not be diffident, nor discouraged to call on him,
whatever her distress be; Therefore is it subjoyned to this great distress,
Thither cause thy mighty ones to come down, O Lord, pointing out that the
Churches refuge will be prayer to him at that time. 7. God has alsufficiency
of power and instruments, who will be able to do for his Church when she calls
to him, were all the world-against her; For, Thither cause thy mighty ones to
come down, is a promise that he will provide instruments armed with his power,
whom he will bring down to the valley of Jehoshaphat at that time, though he
will first put his Church to it, to entreat him to do this for her, Ezekiel.
36.37. It is needless to enquire who these mighty ones are, whether Angels,
inflicting some extraordinary judgment, or the enemies themselves thus
convened, whom he will enable to cut off one another; But it seems that there
will be somewhat extraordinary in the overthrow of Isreal's enemies, as is his
usual way when his Church is brought into eminent danger. See Rev. 20.9. 8. It
is an heathen-like mark upon men, to come in opposition to the Church of God;
Therefore are they so often called the heathen here. Which though it may be
understood only of the Nations; yet as all these were heathens in Joels time,
so be of what profession they will, they prove themselves heathens who would
bear down the Church of the true God, and particularly, who would crush the
Church of Israel being turned to him after her long rejection. 9. The Lord
would have his people infallibly assured that he is nothing troubled with the
opposition of enemies; and albeit they be often shaken with the apprehensions
of their formidable power and preparations; yet they would recollect
themselves, and see Gods overruling hand in all of them; Therefore again says
he, let the heathen be wakened, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat. And
by repeating of it, would have his Church persuaded that he has an hand in it,
and knows how to overruled it. 10. God will make use of enemies gathering
themselves to secure them from fleeing his judgment; wherein he will deal with
them as delinquents brought before his tribunal, in the place which he has
appointed; Therefore it is again repeated from v. 2. that he brings them to the
valley of Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to judge all the heathen round
about.

Ver. 13. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe: come, get ye down, for
the press is full: the fats overflow, for the wickedness is great.
In the next place, the delinquents and executioners being thus convened, the
Lord commands his instruments (like prepared reapers brought to a field of ripe
corn) to do execution upon them, because their sin is now come to an height,
and they are ripe for judgment, as ripe corn is for cutting down, and full
fats and wine-presses for treading out. Whence learn, 1. When God arises to
judgment, he will not only give out sentence, but real execution will follow
thereupon; So much does this command, after the former process, teach. 2.
Albeit the least sin deserves greatest plagues, even when it is first
committed, yet such is Gods patience and long-suffering, thae he will not at
first punish even the sins of enemies, but will let them tipen and come to an
height, before he smite; Therefore is it that after all this opposition of
enemies, he now declares, that the harvest is ripe. See Genesis 15.16. 3. Albeit
the Lords long-suffering patience be so great, yet the sin of enemies will at
last ripen and come to a very great height; For, now says he, the harvest is
ripe, the press is full, the fats overflow, to wit, with grapes to be pressed
and trodden out: and this is afterward expressed in proper terms, their
wickedness is great. 4. When sin is ripe, then execution of vengeance will no
longer be forborne, but the greatness of sin will be made visible in the
greatness of judgments; Therefore becaose of this ripeness and great
wickedness, the command is given, put ye in the sickle, (to cut down this ripe
corn, Rev. 14.15.) come, get you down, etc. to wit, into the valley, to tread
and press out the grapes.

Verse. 14. Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision; for the day of the
LORD is near in the valley of decision.
The effect of this sentence and command given to the executioners, is, that
there shall be great execution made of the enemies, and they shall fall without
number. And for the Churches greater comfort, it is declared, that this day of
the Lords vengeance is near, not when the Prophet spoke this, but it shall
speedily come after the enemies great preparations against the Church. The
place of this execution is called the valley of decision, or threshing, which
is the same with the valley of Jehoshaphat, v. 2, 12. and it gets this new
name, because there the Lord will make a great havoke of enemies (which is
usually expressed by threshing, Mic. 4.13. Isa. 41.15. 2 Kings 13.7.) or,
because it is the valley determined and appointed (as the word will signify)
wherein to do this execution, or the place wherein God will decide this great
controversy betwixt him and his Church on the one part, and these enemies on
the other* Doct. 1. Albeit it may be matter of admiration and terror to the
Church, to see so great and so many enemies combined against her; yet God shall
make that resolve in as great a wonder, to see the great havoke made of them;
Therefore is it held out by way of admiration, Multitudes, multitudes in the
valley of decision. 2. God will at last decide the controversy betwixt the
Church (and especially of Israel) and her enemies, and will determine the
question by making many a skin pay for it; For, the valley of Jehoshaphat, will
be also the valley of decision, and there multitudes, multitudes shall be laid
in the dust. 3. When enemies are at the height of their attempts, especially
against converted Israel, then the Lords people may expect that he will not be
long in taking his day about of them, wherein his glory will shine; for, the
day of the Lord is near in the valley of decision.

Verse 15. The Sun and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall
withdraw their shining.
This execution is further amplified, that (as the Church had felt before in
her calamities, chap. 2.10. so) the enemies should at that time of their
extremity, be denied all comfort in the creatures, from heaven or earth, and
that there should be great alterations in the world, (of which more, v. 16.) if
not also the extraordinary signs of eclipses and darkness, presaging and
accompanying the same. Doct. 1. Though enemies may be insulting when the Church
is in great bitterness; yet the day may and will come about, wherein they
shall drink of her cup, if not of a worse; For, what was denounced against the
Church, chapter 2.10. is now made their portion. 2. Whatever be the delights and
enjoyments of Gods enemies; yet when he begins to reckon with them, all their
comforts and refuges from heaven or earth, will fail them, and all things will
frown and lowre upon them; For, so much is imported in that the Sun and Moon
shall be darkened, etc. These creatures shall deny them light and comfort, and
this shall make all things dark on earth to them, and these dreadful sights
shall terrify them.

Verse. 16. The LORD shall also roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall shake, but the LORD will be the
hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel.
Follows a comfortable application of all this to the Church, and
particularly to Israel, holding forth in several promises, what mercy to them
shall be in their recollection (of which, v. 1.) and in this streak on their
enemies, and what sweet consequents shall follow thereupon. The first promise,
is, that when the Lord shall manifest himself thus terribly against their
enemies, according to the predictions of his Word, and out of his love to his
people, and when he shall make great alterations thereby (which is a further
amplification of the calamities which are to come on enemies;) Yet in the midst
of these confusions and terrors, he will afford hope and strength to his
Church and people. Whence learn, 1. When God manifests himself against his
Churches enemies, and specially, against Isreal's adversaries, he will be very
terrible and dreadful; And his being a party, will make all the creatures to
deny comfort, and will add to the bitterness and terror of such a desolate
condition; for, the Lord shall roar, like a Lion, see Zeph. 2.11. Isa. 42.13,
14. And beside their desolate condition, v. 15. the Lord also shall roar, to
imbitter that, and as the cause of it, as is after cleared of the shaking of
heaven and earth. 2. Gods executing of vengeance will be according to the
predictions uttered in the Church, and these will be found terrible in
execution, what ever men thought of them before; for, the Lord shall roar out
of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem imports, that God from out of Zion
had spoken against them by his Word, and that now his speech going forth in
execution, shall be found terrible, as the roaring of a Lion. 3. God will make
his presence with, and love to his people conspicuous by his indignation and
severity against their enemies; for, the Lord shall roar out of Zion, etc.
imports also that he is present there, and that he evidenceth his respect to
his habitation, by his dreadful thunderings against the enemies thereof. 4. As
God is powerful to overturne heaven and earth when he pleases; So his subduing
of enemies may bring great alterations and overturnings in the world; for, when
he shall roar, the heavens and the earth shall shake, which, together with what
is said, v. 15. makes a complete parallel with the condition of the Church,
chap. 2.10. and it imports such an alteration of affairs, as if there were a
dissolution of the world, and overturning of the course of nature. And it is no
wonder, if they who are so well rooted in the world, cause it to shake hefore
they be cast out of it, and if they who are so universally spread through the
earth, need general commotions to make them miserable. 5. When God is shaking
the earth to overturne enemies, Gods people, may be exercised with many fears
and apprehensions that the storm will break upon them; Therefore they need a
promise to secure them against this. 6. Nothing will be able to secure the
hearts of Gods people against the terrors of a time of great commotions, but
God only, and what they find in him and from him; Therefore does the promise
remit them to what the Lord will be unto them. 7. In times of great confusion,
the Lords people may expect that he will be a place of refuge to hide them in,
that he will furnish them who come to him, with ground of hope for the future,
and with strength and courage to bear out till the accomplishment come: for,
that which is propounded here, i^ hope, or a refuge and strength, and God
undertakes not to disappoint them of these, the Lord will be the hope of his
people, etc. he will take them under his protection, he will let them see
ground of hope in himself, and furnish them with hope to lay hold on it, and
with strength to bear them out. 8. What the Lord has been or will be at any
time to his people Israel, in performing spiritual promises, that he will be to
all who are indeed his people; Therefore does the promise run generally both to
his people whoever they be, and to the children of Israel.

Ver. 17. So shall ye know that I am the LORD your God dwelling in Zion, my
holy mountain: then shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no stranger pass
through her any more.
The second promise is, that by these and other experiences of his love, they
shall be confirmed of his interest in them and care of them, no less then when
of old he resided among them in the visible signs of his presence. The third
promise is that (for fitting them to enjoy his presence) he will make them holy
by sanctification; And upon this shall follow their preservation from the
invasion of open enemies, and that they shall not be exposed as a prey to them,
as formerly they had been. This also in Scripture Language is understood by
their being holy, as it is observed in Obad. v. 17. partly because of the
ceremonial pollution that of old did accompany the invasion of their land by
heathens, beside that it did obscure their privilege of being the Lords
peculiar, sanctified, and set apart people; But chiefly, because (as is usual
in wars, when profane Nations invade the Cuhrch) they did overturne holy
ordinances, and cast all loose and in confusion. Doct. 1. Interest in God is
the great ground of the Churches encouragement; for, it is held out as their
great mercy, I am the Lord your God. 2. This interest is yet more sweet when
it is evidenced by his presence and the gracious effects thereof among his
people, and he is not provoked to forsake them, though they be his; Therefore
it is added, I am the Lord your God dwelling in Zion. 3. It is an addition to
all these mercies, when not only matters stand so, but the Church knows it,
and is convinced of it; And this must be Gods own work, without whose help,
they will neither see interest nor presence, who yet in reality enjoy both;
Therefore he undertakes it, to make their comfort and mercy complete, Ye shall
know that I am the Lord your God, etc. See 1 Cor. 2.12. 4. The Lord will in due
time make his interest in, and presence with his people convincingly clear, by
visible dispensations and actings for them; for, so (by what I will do for you)
shall ye know that I am the Lord your God, etc. 5. Where God takes up his
dwelling among a people, all that concerns them becomes his, and he takes
care thereof; for, then it is my mountain, to wit, Zion where he dwells. 6.
Gods presence with a people must be entertained and proven by their holiness;
for, then it is my holy mountain, and Jerusalem is holy. See Psalm. 93.5. 7. It
is God only who can undertake for making his people holy, and it is their duty
to deny themselves, and employ him for that end; for, it is his promise, then
shall Jerusalem be holy. 8. Where a people have real sanctification, as a fruit
and evidence of Gods presence, they have also the promise that he will preserve
them from the invasion of enemies; for, then shall Jerusalem be holy in this
respect also, that no stranger shall pass through her, to wit, in an hostile
way. And albeit this seem to be a peculiar promise to converted Israel, and
albeit others (even Judah it self) when they have been upon the amending hand,
have met with sad storms from enemies; Yet certainly such have the promise of
this mercy, when it is for their good; and what they meet with which seems
contrary to it, is but to stir them up yet more to the study of holiness, and
in that respect they get a blessed issue from their troubles, and will come to
a complete issue at last. 9. It is a sad ingredient in the trouble of the Lords
people, when they are invaded by profane Nations, that not only their
privileges are obscured thereby, but that their invasion and the confusions
occasioned therreby, together with their corrupt principles and practices, do
cast l^^se and overturne Religion, and bring in a deluge of prophanity;
Therefore is the mercy of their deliverance from strangers set forth under the
name of being holy, as is before explained. 10. Such as have been long molested
by enemies, though they will meet with trouble, in one kind and degree or
other, while they are within time; yet they may attain to this mercy, to be
free of molestation and trouble from invading enemies, and not meet with it any
more in the measure that formerly they have had; for, such is the promise to
Israel and Jerusalem, being converted, there shall no strangers pass through
her any more. Whatever troubles they may meet with from enemies, after that
great day of vengeance formerly mentioned; yet they shall not any more pass
through them as formerly, to subdue or rul^ over them, or carry them into
captivity; So that their greatest hazard then will be, that quietness may
breed security.

Verse. 18. And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall
drop down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of
Judah shall flow with waters, and a fountain shall come forth of the house of
the LORD, and shall water the valley of Shittim.
The fourth promise is, that God shall be so bountiful to converted Israel,
th^^ they shall not want abundance and variety of temporal benefits, which are
instanced in their mountains and hills abounding with vines, and with good
pasture for the herds and flocks, that they may afford much milk; and that
they shall have abundance of water, which was oftentimes scarce in that land.
To this is subjoyned the fifth promise, that this plenty should be accompanied
with spiritual graces and refreshments, conveyed by the Gospel, and flowing
forth not only for their own quickening and comfort, but for the good of the
Nations round about, even of those whose condition seems most desperate. To
clear this promise a little, we have first, 1. The benefit it self, compared to
a fountain of waters flowing out, whereby (as is cleared on Zech. 14.8.) is
understood all spiritual graces and refreshments, which are held forth, and
instrumentally communicated and conveyed to sinners by the Doctrine of the
Gospel, and applied and quickened by the Spirit. 2. We have the fountain and
rise of this benefit, it shall come forth of the house of the Lord. It is
conceived that the speech alludeth to some conduits that conveyed water to
the Temple, some whereof came by the Altar to wash away the blood that was
poured out there, and so ran out again with it. See Ezekiel. 47.1. and so it
should point out, that as these waters flowed out from the Temple with the
blood of the sacrifices; So these Gospel-refreshments and graces do flow out
unto the world from the death of Christ. Which is a truth of it self, that
Christ is to be acknowledged for all of these, whatever be said of the
allusion. Or it may be conceived thus, that as of old the Doctrine of the
Gospel conveighing these graces and refreshments, came from Zion and Jerusalem,
Isa. 2.3. so after the conversion of Israel, and their becoming the house of
the Lord, these same refreshing waters should flow out again from them. And
this leads to the third thing to be explained, which is the extent of this
benefit, that it shall flow out as a river to water not only Judea, but the
country about, signifying that there should not only be abundance of saving
doctrine, and of graces and refreshments in the Church of Israel, but that
fountain opened up among them should flow forth to other Nations, to water
them and make them fruitful. And in particular, the valley of Shittim is named;
which is a plain in Moah, Numb. 25.1. Josh. 2.1. which it seems was barren,
and the waters thereof unwholesome, by reason it lay so near the Dead-sea, or
lake of Sodom; And yet it is promised that this fountain shall water it, and
make it fruitful. See Ezekiel. 47.8. Doct. 1. Piety has indeed the promises, and
is the shortest cut to do well every way; and where the Lord comes, and is
entertained in spiritual benefits, he will give what is good in other things;
for, converted Israel shall get an ample proof of what God is able to do in all
ages, if it were for his peoples good, In that day the mountains shall drop
down new wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the rivers of Judah
shall flow with waters. 2. It is the great fault even of the Lords people, that
their estimation of mercies decays, because they are common and ordinary;
whereas Gods hand should be seen dispensing them in a peculiar way to them: And
to prevent their miscarriage, he does so order their outward mercies, as his
special providence may be seen in giving them. Therefore does he make promises
concerning these temporal things, that they may see more then others in his
giving thereof to them. And he did so order matters concerning their land, as
the having abundance of water, (which is a very common benefit among many
others) should be a special favor to them. 3. When the Lord lets out much
plenty to his Church, there is great need of much of the grace of God, and
spiritual things of his Kingdom therewith, to season and sanctify the use
thereof unto her. Therefore is there a spiritual promise subjoyned to the
former; albeit it was said before, they should be holy. Without this,
prosperity is but a snare, and it is an evidence of an ill condition, when much
plenty does not put men to it, to press after the enjoyment of God, and after
grace so much the more. 4. As the graces and blessings held out and conveyed
by the Gospel, are the great refreshment of the children of men, (and therefore
compared to a fountain of waters, which quenches thirst, and refreshes and
waters the earth;) So where they are once received, they will never utterly
decay, and will still be refreshful and comfortable; Therefore are they
compared to a fountain coming forth, or a spring which never runs dry, and the
waters thereof are still fresh. 5. Spiritual Gospel-blessings are twice
mercies, when not only they refresh and do good to these who receive them; but
do make them instrumental to make the same spread to others; for, it is the
advantage of this fountain that it shall come forth; not only to water
themselves, but others. 6. As at the first the riches of the Gospel flowed out
from among the Jews, and by the Ministry of the Jews, to the Gentiles; So
again converted Israel will be made instrumental to propagate the Gospel and
the Kingdom of Christ to other Nations; For, then a fountain shall come forth
of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim. See Romans
11.15. 7. The Doctrine of the Gospel, and the graces and refreshments
communicated thereby, are able to cure and recover them whose condition is most
deadly, and to make them fruitful who have been most barren: And in particular,
converted Israel will be employed to bring in Nations to Christ, who have layen
still under the curse, during the rhyme of the Gospels spreading among the
Gentiles, though possibly at the first going forth thereof, many of them have
heard somewhat of it: So much seems to be signified by this fountains
watering even the valley of Shittim, though it be probable that even then some
will be left still in their former condition. See Ezekiel. 47.8.

Verse 19. Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate
wilderness, for the violence against the children of Judah, because they have
shed innocent blood in the land.

20. But Judah shall dwell for ever, and Jerusalem from generation to
generation.


The sixth promise is, that their inveterate enemies (such as Egypt and Edom
had been of old) shall be utterly destroyed, because of the injuries done to
them; Whereas the Lord shall not only establish, but continue them a Church to
him, from age to age after their conversion: Whence learn, 1. Inveterate
enemies to the people of God, and such as do cruelly oppress them after the
manner of Egypt of old, and do prove false brethren to them, as Edom did of
old, will certainly be destroyed, and that utterly, that so an end may be put
to their opposition; for, Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a
desolate wilderness, or made void of inhabitants. This is often repeated again
and again, that others who trace these steps, may see their own danger
beforehand, and study to prevent it; and to assure the godly that this is not a
rash sentence, but such as he will not recall it. 2. A peoples opposition to the
Church of God, and their violence and cruelty toward them, is a special
controversy which God will prosecute; for, this sentence is given out, for the
violence against the children of Judah, because they have shed blood, etc. 3.
The Lords controversy against his people for sin, because of which he lets
enemies loose upon them, does not make the quarrel of enemies the more just,
nor does his peoples blood which they shed, cease to be innocent blood for all
that, and to cry for vengeance upon them; For, says he, they have shed
innocent blood. 4. If this, that they have shed blood in their land, be
referred to Egypt and Edom, that they were cruel to such Jews as lived in
exile among them; It does teach, that men's cruelty is so much the more odious
before God, when it is exercised on these who are already broken with
afflictions. But it seems rather to be understood of the Jews land, which
these enemies invaded: and so it holds out that cruelty is odious when men
exercise it upon these who have given them no provocation, as they did on
Judah, when they were staying at home, and not troubling them. 5. Albeit the
Church do oftentimes seem to be furthest behind of any society, for outward
prosperity; yet the time will come, when she shall see her own mercy in the
misery of others, and shall be in good condition when they are gone; for, in
opposition to what shall come on Egypt and Edom, it is added, But Judah shall
dwell for ever, etc. See Isa. 27.7. Exodus 14.30, 31. 6. The Lord will
perpetuate a Church of Israel after their conversion and restitution, till the
end of time; for, it is his express promise, Judah shall dwell for ever, and
Jerusalem from generation to generation.

Ver. 21. For I will cleanse the blood that I have not cleansed, for the LORD
dwells in Zion.
All these promises, (and particularly that of perpetuating the Church of
Israel,) are confirmed by a new promise, wherein the Lord undertakes to purge
her by Justification and Sanctification, from the pollution wherein she had
layen so long; and that he will do this, because he dwells, (or, that so he may
dwell) among them by his Word and Spirit, with no less blessing then of old.
Whence learn, 1. Sin when it is rightly looked upon, will be found a very vile
and loathsome thing, and they will so judge of it whom God is about to deliver
from it; Therefore is not only the bloody crimes, but all the iniquity of these
whom he is about to purge, called their blood, as, Ezekiel. 16.6. 2. There can be
no assurance of obtaining other favor, till this pollution be done away;
Therefore this promise comes in as a confirmation of the former, and making
way for them, For I will cleanse their blood. 3. There can be no purging of sin
to fit us for other mercies, till God interpose in it, and till he apply the
merit and efficacy of the death of Christ to take away the guilt and pollution
thereof; and this he will do to his own, he will send this mercy, to fit and
prepare them for more, I will cleanse their blood, says he. The endeavors of
such as are most convinced of sin, will not avail without this, and till they
employ him for this end. 4. The Lords former rejecting of a people, and giving
them up to walk in their own ways, will not hinder his respecting them and
purging their sin in a time of love: For, albeit Israel have now for many ages
not been cleansed, yet says he, I will cleanse their blood that I have not
cleansed. 5. As it is the Lords presence in favor with a people, and not their
merit, that assures them of his purging their sin, (for, this is done, for the
Lord dwells in Zion?) So his clensing of a people from sin, does assure them
more and more that he will abide with them; for, so will the words also read, I
will cleanse, etc. and the Lord, or so shall the Lord dwell in Zion.

AMOS. The Argument.
This Prophet was raised up by God, and sent from Judah to preach unto Jsrael,
much about the same time with Hosea; who in executing of his Commission, after
he has threatened some Nations about, for their sins, and spoken against Judah
also; he falls expressly upon Jsrael, and charge upon them (and sometimes upon
Judah with them) the many sins of idolatry, oppression, incorrigiblenesse,
wantonness, and the like: for which he threatens that God would destroy them,
to chap. 7. After which, by diverse types and representations, he confirms
that this sentence of their destruction was irrevocable, threatening the false
Priest at Bethel, who opposed him in his ministry. And then closes the
Prophecy with some promises relating to the times of the Gospel, which are
sub-joyned for the comfort of the godly, who should live in these sad and
calamitous times that were ensuing.

CHAP. I.
IN this Chapter (after the inscription of the Prophecy, v. 1. and the general
sum thereof v. 2.) The Lord by his Prophet denounces judgments to come on
several Nations about, because of their many and multiplied sins; and namely on
Syria, v. 3, 4, 5. On the Philistines, v. 6, 7, 8. On Tyrus, v. 9, 10. On Edom,
v. 11, 12. And on the Ammonites, v. 13, 14, 15.

Verse 1. THe words of Amos, who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, which he saw
concerning Israel, in the days of Vzziah King of Judah; and in the days of
Jeroboam the son of Joash King of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
The inscription of this Prophecy, holds forth first, That Amos who carried
this message, was but a mean man of Tekoa in Judah, (of which 2. Chro. 11, 5,
6. Jer. 6.1.) and of a mean employment, being but an Herdman and of the meanest
sort; not one who had herds which were kept and fed by others, (as the word
here used sometime signifies, 2. Kings, 3, 4.) but one who was either a mean
servant to others, or at best, a mean man who fed his own cattle, as appears
from Chap. 7.15. Secondly it holds forth that he was sent especially to Jsrael,
though he deal also with others upon occasion. And thirdly that he received
his Divine message, and began his preaching in the days of Vzziah and Jeroboam
the second, two years before that earthquake of which mention is made only
here and Zech. 14.5. Some conceive it to have been in the year of Vzziahs
death, and that it is hinted at Isa. 6.1, 4: Others, that it was at the time of
his presuming to offer incense, 2. Chron. 26.16. as another testimony (beside
his leprosy, 2. Chron. 26.20.) of divine displeasure against his course; But
at whatever time it was, this is certain, that hereby the Lord gave warning of
great and dreadful commotions and alterations that were to be among these
Nations, as accordingly came to pass on Israel after the death of Jeroboam the
second. Doct. 1. The word of the Lord ought not to be rejected in the mouth of
meanest instruments; nor is their authority to be suspected or condemned
because they are mean; for Amos who was among the herdmen of Tekoa, has the
words which he saw concerning Israel. 2. Albeit that men ought not to usurp the
ministerial calling, nor leave their mechanic and servile employments, to
intrude themselves upon it, (for, Amos had an extraordinary calling) and albeit
men who are called to that office, ought not to tempt God, by neglecting lawful
means appointed for their enabling to discharge their calling, (for, the
endowments of Amos, who was, not bred for that calling, Chap. 7.14 were by
extraordinary dispensation) Yet such as are called of God, and are conscious to
themselves of much insufficency and inability, though they use means; such I
say have notable encouragment to come to God for teaching and furniture in an
ordinary way, who has given such proof of his fullness in raising up and
instructing this herdman to be his extraordinary Ambassador. 3. Such as give
but ill entertainment to the messages they receive, may get rougher messages
sent unto them; and such as despise eminent and discreet messengers, God may
send such to them as will use them more roughly; for Israel had many notable
Prophets both before and at this time, who being despised, he employes this
herdman, who was not only hateful to them, as being a Jew and a base man, and
so it might lay their pride when God sent such a one unto them; but God makes
use of his rustic and rude humor, that they might be dealt with plainly and
roughly, who now through their own obstinacy were become like the brute beasts
which Amos had kept before. 4. Such as are called of God, were they never so
mean, may boldly and on all hazards declare his mind to a sinful people; and
their courage is a testimony of their calling, witnessing against all
despisers; for as Amos durst deal freely with Israel, and tell the words which
he saw concerning Israel; so the Lord did convince Israel that he was called by
him, in that he durst leave his own country, and trusting in God, durst deal
freely with this flourishing Kingdom, according to their deservings. 5. It is a
great snare to a wicked Nation, when they prosper notwithstanding their
wickedness; and there is need in such a case, that the wrath of God pursuing
sin be frequently inculcate from the word, that men may not deceive themselves;
therefore is Amos (as well as Hosea) sent with these hard tidings; in the days
of Vzziah, and in the days of Jeroboam etc. Both of which had prosperous
reigns, at least for a time, 2. Kings 14, 23, 24, 25, etc. 2. Chron, 26. 3, 6,
7. 6. When the Word of the Lord is not regarded, it is just with him to preach
to a people by his judgments, and by unnatural and extraordinary signs and
wonders, to let them know his anger; so much may be gathered from this
Earthquake which was a terrible stroke and warning to that people who believed
not, and therefore is taken special notice of here, and long after. Zech. 14.5.

Verse 2. And he said, The Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from
Jerusalem: and the habitations of the Shepherds shall mourn, and the top of
Carmel shall wither.
This verse holds out the sum of the whole Prophecy, to wit, that God was
about to manifest his terror in executions according to the threatenings of his
Word. As the sentence may relate to heathen Nations round about, who are also
threatened by this Prophet, it has been opened upon Joel, 3.16. But as it
relates to Israel, to whom this Prophet is chiefly sent, and to whom the most
part of what follows is directed, the sense and sum of it is; that the
Prophet speaking in his own terms, (who was well acquainted with the roaring
of Lions in the wilderness, and with pastures for sheep) declares, that
however Israel since their defection from the house of David, despised the
Temple of Jerusalem; yet they should find that God dwelt there, and that the
true Doctrine sounded there, and from thence; and as other Prophets before him,
and he among the rest, were sent out by God dwelling in Zion (and some of them
from thence) to denounce his terrible judgments; so these threatenings were now
to break forth in dreadful execution. In so much that the habitations of the
shepherds shall mourn etc. Whereby we may understand, that all their fertile
and pleasant places (such as their green pastures, and fruitful Carmel, either
that in Asher near the Sea, Josh. 19.24, 26. Jer. 46.18. or rather that in
Judah better known to him, Josh. 15.21, 55. 1. Sam. 25.2.) should be laid
desolate; and that as the Land should feel the stroke, so the inhabitants
being deprived of their delighted-in prosperity, should be filled with sorrow
and grief, and be made to mourn, as herdmen do when their pastures are dried
up. Doct. 1. However the Church and truth of God be contemned by these who make
defection therefrom, and God may seem to lie by for a time from avenging this;
Yet he will appear to assert his presence in his Church, and to manifest the
truth of his word by execution according to it: for the Lord will roar from
Zion (his dwelling place) and utter his voice from Jerusalem, where the Temple
stood; that is, he will now in a terrible way, make it manifest, that what
Doctrine was preached there, and elsewhere in his name, was his word. 2.
However men contemn God in the matter of subjection to him; yet he will be
their party to punish them for their sin whether they will or no; for Amos gets
it in Commission to publish, that God will manifest himself dreadful against
them, and he said, the Lord will roar from Zion etc. 3. The Lords word, how
much soever it be despised, yet it will prove terrible to the stoutest, when it
breaks fourth in execution; for the Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his
voice from Jerusalem, that is, his threatenings, though despised, will prove
thus dreadful in that day. 4. God is provoked to make the creaturres whereof
man makes use, feel his anger and smart under it, if men will not be sensible;
for the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall
wither, that is, their pleasant pastures, and the most excellent of their
friutful Fields (as Carmel signifies) shall feel the stroke. See Jer. 12.11.
5. Whatever fruitful or pleasant thing it be that men lean to, and delight in,
neglecting God, it will certainly in due time decay till nothing be left them
but sorrow for the want of them; for so much also is imported here, in that the
habitations of shepherds shall mourn; not only shall the Land be put in a
mournful posture, but the inhabitants shall be filled with sorrow.

Verse 3. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Damascus, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they have threshed
Gilead with threshing instruments of Iron.
Albeit the Lord sends Amos chiefly to preach against Israel, (as appears from
v. 1.) yet he ordains him to begin with accusations and threatenings against
foreign Nations round about, before he come to deal with them. And accordingly
in this and the beginning of the next Chapter, there are six of these Nations
spoken to. We may conceive these reasons why the Lord follows this method. 1.
That however this Prophet was a mean man, yet Israel might be convinced of his
Authority and Commission to be a Prophet, in that God had revealed his mind to
him concerning so many Nations beside themselves. 2. That when Israel should
look on other Nations, and see them plagued as well as themselves, they might
not (as men are naturally unwilling to see God in calamities) ascribe their
own afflictions to fortune or chance among the rest, since others of whom God
took no such strict notice, were afflicted as well as they. By these
predictions God would let them see that he had a hand in all of them. 3. This
doctrine against the Nations tends to the aggravation of Isreal's guilt, for
whose sake God had plagued so many (as will appear in the rest of the Chapter)
and yet they proved as bad as any. 4. It tends also to show unto them, that
the present prosperity of the wicked Nations should not embolden them to
despise Gods threatenings against themselves, seeing that prosperity was to come
to such an end. 5. From these threatenings Israel might gather that God who
punished the Nations who were without the written Law, would not spare them who
were his people, and knew his will, and who were guilty of sins, and these as
gross and many as any of the Nations: For they were Idolaters as well as they,
and were cruel oppressors of their brethren, as well as the heathen whom God
was to punish for the same fault.

The first Nation here spoken to, is Syria, whose head. City is Damascus, Isa.
7.8. These the Lord challenges, and threatens not to withhold any longer
their deserved punishment; And that because of their many and multiplied sins:
and especially because of their cruelty against his people in Gilead, which the
History declares was done by Hazael, 2. Kings 8.12. and 10.32, 33. And by
Benhadad his son, 2. Kings 13.3, 7. As for this kind of cruelty of threshing
people with instruments of Iron, it seems to be the same with that 2. Sam.
12.31. or somewhat like it. It was a kind of torture inflicted upon vanquished
people, which the Syrians put in practice, or at least did use them as cruelly
as if they had done so. Doct. 1. God is sovereign Judge of all the world, to
give out sentence according to men's ways, and to ride circuit in it, to see his
sentence executed; for so much is held forth in this process led against the
Nations on every hand, to every one of which, Thus says the Lord; is prefixed.
2. Eminent persons, and such as live in eminent places of a Land, do ordinarily
prove the fountains an promoters of all that evil which draws down wrath upon
the whole Land; for this cause it is that here only Damascus the chief City is
at first named; as being (together with the Royal Family, comprehended under
it, v. 4.) the rise and cause of all this provocation and woe. 3. Albeit the
Lord be long-suffering toward all, yea even toward heathens; yet when men
abuse his patience, by continiance in sin till there be no end nor remedy, he
will surely reckon with them, for now it comes to this, I will not turn away
the punishment thereof, as in his long-suffering he had done formerly, or he
will not let them be quiet, or at peace, or not take pains to convert them any
more, but will give them up to reap as they deserve. 4. The Lord will then
begin to reckon with a people for sin, When 1. Their provocations are gross
for kind, being transgressions, or rebellions. 2. When these sins are not few,
out multiplied and many, three and four. 3. When their sins are still growing,
and sin added to sin, as when it goes from three to four. 4. When the longer
they grow in sin, their sins are still the grosser and more horrid (as it will
still be) such as the particular sin here laid to their charge is. 5. When
iniquity continued in, fills up the complete measure prescribed by God in his
long-suffering; for three and four make up seven which is a number of
perfection. All this is imported in this general challenge and threatening, which
is made use of here and afterward, for three transgressions and for four, I
will not turn away the punishment, because they have etc. Doct. 5. Albeit a
people may have many sins and these very gross, provoking God against
themselves; Yet when God is about to punish, there is ordinarily some
particular ill that puts the capstone on all the rest, and fills up the
measure, and which draws out the stroke; Therefore after these three
transgressions and four, there is here one particular sin condescended on, as a
notable one above the rest, for which especially God will strike. 6. Cruelty
against Gods people, as it is a fruit of men's ripeness and coming to an hight
in sin; so it is a particular sin which God will not pass over, though he wink
at many other faults; for this is the particular sin here, because they have
threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of Iron, the sub-joining whereof to
the general challenge, shows that none but they who had three transgressions
and four, would have followed such a cruel course against the Church; And that
however he had turned away their punishment, notwithstanding many former
provocations, yet now because of this he would not spare. 7. Before the Lords
people shall want a scourge when they provoke him, he will raise up even
subdued Nations to do that work; for these Syrians were subdued by David, 2.
Sam. 10.15.19. but they began to lift up their head again, upon Solomon's
defection from God, 1. Kings 11.23, 24, 25: and are now a strong and sharp
scourge to Israel.

Verse 4. But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, which shall devour
the palaces of Benhadad.

5. I will break also the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the
plain of Aven: and him that holds the Secpter from the house of Eden, and the
people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, says the Lord.


In these verses is held forth, the particular sentence and threatening for this
sin; that he will destroy the Palaces of their Kings, v. 4. and will break the
strength of their fortified Cities, and so give them up into the enemies hands,
who shall destroy the inhabitants, waste the Country, root out their Kingly
race, and send the body of the people into captivity, v. 5. As for the place
here named, Damascus, the plain of Aven, and the house of Eden, or Beth-Eden,
it is thus conceived, that as Damascus was their chief City, and commanded a
tract or Province of Syria about it; so Aven was another great City, and chief
in another Province (though Damascus was chief of all) which together with the
plain about it, are here threatened, or the name of it was Bikath-Aven (which is
translated the plain of Aven) and it is threatened with the loss of the
inhabitants: And the house of Eden or Beth-Eden, signifying a place of
pleasure, was the chief City in another pleasant Province, called afterward
Coelo-Syria, from whence their Royal Race came, or they did much reside there,
because of the pleasantness of the place, or on other occasions not left on
record, and therefore it is threatened they shall be cut off with this place.
Doct. 1. Gods threatenings not to spare a wicked people, are not empty words,
but will end in real executions; for so does he expound his general sentence
in the former v. I will not turn away the punishment thereof, but I will send a
fire etc. 2. The just judgments of God inflicted upon impenitent sinners, are
terrible, irresistible, and with which no composition can be made; therefore
are his judgments compared to a fire sent by him, devouring all where it
comes. It may be true indeed that these Palaces were devoured by fire* and the
rest likewise which are so threatened; but it is most safe to hold in the
general, that his judgments be what they will, will violently consume like
fire, being inflicted in the fire of his wrath and displeasure. 3. Not only
mean men, but even Kings may expect to smart under Gods hand when they provoke
him, and that not only in the sufferings of their subjects, but in the ruin
of their own Palaces; for I will send a fire into the house of Hazael (who was
one of their Kings, and a cruel enemy to Israel) which shall devour the Palaces
of Benhadad, that is, which belonged to Benhadad, who was Hazaels predecessor
and Master, 2. Kings 8.7, 15. or to Benhadad the Son of Hazael, 2. Kings 13. 3.
The meaning is, that this fire should devour these Houses and Palaces (for they
are the same thing) though they had been possessed by never so many Kings for a
long time. 4. The strength of Cities, or any opposition and defense the
inhabitants can make, will serve in no stead when God in anger is a party; for
I will break also the bar of Damascus, or that which may seem to make it
impregnable. 5. Variety of Regions and Provinces united together, and
multiplicity of inhabitants therein, will serve for nothing when God is angry,
but to make the stroke of vengeance more remarkable, in overthrowing and
cutting off; for all these three Provinces and their chief Cities are threatened
by him who can easily reach them all; and particularly that he will cut off the
inhabitant from the plain of Aven, or Bikath-Aven, and so the place becomes
vanity, and reaps the fruit of iniquity, according to the signification of the
name. 6. Places that are very pleasant, and Royal Families and Races ought to
expect no more exemption then others from the stroke of an angry God, when they
provoke him* for says he, I will cut off him that holds the Scepter from the
house of Eden. 7. Mean persons will not escape deserved vengeance either,
though their provocation be inferior to that of Rulers; and God is provoked,
utterly to unpeople and transplant a Nation, when they sin against him, and
especially when they invade Gods people in their Land, and exercise cruelty
upon them; for the people of Syria shall go into captivity, unto Kir, says the
Lord; not that Kir in Moah, Isa. 15.1. but another in Assyria or Media, whither
the Assyrian carries them, as is recorded in the history, 2. Kings 16.9.

Verse 6. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Gaza, and for four,
I will not turn away the punishment thereof: because they carried away captive
the whole captivity, to deliver them up to Edom.

7. But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the palaces
thereof.

8. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holds the
Scepter from Ashkelon, and I will turn my hand against Ekron, and the remnant
of the Philistines shall perish, says the Lord God.


The second Nation spoken of are the Philistines. Gaza is only named in the
challenge and general sentence, it may be, because it was chief of them at
that time, or chief in this sin. In the particular sentence three other of
their Cities are mentioned; only Gath, the fifth City is omitted here as in
other passages of the Prophets, either because it was in the possession of the
Jews, or because it was become more obscure and ruinous, and so is
comprehended under the rest, or for some other cause not recorded. The sum of
this purpose, is, God threatens that he will, not spare them because of their
manifold provocations, and particularly, because of their cruelty toward the
Jews, in selling all the captives of them they could catch, unto Edom, who
hated them most, that so they might never return to their homes, verse 6. And
because of this, he gives out a particular sentence, that he will consume and
destroy their chief Cities, with the inhabitants and Princes or Rulers
thereof, and will also destroy the rest of that Nation who inhabit the Country
and Villages, verse 7, 8. As for this sin of the Philistines, it seems to
relate to the time when Edom revolted from Judah, and returned to exercise and
let out their wonted spite against their brethren, 2 Chronicles. 21.8, 9, 10. At
which time also the Philistines with others invaded Judah, 2 Chronicles. 21.16, 17.
and whomsoever they took captive, (or any of the Jews or Israelites who fled
for shelter among them about these times, as they did to other places, Isa.
16.4. they delivered them to Edom. The stroke here threatened was inflicted on
them; partly by Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.6. partly by Hezekiah, 2 Kings 18.8.
according to the prophecy Isa. 14.29. by the Assyrians, Isa. 20.1. and finally
by the Babylonians (beside what was done by the Egyptians) Jer. 25.20. with
chap. 47.1, 2, 4. And however several strokes be threatened to come on several
places here, yet it is not needful so to distinguish them, as if no more came
on any place then is here threatened against them in particular; but it may be
conceived that all these strokes came on every one of them. Doct. 1. It is the
common disease of the World, that in all places of it sin will be found gross
and growing, and ripe for vengeance; for here are three trangressions and
four, as well as in Damascus, and so also in other places, which are afterward
threatened. 2. God is uniforme in his proceeding, and still the same for justice
and power to take a course with growing sin, in one place as well as in
another, were they never so many; for Gaza and other Nations that are spoken of
afterward, get the same measure with Damascus: Thus says the Lord, for three
transgressions and for four I will not turn away the punishment thereof. 3.
Such as are come to an height of impiety and wickedness, are readily given up
to employ their power against Gods people, that so their measure may run over,
and the stroke may be hastened out; for so Gaza, which has three
transgressions and four, is given up to wrong Judah, upon which, specially,
the sentence is given out. 4. False brethren are greatest enemies, and do give
harder measure then any other enemy to the people of God when they come into
their hands; for Edom was so cruel an enemy, that it is greater cruelty in the
Philistines to deliver the Jews to them, then if they had kept them in bondage
themselves after they had captivated them. 5. It is great cruelty, and that
which God will not look over, when men do add affliction to his afflicted
People, and are accessory in any measure to their ill usage from others, and do
what they can to make their case desperate; for it is Gods controversy with
the Philistines, because they carried away captive the whole captivity (or so
many as they could catch) to deliver them up to Edom. When they had afflicted
them by taking them captive, they do add to it; and albeit Edom use them most
cruelly, yet they are accessory to it, by delivering them up. 6. The enemies of
the people of God will gain nothing by their oppression, when God begins to
reckon with them, but will assuredly draw vengeance upon themselves; for
because of this, I will send a fire etc. says the Lord. 7. Strong walls and
flourishing Cities and pleasant Palaces, multitude of inhabitants, and the
power and authority of Rulers, will not secure sinners against vengeance, but
only draw forth a more ample proof of Gods power and justice; for I will sent
a fire on the wall of Gaza, which shall devour the Palaces thereof. And I will
cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holds the Scepter (or their
Lord, 1 Samuel 6.18.) from Ashkelon. 8. The Lords former spareing, and permitting
of a people to flourish, will not secure them when sin is come to an hight; for
I will turn my hand against Ekron, or alter my former indulgence toward it,
and now smite it. 9. Whatever be the Lords compassion and relenting toward his
own people, when he is smiting them; yet he will pursue a controversy against
impenitent and cruel enemies to his Church, so long as there is any remnant of
them; for, and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, 10. Gods word, who
is absolute and alsufficent, is enough to assure men that greatest and most
incredible things will come to pass; therefore is it subjoined, by way of
confirmation to all this, says the Lord God.

Verse 9. Thus says the Lord: For three transgressions of Tyrus, and for four,
I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they delivered up the
whole captivity to Edom, and remembered not the brotherly covenant.

10. But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the
Palaces thereof.


The third people here spoken against, are the inhabitants of Tyrus, whom he
chalengeth for their many sins, and particularly, for the same sin of cruelty
against Israel or Judah, whereof the Philistines were guilty; whereby they
manifested their prefidious ingratitude in forgetting that Covenant of
friendship that was betwixt Israel and Tyrus in the days of David and Solomon,
by reason of which they called each other brethren, see 2. Sam. 5, 11. 1. Kings
5.1. and 9.13. Or it may be thus understood also, that beside their own
ingratitude in dealing so cruelly with Judah, they forgot also the obligation
that was lying upon the posterity of Esau, to deal more kindly with the
posterity of Jaoob their brethren; and they should not have sed or assisted
their cruelty against their brethren. For this sin the Lord threatens not to
spare them any longer, but that he will destroy their Town and Palaces. As for
the time when Tyrus committed this sin, it should seem they served and a
assisted Hazael and Benhadad in their wars against Israel, and it may be, other
enemies, or Israel it self in their enterprises against Judah; and what share
of captives fell to them, they delivered up to Edom: for which they were
recompensed according to this threatening by Nebuchadnezzar, Ezekiel. 26.7. etc.
Doct. 1. When a Nation does flourish and become potent, it is no wonder to see
sin grow and ripen fast among them, and divine patience toward them come to a
period; for, Tyrus that flourishing City, Ezekiel. 27. has three transgressions
and four, for which God will not turn away the punishment thereof. 2.
Prevailing cruel enemies against the people of God will not want many agents
and assistants, and the Church in her distress may expect to have many foes,
to take advantage of her, and to oppress her; for, both the Philistines, v. 6.
and Tyrus concur with Edom in their cruelty after their successful revolt,
Tyrus also delivered up the whole captivity to Edom. 3. No friendship nor
former obligation will bind wicked Nations to the Church in her distress, nor
will God suffer any of these relations to avail her, when she provokes him; for
Tyrus did all this notwithstanding the brotherly Covenant. 4. When God reckons
with cruel enemies, he will not forget their obligations to do otherwise, that
it may aggravate their guilt; for, now in the day of account, it is laid to
their charge that they did this, and remembered not the brotherly Covenant. 5.
It is a great iniquity in men to contribute, or be assistant to others in their
unnatural cruelty against Gods people, especially being bound themselves to
befriend them; for, so much also may be imported here, that Tyrus not only
sinned in forgeting their own obligation, but in assisting Edom, not
considering what strict ties were upon him to be more kindly to Israel his
brother. 6. The strength of a place either by situation or art, and the state
and magnificence of a people and their habitations, will not hold off divine
vengeance, especially when he is avenging the injuries done to his people; for,
albeit Tyrus was seated in the Sea, and well fortified with walls; and albeit
as all their merchants were Princes, Isa. 23.8. so their houses (for most part)
were stately Palaces: Yet when God reckons for this sin, I will says he,
send a fire upon the wall of Tyrus, which shall devour the Palaces thereof.

Verse 11. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Edom, and for four,
I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he did pursue his brother
with the sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually,
and kept his wrath for ever.

12. But I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour the Palaces of
Bozrah.


The fourth Nation here challenged, are the Edomites themselves, or the
posterity of Esau The Lord chalengeth and threams not to spare them any longer,
because of their manifold sins, and particularly for their bloody cruelty
against their own brethren of Israel and Judah (though they had most occasion
to let it out against Judah) whom they pursued with the sword. This their
carriage is amplified. 1. That they did cast off all pity, and showed great
hatred or anger in it, that is, they renounced all natural affection to their
brethren, and cut them off at all occasions in great rage without any mercy, or
respect to age or sex. 2. That this hatred was irreconcilable and perpetually,
even from the day that Esau first began the quarrel, Genesis 27.41. to the
destruction of Jerusalem Psalm. 137.7. and accordingly it did break out on all
occasions, as is recorded in Scripture. See Number. 20.20, 21. 1. Kings 11.14. 2.
Chron. 20.10. and 28.17. Psalm. 83.5.6. and frequently elsewhere. Because of all
this the Lord threatens that he will destroy the chief Cities of Edom, such as
Teman, Jer. 49.7. and Bozrah, Isa. 34.6. and 63.1. which does consequently
import that the whole Country should be subdued and overrun. Doct. 1. Such as
are apostates and false brethren to the Church, will be given up to as great
and many provocations as any, that so all may see the fruit of their apostasy,
and themselves may be ripened for deserved vengeance; for, Edom the apostate,
has three transgressions and four, because of which, the Lord will not turn
away the punishment thereof. 2. Whatever be the other provocations of
apostates, they will be sure to be persecutors of the blessed seed; and whoever
persecute them beside, they will be the bitterest; And this is Gods special
quarrel against them, as it is here against Edom, because he did pursue his
brother with the sword, and did tear as a beast does his prey, and that without
all pity. 3. Such as are apostates and have a cruel and bloody disposition
against the people of God, may (in Gods holy and wise providence) get
opportunity to vent their malice; and God may bring his people at under, if it
were but to discover and try such; for, Edom wants not an opportunity to pursue
and tear his brother. And albeit he was made to serve his brother, yet God
permits him to break the yoke (according to the prediction, Genesis 27: 40.) that
he may discover what is in him. 4. As no relation to the people of God will
stay the fury of Apostates, nor will one Family or Womb ever make the two
seeds one; So the Lord will not forget these relations, that he may aggravate
their sin thereby; for, it is put upon his score, he did pursue his brother,
that is, the posterity of Jacob, who lay in the same womb (and that at one and
the same time) with Esau their Progenitor. 5. Natural affection in men toward
their relations, is commendable in the sight of God, and he will make it a
quarrel when they do not evidence it by effects; for, it is a quarrel against
Edom, that he did cast off all pity, or corrupted his compassions or bowels
toward his brother. See Romans 1.31. 2. Tim. 3.3. 6. When men turn Apostates from
God and his Covenant and truth, the Lords people needs not trust any thing to
these affections which ordinarily are most deeply imprinted in them (as in all
men by nature) for, they will not only lose them all, but their affection will
degenerate into extreme and cruel hatred; for, Edom did cast off all pity, or
corrupted his compassions, and in place thereof, his anger did tear. 7. The
Lords people are not to expect that any length of time will mollify the rage
of Apostates and Persecutors, or that their lying by at any time does flow from
any change of their disposition: but as they are cruel at all occasions, so
their wrath is irreconcilable; and when they are most quiet; they are but
waiting for an opportunity to do mischief; for, his anger did tear perpetually,
when he had occasion, and he kept his wrath for ever. 8. Though God may long
forbear persecutors, even the worst of them; yet their cruelty will at last
bring vengeance to their own doors, to the utter undoing of what is most
flourishing among them; for, I will send a fire upon Teman, which shall devour
the Palaces of Bozrah. He will send his consuming vengeance to burn from City,
to City. Which accordingly was executed by the Caldeans, as Histories do record.

Verse 13. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of the children of
Ammon, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof: because they
have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they might enlarge their
border.

14. But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the
Palaces thereof with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day
of the whirlwinde:

15. And their King shall go into captivity, he, and his Princes together,
says the Lord.


In the fifth place, the Ammonites are spoken against, and are challenged for
their manifold transgressions; and particularly, that they not only slew the
men, but ripped up the very women with child in Gilead, that so they might
enlarge their Kingdom by possessing that tract of Land laid desolate by
themselves, v. 13. This injury the Lord threatens to aveng in a terrible
manner, by consuming Rabbah (which was their chief City, 2. Sam. 11.1.) by the
furice of war, v. 14. And by sending their King and Princes into captivity, v.
15. The word rendered their King, is also the name of their idol Malchom (called
elsewhere Molech, and Milcom, 1. Kings 11.5.33. 2 Kings 23.13.) who it may be
was carried away with the rest; but the context seems to speak more clearly of
their King and his Princes. As for this cruelty of the Ammonites against the
inhabitants of Gilead, it was founded on an old quarrel. And it appears, that
that Land did of old belong to the Ammonites, before that the Ammorits (whom
Israel dispossessed) took it from them, Judge. 11.13-24. and therefore on all
occasions they contended with Israel about it, but injustly, seeing that they
incroached upon nothing that was then in the Ammonites possession, but did
only cast out the Amorites out of Gilead, who were a people appointed for
destruction. As for the sentence given out against the Ammonites, although it
be true that Vzziah (in whose days Amos prophesied) did terrify them, and
cause them to bring gifts to him, 2. Chron. 26 8. and Jotham his Son did
defeat them, and make then tributaries, 2. Chron. 27.5, 6. Yet it seems that
this final overthrow was given them by the Babylonians after the destruction of
Jerusalem, as Histories do mention. Doct. 1. As many as have outward relations
to the Church of God, will be found guilty of many sins; and especially of
cruel persecution, and ripe for plagues, as of any other people in the world;
for, Ammon was also a friend, being descended from Lot, and yet he has three
transgressions and four, for which God will not turn away the punishment
thereof, and he is also an enemy to Israel. 2. As God abhors all cruelty, so
especially that which is exercised against the weaker Sex, and innocents; for,
it is his quarrel, they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, and so
cruelly destroyed the mothers, and the young ones. 3. Albeit that men count it
their glory to be able to remove ancient landmarks, and to enlarge their
dominion; yet it is a sin against God so to do, Deuteronomy. 19.14. and 27.17. And it
is a great aggravation of their cruelty, that they should cut off, and crush
and undo so many, only that themselves may have more room in the world, and
more large dominions; for, it is his controversy that they did this, that they
might enlarge their border Senacherib gloried that he was good at this, of
removing the bounds of the people, Isa. 10.13. And God suffered his sons to
pass over the bound of their duty, and kill him, Isa. 37.37, 38. 4. When men
do with cruelty and violence usurp upon others, God is provoked to make them
lose what was their own, as well as that which they purchased so sinfully; for,
because of this I will (says the Lord) kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbath
etc. It brings calamity and desolation to their own Country and Cities. 5.
Judgments upon wicked and cruel men will have much of Gods wrath in them, and
they will come suddenly and violently, and be accompanied with much terror and
confusion; for the calamity shall be like a fire which devoureth all, as being
inflicted in the burning indignation of God, and they shall be consumed with
shouting in the day of battle; that is, in the fury of war, wherein there
shall be dreadful shoutings of assailing enemies, and of affrighted people, and
with a tempest in the day of the whirlewinde, that is, the calamity shall
surprise and overwhelme them like a tempestuous whirlwinde: All which shows
how sweet it is to have peace with God in a sad and boisterous time; for it is
the want of this that makes this condition so dreadful to them. 6. Kings and
great ones will be so far from helping these whom they draw to sin with them,
and idols so unable to help these that worship and trust in them, that
themselves shall be made eminent spectacles of justice, and monuments of the
power of the true God, and of the truth of his word; for, their King (or
Malchom) shall go into captivity, he and his Princes together, says the Lord.

CHAP. II.
IN this chapter. 1. The Lord proceeds to challenge and threaten Moab, another
of the Nations about v. 1.2, 3. 2. He does also speak a word against Judah, v.
4, 5. 3. He begins the process against Israel his more peculiar charge; whom
he charge with many sins, particularly, with injustice, oppression, and
uncleanness, v. 6, 7. and that they joined their oppression with, and strove
to cloak it by their corrupt worship, v. 8. and with great ingratitude, in that
they sinned thus against him, who not only subdued their enemies who possessed
that Land, v. 9. but delivered them from Egypt, and preserved them in the
wilderness till they got that Land, v. 10. and in that they did no less
profanely entertain his spiritual mercies and favors, v. 11, 12: Because of
all which he declares that being burdened with their sins, v. 13. he would
send inevitable calamities upon them v. 14, 15, 16.

Verse 1. THus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Moab, and for four,
I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because he burnt the bones of the
King of Edom into lime.
In this Verse Moab is challenged; and the Lord threatens not to spare them any
longer. And that because of their many and multiplied sins, and particularly,
because of some horrid cruelty committed by their King (as would appear) upon
the body of the King of Edom, whose bones he burnt into lime, that is, into
small white dust like unto lime, or (as some conceive) he made indeed lime of
it, to plaster his house, that so his cruelty might be satisfied. This fact of
the King of Moab is applied by very many to that which is recorded, 2. Kings
3.26, 27. as supposing, that the King of Moab being beseiged by three Kings,
did attempt to break through into Edoms Camp; (either because it was weakest,
or because he had greatest indignation against him, for joining with Israel and
Judah, to whom he was yet subject in this quarrel) but failing in the attempt,
he took the King of Edoms Son who was either new taken, or before that time in
his power, and burnt him. But it seems rather that that History should be
understood of the King of Moab's offering of his own Son in a barbarous
Sacrifice to his idols, imploring their help in his extremity: And beside, the
heir of the Kingdom could not well be called the King of Edom, while his
father was yet alive, and in the Camp. Therefore I conceive that this challenge
relates to some other act; and that the King of Moab, either when he went to
avenge himself on Edom, (after these three Kings had raised their seige, 2.
Kings 3.27.) or at some other time, did let out his fury upon the very bones of
the dead King, either after he had slain him, or being dead before, he dug
them out of the grave. Doct. 1. Gods providence and dominion is universal in
the world; not only to avenge wrongs done by heathen Nations unto the Church,
but to take order with the wrongs done among themselves; for he threatens to
reckon with Moab for what he did to Edom. 2. The Lords having a sad and just
quarrel against men, will not assoile nor excuse others who do them wrong; for,
he has much to say against Edom, Chap. 1.11. and yet Moabs fault is not the
less. 3 Barbarous and inhumane cruelty is odious to God, and the fruit of much
growth and ripeness in sin; for, here it is the result and height of Moabs
three transgressions and four, for which the Lord will not turn away the
punishment thereof. 4. It is in particular an hateful and barbarous cruelty
that is exercised against the dead bodies and graves of men; for, this is
challenged here, that he burnt the bores of the King of Edom into lime. And if
God will not pass over this, when it is done to a profane man, how much more
will he avenge it, when it is done to the bodies of his Saints and Martyrs. 5.
Cruelty is so much the more odious to God, when it is exercised by kinsmen and
friends, against these to whom they have relation; for, Moab was also a kinsman
to Edom, and therefore his cruelty is the more heinous.

Verse 2. But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the Palaces of
Kerioth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of
the trumpet;

3. And I will cut off the judge from the midst thereof, and will slay all the
Princes thereof with him, faith the Lord.


The particular threatening and sentence against Moah, is, that God will consume
Moab, and their chief City Kirioth (Jer. 48.41.) with the fury of his anger, in
the heat of war, when there shall be great tumults, and cries and sounding of
trumpets, stirring up the assailers to do execution, and great noise among them
who perish, v. 2. It is also further threatened that God will make them cease
from being a Nation, by cutting off all their Rulers of all ranks, v. 3. Whence
learn 1. What ever men may expect by cruel policies, which they use either to
avenge, or secure themselves for the future; yet it will certainly bring home
terrible judgments upon themselves, and will not avail against God, when he
pursues; for, how formidable soever Moab thought to make himself by that
horrid fact; yet that availes not, but even because of that, I (says the Lord)
will send a fire upon Moab etc. 2. Wicked and cruel Nations deserve not only
to be afflicted, but to be utterly consumed; for, such is the threatening, they
shall be devoured and die. 3. Albeit any kind of death be dreadful enough to
these against whom God has a quarrel; yet it is a sad calamity and judgment,
and an addition to the stroke upon them, when they are cut off in the terrible
confusion and heat of war, in a storm and sack by enemies; for, it adds to
this calamity, that Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the
sound of the trumpet, intimating that they should not get quarters or
conditions of enemies, but should be cut off in the fury of war. 4. It is a sad
judgment on a Nation, and portends the ruin thereof, when it is left
destitute of Rulers, or they are cut off; for, it adds to the calamity, I will
cut off the Judge from the midst thereof etc. 5. The word of him who is the
true God is sufficient to assure us of vengeance, if it were even on Kings and
Princes and the greatest of the world who provoke him; yea even albeit they had
so much power as to attempt, and prosper in a rebellion against them who are
over them; for albeit the King of Moab did succeed (after some difficulties) in
his rebellion against the King of Israel, 2 Kings 3, 4, 5, etc. yet God passes
his word for cutting him off; I will cut off the Judge from the midst thereof,
and will slay all the Princes thereof with him, says the Lord. 6. The supreme
Magistrate of Moab who had the Princes under him, is only named the Judge,
though elsewhere the name of King be given to him; it may be because they had
no King but a Regent, when they were destroyed; or, because they deserved not
that title after their rebellion, being no lawful Kings, but Judges or
Deputies to Israel, who had revolted and assumed the title of absolute Kings;
Or rather this designation given even to their King, should teach, that even
these who are in highest place of authority, should look upon themselves as
bound to judge and to do justice to the people; otherwise they are not worthy
of their place.

Verse 4. Thus says the Lord, for three transgressions of Judah, and for four,
I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they have despised the
law of the Lord, and have not kept his commandments, and their lies caused
them to err, after the which their fathers have walked.

5. But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem.


The Lord having thus spoken his mind concerning several Nations about, he
sees it meet also (before he come to speak of Israel) to speak a word
concerning Judah, that so he might not only use means for warning and
reclaiming of them, but might prevent all occasion of carping at Amos as
partial, and sparing toward his Countrymen: And might take from Israel all
occasion of hardening themselves in sin, by reason of the wickedness of Judah,
who kept the worship of God more pure, as was frequently objected to Israel by
the Prophets.

The Lord does here challenge and threaten Judah for their many and multiplied
sins, and specially, that they did despise and not observe the Law of God in
the matter of worship and conversation, as if it were not a sufficient rule for
either: and that they did deceive themselves and one another in their
debordings, with false excuses and pretenses of good intentions, and
particularly, with the pretense of imitating the customs of their Progenitors.
Because of which the Lord threatens to punish and destroy the Nation, and their
chief City; as was accomplished by the Chaldeans; Whence learn. 1. The visible
Church not entertaining communion with God, nor emproving her spiritual
advantages, may fall into provocations, nothing inferior for number and
heinousness to the iniquities of Nations about her; for, there are also three
transgressions of Judah and four, as if they had striven with the profane
Nations, to have as many and gross sins as they. 2. If God do not spare
heathens who sin without law, and have but little knowledge of God or his will,
far less will he spare his people who are as lewd as they; therefore is that
same sentence justly pronounced against Judah; for the three transgressions of
Judah, and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof. 3. The
contempt of the word of God, is the great sin of the Church, comparable to the
heinous debordings of others, as being a great sin of it self, to contemn the
authority of the Great Lord, and the great mercies offered to themselves upon
obedience to his word, and a sad aggravation of all their other transgressions,
therefore, in place of the atrocious crimes laid to the charge of heathens,
Judah is in particular challenged for this, because they have despised the Law
of the Lord. 4. When men do not make conscience of keeping close by the
Commandments of God in their conversation and worship, but do walk as they
list, and do corrupt Religion by their devices, God does justly reckon that to
be a contempt of his word; therefore it is sub-joyned, by way of confirmation
and explication of the former challenge, and have not kept his Commandments.
For albeit men may profess a respect to the word, when yet their carriage is
loose, and they dare follow their one devices in the matter of Religion, yet
such practices are upon the matter a contempt of it, and it will come at last
to an express contempt; for, when the word inculcates their duty upon them,
and yet they resolve to go on, they cannot but at last loath and hate it. 5:
Albeit men will not want pretexts and shifts to palliat their ill courses, and
harden them in them, notwithstanding the admonitions of the word; yet all these
are but deceiving lies, and snares to mislead them, and will be so far from
justifying a sinful course, that they heighten Gods quarrel against it, and
against sinners because of it; for, it is added as a part of the quarrel, and
their lies caused them to err. Where by lies I do not so much understand their
idols, and fair expectations in serving them, which did draw them away, as
their pretenses and excuses, whereof they wanted not abundance; and that was a
judgment upon them: for hereby they were confirmed in their defection, and at
last should be miserably disappointed, when all these were found vain and
frivolous. 6. However men labor to justify their corrupt courses by the
example and practice of their Progenitors; yet that will not extenuate, but
rather aggravate sin, and serve such sinners, heirs to the sins of their
fathers which they imitate, and to the punishment deserved thereby; for this is
one particular pretense, whereof he makes a challenge, that they were misled by
the lies after the which their fathers have walked. Sin is so much the more
dangerous, as it is hereditary, Ezr. 9.7. Act. 7.51. 7. The righteous Lord will
not only not spare his people when they sin, but will make their outward lot
as sad as the lot of others whom they are like in sin; and so much the sadder
as their destruction is accompanied with sad strokes on his own precious
interests; for, he threatens them with the same judgments that came on others,
I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem;
among which the Temple was chief, and this might make their stroke sad.

Verse 6. Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Israel, and for
four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof, because they sold the
righteous for silver, and the poor for a pair of shoes.

7. That pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn
aside the way of the meek; and a man and his father will go in unto the same
maid, to profane my holy Name.


After all this preface concerning the judgments to come on the Nations about,
and on the Jews; the Lord imployeth Amos to deal with Israel his more proper
charge: with whom in this chapter he enters in process, chalenging and
threatening them in the Lords Name, for their manifold iniquities, several
particulars whereof he lays before them, to v. 13: and then gives out a more
particular sentence against them, to the end of the Chapter.

In these verses, after the general challenge and sentence for their many
iniquities, nothing inferior to what was among other Nations; He does in
particular charge them 1. With injustice and oppression, appearing in several
particulars; namely, that they were given to bribery, to the perverting of
justice, so that for silver they would sell the man that had a righteous cause,
into the hand of an unjust oppressor; Yea, for a very small gift, they would
betray the right of the poor who had nothing to give them: and that they
thirsted to have the poor under their feet and oppressed, and did subvert and
overthrow peacable men in their course and cause. 2. He charge them with
incestuous uncleanness, whereby they profaned the name of God that was called
upon them. From v. ^6. learn, 1. Such as do backslide from God, his pure
worship and truth, will soon be given up to many and multiplied gross
iniquities, which may discover what are the fruits of these courses in Religion
which they choose, and refute all their pretenses justifying the same; for,
Apostate Israel, has three transgressions and four, for which God will not
spare them: And the Lord instanceth these chiefly in gross sins against the
second Table, that they who would not see their sin in corrupting Religion,
might read it here, and might discern what were the fruits of a false
Religion. 2. Circumvention of men in their righteous cause, and the perverting
of justice, are cruel merchandising and selling of men, and sins for which God
is provoked against a whole Land; for, so are they here called, they sold the
righteous, and the poor; and because of these corruptions of their Judges all
Israel are threatened. 3. Covetousness is not only a great evil of it self,
but the root of much evil and miscarriage, and particularly in Judges, who
being led thereby, do readily pervert justice; for, it is for silver and
advantage, that all these disorders are committed. 4. Men are not advanced to
places of power and authority, that they should enrich themselves by all the
shifts they can, or to decide in causes according as they are biased with
bribes; but to execute justice impartially to all; And when it is not so, God
will make a challenge of it; for he challenges here, that they sold the
righteous for silver. 5. When men are addicted to covetousness, and once
accustomed to pervert justice for bribes, they will easily be drawn over to
do wrong, by a small tentation; like a harlot, who having once prostitute her
chastity, will be so shameless at last, as to take any price; for they will
sell the poor for a pair of shoes (or, a mean price) before they want
altogether. 6. Albeit the poor find few to do for them, yet God will own
them in their righteous cause, and will resent the injuries done unto them; for
here he challenges men for the wrongs they do them. From verse 7. Learn 1.
The Lord takes notice of men's affections unto, and their assiduousnesse in
sin, when they are watching all occasions, and restless till they carry
their point; for he marks that they pant after the dust of the earth on the
head of the poor. The Lord sees not only who sin, but who are driven to it
through the violence of tentation, and who are eager and panting to be at it.
2. It is a plague upon men, that they want not their own toil and vexation in
following sin; and yet all that toil will not reclame them, nor make them
give over; for they pant and are breathless with eagerness, and yet they go
on; see Jer. 9.5. 3. The cruel designs of oppressors are hateful to God,
when they are not content to pill the poor, but will have them utterly ruined
and crushed; for it is his challenge that they pant after the dust of the earth
on the head of the poor, that is, they are never at rest till they get the
very head of the poor on the ground among the dust, that they may tread on it;
or till they bring them under extreme calamities and sorrow, causing them to
put dust on their head, as was usual in great distress, 2 Samuel 13.19. Job
2.12. and elsewere. 4. It is the commendation of men to be peaceable and meek,
not given to contention, and modest in prosecuting of their rights, when they
are called to contend; for so much is imported in their name, who are here
owned of God, they are the meek. 5. Men's modest and peaceable behavior will
not restrain wicked ones from troubling and studying to overthrow them by
fraud or force; for they turn aside the way of the meek, that is, they supplant
him, and do overthrow his courses and enterprises, as if a man were turned out
of the way wherein he is walking. 6. The more modest and peaceable men are, and
the more meekly they carry themselves under injuries, the Lord will own their
quarrel the more; for he does here take their cause in hand, and challenges
these oppressors that they turn aside the way of the meek. 7. Incest is an
abominable and odious sin, and yet they who give way to any sin, though it
seem more cleanly, may be given up to that also; for where covetousness,
fraud, and oppression had place, there also a man and his father will go in
unto the same maid. Delighted in sins may draw on other sins, at which at
first men may be ready to startle. 8. Sin in the visible Church is not only
odious in it self, but as it tends to the dishonor of God, when it is
committed by these who have his name called upon them, and who will needs
pretend they are his dear people, notwithstanding all they do; for it
aggravates their sin, that it was done to profane my holy name, says the
Lord.

Verse 8. And they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge, by every
altar, and they drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their god.
The third particular sin laid to their charge, is, their joining of
oppression with Idolatry, and seeking to palliate it by their corrupt worship;
for they not only took and detained the poor man's pledge, contrary to the
law, and did unjustly fine men and exact money of them; but when they had done
so, they durst go to their Idols Temples and their Altars, to worship, and
thought all well enough if they employed the unlawful purchase in sacrifices
and feasts before their Idols, Whence learn 1. The Lord abhors cruelty,
even in men's prosecuting of their rights, against the poor; for so much does
the Law against detaining of the poor man's pledge, Exodus 22.26, 27. teach, for
the violation whereof they are here challenged, they lay themselves down upon
clothes laid to pledge, that is, they not only detained them, but did wear
and make use of them. 2. Idolatry in worship, and corrupt conversation are very
near in kin, and will agree well together; for, worshipping of that which they
accounted their God (who was not the true God, who would not be represented by
their calves) and their many Altars, do suit well with detaining of pledges,
and condemning of men unjustly. Which should warn the followers of the true
Religion, that they do not put a blot upon it by such courses. 3. As Idolatry
is a very licentious way, for they lie down there, (as was the custom at
Feasts, Ezekiel. 23.41.) and drink wine, and are still at Feasts in their Idol
service; So ill purchase is ordinarily ill spent, and employed in Idolatry, and
Luxury, or the like; for so did they with their pledges and fines. 4. It is an
high degree of impiery, when men dare avow sin before, and in worshipping of
that which they suppose to be a deity; for it was their great presumption that
they lay themselves down upon clothes laid to pledge, by every Altar, and they
drink the wine of the condemned in the house of their God, see Matthew. 5.23, 24.
5. It is also yet higher presumption, when men do think that outward shows or
performances of Religion (whether it be true or false) are sufficient to
expiate, or cover their gross oppressions or iniquities; for in this also they
sinned, that they thought all well enough, if they came and made offerings to
their Idols of their unlawful purchase; Which was a great error, had the way
of Religion been even pure and and according to the rule, as it was not; see
Jer. 7.8, 9, 10, 11.

Verse 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, whose height was like the
height of the Cedars, and he was strong as the Oaks; yet I destroyed his fruit
from above, and his roots from beneath.

10. Also I brought you up from the land of Egypt, and led you forty years
through the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorites.


The fourth particular sin charged upon them (and which is an aggravation of
their other iniquities) is their ingratitude in thus sinning against God, who
had heaped upon them mercies, both temporal, v. 9, 10. and spiritual, v. 11.
The temporal mercies conferred upon them were, 1. The destroying and cutting
off of the Amorites both root and branch before them, that so he might give
them their land and riches: And that the Lord did this notwithstanding that the
Amorites were Giants, and stronger then Israel, v. 9. 2. That before this the
Lord did deliver them from Egypt, and preserve and keep them in the
wilderness, till he brought them to the possession of that Land, v. 10. From
v. 9. Learn 1. Ingratitude is the great sin and aggravation of all the other
sins of the visible Church, when mercies will not do at them, either to
prevent sin, or make their heart melt for it when it is committed; for this
is the aggravation of all their sin, that notwithstanding this their
carriage, yet I destroyed the Amerite before them, etc. says the Lord. 2. As
the Lord is able to overcome the greatest and strongest of Nations, and will
quite root them out, if they stand in the way of his peoples mercy; so
deliverance from potent and mighty enemies is an obliging mercy; and the
greater difficulties there be in bringing about deliverance, the more of Gods
power and love, and the more obligation to duty should be read in it when it
comes; for albeit the Amorites height was like the height of the Cedars, and he
was strong as the Oaks, and so were stronger then Israel, yet I (says the
Lord) destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath; or, did quite
extirpate them out of that Land, as a tree that is taken away root and branch:
And therefore Isreal's sin was the greater, who received so notable proof of
love, and yet sinned against God. 3. The Lords sore strokes on wicked enemies
because of sin, and for the Churches good, should be laid to heart, to stir
her up to duty who is more kindly dealt with; for, so much also may be gathered
from this challenge and aggravation of their sin, that since the Lord had
made the Land to spew out these Nations root and branch for sin, it was
abominable in Israel, who were put in their room, to grow as ill or worse. From
v. 10. Learn 1. Albeit we be ready to forget greatest mercies, and to despise
them when they are past, yet they should never be forgotten, but kept in
remembrance, to bind us to our duty: And when we grow negligent herein, God
will not forget to inculcate them, to aggravate our sin; for albeit this his
kindness in redeeming them from Egypt was forgotten, and out of date in their
account; yet God mentions it on all occasions, as a mercy which did yet oblige
them, and which would not fail to make up their dittay when they sinned; Also
I brought you up from the land of Egypt. 2. Albeit the Lords people in their
distresses may be ready to say, wherein have thou loved us? yet even a
wildernesse-condition may have much obliging mercy in it, and mercies which it
is great ingratitude to slight, and not to walk answerably; for it comes in
also as an aggravation of their sin, I led you forty years through the
wilderness. His protection, provision, and suffering of their manners there,
were mercies not only to sweeten the hardships of that lot, but to oblige them
to God throughout all their generations. 3. Whatever may be the Churches
thoughts of a present afflicted condition, yet the issue of the worst of her
lots will be full of obliging mercies; for so is here imported, that their
wandering in the wilderness had a good issue, to possess the land of the
Amorites. And these only are named of all the Nations of Canaan, because they
were most potent, as v. 9.

Verse 11. And I raised up of your sons for Prophets, and of your young men for
Nazarites, Is it not even thus, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord?

12. But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and commanded the Prophets,
saying, Prophecy not.


In prosecuting of this challenge and aggravation of their sin, the Lord
subjoynes some spiritual mercies conferred upon them also. And namely, that he
sent them Prophets, and that of their own children and people; And did raise
up Nazarites, who by their strict way of living (according to the Law, Number. 6.
were patterns of that purity in moral duties which God required of the people.
And it may be also that by these are understood the sons of the Prophets, who
in their youth were bred under more strict discipline for that holy calling.
Upon all this the Lord infers, that since these instances of his mercy were
so clear as their consciences could not deny the truth of them, v. 11. they did
injustly aggregage iniquities formerly laid to their charge; And particularly
these spiritual favors showed unto them, did render their carriage odious, in
that they not only made not right use of them, but made the Nazarites
contradict their profession, and break their vow, by giving them wine to drink,
contrary to the Law, Number. 6.2, 3. and did prohibit the Prophets to reprove
their sins freely, or did trouble them if they did it. From v. 11. Learn 1.
Whatever outward favors are conferred upon a people; yet spiritual benefits
ought to be looked on as chief mercies, and specially obliging; Therefore does
the Lord add these to the former, as completing the mercy of their outward
deliverance, and adding much to the sin of their ingratitude. 2. Whatever be
a corrupt peoples estimation of faithful Ministers, sent to reveal the word
of God unto them; yet the Lords sending of them is a special mercy; for it is
one witness for him, pleading against their ingratitude, that he raised up
Prophets among them. See Isa. 30.20. Jer. 3.14, 15. 3. It should not occasion a
peoples contempt of Ministers, that they are men like themselves, and chosen
from among themselves; but it should rather oblige a whole Land to God, that he
raises up faithful and eminent instruments of them; for he rehearses it as a
mercy showed unto them, I raised up of your sons for Prophets. 4. It is a mercy
which should oblige a land, when they have not only schools of Prophets, and
hopes of a succeeding ministry, by young men their separating themselves from
worldly delights and incombarances, that they may fit themselves for that
calling; But when there is purity and holiness among them, and some eminent
paterns of it to stir up others; for, so much is imported in this, I raised up
of your young men for Nazarites. 5. Albeit that wicked men take no great notice
of Gods mercies toward them, yea and often times do quarrel and mistake them;
yet their consciences will plead for God, that his mercies are real and true
mercies, and that he does them good indeed, and does not only say so; for, is
it not even thus, (to wit, that I have done to you as I say) O ye children of
Israel, says the Lord? From v. 12. learn 1. Not only temporal, but even
spiritual favors of ordinances and encouragements to piety, will not work
upon a naughty people; But the more kindly they are dealt with, they will
bewray their perversity the more; as this carriage of the Israelites does
teach. 2. It is a horrid sin and heinous abuse of Gods kindness, when men will
not only not be holy themselves, but do hate and oppose and crush it in
others, that they may not obey the Law of God more then themselves; for, such
is this challenge against them here; But ye gave the Nazarites wine to drink.
3. It is also an abuse of great kindness, and a sinning against men's own
mercies, when they will oppose, and hinder or molest the messengers of God, in
the free discharge of their trust toward them; for this was also the ingrate
carriage of Israel; and commanded the Prophets saying, prophecy not, whereof
this same Prophet had experience, chap. 7.12, 13.

Verse 13. Behold I am pressed under you, as a cart is pressed that is full of
sheaves.
This v. as it is by some translated, is a part of the sentence or threatening,
showing that God would press their Place or Land, and fill it with heaps of
judgments and enemies, as a Cart is pressed and filled with sheaves in
harvest. But as it is here translated, it is a general conclusion introductory
to the sentence; wherein the Lord declares, that the multitude and variety of
these their sins did so provoke his justice and patience, that he might justly
complain of them as insupportable and intolerable, as a Cart groans under
burdens: and therefore he would punish, as is declared in the following verses.
Doct. 1. It is the way of secure sinners, to lay over the weight of all their
sins on God and on his mercy, as if he were but a Cart to lie under the burden
of them all, that so they may sleep the sounder and sin the faster; for, so
much does this similitude teach. 2. The Lord, even toward secure sinners, will
take on this burden so far, as to suffer their manners long, before he cast it
off; albeit he be provoked by every sin, and does not allow their presumptuous
casting off their iniquities upon him; yet he does not complain nor strike,
till he be pressed as a Cart that is full of sheaves. 3. Gods patience and long
suffering will at last weary to endure the provocations of sinners, as becoming
insupportable; for, says he, I am pressed under you etc. see Isa. 1.24. Ezekiel.
5.13. and 6.9. 4. When the cup of men's iniquities is full, and God is about to
forbear them no longer, yet they may be so stupide as to need up-stirring to
consider it; for, Behold says he, I am pressed etc.

Verse 14. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong
shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty deliver himself:

15. Neither shall he stand that handles the bow, and he that is swift of
foot, shall not deliver himself, neither shall he that rides the horse deliver
himself.

16. And he that is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in that
day, says the Lord.


The particular sentence for these sins, to be inflicted by God thus wearied to
wait upon them, is, that inevitable judgments should befall them, wherein no
means should avail them; Neither speed of foot nor horse (as it is v. 15.)
should deliver them, nor strength of body or courage of mind (as the two words
v. 14. may be distinguished) nor provision of armor, and skill to use it for
offense at distance, make them dare to stand and face their enemies; But even
the stoutest shall think it fares well with him, if he escape with his life,
when he has cast away his apparel. Whence learn 1. When Gods patience is come
to a period, it will appear in sad judgments, and in his casting off that
burden which he has born so long; for, Therefore (because I am pressed etc. v.
13.) the flight shall perish etc. 2. When God lets out judgments upon a
Nation, they will certainly reach all who are aimed at by them; for, though
some get away, v. 16. yet all that he has a mind to cut off, be they swift or
strong, will be reached. 3. As all outward accommodations and advantages are in
themselves empty, and can avail nothing without a providence of God, Eccl.
9.11. nor are they to be gloried in, Jer. 9.23, 24. so when God is angry, all
probable means that have availed at other times, will prove vain, either for
resisting the judgment, or escaping from it; for, so are we here taught, that
swiftness of men and horses, strength or courage will do no good. 4. Such as
do oppress others, and do not spare the very garments of the poor, so they may
enrich themselves, are justly environed with these straits, that it shall be a
deliverance to them to get their life for a prey, though they have not so much
left them as to cover their nakedness; for, these cruel exactors, who pilled
the poor, v. 8. get now this doom, he that is courageous among the mighty,
shall flee away naked in that day, says the Lord.

CHAP. III.
THe Doctrine of this chapter, seems to have been preached in a time wherein
the prosperity of Israel under Jeroboam made them despise and reject all hard
messages. And therefore in the first part of the chapter the Lord by his
Prophet, having called them to hear his process and sentence against them, v.
1. does refute all their exceptions whereby they endeavored to make void his
threatenings; Showing, that interest in him, and his former kindness toward
them, would rather hasten then hold off the strokes deserved by them, v. 2.
that sin would separate them from him, whom they pretended to enjoy, and be
familiar with, v. 3. that threatenings were not vain nor without cause, v. 4.
that afflictions came not by chance, nor would they be rid of them or of
threatenings for sin, till they had done their work, v. 5. (and therefore it was
their stupidity not to be alarmed with threatenings, and not to see God in
troubles, v. 6.) and that when he warned them by his messengers, v. 7. it
became them to fear and not to quarrel his servants who carried their Masters
mind, v. 8. In the second part of the chapter, he goes on to the process,
calling the Nations to judge of their wickedness, and of the justice of his
judgments, and accusing them for oppression and disorders, v. 9. and that they
did voluntarily blind themselves through custom in sin, and heaped up wealth
by oppression, v. 10. for which he threatens that he will invirone them with
enemies on all hands, who should break their power and spoil their houses, v.
11. that a very few shall escape these judgments, v. 12. that he will also
punish them for their idolatrous worship, wherein they confided, and will cause
break and deface their Altars, v. 13.14. and that he will punish their rich and
great ones, by destroying their stately Palaces, v. 15.

Verse 1. HEar this word that the Lord has spoken against you, O children of
Israel, against the whole family which I brought up from the land of Egypt,
saying.
In this verse they are cited to hear this message of challenges and
threatenings, which God had sent by this prophet unto them; wherein he obviates
their exception at the Prophets baseness, by showing that it is his word; and
their trusting in their own privileges, by showing that this should not exempt
them, as is at lengeth deduced in the following purpose. Doct. 1. When the Lord
condescends to choose a people to himself, it is his way to prevent them in
their low condition, by his goodness, and to purchase a dominion over them and
engage them to be his, by many mercies showed unto them; for, such was his
dealing with Israel; he brought them up from the land of Egypt, where they were
in bondage, and upon this he grounds his plea and challenge. 2. A delivered and
dignified people do ofttimes so carry themselves, as God has much to say
against them; for, there is this word which the Lord has spoken against you, O
children of Israel. 3. Such as God has done good unto, are bound not to slight
his word; but to hear and ponder what he has to say, though it were even
against them; considering what misery it portends (if not prevented) to have
the word against them, and how little it will avail them not to hearken to it;
and considering what their obligations to God are, and that he can reach them
otherwise who will not hear the word; Therefore, says he, hear this word
etc. 4. It is the duty of these who would have the word effectual on their
hearts, not to fix their eye upon the baseness of the instruments who carry
it, but on God who puts these messages in their mouths; Therefore, are they
led from looking to this herdman, and to hear this word that the Lord has
spoken. 5. All a peoples real privileges, and what they please to arrogate to
themselves beside, will not avail them before God, when they provoke him, nor
will they be a shelter to protect them in their slighting of the word; for,
says he, hear this word -- against the whole family which I have brought up
etc. Albeit Israel, to whom the Prophet is sent, were not this whole Family,
yet they were the greatest part; and they thought little of Judah in comparison
of themselves, accounting that (as they were the most in number, so,) they were
the Lords chief people, to whom the adoption and promises did belong. And the
Lord declares, that granting all that were true (as it was not) yea and though
Judah were joined with them (and so the sentence should import a rejection not
only of a part, but of all that people;) yet all that could not avail to
excuse their sin, or keep in this sad sentence.

Verse 2. You only have I known of all the Families of the earth: therefore I
will punish you for all your iniquities.
Follows the Lords express obviating and refuting of all their exceptions
against what the Prophet had in commission against them. And first, whereas
they might allege, that they only, of all the Nations, were Gods peculiar and
chosen people, and therefore could not be rejected nor ruined, unless God would
resolve to want a people: The Lord (in answer to this) declares, that so much
the more as they were his people, he would not spare them, since they walked
not answerably. Whence learn. 1. The Lords faithful servants must resolve not
only to have much humbling toil and exercise in seeking to know Gods mind,
and in carrying it unto his people; but also to be exercised with casting down
of many strong holds and imaginations, which sinners raise up in their hearts,
to ruin themselves by obstructing the success of the word; for so much does
this pains taken to refute their exceptions and delusions, teach. See 2 Cor.
10.4, 9, 2. It is the Lords prerogative to make choice of what Nation he will
to be a peculiar people unto himself, and they are highly honored whom he so
chooses above others, be their other lots what they will; for, says he, you
only have I known (that is, chosen and taken special notice of) of all the
Families of the earth; Whereby is not intimate any injury done to other
Nations, but it intimates his absolute sovereignty to choose whom he will,
being debtor to none, and his great mercy to them who are thus respected. See
Acts 14.16. Psalm. 147.19, 20. 3. Such as do enjoy special privileges, and do
not make right use of them, will soon come to a great height of iniquity, both
for nature and number; for they are guilty of iniquities, and there is an all
of them, all your iniquities. 4. When Gods peculiar people do make defection
and go wrong, their privileges turn a great snare unto them, filling them
with conceeit of their own excellency, notwithstanding their sin and guilt,
and hiding from them the odiousness of their sin, and the greatness of their
danger thereby; for, here Gods knowing of them is an exception to be removed
and refuted. 5. Whatever may be the dreams of secure sinners, yet they will
find that their privileges do aggravate their sin, and do draw on more
certain and severe strokes upon them; for, says he, You only have I known,
etc. therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. Which is not so to be
understood as if he would altogether spare others when they sin, but that
however he may wink at the sin of others, yet he will more certainly and
severely punish them then any other. For 1. Their sin is more gross then the
sin of any others, and there must be more of malice and wickedness in it,
considering the many means they enjoy. 2. There is much ingratitude in their
sin, which renders it the more odious and intolerable. 3. Whereas God is
therefore kind unto a people, that he may be glorified in their holiness and
obedience, it cannot but grievously provoke him, when they walk the quite
contrary way. ^4. It concerns God to vindicate his own glory and holiness by
punishing them when they sin, lest he should seem (by forbearance) to approve
of their sin, who are so near unto him by privileges. 5. Because they are
his people, therefore he will reclame and not want them, whereas he may let
others walk in their own ways.

Verse 3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed?
Secondly, whereas they might allege that God was present and familiarly
conversant with them, by many signs of his presence, and that God could not be
separate from his people: The Lord declares that common sense might teach
them, that as two persons not being reconciled, or not going to the same place,
cannot long walk in one way and familiarly together: Even so while they
provoked him, by leaving his ways that lead to happiness, and walking in ways
displeasing to him, they could not expect that he would walk or be familiar
with them. Whence learn, 1. Men are naturally dull and slow in taking up
spiritual things; So much do the similitudes made use of in this and the
following verses, to inculcate spiritual things, teach. 2. Whatever be our
dullness and stupidity, or our conceit of our selves; yet our own consciences,
when they are put to it, will plead against our principles and way, when we
think to sin against God, and yet to do well enough for all that; So much
are we taught by all the questions in this debate, wherein the matter is put to
their consciences, however for present they pleased themselves. 3. The root of
our happiness consists in agreement with God, by being reconciled with him
through the blood of Christ, and by minding the same end with him, to wit, to
glorify him and be glorified with him; for, here the ground of Gods walking
with men, and of their enjoying the fruits of his familiar presence, is in
their being agreed, at peace together, and agreed upon the same end of their
walk. 4. Such as are thus indeed agreed with God, must resolve to walk with
God, and may expect that God will walk with them; for it is imported here that
two will walk together, when they are agreed. By walking together, as it is a
duty on man's part, I understand, 1. That men when they are reconciled with God,
must yet reckon that they are but upon the way to their journeyes end, and to
reap the fruits of friendship with God. 2. That they must set themselves to be
at pains, and to walk, that they may attain this end. 3. That they must walk
in close and familiar communion with God, and longing to enjoy him, both for
keeping up the friendship, and for influence and furniture for their duty, and
his presence to sweeten their lots. And by walking together, as it is a
gracious promise on Gods part, I understand, that unto such as are at peace
with him, and depend on him in going about their duty, he will manifest his
familiar presence and favor by many proofs of his love, that he will furnish
them for duty, and be with them in all their difficulties: And that they are
bound to believe it is so, albeit they do not sensibly find it. Doct. 5. Such
as pretend that they enjoy God, and his presence and favor, and yet do not
make sure that they are reconciled unto him, nor do walk in his way, will upon
serious enquiry find themselves disappointed; and they do provoke God to
remove from them any visible evidence of his presence; for, says he, Can two
walk together, except they be agreed? that is, your consciences will tell you
the one cannot be without the other; and what outward signs of my presence ye
think ye have, they cannot be continued with you, since ye do not improve them
to your own true advantage.

Verse 4. Will a lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? will a young
lion cry out of his den if he has taken nothing?
Thirdly, whereas they were ready enough to despise all threatenings as vain,
and nothing else but the ordinary tone of Prophets, who behoved still to
quarrel and threaten, and yet they prospered well enough under Jeroboam their
King: the Lord declares, that as a lion or young lion will not roar except he
have a prey, or see one which he is presently to leap upon and take; so the
Lord does not threaten but where there is just cause, and where judgment is to
follow. Whence learn, 1. It is no new thing to see a people so plagued, as
they stand not to contemn and despise the threatenings of God; for, so is here
imported. Such as are forborne by God, or do enjoy present prosperity, they are
emboldned thereby to neglect what God says; but it is the hight of obstinacy,
when men are feeling the truth of the word in sad afflictions, and yet do
despise it, in what it threatens for the future. 2. However the Lord be
absolute and sovereign, and may yet forbear, yea and cure even them who prove
themselves otherwise incorrigible under threatenings or judgments, Isa. 57.17,
18; Yet in his ordinary procedure, his threatenings do portend a storm, and
that judgments are coming, and will come, except they be prevented by
repentance; for, the lions r^aring intimates that he has a prey, or is to fall
upon it. 3. God revealing his displeasure by threatenings, is very dreadful,
and will prove so, if sinners provoke him to execute what he threatens;
therefore is he compared to a lion, whose roaring is dreafull, and that so much
the more, as when he roareth, he is about to tear the prey.

Verse 5. Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth where no gin is for him?
shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing at all?
Fourthly, whereas they might allege, that albeit afflictions had come, or
should come upon them, yet what needed they keep such a business about them,
since nothing was more ordinary then to see such revolutions, that all
Kingdoms and Nations, as well as they, had their own times of affliction, and
after a time their case alters again, and they recover? The Lord (to obviate
this) declares, 1. That as a bird is not taken on the earth without a snare; so
afflictions upon persons or nations do not come by chance, nor without his
special providence. 2. That as a fowler does not willingly nor usually (though
sometime he may for want of power to prosecute his purpose, and so the
similitude is not to be strained) take up his net before he catch his prey; so
neither could Prophets cease to threaten, till either they were taken
therewith, and brought as true penitents to Gods mercy, or were given up to
justice: Nor would rods be removed, till either they were amended or destroyed
by them. Doct. 1. Such as do contemn and make ill use of the threatenings of the
word, will readily also contemn and harden themselves under sad plagues; for,
so much does the connection of this with the former verse teach; and such as
make but ill use of rods, would look upon that as the fruit of despising the
word; and till that be first mourned for, the other will not be gotten amended.
2. One great distemper, and cause of men's hardening themselves under
afflictions, is, their unwillingnesse to see an hand of God in them, which
would invite and stir them up to repent and turn to him, as the only remedy of
their grievances; for, this is the distemper here refuted: and we find it very
eminently in the Philistines, notwithstanding all their convictions, 1. Sam.
6.9. 3. Whatever be the shifts of men's hearts, yet it is a clear truth which
men are bound to believe and make use of, that their afflictions come by the
providence of God, that it is his forbearance which keeps them from that gin,
and his hand that intraps them; for, in this he appeals to themselves, and
presses this truth upon them: Can a bird fall into a snare upon the earth,
where no gin is for him? The study of this truth is very necessary, partly,
that men may dream of no issue so long as they neglect to turn to God; partly,
that they may tremble and be affected that they have to do with such a party,
whose anger is dreadful, and in whose favor is their life; partly, that they
may be patient toward Instruments of their trouble, when they see God employing
them; and partly also, that being reconciled with God, they may be comforted,
that his hand and providence is supreme in measuring out their trouble, who
numbers the very hairs of their heads, Math. 10.30. 4. It is a judgment on
wicked men, that plagues sent upon them are as snares and gins to them; for, so
are they here expressed in this similitude; not only because their own sins
prove a net to catch them in and deliver them to justice; or because many times
snares are their greatest plagues, when outward favors harden them in sin; But
1. because their afflictions do surprise them inexpectedly, and they are still
taken asleep, notwithstanding all the warnings they get, Luke 21.24, 45. 2.
Because their afflictions are plagued to them, and by their carriage under them
they draw still on more afflictions, as a bird taken in a snare, does but
entangle it self the more that it endeavors to escape. Doct. 5. Whatever be
the Lords sovereignty in grace, to change his dispensations toward his people
when he pleases; yet such as are ill pleased with rough messages or
judgments, may blame themselves for their continuance, since they are sent
upon an errand, and we must do what they are sent to work before they be
removed: for, shall one take up a snare from the earth, and have taken nothing
at all?

Verse 6. Shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?
shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord has not done it?
In this v. the Prophet repeats, and confirms and inculcares what has been
said concerning threatening and afflictions, that so he may stir them up, and
let them see their stupidity; and 1. As for threatenings, he declares that they
in any of their Cities, would presently fear some danger, and gather together
for preventing it, if the watchman sounded the trumpet at an extraordinary
time, and gave them the alarm; And why then would they not be sensible, when
God by him threatened them with his wrath, and that the enemy should come
against them? 2. As for the evils that had come, or were to come upon them in
any of their Cities, he declares that they could not deny but they were of
God, and therefore why did they sleep so securely? Whence learn, 1. Alarmes and
threatenings from the word, are as terrible as any thing can be, and would be
thought so if they we well considered upon; therefore are they compared to a
trumpet blown in the city, giving the alarm of an enemies approach. 2. Men's
own consciences may convince them of dreadful stupidity, if they fear not when
they are threatened; and their sense of common and visible dangers will plead
against them, and tell them that they fear God less then any thing; for,
says he, shall a trumpet be blown in the city, and the people not be afraid?
where he brings in their fears in such dangers, as witnessing against their
stupidity, when they are threatened, and puts the matter to their consciences,
if they could excuse them in this. 3. It would help much to make threatenings
effectual, if men would look over these who carry them, to God who sends
them, and to what they portend; for, so much also does this similitude teach: A
watchman in himself is not terrible, nor wishes ill unto the City, nor is the
sound of his trumpet in it self dreadful, but as it warns of the approach
of a furious enemy; and so is it here. 4. Threatenings do not prove false
alarmes, but are seconded with plagues on these who make no use of them; and it
is very rare to see it otherwise, but they who debord so far as to need
threatenings, do also provoke God to smite; for, the one does follow on the
other here, and Israel tasted of both, having before this been visited with
many rods, chap. 4.6. etc. to prevent the final sentence, all which they had
also abused. 5. Albeit afflictions for sin be the holy works of an holy God,
and acts of justice, and so good; and albeit they do work for good to the
Lords penitent people, Psalm. 119.67.71. yet as they are evil in themselves, so
they are and will prove an evil to the wicked and impenitent; as here they are
called, evil in the City, or in any of their Cities. For they are sent to be
bitter and cross to men who walk contrary to God, and to thwart their
corruptions and rob them of their enjoyments; They should also discover the
evil and bitterness of men's departing from God, Jer. 2.19. (and where they
have not this effect, it will not avail that men find them evil unto them) Yea
they will prove evil to make men worse and more wicked then they found them. 6.
As the not seeing of Gods hand in trouble, and that we have to do with him, is
a chief cause of our miscarriage under it; so this is an evil not soon
remedied, and a lesson not easily learned; Therefore, after what is said, v. 5.
it must be again inculcate, shall there be evil in the city, and the Lord has
not done it? 7. Whatever be men's stupidity, and wilful blindness; yet the
Lord has a witness in every man's bosom, who does not utterly renounce a
deity, that he is the author of afflictions; Therefore does he pose their
consciences, to see if they could shift this, shall there be evil, and the Lord
has not done it? 8. Let men be never so unwilling, yet it is their duty never
to give over, till they have seen God in their afflictions; Therefore does the
Lord so press it upon them, as a needful lesson. For (beside what is marked of
our own advantage and duty, on v. 5.) it is our glorifying of God, to
acknowledge his providence, and that not only in general, but as it shines in
particular actions; and in particular, to look upon afflictions for sin, as
beseeming an holy and just God; and this would help us to our duty under them.

Verse 7. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto
his servants the Prophets.

8. The lion has roared, Who will not fear? the Lord God has spoken, Who can
but prophecy?


Lastly, whereas they might except, that if judgments were to come upon them
from God, yet why would they trouble them continually with the noise thereof
before they came? They could not but look on Prophets as the authors of their
disquiet, and delighters in their ruin since they would never let them alone:
and in particular, they would little regard him, who was a base man, and one of
Judah who bare them at little good will: The Prophet in the Lords name
declares (in answer to this) that they were rather bound to see and
acknowledge Gods long-suffering and mercy, who would forwarne them of their
danger before it came, and for that end employed his messengers, and him in
particular, v. 7. And therefore it was but folly and madness in them not to
tremble, when God by him did testify his anger like a roaring lion; or to let
out all their spleen against him, who could not but deliver what he had in
Commission, v. 8. For the understanding of that general assertion, v. 7.
consider, 1. God is not bound at all to observe this method, but may execute
what he pleases, though he have neither reveaved it to men nor angels: only
it pleases him out of his gracious condescendence, ordinarily to follow this
method. 2. This is not to be extended to all persons, nor yet to all things, as
if he did nothing in mercy, justice, or sovereignty in all the world, but he
did communicate it with his servants first; But the meaning is, that in
inflicting judgments on the Church, he usually takes this course, first to
advertise them by his messengers. 3. Albeit this relates especially to the time
wherein the Church had extraordinay Prophets; yet this holds still true that
the desert of all sin is held out in the written word, and declared unto people
by their faithful pastors from the word: so that the Church may see and know
what she is to expect, as well as when she had extraordinary messengers. Doct.
1. As divine Doctrine is a mystery above the reach of reason, and to be known
only by revelation; so in particular, however the Lords wrath be very clearly
deserved by sinners, yet it is ofttimes a secret to them, and not discerned
till it be inculcate upon them, or till they feel it: Therefore is it called
his secret here. 2. The way to know Gods mind concerning men, is by the
ministry of his servants, either extraordinary, or ordinary, speaking
according to the word; for, he reveals his secret unto his servants the
Prophets, for the Churches information. 3. Such as would get the mind of God
to carry to his people, would become his servants, not only by taking up that
office upon his call, and attending on him in it; but also by being in their
whole course, devoted to him, that so he may bless them in that particular
function; for they are his servants. 4. It is the Churches great mercy, whereof
she should make especial use, that God does warn her of her danger before she
fall into it; for, it is held out as their advantage, that surely the Lord God
will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto his servants the Prophets. 5.
A people may mistake and quarrel many dispensations of God toward them, which
yet do speak his great kindness to them, if it were well considered; for, they
quarrelled all this freedom, which yet flowed from Gods mercy and
long-suffering toward them. 6. The word of God is the sure rule, whereby men
may know their duty, and what will be the profit or danger of any course they
follow; And albeit dispensations may seem for a time to go otherwise then
according to the words verdict; yet at last, all things will certainly and
visibly be according to what the word says; for, so much does this hold out in
general, that it is from the word, whoever carry it, that men may know what God
thinks of their way: and such as cleave to the word in duty, may expect that
Gods dealing will in due time be according as they are warranted from the word
to expect. 7. It is needful work, to stir up our own hearts again and again, to
see God in threatenings, and to read his dreadfulnesse therein; that so we may
be ashamed of our own stupidity, that will not fear his anger, albeit it have
not burst forth in execution: Therefore, is it again inculcate, The lion has
roared; who will not fear? 8. There is small cause to be offended at ministers
freedom in publishing their Commission; considering that it is an evidence of
their zeal, to be imitate by all, rather then quarrelled; and that they stand
strictly engaged to be faithful, upon their greatest peril: for, whereas they
could not endure this Prophets freedom, he excuses himself with this, that
the Lord God has spoken, (by giving Commission) who can but prophecy? Whereby
we are not only to understand a strong impulse upon their hearts, with the
Commission (though Prophets had that, Jer. 20.9. and conscience, and love and
zeal for God, will set all on edge to plead for God, who have his Commission)
but that his calling laid a necessity on him, were he never so unwilling, as,
Cor. 9.17. And that he was in great hazard, having his own soul at the stake,
if he were not faithful, as Ezekiel. 33.6. And therefore he behoved to preach,
however they quarrelled or contemned him.

Verse 9. Publish in the palaces at Ashdod and in the palaces in the land of
Egypt, and say, Assemble your selves upon the mountains of Samaria: and behold
the great tumults in the midst thereof, and the oppressed in the midst thereof.

10. For they know not to do right, says the Lord, who store up violence and
robbery in their palaces.


These exceptions being thus removed and refuted, the Lord by the Prophet goes
on to the process, to accuse and sentence them. And for this end foreign
Nations about (such as Egyptians and Philistines) are called to come and bear
witness against their sin, and to justify the Lord in the judgments that
were to come upon them. The sins for which they are accused, are horrid
tumults and oppression, v. 9. Wherein they bewrayed much obstinacy and
voluntarily contracted blindness through custom in sin, and great
insatiablenesse, in that they heaped up goods taken by oppression, in their
houses. v. 10. He names the Mountains of Samaria, though it appears there was
but one hill on which the City was built, 1 Kings 16.24. either because he
understands the whole hilly Country that depended on that City; or rather
(since he seems to speak chiefly to the ills done in that City) because that
hill had several risings in it: And so he intimates, that in every corner of
the City, these iniquities were to be found. Doct. 1. Whatever be the
vain-gloriation of a sinful and corrupt Church; yet their course is oft-times
worse then the way of very heathens, and such as they would condemn; for,
albeit Israel despised all other Nations, and these among and above the rest,
yet they are called to assemble and behold their great wickedness, which they
would abhor. In which we may consider 1. Albeit Israel would not hear nor could
bear these threatenings (as appears from the former doctrine in this Chapter)
yet it is here intimated that the Nations about would see they were deserved,
as 1 Kings 9.8, 9. 2. How blind soever Pagan Nations be in matters of the first
Table, and of Religion (though even in that, their cleaving to what they chose
for a deity, will aggravate the inconstancy of the Church, Jer. 2.10, 11.) yet
in matters of justice and equity, and of the second Table, (which are here
spoken of) the practice of many of them by the light of nature, may condemn
them who have the clear light of the written word, Romans 2.26, 27. And so also
will the use they make of any means that at any time has been offered unto
them, Matthew. 12.41. 3. In particular, these Nations of Egypt and the
Philistines, (of whom Ashdod was a part) were noted and infamous among the very
Pagans for luxury and other vices; And yet even these, and they who lived in
palaces among them, would condemn Israel; So is Judah called worse then Sodom,
Ezekiel. 16, 46, 47, 48. To show how vile a people who have visible interest in
God may grow, when once they decline, even to be matter of admiration to the
vilest of Pagans; and to show how odious sin is in such. Doct. 2. The Lord will
also imbitter the cup of such as provoke him, by making their enemies witnesses
of his judgments upon them; for, it is for this end also they are assembled,
to be witnesses and spectators of what he here threatens to afflict upon them.
And the Egyptians and Philistines are called to in particular; partly, because
they had seen most of Gods glorious actings for Israel; therefore now he will
vindicate his own holiness in their view, that none may think that he who had
owned Israel, did approve their sin. And partly, because these Nations had been
inveterate and bitter enemies to Israel, and therefore the Lord will add to
Isreal's calamities, by letting even such enemies behold that upon them, which
would be so sweet a sight, unto them. See 2 Samuel 1.20. Mic. 1.10. 3. Times of
licentiousness, tumults, and disorders, are times of great provocation, both
in themselves and in their effects; for, their great sin which he would have
remarked, is, their great tumults which were sins in themselves, and causes and
occasions of many other sins. 4. Oppression is one of the fruits of
licentiousness and disorder, which God is highly offended at; for, the same
word signifies both tumults and troubles or vexations, and then it clearly
follows, that there are the oppressed. 5. Oppression is so much the more
odious, when it is not committed in the remote corners of a land, but in the
midst of Cities, where justice should be executed and bear sway; for, these
great tumults, and the oppressed are in the midst thereof, to wit, of the
mountain of Samaria, where the City stood. 6. It is an horrid aggravation of
sin, when men do voluntarily blind themselves, and will not acknowledge God,
nor his law to be their rule, that so they may sin without a check: and when
through a custom and habit in sin, they put out all light and cannot do any
thing that is right; for, both these are in this challenge, as an aggravation
of their course, for (or and) they know not to do right. 7. Whatever course men
take to shift the challenges of the word; yet they should know that it is God
with whom they have to do, who cannot err in what he says, and whose
challenges and the effects thereof cannot be got shifted; therefore it is
added, they know not to do right, says the Lord. 8. Oppression continued in,
is a great evidence of a people being under many spiritual plagues; And
particularly, that they are voluntarily blinded, and hardened through custom
in sin; Therefore is this challenge not only subjoyned to the former of
oppressions and tumults, to show from whence these evils flowed; but more
expressly it is said, They know not to do right, who store up violence and
robbery, or goods purchased by that means. 9. Much gain and heaping up of
wealth by oppression, will not assoil the oppressor; nor will men's great state
and pomp warrant them to oppress, but will rather make their sin the more
heinous, considering how inconsistent in reason the one is with the other, that
they should be great men having enough, and yet be endless in oppression, and
that their stately palaces should be filled and defiled with such ill purchase;
for, it adds to the challenge that they store up robbery and violence, and
that in their palaces.

Verse 11. Therefore thus says the Lord God, An adversary there shall be even
round about the land: and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy
Palaces shall be spoiled.
Follows the Lords sentence and threatening, for these and other sins
mentioned in the sentence it self. The sentence has four branches; whereof
the first (in this v.) is, that the Lord will surround them and their land with
enemies, so that there shall be no way for them to escape: and that neither
their power, nor their wealth should avail them, but the enemy should bring
down the one and spoil them of the other. This adversary round about the land
is chiefly to be understood of the Assyrians, who it seems invaded them on all
quarters, and did break their power and take their wealth. Yet it may be
extended also to signify, that if any should escape their hands and flee, they
should find enemies on all quarters of the Nations about them, ready to entrap
them. Doct. 1. Whatever be the condition of impenitent enemies and oppressors,
yet God is sufficient and able to reach them and be about with them; Therefore
is this threatening against potent oppressors, begun with Thus says the Lord
God. 2. Men are bound to see more in Gods quarrel (and ofttimes another thing)
then what their enemies do pursue them for; for, the Assyrians undertook this
war, only to punish Hosheas rebellion, 2 Kings 17.4. but the Lord tells them
that therefore (because of their oppression, and their idolatry, of which
afterward) an adversary shall be about the land. 3. Albeit men think they have
many shifts against a day of trouble; Yet God can (and when he is provoked,
will) easily surround them, so that they shall not escape trouble, and make
them find few friends notwithstanding all their confederacies; for, an
adversary there shall be even round about the land. 4 When God imployeth
instruments of vengeance against his incorrigible people, they will not only
be able to threaten them on every hand, with trouble at distance, but also to
be successful in their enterprises against them; for, the adversary shall not
only be round about the land, but shall come in upon them with success, to
break and spoil them. 5. A peoples power and strength, or their wealth
(especially being ill purchased) will not avail when God is angry; but as
strength will prove weak and be easily crushed; so their ill purchased wealth
will but contribute to make Gods vengeance on them conspicuous in taking it
away; it will make their lot under want more bitter then if they had never had
wealth; and it will leave the sting of an ill conscience behind it to imbitter
their want: for, he shall bring down thy strength from thee, or dispoile thee
of power and lay thee low, and thy Palaces (where they heaped up wealth, v.
10.) shall be spoiled.

Verse 12. Thus says the Lord, As the shepherd takes out of the mouth of the
lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, so shall the children of Israel be taken
out that dwell in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus in a couch.
The second branch of the sentence is, that few should escape in this
judgment, but as a lion having taken his prey, does eat till he be full, and
then go away, and so the shepherd may recover a piece of an ear or two legs
which he has left; So there should be a very few of them left, who should hide
themselves in Samaria, lurking under or about beds. As for that which
follows, And in Damascus in a couch, whether we understand it of the City of
Damascus in Syria whither many should flee as to friends, and where they should
be sought out (except such as escaped by lurking in couches) after the land of
Israel is subdued; or, of some street in Samaria, called Damascus, where men
should lurk in or under couches; or, whether we take the word appellatively,
that they should lurk in Samaria, in the corner of a bed, and in the feet, or
corner of a couch: whichsoever, I say, of these ways we understand it, all
comes to this, that very few should escape who should lurk and hide themselves
in holes and corners. And as for the judgment which so few shall escape, if we
understand it of slaughter, it must certainly be understood of the inhabitants
of Samaria, who it seems were generally cut off at the taking of the City; for
otherwise many went into captivity; or, it may be understood, that of all the
Nation of Israel very few escaped, but either they fell by the sword, or were
carried into captivity. Doct. 1. Gods judgments and such as he employes to
execute them, will be terrible and irresistible, till he have done all his
work: therefore it is declared that it shall fare with Israel as with a lamb
in the mouth of a lion, which no shepherd dare rescue, but must be content to
gather up what the lion leaves, as a witness that it is not lost through his
default. 2. Times of judgment upon a land will ordinarily be so universal, as
very few will escape; but either by death or captivity, or some other ways,
they will drink of that cup; therefore are they who escape compared to two
legs, or a piece of an ear. 3. Such as in a time of a calamity do escape death
or captivity, may yet be put to many hard shifts in lurking, to avoid them;
for, they are taken out from this danger, in the corner of a bed, and in
Damascus in a couch, as is before explained. So that they who in these times
get their life for a prey, should not also seek great things for themselves,
Jer. 45.4, 5.

Verse 13. Hear ye, and testify in the house of Jacob, says the Lord God, the
God of hosts:

14. That in the day that I shall visit the transsions of Israel upon him, I
will also visit the altars of Bethel, and the horns of the altar shall be cut
off and fall to the ground.


The third branch of the sentence (the certainty whereof is intimate in a new
Commission to publish it, and wherein more of Gods quarrel is held forth) is,
that when God comes to punish them for their other sins, he will also take
course with their idolatry at Bethel; and that the horns of their altar there
(which they made in imitation of that in Judah, Exodus 27.2.) shall be broken
down. It appears that this was done by the Assyrians, who defaced their altars
and places of worship, because their Religion did not agree with theirs, though
it was idolatrous also. But it was Josiah who after that, did quite demolish
that altar, 2. Kings 23.15. Doct. 1. Such as are to carry Gods mind unto his
people, have need frequently to rouse up themselves, and to be rouzed up by
God, to take up his mind and authority in it; therefore in the midst of his
purpose, is there a new charge given to Amos and the rest of the Prophets, Hear
ye, says the Lord God etc. 2. When God is threatening a people, and declaring
the causes of his displeasure, they have need to be stirred up again and again
to hear; for, this charge to the Prophets, is not only for themselves, but to
show to the people what they need also. 3. When God is either chalenging or
threatening, it is needful to consider what his power is to avenge the fault he
chalengeth, and to execute what he threatens; therefore is he designed in this,
the Lord God, the God of hosts. 4. What the Lord does give his servants to hear
and understand, they are bound to communicate it, and that so seriously as they
give not occasion to hearers to slight it; for, hear ye, and testify in the
house of Jacob, says he. 5. Albeit men do place their confidence in their
idolatrous and corrupt way of religion and worship, as thinking thereby to
escape the punishments deserved by their other sins; yet this will deceive
them, and what was their confidence will prove a land destroying sin with and
above the rest; for, in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel
upon him, I will also visit the altars of Bethel, as his great sin. See Jer.
48.13. 6. Idolatry once admitted, is so hard to remove, that it may continue
till a period be put unto it by the utter ruin of a Nation: for, their altar
of Bethel continues, till the Assyrians break them and it both. 7. A people
once addicted to idotatry, are very averse and incapable of seeing either the
evil of it, or the danger that comes by it; therefore this challenge, and
sentence especially, must be testified in the house of Jacob. 8. Such as will
not put away idolatry, nor destroy the monuments of it, will find that God
will cause others (though they were idolaters themselves) do it upon their cost
and expense; for, God sent the Assyrians upon them, who made the horns of the
altar be cut off, and fall to the ground, though they had kept them up with
great respect.

Verse 15. And I will smite the winter house with the summer house, and the
houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says the
Lord.
The last branch of the sentence is, that he will take course especially with
the great ones, and richer sort of people, who had winter houses for repelling
the cold, and summer houses wherein they might get cool air. See Jer. 36.22.
Judge. 3.20. These the Lord threatens to destroy and cast to the ground, albeit
for pleasure and pomp, they had adorned them with Ivory and built them ample
and large. Whence learn, 1. Such as taste most of prosperity in a wicked Nation,
may look for a peculiar stroke; therefore is a particular sentence directed
against such here. 2. Men's pride, and keeping up much state and pomp, while
they wallow in their sin, will not hold off vengeance, but is another cause of
Gods controversy against them; and as prodigality in apparel, so also men's
sumptuousness in their habitations and dwellings, may be a cause of Gods
anger; therefore will God testify his displeasure against the winter house and
the summer house, the houses of ivory, and great houses of such sinners. 3.
Men's pleasant and commodious habitations, wherein they do not honor God, will
but help to augment their misery, when God does overturn them in his kindled
displeasure; for, this shall be one part of their calamity, that these their
statly and pleasant habitations shall perish and have an end.

CHAP. IV.
IN this chapter the Lord goes on with the process against Israel, yet
inviting them to repentance, that they may prevent the small stroke, and 1. He
accuses and sentenceth their great ones for their cruel oppression, v. 1.2.3.
2. He challenges them for, and gives them up unto the idolatry of the calves,
in following whereof they were so obstinate, v. 4.5. 3. He challenges them for
incorrigiblnesse and impenitence, under all the judgments, that formerly had
been sent to reclaim them, v. 6. -- 11. Unto which he sub-joines a sentence of
further judgments, v. 12. -- which, since they were not able to resist, he
exhorts them to prevent by repentance, considering the advantage they had of a
Covenant yet standing betwixt God and them, v. -- 12. and considering what a
Lord he was with whom they had to do, v. 13.

Verse 1. HEar this word ye kine of Bashan that are in the mountain of Samaria,
which oppress the poor, which crush the needy, which say to their masters,
Bring and let us drink.
In this first article of accusation, the Lord prosecuts that process for
cruel and covetous oppression, which he had begun, chap. 3.9, 10. And in this
v. he calls the Nobles and Judges of the chief City Samaria to hear what he had
to say against them for their oppression and crushing of the poor and meaner
sort; and he lays to their charge, that they stirred up one another, as they
had power over the poor by being Creditors or Judges in their causes, to poll
them, that so they might have among them wherewith to satisfy their lusts: Or,
they being Judges, did conspire with the Creditors and Masters of the poor, to
crush them, providing they got a bribe wherewith to make merry. He compares
them to kine of Bashan, which was fit place for pasturage, Number. 32.4. Deuteronomy.
32.14. because they were not only fatted, and made brutish and insolent by
prosperity (upon which grounds enemies are compared to bulls of Bashan, Psalm.
22.12.) but were also become effeminate thereby. Doct. 1. Nobles, Judges and
great and potent men, are ordinarily the ringleaders of all provocations in a
land, and such as God has most to say against; for, these are understood by
kine of Bashan, that are in the mountain of Samaria, and especially the Judges,
as the purpose makes clear. 2. While Amos is directed to call them kine of
Bashan, we are not to conceive that he con^emns and affronts what lawful
authority any of them had; for, that is contrary to duty and sound principles,
Jude, v. 8.9. But he does only point out what their course was in it self,
and lays to their charge that they had prostituted and abused their place and
office, and rendered it and themselves contemptible. And in particular, by this
he would teach, 1. That however great men do ordinarily despise ministers,
especially if they be mean persons; yet their sinful courses do render
themselves more base and contemptible, notwithstanding all their grandour; for,
whereas they thought little of him, as being an herdman; he declares that they
were yet worse then he, and but like beasts; and so an herdman was a fit enough
messenger for them. 2. Albeit also great men be readily puffed up by reason of
their wealth and outward prosperity; yet that affords but poor matter of
gloriation; and abused wealth does not augment the honor, but rather increase
the contempt of the abusers; for, in oppositon to the high thoughts they had of
themselves by reason of their wealth, he declares that they had no more to
glory of then beasts which got a good pasture as well as they; and that all
their wealth and greatness did but render them more brutish and effeminate.
See Psalm. 49.20. Doct. 3. Albeit that men, and especially great ones, be
unwilling to hearken to God speaking in his word; and albeit their grandour and
prosperity does but hinder them to hear, and harden them that they will not
hear, Jer. 5.5. and 22, 21. yet they are bound to hear, and will be made to
hear upon their own cost, if they do it not willingly: for, hear this word, (to
wit, of the challenge, but especially the sentence, as the construction of the
purpose bears) imports that preaching to them needs a preface to attention;
that it is even their duty to hear, and however they stop their ears, yet God
will enforce audience one way or other. 4. Whatever be the prosperity of men,
or their apparent stability in it; yet they are still in a woeful case, so long
as the word is a party against them, condemning their way, or writing bitter
things against them for it; for, though they were fat, and settled and wanton
on their mountain; yet hear this word, is still an alarm unto them, and that
which may mix their cup with wormwood. 5. Oppression is one chief sin for
which God contends with a land; and specially when Magistrates, who are
appointed for the protection and support of the weak and indigent, do rather by
fraud or force crush them; for, it is the challenge against these kine of
Bashan, that they oppress the poor, and crush the needy. The first word may
signify their oppression by fraud, and the other, their violent oppression and
crushing them, so that they were made utterly unable to subsist. And so
oppression is distingushed, Luke 3.14. It is a sin in any to oppress, and
especially in Magistrates to oppress their subjects, and most of all, to
oppress these who are already miserable. Naboths Vineyard lost Ahab a
Kingdom, and Rehoboams oppressing humor lost him ten Tribes. See Jer. 34.17.
Neh. 5.1. -- 13. 6. Albeit the poor and indigent have none to own them, nor to
resent the injuries done to them; yet God, who is the supreme Lord, will not
fail to plead their cause with the greatest; for, here he pleads it against
the kine of Bashan: and how much more will he plead their cause, if they be his
own people, and cry to him under oppression? See Psalm. 12.5. Luke, 18.7, 8. 7.
It is a great height of sin which God will not pass over, when men (and
especially Judges) dare encourage and stir up others to oppress, and dare
concur with them for their own interests; for, this the Lord does specially
challenge, they say to their Masters, Bring and let us drink. 8. It is but a
poor benefit men reap by their oppression, when all is employed to satisfy
their lusts; and that is the height of the good that ever men will get of ill
purchase; that they provoke God yet more against them by the ill use thereof;
for, all they mind in their bribery and oppression, is Bring and let us drink,
which was a vice they were addicted to, Isa. 28.1. And for this the Lord also
challenges. 9. Though nature be content with little, and sobriety and religion
would teach men so; Yet men devoted to their lusts, are in Gods judgment
insatiable, and have never enough; for, albeit they be like fat beasts, yet
they must drink more; and albeit they have much, yet their lusts consume it
all, and they must oppress and take bribes, and all little enough to furnish
them wherewith to drink.

Verse 2. The Lord God has sworn by his holiness, that lo, the days shall
come upon you, that he will take you away with hooks, and your posterity with
fish hooks.
The sentence for this sin (which is confirmed with an oath) is, that these
great ones and their posterity should shortly be carried into captivity, and
that as easily and exactly as men do catch little fish. Whence learn, 1. It is
the great plague of secure sinners, that notwithstanding their punishment be
certain, yet they will not believe it, but are surprised therewith: for, that
the Lord God has sworn it, does import that this matter is certain, and
without all controversy, and yet that they will not credit it, but are
surprised, the days come upon them. 2. The holiness of God may assure wicked
men, that their impenitent courses will not escape vengeance; for, he has
sworn by his holiness, not only to prove that he is the most High, who swears
b^ himself, Heb. 6.13. but to show that his holiness could not endure such
courses, especially in them. See Hab. 1.13.3. When men's grandour, power and
wealth, tempts them to become oppressors, and give up themselves to sinful
pleasures, it does portend some sudden and remarkable shake; for, upon that
challenge, v. 1. it follows, lo the days shall come upon you, that he will
take you away, etc. 4. Oppression and men's settling on the world and pleasures
thereof, does deserve not only spoil and poverty, but captivity also, and the
rooting of them and theirs out of all their enjoyments; for, this is the
particular stroke threatened, he will take you away and your posterity. 5. God,
in inflicting general strokes, can find out and reach particular sinners, and
every one of them; for, so much does the similitude from fishing import, that
God will single and find them out, as the fisher man does take out his fish
one after another, with hooks and fish hooks. And thus the similitude seems to
be understood, Jer. 16.16. 6. How great and strong soever wealthy oppressors
think themselves, yet Gods judgments will find them light, and will easily
reach and bring them down; So much also does the similitude teach, that they
should not prove fat and strong kine, when enemies are sent upon them, but
should be as easily carried away, as fish are taken up with hooks: And thus the
similitude seems to be applied, Hab. 1.14, 15.

Verse 3. And ye shall go out at the breaches, every Cow at that which is
before her, and ye shall cast them into the palaces, says the Lord.
This sentence is further enlarged, and amplified, and it is threatened, that
the Walls of Samaria being broken down, they (who before kept great state and
order in their going in or out, and did so shut up themselves, that it was not
easy to get access to them) should abruptly, like affrighted Cows (whom they
resembled, v. 1.) flee out at every breach, thinking to save themselves. As for
that which follows, ye shall cast them into the palace, it may with some
little supplement be thus rendered, ye shall cast away the things, that were
brought into the palace; and so the meaning is, that they shall cast away these
precious things that were brought and kept in their palaces, that so they may
escape with their lives, if it be possible, as is threatened, Chap. 2.16. And
according to this interpretation, he would teach, That wealth purchased by
oppression will prove but a burden and vexation in a day of calamity, and the
day may come wherein men would be as gladly rid of it, as ever they would have
had it. But the most simple reading is, you shall hastily, or abruptly cast
your selves into, or toward the palaces. And so the meaning is, that as some
should seek to flee away by the breaches, so others of them should run toward
the palace, or strong houses, if so be they may find shelter there, Doct. 1.
Wicked and oppressing Rulers and great men do not only bring ruin on
themselves, but on the places they live in, and trust to for security; for,
because of them Samaria is full of breaches. They have so deep roots in the
earth, that they pluck up much earth when they are pulled up. 2. This Metaphore
of going cut at the breaches like affrighted Cows running out of their
enclosures, (wherein he insists in what was said of them, v. 1.) and their
running abruptly to their palaces, may teach. 1. Whatever courage oppressors
may seem to have in prosperity, or how bold soever they seem to be in
oppressing innocent subjects; yet approaching or incumbent vengeance will fill
them with fear and terror: They shall be like mad Cowes, glad to get away any
way. 2. Conjunction in sinful courses, will breed no amity nor kindness in a
day of trouble; and trouble will so astonish wicked men, as all their care will
be for themselves only; for, they who were consorted together, v. 1. shall now
go out every one at the nearest breach, not caring nor waiting for another. 3.
The Lord also by judgments will put an affront upon the state and pomp which
great men keep, when yet they study not to honor God; for they who would not
appear in public, but in great state and order, are now forced to betake
themselves abruptly unto their palaces, or strive to get away. 4. The great
confusion of conscience wherewith the Lord does justly plague wicked men in a
sad day, will appear in their great irr^^olution and incertainty what course
to take, but one running one way, and another taking another; for, so is
verified in these, while some flee out of the City, as then only refuge, and
others into their palaces.

Verse 4. Come to Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal multiply transgression, and
bring your sacrifices, every morning, and your tithes after three years.

5. And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving with leaven, and proclaim and publish
the free offerings for this likes you, O ye children of Israel, says the Lord.


In the second article of the process, he prosecutes that which he had
intended against them, chap. 3.14. concerning their idolatry of the Calves at
Gilgal and Bethel, of which there is frequent mention in Hosea. And the Lord
declares, that however they pretended to imitate Gods instituted worship in
Judah, and to be very diligent and active in these external performances; yet
since they did not cleave to the appointed place, and Altar erected for public
worship, and did change the Priesthood, and set up their Calves as relative
objects of worship, he could not look on their way but as transgression and
defection; and since they were obstinate in it, he does judicially give them up
to their own ways. Doct. 1. If we do consider the parts of Gods approven
ceremonial worship, which they pretended to imitate, it may hold out several
instructions to us. And 1. The sacrifices every morning (which is not to be
understood as if Israel did not imitate them in the evening sacrifices also,
but this is named only, to show how early they were at their corrupt worship)
may teach; That Religion, and the duties thereof, should be a daily task,
wherein men should employ themselves early and diligently: And that Christ,
pointed out by the sacrifices, should be daily made ^^e (...) by them who would
approve themselves to be (...) ^^^gigious. 2. Their tithes after three years,
is an im^tation of that Law, Deuteronomy. 14.22, -- 29. wherein all Israel (...)
commanded, to lay apart a second tithe, after the Priests had got theirs, which
for two years (counting from the seventh or Sabbaticall year) was carried up,
or the worth of it in money to Jerusalem, to make holy feasts, inviting the
Levites and Widows thereunto; and the third year they kept it at home, and did
distribute it among the Levites, the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow,
which were among them. And this practice does teach; That men are not to rest
upon external performances of Religion, but with it they ought to join a
conscientious performance of duties toward their neighbors; and particularly,
of maintenance and encouragement to their Ministers, and of pity to the poor.
See Math. 15.5, 6. 3. This offering of a sacrifice of thanksgiving, teaches;
That no other duty of Gods service can be rightly performed, unless conscience
also be made of praise. See Philip. 4.6. 4. The use and allowance of leven in
the sacrifice of praise, and that according to the law, Lev. 7.13. cannot be so
understood, as if the Lord in this service allowed any thing which is
prohibited under the prohibition of leven in all other sacrifices, Lev. 2.11.
and namely, hypocrisy, error, and prophanity, which is in Scripture pointed
at by the name of leven; for, albeit the Lord do in his Christ pardon the great
mixture of these things, which is in his peoples service, yet he will not allow
it in any. But this ceremonial precept concerning leven in these sacrifices,
may point at these things; partly, that leaven is indeed forbidden in all
offerings that are burnt upon the Altar to God, (and it was an addition to
Isreal's sin, if they did otherwise, which yet appears not from this place)
but in sacrifices of praise, there fell much to the Priests share, and much was
employed in feasts: and so it was less matter what were men's share and
portion, if God got what was his due; partly, that as leaven takes a time to
prepare the dough for baking, Matthew. 13.33. and does ^^ke the lump to swell and
heave up; so especially in the performance of praise, men would have their
hearts put in frame for it, and they should be raised up with the sense of the
excellency and love of God, and of h^^ m^^cies toward them, Psalm. 108.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. And (...) ^^at as leaven does make bread sower to the cast, and they were
to eat of this at their sacrifices of praise: So (...) ^^ll most seriously
offer praise for any mercies and deliverances, when we still entertain sensible
thoughts of the bitterness from which we are delivered: and this also was
pointed at by the bitter herbs used in the feast of the Passover. 5. These free
offerings, which are to be proclaimed and published (of which Lev. 7.16. and
22.18. etc. Numb. 15.3. and elsewhere) were sacrifices of praise performed by
some, beside their ordinary peace offerings, either in testimony of their sense
of Gods goodness in general, or upon the receipt of some special favor, or
performance of some vow. They do not serve to warrant a man to devise any part
of worship of his own head, upon whatsoever pretense of affection or zeal; for
all that were but will worship, and so not acceptable: And there are duties
abundant in institute worship, whereby men may testify all the zeal and
affection they can pretend to. But they serve to point out that our service to
God, and especially praise, should be performed out of a free, voluntary and
ingenuous disposition; and that favors daily observed in Gods dealing toward
us, and received by us, should daily put a new edge upon our affections, and
engage us with our own consent to what is our duty: and that out willingness
and affection should witness it self, not by verbal professions only, but by
real offering of our selves, and what is ours, to God, Psalm. 116.12.16. Doct.
2. The practice of Israel in imitating these parts of institute worship; and
the Lords reproving thereof, and giving them up thereunto, may teach. 1. Men in
judging of the truth or falsehood of a way of Religion, have need to be very
attentive and circumspect, that they be not deceived with pretenses or shows;
for Isreal's way was very plausible, they did imitate the true Religion in many
things: they were very active in their way, and diligent and early about it,
and did multiply sacrifices, and they made a great show of zeal and affection
in it, they did proclaim and publish the free offerings. All this put together,
might easily deceive the simple, and yet did not at all justify their way. 2.
Whatever imitation there be of the true Religion, or whatever activity, o^
(...) there be in a way of worship; yet wh^^^ (...) ^tion is wanting to all, or
any part of that (...) not only not good, but an heinous provocat^^^ (...)
^^cause of controversy, and the more there is of it, (...) is the more
provocation in it; for whatever Israel pretended to in their way, yet since
they had no command to offer these things at Gilgal or Bethel, nor on their
Altars, or by their Priests, the Lord declares concerning it that they come to
Bethel and transgress, at Gilgal they multiply transgression, by their
frequent and many sacrifices. 3. Men's not consulting with God in his word, but
following their own humors and inclinations, is a crooked rule of Religion;
their hears being naturally mad on ill ways, and their interests being ready
to byasse them: Therefore are they upbraided with following this as their rule,
that they did so and so, for this likes you, O ye children of Israel. 4. When
men once engage in a corrupt course of Religion, they will not readily abandon
it again: There is more of a judgment in men's being given up to it, then will
easily be shaken off; for, this exhortation, Come to Bethel and transgress,
etc. and his declaring that this liked them, imports that there was no
reclaming of them. Which may be a warning to men not to embarque in the least
in such courses; and may guard us from stumbling or thinking a course of
Religion right, merely because men persist obstinately in it. 5. As God is
provoked to give up such to their own counsels, as are obstinate in a false
religion; So a false religion is a plague great enough of it self, and it
speaks a judgment sad enough, to be given up to it, considering what a
spiritual plague it is, beside what it may draw on both here and hereafter.
Therefore albeit he threaten elsewhere to punish them otherwise for this sin;
yet there he declares, that he needs no more for a plague, but give them their
will, Come to Bethel, etc. for this likes you, O ye children of Israel, says
the Lord God.

Verse 6. And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and
want of bread in all your palaces; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord

(...) I have withholden the rain from you, (...) yet three months to the
harvest, and I (...) to rain upon one City, and caused it not to rain upon
another City: one piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained not,
withered.

8. So two or three Cities wandered unto one City to drink water; but they were
not satisfied; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

9. I have smitten you with blasting, and mildew; when your gardens, and your
vineyards, and your fig trees, and your olive trees increased, the palmer worm
devoured them; yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord.

10. I have sent among you the pestilence, after the manner of Egypt; your
young men have I slain with the sword, and I have taken away your horses, and I
have made the stink of your camps to come up unto your nostrils, yet have you
not returned unto me, says the Lord.

11. I have overthrown some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye
were as a firebrand plucked out of the burning: yet have ye not returned unto
me, says the Lord.


The third Article of the challenge is for their incorrigiblenesse and
impenitency; In that when, for their Idolatry and other sins, God had
inflicted many judgments to reclame them; yet they did not return to him, but
persisted obstinately in their wicked courses. The judgments and corrections
which they had thus abused, are first famine (so that they could not foul their
teeth with eating) and that universal in all places, v. 6. And so we find they
were afflicted 1 King. 17. and 18. 2 King. 4.38. and may be at other times
after that. Secondly (which is one cause of famine) want of rain, which (...)
^ded much; Deuteronomy. 11.10, 11. And this (...) continuance, and when rain was most
needed (...) ^vidence also was visible in sending rain on (...) yea and parcel
of ground, and not on another; and (...) themselves were made sensible of this
stroke, by the want of water, causing them seek it from place to place, but to
no purpose, v. 7, 8. Thirdly (which is yet another cause of famine) they were
smittin by blasting winds, putrefaction and insects devouring all the fruits
of their ground, v. 9. Fourthly, they were smitten with pestilence, such as was
inflicted on Egypt of old, and by the sword upon their young men; their horses
were taken away by their conquering enemies, 2. Kings 13.7. or were consumed in
the war, or with the pestilence: and by reason of mortality and slaughter in
their camps, there was such an ill savor as could not be endured, v. 10.
Fifthly, They were for the most part so consumed with judgments, as Sodom was,
so that any remnant that was left, were but like a stick half burnt, plucked
out of the fire, v. 11. And yet to all these, and every one of them it is
sub-joyned that they made no right use of one or other of them.

From this whole challenge in the general, learn, 1. When God begins to reckon
with a visible Church, he will find her guilty not of one, or few, but of many
gross faults; for, in this process, beside the faults formerly challenged, he
finds her guilty of this also, that she is incorrigible. See Ezekiel. 8.6, 13,
15. 2. A course of sin will not prove a thriving way in end to any, but
especially to the Church, which the Lord will either make a theater of mercy,
or a field of blood; and he has many rods for that end; for, as they liked
their way of sin, v. 5. so he also chooses their judgments, and pours out a
quivet full of them upon them. 3. When the Lord strikes his Church sorest, and
with most rods, either together or one after another, yet he does but hereby
call her to repentance, and drive her to his mercy; for, it is his challenge
that being under all these judgments, yet they set not about turning to him,
as the thing he was driving at. 4. It must not be men's own conceits, or their
partial self love, but God who judges of the truth and reality of their
repentance; for, whatever they might pretend to offer to (...) ^^^ictions, yet
he assumes the judgment thereof (...) to himself; ye have not returned, says
(...). Whatever exercise judgments may put sin^ (...) to; yet it is not easy
to attain to true repentance ^^^er them; for, this is the constant challenge,
yet have ye not returned to me, or, even to me. This is not to limite the Lord,
but he both can and does drive many to him by rods inflicted for sin; yet it is
no small difficulty (as sad experience proves) in too many. Considering 1. Even
sad strokes are not soon felt by every one, or so felt as to stir them up to
any exercise, Isa. 42.25. Hos. 7.9.2: When strokes are felt, bitterness,
resentment, discouragement etc. are soon attained, and without any pains; but
repentance is a more difficult task, and is ofttimes impeded by these
distempers. 3. Gods hand is not soon nor easily seen in felt rods, to invite us
to repentance as the only remedy; or it is but little seen by reason of our
eyeing of instruments and second causes. 4. When we do in general acknowledge
an hand of God in our calamities, yet we may deceive our selves with a deluded
conceit of being delivered some other way, or by some other mean then by
turning to him. 5. When we are convinced of the necessity of repentance, yet it
is not easy to attain sincerity and steadfastness in it, Psalm, 78.34, 35,
36.37. 6. When we desire most sincerely to repent under calamities, yet it
cannot succeed till first we look back, and mourn for our sleighting the word,
which drew on the rod. 7. In a word, no outward dispensation can produce
repentance, without the grace of God; but crosses of themselves will rather
drive men further from it. See Isa. 57.17. Jer. 31.18. So that all have great
need to set about this duty in the sense of these great difficulties, that they
may eye God the more; and they who find mercy, to get another use of trouble,
ought to acknowledge the singular grace of God in it. Doct. 6. It speaks very
sad wrath on Gods part, and much impenitency on our part, when not only the
same judgments continue, but new judgments are inflicted, one after another;
for, this variety of rods does declare that Israel had not yet returned to God,
and that he was still pursuing them. Such a condition does declare that no rods
formerly inflicted have wrought upon us; that God is still angry, Isa. 9.12,
17, 21. and 5.25. and 10.4. and that we are walking contrary to God, which
provokes him to walk contrary to us, and punish us yet seven times more, Lev.
26.21, 23, 24. etc. 7. Such as do not repent nor are bettered by one rod, may
also abuse and harden themselves under never so many; for, this was their fault
under all of them, yet have ye not returned to me. Men must get the plague of
their own heart cured, before any affliction work upon them; judgments are in
themselves stupifying and do harden sinners, if grace prevent not: and abuse of
one rod draws on more hardness, and fits a sinner for the abuse of more
rods: so that still the longer, it is still the more easy to go wrong. 8.
Incorrigiblenesse and impenitency under multiplicity of rods, is a great height
of defection in a people, and the cause of a sad controversy; for, here this
is the great challenge God has against them, which draws on yet a sadder
quarrel in the following purpose. See Isa. 1.5. and 9.13: Jer. 5.3. and 6.29,
30. Ezekiel. 24.13.

In particular (that we may enlarge this incorrigiblnesse from the text) from
v. 6. learn, 1. As famine is a sad stroke, however sinners think little of
their daily bread; (for, here it is mentioned as a rod which might have
reclaimed them;) So when a people become brutish, and will not be led, so much
as by principles of reason, to acknowledge God, or to take up their duty, nor
will take notice of other evidences of Gods displeasure against them, it is
just with him to pinch them by the belly, like beasts, whom they resemble in
practice; for, they who were kine of Bashan, v. 1. and were so brutish as to
take no notice of Gods giving them up to their own counsels, v. 4, 5. are given
up to cleanness of teeth, and want of bread, as to a stroke which they would
feel. And whenever the Lord smites a people with famine, they ought to read
their own brutish disposition in that rod. 2. Such as do abuse prosperity, and
do not maintain the service of God, and his ministry, with the good things
given to them, it is righteous with him to let them smart under want; for, this
stroke comes also because they did but abuse plenty to serve their lusts, and
make them drunk, v. 1. And because they left his Temple and Priests without
Sacrifices and maintenance, and employed all these on their idols, and to the
maintenance of their unlawlul priests, v. 4, 5. 3. It is a sad lot, and speaks
much displeasure from the Lord, when he makes strokes become universal, so that
none can help another; and by such a lot, he would invite sinners to
repentance; for, this adds to the affliction, that it was in all your cities,
and in all your places; and by this he put them to it, if so be they would
return. 4. Sin is for the most part so deeply rooted in men's hearts, and so
much affected by them, and God so little taken notice of in calamities; that it
is no wonder to see men starved out of the world, before they will famish their
idols, and relinguish sin; for, albeit their stroke was such, Yet have ye not
returned to me, says the Lord.

From, v. 7, 8. learn, 1. The longer time that sinners be warned of judgments,
before that strokes be inflicted, it does heighten their impenitency before the
Lord; for, it adds to their sin, that they had three months drought before the
harvest came (in which time rain was most needed) to warn them of the ensueing
famine, and yet it took no effect; ye have not returned to me. 2. As Gods
providence is supreme in ordering all natural causes and effects, even in
dispensing rain as he pleases; so it aggravates the impenitency of sinners,
when Gods hand is eminently seen in a stroke, and yet he is not sought unto:
therefore it is marked, that he caused it to rain upon one city, and not upon
another etc. And yet have ye not returned. 3. The Lord when he pleases, can
make as small a matter as a drink of water prove a great trial to a people, and
cause them change their station to follow it; for, two or three cities wandered
to one city (belike where rain had been) to drink water. Such a great pinch was
even Ahab brought unto, 1. Kings, 18.5, 6. 4. It cannot but add to a peoples
sin, when they are made to feel a stroke, and are put to toil by it, and yet
make no use of it, to see Gods quarrel, or turn to him; for, it is his
challenge, they were made to wander to seek water, and yet returned not. 5.
Whatever course sinners take to be rid of troubles, when yet they neglect
repentance, it is meet and just that they be disappointed therein; for,
notwithstanding their wandering, yet they were not satisfied. The wells that
might supply one city, could not supply so many. 6 It is the great sin of men,
that being disappointed in all their expectations, and crossed in all the
courses they take to be rid of troubles, yet they will not, among the rest,
essay to turn to God: for, this is the challenge, that not only they wanted
water, but when they used all means they were not satisfied, and yet have ye
not returned to me, says the Lord. See Hos. 2.6, 7.

From v. 9. Learn, 1. God has variety of means whereby to plague men, and to
bring upon them any affliction he intends against them: and particularly, he
has several ways whereby to bring on famine. He can arm all his creatures to
cut off men's provision, one of them after another; he can make the change of
air, and small insects do that work when he pleases; for, beside the
drought, v. 7, 8. blasting and mildew do cut off their corn, and the
palmer-worme spoils their gardens, vineyards and other fruit trees. 2. Albeit
men under affliction have their eye much upon the present particular mean of
their trouble; yet the removal of that will not avail them so long as God is
angry: But whatever be the change of providential dispensations, the impenitent
may expect to meet with trouble; for, as blasting came by withering winds, so
when that was removed, and they got rain (either after the drought, or in other
places where it rained, v. 7.) that did not avail, but cold rain and the heat
of the sun after it, begot mildew or rottenness. 3. It is a great aggravation
of impenitency, when the Lord makes all creatures prove enemies, and every
dispensation prove a cross to men; and yet they will not be driven to make God
their friend; for, this is the challenge that under all this, yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord.

From, v. 10. learn, 1 When one kind of affliction will not work upon
sinners, God has change of rods wherewith to exercise them; for, whem famine
prevaled not, he had pestilence and the sword. 2. It is a very sad and humbling
case, when the Lord who did gloriously appear for his people, by plaguing their
enemies, is provoked to put his people in the room of enemies to feel the
same plagues. And it is yet sadder when such a dispensation does not affect and
drive them to God: for, this adds to the affliction, that I have sent among
you the pestilence after the manner of Egypt (pointing, as would appear, at that
stroke, Exodus 9.8, 9.) and it is sad that though there was such a strange
dispensation, yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lard. See Isa. 63.9,
10. 3. Whatever be a peoples duty, yet where God has a controversy, their
endeavors aganst their enemies will be to small purpose, and will only
contribute to heap miseries upon themselves; and they are bound to see Gods
quarrel and hand in this; for, your young men have I slain with the sword, and
have taken away your horses, and I have made the stink of your camp to come up
into your nostrils. 4. It does yet add to a peoples sin, when the Lord does
choose new rods for them, when he by his immediate hand, concurreth with
enemies to ruin them, and when these who are reserved, bear the sad prints
of, and warnings from these calamities, and yet they will not be induced to
turn to God; for, this is his quarrel here, that albeit he not only made the
endeavors of enemies successful, but did immediately smite them with
pestilence; and albeit their low condition, by breaking their military force,
and the stink of their camp, were a warning to them; yet have ye not returned
unto me, says the Lord.

From, v. 11. learn, 1. The visible Church may so far debord as to deserve to
be afflicted as severely as the worst of people: and God may in justice inflict
what she deserves; for, I have overthrown some of you as God (speaking of
himself in the third person) overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. It needs neither be
certainly affirmed nor denied that God did by fire, or some extraordinary
vengeance from heaven, consume some of them; for, on the one hand that may be
true, though it be not recorded in the history. And on the other hand, the
expression may point rather at the measure of Gods displeasure, then at the
manner of the punishment; and it is sufficient to assert that by the many and
diverse judgments inflicted on them, they were utterly consumed in several
places. 2. As the Lord is still gracious to his Church and people, to preserve
a remnant of them in the midst of utter desolation, and notwithstanding great
provocations; so he sees it meet to cause such as are preserved, bear the
marks of common calamities, that they may be stirred up to make use of them:
for, says he to the remnant preserved, ye were as a firebrand plucked out of
the burning, intimating what was his goodness which plucked them out, and what
prints of that combustion were upon them, whereof they might make use of. See
Zech. 3.2. 3. It is an undeniable proof of a peoples incorrigibelnesse, when
neither the extremity of judgments, or of Gods displeasure, or immediate hand
in them; nor of mercy remembered in wrath, will prevail with them to make them
turn to God; for, this feals up the challenge, that when some of them were
overthrown like Sodom, and yet some of them were preserved, yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord.

Verse 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee O Israel: and because I will do
this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
Unto these challenges a further threatening is sub-joined of some strange
judgments to come upon them. In consideration whereof, he exhorts them to
prepare to meet him; that is, (according to that speech, Luke 14. 31, 32,)
either they would strengthen themselves to grapple with him, and resist his
judgments: Or, (since they were too weak for that) they would by repentance
study to prevent this stroke of an angry God. And this exhortation has an
argument couched in the bosom of it, that as it became them who were Israel,
thus to behave themselves; So it might encourage them that the Covenant was not
yet renounced or made void, but he was their God still. Doct. 1. The
incorrigiblenesse and impenitency of a smitten people does portend terrible
judgments yet to come, and does justly procure them. For it is righteous with
God to prosecute his begun process against an undanted people (who have said
by their practice, that they will not receive correction, nor be reclamed,
whatever he do) till it be seen whose word shall stand, his or theirs, as Jer.
44.28. And it is just with him not to respect any afflictions that are on a
people who make no use of them, but still to inflict more plagues, though they
had never so many before. Therefore does their incorrigiblenesse draw forth
this sentence; Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel. 2. When the Lord
has smitten a people never so sore, he has yet more and sadder judgments to
inflict, if they continue impenitent; for, after all the former strokes, he yet
threatens, thus will I do unto thee; and L^v. 26. it is often said, he can
smite an impenitent people yet seven times more. The judgment here threatened
is only mentioned in a general, thus will I do, whereby we are not so much to
understand, that he will do as he has formerly threatened v. 2.3. or that he
keeps it up, that he might make it sadder or lighter, according as they carry
themselves in the matter of repentance. But by this it seems he would point out
the tetriblenesse of this stroke, in that it is inexpressible, and the very
nameing of it terrible. And if any question what can be added to the judgments
formerly inflicted; it would be considered, 1. Albeit former judgments have
not wrought upon a people; yet there may be hope that Gods pursuing them, may
prevail: Therefore the Lord may add this to all the former judgments, that
they shall be plagued with the want of any future blessings of rods, and that
afflictions shall never do them any more good, but shall harden them. See Ezekiel.
22.20. and 24.13. 2. Whereas these judgments had wrought slowly toward their
ruin; He can turn the moth into a lion, and speedily consume them. See Hos.
5.12, 14. 3. He can send these judgments not successively one after another,
upon a people, but can pour them out all at once, as Lam. 2.22. 4. Whereas men's
minds may be supported under a deluge of outward calamities; he can break the
peace of their mind, can fix their eyes to pore upon their troubles, raise up
tentations about them, and waken up anguish and perplexities, as Lam. 3.18, 19.
Job. 9.18, 27, 28. 5. Whereas notwithstanding all the former judgments, a
people may yet have a remnant preserved, and be permitted to dwell in their
land; He can cast them out of their land, and make their remembrance to cease,
as v. 2.3. Ezr. 9.14. Deuteronomy. 32.26. 6. Whereas a people under all these
calamities, may yet continue to be a Church; He can break his staves and
unchurch them. Hos. 1.9. 7. All these calamities formerly mentioned are but
temporal; but God can add to all these the casting of both body and soul in
hell. Doct. 3. This exhortation given to threatened Israel, may in general
teach, 1. When the Lord is about to strike in great severity, yet he desires
an intercessor, and to be prevented; And albeit this will not always hold off
the stroke (especially when some few only set about it, and the body of a
people are perverse and stubborn, Jer. 14.11. Ezekiel. 14.13, 14. etc.) yet it is
well pleasing to him, that the duty be set about; therefore does he command it
here. See Isa. 59.16. Ezekiel. 22.30. 2. Such as have been much hardened in
impenitency, under many warnings and judgments, may yet attain to repentance,
if they will know the plague of their own heart, and in time set about the
duty; for, the exhortation supposes that any who are sensible of their former
obduration, should not despair of repentance as impossible. See Lev. 26.40, 41.
3. No man but he will endeavor to prevent wrath by repentance, who is sensible
that he is no party for God, nor able to abide his anger; for, so much does the
exhortation import, that if they were not able to stand it out, they should
submit and repent. See 1.1. Cor. 10. 22. Psalm. 90.11. Doct. 4. In particular,
these exhortations to prepare to meet God, holds out the duty of true
penitents, in these particulars. 1. A penitent should take up God as his party
with whom he has to do, both in judgments, and in performing duties of
repentance; for, it is God he has to do with. 2. He is not to look upon
repentance as a duty he will attain to at a fit, but there must be preparation
and upstirring for it, by real conviction for sin, much diligence and
seriousness; for, they must prepare for this duty. 3. He must make it his
care, especially, to prevent wrath by repentance; for, he must prepare to meet
God, coming against him with vengeance. Albeit repentance be good at any time,
yet a penitent under trouble will find his stroke the sadder, that it might
have been prevented in time: and he will find his work the more difficult,
that the storm is broken upon him. 4. When a penitent has done all he can by
way of duty; yet he is bound to think little of it, as being rather a
preparation, then any thing else; and he will so judge of it, if he be real.
5. Whatever sense he have of short coming, and whatever he be in his way; yet
he is bound not to stay away, but to creep toward God, and prepare to meet him.
Doct. 5. The motives and arguments of repentance, here held out, may teach. 1.
As whatever guilt and sad dispensations may seem to say, a true penitent will
find the Covenant standing firm; (as here it is imported to be yet in force,
notwithstanding all their sin, and judgments for the same:) So such as would
repent indeed, ought not only to be affected with challenges and judgments;
but should make use of faith in Christ, and of the Covenant to melt their
hearts, and draw them to repentance. And such as do profess an interest in
God, should be ashamed to continue impenitent, when he is angry, and not to
tremble, and seek to make their peace, when he proclames war against them.
Therefore, says he, prepare to meet thy God, as directing them to make use of
the Covenant for this end, and inforceing repentance upon them from their own
professions of interest. 2. As the Lords heart warmeth toward his poor people,
and upon this it is that he invites them to repentance (for, he names Israel
twice, as a name that had been dear to him, as David did name Absolon in his
perplexity, 2. Sam. 18.33.) So the titles and privileges of a people, should
prove an argument of repentance unto them; for, if they be Israel, they should
prepare to meet God, for so did Israel of old, Hos. 12.3, 4. and thereupon
obtained that name, Genesis 32.28.

Verse 13. For lo, he that forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and
declares unto man what is his thought, that makes the morning darkness, and
treads upon the high places of the earth: the Lord, the God of hosts is his
Name.
A second argument and motive to repentance is expressed in this v. and taken
from the consideration of God who is their God, and with whom they have to do;
who is here described from such acts of his power, Omniscience and Majesty, as
may invite them to repent, and terrify them if they neglect it. Whence learn,
1. A right consideration and taking up of God with whom we have to do, is a
notable mean to make us serious in our duty, particularly, in repentance;
therefore is this argument made use of to press the exhortation. 2. It is our
duty in meditating on God, not to please our selves with formal and common
dispositions; but we should have our thoughts elevated and raised up, that we
may think of him with reverence as becomes, and may thereby be quickened to
duty: therefore is there a lo, or, behold, perfixed to this doctrine. 3. God
has given such a proof of his power in making and upholding the hills, as may
encourage sinners to flee unto him, and make him their refuge; and may be a
terror to them, if they stand out: and a right observer of this work, will
read such a lesson from it; for, this is one argument, he forms the
mountains: 4. As the Lords creating of the wind should set forth his
excellency, and preach repentance unto sinners, and encouragement to the
penitent: So his creating of invisible spirits and the souls of men, should
teach them to fear him who has command and power over souls, as well as
bodies; for, it is another argument, he creates the wind, or the spirit and
soul. 5. There is no dallying with God in the matter of repentance, who not
only knows man's most inward meditation, but gives proof thereof; and
without his information, man cannot know himself: for, he declares unto man
what is his thought, to wit, by his word, and by wakening of men's consciences.
6. It is but folly for impenitent sinners to trust to any-probable mean of
comfort or relief, seeing God can as easily turn all their joy, and hope of
deliverance, into sorrow, grief and trouble, as he can over-cloud a clear
morning; for, so much is held out in this, that when a morning breaks forth
after a dark night, he makes the morning darkness. 7. To be high and eminent
will neither assoile the impenitent, nor set him above God, or above the reach
of his hand; for, he not only reaches, but treads upon the high places of
the earth, or whatsoever is eminent and exalts it self against his
obedience; whereof his treading on the hills is a visible pledge. 8. The Lord is
the fountain of being unto all his creatures, and has all of them as armies
ready to obey his commands; and this also should make the impenitent to
tremble, and encourage such as make their peace with him: for, it is the last
argument, Jehovah, the God of hosts is his name.

CHAP. V.
IN this chapter, the Lord prosecutes what he had begun in the close of the
former; and takes much pains to stir them up to repentance, that so they may
prevent their own ruin, and that they may be left without excuse, if they will
not harken unto him. And for this end, in the first part of the chapter he
lays before them their sad condition which was approaching, in a lamentation
for the utter destruction of their state, v. 1, 2. and the almost utter
consuming of the body of the people, v. 3. In the second part of the chapter,
he exhorts them to make use of this warning, and to seek to God by repentance
for preventing of the stroke. This exhortation is several times repeated, and
seconded with directions how to perform the duty rightly, with promises to
encourage them to it, with challenges for sin, showing what need there was of
it; and these pressed home with threatenings of deserved judgments, to keep
them from sleighting challenges. And 1. They are exhorted to seek him, and
encouraged from a promise of life, v. 4. and dissuaded from their idolatrous
courses, which would bring judgments upon the places where they were
entertained, v. 5. 2. The exhortation and encouragement are again repeated,
with a certification that if they obeyed not, wrath should come upon them,
which they should not remedy by their idolatry, v. 6. considering that (beside
their idolatry.) they were guilty of horrid injustice and unrighteousness, v.
7. 3. They are again exhorted to seek him, considering his power, which appears
in his ordinary providence in the world, v. 8. and in his doing great thing by
unlikly means, v. 9. And considering what their sins were, and what they
deserved; wherein he declares, that they were such as could endure no
admonition, v. 10. that they were cruel oppressors, to raise up themselves, but
it should be to no purpose, v. 11. and that he knew their horrid injustice,
however they did palliat it, v. 12. and would therefore punish them with
judgments, under which they should not dare to mutter, and wherein wise
observers should adore his justice, v. 13. 4. The exhortation is yet again
repeated, and they are stirred up really to seek good and abandon evil,
promising them life, and his presence which now they did but presumptuously
boast of, v. 14. and they are pressed to prove the sincerity of their seeking
by their zeal and affections, and executing of judgment and justice; upon
which there is hope of mercy held out to that remnant, v. 15. otherwise, it is
threatened that all persons and places shall be filled with sorrow and
lamentation, v. 16.17. In the third part of the chapter, the Lord refutes their
carnal confidences which made them contemn his threatenings: and namely 1. Their
atheistical scorning of threatened judgments, and their looking to be better
dealt with; which he declares was a plague upon them, and would be refuted by
the dreadful darkness of the day of vengeance, wherein one misery should be
heaped on another, to plague them, v: 18, 19, 20. 2. Their hypocritical conceit
of their external worship; which the Lord rejects, since (beside the
unwarrantablenesse thereof) they walked not straightly in the duties of the
second Table, v. 21.22, 23, 24. 3. Their glorying in antiquity and the customs
of their fathers; Concerning whom the Lord declares that they had corrupted
his worship, as well as they who succeeded them, v. 25.26. and therefore they
who had imitate them, should pay for all by their captivity, v. 27.

Verse 1. HEar ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation, O
house of Israel.

2. The virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more rise: she is forsaken
upon her land, there is none to raise her up.


In these verses, the Prophet lays before Israel their sad condition and
approaching ruin, in a lamentation given and dictate to him by God, thereby to
express his sense of their condition: Wherein it is lamented that the Church
and state of Israel is fallen, and that without hope of recovery; she being
deprived of her members and subjects, and none left to raise her up again.
From v. 1. learn, 1. A peoples obstinacy and opposition to God, and their
contemning of better tidings from the word, will at last resolve in sad news
and lamentations: and whatever it be that people rejoice and comfort themselves
in, neglecting God, it will certainly end in bitterness and sorrow; for, now
the wanton and incorrigible house of Israel get a word against them, even a
lamentation. 2. Impenitent sinners are ordinarily so careless and so deaf,
that they have need to be stirred up to give attention, even when saddest news
are gone out against them; for, they need a call here, Hear ye this word etc. O
house of Israel. 3. Albeit the Lords faithful servants must carry hard tidings
against his people, when they are commanded; and are bound to glorify Gods
justice, when it is manifested in righteous judgments: Yet their own
dispositions are not so cruel, but they will be ready to lament for the sad
tidings which they must carry: and it is matter of deep sorrow, when the Lord
enters into judgment, even with his sinful Church, and people, and rewards
them as they deserve; Therefore is this threatening held forth in a lamentation
of the Prophet. From v. 2. learn. 1. It is the sad and lamentable fruit of sin,
that it brings a Nation or person violently down from their dignities and
enjoyments, into a gulf of miseries; for, it is the lamentation that Israel is
fallen, which is a violent change to the worse. He speaks of it in the present
time, because of its certainty and nearness, and because the lamentation is
fitted to the time when it should be so. 2. A peoples former flourishing
condition, and their not meeting with such sad lots, yea and Gods former
tenderness toward them, will not hold off deserved wrath, it may well make it
sadder; for, though they be the virgin of Israel, both in respect of Gods
tenderness toward them (as a man is careful of his daughter, being a virgin)
and in respect of their former flourishing condition, and that they had been as
an untouched virgin in respect of total subduing (and so it is spoken of other
Nations, Isa. 47. 1. Jer. 46.11.) Yet the virgin of Israel is fallen, and that
makes her fall the sadder. 3. Albeit secure sinners (especially in the Church)
do ordinarily dream of a speedy recovery out of their calamities; yet it is no
wonder to see deliverance long a coming when once God is provoked to strike in
extremity: Yea it is just with God to strike an impenitent Church without hope
of recovery, at least for many generations; Therefore it is added, she shall no
more rise, or recover, like a weak woman so crushed with a fall, that she
cannot get up again. Which is not to be understood as if Israel should never
recover; for the contrary is promised, Hos. 3.5. and 41.10, 11. Romans 11.26. and
elsewhere: And the original expression is used of things which come not to
pass only for a time, as 2. Kings 6.23. and 24.7. compared with Jer. 37.5.
But the meaning is, that however formerly when they were afflicted, they did
recover again either in the same, or in the following generation. 2. Kings
13.22.23, 24, 25. and 14.25, 26, 27. yet now it should not prove so: But by
this stroke, the Nation and state should for once be lost without hope of
recovery, and should continue so for a long time; as has been sadly verified
to this day. 4. God when he is provoked, can deprive a people of all refuges;
and leave them destitute of all help, in the midst of their former enjoyments;
for, she is forsaken, and that upon her land, there is none to raise her up.
This confirms her hopeless condition, that like a virgin crushed with a fall
to the ground, and wanting help to raise her up; so should she be deprived of
her subjects who in great numbers had possessed that land, and should have none
to recover her out of her difficulties, but she behoved to lie still upon the
ground, and not get her state erected again on that land, as formerly.

Verse. 3. For thus says the Lord God, The City that went out by a thousand,
shall leave an hundred, and that which went forth by an hundred, shall leave
ten to the house of Israel.
The Lord enterposeth to confirm this lamentation, and explaineth yet further
their helpless condition in their trouble; by showing that not only they
should be broken as a State or Nation, but that great havoke should be made
even of the body of the people. In so much that whereas in armies offending,
Commanders use to decimate them, and punish the tenth man; He on the contrary
should only leave the tenth, and cut off nine parts, to wit, by slaughter and
captivity, as is explained chap. 3.12. Doct. 1. It is a needful study to
observe and hear God speaking in threatenings, and seriously to consider what a
Lord he is; therefore is it subjoyned, for thus says the Lord, and to affect
them the more, he is described to be the Lord God. 2. When God is provoked to
let out the wrath that is due to sin, it will make a sad and great change, and
a great havoke of men; for, so it is here, scarcely is the tenth man left; The
City that went out by a thousand, shall leave an hundred, and that which went
forth by an hundred, shall leave ten to the house of Israel. The form of
speech alludes to the dividing of the people under captains of thousands, and
of hundreds. 3. When a Nation becomes impenitent and obstinate, it is just
with God, not only to ruin them as a State, and break their authority as a
Nation, but to break forth upon the body of the people, and consume them with
judgments also; for such was Isreal's lot, not only did they fall as a Nation,
v. 2. but here the body of the people are consumed. 4. The Lord in greatest
severity, does yet remember mercy toward his people. Even threatenings against
them, have promises of mercy in their bosom. And in particular, no sad
dispensation toward Israel, does utterly make void Gods mercy toward them: for,
so does appear here; albeit it be a threatening that they are but ten, yet that
they are ten, is a mercy and promise. See Isa, 6.13.

Verse 4. For thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel, Seek ye me, and ye
shall live.

5. For seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to Beersheba: for
Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught.


Follows the Lords scope in all this threatening, which is to invite them to
repentance, unto which they are so frequently exhorted, and pressed and
directed, in this part of the chapter. In these verses they are, 1. Commanded
and exhorted to seek him. 2. They are encouraged so to do, by a promise of
life, whereby we are to understand not only a spiritual life of grace here and
glory hereafter, but also that they should be delivered from trouble (at least
not be totally consumed by it) and enjoy outward prosperity and felicity, in
place of the calamities which their sin drew on. 3. They are directed how to
seek him rightly, to wit, that they should seek him in his own appointed way,
and not follow their idolatrous courses. And to this a reason is sub-joined,
that the places where their idols were entertained and worshipped, were to be
consumed by the wrath of God; and therefore it was their folly to follow them.
From v. 4. learn, 1. The Lords scope, when he threatens most severely, is to
drive his people to repentance, that they may be fit for mercy; Therefore this
exhortation comes in with the particle for (or since it is so, this is the
thing I drive at) seek me. Unless we fasten upon this, we will either but
despise threatenings, so long as we can, or become heartlesse when are sensible
of them. 2. As to enjoy God will be the chief desire and aim of penitents,
and not to be freed from trouble only: So however secure sinners glory much of
their enjoying of God; yet when trouble is blessed to set them on work, they
will find their mistake, and see that he is departed. In both these respects
are they directed to seek God as their chief desire, and him whom they had
lost in their security. 3. Albeit sensible souls find the Lord absent from
them, through their own default; Yet that should not deter them from seeking
and pursuing after him again; for, to such is the command, seek ye me. To be
made sensible of a distance, and of absence, is a greater token for good, then
that it should be crushed by such discouragements. 4. Albeit also such as find
a distance, and are seeking to make it up, may possibly, for their further
exercise, not seem to come speed at first; yet that should not weaken their
hands: nor will they be accounted less penitent, or be further from
acceptance, that they are but pursuers, and not enjoyers; for, approven
repentance here is not to find God, but to seek God, and these get the
promise. Seek ye me, and ye shall live. 5. Albeit Satan lay many impediments in
a penitents way; Sometime by assaulting him with fits of security; sometime
representing God so unto him, as he dare not approach; sometime suggesting that
there is no hope for him; and sometime discouraging him, that his former
endeavors seem to have been in vain: Yet this may resolve the doubts of most
desperate sinners, that even they are commanded to come to God: and that by
him, whose power may terrify, and whose sufficiency may encourage, and at
whose command we may let down the net; Therefore is the exhortation thus
pressed, Thus says the Lord unto the house of Israel, (as bad as they are)
seek ye me. See Isa. 45.19. 6. A penitent seeker of God would not only mind
the command of God, but would eye the encouragement also, and join the Gospel
with the Law, to quicken him in his duty; Therefore is there an encouagement
sub-joined, seek ye me, and ye shall live. 7. As all they who do not seek God,
are but dead even while they seem to live in pleasure, 1. Tim. 5.6. So to seek
God is the undoubted way to attain a spiritual life, and to get a sentence and
principle of eternal life, and to live comfortably in his favor: Yea it is the
ready way to obtain outward prosperity, in so far as is for their good, and to
have their lot, whatever it be, made comfortable: for, this promise, ye shall
live, albeit it hold not out such temporal favors to every penitent, as it
does to Israel; yet it holds out so much as is contained in the doctrine to
every penitent. From v. 5. learn, 1. The right and acceptable way of seeking
God is an old controversy in the Church, and a controversy which God only by
his word must resolve and determine: Therefore does he add this direction how
to seek him. 2. The following of idols and their service, and the worshipping
of God in and by them, will prove but a poor shift in trouble; and is a service
which he will not accept, nor approve of as right seeking of him: Therefore,
whereas they might be ready (if they did any thing) upon such an invitation, to
run to the worship of the calves; The Lord expressly prohibites them, if they
would approve themselves as seekers of him: But seek not Bethel, nor enter into
Gilgal; and pass not into Beersheha. These places have been often spoken of in
Hosea; only Beersheba is here first named in these Prophets; which it seems
they also frequented for idolatrous worship, because Abraham and Isaac had
dwelt often there, Genesis 21.31. and 26.23. and not only they, but Jacob also
had worshipped God there, Genesis 21.33, and 26.23, 24, 25. and 46. 1. It was
afterward a City on the very south border of the promised land, as Dan was on
the north, Judge. 20.1. 1. Sam. 3.20. and did belong to to the Tribe of Judah,
Josh. 15.20, 28. And therefore it is a question how Israel came to erect their
idolatry there. It may be it was because that City fell afterward in Simeons
lot, Josh. 19.1, 2. who revolted with the rest from the house of David. Though
after the captivity of the ten Tribes, we find it in the possession of Judah,
and polluted with their idolatry, 2. Kings 23.8. 3. Idols will be so far from
helping these who worship them and trust in them, that God will discover the
vanity of them, by making them causes of ruin to all places where they are
entertained; for, so much is held out in this reason dissuading them from these
courses, for Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Bethel shall come to
naught; Where in the Original there is an allusion to the names of these
places, that as Gilgal had its name from rolling, Josh. 5.9. so it should roll
into captivity: And Bethel should prove vanity, or Aven, as it was in effect by
reason of idolatry, whence it is called Bethaven, Hos. 4.15.

Verse 6. Seek the Lord, and ye shall live, lest he break out like fire in the
house of Joseph, and devour it, and there be none to quench it in Bethel.
The exhortation and encouragement are here the second time repeated. And a
certification is sub joined, that if they did not obey, wrath would break out
and consume them like a fire, which they should not be able to quench by their
idolatry. Whence learn, 1. There is need of frequent up-stirrings and
encouragements to set us on work, and keep us going in seeking God: Therefore
must both the command and encouragement be repeated. 2. What the Lord says for
the encouragement of penitents, and such as seek him, may safely be leaned
unto, for he will not recall nor eat it in again: Therefore does he again
promise, Seek the Lord, and ye shall live, as that which he will stand to and
make good. 3. The Lords displeasure against his sinful and impenitent people,
will break forth, and prove so much the more violent, as they have had many
warnings and encouragements; for, upon the back of the exhortation and promise,
it follows, lest he break forth like fire in the house of Joseph, or ten
Tribes, whereof Ephraim the son of Joseph was the chief. 4. Idolatry and
corrupt Religion have need of prospering times; for, when wrath is kindled,
such courses will not avail either to avert, or moderate it: Therefore, says
he, when this fire is kindled, there will be none to quench it in Bethel.

Verse 7. Ye who turn judgment to wormwood, and leave of righteousness in the
earth;
To help them to take with this exhortation, he lays before them their guilt
needing repentance and deserving wrath. And as before it is insinuated that
they had sinned against the first Table, in the matter or worship: So here
their violation of the second Table is laid to their charge, in that they
turned the seats of justice into places of bitter and deadly injustice, and
left no place for any righteousness among them, but did tread it under foot.
Whence learn, 1. Men will never be serious and sincere in the matter of
repentance and seeking of God, for any troubles that can come upon them, till
first they be convinced of sin and guilt: Therefore are they charged with
guilt, to make the exhortation effectual. 2. The Lord abhors partiality in
men's taking with guilt. He will have them so take with one sort of sin, as they
do not lightly pass over another; and so to see their sins against the first
Table, as they be humbled also for provocations against the second: Therefore,
after the challenge for their idolatry, he lays before them their sins in the
matter of justice and righteousness. 3. As the impartial administration of
justice is a very profitable and pleasant thing; So it is a bitter and deadly
thing to pervert justice; And as it is bitter and intolerable to the innocent:
So God will look upon it as a bitter course which he cannot endure. Therefore
does he challenge them that they turn judgment to wormwood. 4. When public
judicatories are corrupted with injustice, then a door is opened to all crimes
and unrighteousness in private dealing: And this will be put on their account
who make not justice formidable to such transgressors; Therefore it is added,
and leave off righteousness. 5. It is an high degree of wickedness, when not
only righteousness is omitted, but is despised also; and all they are
condemned and trod upon who would follow it: This was their sin here, and leave
off righteousness in the earth, or let it rest on the earth, and leave it on
the ground, as a contemptible thing, to be trod upon.

Verse 8. Seek him that makes the seven stars and Orion, and turns the
shadow of death into the morning, and makes the day dark with night; that
calls for the waters of the sea, and pours them out upon the face of the
earth, the Lord is his Name.
This v. in the Original has only Him, or he that makes the seven stars etc.
And it is conceived by many as a continued challenge, repeating from v. 7. Ye
leave off, or forsake him that makes the seven stars etc. But it runs as well
with the translation as a resuming of the exhortation, which is the principal
thing insisted on in this part of the chapter. And it is again pressed, partly,
from the consideration of the power and providence of God, v. 8, 9. and partly,
from the consideration of their own sins, and and of the judgments coming
upon them, because of sin. In this v. the power and providence of God are
commended as shining in natural things, and their motions; 1. That he is the
Creator and Governor of the stars, and their influences, and of the seasons
caused thereby: This is instanced in the seven stars, who do afford more warm
influences, and Orion, which produces boisterous storms. See Job. 9.9. 2 That
he is the appointer and orderer of the vicissitudes of day and night, whereby a
clear morning succeeds to darkness like the shadow of death; and again a
dark night shuts up the clear day; or, (as this last part may be also
understood) He can alter natures course, and darken the clearest day with thick
clouds. 3. That he can raise vapors out of the sea, and pour them out in rain
upon the earth, or, can by inundations and deluges, let in the sea upon the
land. By all which it appears that he is Jehovah, the true God. Compare chap.
4.13. Doct. 1. Such as would seek God rightly, ought to know him, and study
what he is; That so they may know him to be the true God, infinitely above all
idols; and that therefore his commands are not to be slighted, nor will he be
pleased with outside service, and that all they who seek him sincerely have
cause to be encouraged in him. Therefore, does he describe himself, to press
them to seek him, and comprehendes all in this, the Lord is his name. 2. The
Lord is the Creator and Supreme Governor of all the creatures in Heaven and
Earth: And he is to be seen and acknowledged as such, without resting on these
creatures themselves, or ascribing their courses, motions, and influences to
fate, or any second cause: Therefore is it declared that he makes the seven
stars, and Orion etc. 3. It is not enough to see God and his providence in the
works of nature, or motions of second causes; But we ought so to see him in
them as may commend piety to our hearts, and press us to it: Therefore does
the exhortation run, seek him that makes the seven stars etc. And
particularly, first, it is an argument to seek him, that he makes the seven
stars and Orion. Whereby is held out. 1: That God is worthy, and ought to be
sought unto and served, who is not only above men and creatures on earth, but
his power is in the heavens. 2. He is able either to ruin or refresh men by
means and second causes which are at a great distance from them, even by the
influences of the stars: and therefore he ought to be sought unto. 3. The very
vicissitudes and change of seasons and weather, are Gods work wherein he is to
be seen, and which should invite us to seek him. Secondly, his turning the
shadow of death into the morning, and making the day dark with clouds;
teaches, that God is he who can change or settle conditions as he pleases; He
can turn adversity into prosperity, and prosperity into adversity, as he
pleases: And if he settle, none will shake, and if he shake none can
establish: And therefore the short path to well-being, is to seek him. Thirdly,
his calling for the waters of the sea, and pouring them out upon the face of
the earth, teaches, that God has showers of comforts, and deluges of
miseries, to pour out as he pleases. When they who seek him stand in need, he
can bring abundance of comforts unto them in as strange a way, as to call up
sea-waters into the air, and purify them, and pour them out upon the earth.
And when sinners neglect him, he can wonderfully plague them as if he made void
his decree concerning the bounds of the sea, and let it in upon the land.

Verse 9. That strengthens the spoiled against the strong, so that the
spoiled shall come against the fortress.
In this v. the power and providence of God, are further commended from what he
does in humane affairs. Wherein it is declared that he can employ contemptible
and subdued people, and make them prevail over the strongest, and their strong
holds. This may be understood either generally, that the Lord does this among
all Nations as he pleases. Or more particularly, that he speaks it with
relation to them; and that either by way of threatening, that if they sought not
to him, but trusted in their strength and forts, he could make most
contemptible and weak means crush them and it. Or by way of promise, that if
they would repent and seek him, he would strengthen them (though sore broken)
to recover and prevail over their enemies. Doct. 1. The power and providence
of God, do shine not only in the works of nature, and of natural second
causes, but also in over ruling the actions of men according to his pleasure:
and he (and not chance or fortune) is to be seen suprem in all of them; and a
right sight thereof will invite men to seek him who is supreme over them and
their enterprises: Therefore also is this held out as an argument pressing them
to seek him. 2. Men's strength and valor, or their forts and strong holds will
prove but weak defenses when God is angry, and is about to bring destruction;
for, so is here held forth. 3. God needs not any great or probable means, to
oppose what men account their great strength, or to bring it down; for, he
strengthens (or recreats and gives courage to) the spoiled against the
strong, so that the spoiled shall not only hazard to go to the fields against
enemies, but shall come against the fortress.

Verse 10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate: and they abhor him that
speaks uprightly.
This duty, which has been pressed from the consideration of Gods power, is
yet further inculcate from the consideration of their own sins, and of the
judgments deserved thereby, both which he lays before them. And first,
(which he speaks of them, as not worthy to be spoken unto) he challenges;
That in the gate they could not endure any rebuke, or upright speaking: that
is, their Judges especially who sat in the gate, were so wicked, and so
incorrigible, that they could not endure any who opposed or reproved their
unrighteous decrees, or who spoke and pleaded for righteousness and equity.
And they could not endure the Prophets who did publicly reprove their vices,
and counsel them to do righteously. Whence learn, 1. Administration of justice
(being appointed for the genral good of a society) should be so managed, as
Courts of judgment may be open and patent to all who are wronged. And Judges
should carry themselves openly and fairly in it. So much was signified by
administration of justice of old, in the gate, where the meanest might have
easy access, and the Judges determined in open view of all. 2. In times of
public and general defections, God has ordinarily much to say to Judges and
Rulers; for, here they who manage matters in the gate, (as appears from the
following verses) do that which is worthy to be rebuked, and which is not
upright 3. It is the commendation of men in a declining time, that they are not
drawn from their duty by the impetuous stream of the time; and that they do
in their stations, oppose others who do wrong, which is a mean to guard
themselves, when they are zealous against evils in others: for, here there are
Prophets and others in their stations, who rebuke and speak uprightly, and that
publicly in the gate. 4. Upright men, and such as are faithful and free in an
evil time, may expect not only that they will not always prevail with these
they deal with; but that they shall meet with contempt and hatred for their
pains; for, such was their lot here. See Isa. 29.21. 5. It is a great height of
impiety, when men not only do wrong, but cannot endure them who join not with
them, or would reclaim them when they sin with an high hand. This is an evil
that, if it be not repented of and amended, will provoke God to take the
reproof in his own hand; As here he does; and Rulers cannot be free of it,
when they will not be meddled with, nor endure counsel and admonition from these
who are warranted by God to offer it unto them. This is the sum of the
challenge, They hate him who rebukes in the gate etc.

Verse 11. Forasmuch therefore as your treading is upon the poor, and ye take
from him burdens of wheat, ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall
not dwell in them: ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink
wine of them.
Secondly, he challenges them for cruel oppression of the poor, and that
(having taken all their silver from them) they did cause them bring their very
meat and livelihood on their shoulders to them. And he declares, that however
they did this to enrich themselves, and to make themselves stately houses and
pleasant vineyards, yet they should not enjoy them. Whence learn, 1. Oppression
of the poor is an heinous sin before God, who is the author of justice, and
Patron of the poor especially. And it is a sin, which when men are truly
convinced of, they will find themselves in a woeful condition, and in a
condition calling aloud to repent; Therefore it is here challenged, and made
use of to press them to repent. 2. God does take notice of the degrees of
oppression, and does ponder all the cruelties in it, to lay them to their
charge, who will not judge themselves, and repent thereof; for, he lateth to
their charge, that they trod upon the poor, or did so oppress them as if they
were but mire to be trod upon; and that they had a habit of this; their
treading is upon the poor, as if they stepped not a step, but upon oppressed
ones. And he challenges them that they deprived them of their very livelihood;
Ye take from him burdens of wheat, which he had provided for his own
maintenance. 3. Oppression is so much the more odious, as the oppressor has
not a pretense of necessity for his course, but having enough, he must yet
ruin others to make him live in more state; for, he callengeth, hereby ye have
built houses of hewn stone, and planted pleasant vineyards. 4. As all things in
the world are but uncertain, even when men have them among their hands; and the
use and enjoyment of what we have, is a new gift of God after he has given it:
So men's ill purchase, and raising of themselves by cruel oppression, is an
unsure foundation, and may strip men of fair possessions; for, ye have built
houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: ye have planted pleasant
vineyards, but ye shall not drink wine of them.

Verse 12. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins: they
afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the gate
from their right.
Thirdly, to confirm this challenge, and show the equity of his sentence; He
declares, that however they did palliat these their sins, under the pretense
of Law and right, yet he knew perfectly both the number and the nature of their
sins. And to witness this, he chalengeth them further concerning their
oppression, that beside what was committed by great men in an extrajudical way,
their very public judicatories were corrupted, by afflicting the man who had a
righteous cause, by taking a bribe, or ransom (as the Original imports) to
absolve the wicked who ought to be condemned; and by depriving the poor of
their right. Whence learn, 1. Albeit men be great palliaters and excusers of
their own way, that so they may deceive and silence others, and may delude and
harden themselves; Yet God does perfectly know their ways in all the
aggravations thereof; as here he declares, For I know your transgressions. 2.
As men who once corrupt their way within the visible Church, will soon turn
monstrous; So it is an heinous provocation, when sins are gross, and
transgressions or rebellions; When these are not few, but multiplied and
manifold; and when men are violent and impetuous in following thereof, and do
break over all banks, and bear down all opposition in their way; Therefore are
they called mighty, or strong sins. 3. Oppression committed under the pretext
of justice, is especially marked by God as hateful, and as gross and violent
iniquity; for, it is supposed that men who are employed to administrate justice
do know their duty and danger better then others; and therefore it must be
violent corruption in them that drives them to transgress; and beside, the
prostituting of justice (which is Gods ordinance) that it may be subservient to
men's corrupt ends, is abominable iniquity. Therefore does he instance that
general challenge, as being evident in the matter of justice. And he declares
it to be so hateful, that the actors thereof are not worthy so much as of a
reproof from God; And therefore, having spoken to them in the former part of
the v. he speaks this particular challenge of them, They afflict the just etc.
4. As injustice may be several ways committed; So all the kinds thereof are
hateful to God. And whether men do afflict the innocent, or absolve the guilty
for a reward, or wrong a man in his right, because he is poor, they will still
find their course abhorred of God: So that men need not please themselves that
they are free of one kind of oppression and injustice, if yet they be involved
in another: Therefore does he mark and challenge these several kinds of it,
They afflict the just, they take a bribe, and they turn aside the poor in the
gate from their right. See Prove. 17.15.

Verse 13. Therefore the prudent shall keep silence in that time: for it is an
evil time.
Some take this v. as a further challenge and aggravation of their sin, that
they were so impetuous and incorrigible, v. 10. that prudent men would meddle
no more with them, nor speak against that which they could not amend. Which yet
does not so much commend or justify their silence in their station, nor
warrant others to follow it as a rule; as it declares what was the great pride
of that people, who shut all doors upon good counsels. But it seems rather to
be a threatening because of these their iniquities, formerly challenged. And it
may be conceived, either thus; That as they would not suffer any admonitions,
v. 10. so the time should come, wherein their evils and oppressions should be
so great, and their oppressors so cruel, that any, who had their wits about
them, should not dare to mutter. Or, (which seems to be the more simple
interpretation) that judgments should come, wherein the godly and prudent,
wisely considering the iniquity of the times procuring the same, should
silently and without murmuring, adore the justice of God, and should have
nothing to say or plead on their behalf, why it should not be so with them.
Doct. 1. Insolent and imprudent boldness in sinning, is justly punished with
such cruel usage from men, as that they dare not speak nor bemoan themselves.
And albeit it be men's great cruelty so to entreat an afflicted people; yet the
afflicted are bound to see Gods justice therein. So much does the first
interpretation hold forth. 2. As all men are bound reverently to adore, and
submit to God in his judgments, and to silence all the swelling thoughts of
their heart against his dealing, or at least to smother them, when they cannot
suppress them, (for, so much does this silence in general import. See Lev.
10.3. Psalm. 39 9;) So it is a sad case when the truly godly, who are cordial
sympathizers, and earnest intercessours in the straits of a Nation, are stricken
dumb in a day of calamity; and do see so much provocation among a people, and
so much incorrigiblenesse under other means, that they have nothing to say
wherefore God should not take his rod in his hand; for, beside the general
duty, this is it which is here held forth in particular, as an addition to
Isreal's calamity, that they should be smitten, and the godly should have
nothing to plead why it should not be so, The prudent shall keep silence etc.
3. Such as would walk aright under sad dispensations and judgments, ought to
be spiritually wise and prudent, and ought to compare dispensations with
provocations procuring the same; for they are the prudent, who keep silence,
and they consider that it is an evil time, for which God sends these
dispensations.

Verse 14. Seek good and not evil, that ye may live: and so the Lord, the God
of hosts shall be with you, as he has spoken.
The exhortation is the fourth time repeated, and is partly explained and
pressed by propounding encouragements, v. 14, 15. and partly pressed from the
calamities that were approaching, v. 16, 17. In this v. the exhortation is
explained, that they should so seek him, as to follow what is good, and to
renounce evil. And unto this, the former promise of life is sub-joined. To
which is further added, by way of explication, that whereas they now only
presumptuously dreamed and boasted of their enjoying Gods presence, they
should, upon their sincere seeking of him, find it really true. Whence learn,
1. When the Lord is most sharply reproving, and sadly threatening a people, yet
he would not have them thereby deterred from seeking to him; Therefore to
prevent this mistake, he repeats the exhortation after the former challenges
and threatenings. 2. Men do need frequent up-stirring unto, and informations
concerning the right way of repentance and seeking of God, as being unwilling,
and very ignorant and ready to run wrong, or please themselves on slight
grounds in that matter: Therefore is the exhortation again inculcate and
explained. 3. Men in seeking God, should follow that which is really good, and
not what seems to be so only; And they who seek God sincerely, do not only
offer service and homage to God, but are seeking their own real good:
Therefore is seeking of God explained to be seek good. 4. Albeit it be an
evidence of men's enjoying real good, when they sincerely seek God; And albeit
there be much good daily conferred on them who are seeking him; Yet the sincere
seeker of God will see his wants most, and be set on work to pursue after what
is good; and these who are sincerely pursueing, are accepted in Gods sight.
Therefore are true penitents described, that they seek good, rather then by
their enjoyments. 5. Men must not lay their account to seek after good,
retaining their former evils; But they who would approve themselves, must
abandon them, that they may enjoy good; Yea, their former fervor in following
thereof, must be employed in seeking good, and must be a spur in their sides,
not to be remiss and coldrife in their duty; Therefore it is Subjoyned, seek
good and not evil. 6. Let men reproach God and his ways as they please; yet it
is a certain truth, that God delights to do good unto his people, and that none
shall seek him in vain; For, his word is again given, that seeking tends to
this, that ye may live. Wherein not only the certainty of their liveing is
held forth, but his delight and desire that they should live; and therefore he
exhorts them to seek, that so they may take the way to life, and get it, seek
good that ye may live. see Ezekiel. 18.29, 30, 31, 32. 7. Albeit convinced
sinners, ought to make use of the Law as well as the Gospel; and albeit their
discouragement and unbelief, being convinced, may for a time put them to some
diligence and pains: Yet neither will they be able to persevere in such a
course, nor will it work an effectual and through change, unless the Gospel
and encouragement by faith be made use of, and eyed likewise. Therefore, also
does he propound Gospel encouragements and comforts, as a special means of
making the exhortation effectual, seek good that ye may live etc. 8 The Lords
presence in favor and mercy is the sweet comfort and rich upmaking of a
people, and the special and chief cause of their happy life: And no wonder, he
being the Lord, whose being is of himself, and needs nothing of them, and can
give a being unto any encouragement, and by his word can create it of nothing,
when they need it, and being the Lord of hosts, whose power is able to protect
them, and raise instuments and means of help unto them: Therefore it is added
as their special encouragement, and an explication of that promise of life, So
the Lord, the Lord of hosts shall be with you. 9. Albeit the members of a
visible Church, will not be put from a conceit of Gods favor and presence with
them, what ever their way be; Yet they are but deluded and do only dream of
it, while they continue in sin, and do not sincerely seek him; for, it is
imported they have spoken much of his presence, but groundlesly, so long as
they did not seek good and not evil 10. It is a special encouragement to seek
God sincerely, that whatsoever men conceit of Gods favor and their own
happiness, while yet they are in a wicked way, will prove all really true, if
they will take the right way of seeking God: for, so is expressly held out for
their encouragement, seek good etc. And so the Lord, the God of hosts shall be
with you, as ye have spoken. 11. Whatever men may boast of Gods favor and
their hope to attain salvation, as their great happiness; yet they declare
themselves liars, and proclaim their contempt thereof, when they will not so
much as follow the sure way to attain that, which they pretend so much to
esteem; Therefore also does he urge their presumptuous delusions against them,
as pleading for what he presses, that they should take the right way to attain
what they pretend to account so much of.

Verse. 15. Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish judgment in the
gate: it may be that the Lord God of Hosts will be gracious unto the remnant of
Joseph.
In this verse the exhortation is yet further explained, that not only in
external practices they should seek good and not evil; but that in their heart,
they should seriously and with affection and zeal, embrace the one and detest
the other; And that they should prove the sincerity hereof and of their
turning to God, by the exercise of judgment and justice. Unto which an
encouragement is subjoyned, that however Joseph, or the ten tribes, whereof
Ephraim was chief, were sore crushed and but a remnant left of former
judgment; Yet there is hope that God will show mercy to them. Whence learn, 1,
Man's laziness in seeking God before they be convinced, and their
discouragements when they are convinced, are ordinarily so great, that they
need much upstirring and encouragement, Therefore are the exhortation and
encouragement yet again repeated and enlarged. 2. The Lord will not respect
men's external practice of good, when it may be their hearts abhore and loath
it, and are bent on other courses; But he requires chiefly that they be rooted
in the love of good, and do zealously affect it. And when it is so, the Lord
through Christ will pass over many failings in practice; Therefore, it is
further added to explain and enlarge what is said, v. 14. love the good; see
Romans 7.22, 23, 24, 25. 3. Men's affections toward good, must be evidenced by
their cordial detestation of evil. Their hatred of evil, must kindle their
affection to good, and their tasting of the sweetness of what is good, should
again make them detest evil yet more: And where it is so, the Lord will have
respect to the sincerity of men under many failings, Therefore are they
conjoined, Hate the evil, and love the good. He will not have them simply not
doing evil, while it may be their heart is going a whoring after it, but will
have them really detest it; and not only so, but he will have their hatred
thereof setting them an edge to what is good, and their loving of good
cherished thereby, see Romans 12.9. 4. Albeit the following of good bring true
advantage unto men, and evil courses bring prejudice, and albeit this may be an
encouragement and argument to prevail with men: Yet it is not sufficient that
men's affections be set upon good, merely because of gain and advantage
thereby, or that they loath evil only because in some cases and times, it may
bring loss and detriment. But men's affections should look upon courses as good
or evil in themselves, and accordingly love and hate them, whatever may attend
them; Therefore it is simply commanded, Hate the evil, because it is evil, and
love the good, because it is good. 5. Such as are truly seeking God and turned
unto him, ought to respect justice, and to prove their sincerity thereby;
Therefore it is subjoyned, and establish judgment in the gate. Where to
establish it, is not only to erect Courts for judgments, but to prosecute the
course of justice firmly, not being shaken or diverted, by intrest, passion, or
reward. 6. Free grace and mercy in God, is the only clame of all such as are
sincere in seeking God, and are not puffed up with a conceit o^ their own
worth: And his grace and mercy (being the glorious and omnipotent God) is so
infinite, so free, and so tender, as may invite all to seek him, and to
acquiesce in what his grace and mercy sees fit to carve unto them; Therefore
is this propounded as their encouragement, The Lord God of hosts will be
gracious. 7. When a people do sincerely seek God, he will respect all their
afflictions, as arguments why he should have mercy on them. And his former
afflicting of them in just displeasure, will not be an hinderance to his
showing mercy. Therefore it is added, he will be gracious to the remnant of
Joseph, that is, though he had been provoked to leave them but a remnant, yet
he will now be gracious, yea so much the more, as they are but a remnant. 8.
Albeit the Lord do allow encouragement upon such as sincerely seek him; Yet he
would not have them absolutely expecting temporal deliverances, when
provocations are come to a great height: And he sees it meet to exercise them
with incertainties, that they may be yet more deligent. Therefore is the
promise propounded with it may be, to show that as his graciousnesse appears in
temporal deliverances, he would not have them peremptory about them, but to
prove their real piety by submission in these things: And that he will hold out
all their encouragements so, as may prevent security. Compare, Joel, 2.14. Jon.
3.9. Zeph. 2.3.

Verse. 16. Therefore the Lord, the God of Hosts, the Lord says thus, Wailing
shall be in all streets, and they shall say in all the high ways, Alas, alas!
and they shall call the Husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful of
lamentation to wailing.

17. And in all vineyards shall be wailing: for I will pass through thee, says
the Lord.


To quicken them yet more unto his duty, the Lord declares that if they will
not repent, (as there was no hope they would) he will not contest any longer,
but that the sentance is already passed, that he going through them with
vengeance, will give matter of sorrow and sad lamentations to all persons in
all places. Whence learn. 1. Whatever encouragement God allow unto men upon
their repentance, yet none should scorn his threatenings, because of his
gracious offers: for when he enters in a process with a wicked people, he will
either amend or end them thereby. And it proves too often true, that men are
rather ripened for judgments, then reformed by the Lords dealing with them;
Therefore he guards the former encouragements, by this threatening, if they
repent not, waling shall be in all streets etc: and he propounds it absolutely
by way of concluded sentence. Therefore the Lord says thus etc. to intimate,
that however he exhorted and encouraged them, yet there was no hope that they
should hearken unto him. 2. Such as do provoke God, should seriously consider
how great and strong a party he is; and for this end, they should meditate upon
him as he has revealed himself. And they who will not acknowledge his
greatness in his Law, propounding their duty, and prohibiting sin, or in
offering encouragements to divert them from their evil way, and vain deluding
comforts; They, I say, may expect that he will make his greatness conspicuous
in punishing of them; Therefore in pronouncing this sentence, he is declared to
be the Lord, the God of hosts: the Lord who says thus, where he takes unto
himself his several names, pointing out his essence, power, and authority and
dominion. 3. When God is provoked by his people, especially by their neglecting
repentance and scorning his offers, he will not dwell in the midst of them, nor
protect them, but will turn their party, and run through their land with his
judgments; for, where the former exhortations have not place, I will pass
through thee, says the Lord (See Exodus 12.12.) and this is the cause of all
the woe that is here denounced against them. 4. When the Lord is provoked to
appear in anger against them who will not repent, he will make all their joy
and insolent scorning of repentance, end in sorrow; for, there shall be
wailing, and they shall say, alas, alas. 5. God will make the sorrow of a
guilty people universal, both on persons and in places; That so he may reach
all who are guilty, and that they may be stripped of all comforts, who will not
seek to him; for, this sorrow shall be in all streets, in all highways, among
the husbandmen, and in all vineyards. Neither City nor Country, shall be free
of it, nor open fields and highways, nor enclosed vineyards. 6. It is
righteous with God to make the sorrow of an impenitent people, singular; and
unto such trouble, inflicted by an angry God will produce sorrow greater then
can be expressed; Therefore beside these who are afflicted, such as are skilful
of lamentation (of whom see 2. Chron. 35.25. Jer. 9.17, 18. Math. 9.23.) shall
be called to wailing; Whereby the spirit of God does not justify the
lawfulness of men's having skill and faculty to put on such affections, and
their hireing them out for gain; But he intimates that their sorrow should be
so great, as to need help to express it. 7. We ought frequently to consider
that it is God with whom we have to do in threatenings and judgments; lest
forgetting that, we miscarry under them: Therefore, again all is sealed up with
this, says the Lord.

Verse. 18. Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord; to what end is it for
you? the day of the Lord is darkness, and not light.

19. As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him, or went into the
house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.

20. Shall not the day of the Lord be darkness, and not light? even very dark,
and no brightness in it?


Because the Lord had to do with men of corrupt dispositions, who would neither
be allured with offers, not affrighted with threatenings, that so they might
seek him; But still fostered themselves in security, by reason of many false
pretenses and presumptuous conceits: Therefore in the close of this chapter, he
refutes these their confidences, that so the threatenings might sink down in
their hearts, to move them to repent. And first, he deals with them who desire
the day of the Lord, that is, such, who being Atheists and Epicures, did not
acknowledge God or a providence, nor would believe any thing of approaching
judgment; Or such, who being presumptuously secure of Gods favor and an
interest in him, could not believe that any such day would come as the Prophet
threatened, or that it would be so dreadful to them, as the Prophets foretold.
And therefore in presumptuous scorn they desired once to see that day,
wherewith they were so often threatened. See Isa. 5.19. Jer. 17.15. Ezekiel. 12.22.
2. Pet. 3.3, 4. Concerning these, the Lord declares, that this disposition was
an evidence of a plague upon them, and of more yet to come; and that they
little considered what they were doing: for that day should not only come, but
it should be full of perplexities and miseries, without any light or comfort,
v. 18. And heaps of evils should follow one after another, so that he who
escaped one, should fall in another, v. 19. yea certainly it should be a time
of great misery, without any light of counsel or comfort, v. 20.

From, v. 18. learn, 1. When the word is most clearly preached, and threatenings
most terrible, there will still some be found so atheistical as not to credit
them at all, and so presumptuous, as not to submit to the verdict of the word,
but they will comfort themselves, expecting that God will do otherwise then it
faith; for, so is here imported. 2. It is no wonder to see such Atheists and
presumptuous sinners, come to that height, as not only to harbor such
thoughts in their own bosoms; but to pluck off any veil of hypocrisy they
had, and set down in the seat of the scornful and openly deride the word; for,
so do they here, they desire the day of the Lord, (or the day of vengeance,
wherein he will prove himself to be the Lord) that is, with insolent and
profane scorn, they desire to see that day, and that the Prophets would make
their words good, which they expect will never be. Albeit many who harbor such
thoughts would be unwilling it should be known; Yet God is provoked to pluck
off the mask, and bring them out: And where the word effectually preached, does
not prevail, corruption will be irritate thereby, to vent it self more
openly. 3. Such atheistical and presumptuous dispositions in men are an heavy
plague of themselves, and do portend more plagues, and that there is a plague
and woe in all the calamities that come upon them. In these respects it is said,
Woe unto you that desire the day of the Lord. 4. Epicures and presumptuous
Atheists and Hypocrites, do little consider what they are doing, or what is
their danger, when they scorn threatenings and desire to see them accomplished:
And if their consciences were put seriously to it, they would tell them it were
so; Therefore does he pose them, to what end is it for you? Or, what can ye
expect in such a day? or what do ye gain by such a scornful temper, that ye
should be so bent on it? Their consciences (if awake) could tell them that such
a day were rather to be prevented then desired; and that they could reap
nothing by such atheistical scorn. For neither did it produce any present true
good in them, nor would it hold away that day, but rather hasten it, and make
it more bitter and grevious. And therefore they ought to consider better and
avoid it. 5. As even the cleanly trials of Gods people, may produce much
humbling exercise through want of light or sensible comfort; that so they may
be trials indeed, and may purge dross: And as judgments inflicted, upon a
people for sin, will be full of perplexity and discomfort, as being accompanied
with real desertion, with guilt of conscience, and other spiritual plagues: So
in special, presumptuous and secure Atheists may expect an hot alarm, and that
calamities will be made dreadful to them; for, unto all, but especially unto
them, the day of the Lord is darkness and not light, that is, full of misery
and perplexity, leaving them void of counsel and comfort. From, v. 19. learn,
1. When God appears in anger against an atheistical and incorrigible people,
they may expect to be involved in an heap of miseries on all hands; and that
not one, but many evils, either together, or following one after another, or
both; Therefore it is resembled to the condition of a man environed on all
hands with lions, bears and serpents. 2. There is no shifting nor declining
judgments when God sends them: the sinner that avoids one, may expect to meet
with another, and he may expect a plague where he thinks to be most secure;
for, it is As if a man did flee from a lion, and a bear met him, or went into
the house, and leaned his hand on the wall (expecting to be upheld) and a
serpent bit him, or, an unexpected stroke came upon him. See Isa. 24.17, 18.
From v. 20. learn, 1. The sadness of a day of judgments and calamities, is
not soon seen, nor laid to heart; and men should seriously consider it before
hand, that so they may be stirred up to prevent it, that they may not feel it:
Therefore is it again inculcate and repeated, shall not the day of the Lord be
darkness, and not light? 2. The Lord needs no more to prove the truth of what
his word says, but men's own consciences, which will be a witness against
their atheism and presumption, however for present they lull them asleep and
sear them with an hot iron; Therefore does he put the matter to their own
consciences (shall not the day of the Lord be darkness etc?) as being
witnesses that might, and in due time would speak for him. 3. Albeit the truly
godly will have still allowance of some light in trouble (though sometime
tentation hide it from them. Isa. 50.10.) and may sometime attain to some
measure of their allowance, Psalm. 112.4. and may certainly expect that there
will be a clear and comfortable issue from their troubles, Mic. 7.8. Yet it is
terrible to think how dreadful a day of vengeance will be to the wicked, how
grevious and perplexing their miseries will be, and how destitude they will be
either of present comfort, or of any hope of it for the future: Therefore is it
added by way of explication, even very dark and no brightness in it.

Verse 21. I hate, I despise your feast days, and I will not smell in your
solemn assemblies.

22. Though ye offer me burnt-offerings, and your meat offerings, I will not
accept them: neither will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.

23. Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs: for I will not hear the
melody of thy viols.

24. But let judgment run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty
stream.


The second carnal and presumptuous confidence which the Lord refutes, is their
hypocritical resting upon their ceremonial observations, in keeping sacred
solemnities, offerings sacrifices of all kinds, and using of songs and musical
Instruments in their Temples, all which they observed in imitation of Judah.
And concerning these the Lord declares, that however they pleased themselves
in them, and thought that he accepted thereof, and of themselves for their
service sake; Yet he abhorred them and could not endure them. The reasons
whereof are, first; That these performances were not of divine institution, but
of their own inventions, and therefore all along are called yours, or thine.
The second reason is more expressly held forth, v. 24. Which is not a
threatening that his righteous judgments inflicted for these sins so abhorred
of him, should carry all down before them like an impetuous stream; but an
exhortation that they would study to abound in righteousness and justice, the
want whereof was a cause, why no such ceremonial service could be respected.
This reason pleads against the acceptance even of institute ceremonial worship,
when the worshiper rests upon it, not seeking to be reconciled to God through
Christ, whom these ceremonies pointed at; nor proving the sincerity of his
Religion by the fruits of righteousness and new obedience. And in this respect
we find the same sentence given out against the Jewish worship, Isa. 1.11, 12,
13, 14. and 66.3. Jer. 6.20. Much more might it be pleaded against them, who
not only rejected Gods institution and command in the matter of their worship;
but would not so much as study that behavour which God required in those who
worship him according to the Rule: and yet they rested on it. Doct. 1. This
place holds out yet more parts (beside what is spoken to chapter 4.4, 5.) of
Gods approven Ceremonial service, which Israel pretended to imitate; from which
we may gather some instructions. And first; Their Feast Days, and Solemn
Assemblies, or restraints from labor and other distractions, that they might
attend solemn worship, do teach, 1. The people of God have matter of joy and
feasting allowed unto them in Christ; and they who embrace him should labor to
enjoy and possess their allowance; Therefore had they Feasts (the substance
whereof was Christ) which they observed. 2. The Lord requires that beside the
worship performed to him ordinarily and daily, there be solemn public worship
in his Church; and that men perform the same on the times appointed by him for
that end, and when his providence calls them to any extraordinary duty; So
much is pointed out by their selemn assemblies. 3. Albeit the Lord does not
allow any to cast off a calling under pretext of following his service; yet he
requires that our following our callings do not hinder his worship; and that
when he calls us to solemn worship, we lay aside the distractions of our
employments; and what else may hinder the right performance thereof; for, their
solemn assemblies, were restraints also, as the word imports. Which in their
festivites imported not only restraint from their ordinary employments, but
from their drouping discouragements also, that they might rejoice in God. Neh.
8.9, 10. And in their solemn fasts, imported also their restraint from lawful
delights, that they might wait upon the work to which they were called. 2.
Secondly, their burnt-offerings (of which Lev. 1.) which were daily offered,
Lev. 6.12. Exodus 29.38, 39. and which were joined with other sacrifices;
partly, in that they were daily offered, when other sacrifices of praise, or
for particular sins were offered, and before them: and partly, that their
peace-offrings were laid upon them, on the Altar, Lev. 3.5. and they were
joined with their offerings for particular guilt, Lev. 5.7, 10. These, I say,
do teach, 1. Whatever men may pretend to in particular duties of worship; yet
all that will not avail, unless, first, men make sure the renovation of their
nature, and that they have closed with Christ, for reconciliation of their
persons; So much was signified by the burnt-offering for all their sins, and
for the corruption of their nature, which they offered daily, and with other
sacrifices. 2. As praise for particular mercies will sound well from them, who
have assurance of reconciliation through Christ; So no particular favor or
mercy within time should make us forget our misery or need of Christ, or hinder
us to make daily use of him: So much did the joining of offerings of praise
with the burnt-offerings, teach. 3. As men ought not to sleep securely under
particular and daily contracted guiltiness, nor dream that it is enough that
their persons are reconciled with God, unless they also flee to Christ for
expiation of their daily faults of ignorance and infirmity (for so under the
Law, they had trespasse-offerings and sin offerings, beside their
burnt-offerings) So men that make right use of Christ, to expiate particular
guiltiness, will be led by their falling therein, to study yet more the
corruption of their nature and general pollution; and to flee to Christ, that
the evidences of their reconciliation may be made clear unto them, after such a
cloud upon them; So much does the joining of offerings for particular sins,
with the burnt-offerings, teach. Thirdly, their meat offerings (of which, Lev.
2.) and the peace offerings of their fat beasts, (of which Lev. 3.) which were
several sorts of thank offerings, do teach, 1. Praise is to be made conscience
of, by all those who live in visible Covenant with God: and his mercies toward
them are not to be buried in oblivion: So much did the appointing and practice
of these offerings teach, 2. The Lord is so gracious and condescending, that
however he will not appove of sleighters of his service, Mal. 1.14. Yet he will
not respect his servants according to the greatness of their gift, but
according to the sincerity of the offerer; Therefore did he appoint both
meat offerings, and peace offerings of beasts, for praise; that such as could
not afford a beast to offer, might not be discouraged if they were willing, but
might bring a little flower, and such things as they had. This condescendence
was observed also in other sacrifices, Lev. 5.7, 11. and 12.8, 3. Such as make
conscience to offer praise unto God, do reap much advantage unto themselves;
and Ministers may look for sweet days to themselves, and for fair spiritual
allowances and enlargements, when they minister unto a people whose hearts are
in love with God, and taken up with his praise; therefore also was it called a
meat offering, because the Priests got a share of these offerings to eat, as
both they and the people also did get a part of the peace offering of beasts.
4. Men are bound to offer praise to God, not only for his special favors and
singular mercies, but even for common providence and favors, if it were of
meat and drink: So much also was signified by their meat offering, as
signifying that they acknowledged they had their meat of God. Albeit these
mercies be common and ordinary, and therefore little thought of; yet they are
in themselves greater and more needful then many mercies, with the want or
enjoyment whereof we are more affected: And conscience being made of praise for
these, it will prove a mean to draw down more special and sensible mercies. 5.
Whatever the Lord accept of his poor and empty people, yet he requires that we
offer him the choice of what we have; and particularly, that we go not about
praise with formal dispositions: Therefore required he the fat in these
sacrifices, Lev. 3.3. etc. and therefore it is required they be fat beasts. 6.
Albeit praise be in it self an excellent performance, and men are ready to
conceit of it, who attain to it: Yet Christ must be employed for the acceptance
of it, and the offerer must hide himself and his service under Christ's
righteousness, otherwise the best of it is an abomination before the Lord: So
much is signified, not only in that burnt-offerings were to be joined with
this offering, as is before marked, but that all of them must be offerings, and
laid upon the Altar, there to go up with acceptance. And Christ is the
substance (as of the offering, so) of the Altar which sanctifies the gift,
Math. 23.19. Fourthly, their songs and use of viols, do teach, 1. Singing of
Psalms and spiritual songs is an ordinance of God, and a part of his service,
and mean of setting out his praise. 2. Praise is a duty, for the performance
whereof we are especially unfit; and a duty which requires the exciting of our
selves and all the faculties of our soul, and which needs special influence,
that we may go rightly about it; for, so much was imported by the Ceremoial use
of viols and other musical instruments, whereby they were excited and quickened
to sing, and whereby was signified the employing of all their strength in that
work. And albeit the Ceremony be ceased, yet the thing signified thereby is
still our duty. Doct. 2. Whatever pains men seem to take in a way of Religion,
and whatever time they devote to it, or how specious soever their performances
seem to be; yet it will be all to no purpose, where Gods warrant and
institution for these performances are wanting: Neither will God accept that
men dedicate and consecrate a day to him as holy, when he has not appointed it
to be so in his word: nor will he accept of any service, where a divine
institution is wanting in whole or in part. Therefore does he reject all these
as their own, since their days were not the days appointed by him, and their
services were not performed in the right place, nor by the right Priests. 3.
The Lords dislike of will worship, and the devices of men in the matter of
Religion, is not only a simple dislike or not approving of it (though that be
sad enough, seeing it is his acceptance that makes our service of any worth or
use;) But he does exceedingly abhort it, as a thing he cannot endure; that men
should be so presumptuous as to take his room to prescribe the way of
Religion, and to come before him with that which he has not appointed; So much
do all the expressions of the dislike import, I hate, I despise your feast
days, I will not smell in your solemn assemblies (or, not accept or smell a
savor of rest in your sacrifices offered at these times. See Genesis 8.21. Exodus
29.18. Ezekiel. 20.40, 41.) I will not accept, or, regard offerings; take away thy
songs, I will not hear thy viols. 4. Such as profess that they have chosen the
true God, and in testimony thereof, do offer external worship to him, should
prove the sincerity thereof, and adorn their profession by a righteous
conversation, and by discretion and equity and justice in their dealing with
men. And as will-worshippers do make these (as well as others) commands of God
of no effect by their traditions; So this their miscarriage does yet render
their corrupting of Religion the more odious: Therefore does he insinuate that
they were wanting in the matter of judgment and righteousness, which if he
would not endure in Judah, who kept by the Rule in the matter of external
worship; how much more intolerable was it in them who regarded not how they
walked, and obtruded their own devices, as a satisfaction to him? 5.
Righteousness and judgment are then rightly performed, when men abound in the
fruits thereof, like waters, and a mighty stream, where there is much water;
When they are firm and constant in them, like a stream and river that keeps
the channel; and when they are performed in zeal, bearing down all opposition,
discouragement and tentation before it; like a mighty stream, that runs and
carries all that is in the way with it, and before it.

Verse 25. Have ye offered unto me sacrifice and offerings in the wilderness
forty years, O house of Israel?

26. But ye have born the tabernacle of your Moloch, and Chiun your images, the
star of your god, which ye made to your selves.

27. Therefore will I cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus says the
Lord, whose name is the God of hosts.


Their third carnal confidence is antiquity, and their fathers, in whom and
whose customs they gloried: In answer to which, the Lord speaks to them as one
body of a people with their fathers, and declares, that in the Wilderness
their fathers did not worship him with their sacrifices: but did, even there,
worship Idols and Images. For which he threatens, that they being heirs to
their fathers guilt, and Imitaters thereof in their Idolatry, should go into
captivity in far countries. For clearing some difficulties in this text,
Consider. 1. This not offering of sacrifices unto God for the space of forty
years in the Wilderness, is not necessary so to be understood, as if (except
what they did at mount-Sinai, when they entered in Covenant) sacrifices were
generally omitted in the Wilderness, as we find Circumcision was, Josh. 5.4,
5, 6, 7. But it may as well be understood thus; That though they did sacrifice,
and intended to offer it unto God; Yet since (beside the Idolatry of the golden
calfe, and such like rites of their own devising, and their want of sincerity,
and true conversion and reconciliation unto God) they joined gross Idolatry,
and worshipping the of stars and host of heaven with it, and their hearts and
eyes were after these their Idols, Ezekiel. 20.15, 16, 24. Therefore the Lord
expounds all their sacrifices as not offered unto him, but to their Idols whom
they respected so much, see Isa. 43.22, 23. Deuteronomy. 32.16, 17. 2. This bearing of
the Tabernacle of their Moloch (as we are helped to read it from Act. 7.43. and
not Siccuth your King) is to be understood thus, That though they carried about
the Lords Tabernacle with them, as pretending to honor him, and that it was
their glory to have him present among them; Yet they had also Images and
representations of th^se Idol Gods (as the text imports) which they carried
about in some little tents like chapels. 3. As for these Idols, and the
difference betwixt this text and that place Act. 7.42, 43. (some whereof I
remit to the doctrines) we may Consider. 1. That Moloch was an Idol of the
Ammonites, as is frequently recorded in Scripture. 2. That which is called
Chiun here, and Remphan Act. 7.43. is one and the same Idol, or supposed
deity; and is called Remphan, both by the Greek Interpreters of the old
Testament, and afterward by Stephen, because that name was better known to the
Egyptians where the Old Testament was translated, and to the Jews in these
days, then the other of Chiun. 3. These supposed deities whom they acknowledge
under these names, were nothing else but the stars or planets, as is expressly
cleared, Act. 7.42. where they are called the host of heaven; and here, the
star of your God. An Idolatry to which they were much addicted afterward. Zeph.
1.5. Jer. 44.17. etc. It is not needful to determine what particular planets
are signified by these names, though most probably, by Moloch is meant the
Sun, which (as the word signifies) is King of the planets and has dominion
over sublunary things; And by Chiun, or Remphan, Saturn. 4. They worshipped
these Idols not only immediately, but mediatly in and by Images representing
them, As is marked, Act. 7.43. Figures which ye made, to worship them, and here
mention is made of their Images which it seems they carried about with them,
and, the star of your God, whereby I conceive is not only meant, your God, the
star, by way of direction and scorn of their folly, in choosing such a deity,
but that either they made their Images in likeness of a star, or with the
sign of a star upon them, to testify what they represented. Lastly, it would
be considered, that however this change shall be general; Yet it is not to be
understood of every one in Israel, whereof many were godly, but of the body of
the people. Doct. 1. Such as would profit by the Scriptures, and know the mind
of God revealed therein, should be conversant with all of it, whereby they will
find that in one place which is not to be found in another: As here we find
somewhat concerning Israel in the wilderness, which is not so clearly in all
the History. 2. God will not account much service to be offered unto him, which
is pretended to be so: Nor will he accept of service as done to him, when men
do not offer themselves to God with their service, nor do keep close by his way
and rule. And such is the service that God gets even of many whom he chooses
to be his peculiar people; for this cause does the Lord say of Israel, that
they offered not sacrifices to him, as is before explained. 3. This carriage of
the Lords people is yet the more heinous, when it is performed after glorious
deliverances, and is of long continuance, and in the midst of new exercises and
gracious providence; for, that they neglected this in the wilderness, and
forty years, it does not only import that Israel was soon at these courses
which the present generation followed; But that it is grievous they should do
so in such a time and place. 4. A present generation imitating the defections
of their progenitors, have much old debt opon their head which will be laid
upon their account; Therefore is this' laid to the present generation as their
sin, seeing they were one body with their progenitors, and did follow their
courses, Have ye offered unto me etc. O house of Israel? 5. Let men do what
they will to stupifie their own consciences, yet they have not security of
them, but when they least expect, they will leap in their throat; And e're all
be done, God will have the most obdured man pronounce his own sentence with his
own mouth: Therefore does he (as often before) put their own consciences to it,
and pose them, Have ye offered etc? to intimate that they had no true peace of
conscience in the matter, and that their consciences would at last turn their
saddest party. 6. God will have no communion with Idols, nor will he approve or
accept of even his own institute worship, when men join Idolatry therewith;
for, it was because of their serving Moloch, and the rest of their Idols, that
God declares their offerings were not offered to him. 7. The visible Church
may backslide so far, as to be guilty of grossest Idolatry; And God is provoked
to give her up thereunto, when she sets up her own inventions in his worship;
for, Israel carried the Tabernacle of Moloch, and Chiun etc. And this is the
fruit of their Idolatry in the matter of the golden calfe, as is cleared. Act.
7.40, 41, 42. 8. It is the great folly and madness of men to think that a
deity is in their choice, to choose and make what they will, a God unto
themselves; Or to think to represent a deity, by Images which are of their
making; or to worship these Images, as in reality they do, whatever they
pretend to the contrary; for, it was also their fault, that they had Images,
the star of your God, which ye made to your selves; And Act. 7.43. it is said,
figures which ye made, to worship them. 9. Idolatry, being continued in, will
at last draw on exile and captivity; Therefore is the sentence given out
against the present generation, that since that course had gone such a length,
Therefore I will cause you go into captivity beyond Damascus, And by this
expression, beyond Damascus, is imported, not only that they should be carried
far away beyond that place, which Stephen, Act. 7.43. respecting the event,
declares how far it was; even so far beyond Damascus, that it was beyond
Babylon also. But further the expression may also import. 1. Whereas they
thought much of the strokes had been inflicted on them by the Syrians of
Damascus, and that, belike some of them were carried into captivity by them;
The Lord declares, that they should be carried further off then ever they were
carried by the Syrians; And that their continued in provocations should make
them think little of what they had felt, in respect of what was to come upon
them. 2. Whereas they might think strange of that sentence given out against
the Syrians, and of their threatened captivity, chap. 1.5. The Lord declares,
that they should be carried further off then the Syrians, and that the stroke
to come on them, who were his people and yet proved incorrigible, should be
sadder in that respect then his stroke on a pagan Nation. 3: Whereas they might
look on the Kingdom of Syria and Damascus as a strong bulwark betwixt them and
any remoter enemy on that quater, as being a potent Kingdom not easily to be
subdued; The Lord declares that this refuge shall fail them, and an enemy
should come further-off, who should carry them beyond it. Doct. 10. Men will
very readily sleep securely under saddest threatenings, unless they consider
again and again that God is their party, and do seriously meditate upon his
greatness and power; Therefore are they again advertised, that this is said by
the Lord, whose name is the God of hosts.

CHAP. VI.
ALbeit Israel was Amos peculiar charge, yet in this chap. Judah is joined with
them, both in the challenge v. 1. And all along, as appears from the last
threatening, v. 14. And by so doing the Lord would have it cleared that his
servant was not partial in his doctrine, nor led by any private spleen against
Israel; And he would let Israel see how little cause they had to be secure,
seeing Judah is so dealt with also. In the first part of the chap. the Lord
challenges and denounces a woe upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem and Samaria,
(and especially the great ones) for their profane security, relieing upon
their strength and eminency, v. 1. (which yet was but a weak ground, if they
considered other Nations and cities, v. 2.) for their contempt of threatenings,
and the oppression that followed thereupon, v. 3. And for their sensualty and
luxury, little regarding the afflictions of the rest of the country, v. 4.5.6.
In the second part of the chap. the Lord explains that woe, v. 1. and
pronounces sentence against them; That these secure voluptuous persons should
go into captivity with the first, and so their jollity should be removed, v. 7.
That certainly he would not regard their privileges and execellencies, but
would trample upon them, and deliver up their city to the enemies, v. 8. That
there should be a great mortality among them, v. 9.10. And that he would ruin
the families and houses of great and small, v. 11. In the third part of the
chap. the Lord confirms this sentence; showing, that however hitherto he had
manifested his patience, and taken pains upon them; Yet now it was to no
purpose to use any further means to reclaim them: as appeared from their
horrid injustice, v. 12. And however they were insolent and boasters of their
own strength, v. 13. Yet he would refute that carnal confidence, by sending an
enemy who should overrun the Land of Canaan from one end to another.

Verse 1. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of
Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel
came.
In this v. a woe is pronounced against the inhabitants of the chief Cities of
both Judah and Israel, and especially against the great ones there, because
they were stupidly secure, as trusting in their strength by situation, and
their own and the places eminency, these two places being the two chief places
of both the Nations or Kingdoms, to which all Israel did resort, as to the
chief Cities of the Kingdoms and places of public justice, and of public
worship also in Jerusalem. Doct. 1. Albeit ease and a quiet settled condition
be that which men love well, and do hunt after by all means, and take too well
with when they enjoy it; Yet ofttimes such a condition breeds so much
presumption and carnal security, that it brings a woe and curse with it; for, woe
to them that are at ease, or secure, as these at ease ordinarily are. 2. Such
as seem to cleave, or really do cleave to God and his way, better then others,
may readily make a sleeping pillow of that; and yet that does not warrant them
to be secure, but will rather put them in the front of those that are under the
woe, if they prove so: Therefore does he begin with this, woe to them that are at
ease in Zion, before Samaria. Where it is imported that they may be at ease,
and that then they get the first of the woe. And he names Zion rather then
Jerusalem, because (among other reasons) this mount was the eminent part of
their City, being the City of David, the man according to Gods heart, with whom
the Covenant was made, and who herein was a type of Christ and the place
whereunto David brought the Arc, 2. Sam. 6.12. And therefore it is that
however the Temple stood on mount Morijah, 2. Chron. 3.1. yet mount Zion is
often named as the place of Gods residence, to which the promises are made,
being a type of the Church, where Christ the Son of David reigns and dwells:
And yet the Lord declares that all this should no avert the woe. 3. Albeit that
the strength of places by situation, do breed carnal confidence, and that draw
on security; yet all that is no warrant for it, nor will guard against the woe:
Therefore also is Zion named, because it was strong, and long a taking from the
Jebusites, 2. Sam. 5.6, 7, 8, 9. unto which is sub-joyned, and trust in the
mountain of Samaria, which was also strongly situate upon a mountain, 1. Kings
16.24: 4. Albeit men also glory and rest in their own eminency, and the
eminency of the places where they live; Yet carnalsecurity will find no
sholter there either, nor does that afford any cause to sleep when God is
angry; for, woe is upon them, though they be named the chief of the Nations (or,
the named and eminent ones, of the chief places of the two Nations, as pointing
at their Grandees) to whom the house of Israel came, or comes. Albeit they
were the great men, and many might fall ere the stroke reached them; and albeit
they dwelt in the chief Cities which might stand out when the country should be
overrun: Yea, albeit they might reckon that if they and these Cities were
destroyed, Israel should have no Judges nor place of meeting as a Nation, yea
and should not be a Nation; yet all that does not warrant them to be secure,
nor will keep them from the woe, when they are so.

Verse 2. Pass ye unto Calneh and see, and from thence go ye to Hemath the
great; then go down to Gath of the Philistines: be they better then these
kingdoms? or their border greater then your border?
The places here spoken of are known from Scripture what they were. For Calneh
was an ancient City and Kingdom beside Babylon, Genesis 10.10. Hemath, or Hamath
(called the great, to distinguish it from a City of that name in the land of
Israel, Josh. 19.32, 35.) was a City and Kingdom on the North border of Israel,
1. Chorn. 13.5. 2. Chorn. 7.8. Josh. 13.5. Numb. 34.7, 8, and here, v. 14. See
2. Kings 23.33. and 25.21. Gath of the Philistines was a known City nearer to
themselves. But the sense of the place is more difficult; for it is a general
and ordinary rule, especially in this Original language, that affirmative
questions (such as these are here) should be resolved in negative assertions:
Thus the sense of these questions in the end of the v. will be, that none of
these Nations were better then their Kingdoms, nor the extent of their border
larger. And so the v. will contain a challenge of their ingratitude, who had
abused such singular favors by their security. But, however, if we look on
Isreal's land with all the privileges they enjoyed in it, and in respect of
Gods care and eye upon it, and its being a type of Heaven, it was justly called
the pleasant land, Dan. 8.9. and the glory of all lands, Ezekiel. 20.6.15. Yet it
is not to be supposed but that other Nations did parallel, yea and surpass it,
for strength and greatness of Cities, for pleasure and fertilty of the soil,
or for extent of bounds. And therefore I rather understand the scope of the v.
on the contrary, thus; That it was in vain for them to trust in their strength
and eminency, v. 1. considering that other Nations and Cities more flourishing
and better then they, were now desolate by some late stroke which it seems was
fresh in their memory, though not recorded elsewhere. And for further clearing
of difficulties, it may be considered, 1. That these affirmative questions are
not always to be understood negativily, but sometime do only point out the
certainty of an affirmative assertion, as 2. Sam. 15.27. in the Original it is,
art thou a seer? which is as much as certainly he was one, and therefore should
carry himself as became such a man in that time. Likewise Jer. 31.20. (where
both the notes of interrogation here used, are) Is Ephraim a dear son? is he a
pleasant child? which imports an affectionate acknowledgement and resentment
that he was so. And so it may also import here, that they should seriously
consider the greatness of these Cities and Dominions which were now ruined,
that they might see the folly of their vain gloriation and carnal security. 2.
Albeit we do resolve the questions negatively, they are not better then these
Kingdoms etc; yet it will only import this much here; that however of old
these Cities and Countries were better then these of Israel and Judah; yet now,
by reason of desolation, they were nothing so: and therefore did warn them not
be carnally confident. 3. Whereas three places are here named and preferred to
these Kingdoms, it is not so to be understood as if in every respect every one
of them were better then they; for, though it be not to be doubted but some of
these (and possibly both Caineh and Hemath) had both stronger Cities, more
fruitful soil and larger bounds then they; and though the land of the
Philistines was very fruitful, lying by the Sea, and belike they enjoyed a
larger territory of old: Yet Isreal's dominion was larger then theirs, and
therefore far larger then that of Gath, which was but one City: But the meaning
seems to be; that whereas Judah and Israel boasted of strong Cities, pleasant
and large Territories; The Lord declares, that if they viewed these places
well, they would find they had surpassed them either in all, or some of these
respects; And particularly, that Gath had been a stronger City then any of
theirs. And for this cause I conceive it is that Gath is only named of all the
Cities of the Philistines, because it only before this time was become
desolate (belike since Vzziah brake down the wall thereof, with some other
Cities, 2. Chron. 26.6.) and never repaired; and therefore it is so often omitted
by the Prophets who lived after these times, when other Cities of the
Philistines are spoken of. Doct. 1. Whatever outward favors the Church and
people of God enjoy, wherein they trust and rest securely because thereof, yet
the vanity of such a dream may appear in that other Nations come nothing behind
them in these things; for so is here held out, that these places had been
better then what they enjoyed* and therefore it was their folly to rest on
these things. 2. As sin does bring desolation on many a flourishing City and
Country in all quarters; So the examples of Gods justice on heathen Nations
ought to warn even Gods people of their danger: Considering that his punishing
of these who know not his revealed will, is an evidence that much more he will
punish them; for, therefore are these examples produced, to warn Judah and
Israel. And these are named to show that in all places this his justice had
shined, and it is like they had been wonderfully laid desolate about that time.
3. That the people of God may prevent or cure security, and may get good of the
warnings that are given them; it is needful that they do not give way to supine
negligence, but that they rouse up themselves to observe the passages of divine
providence far and near in the world; and that they take notice of the power of
divine justice against impenitent sinners, in overturning flourishing Cities,
and strong and great Nations; that so they may not lean to smaller appearances,
when yet they provoke God; for, to this end says he, pass ye into Calneh, and
see, and from thence go ye to Hemath etc. Which is not to be understood so, as
if they were to undertake any journey to these places, or that in their ensuing
exile and wandering they should see these ruins; But that as these things were
true in themselves, so they should seriously observe the same in all the
circumstances, to refute their own presumption, and cure their security. The
form of speech is like to that, Jer. 2.10, 11.

Verse 3. Ye that put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to
come near:
The Lord proceeds to hold forth further causes of that denounced, woe, by
pointing out several effects and evidences of their security. The first is,
That they contemned all the threatenings of the Prophets concerning a day of
vengeance; as not looking for it at all, or not so suddenly, or driving all
thoughts of it out of their head. And upon this (which is a second effect and
evidence) they followed injustice and oppression with great eagerness, and
hasted on the day which they would not believe, nor desire to think on. Doct.
1. As there is a day, which will be noisome and evil to the guilty, hastening
upon the back of security and sin, (for, so is here imported, that there was
the evil day, foretold to be coming) So it is the great sin of a people, and an
evidence of their desperate secure condition, when they do provoke God, and yet
do neither fear nor believe approaching judgment, nor will take with warnings
of it; for, this people did draw these courses near, which unavoidably drew on
judgments, and yet when they were told of danger, they put far away the evil
day, which may be understood that they did not believe, or fear it at all, as
chap. 5.18. and 9.10. and in scorn told the Prophets it was prolonged, and
therefore did fail, as Ezekiel. 12.22. 2. As it is the sin of men to look on
judgments even but as a far off, when sin is come to an height, and they are
sleeping securely in it; So is it also their great sin, and the dream of
secure sinners, when they content themselves that judgments are far off, and
not near, when yet that is but a poor comfort, seeing any thing that is
measured by time will soon come about; for, so is further imported here, they
put far away the evil day, when they looked on it (if it should come) as not
near at hand, and contented themselves with that. 3. It is yet further a poor
shift of secure men, when they make not sure their peace with God, nor deal
with him to avert judgments; but all their care is, to put thoughts of
judgment out of their mind, let God do as he pleases; and so evil is upon
them ere they know of it: for so much further may be imported here, that
whether judgments were far off or near hand, they labored to put all thoughts
of it far away. 4. Men are but in a poor condition, when they do not order
their way so as to abide and endure an evil day, as Isa. 33.14, 15, 16. and do
not daily labor to answer that question, what will ye do in a day of
visitation? Isa. 10.3. But all their care is to avoid it on any terms; for, so
much also does this putting far away the the evil day import, that they had
nothing to bear out in such a day if it should come; whereas the godly are
made able to resolve upon and ride out the saddest of storms, Hab. 3.17, 18.
5. When men sin, and yet cast off all fear of judgments, it will soon harden
them and make then very eager in their course; and that is a new judgment upon
them; for, upon the former follows, they cause violence to come near, and
are eager upon it. 6. Whatever ground of confidence men may seem to have
against an evil day; yet it is an ill mark of it, when it makes them the bolder
on sin, which procures the stroke, and makes it bitter and sad: for, this is
marked as one fault of their secure thoughts about an evil day, that this made
them more bold to sin, they put far away the evil day, and cause violence to
come near. 7. Oppression and violence is not only an heinous sin, but a
clear evidence of security, of atheistical contempt of the word and
threatenings thereof; for, upon their security, and putting far away the evil
day, this sin in particular follows, they cause violence to come near: So
near as they bring this, so far have they put away the other in their hearts.
8. Oppression is yet the more heinous, when it is acted under color of law and
justice, by Superior and inferior Magistrates; for, it adds to it that it is
the seat (or bench) of violence, and elsewhere the throne of iniquity, Psalm.
94.20.

Verse 4. That lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their
couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock and the calves out of the midst of
the stall:

5. That chaunt to the sound of the viol, and invent to themselves instruments
of music like David:

6. That drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments:
but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.


A third effect and evidence of their security, is, their luxury and
sensuality, in that they lived a merry life, having stately beds and couches,
abounding with superfluity, whereon they lay and stretched themselves, when
they were full at their feasts; they made themselves good cheer, had much
mirth and music at their feasts, drank largely out of great bowls, and
anointed their bodies (as the custom then was at feasts or in more cheerful
times, 2. Sam. 12.20. Eccl. 9.8. Luke 7.46.) with the best ointments. All which
is the more hateful, that (which is a fourth effect and evidence of their
security) they little minded the affliction of their brethren, or of the body
of the Church and Nation, who were in distress up and down the country, while
they lived at ease in the chief Cities. He calls them who were afflicted,
Joseph, either because it was the ten Tribes who suffered chiefly at that time,
with whom even they of Judah were bound to sympathize; Or, because he would put
these great ones in mind, that their carriage was like the carriage of Joseph's
brethren toward him, who sat down to eat bread, and little regarded the
affliction of his soul when he was cast into the pit, and sold. See Genesis 37.24,
25. and 42.21. Doct. 1. Men do undeniably bewray their secure dispositions and
abuse of ease, when all the use they make of it, is to pamper and satiat
themselves with beastly pleasures, and they do live in riot and sensuality,
omitting nothing that may make them complete Epicures; for, so is it here laid
to their charge, as a fruit of their being at ease, that they lie upon beds of
ivory, and eat and drink well etc. Not that it is simply unlawful for great men
to lie better, and feed on better things then others; but that (beside the
unseasonablnesse thereof, of which afterward) they exercised all their care
about these things, were excessive and superfluous in them, and rested thereon
and glutted themselves therewith. And if this be a sin in those that are at
ease; much more in them who are in distress, Isa. 22.12, 13. 2. Men have need
to watch over their ways even in meanest things, and to take heed lest in
their very beds, household furniture, meat and drink, and dressing of their
bodies, and the like, they be drawing a woe upon themselves; for, in all these
the Lord has a quarrel against these secure sinners. 3. Ministers lawfully
may, yea and in duty should be particular in condemning sins, and lay before
men their failings in beds, table, apparel etc; for, so does Amos here in the
Lords name. 4. As men may lead a merry life, who yet have no cause of joy: so
however secure sinners, who choose such mirth for their portion, and shelter
against all storms, do keep themselves throng with it, lest an evil conscience
flee out upon them; yet all this their joy does but add fuel to the fire, and
contribute to make the woe the sadder; for, so much may we learn from their
chaunting to the sound of the viol (or joining their voice with the instrument)
and inventing instruments of music; whereby music is not condemned, but they
are condemned who please themselves with it, and fed their security thereby,
little minding their duty, or that which would be matter of true peace and joy
unto them. 5. It is an aggravation of the sin of wicked men, when they abuse
the example of Saints to sin; either when they stumble on their infirmities, or
do pretend to imitate their good actions in their ill courses, and abuse that
which they enjoyed well; for, this adds to their sin, that they alleged they
did this like David, who was a great lover and Master of music, but he spent
all his care that way in setting forth Gods praise, whereas they only made use
of it for carnal pleasure. 6. Afflictions are sent upon some people, and not
upon others, or on some part and persons of a Nation, and not upon others, not
only for their own correcttion and exercise who are afflicted, but to try the
sympathy of others, and to see what use they will make of it; for, Joseph's
affliction or the breach made upon him, tried these Grandees. 7. As much
sensual pleasure does besot men, and deprive them of all sense of the
afflictions of others, and sympathy with them; (for, here the one follows on
the other) So whatever may be pleaded for the pomp and state and pleasures of
great men; yet it cannot but be sinful in a time of affliction, and when it
deprives them of all sympathy and fellow feeling, and they make themselves a
good life, when others are undone. For, it is the challenge, that they do all
these things, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.

Verse 7. Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive,
and the banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be removed.
Follows the Lords sentence for these sins, and an explication of that woe, v.
1. in several branches. And first, He threatens that they shall be first and
chief among these who shall go into captivity; whereby he will put an end to
their luxurious feasting. Whence learn. 1. The luxury of great and rich men
does import such a distemper among a people as will draw on speedy captivity
upon them; for, now captivity is to be the lot of all, as well as of them. 2.
Such as are most secure when the Lord makes a breach by trouble, and do think
themselves furthest from it, may taste first of it; for, they shall go captive
with the first that go captive, to wit, of the inhabitants of these Cities;
for, otherwise the country was spoiled and many of them captivated before. Or,
it may be read, they shall go captive in the head of them that go captive, that
is, they shall be ringleaders, and noted and eminent sufferers in this misery,
as before they were eminent in place, and chief in following sinful pleasures.
Yea in Judah we find they suffered before the poorer sort, 2, Kings 24.12, 13.
and more then they, 2. Kings 25.18, 19, 20, 21. 3. Luxury and wanton sensuality
and superfluity will be made to cease; and if nothing else will do it, God can
make captivity effect it: Therefore it is sub-joined, and the banquet of them
that stretched themselves (or, abounded with superfluities) shall be removed;
The word rendered banquet, signifies mourning, or, a mourning feast, as it is
translated Jer. 16.5. in the text and margent; to intimate that their feasting
should in the issue prove sad and mournful, as their mourning feasts were. 4.
God abhors sensuality for this among other causes, that it exhausteth men
with providing needless superfluities, whereas nature is content with a
little; and it mispends their time, and makes them unable for a calling; for,
so is held out here, they (as the word will bear) abounded with superfluity in
their banquets, and they did eat and drink, and then stretched themselves on
beds, when they were full, as being meet for no employment.

Verse 8. The Lord God has sworn by himself, says the Lord the God of hosts,
I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces: therefore will I deliver
up the city, with all that is therein.
Secondly, (which clears how their captivity shall come to pass) He
threatens to deliver up their City, (or the chief City of every one of these
Kingdoms) with all the people and wealth thereof into the enemies hands. And
this is confirmed by the oath of God, who is omnipotent, and who also (which is
another confirmation) declares that their privileges and excellencies wherein
they trusted and gloried, were hateful to him, and therefore to be taken from
them. Doct. 1. Sensuality in men produces great stupidity, that they will not
believe God when he threatens; Therefore must he swear, and give an oath to end
that controversy. 2. Whatever be the secure thoughts of sinners, yet it is his
irrevocable sentence to punish these who continue impenitent in luxurious
courses, and he is able to execute it: for, the Lord God has sworn by himself,
or by his life, or soul, that he will do this. He not only swears by himself,
because there is not a greater: But this oath imports further, that men may
swear in a sudden passion and change again, but he is Jehovah and unchangable;
Men may swear to be avenged, yet they may die and their thoughts perish, but he
lives to see his will done, and gives his life for assurance of it; and men
may swear to be avenged, and yet want power; but he is the Lord God, and again,
the Lord the God of hosts, who swears this. 3. A peoples excellencies and
privileges will not hinder their being hateful to God, who is no respecter of
persons, when they provoke him; Yea when privileges are abused and carnally
rested upon, they become abominable; especially when men neglect and despise
what is their true excellency, and content themselves with what is baser: All
these are imported in that assertion, I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate
his palaces; Whereby is signified, 1. That though Jacob have peculiar
excellencies and privileges, yet now God abhors him. 2. That his
excellencies and privileges are abominable and stinking before God, when he is
proud of them, as the word also signifies. 3. That it was abominable in him,
on whom greater privileges and excellencies were allowed, to glory only in
wealth and palaces, and therefore that word is sub-joined as an explication of
the former. Doct. 4. When men will not take notice of Gods abhorring them, when
it is intimate from the word, he will make them feel it by effects, by giving
themselves and all they gloried in, to be trod upon by enemies; Therefore it is
added as an evidence and effect of his abhorring them, Therefore will I deliver
up the city with all that is therein.

Verse 9. And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that
they shall die.

10. And a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that burns him, to bring out
the bones out of the house, and shall say unto him that is by the sides of the
house. Is there yet any with thee? And he shall say, No. Then shall he say,
Hold thy tongue: for we may not make mention of the Name of the Lord.


Thirdly, he threatens that beside captivity, and the taking of their Cities,
there should be a great mortality among them, so that these who escape other
judgments shall die at home, and (as would appear) by pestilence: And that so
few or no domestics should be left to bury the dead, that the uncle or nearest
kinsman (to whom the right of succession to the inheritance belongs) must come
to do it, and with the help of one must burn them to bury the bones, since they
cannot carry away the whole body. As for that conference in the end of v. 10.
it is by many understood thus; That when the Uncle shall know from him who
goes into burn the body, and bring out the bones, that no more are left alive,
or that all the dead are now burnt; he shall enjoine him silence, and not to
murmr against the just providence of God, seeing neither the dead nor
themselves had acknowledged or glorified him. But it seems more genuinly to
point at this; That they two, when they are assured that there are no witnesses
of what they have done, shall aggree together to keep silent what they had
done, left they should be sequestrate, as being legally polluted by touching
the dead, Number. 19.14. seeing in these extremities and confusions they could not
possibly observe these legal injunctions. This is called a making mention of
the name of the Lord, because by observing these ordinances, they did
acknowledge and glorify him as he revealed himself and enjoined to them.
Doct. 1. Where God has a controversy, men's escaping of one stroke will not
secure them against another; for, if there remain ten men in one house, they
shall die. Whether we take ten men for few, or (which is more likely) for many
in a great family; yet they remain after former calamities that have swept away
others, and now they shall die. 2. Beside the overthrowing of a State and
Nation, and these who fall in such a time by the sword and captivity, God is
provoked also in a time of wrath, to pursue particular families and persons
with pestilence and other plagues: Yea it is not strange when the Lord breaks a
Nation by captivity or subjection, to see that present generation posted away
with mortality and death; for, after the former strokes, v. 7.8. it follows,
if ten men remain in one house, they shall die: 3. It is an addition to the
calamity of sad times, when men are not only cut off, but want the honor and
solemnity of ordinary burial; for, a man's uncle shall take him up, and he that
burns him to bring out the bones out of the house. Albeit among the Jews,
they burnt odours at the funerals of some of their Kings, 2. Chron. 16.14, and
21.19. yet in ordinary they buried the dead bodies, and only in great
extremities burnt the bodies and buried the bones, as 1. Sam. 31.12, 13. And
therefore it adds to the affliction, that there are but two here to bury many,
and that they must burn them. See Psalm. 79.3. 4. Whatever may be the Lords
condescendence in extremities; Yet it is a great addition to the calamities of
a time, when the observation of any ordinances enjoined by God, are interrupted
thereby. For, albeit in many extremities (and belike in such as this was) the
Lord did dispense with Ceremonial observations, yet it was in it self an
affliction that they might not make mention of the name of the Lord. Compare
Hos. 9.3. 5. The Lords appointing of ordinances unto a people, is that whereby
he reveals himself unto them, and in the observance whereof he will be
acknowlegded and honored by them; and it is the honoring of him which men
should chiefly mind in these observances; Therefore, as God setting up
ordinances is his recording of his Name, Exodus 20.24. so the right performance
and observing of these ordinances, is declared to be a making mention, or
remembering of the name of the Lord. 6. Whatever clearness men themselves have
in the matter of their liberty, concerning religions observations; Yet especial
care should be had that they give no scandal in the use of their liberty. So
much seems to be imported in the conference, and that they should keep the
matter quiet, knowing that some were so scrupulous as not to digest this even
in greatest extremities.

Verse. 11. For behold, the Lord commands, and he will smite the great house
with breaches, and the little house with clefts.
Fourthly, all these threatenings are amplified by showing that God had
determined utterly to ruin (not only or so much the habitations, as) the
families of great and small, as an house comes to ruin by breaches and clefts
and droppings. Whence learn. 1. In great desolations it is good and necessary
to see an hand and purpose of God, which makes them effectual and
irresistible. Therefore it is premitted, the Lord commands, and he will smite
etc, and a behold is prefixed to this. See Nah. 1.14. Jer. 47.6, 7. 2. Where
God has a purpose of vengeance, he can reach all persons of all ranks, and all
their enjoyments; And he will not spare or be hindered to smite the greatest
because of their greatness, nor will he pass over the small sinner, because
of his meannesse, but will be about with both; for, he will smite the great
house and the little house. 3. These strokes are yet sadder, when the Lord
sends them not on some persons only, but makes them run through whole
families, and societies, till they be consumed, and their houses made a
desolation; for, he will smite the great house with breaches, or droppings, and
the little house with clefts, that is, he will consume whole families as an
house is dissolved and consumed by breaches and continual droppings; and will
leave their habitations ruined, as a witness of this desolation.

Verse. 12. Shall Horses run upon the Rock? will one plow there with Oxen? for
ye have turned judgment into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into
hemlock.
In the rest of the chap. this whole sentence is confirmed, by obviating two
exceptions. First, Whereas they might object that God was more strictly engaged
to them then to do so, and would certainly take some other course. He declares
that it were to as small purpose to take pains (by messengers or gentle
dealing, and the like) to reclame them, as for an horse to run upon and among
rocks, or to yoke a plough there in hope of increase: And therefore he would
wait no more upon them, the time of his patience being expired. This their
hopeless condition he proves from their great injustice; so that in place of
judgment and righteousness which should abound in their Courts, there was no
fruits there to be found but such as were bitter and deadly, like gall and
hemlock. see chap. 5.7. Hos. 10.4. Doct: 1. Albeit Gods efficacious working be
irresistible, yet his moral operations and his dispensations are such as men
may make their hearts proof against them, and turn incorrigible under them;
for, so is imported, they would no more be prevailed with by warnings, or
dispensations, then a rock could be a place for an horses running, or for
increase, 2. Though men's consciences be blind often times in their own
particular; Yet their very common sense in other things may witness to them
their own desperate condition; for, albeit they would not see their own case,
yet their very common notions of horses running and plowing might preach to
them, if they were well applied. See Isa. 1.3. 3: When men turn obstinate and
incorrigible, God does justly give up with them, (whatever he do to the Elect,
out of his soveraignity in grace) and their consciences will witness for God,
that it is righteous he do so: for, so much does the scope of these questions,
and similitudes, as they are before explained, import. 4. There is no clearer
proof of the desperate and incorrigible condition of a people then their
injustice in the Courts of Judgment, and their making it bitter and deadly to
the oppressed; for, so does the Lord confirm this, for ye have turned judgment
into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into hemlock.

Verse. 13. Ye which rejoice in a thing of naught, which say, Have not we taken
to our selves horns by our own strength.

14. But behold, I will raise up against you a Nation, O house of Israel, says
the Lord the God of Hosts; and they shall afflict you from the entering in of
Hemath, unto the river of the wilderness.


Secondly, whereas they did glory that their strength was renewed and increased
(as it was under Jeroboam the second, and Judah was strong under Vzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26.) so that they might drive away any enemies who should invade them;
The Lord declares that all this was but vain gloriation; And that he would
refute it, by sending enemies who should afflict and oppress them, from Hemath
on the North border (as is cleared v. 2) to the river of the wilderness, or of
Egypt, on the South border, as Number. 34.5. Josh. 13.3. and 15.47. 1 King. 8.65:
And so it comprehends the whole land of Canaan, and takes in Judah also, who
were vexed and oppressed (as the word signifies) by the Assyrians, when Israel
went into captivity; If it do not also relate to their captivity by the
Babylonians, which must be understood in these threatenings, v. 7.8. Doct. 1. It
is no strange thing to see much gloriation and carnal joy among a people, when
yet their sins are come to a great height, and vengance is very near; for, at
this time they were rejoicing. 2. The power and strength of a people is one
chief cause of a peoples sinful gloriation, and it is hard (...) have these
and not to glory in them; for, this they rejoice in, that they have horns, or
power to push their enemies. 3. As all things beside God are but naught and
vain to be gloried in; So a peoples gloriation in any thing is a way to make it
prove naught in effects, whatever it seem to promise; for, in these respects
he says of this their power, ye rejoice in a thing of naught; or that which is
nothing. 4. Men's exalting themselves in what they enjoy, and ascribing the
glory of it and the purchase thereof to themselves, is a clear evidence of
carnal gloriation, and that what they glory in will prove naught; for, this was
an evidence thereof, they rejoice in a thing of naught, who say, Have we not
taken to us horns by our own strength? as quickening up themselves and others
to consider this, as if they were not yet high enough in their own or others
thoughts. See Dan. 4.30, 31. and 5.19, 20. 5. Men are ordinarily so deluded in
the matter of carnal gloriation, that they will not see the folly thereof any
other way then by effects; And God will refute it so: for, so is subjoyned, But
behold I will raise up against you a Nation etc. see Ezekiel. 28.9. 6. God is an
impartial avenger of sin in one and other; and when a disease is universal, he
can make scourges go through a land and all the corners thereof: And as carnal
gloriation will not cease, so long as a people have any thing to look to in any
corner; So God will strip sinners of any such refuge; for, so much is imported
in this, they shall afflict you from the entering in of Hemath, unto the river
of the wilderness, whereby is held out, that God would neither spare Israel
nor Judah, but would send an universal stroke to refute their folly in every
corner.

CHAP. 7.
THe scope of the most part of the rest of this prophecy tends to confirm the
sentence already past against this incorrigible people. Wherein by several
types represented and explained by God, is declared that the sentence of their
desolation was irrevocable. And with all the prophet asserts his own authority
to deliver this message; and subjoynes somewhat for the comfort of the godly.

In the first part of this chap. under the type of devouring grasshoppers, and
of burning fire, both which are diverted at the prayer of Amos, v. 1. -- 6. and
of the Lords standing upon a wall with a plum-line, v. 7. is signified, that
the Lord having hitherto chastised Israel moderatly to reclaim them, and having
removed these afflictions, that they might be wrought upon; Now (since they are
become desperate) he will not forbear nor moderate their calamities as
formerly, v. 8. but will especially destroy their Idolatry, and cut off their
Royal Family, v. 9. In the second part of the chap. Amos being accused and
delated to the King, by the false Priests at Bethel, v. 10.11. and being by him
allured and terrified from prophesying any more against them, v. 12.13. he does
vindicate and assert his own authority to prophecy, v. 14, 15. and threatens
this subtle persecuter, and confirms the sad sentence against the land, v.
16.17.

Verse 1. THus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold he formed
grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth: and lo,
it was the latter growth after the Kings mowings.

2. And it came to pass that when they had made an end of eating the grass of
the land, then I said, O Lord God; forgive, I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob
arise? for he is small.

3. The Lord repented for this, It shall not be, says the Lord.


The Lord being to declare that his long-suffering and patience toward that
people, was at an end; He does first hold forth how and in what measure it had
been manifested to them, by two types and visions. The first whereof (in these
verses) is of grasshoppers created by God to consume their fruits, which having
consumed much, they are (upon the intercession of Amos, pleading from Jacobs
irrecoverable condition) recalled from the utter consuming of all. For clearing
of this, consider, 1. This being but a vision, it is not needful to understand
these grasshoppers literally, or only of these or the like creatures sent among
them, and causing famine, of which chap. 4.9. But generally they signify all
the lesser afflictions (by incursions and invasions from enemies, by drought,
insects, or the like) whereby they were afflicted, and by which, and his
sending them in a more moderate and gentle way, God did excite them to
repentance. 2. As for the time of this vision, being the beginning of the
shooting up of the latter growth, after the Kings mowings, it seems to be
understood not so much of their cutting the first growth of the rank corn, that
so it might stand and ripen the better; as that the first growth of their
grass was cut down for the Kings use, to maintain his war-horses, and the
latter growth came to the people for their private use. And this circumstance
of the vision is not necessarily to be interpreted of their condition after
their defection from the house of David, that their former flourishing
condition was become but like a latter growth, often cut down: But it seems
rather to signify that this rod did afflict chiefly only the body of the
people, their Kings being (as the type imports) furnished, and their state yet
standing. 3. This intercession of the Prophet, albeit it hold forth in
particular his tenderness and sympathy with that people; yet it points out
also what was the practice of all the godly in that time. Doct. 1. When the
Lord is about to strik his people in greatest extremity, it is their duty to be
convinced, and acknowledge that mercy and long-suffering has been much
manifested toward them, before it come to that; for, so much does the scope of
this and the following type and vision, premitted to the third, import: for by
the two first he clears what his long-suffering had been, before the final
sentence come forth. 2. Such is our stupidity, and little observing of Gods
dealing, that when it is most obvious and visible, yet it must be much and
diverse ways inculcate; for, albeit the afflictions that had come upon them,
might be sensibly felt; Yet it must not only be told they were afflicted, but
it must be held out in a sensible type, and they excited twice to remark it,
Behold, lo; and all this especially is done, to let them see Gods hand in these
lots, that so they might make use of them. 3. It is not inconsistent with the
Lords mercy and long-suffering toward a sinning people, that he strikes them in
some measure: But when he does smite in measure and not procceed to extremity,
even that should serve to magnify his mercy and long-suffering, and to invite
them to repentance, that they may reap more fruits of mercy; for, in this
vision, wherein he holds out his long-suffering, it is declared he did smite
them, but so as might rather allure them to come to him, then consume them. 4.
Trouble is of Gods creating and forming, and he is to be looked on as the
author thereof; and before a needful affliction be wanting, God will create or
form it out of nothing, or what is unlikely to produce such a trial: for, the
Lord God showed to me, and behold, he formed grasshoppers. 5. Weak means and
scourges in Gods hand will serve his turn, to afflict in what measure he
pleases; Therefore are these afflictions compared to grasshoppers, or the like
little creatures, and yet they did eat up, and put the sensible Prophet to
prayer. 6. It should be acknowledged as special mercy, when God does spare any
thing, when he inflicts strokes on a people for sin: And in particular, albeit
strokes on particular persons may be very sad; yet they should not be accounted
intolerable, so long as the public interest and a state stands; for, so much
may be signified by the grasshoppers coming not before the latter growth after
the Kings mowings, as is before explained. 7. It is no strange thing, that when
God inflicts any calamities, they do consume much before a people be stirred up
to make any use of them; for, so much is imported in the vision, they made an
end of eating the grass of the land, before the Prophets intercession. 8.
Albeit ofttimes few of these who are smitten and especially concerned in
judgments, will be sensible or seek to God under them; yet the truly godly
both should and will intercede with God in times of public calamities; for, so
much does Amos practice teach. 9. Such as would intercede acceptably with God,
in times of calamities, should be most affected with the sense of sin, and a
desire to have it removed; Therefore does Amos begin, O Lord God forgive, I
beseech thee, as expecting a good issue from the trouble, in the pardon of
their sin. 10. Such as are truly convinced of, and humbled under the sense of
sin, will be driven to seek for a free pardon, as their only refuge; and will
be far from thoughts of their own deservings, or of their ability to rid
themselves of that burden: for, such is Amos request, forgive I beseech thee.
11. Trouble will soon exhaust and bring a people so low, as there will be no
visible effectual mean of their restoration, were they never so potent before;
for, so much is imported in that question, by whom shall Jacob arise? that they
were fallen, and neither could they raise themselves, nor were there any other
to help them. 12. When the Lord brings a Church so low, and they are sensible
of their sin; such a condition calls on them who are sensible to betake
themselves to God, as Amos does here; and they are warranted to cleave to a
Covenant interest (imported in the name of Jacob, with whom the Covenant was
made or renewed) to plead in faith against the utter ruin of a Church, and her
falling without recovery (for, the question lays this as a principle, that
Jacob must arise, and upon that he pleads against their hoplesse condition) and
they are warranted to make use of their own weak and low condition, as an
argument of pity; Therefore it is sub-joined, for he is small. 13. The Lord is
very willing to be entreated, and upon entreaty, to divert and moderate his
strokes, especially during the time of his long suffering; for this, it shall
not be (to wit, to undo them quite) says the Lord; his word is enough for it.
14. Whatever be the carriage of men under calamities; Yet it is Gods mercy and
gracious condescendence that is alone to be magnified in any moderation or
favor they meet with; for, The Lord repented for this, or of this etc. It was
his gracious condescending to change his dealing (as men do, when they repent)
that produced this favorable sentence.

Verse 4. Thus has the Lord God showed unto me; and behold, the Lord God
called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and did eat up apart.

5. Then said I, O Lord God, cease I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise?
for he is small.

6. The Lord repented for this. This also shall not be, says the Lord God.


The second type and vision pointing out Gods long-suffering, is of fire
devouring the great deep (or drying up the springs which come from it) and
consuming a part of the land; the progress whereof is stopped upon the
intercession of Amos, as the former was. This also being a type represented in
a vision, needs not to be understood literally of fire or drought, whereby some
parts of that Kingdom were afflicted. chap. 4.7.8.9. but it seems to point
out other sadder calamities, which like fire threatened to devour the whole
Kingdom (which may be here signified by the great deep, or a confluence of
waters; as usually great Nations are signified by waters, Rev. 17.1.15.) and
did consume it in part, when their power was broken and weakened, their men
killed, and the sword, famine, and pestilence, succeeding one another, or
coming together, had almost ruined them. And particularly, it seems to relate
to the strokes inflicted by Hazael and his son, which had undone them, if the
Lord had not raised up Jeroboam the second to interpose, 2. Kings 14.23, -- 27:
and it may be also to the strokes inflicted by the Assyrians before their final
overthrow. Doct. 1. Lesser corrections, and moderation and favor showed in
them, are ofttimes so abused, as draws on new and sadder strokes; for, this
followed after the former, when they had made no use of them, nor of their
deliverance from them. 2. Such as will contend and strive with God, and will
not be bettered by his dealing, do provoke him to strive with them yet more;
and he has still more and sadder strokes, and instruments to inflict them, and
power to make them effectual: for, he called (to his fitted instruments) to
contend against their stubbornness by a new judgment of fire, and it
devoured. By all which he proves himself to be the Lord God, as here he is
twice designed. 3. The wrath of God pursuing an inpenitent people, is so
violent and irresistible as no endeavors of men can stand in its way, or stop
the course thereof; Therefore it is compared to fire, devouring the great deep,
and eating up a part, and ready to devour all, if God had not recalled it. 4.
It is the duty of Gods people not to be weary of prayer and intercession in
times of calamitiy, even albeit they should increase, and a people grow still
worse; for, Amos intercedes again upon this new occasion, though greater, and
though the people were so much the more hardened, by their abuse of Gods former
dealing. 5. Albeit Gods faithful servants be ofttimes ill-beloved and hated by
a wicked people; yet they are indeed their best friends, and special means, by
their intercession, of drawing down any blessings which they enjoy; for, so did
Amos prove to Israel, however they could not endure him. 6. The same arguments
for coming speed in prayer, must not be cast away, even when a people have
abused Gods accepting of them; but may yet be pleaded before him in new
straits; for, albeit the people made ill use of Gods favoring them in mercy,
upon the grounds of Amos pleading; yet he renews the same sure in this new
difficulty; only in place of pardon and forgiving, he pleads that God would
cease, or forbear to strike further and consume them by it; as being a visible
effect of pardon, which he desires may be manifested: or as pointing out what
it is to grant a National pardon to the body of a people; to wit, That the Lord
would so far pass over their provocations, as not to destroy them from being a
Church and Nation, though by peece-meal he cut off all the particular
offenders, were they never so many, yea and punish them eternally for their
sins. See Numb. 14.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. 7. The Lords compassion is not so
exhausted, by letting forth it self in former exigents, nor yet by a peoples
abusing the effects thereof; but he has still bowels of mercy ready upon
prayers and intercessions, to respect them: and it is not once but often that
he moderates the afflictions of his people, before he utterly consume them.
For, upon this second intercession for this stubborn people, Amos finds the
same mercy in God, and gets the same answer that formerly. And albeit Amos was
an eminent Prophet, yet he was a man subject to like passions, and may be an
encouragement to others, Jam. 5.17.

Verse 7. Thus he showed me, and behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a
plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand.

Verse 8. And the Lord said unto me, Amos, what see thou? and I said, A
plumb-line. Thou said the Lord, Behold, I will set a plumb-line in the midst of
my people Israel, I will not again pass by them any more.


The scope of this third type and vision, of the Lords standing upon a wall
made by a plumb-line etc. is to show, that the Lord will not deal so
favorably with this people as formerly. But as he had (like a Master builder
building a straight wall by a plumb-line) erected them into a Nation and
orderly state, and had given them an excellent rule and line of laws, whereby
they ought to have squared their actions; So since they were so far degenerate,
and were neither excited by lighter rods, nor drawn to repentance by heavier
judgments, nor, wrought upon by his favors, He will not any longer spare
them, nor hold off the extremity of desolation and ruin from coming upon the
Nation. But as a builder does exactly try his work by his plumb-line, to cast
down what is not regular; so he will not look upon their sinful courses any
longer with an eye of mercy, and pity, and long-suffering, but according to the
strict rule of justice: and he will exactly try how they have observed the Law
in worship and manners, and will accordingly recompense, and not spare. And so
this relates to what was execute by Shalmaneser. We have the same similitude
made use of much to this purpose, 2. Kings 21.13. Isa. 34.11. Lam. 2.8. and
somewhat like it is spoken of Dan. 5.27. Doct. 1. It is our duty to be
attentive to what God reveals of himself and of his mind, as being well worth
the marking; and we have need to be excited to consider it, even when it most
nearly concerns us; Therefore is Amos quickened to consider this type, by a
question, Amos, what feast thou? 2. When men are most attentive in considering,
and do see most of what God manifests, yet they will not profit as becomes
without Gods help, and unless he explain his own mind from step to step; for,
though Amos see the type, and give an account what it is, yet he does not
understand the signification thereof, till God reveal in it to him. 3. When
extreme judgments are nearest approaching, ordinarily they are little
discerned by them who are concerned; for, so much may be imported in this, that
however Amos presently understood the former types, yet he cannot understand
this (pointing out the utter desolation) though he see it, till God expound it.
4. A people who have formerly reaped the fruits of Gods long-suffering, even
once and again, and after they have abused them, are not to expect that he will
spare them, when they continue in sin, and make no use of his goodness; for
after his former long suffering held forth in the former visions, it comes now
to this, I will not again pass by them any more, to wit, to deal moderately,
and pass over their provocations, and spare them, or but lightly touch them as
in passing, as he had done formerly. So the phrase to pass by imports. See
Mic. 7.18. 5. God needs no more at any time to ruin a people, but exactly
consider their sins according to the Law, and punish them accordingly; and he
will do so to all such as make no use of Christ, but continue in sin, and turn
the grace of God into wantonness; for, so much is signified by setting a
plumb-line in the midst of Israel, as is before explained. 6. No privilege or
pretense of interest in God will secure impenitent sinners, nor avail them to
prevent even utter desolation; Therefore does he give them their title, my
people Israel, in the very sentence, to show that this should avail them
nothing to hold it off. 7. When God reckons with his people, it will be a sad
account that he has taken much pains upon them, and furnished them with
notable means of doing well, and yet they have degenerate; So much is signified
in that they were sometime a wall made by a plumb-line, whom now he tries by a
plumb-line. See Jer. 2.21. 8. It is a sad evidence that judgments do tend to
utter ruin, when prayer is restrained under them; So much seems to be
signified in that Amos intercedes not here as formerly. And we find it
foretold that during the captivity of Babylon, prayer should be restrained,
Ezekiel. 24.23. And it is regrated that it was so, Dan. 9.13.

Verse 9. And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries
of Israel shall be laid wast; and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam
with the sword.
This sentence of their utter ruin, is further enlarged and explained: and it
is declared, that especially he will destroy their idolatry, and lay the places
thereof desolate; and that he will cut off the house of their King, and so pull
away the two pillars upon which their state leaned. This stroke on Jeroboam the
seconds family was accomplished, as we find, 2. Kings 15.8, 9, 10. after which
the Kingdom decayed daily, and came to ruin speedily. Doct. 1. Idolatry and a
false religion is one prop of a state which will soonest fail it of any, and a
sin which God will least spare in his people, of any course they take; for, so
did Israel find in the matter of what they accounted their Sanctuaries, and
their high places. 2. The Lord is so provoked against idolatry and a false
religion among his people, that he will be satisfied with no less then the
utter overthrow thereof, and the desolation, of the places where it is
practiced, if no other course will draw men from it; Therefore he threatens
that their high places and Sanctuaries shall be desolate and laid waste. 3. The
most specious pretenses of imitating and respecting godly progenitors, in
idolatrous courses, will not justify them, were they never so many; But that
abuse and pretense will add to the controversy; Therefore are they called the
high places of Isaac, (who worshipped God publicly in several places of that
land, chiefly at Beersheba, as is marked on chap. 5.5.) and the sanctuaries of
Israel, who met with God, and worshipped him in several places, especially at
Bethel. And by this is declared, that their pretense of imitating them in
choosing these places, should not hold off the stroke, but rather help it on.
4. Royal authority, and the command of Rulers can as little justify idolatry,
as the pretense of the example of Progenitors; But Rulers do thereby rather
draw violent destruction upon themselves and their families, which God is able
to inflict when he pleases: for, says he, I will rise against the house of
Jeroboam with the sword. 5. The violent judgments that come even upon wicked
Rulers, are tokens of wrath, and a mean to draw it on upon a sinful land; for,
this against the house of Jeroboam, is brought in as helping on that sad stroke
upon the whole Nation. v. 8.

Verse. 10. Then Amaziah the priest of Beth-el sent to Jeroboam king of Israel,
saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel;
the land is not able to bear all his words.

11. For thus Amos says, Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall
surely be led away captive out of their own land.


Follows, to the end of the chapter, the prophets trials from the false
priests at Bethel, with his carriage in relation thereunto. This priest does,
First (in these verses) accuse him to the King. Wherein, 1. He charge him
with treason and open rebellion, and that he excited the people against
authority by his doctrine against him. 2. He declares that the land cannot
bear all his words, whereby may be signified, that upon his doctrine, the land
is like to be shaken with commotions, tumults and conspiracies; Either the
subjects being afflicted with his doctrine will side with him, and rise up
against authority, or (which is more likely to be the sense) the people cannot
endure him and his doctrine, and are but waiting for the Kings decree against
him, that they may execute it; or are ready to do it of their own head in a
tumultuous way, if he will not appear. And so he would insinuate to the King,
that it was a way to lose the hearts of his subjects, if he did tolerate such a
man so odious to him. 3. To make good this his charge and assertion, he repeats
some of Amos doctrine to the King, but unfaithfully and not fully. Doct. 1.
Such as are, and resolve to be faithful messengers and servants to God, in
corrupt and declining times, ought to lay their account for persecution; for,
so much does Amos lot warn us of. 2. As false teachers prove readily most cruel
persecuters of faithful Ministers, because of their own interests, that are
like to suffer prejudice; So this course is more horrid in them then any
others; Therefore is it chiefly marked what Amaziah the priest of Bethel did.
See Jer. 20.2, 3. 3. It is a special mean taught by Satan, for driving on a
course of persecution, when persecuters do delate the faithful servants of God
unto Kings and Rulers, as enemies to them; and when, having Kings ears, they
do inform against them behind their back, when they know not of it, nor are
admitted to speak for themselves: for, this was Amaziahs way, he sent to
Jeroboam King of Israel etc. 4. It is the ordinary trick of persecuters, and a
great injury to these whom they inform, as well as to the party troubled, that
they do misrepresent matters, and do hide the true cause of their spleen, and
only pretend great friendship to authority, and accordingly hold out what may
be plausible to them, and effectual to sharpen their rage against Gods
servants, for, though his own interest really grieved him, and that Amos cried
down his high places, as afterward appears; yet there is not a word of that
in the delation, but only of treason, and loseing the Kings subjects one way
or other by Amos preachings. 5. It is an old, but an injust scandal cast upon
faithful Ministers, that by their free preaching, they are the trumpets of
sedition and rebellion, affronters of authority, and withdrawers of their
subjects from their duty; for, such is the charge against Amos, Amos has
conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel; the land is not
able to bear all his words. Whereas Amos was his best friend, seeking his real
good, and learning him how to prevent the loseing both of himself and his
subjects; and to rebuke his sin openly, being public and general, I was not to
affront him, but to apply a public remedy to a public inveterate evil; and to
think otherwise, were for a man to lift up himself against God, as if he
should not be reproved by him. And in a word, Amos doctrine could be
intolerable to none, but such as proclaimed their contempt of God, and their own
incorrigiblenesse in sin. 6. It is also an old and injust trick in
calumniatours and persecuters, to repeat the doctrine of honest ministers
unfaithfully, in the ears of Rulers, by diminishing, perverting and corrupting
what they say; for, such is the account that he gives of Amos doctrine. v. 11.
for albeit he repeat truly concerning the captivity of the people, yet neither
in that, nor what concerns the King, does he repeat the causes procureing these
strokes, which Amos had clearly told; And he puts in Jeroboam himself in place
of his house which Amos had threatened, v. 9. to set the King more on edge. 7.
It is an evidence of the desperate and deadly condition of a land, when a
people do by sin procure saddest judgments, and yet will not see them
approaching, and are ready to persecute any who tell them of their danger; for,
such was the temper of this false priest; He supposes it a quarrel great
enough, that Amos had told the Kings house and the land of their approaching
hazard.

Verse. 12. Also Amaziah said unto Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thee away into
the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophecy there.

13. But prophecy not again any more at Beth-el: for it is the Kings chapel,
and it is the Kings court.


This course not succeeding, (as it seems Jeroboam would not meddle with Amos,
either out of fear or policy) he takes another course: And pretending
friendship and a respect to the prophets good, He. 1. advises him to leave
that land and go to Judah; alleging that now he might go easily if he went
soon; but if he fled not shortly, he was in hazard to be taken or ill
entreated: and withal, he lays before him how he might live better in Judah,
and exercise his calling with more peace and fruit then in Israel, v. 12. 2. He
advises him especially not to prophecy any more in Beth el; and that because
it was the Kings Sanctuary (as the word will bear) appointed by him for public
worship, and so none might challenge it; and withal it was the Kings chapel,
where he himself performed public worship; and therefore he could not endure
any contradiction there, which would reflect both upon his authority enjoining
that worship, and upon his own practicing of it. Likewise he tells him, that
Beth el is the Kings Court, where he remains, and has his residence at some
times, especially when he came to worship, or, the house of the Kingdom, a
place of public judicatories where his opposition could be less hid or
endured then elsewhere. Doct. 1. As the Lord can when he will, disappoynt and
break the snares of persecuters when they are most subtly laid; (as here it
appears Jeroboam did nothing upon this subtle and nettling desolation:) So
persecuters are endless in their projects, and when one fails, they will be
sure to essay another; As the practice of this false priest may teach us. 2. As
persecuting enemies may pretend friendship, that they may overthrow Gods
servants; So they are most dangerous when they do so, and do insinuate by
flattery, that they may suggest ill counsels, or otherwise ensnare them: for,
this was Amaziahs last refuge to insinuate with Amos, that he might be rid of
him. And therefore he who counted but basely of the prophet, and in his
delation to the King calls him only Amos, now he insinuates with him, and
called him the Seer, a name given of old to prophets, 1. Sam. 9.9. He who would
have incensed the King against him, pretends now a great solicitude for his
safety, good and ease, and that his hazard was from others only; flee, says
he, for thy self, (as it is in the original) or for thine own behoof, and eat
bread in Judah, which thou will not get here: And he who could not endure good
doctrine, pretends that he is not against prophesying, but acknowledges it is
good; only he would not have his person in hazard, but let him prophesy with
safety in Judah; prophesy there. So subtle are pesecuters, and can turn
themselves into so many shapes, that they have need of much light from God who
would discern and avoid them. 3. Whatever persecuters, and especially corrupt
Churchmen, may pretend for their way, of zeal to Religion, or of respect to
the servants of God, or to these whom they incense against them; Yet it is but
themselves, and their gain and advantage, which is their snare and sets them to
work: for, so much does he discover in that particular counsel, prophecy not
at Bethel, though he tell not the true causes of that counsel; for, he drove
his great trade there, and he was afraid lest the Prophets doctrine should
bring down his market, and therefore he would be rid of him. 4. The discourses
and insinuations of this subtle persecuter, which were unsound, and nothing
else but so many tentations and snares laid in Amos way, may afford unto
faithful Ministers especially, several cautions and directions in prosecuting
their calling. And 1. Gods servants, as they must be simple, harmless and
innocent, so they must be wise and prudent, not trusting every flattering
insinuater, or giving simple credit to every insinuation; Otherwise, they may
get a persecuting Amaziah in their bosom in place of a friend, and be drawn
upon a snare. 2. It is a great snare, and very unbeseeming the servants of God,
to be affrighted in or for their duty, so as to abandon it; for, flee for thy
self, as a man affrighted and minding only his own safety, was an ill
counsel. See. Neh. 6.10, 11. 3. A seeming creditable pretense of retreat will
not warrant men's faithless terror in performing duty, or their neglect of it;
for, though he propound fleeing to the land of Judah, as creditable enough to
withdraw into his own Country and home, yet that is also but a snare. 4. Men
must not abuse providential opportunities concurring with other tentations, to
withdraw them from their duty in a time of hazard, or to draw them any way
wrong; for, albeit he propound his counsel, as that providence gave him now
liberty of retreat, if he would flee and make haste, and that he would not meet
with the like again, when possibly he would desire it; yet that was no
sufficient argument to Amos. Providence must never be so read, as to draw men
from their duty revealed in Scripture. 5. A Minister must not make choice of
places wherein to exercise his calling, according as he may get respect or
commodity thereby; But he must follow the call of God, whatever his lot be, or
though it should seem he would be better elsewhere; for, it is but a poor
argument that he may eat bread in Judah, and therefore should leave Israel
where he was not well respected nor entertained. 6. Ministers must not quit a
station wherein God has put them, pretending they do no good in it, and that
they might be more useful elsewhere; But it is their duty to sow the seed of
the word wherever he commands them, and let him make what use of their service
he pleases; for, it is another unsound insinuation in this counsel, that he
might prophecy in Judah, and his calling be more respected, and prove more
successful there, then in Israel. 7. Ministers must not be allured with
promises of immunity for by-gons, to omit duty for the future; for* this was
another snare laid, prophecy not again any more at Bethel, which imports that
nothing would be said for what was past, If he took heed for time to come. 8.
Faithful Ministers must not be borne down, nor their hands weakened by the
general applause and countenance given to ill courses; But they must do their
duty in opposing evils that are generally countenanced and cried up; for, it
was Amos duty to prophecy at Bethel, and he did so, not only because it was a
public place to preach in, but he would witness against their idolatry, in
the place where their calves were worshipped and most in request. 9. Faithful
Ministers must not give way to this corrupt principle, that Rulers must not be
controuled, but their will stand for a law in matters of Religion; and that it
is a contempt of, and enjury done to their authority, to warn them of their
sin; But they are bound to condemn both their injunctions in matters of
Religion, and their practices, if they be contrary to the word; for, it is no
valid argument for silence at Bethel, that it is the Kings Sanctuary, or
Chapel. 10. Ministers must not be dazzled with the greatness of men, or
danger of hazard from them, nor with eminency of places, in doing their duty:
But they must set their faces like a flint against all such discouragements and
tentations; for, that Bethel is the Kings Court, or house of the Kingdom, is
no sufficient argument for Amos silence and flight.

Verse 14. Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, neither
was I a prophets son, but I was an herdman, and a gatherer of sycomore fruit.

15. And the Lord took me as I followed the flock, and the Lord said unto me,
Go prophecy unto my people Israel.


Amos, in this first part of his reply, does assert his authority to prophecy,
particularly against Israel; showing that he was extraordinarily called to it,
when he dreamt not of it, but was earning his bread, and living soberly in a
mean calling; and that before that calling came, he was neither a Prophet, nor
so much as a Prophets son, that is, trained up in the schools of the Prophets
in order to that calling. See 2. Kings 6.1. But he was brought to it, as David
to the Kingdom from following the ewes. And by this he clears that he
prophesied not thus of his own head, or at the command of any other, but God
only; And that he never turned a prophet for his food, being meanly bred, and
content with sober diet. Doct. 1. A clear calling from God to any station, is a
sweet support under any distress or opposition men may meet with in it: and
they who have this, ought to be comforted in it, whatever come; for, Amos
opposes his clear call to all these insinuate hazards. 2. Albeit men be bound
to means and to walk by a rule, yet God is not bound, but may call and employ
whom he will, and make them able and eminent; for, of a mean herdman, he makes
an eminent Prophet. 3. No lawful calling how mean soever, is a disparagement
to any, but it is rather a commendation, when God lays a man's lot low, that
he stoops to a mean calling and keeps by it, and lives soberly in it; for,
Amos thinks it no disparagement, that he was an herdman, and a gatherer of
sycomore fruit, for himself and family, or possibly to sell. 4. It is no
disparagement to the word, nor should it be the less respected, that mean men
are employed to carry it, seeing it is the word of God, in whose mouth soever
it be; and the excellency of the power thereof is of God, and not of men; for,
Amos thinks it no just ground of sleighting the message he carried, that the
Lord took him as he followed the flock, and said, Go prophecy etc. 5. Where
the Lord gives a call and imposes a duty, he must be obeyed and followed,
oppose who will; for, in answer to all that was said for his fleeing to Judah,
he asserts this, The Lord took me, and said, Go prophecy to Israel. See Act.
4.19. 6. The Lord evidenceth such respect to a people in sending his messengers
unto them, that it is very odious in them to despise and loath such a mercy;
for, he upbraids their ingratitude with this, that it was in the Commission,
prophecy unto my people Israel.

Verse 16. Now therefore hear thou the word of the Lord; Thou say Prophecy
not against Israel, and drop not thy word against the house of Isaac.

17. Therefore thus says the Lord, Thy wife shall be an harlot in the city,
and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be
divided by line, and thou shall die in a polluted land, and Israel shall surely
go into captivity forth of his land.


In the second part of this reply, Amos in the Lords name threatens this false
Priest for his presumptuous prohibiting of him to prophecy: and foretells that
his wife shall be an open harlot (not so much forced by soldiers, as
voluntarily addicted to it) his children shall be slain, his land divided, and
himself die in exile out of the holy land: And withal he declares that however
he would not hear of it, yet Israel should certainly go into captivity. And it
is very likely he went into captivity with them, either at the first or second
time, of which, 2. Kings, 15.29. and chap. 17. for it is not so many years
betwixt the death of this Jeroboam, and the last captivity, as should make it
altogether incredible. Doct. 1. Such as would hinder the course of Gods word,
and oppose his servants in carrying of it, shall not miss a sad word against
themselves; for, though this Priest deserved this sad sentence otherwise, yet
this put the capstone on all, Thou say, prophecy not against Israel, and
drop not thy word against the house of Isaac. And for this phrase, that
prophesying is called dropping, See on Mic. 2.6. And even threatenings against
incorrigble people may be compared to dropping and rain, because however they
do not make a people fruitful, yet they prosper in what the Lord sends them to
do, as is said in a certain case, Isa. 55.10, 11. 2. It is an ill use made of a
peoples privileges, when they are held up to ward off sad messages, and do
embolden them to despise the word; Therefore does Amos mention his mustering up
of the titles of Israel and the house of Isaac, in this matter, though it was
not before recorded; It may be he pressed Amos oftener then once, and was more
boisterous at one time then another. 3. It is righteous with God to make
opposers of the word, spectacles of his justice and indignation; and to let out
judgments on corrupt Churchmen, their families and enjoyments, suitable to
their abusing of his Church and people in their calling; for, such a procedure
is to be seen in this sentence against the Priest: He induced Gods Church to
spiritual adultery; and his wife is an harlot in the city. See Hos. 4.13: He
destroyed the souls of Gods children; and his sons and daughters fall by the
sword. He was given to the world, and was a chief cause why Israel was
dispoiled of their inheritance; and his land is divided by line, among the
Conquerours. He was a chief cause of Isreal's exile, and would not let them
believe it; and he gets the threatening verified on himself, and that without
recovery, thou shall die in a polluted land. And he polluted the holy land with
idolatry; and he dies in a polluted land: 4. Whatever be the secure confidences
of sinners or seducers; yet these will not make void Gods threatenings, but he
will refute all their dreams by real strokes: for, in opposition to what he
would not believe himself, nor let the people believe, it is here again
asserted, and Israel shall surely go into captivity, says the Lord. 5.
Whatever may be the lot of the truly godly, yet it cannot but be sad and bitter
to wicked men, when they are made witnesses of these calamities which they
occasion and draw upon a people, by misleading and hardening them in sin; and
when they share deeply in them, and never see an end of them, but die under
them; for, so much may be gathered from this, that he lived till the captivity
came, and drank so deep of that cup.

CHAP. 8.
AMos does not stand upon the prohibition laid upon him, but goes on fully and
clearly to lay before them their approaching ruin, and the causes thereof. And
in this chapter first, under a new type is represented the final subversion of
that State and Nation, near approaching, v. 1, 2. wherein their sacred songs
should be turned into howlings, and their dead should be so many, as they
should bury them without lamentation, v. 3. Secondly, this sentence is enlarged
and amplified in the rest of the chapter. Wherein, 1. The equity of the
sentence is cleared from the consideration of their sins procuring it; which
(beside what is mentioned in the threatenings) are, their great inhumanity, v.
4. and their wearying of their sacred solemnities, longing to have opportunity
to follow their gain, and that by deceitful bargaining they might enrich
themselves, and bring the poor into bondage, v. 5.6. 2 The grievousnesse of the
calamities, that were to be inflicted for their sins, is pointed forth in
several particulars: Namely, That God has sworn not to forget these courses,
but will keep them on record till he punish for them, v. 7. That this should
draw on horrible confusions accompanied with great sorrow, and a deluge of
calamities to cast them out of their land, as their consciences could tell
them, v. 8. That he would send a sudden change of their condition, when they
least expected, v. 9. would fill them with bitter sorrow, v. 10. would plague
them with the want of his despised word, v. 11, 12. would consume even the
strongest with calamities, v. 13. and (which contains another cause of the
judgment) would cause idolaters to perish without hope of recovery, v. 14.

Verse 1. THus has the Lord God showed unto me, and behold, a basket of summer
fruit.

2. And he said, Amos, what see thou? and I said, A basket of summer fruit.
Then said the Lord unto me, The end is come upon my people of Israel, I will
not again pass by them any more.


In these verses, by the type of a basket of summer fruit, (which Amos is
excited to consider) is signified, that God will not plead any longer with
them, nor wait any more upon them, or spare them. But as summer fruits do
portend a ripe harvest, or that it is near approaching; so their sins were such
as made them ripe for destruction. And as ripe fruits are plucked down, and
gathered into baskets and eaten; So should the greedy enemies devour and
destroy them. Whence learn, 1. People that are nearest destruction are
ordinarily so stupid, that they need to be often told of their danger; And God
sees it ofttimes meet to give them frequent warnings, that they may be without
excuse; Therefore is this new type held forth with the explication thereof,
containing the same in substance that was spoken to chap. 7.7, 8. 2. As
threatenings according to the word, in the mouths of Gods servants, are of him,
and not devised by them; (for, the Lord God showed this type, and expounded it)
So they have need to be still of new excited to consider what God reveals, and
to have raised thoughts upon it; that so they may excite others to the like
attention; Therefore a Behold is prefixed to the type, and Amos is put to
consider it by a question, Amos what see thou? which points also at the duty
of all who hear it. 3. Sin, though it be long forborne, will at last ripen and
come to an height; and when it is so, the Lord will not spare, notwithstanding
his former long-suffering and moderation; So much does this type point out, and
the explication thereof; The end is come, I will not again pass by them any
more, which is the same with chap. 7, 8. 4. It is men's duty to see that what
God says may take deep impression; And for this end, as Ministers should
avoid the wisdom of words which corrupt the simplicity of Religion and the
Gospel: so it is lawful and needful that they express the matters of God so as
may render them most taking, and make them stick fastest: Therefore is there
not only a type used, but in the Original there is an affinity in sound and
(almost) in the word, betwixt the type, summer fruits, and the thing signified,
the end. And this is made use of to inculcate the matter, and cause it stick in
their memory. 5. Men are so prone to lean to carnal confidences, and
particularly, on their visible interest in God, as if that would hold off
deserved judgments; that it is the duty of Gods servants, frequently to
discover the deceitfulness of such a course; Therefore again do they get a
name of interest in the sentence, my people Israel, to show that such a
pretense will fail them. 6. When God proceeds to severity against his people,
it will add to the bitterness thereof, that he had dealt otherwise, and they
have made no use thereof; Therefore is it put in the sentence, that he will not
pass by them again, any more, as he had done formerly.

Verse 3. And the songs of the temples shall be howlings in that day says the
Lord God: there shall be many dead bodies in every place, they shall cast them
forth with silence.
The greatness of this near approaching calamity is held forth from two
effects. 1. That their joyful songs, even in their Temples and at their sacred
solemnities, should cease, and in place thereof, there should be the howling of
the afflicted. 2. That there should be so great a mortality (by reason of
sword, or famine or pestilence, or altogether) that they should cast the dead
out of the way, or in common pits, and bury them without lamentation or public
solemnity. Whence learn, 1. It is a sad evidence of Gods displeasure, when
sacred solemnities cease, and nothing is left in place thereof but sorrow and
lamentation; for, so much does this sentence teach in general, whatever their
Religion was. 2. Whatever be the joy of the wicked, and their pleasing of
themselves in their corrupt and idoratrous worship; yet it will at last end in
sorrow; for, the songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, says the
Lord God. 3. When God pleads a controversy with a Nation, it is righteous with
him not only to break their power, and bring them in subjection unto their
enemies, but also to pursue particular persons with plagues, to the cutting off
of not a few of them: for, there shall be many dead bodies in every place. 4.
Albeit it may be the lot even of the godly under calamities and persecutions,
to be cut off, and want burial, Psalm. 79.2, 3. Yet the want of ordinary burial,
or to be buried without usual decency and lamentation, is a judgment upon the
wicked, wherein Gods hand is to be seen in pouring contempt upon them after
they are dead, and stupifying the living with multitudes of calamities; for, it
is a judgment, they shall cast them forth with silence, where by silence is to
be understood especially, want of funeral lamentations usually among them;
though chap. 6.10. it be taken in another sense.

Verse 4. Hear this, O ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of
the land to fail,

5. Saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and the
sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? making the ephah small, and the shekel
great, and falsifying the balances by deceit.

6. That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a pair of shoes: and
sell the refuse of the wheat?


The equity of this sad sentence is cleared by showing what are the causes
procuring it; one whereof, relating chiefly to the second Table, is here laid
to their charge; another concerning Religion, is spoken to v. 14. In these
verses he calls the richer and greater sort especially, to hear these sad
tidings; and charge upon them. 1. That they were cruel and inhumane to the
poor, and swallowed them up by oppression, so that they were made to fail or
cease, that is, they were not able to subsist, but were put off the world by
their cruelty, v. 4. 2. That they wearied off days of solemnity and sacred
meetings (which they kept in imitation of Judah) and longed to have them over,
that they might follow their gain, and satisfy their coveteous humors, v. 5.
3. That they were not only covetous, and followed gain eagerly in a lawful
calling, but they were both deceitful and cruel in their bargains. They both
wronged and falsified the measuers whereby they sold out their commodities, and
their weights whereby they weighed the money (according to their custom at that
time) that came in unto them: They were not content to spoil the poor of their
money, but got them made slaves and bondmen to them for a thing of naught; and
though they had corrupted both measures and weights, yet they sold not good
commodities, but corrupted their wares, and made gain of the chafe and refuse
of wheat, as if it were good, v. 5, 6. Doct. 1. The Lord would not have rods
dumb, but speaking to guilt; and when he threatens, it concerns the guilty to
hear; and though they be averse from it, yet God will make them hear ere all be
done: Therefore is it subjoined to the former sentence, Hear this, O ye etc. 2.
Oppression of the poor is an inhumane beastly sin, and a great cause of Gods
controversy against a land, provoking him to prove himself higher then the
highest, Eccl. 5.8 Therefore is this brought in as his quarrel, and pointed out
as a beastly sin; ye swallow up the needy, (or, pant and gape to get him
swallowed down) even to make the poor of the land to fail. And albeit this be
the sin of the richer sort only, yet it is held out as the cause of the lands
destruction; Because, however the poorer have their own sins, yet the greater
sort are ordinarily ringleaders in procuring National judgments; and it may
be here, the meaner followed the footsteps of the greater, so far as they had
power. 3. As the covetous are never without their own sorrows, were they never
so thriving, 1. Tim. 6.9. so it is matter of sad challenge, when the cares of
the world turn an enemy unto, and make men weary of Religion and attendance
upon the duties thereof; And when men not only have their hearts upon the
world on sabbaths and times of religious duties, but do look on all these as
distractions, and matters in the by, and make the world and gain their great
earand: for, this was their fault here, When will the new moon be gone, that we
may sell corn? and the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat? They mention only
sabbaths and new moons, though they had other solemnities, because these
recurred more frequently, and other solemnities came about but once a year, and
therefore did not so often vex them. And if this was a land destroying sin,
how much more is God provoked when men dare openly by actions profane the
Sabbath, and neglect duties of worship? See Neh. 13.15, 16. etc. 4. When men do
make a prey of the poor by falsifying of wares, measures, weights and coin,
they will find that they do highly provoke God, whatever they gain thereby;
for, such is the challenge, they make the ephah small, and the shekel great, by
adding to the weight whereby it is weighed; They falsify the balances by
deceit, either in weighing money or other commodities, and they sell the refuse
of the wheat. 5, As the Lord sees it meet to exercise some with poverty, and
by putting them in the reverence of great men; so their condition is not only
an exercise to themselves, but a trial to others, wherein God takes special
notice how they are entreated; Therefore does the Lord challenge for what they
did to the poor and needy. 6. Albeit oppression in the matter of goods and
means be very intolerable and horrid, yet that is but little in comparison of
injuries done to the persons of men, and when for small things the poor are
brought in bondage, slavery or restraint; for, they buy the poor for silver,
and the needy for a pair of shoes, or, for a mean thing they made bondmen of
them, abusing that law, Lev. 25.39.

Verse 7. The Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never
forget any of their works.
Follows an explication and enlargement of the grievousnesse of the
judgments, formerly denounced for these sins. This is contained in several
branches; The first whereof holds out in general, that certainly punishment
would ensue, the Lord having sworn by himself that he would not forget their
carriage, but put all their doings upon their account till he return them a
meet recompense. Whence learn, 1. When wrath is most deserved, and ready to be
let forth, men are ordinarily least sensible, and will least believe it;
Therefore must the sentence be again confirmed by an oath, which is the third
time an oath is given in this prophecy. See chap. 4.2. and 6.8. 2. The Lord
swears here by the excellency of Jacob, which is himself, seeing he cannot
swear by another, Heb. 6.13. and he is expressly called the excellency or glory
of his people, Psalm. 106.20. Luke 2.32. And by this title, he would teach, 1.
That nothing beside God, can make a people truly excellent, enjoy what dignity
and excellency they will. 2. That it is the great ingratitude and dittay of a
people, when being excellent through him, they do not acknowledge him, nor walk
answerable; for, it is to aggreage their sin, that he gives himself this title
in this sentence. 3. That whatever be men's confidence in their privileges; Yet
when they provoke God, they will be disappointed; yea, their sin will turn what
they gloried most in, to plead against them: Therefore also is this brought in,
in the sentence. Doct. 1. Oaths, when men are called to give them, should be
taken and given with much gravity, reverence and dread; for, so much may be
imported in the way of this oath of the Lord, which is in the Original, if I
ever forget etc. which imports not only the certainty of what he swears, as it
is translated, and therefore the certification is suppressed in silence; But
this covering of it in silence does import, that men in giving an oath, should
tremble at the very mentioning of what will follow, if they swear falsely. 4.
Albeit an impenitent people, when they are spared, do think that all is
forgotten; Yet they have Gods word and oath for it, that where pardon is not
obtained through Christ, the account is but growing, and that all their sins,
lesser and greater, will at last be brought forth, to make their case the
sadder when he reckons for all together; for says he, Surely, I will never
forget any of their works. He will remember all of them, and not any of them
but they shall be brought out in the process.

Verse 8. Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
dwells therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood: and it shall be cast
out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.
In the second branch of this enlargement of the sentence, it is declared, that
as the very land might be astonished and shake at their provocations (which
their consciences could tell them was deserved) so it should be filled with
horrible confusions causing all to lament. And that they should no more get
dwelling or abiding in it, then if it were drowned and overflowed, as Egypt is
at some seasons by the River Nilus. This seems to be the sense of this verse;
the first part thereof concerning the lands trembling, imports not only that
the insensible earth might tremble under such a burden of sin and sinners, and
be ready to testify its indignation against them (as it may be he speaks this,
about the time of that earthquake, chap. 1. 1. and pointing at it) But further
it imports, there should be horrible confusions upon the land (as if it were
trembling) to cast them out of it, and make them mourn, as it is subjoined; and
so the speech is taken, Psalm. 60.2. and 75. 3. The second part of the verse
illustrates their calamities by the simile of a deluge; and as before the lands
trembling is brought in to point out the commotions and confusions they were to
meet with upon it; so also these things here are applied to the earth, which
befell them upon it. The parts of the simile are. 1. It shall rise up wholly as
a flood, or, as with a flood, and the meaning is; That as waters rise up and
cover a land (for, so the sense is, though the land be said to rise up) so
should their land be overflowed with calamities, that they could not abide on
it, and (as the Original word will also bear) in should evanish and come to
nothing, as with a flood, that is, it should be so covered as not to appear,
and they have no more use of it then if it were not. 2. If shall be cast out,
that is, as the Sea and deluges are restless and do still toss and cast out
the slime and mire which they raise (and so the same word is expressed, Isa.
57, 20.) so the land should be shaken and disquieted with trouble, that it
might spew them out, Lev. 20.22. 3. (Which clears all the former) it shall be
drowned, as by the flood of Egypt, so that they cannot dwell on it: Doct. 1.
How sound soever impenitent sinners sleep, and how incredible and injust soever
they may think it were, that God should destroy them: Yet their greatest
unfriend is in their own bosom, and it is their great madness that they do
not consider how much their consciences will have to plead for God in a day of
rebuke, and how sad that pleading will be; Therefore are they so often put to
it, in this matter, by these questions. 2. Albeit the Lords servants be
accounted, by reason of their faithful doctrine, the disturbers of the earth,
as chap. 7.10. Acts 17.6. Yet it is men's own sins that disturb it, and draw on
all these confusions they meet with: for, it is for this the land trembles,
and there are so many confusions upon it. See Jer. 9.12. 3. Albeit sinners
sleep securely in their sin, yet the very creatures may bear witness against
their stupidity, as Jer. 2.12. And albeit they fear no dangers; yet the very
creatures are ready upon a call, to testify their indignation against them;
for, so much also does the lands trembling, as it is before explained, import;
to wit, that the insensible earth was more affected then they, and groaning
under that burden, and that it was a wonder that it did not perpetually quake,
till it swallowed them, as Number. 16.31, 32. 4. Albeit sinners, when they see
that strokes will come on, will not be moved for all that, but be ready to
harden themselves against them; yet God will make them to smart under his rods;
and he will do so to all who are guilty, as well as to one: for, every one
shall mourn that dwells therein. 5. When men settle upon their dregs, and
seek to root themselves in the earth, it is righteous with God to give them a
disappointment, and that he send calamities comparable to the greatest
accidents in the world, to shake them out of their nests, and to overflow all
their enjoyments; So much is intimate, in that it shall rise up wholly as a
flood, and it shall be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt.

Verse. 9. And it shall come to pass in that day, says the Lord, that I will
cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear
day.
In the third place, Whereas they trusted in their prosperous and comfortable
condition; The Lord threatens to send a sudden change, like a Sun set at
noonday, or some sudden darkning of the earth, in daytime. Whence learn. 1.
Sinners, by Gods permission and long-suffering, may enjoy a very prosperous and
comfortable outward condition; And this may get time to continue and increase,
till it come to an height and prime; for, so is imported, they had a noon and
clear day. 2. Albeit sinners do rest and lean on such a condition; yet it
cannot secure them against God, but he is provoked to make the very height of
their prosperity, the time of the sad change of their condition; and to
surprise them with a stroke when they do least expect it: for, the Lord God
will cause the Sun to go down at noon, and darken the earth in the clear day,
See Jer. 15.9. 3 Times of calamities and real desertions will prove very sad to
the impenitent and wicked, and so much the bitterer, as their condition has
been better outwardly: Therefore is their condition compared to a Sunset, and
darkened earth, and that at noon, and when the day has been clear.

Verse. 10. And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your Songs into
lamentation, and I will bring up sackcloth upon all Loins, and baldness upon
every head; and I will make it as the mourning of an only Son, and the end
thereof as a bitter day.
Fourthly, it is threatened that by these troubles, their former joys should
turn into general sorrow, such as no signs could sufficiently express, and
which should be comparable to the greatest of worldly sorrows, and continue
all their days, and be transmitted to their posterity. Whence learn. 1. The
joy and mirth of wicked men, were it never so great, shall end in sorrow; And
God will reach all of them, and all their joy, to put an end to it: for I will
turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation. 2. The
sorrow of wicked men who will not be sensible of, nor mourn for sin, will, in
Gods justice, be made very great and bitter unto them; So that all signs (of
sackcloth on their loins, of which frequently in Scripture, and baldness, of
which M^^. 1.16.) shall be little enough, or too little to express it; and for
the measure thereof, it shall be as the mourning of an only Son, of which see
Zech. 12.10. 3. It is righteous with God to reach all ranks with his stroke,
and make them mourn in a day of recompense, and not the poor only, who
ordinarily suffer most in some calamities, while as others escape free; for,
says he, I will bring up sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every
head. 4. It is also just with God that wicked men never see an end of these
calamities they procure to come upon a Nation, but that they die under them,
and leave them behind them to posterity; for, the end thereof shall be as a
bitter day, that is, when they expect an issue, they shall find bitterness,
and they shall come to an end under the bitterness thereof.

Verse. 11. Behold, the days come, says the Lord God, that I will send a
famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of
hearing the words of the Lord.

12. And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the
east: they shall run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it.


Fifthly, Whereas they were now so desirous to be rid of the word; The Lord
threatens that in their extremities they should be deprived of it, and should
not find it, though they seek after it. Whence learn. 1. The word of the Lord
should be, and is unto the Soul what food is to the body, for refreshing and
strengthening thereof, for keeping it in life, and enabling to action and work;
Therefore is the want thereof called famine in the land. See Job 23.12. 2. When
the word is despised, and men be weary of it, God is justly provoked to take it
from them; for, whereas the false priest expresses, their general temper,
chap. 7.12, 13. now the days come, Says the Lord God, that I will send a
famine in the land, of hearing the words of the Lord. 3. As men's Souls are
better then their bodies, and their eternal welfare to be preferred to a
natural life; So a famine of the word is a sadder stroke, and speaks more
wrath, then if the Lord should let a Nation starve for want of meat and drink:
Therefore is it expressed so as not a famine for bread, nor a thirst for water
(which were a small matter in comparison of this) but of hearing the words of
the Lord; And therefore also is a Behold prefixed to it. 4. Greatest despisers
of the word, and they who would think it their great mercy to be rid of the
trouble thereof, may yet come into extremities wherein they shall miss the
word, and would be glad of it, and take much pains to enjoy it; for, they shall
wander, and run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord. 5. It is righteous
with God, that they who contemn the word, when it is offered, and do miss and
seek it in trouble, only out of the sense of calamities, to get ease of them,
and not out of any sense of sin, or desire of true spiritual comfort; It is
righteous, I say, with God, that such should come no speed in seeking after the
word, though they take never so much pains to run through all the corners of
the land: for, they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to
the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. Where in assigning, the borders of the land, the only difficulty is,
that as the great sea was on the west, so the other is placed south, which
elsewhere is said to lie eastward. But it suffices us, that however the dead
sea lay eastward to Judah, yet it lay south or southeast to Israel; or, it may
be conceived, that the sea on the south is the red sea, which sometime is put
for the border of the land, Exodus 23.31. It is further to be considered, that
however he speak of their wandering with relation to the bounds of the land of
Canaan, yet it appears not that they had that want before their captivity;
for not only had they prophets still in Judah, if they had been so earnest,
but it is probable Hosea continued till their final captivity; But as it is
usual to describe the several quarters of the earth with relation to the
borders of Canaan, and under the same names; So it seems to be the sense,
that in their exile, they should seek for the word in all quaters, and not
find it

Verse 13. In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst.
Sixthly, He threatens that their calamities should be such, as the very young
men should not be able to endure them, and fair and tender virgins should not
be respected, but should succumb under them; By thirst here we may understand
either literally, the want of food and drink, or figuratively, that they should
find no refreshment nor comfort under their troubles, as Hos. 2.3. Whence
learn 1. When the Lord removes his word from a people, it is an evidence of sad
plagues following upon it, and of much fainting discouragement without hope of
issue, under them; for, after that threatening, v. 11.12. it follows, in that
day shall they faint for thirst. Either shall they be plagued with famine, or
left under that or the like rod, without all refreshment and comfort, and that
not for a fit, but till they faint again. 2. Men's natural strength and vigout,
as it comes far short of what strength God gives unto his faint people, Isa.
40.29, 30, 31. so especally it will not endure not carry through under
calamities and judgments for sin; for, the young men shall faint. 3. When God
is provoked against a Nation, he will not respect nor spare them whose
condition otherwise pleads for pity; for, neither fair and tender virgins, nor
growing up youth and posterity are here spared.

Verse 14. They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God, O Dan,
lives, and the manner of Beersheba lives, even they shall fall, and never
rise up again.
Lastly, He thretens that all Idolaters (Such as all they were that worshipped
the Calves at Bethel, Dan or Beersheba, or any other place) should chiefly
suffer and perish without hope of remedy. And this not only contains a
threatening, but points out also another cause (together with their oppression,
v. 4.5.6.) of these threatened judgments. Their idolatrous worship is expressed
by swearing, which is frequently put for all religious worship, as is marked on
Zeph. 1.5. And several sorts of it are expressed here; And namely, that they
did swear by their Idols which were maintained by their chief city Samaria,
though it was their sin and not their God; That though they pretended to
worship the true God in this, and to swear by his name; Yet they did not honor
him as he revealed himself in his word, and is acknowledged in his true
Church; but did swear by him as he was worshipped in Dan, and by the God whose
way and manner of service they had erected at Beersheba. And so they gave that
honor to their Idols and calves immediately, and pretended to offer it to God
only in and by these Idols. Doct. 1. God has a special controversy against
Idolaters and corrupters of Religion in his Church; Therefore is there a
peculiar threatening against such. 2. The true God will not acknowledge any
service as done to him, which is offered in any Idolatrous way, and in and by
Idols and Images: Nor will he acknowledge that he is the God, who is worshipped
and acknowledged in such away; for, albeit to swear by the true God, be a part
of his worship; Yet he makes it a quarrel that they swear by him as represented
by their Idols, and as he is served in Dan, and in Beersheba after their
devices; They swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy God, O Dan lives, and
the manner of Beersheba lives. 3. Idolatry will be especially charged upon
these who are chief in promoting and entertaining thereof; for, in that
respect their Idols are called Samaria's, though it may be understood also of
Bethel, which was within the territory of Samaria, 4. When men reckon rightly,
they will find that Idolatry is their great sin, and the chief cause of Gods
quarrel, and not the matter of their confidence; Therefore it shall be called
the sin of Samaria. 5. Whatever the Lord may do unto the body of a Nation,
after he has afflicted them, Yet it is just with him to prove his displeasure
against Idolaters therein, by consumeing them utterly without restitution; for,
even they shall fall, and never rise up again.

CHAP. 9.
FOr the right taking up of the scope of this chap. we are to consider, that
the vision of the Lord standing upon the Altar etc. v. 1. is not to be
understood of the Altars of their Idols, nor of their temples in Israel, with
which the Lord had never any thing to do: but of the Temple of Jerusalem. And
so as they were challenged and sentenced together, Chap. 6. so here over again,
this sentence is confirmed to be irrevocable against both. And by the Lords
joining of Judah (who had some form of external lawful worship) and their
Temple, in the sentence with Idolatrous Israel, he would let them see what
great cause they had to be afraid. Withal they are thus joined in the
sentence, that so way may be made for the following promises, v. 8.9, 11. etc.
which are common to both.

In the first part of this chap. by a new type and vision is signified the
cutting off of the Nation of Israel (comprehending Judah also) both great and
small, wherein there should be no escaping, v. 1. seeing there is no sleeing
from God when he pursues in anger, as he would do them, v. 2.3, 4. which is
further confirmed from the great power of God, v. 5.6. and their sinfulness
and baseness, v, 7. In the second part of the chap. this sentence, and the
rest of these hard messages, are sweetened and moderated by a twofold promise.
First, (which qualifies the extremity thereof for the present) that God will
spare a remnant in the midst of these calamities, and that though he destroyed
the profane body of the Nation, yet he will reserve them, v. 8. and will not
lose them, however he scatter and toss the Nation, v. 9. and do cut off
profane Atheists, v. 10. Secondly, (which follows upon the former in due
time) he promises to restore the Church of Israel, and raise up a Gospel
Church under Christ, comparable to the condition of Israel of old, v. 11. to
enlarge the Church by the addition of the Gentiles unto them, v, 12. to bless
them with prosperity, v. 13. And particularly, that he will recollect, restore
and establish Israel, v. 14.15.

Verse 1. I Saw the Lord standing upon the altar, and he said, Smite the lintel
of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the head all of them,
and I will slay the last of them with the sword: be that flees of them, shall
not flee away; and he that escapes of them, shall not be delivered.
The scope of the type and sum of the sentence in this v, is, that by the
Lords command to his instruments to smite the lintel of the door, till the
posts upholding it do shake, is signified not only the destruction of the
Temple, but the cutting off of great and small of the people, which is declared
to be a stroke which none of them should escape. Doct. 1. Despised ordinances
will at last bring sad judgments, and men's conceit of their service, and Gods
former savor and acceptance thereof, will not hold it off; So much is
signified by the Lords standing upon, or beside the Alter, which not only
imports that his glory is now removed from the mercy seat, and come that
length, as Ezekiel. 9.3. and that he is standing ready to execute his judgments;
but that the sentence comes from the abused Altar, and that God cares for no
other sacrifice there, but a sacrifice of men: and that the place of
propitiation where they thought to please him, however they sinned, is now
turned into a seat of justice. Therefore also is the Commission given to the
executioners while they stand beside the brazen Altar, Ezekiel. 9.2. Even Gods
mercy-seat will be terrible to impenitent sinners. 2. Gods smiting of his own
house is a sad presage to a people; and his not sparing his own Church, may
cause others tremble who are yet worse then they; for, therefore is use made of
such a type, he said (to his prepared instruments) smite the lintel of the door
(which was graven with flowers, and so gets the name from them) that the posts
may shake, whereby is signified that he was to destroy that Temple and the
service thereof, as a pledge of Judah's ruin, and by this sentence against
Judah, he lets Israel see what they may expect. And albeit this smiting of the
lintel of the door, and shaking of the posts, may import that it is a chief
mean of ruining a Church, when the doors of discipline and order are broken
down; yet that is not to be strictly pressed, but the general scope is to show
that it should be a ruinous house. And withal, beside what relates to the
Temple it self, it may point at what is further typified thereby, that as the
stroke on the lintel did shake the posts, so the ruin of the Nation should
begin at the strokes that were to come upon the great ones, as is after
cleared. 3. When God is angry against a Nation, he will not spare great nor
small, but by cutting off these in eminency, he will expose the people to
ruin; for, as smiting the lintel made the posts to shake, so says he, cut
them in the head all of them, (or cut the head and great ones) and I will slay
the last of them (or the meaner sort) with the sword. 4. However men may think
to secure themselves when God is angry, yet all will be in vain; There is no
way of escaping his indignation, nor will probable means secure them; for, he
that flees of them, shall not flee away, but shall be over taken, and he that
escapes of them, from one stroke, or at one time, shall not be delivered, from
another stroke, or at another time.

Verse 2. Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them: though
they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down.

3. And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and
take them out thence, and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the
sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bit them.

4. And though they go into captivity before their enemies, thence will I
command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes upon them
for evil, and not for good.


This last part of the sentence, concerning their not escaping, is further
amplified and enlarged, wherein it is declared that wherever they can flee to
for shelter, he is omnipresent and able to reach them, and will do so. Though
they should dig into hell or the depths of the earth, or climb up to heaven,
yet he will take them and bring them down; In tops of mountains he will find
them out; in depths of the Sea, he has monsters ready to bite and devour them;
and their thinking to escape by yielding unto enemies, and being carried into
captivity, will not for all that preserve them from the sword. It is also
further declared, that the Lord will do all this in his great displeasure
against them, which shall watch over them for evil and not for good. Doct. 1.
Secure and and presumptuous sinners are endless in multiplying false
confidences; and even when trouble breaks out upon them, they will not be
driven to God, nor see their extreme danger, but are ready to think they will
find ways abundant to get out; for, so is here imported in all these
suppositions of digging to hell, climbing to heaven etc. which show how many
shifts they dreamed of to avoid this sentence, even albeit it should break
forth in execution. 2. Among other deluding confidences, whereby secure sinners
think to shelter themselves, this is one, that they think their captivity and
former troubles lying on, should be a reason why no more should be laid upon
them; Therefore is that brought in among the rest, though they go into
captivity before their enemies, because they reckoned that being already
captives, either their enemies with whom they had capitulate, would spare them
or God who had thus afflicted them, would therefore forbear to strike them any
more. 3. All the defenses creatures can seek unto, are to no purpose against an
angry God, were they more then they are; He is omnipresent, and cannot be fled
from, Psalm. 139.7.8. etc. He is powerful to destroy, having armies and
instruments of vengeance everywhere: for, so is here held out, and all these
suppositions of climbing to heaven, digging to hell, hiding in the bottom of
the sea etc are here produced, not that they could do so much for their own
safety, but to show how vain their confidences were, seeing albeit they could
do much more, yet it would not avail them. 4. It is righteous with God not to
rest satisfied with the subduing, yea and captivity of an incorrigible and
impenitent people, but to pursue them with the sword in all the corners where
they are carried captives; for, so is threatened here, Though they go into
captivity before their enemies, thence will I command the sword, and it shall
slay them. See Ezekiel. 5.2. 5. It is a sad addition to the weight and bitterness
of strokes, when they flow from anger, and are inflicted in displeasure;
Therefore it is added to the rest, and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil
etc. which is borrowed from among men, who as they look with delight on these
they affect, so their anger against these they are displeased with, appears in
their looks, and their watching all advantages, to be about with them. 6. God
pursuing in anger is too sore a party for a sinner; He can take advantage of
them at every step, to deprive them of all good, and afflict them with all
kind of evils: and when sinners are so crossed and afflicted on every hand,
they are bound to read the vigilant displeasure and severity of God in it; for,
so much is imported in this, I will set mine eyes upon them for evil and not
for good, that he will be (so to say) intent and watchful to reach them, as he
can easily do. See Jer. 44.11. and this is yet the sadder, that a reconciled
people have a contrary promise, Jer. 24.6.

Verse 5. And the Lord God of hosts is he that touches the land, and it shall
melt, and all that dwells therein shall mourn, and it shall rise up wholly
like a flood, and shall be drowned as by the flood of Egypt.

6. It is be that builds his stories in the heaven, and has founded his
troup in the earth, he that calls for the waters of the sea, and pours them
out upon the face of the earth: the Lord is his Name.


This whole sentence is further confirmed, in these verses, from the power of
God, who is the Lord God of hosts, and whose power appears in that with a
touch he can dissolve the land as with a melting fire, and fill it with
confusions to make all the inhabitants to mourn, and can make it as inhabitable
as if it were drowned, v. 5. It is he also who by his wisdom and power created
the heavens, and several regions of the air, as so many stories one above
another, Psa. 104.3, 13. who has variety of creatures, as so many troops on
earth, to serve him: and who sends out the waters of the sea upon the earth,
by rain or inundations. By all which he proves himself to be Jehovah, v. That
which is spoken of him v. 5. is the same in substance, and almost in words with
chap. 8.8. and may be either a repetition of that same particular threatening,
whereby he undertakes to prove his power, and repeats it that they may think
more seriously upon it: Or it may be taken in general, as pointing out what he
can do to any land, or the whole earth, and what he has done at some times,
that so he may rouse up this secure people. That also which is in the close of
verse 6. is again repeated from chap. 5.8. as a doctrine to be much studied.
Likewise that passage, v. 6. he has founded his troup in the earth, may also
be thus understood, that he has established the earth as a bundle (as the word
signifies) and a foundation to that stately fabric of the heaven and stories
thereof, whereof mention is formerly made. Or, that he has founded his bundle
upon (or beside) the earth, that is, the sea, or gathering together of waters,
which God has set bounds unto, and made it one globe with the earth. Any of
these interpretations may well enough consist with the scope, which is to set
forth the great power of God. Doct. 1. It is one great sin and snare of
sinners, that they little consider what God is with whom they have to do; and
that much pains will not so make him known to them, as they may see him
formidable while they are in a sinful course: Therefore is so much pains taken
to inculcate this doctrine. 2. General notions of Gods essence and power are
not sufficient to make sinners know him, unless they study to consider him
more distinctly, as he reveals himself; Therefore it is not enough to say he
is the Lord God of hosts, but it is further declared who he is, and wherein
that appears, it is he that touches the land etc. 3. Albeit the earth be all
that carnal men desire, and do rest upon, when they may enjoy it; yet it is
easy for God to make the earth feel his power, when men will not tremble; and
to make it uncomfortable and full of sorrow to them, and drive them from off
the face thereof with deluges of troubles: for, it is he who touches the land,
and it shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn, and it shall rise up
wholly like a flood etc. 4. Gods power and dominion is universal, in heaven and
earth, in sea and dry land, so that there is no escaping of him: And the glory
of his power does shine and may be read in the creating of the glorious
heavens, and ordering of the several regions of the air, and all that is in
them; in establishing of the earth and seas, and in having so many armies at
his command, ready to execute his command against his enemies; All this is held
forth in this description of God, as it is before explained, it is he that
builds his stories in the heavens, and and has founded his troup in the
earth. And these visible and ordinary evidences of Gods power are so much
insisted on, partly, to show how much of him does shine in these, though they
be little observed by most for that end; partly, to show how much of him
spiritual minds will see in these things, having so broad a book open wherever
they turn them: But chiefly to show how stupide this people was now become,
that they did not take up the dreadfulnesse of God, as he revealed himself in
his word to his Church; but they must be led out to study him in these things
whereby he reveals himself to all the world, as well as to them. 5. Gods power
over the waters, to call them out of the sea, and pour them out on the earth,
may also serve to affright impenitent sinners, when they consider how he can
raise up and bring about their calamities in a strange and insensible way; as
vapors are insensibly drawn out of the sea, and gathered in clouds above our
heads and then poured down; And when they consider how he can and will alter
the course of nature, and overturn what seems most established, before they
want a scourge; as when he causes the sea transgress the bounds set unto it,
and overflow the earth; Therefore also is this instance made use of, He calls
for the waters of the sea, and pours them out upon the face of the earth. 6.
God is then rightly seen and acknowledged in his workings, when he is taken up
to be Jehovah, who is of himself, and from whom is the beginning and
continuance of the being of all the creatures; and therefore to be adored and
obeyed by all; Therefore is it subjoined to all this, Jehovah is his Name.

Verse 7. Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of
Israel, says the Lord? have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt?
and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir.
A further confirmation of this sentence is taken from their sinfulness, and
ill deservings. For, whereas they might object against this sad sentence, that
they were come of religious and holy Progenitors, and were adopted to be his
peculiar people; He declares not only that he did that freely, but that their
carriage was more like the Ethiopians, then the children of Abraham, or
Israelites; and therefore he would deal with them as such. And whereas they
might reply, that he had proven a peculiar interest in them, by delivering them
from Egypt; He answers that the like external favor had been showed to the
Philistians and Syrians, and they needed no more boast of the one, then they of
others the like, since their behavior was no better then theirs. As for what
is said of the Philistines, that he brought them from Caphtor, we find indeed
that they and the Caphtorims were of one stock of people, Genesis 10.14. But it is
not so clearly determined in Scripture how they were brought out from Caphtor,
whether it was, that after the Caphtorims had captivated them in their country,
the Lord had delivered them from thence by his providence, and brought them to
the land they now possessed: Or whether they and these of Caphtor were
incorporated in one people, and were delivered from some common slavery in
their own country, and brought to the country they now dwelt in. Yet this last
seems to be more aggreeable to what is elsewhere recorded, as Deuteronomy. 2.23.
where the Caphtorims are said to have possessed the land of the Avims, even
unto Azzah or Gaza. And Jer. 47.4. the Philistines are also called the remnant
of the country of Caphtor. As for the other instance of bringing the Syrians,
or Aramites (and not the Assyrians, as diverse of our translations read it)
from Kir, we find that they were to be carried captive to Kir about this time,
or shortly after, chap. 1.5. 2. Kings 16.9. But it is not so safe to understand
this passage here as a prediction of their future return from thence, spoken of
as if it were already done. For the Prophet is convincing them by things
already done, and it seems rather to relate to some old story, not mentioned
elsewhere, of their deliverance from thence, and when the Assyrians subdued
them, they sent them back thither again, as run-awayes are returned to their
old Masters. Doct. 1. A sinful peoples privileges are turned by them into a
great snare, whileas it hides from them the odiousness of their sin, and the
punishments they deserve thereby; Therefore must this be refuted, and their
condition pointed out in its native colors to them. 2. Whatever marks of
favor God put upon a people, differencing them from others, yet they have no
cause of boasting thereof before him who gave it, and made the difference; for,
are not ye as children of the Ethiopians unto me? may import so much, that
before him they were nothing better of themselves, but were all of them his
creatures, and all alike unworthy and corrupt, till he of free grace made them
to differ, and what they had, was all his own and of him. See Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8.
3. Whatever privileges be conferred upon a visible Church, yet that will not
hide their sin and provocations, nor do they secure them against Gods
displeasure when they sin, far less do they afford them cause of boasting;
for, so much is further and more expessly held forth here, are ye not as
children of the Ethiopians unto me, (or I account of you as such) O children of
Israel, says the Lord? See Joh. 8.44. 4. Not only will not privileges hide a
peoples sin; but as a privileged people may strangly degenerate, so the Lord
will account them as base as the basest of the people, when they do so, and so
much the baser as they have sinned against so great mercies, and being in such
a state, as he advanced them unto: Therefore are they resembled to and compared
with, not every fort of people, but the Ethiopians (whether Arabians, or the
Southern Ethiopians, I will not determine) either because the color of that
people points out Isreal's incorrigibelnesse in sin, Jer. 13.23. or rather
because these Nations were descended of cursed Cham, and were in themselves
barbarous and eminently naughty and wicked, as in some particulars is remarked
of the Arabians, Jer. 3.2. 5. Albeit Gods mercy does shine very eminently in
the many outward deliverances granted to his Church; Yet as wicked Nations may
get many outward common favors also: So the Church has no more cause to boast
and glory of the one, then they of the other, as an evidence of Gods favor
toward her, when yet she provokes God, and walks not answerable to these
mercies, but rests upon them, not thirsting after the spiritual mercies offered
unto her: Therefore is their glorious deliverance from Egypt, compared with
what the Philistines and Syrians had received, because that albeit this
elsewhere be inculcate as a special mercy; Yet sinning Israel making no use
thereof, had no more cause to expect favor in that condition, because of that
mercy, then other Nations might build upon the common favors that were
bestowed on them: And because that mercy was notable and singular in so far as
it pointed at their spiritual deliverance through Christ; and therefore it was
but an outward shell and common favor, when they sought not after this. 6.
Albeit secure sinners lull themselves asleep upon their privileges, and the
outward proofs of love they receive; yet their own consciences can tell them
that it cannot be a sound sleep, and that no privileges of a visible Church
can be a shelter for sin, nor former favors secure them for the future;
Therefore is all this put to their own consciences by these questions, as
frequently before.

Verse 8. Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom, and I
will destroy it from off the face of the earth, saying that I will not utterly
destroy the house of Jacob, says the Lord.
Hitherto Amos has in this Prophecy only denounced hard things against this
incorrigible people, saving that sometime he has made some gracious offers, if
they would repent, and considering that there was no hope of that, did return
to threaten again. Now in the close of the prophecy, all this doctrine is
sweetened with a twofold comfortable promise. In the first whereof, these hard
tidings are corrected with a promise of moderation and preserving a remnant
under these calamities, till better days should come under the Gospel, which
is the sum of the second promise. The first promise is propounded in this v.
That though he have an eye upon their ways, and do purpose for their sin to
destroy the profane body of the people, and to make them cease from being a
Nation; Yet he will not utterly destroy all the people, but preserve some,
because of the Covenant, and because of the elect of them, and of their
posterity who were to spring of them. Whence learn, 1. A people confederate
with God may come to that height in sin, as to be justly accounted a sinful
kingdom, not only because of the corruption of Rulers in it, but because of
the general overspreading of impiety and wickedness; Therefore it gets the
name of the sinful kingdom. 2. As God does observe the ways of all Nations,
to punish them accordingly; so especially he does so toward his Church and
people; and his observance of their debordings, and his strokes upon them, will
be especially remarkable; for, says he, Behold, (as a thing to be remarked)
the eyes of the Lord are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it. 3.
The Lords confedrate people may so far miscarry, as to provoke him to consume
them so as (beside the general cutting off of particular persons) they shall
not have the face of a Nation upon the earth; for, of this Israel is a sad
instance, I will destroy it from off the face of the earth. 4. Even when God
deals with his people in greatest extremity, there is still moderation toward
them, and under saddest dispensations, they will meet with some proof of love;
for, this threatening has an exception subjoyned. 5. As the Lords preserving a
remnant of his people under calamities, (even though they be scattered and
afflicted, and the face of their Nation extinguished) is a sufficient reason
why they should not murmur, Lam. 3.22, 39. and being well emproven, may pretend
much future good to them, how sad soever their cause may be for present; So, in
particular, the Lord will never utterly consume his ancient people Israel, but
does preserve a remnant of them, to witness that their election stands fast,
notwithstanding their long and sad afflictions, ready to be manifested in
glorious effects in due time; for, I will not utterly destroy the house of
Jacob, faith the Lord.

Verse 9. For lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all
nations, like as corn is lifted in a sieve, yet shall not the least grain fall
upon the earth.
This promise is further confirmed and illustrate from a similitude, Wherein is
declared, that as men when they sift and winnow corn to put away the chafe,
will not lose any of the good grain; So however their Kingdom was to cease, and
the people to be scattered into captivity, and tossed with wandering, yet he
will not lose his elect, and a remnant. The meaning of this is not that in
dispensing these calamlties, he would put a visible difference betwixt the
elect and reprobate; for as no doubt many elect ones perish by the sword in
their own land, as well as others, so the elect who went into captivity with
the rest were tossed as well as they, as the similitude holds forth. But the
meaning is, that he will so by his providence order their scattering, as none
of his elect shall perish eternally, and so as he will not lose a remnant of
that people, out of whom his elect are to spring in due time, and whom he will
make as good grain, to grow up to a fair harvest, and become a glorious Church
to him. Doct. 1. Captivity and scattering and wandering among strange Nations,
is a sad and sharp trial, wherewith they may be exercised who escape the fury
of an enemies sword; for, such is their trial here, I will sift the house of
Israel among all Nations. 2. It is the Lords hand which is to be looked unto
and acknowledged in the exile and scattering of his sinful people, And it
should not pass without an especial remark, that he prosecutes his
controversy so, and that he makes all means so effectual for driveing them
from their enjoyments into exile, and for their disquiet and tossing in it;
Therefore says he, Lo, I will command, and I will sift, etc. 3. Such sad lots
as these coming upon the Lords people, are for sifting of them: Thereby the
Lord does narrowly try, and bring out what dross and chafe, and what
soundness and sincerity is in every man's bosom, Luke 22.31. and thereby also
he lets out the wind of his displeasure upon the light and empty chafe of
wicked men, that abound among his people in the day of their prosperity; and
does refine and purge his people, and fit them for, and give them especial
proofs of his favor and love: Therefore, says he, I will sift the house of
Israel, like as corn is sifted in a sieve. 4. Albeit these who are elect, yea
and actually converted, may go into captivity with others, that so the
unconverted may be drawn thereby, as by other means, to seek him, and the
converted may be sifted and purged from dross; Yet God by none of his
dispensations will lose any even the meanest of them who are his elect, or of
them who have really turned to him; for, yet shall not the least grain fall
upon the earth, or be lost and perish. The word in the Original, is a stone,
and it may be the good grain gets this name from its weight, in opposition to
the light chafe. 5. The reason why the Lord will not suffer all Israel to be
lost in their dispersion, is because (whatever they were at their rejection, or
be for present, yet) he has many precious elect ones and heirs of glory to
come out of their loins, and because he will reserve a seed of a glorious
Church of that Nation: And this is the look we should take of their subsistence
under their desolate condition, and notwithstanding their long continued in
blindness and ignorance; for, so much also is imported here, as is before
explained. 6. God is sufficient to secure intended mercies unto his people, and
to perform his promises, in times of saddest shaking; for, he undertakes this
for Israel, that hnwever he sift and shake them, yet certainly he will not lose
so much as the least grain.

10. All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, The evil
shall not overtake nor prevent us.
This promise is yet further confirmed and illustrate, by showing on the
contrary who it is he will not spare, even wicked sinners who will not trust
the word, nor be affraied of threatenings, who therefore shall die by the sword,
and this shall refute their folly. Whence learn, 1. Whatever be the Lords kind
dealing, or purposes of good toward his own in trouble; Yet impenitent sinners
ought to dream of no exemption, but that they shall pay for it with the first,
and that all and every one of them: Therefore is this subjoyned to guard the
promise, All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword. And by dying by
the sword, we may either understand in general, that they may expect to be cut
off either by that or some other violent death, sooner or later, or he would
have them thinking of being cut off at home in their own land with the first,
as being the thing they deserved, though he spared some of them longer. 2. A
visible interest in God, and men's pretending much unto it, and leaning upon it,
while they go on in sin, will produce nothing else but that it shall be a
pressing reason why God will take order with them especially; Therefore is it
put in the sentence, that they are the sinners of my people. 3. It is the great
and crying sin of men within the visible Church, that they are so deluded with
conceit, or so besotted and blinded with Atheism and custom in sin, that they
will not believe Gods word, nor fear when he threatens: Therefore does he
declare who these eminent sinners are whom he will cut off with the first, they
say the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us, or surprise us, that is, either
it shall never reach us nor we meet with it, or if it do, we shall do well
enough, and be prepared to abide it. 4. Albeit such Atheists and presumptuous
sinners think themselves safe enough, that they can so proudly boast, as if all
were well enough, if they believe not, or fear not any evil; Yet such a
disposition is so far from holding off a plague, that it speaks them ripe for
it, and near to destruction: And God will prove them liars by his judgments,
who will not believe his word, but cry up their own delusions and presumptuous
dreams against the verdict thereof; for, this is their refutation, such shall
die by the sword, See Ezekiel. 9.9, 10. Isa. 28.15, 17, 18.

Verse 11. In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,
and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and I will
build it as in the days of old.
In the second place, he sweetens these threatenings, and comforts the Godly
among them, with the promise of restoring and raising up the Kingdom of Christ
under the Gospel. This began to be accomplished when Christ began to preach,
and afterward his Apostles, and is daily accomplishing in Christ's enlarging of
his Church; But there will be yet a more full accomplishment thereof in the
time of the conversion and recollection of Israel, of which mention is made, v.
14.15.

This great promise contains several branches or particular promises; And
first, whereas the house of David, and the Church (whereof David's house and
Tabernacle was a type, Isa. 16.5.) was sore broken since the rent of the ten
tribes, and was yet to be further ruined by the captivity of Israel and Judah,
and the miseries Judah endured after their return; The Lord promises, that in
Christ (the true heir of David) and under the Gospel, the Church shall be
restored and repaired, and become glorious, as of old the state of Israel was
under David and Solomon. This is accomplished and verified in the Gospel Church
in general, and will be accomplished to the old Church of Israel in particular.
Doct. 1. Great desolations may, in Gods providence and justice, come upon what
is most glorous on earth, and even upon glorious Churches; for, the tabernacle
of David, his family and house, and the Church typified thereby, is fallen, and
has breaches and ruins. It is called the Tabernacle of David, rather then his
house or kingdom, either because it became first to be but a Tabernacle, by
the defection of the ten Tribes; and yet albeit it was so low, God would humble
it with further ruin. Or it points out that David's family was but an obscure
Tabernacle till God raised it; and so it shows, that Gods glorious appearing
in the raising up thereof, would not hinder him to make it fall, when he was
provoked. 2. Albeit the Lords breaking and ruining of his Church and people, be
the just fruit of their sin, and a sad lot for present; yet the Lord thereby is
but making way for their raising up again. This will still hold true of his
Church in general, however he dispose of particular Churches, which he is
provoked to destroy: And it will be made good to his Church of Israel, I will
raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches
thereof, and I will raise up his ruins. The expressions are borrowed from men's
repairing of a ruined house. 3. Christ is the repairer of his Churches ruins,
and every loss is richly compensed that is made up in him, and in things of
the Gospel; for, it is in that day of the Gospel, and in and by Christ, that
the Lord will do this, as is further cleared, Act. 15.16, 17. 4. The spiritual
glory of the Gospel Church does parallel any glorious estate of Israel of old;
and the Church of Israel will be again advanced to as much glory (at least
spiritual) as ever they enjoyed; for, I will build it as in the days of old.

Verse 12. That they may possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen,
which are called by my Name, says the Lord that does this.
The second promise (which expounds in part the glory of his Church) is the
enlargement of the bounds of the Church, by taking in Gentiles as well as Jews
into the fellowship thereof, who by professing the name of God shall bear the
badge of being his people. This indeed began to be accomplished when the
Gentiles were brought in with the remnant of the Jews, and filled the room of
these who were blinded and hardened; And so James expounds it, Acts 15.16, 17.
But a more full accomplishment is to be when Israel being converted, shall
bring in many Nations, and even some of their subdued enemies (called h^re
Edom, who of old was one of the worst) with them. As for the difference betwixt
the words of this text, and James citation of them, (who in somewhat differs
not only from the Original text here, but even from the Greek Interpreters) we
need not labor curiously in reconciling thereof. For, 1. Albeit this text be
the chief place pointed at by James, yet since he cites not one Prophet, but
the Prophets, Act. 15.15. it is sufficient that what he says does accord with
what is generally held out in the Prophets, albeit all of it be not found here.
2. Though this were the only text cited by him, yet the general scope of both
places agrees in one, which is to prove that the glory of the Gospel Church
consists in the accession of other Nations, beside the Jews, unto it. And this
was sufficient to James present purpose, and to confirm his opinion in the
Council, albeit his citation, or the translation which he followed, do differ
from the Hebrew in some particulars of less importance. 3. Though there be
some other differences, yet not only are both readings to be acknowledged by
us as true, being used by the penmen of the Spirit of God; But both come to
one sense and purpose, which is the thing that is ofttimes looked to in
citations in the New Testament, rather then the words. For, whereas Amos has
it that they may possess the remnant etc. (or, as some read it, that the
remnant may possess, to wit, the Tabernacle of David, spoken of in the former
v.) and James has it, that the residue might seek after the Lord, the sense is
the same, in regard that they who embracing Isreal's Covenant, are, so to say,
possessed by Israel as a purchase, and they who enjoy the privileges of the
Church, and God in it, must be seekers of God that they may possess, and be
kept in possession. And whereas Amos has it, the remnant of Edom, beside that
general of the heathen, that he may point in particular, at the conversion of
enemies, yet James does not unfitly translate it, the residue of men, not only
because the Jews did usually by the name of Edom (the other son of Isaac)
point out the generality of mankind without the Church, and who were not of
the race of Israel, but enemies thereunto, and so the following words, all the
Gentiles, are but an explication of that; but because the text in Amos does
certainly points out that a remnant of other men then of the Jews, should be
brought in to the Church, which James expresses, leaving that particular
consideration of Edom, as nothing to his present purpose. Doct. 1. The calling
and inbringing of the Gentiles is an especial glory of the Gospel Church: and
it will be the honor of Israel, that when they are converted, many Gentiles
shall be brought in and join with them; for, this is the end of raising up the
Tabernacle of David, and the glory thereof, that they may possess the remnant
of Edom, and of all the heathen. 2. As under the Gospel all Nations have
access unto the Church, and to Christ in it: So in particular, it is a great
mercy that even most bitter enemies may and will be brought in, especially
after the conversion of Israel; Therefore, beside all the heathen, in general,
Edom, who was Isreal's most bitter enemy (whereby we must understand others of
the same kind) is particularly named in this promise. 3. As they are but still
a remnant who seek God in sincerity; so it is no strange thing to see a great
destruction of Nations and enemies, before they will come in to God; for, this
cause are they called the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, not only
because it was but remnants of them who came in at first, and who then, and
afterward when more professed the Gospel, did sincerely turn to God; but
especially because after the conversion of Israel, many of the Nations will
oppose them, and they will be broken and punished by God, and then the remnant
of them, and others shall be converted. 4. As all who are true converts, and
embrace Christ, do embrace and share in Isreal's Covenant made with Abraham and
his seed; So Israel after their conversion, will be a very eminent and notable
Church, whom many Nations shall honor, and to whom they shall join
themselves: In both these respects it is true, that they (or Israel, or the old
Tabernacle of David) shall possess the remnant of Edom; for, all who are
converted, are ingraffed into the same stock, and entered into the same
Covenant with the Jews, and so are a new accession unto them; and Israel being
converted, will bring in a great conquest and purchase to the Lord, of these
who shall be revived and quickened at their appearing on the stage, and who
shall much honor the Church of Israel. 5. As all who are brought in to the
Gospel, are bound to make public profession of the name of God and Christ, and
inrol themselves as his confederates and followers; So it is the great honor
of a people, that they bear this badge and livery, and have a visible right so
to do: And this visible right and profession does warrant them to seek unto God
(as it is Act. 15.17.) and gives them right to Church fellowship; for, it is
they which are called by my name, or, upon whom my name is called, whom Israel
shall possess, and who shall possess the Tabernacle of David, as
Church Members. 6. As all this must be Gods work to bring it about, so his word
is sufficient ground of assurance, whereupon we may expect it, and his doing of
it should put an end to all controversies about it, as in all other things, his
working is to be submitted unto; Therefore is all sealed thus, says the Lord
who does this, whereby he not only gives his word and undertakes to effectuate
it; but he owns the work of advancing the Gentiles, to silence all the
quarrelling of the Jews against it.

Verse 13. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, that the plowman shall
overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that sows seed, and the
mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.
This third promise may be understood figurativly of many spiritual blessings
pointed out under these expressions; But it is more clear to understand it
literally, as Joel 3.18. of great abundance of plenty, which as sometime he
has bestowed upon his Church, so he will give a special proof of his care in
this particular to converted Israel. The promise holds out the old blessing
upon the land promised to Israel, Lev. 26.4, 5. Wherein he promises that the
land shall be so fertile, that when they have scarce done with plowing, harvest
shall come, and then seed-time shall immediately follow upon the vintage, so
that they shall be kept very throng with plowing, sowing and harvest, in a
manner all at once; And that they should have abundance of wine, and the very
hills should as it were, melt down in blessings upon them. Whence learn, 1.
Whatever be the quarrellings of the Lords people about their outward condition;
Yet all that they usually miss, and much more, is in Gods hand to give them,
if they would seek better things in the first place, and if they would not be
the worse for receiving them; So much does this ample promise import. 2. The
Lord also can, when he sees it meet, fit a people for enjoying these outward
mercies, without abusing of them; for, this promise imports that Israel may get
them in mercy, and use them so, at least for a time. For otherwise other
Scriptures tell us, that at last after their conversion, security will be one
of the last and great evils of the Church. 3. Whatever be the ordinary mistakes
of men about piety, yet it is great error to think that piety is loss, and
God will have this error refuted; for, this promise imports, that as the Lord
has sometimes formerly proven that piety is profitable for all things, by some
Sun-blenks of prosperity; So he will make Israel a notable proof thereof.

Verse 14. And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel: and
they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant
vineyards, and drink the wine thereof: they shall also make gardens, and eat
the fruit of them.

15. And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be pulled up
out of their land which I have given them, says the Lord thy God.


The fourth and last promise does more expressly relate to Israel, wherein is
declared, that however they were driven into captivity and scattered for sin;
Yet the Lord will gather them again and restore them, to build up the
redesolations, and enjoy the fruit of their labors, And he passes his word,
and gives the Covenant in pledge, that there shall be no other captivity of
that Nation, to follow after that. So that it cannot be understood of Judah,
and their captivity in Babylon, after which there followed another captivity;
Nor can it well be taken only spiritually, seeing so express mention is made
of their waste cities, and of the land which he has given them. Doct. 1.
Israel will not be lost, nor miss to share in Gospel promises and privileges,
notwithstanding their sin and scattering for sin; for, I will bring again the
captivity of Israel. 2: Outward mercies are sweet, especially in so far as they
are public evidences of a peoples interest in God, as they are to the godly
and his confederate people; for, this sweetens the mercy, that they get it as
my people of Israel. 3. When a people are brought in to Christ, and he begins
to shine upon them, they may expect that he will repair and make up their
desolations and wants; for, they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit
them. 4. As it is just with God to disappoint impenitent sinners of all their
labors and expectations; So a penitent people may expect Gods blessing upon
their labors, and to reap the fruits thereof; for, of this Israel is an
instance, they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall
also make gardens, and eat the fruit thereof. 5. God can not only restore his
people, but establish them in their outward condition, when he pleases; And in
particular, the state of Israel after their conversion, will be settled and not
interrupted with such shakings as formerly; for, I will plant them upon their
land, and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given
them. 6. Gods faithfulness in his promise, and his constancy in keeping
Covenant with his people, may and should assure them of the certainty of what
seems most impossible and incredible; Therefore does he seal all with this
subscription, says the Lord thy God. Where Jehovahs saying it, is sufficient
to assure them he will do it, Number. 23.19. And his designing himself, thy God,
does not only assure them that the Covenant should not be made utterly void,
notwithstanding their long rejection; But that as his being Abraham's God,
proves there shall be a resurrection, and that even Abraham's dust shall not be
lost, Math. 22.32. So his interest in them will in due time, raise them out of
their graves, and quicken these dry bones, that they may enjoy the performance
of all these precious promises. To him be glory in the Church, by Christ Jesus,
throughout all Ages, World without end, AMEN.

FINIS.
Newly printed by Ralph Smith.
A Choice and spiritual Treatise of Gospel-promises. By Dr. Spurstow. Also,

A Treatise of Christian Armor: or, the Saints war against the Devil. By Mr.
William Gurnall of Lavenham in Suffolk.


