Christ and his Church: OR, Christianity Explained, Under seven Evangelical and
Ecclesiastical Heads; VIZ. CHRIST I. Welcomed in his Nativity. II. Admired in
his Passion. III. Adored in his Resurrection. IV. Glorified in his Ascension.
V. Communicated in the coming of the Holy Ghost. VI. Received in the state of
true Christianity. VII. Retained in the true Christian Communion.

WITH A Justification of the Church of England according to the true Principles
of Christian Religion, and of Christian Communion.

Put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ,

Romans 13. 14. For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain,

Phil. 1. 21. (...);

S. Cyril. in Ep. ad. Coelest. Papam, in act. Council. Ephesians. par. 1. If Christ
be evil spoken of, how shall we (that are his Ministers) hold our Peace? And if
we hold our Peace now, what shall we say in the day of Judgment?

By Ed. Hyde, Dr. of Divinity, sometimes fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridge, and late Rector Resident at Brightwell in Berks.

Printed by R. W. for Rich. Davis in Oxford 1658.

To the Christian Reader.
WHen conscientious Ministers cannot officiate in the Church, and conscientious
Christians cannot go to Church; and customary Christians go thither, either to
little purpose, because to no true worship, or to great shame, because to no
true Ministers, it is fit the Church should come to private houses, that's reason
enough for this Treatise of Christianity to see the Press; But it is in vain for
the Church to come to any man till he come to himself, and desire to come to
his Savior, that's caution enough for them who shall see this Treatise of
Christianity: For unless they have Christ in their hearts, they cannot have him
in their eyes; They will scarce find him in the writings of his own infallible
Apostles, and much less of his unworthy Ministers; Do not then complain of
these Unchristian times, (though there was never greater reason for that
complaint) but take heed your own heart be not Unchristian, Then will God in
worse times then these, (if worse can be) never let you be destitute of those
means, which will be able to root and build you up in your Savior; If as you
have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so you do also walk in him, Col. 2. 6, 7.
For this is the only way to have true faith in Christ, even to have
stedfastness in that faith, since that Faith cannot be true, which cares not to
be steadfast: Without doubt there is nothing more sure in it self then the Truth
of Christian Religion, and therefore there should be nothing more sure to us:
Domine si error est a Te decepti sumus, Scot. Prol. in sent. If our Christian
Religion be a device or a deceit, (as too many men now make it, or use it) it is
Thou O Lord have deceived us, said that acute Divine most boldly, and yet more
truly: And we must be as ready to say, Because Thou Lord can not deceive us*
we are sure in what we have from Thee, we are not, we cannot be deceived; As
the certainty of the object is, so the certainty of the subject should be the
greatest, in matters of Religion; Since it is undeniable on all hands, That man
is much more bound by the obligations both of Nature and of Grace, to look to
the certainty, and to compass the assurance of his internal then of his
external tenure, of his eternal then of his temporal, of his spiritual then o^
his corporal good estate and condition: For if Christ be indeed our author for
what we do and suffer, then will he also be our Advocate in all our doings, and
all our sufferings: And so will our cause be certainly justifiable, both in
this world and in the next, as having a twofold goodness, one from it self, the
other from its Advocate; The first goodness of our cause will justify us
before men, but the latter will also justify us before God; The first will
keep men, that though they may oppress us, yet they shall not be able to
condemn us; The latter will keep us from the sentence of Gods eternal
condemnation. So happy is it with that man who knows he serves Christ, and will
not for any fear or love whatsoever, start aside from his service.

Yet now a days we take a quite contrary course, (which cannot be observed
without bitterness of soul, and ought to be reproved with bitterness of words,
for when there is dead flesh on the heart, the style ought to be very sharp, at
least to pierce it, if not to cut it off) most men making sure of their
salvation, before they have made sure of their Religion, and not at all
desiring to make sure of their Repentance, that they may have either Religion
or Salvation: They will needs be walking upon the Battlements of Heaven, before
they have found out the true Jacobs ladder to climb up thither: I speak to and
of those men especially, who are so ready not only to forsake, but also to
contemn their poor Mother, This distressed Church of England, once flourishing
to the envy of her friends, now seemingly withered (for extirpated she cannot
be) to the joy and scorn of her enemies: And I ask them seriously, Were they
sure of their Religion heretofore, or no? (For not the persuasion and
knowledge, but the profession and practice of Religion is Religion, according
to that of Saint James, Be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own souls, Iam. 1. 22.) If they were not sure of their Religion,
why did they then serve God without their consciences, as Hypocrites? If they
were, why are they since fallen from that service against their consciences, as
Apostates? Here seems yet to be a very bad certainty of their Religion, and how
can there be a better certainty of their salvation? unless (that we may
gratify their singularity more then our own Veracity) we will say, There may
be a company of good Christians out of the Communion of Saints, or a Communion
of Saints out of Christ's Catholic Church. Whereas in truth a man that goes
alone in a persuasion by himself, ((...), like Ajax in the Tragedian) is, in
the Poets sense, One out of his wits; in the Casuists sense, One out of his
Conscience; and must be in the good Christians sense, One out of his Religion;
Pude^ haec opprobria nobis, and dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli. The
intent of this Treatise of Christianity (which labors for such a Zeal as may
inflame devotion, and for such a simplicity as may satisfy it) is, To bring
these men back again to their Savior Christ, and to the ordinary way of their
salvation, His Church; To Christ their Savior, whiles it sets out the
Christians knowledge of, and joy in Christ: To Christ's Church, the ordinary way
of their salvation, whiles it keeps in memory the ancient festivals of the
Church, not only professing that knowledge, but also embracing and expressing
that Christian joy: The first part is Christ Preached; The second part is,
Christ Practiced: The third part must be your own, that is, Christ Purchased,
which from the bottom of his heart, and in the bowels of Christian Charity he
wishes unto you, who is

Your Brother and Servant in Christ, E. H.

A Prayer in honor of Christ's Nativity.
OBlessed Jesus, thou Lover and Redeemer of souls, God manifest in the flesh,
who came unto men, and did become man, to bring true light into the world
from the Father of Lights, grant we beseech thee unto us miserable sinners, so
to glorify thee for thy coming to us, and being in us, and reigning over us,
that though of our selves we are in darkness, and in the shadow of death, yet
in thee we may come to see the true light of Grace, and by thee may come to
enjoy the true light of Glory, to glorify thee eternally who live and
reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God eternal, world without
end, Amen.

A short Scheme of the whole.
Christ welcomed in his Nativity: Has three Chapters.
The first shows the Motives of that welcome. The second shows the Reasons
of that welcome. The third shows the joyful manner of that welcome.
CAP. 1. Showing the Motives of Christ's welcome from God and from Gods Church,
both Triumphant and Militant: Has fifteen Sections.
Sect. 1. Christ's image repairs the loss of Gods image in man. The Churches
desire t^ Christ should be formed in us. Christ's humiliation is the Christians
exaltation. Sect. 2. Christ's humiliation was in the fullness of time. Sect. 3.
The fullness of time in which Christ came to humble himself, was the perfection
of time. Sect. 4. God observed the fullness of time for the sending of Christ,
to fill our souls with Patience and with Piety, which two make up the true
Christians fullness. Sect. 5. The authority of God and of his Church for a
solemn Festival to celebrate the coming of Christ, and that the Church did no
more then her Duty in appointing that Festival, and an Advent Sunday to prepare
for it; and that we cannot justly or safely gainsay that Appointment. Sect. 6.
Christmas no superstitious word; and Christmass-day, observed not for it self
but for its duty, takes off all controversies, and can fall under no just
exceptions, and may not fall under any unjust cavils, much less calumnies.
Sect. 7. The difference betwixt a Jewish and a Christian observation of days;
This latter is a moral part of Gods service, and may not be neglected without
scandal Sect 8. To oppose the celebration of Christ's Nativity, is a scandal to
Christians, and a stumbling block to Jews, keeping them from Christianity.
Sect. 9. The Jews equally scandalized by Idolatry and by Profaneness;
especially that profaneness or irreligion which immediately dishonors our
Savior Christ. Sect. 10. That those Christians who oppose Christmass-day, do
give occasion to other good Christians, to suspect them as not well grounded in
the Christian Religion. Sect. 11. The first Christmass-day was kept by the holy
Angels, therefore no will worship in keeping Christmas, but rather a necessity
to keep it, from Heb. 1. 6. The Kingdom of Christ as Creator, and as Redeemer.
Sect. 12. We must embrace all opportunities of glorifying Christ, that we may
not be thought to desert either our Savior or our selves, whiles we are
defective in our Devotions, either for want of Preparation before them, which
has hitherto made us so bad Christians in so good a Chur^^ or of Affection in
them, which will keep us from being good Christians; or of Thankfulness after
them, which will keep us from worthily magnifying the name of Christ. Sect. 13.
A new song for the coming of Christ: God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost
carefully observed the time of our Saviors coming into the world, therefore it
can be no true piece of Reformation for men not to observe it. Sect. 14.
Everlasting thankfulness is due to God for this everlasting mercy. Sect. 15.
Time not perfect in Gods account from our Creation, but from our Redemption.
The Jews not destroyed, and Time not untimed merely in relation to the coming
of Christ: Time still continued for the world to make a right use of his
coming: No other time perfect in Gods account, but that wherein he gives his
Son; And no other should be perfect in our account, but that wherein we receive
him.
CAP. 2. Showing the Reasons of Christ's welcome, because of the infinite love
of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, bestowed on man in his Redemption: Has
nine Sections.
Sect. 1. GOds first gift to man was his love in Christ; his second Gift was
Christ in our nature; No Gift can prove a blessing unless God give it in love;
Not Government, not the Gospel, though the one be the best temporal, the other
the best Spiritual Gift. Sect. 2. Gods love in Christ, though it be Universal
in the diffusion, yet is it particular in the Obligation. Sect. 3. Gods love to
man in Christ, was the ground of his Consultation with himself, how to bring us
to eternal life. Sect. 4. Gods love to man in Christ was not in vain, or
without Success; though his Churches love to us, in daily Praying for us, and
teaching us to pray for our selves, often proves unsuccessful: And yet our best
proof that God has loved us in Christ, is, That we love him again both in his
Authority, and in his Ordinances, and in his Members. Sect. 5. Gods love to us
in Christ was not in vain, or without a cause, for as much as Christ was the
ground of our Election, as well as the Author of our Reconciliation: More men
Reconciled by Christ to God, then Recommended to Him: Or more men reconciled
Potentially then Actually. Sect. 6. Gods love in Christ is not a fond love,
therefore he scourges whom he loves; The Christian Church not taught in the
New Testament to expostulate for being scourged, though she be crucified, as
Christ was, between two thieves. Sect. 7. Christ's love to us, that he would
come from the bosom of his Father to teach and to redeem us: The title of the
chief cornerstone blasphemously applied to his pretended Vicar: Christ was not
an Apostle, one sent from God; but an Ex-apostle, one sent out of God. Sect. 8.
Tht mother of Christ so a Woman, as still a Virgin: The Prayer of the seventy
Interpreters. Christ's love to us that he would be made the Son of a woman,
whereby he has exalted men above Angels; A mercy not to be forgotten till
there be no man to remember it; That the Jews corrupted not the Text, proved
from the Prophecies concerning Christ. Sect. 9. Christ's love to us, that he
would be made under the Law: That man is a Son of Belial, not a Member of
Christ, who will not be under the Law. All good Christians follow Christ both
in Active and in Passive obedience.
CAP. 3. Showing the joyful manner of Christ's welcome, as proceeding from joy
in the Holy Ghost, witnessing to our Consciences that through Christ, we are
not under the Law, but under Grace, and made the children of God by Adoption:
Has nine Sections.
Sect. 1. THE spiritual man more wants joy then the carnal man, as being under
greater labors both of sense and motion. God the Holy Ghosts love to man in
teaching him how to rejoice for his Redemption. Hymns expressing that joy, may
be only to the honor of God, and directed to him: The evil spirit silenced at
the coming of Christ, but the mouth of the good Spirit was opened. Sect. 2. God
the Holy Ghosts love to man in giving him the assurance of his particular
redemption, without which there can be no joy for his Creation: It had been
good for that man if he had never been born, spoken of Judas according to our
Saviors own judgment, not our Apprehensions; that Gloss an abusing of the
Text: The joy of our Redemption is not to be lost. Sect. 3. That this
redemption whereof the Holy Ghost assures us, is twofold: First privative,
because we are not under the Law, that is, not under it as condemning us,
though we be under the Law as regulating and restraining us. Secondly Positive,
because we are under Grace, and know that we are so. The right way to attain
that knowledge. Sect. 4. The great joy of Christians for being under Grace, or
for being Adopted in Christ: And how that joy is to be moderated by the
consideration of our own frailty, and of Gods impartial Justice in the
Judgment to come. Sect. 5. Our Adoption in Christ not spoken of by Saint John
without a double Preface, One Practical, Another Speculative; and is here
according to the likeness of his Grace, shall be hereafter according to the
likeness of his Glory. The threefold image of God in man. Sect. 6. Christians
are more eminently the children of God, then were the Jews. The difference
betwixt the Adoption and other spiritual blessings of the Jews and of
Christians; That though they were Adopted to be Heirs as we are, yet were they
tutoured as Infants till the coming of Christ, by whom was wrought a true
Reformation. Sect. 7. A Particular time appointed to rejoice in Christ, not by
way of Restriction, but by way of Application: The Christians joy far above the
Jews, both for his Redemption and for his Adoption. The privilege of true
Faith. And how the Redemption by Christ is larger then the Adoption by him, and
the Adoption greater in his Giving then in our Receiving. Sect. 8. Christ's most
holy Prayer a very comfortable testimony and assurance of our Adoption in him:
How nearly it concerns us in our Prayers, to say, Our Father, not Our Brother
which art in heaven: The conclusion of the Lords Prayer answerable to this
beginning, and not to be questioned; It Is ill quarreling with that Prayer, and
much worse discountenancing and deserting it. Sect. 9. Whether a man that is
not assured of his Adoption in Christ, can truly and rightly, by virtue of his
Baptism only, (the outward seal of his Adoption) say to God, Our Father, or
lawfully and laudibly use the Lords Prayer? And that the assurance of
our-Adoption is according to the assurance of our conjunction with our Savior
Christ.
Christ admired in his Passion: Has four Chapters.
The first Chapter is, Christ admired in his Person. The second Chapter is,
Christ admired in his Propitiation. The third Chapter is, Christ admired in his
Satisfaction. The fourth Chapter is, Christ admired in his Application.
CAP. 1. Christ admired in his Person: Has three Sections.
Sect. 1. THat the eye of man cannot be fixed with comfort upon God in himself,
but only upon God in Christ. Sect. 2. In what sense Saint Paul cared not to
know Christ in the flesh, and yet Christ in the flesh only, is comfortably
known. Sect. 3. True knowledge of, and faith in Christ, not without true
knowledge of, and faith in the blessed Trinity: That the Protestants Faith: The
great loveliness of Christ in the flesh, as (...), as God and man, and the
great mysteries of his two natures in one Person.
CAP. 2. Christ admired in his Propitiation: Has four Sections.
Sect. 1. THE manner of knowing divine Truths what it ought to be, and the
great benefit of knowing Christ in his Propitiation. He that will read the
Scripture to the benefit of his Soul, must have Christ crucified in his
thoughts. Sect. 2. Christ set down in the Scripture as our Propitiation, under
the Title of the Passover, and what that signifies to our souls. Sect. 3.
Christ set down in the Scripture as our Propitiation, under the title of the
Paschal Lamb, and how many excellent Doctrines and Comforts of Christianity are
to be learned from that Title. Sect. 4. The great virtue of this Propitiation,
and the great goodness, wisdom, justice and power of God in finding it for us,
and giving it to us.
CAP. 3. Christ admired in his Satisfaction: Has two Sections.
Sect. 1. THE necessity if Christ's satisfaction, for that he was the only
Sacrifice to expiate sin. Sect. 2. The commemoration of Christ's sacrifice
enjoined, not the Repetition of it: And that the ordination of Ministers for
administering the Sacraments, not of Priests for the offering of Sacrifice, is
most agreeable with the institution of Christ, and the constitution of a true
Christian Church.
CAP. 4. Christ admired in his Application: Has two Sections.
Sect. 1. CHrist in his propitiation and satisfaction, does not benefit us
without a particular Application. Sect. 2. The ground of that Application is,
Christ's threefold conjunction with us, in his Person, in his Nature, and in his
Office; from which proceeds the Marriage of the soul with Christ.
Christ adored in his Resurrection: Has two Chapters.
The first Chapter shows, That Christ is to be adored chiefly in his
Resurrection. The second Chapter shows, That God is to be adored only in
Christ.
CAP. 1. That Christ is to be adored chiefly in his Resurrection: Has eleven
Sections.
Sect. 1. THE Resurrection of Christ the grand cause of joy to Christians, but
strongly opposed by the Jews, whose Commentaries are not to be followed on
those Texts which concern our Savior Christ, though even those Texts have not
been corrupted by them. Sect. 2. The necessity of our Christian Festival called
Easter, as it is an Anniversary Feast, to express the Christians joy for the
Resurrection of Christ: That thereby the Christians Jubilee, or joy in Christ,
is not confined but enlarged; and that, by the same reason, the Spirit of
Prayer is not confined or hindered, but rather assisted and helped by set forms
of words. Sect. 3. The memorials instituted by God, are chiefly of his Justice
and of his mercy: There is one terrible memorial of Gods Justice against those
who invaded the Priesthood, but many memorials of his mercy: It is a vain fear
which possesses some men, as if the Anniversary memorial of Christ's
Resurrection were not instituted, and could not be observed without will worship
and superstition: That the general equity of the Levtical Law, as far as it was
not Typical, is still in force concerning the solemnities of Religion, and that
approves Anniversary as well as weekly Festivals. Sect. 4. Of the ancient
contention about the observation of Easter; That the Apostles zeal more about
duties then about days, does not overthrow the observing of particular days in
the service of God: And that those days ought to be observed, by Preaching,
Praying, Administering the Sacraments, and also by Almsdeeds, so that false
administration, sc. of the Holy Eucharist in one kind; and false devotions, and
false doctrine, and sordid illiberality in not relieving the poor, are all
alike profanations of a Festival. Sect. 5. The practice of the Primitive
Christians in observing the Feast of Easter; and that there was no superstition
in that practice. Sect. 6. That the Lords day, (which is observed weekly,) is
to be observed in memory of our Saviors Resurrection; And has a double
sanctification, one by relation to its duty, which is publicly to serve God,
and to give him thanks for our redemption by Christ, and is the Principal; The
other by institution, as consecrated to this duty, and is the less principal:
That the Antisabbatarian Doctrine, which advances duties above days, is not
only of Christ's, but also of Moses his own teaching, and makes most for the
true observation of the Sabbath, which yet is more properly called the Lords
day, then the Sabbath. Sect. 7. That Sunday has a better Title to holiness and
unchangeableness as the Lords Day, then as the Sabbath: And that the Lords Day
and the Lords laborers or Ministers are both to continue to the worlds end, by
virtue of Gods command in general, and of Christ's determination, and
institution in particular. Sect. 8. That Sunday as the Lords Day is most truly
a Christian Festival, and ought to be most religiously observed; and so ought
also other Festivals instituted in honor of Christ, as being likewise our
Christian Sabbaths. Sect. 9. The fourth Commandment was not given to limit the
First, and therefore excludes not other Festivals showing our true love of
Christ, but rather commands them: The true manner of observing any Christian
Festival, particularly Easter, is to account and make it a day of observations,
by observing our selves and our Savior; Our selves, what we have been, what we
are, what we desire to be; Our Savior, what he was in his humiliation, what he
is in his exaltation, what he will be in his Retribution. Sect. 10. That the
end of this and of all other Christian Festivals, is our spiritual Communion
with Christ, and therefore they ought to be celebrated more with spiritual then
with carnal joys: that though our carnal joys are greater in their proportion,
yet our spiritual joys are greater in their foundation. Sect. 11. A zealous
observation of this Christian Festival proceeds from the true love of our
Redeemer, and thankfulness for our redemption: A set form of praise fittest to
express that thankfulness
CAA. 2. That God is to be adored only in Christ: Has four Sections.
Sect. 1. THat no man, whilst he is in the state of sin, cares to come near
God, and that Adam after his sin, could not have adored God rightly, if Christ
had not been revealed to him, as the propitiation for his sins. Sect. 2. That
no Religion adoreth God rightly, which adoreth him not in Christ; and of the
excellencies of the Christian Religion; That no other Religion teaches such
conformable truths to right reason, declares an expiation for sin, promises
so great a reward, shows so pure a worship, or so innocent a conversation.
Sect. 3. The reason why God cannot be rightly adored, but only by Christians,
is because he cannot be truly known and loved, but only by those who know and
love him in Christ: The true way to gain that knowledge, and to show and keep
that love, is universal obedience both to his affirmative and negative
precepts, without which there can be no saving knowledge of God: That the
Christians do know and worship God in Christ clearly and substantially, and
that the Jews did so know and worship him in Types and Figures; so that the
Jewish and the Christian Religion differ not in substance, but only in degrees
of perfection. Sect. 4. That those Christians who adore God by any other
Mediator then by Christ alone, do not rightly adore him: And that those who do
rightly adore him, ought not to be discouraged in their Religion, and much less
be deterred from it.
Christ glorified in his Ascension: Has a Prooem, and three Chapters.
The Proeem: That our blessed Saviors Ascension is not so truly observed by
our Commemoration, as by our imitation; and the manner how to consider the
history of his Ascension. The first Chapter is, Christ considered before his
Ascension. The second Chapter is, Christ considered whilst he was Ascending.
The third Chapter is, Christ considered after he was Ascended.
CAP. 1. Christ considered before his Ascension: Has three Sections.
Sect. 1. Christ considered in his Apparitions before he ascended, as to Mary
Magdalen, and to Saint Peter, etc. The wrong use that has been made, the right
use that may be made of those Apparitions. Sect. 2. The Apparition to above
five hundred at once cleared; And Christ considered in his instructions before
he Ascended; That those instructions are more particularly to be observed, as
more directly conducing to the Constitution and the conservation of his Church:
Those instructions briefly explained as they are set down, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Sect. 3. That the words which our Savior Christ spoke to his Apostles before
he ascended may be reduced to these three heads, Words of instruction,
consolation, benediction; That the effect of them all is registered in the Text,
not left to unwritten Tradition: That the Apostles, though thus instructed,
comforted and blessed, yet preached not the Gospel till the coming of the Holy
Ghost upon them, whereby they had not only ability, but also authority, or
Mission and Commission in a full degree.
CAP. 2. Christ considered whilst he was ascending: Has three Sections:
Sect. 1. THat the words used to express Christ's ascension, did manifest his
twofold claim or title to heaven, the one by inheritance, as God; the other by
merit or purchase, as man: And that Christ in his ascension wrought a twofold
miracle, one in the conquest of Earth, the other in the conquest of Heaven; and
what comfort and benefit redounds to us Christians from these Titles, and these
Miracles. Sect. 2. The time of Christ's ascension particularly named in the
Text, and the observation of that Day is founded upon the practice of the
Apostles, which in the exercise of Religion is to be embraced as precept; why
the Apostles left not many precepts concerning circumstances of worship to the
Christian Church; The place of the ascension was Bethany in Mount Olivet, and
what considerations arise from thence. Sect. 3. The persons before whom our
Savior Christ ascended, were first Angels, secondly men; yet men only, not
Angels, appointed by him as witnesses of his Ascension; though not All men: And
that the disturbers of these witnesses, (that is, of the Orders of Christ's
Ministers in his Church) do sin against this Article of Christ's Ascension,
which however, is it self, and puts all true believers above all disturbancet.
CAP. 3. Christ considered after he was Ascended; Has three Sections.
Sect. 1. WHat is meant by the right hand of God, and by Christ's sitting there.
Sect. 2. That Christ as man, sits on the right hand of God. Sect. 3. That to
sit at the right hand of God is proper only to Christ; and therefore invocation
of, or adoration to the blessed Virgin, is not agreeable with this article of
our Christian Faith: That the Author of no Religion but only the Christian, is
said to be at the right hand of God, and to administer his Kingdom; and
therefore no Religion to be compared with it, and no power to prevail against
it.
Christ Communicated in the coming of the Holy Ghost: Has two Chapters.
The first Chapter is, of the Communication of Christ unto his members. The
second Chapter is, of the coming of the Holy Ghost where Christ is
Communicated.
CAP. 1. Of the Communication of Christ to his members: Has three Sections.
Sect. 1. THat we being born in sin, our condition is very miserable, till
Christ be Communicated to us, but after that, very comfortable; for the time of
sin is a time of warfare, captivity, banishment; the time of Grace a time of
peace, of restitution, of liberty; the admirable liberty of Gods servants, the
woeful slavery of those who serve themselves. Sect. 2. That Christ is generally
Communicated to all Christians by Baptism, wherein the Holy Ghost is given to
regenerate and sanctify them, by taking away the imputation or guilt of
Original sin, and making them the members of Christ: How the Apostles baptized
in the name of Christ, and their infidelity and uncharitableness who deny
Baptism to Infants. Sect. 3. That Christ is more peculiarly communicated to
some Christians by the Spirit of adoption, whereby they cry Abba Father,
calling upon God with greater earnestness confidence and comfort then did the
Jews, and yet they also had the Spirit of adoption (though not in the same
degree) as well as Christians.
CAP. 2. Of the coming of the Holy Ghost where Christ is Communicated: Has six
Sections.
Sect. 1. THat the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Christ, that is, the spirit of
the Son as well as of the Father; and that the Greeks were unjustly and
uncharitably rejected by some of the Latins, as Heretics, concerning the
procession of the Holy Ghost: Of the addition of Filioque to the
Constantinopolitan Creed, and that the Pope has no authority to change any
Article of Faith: The Greek Church agreed with the Latin about this
controversy insense, though not in words; Therefore not anathematized by the
Western Churches which use the Athanasian Creed; Bellarmines heavy doom
concerning the Greek Church, fitter for a soldier then a Divine. Sect. 2. That
the coming of the Holy Ghost for the communicating of Christ, after an
extraordinary manner, is not now to be expected; That preaching and praying
with the spirit come not by infusions; Enthusiasts are the worst separatists,
and the greatest blasphemers, guilty of the worst kinds of sacrilege and
idolatry, in robbing God of his public worship after such a manner as he has
commanded, and idolizing their own pretended gifts. Sect. 3. Hypocritical
Christians, who make Prayers for pretenses, worse Atheists then the Heathen;
pretenders to the spirit, are the greatest enemies to the spirit, and show the
least fruits of the spirit; Therefore must be silenced by the Ministers of
Christ, and shunned by his people, who have no excuse if they are misled by
them, because they are to be known by their works, whereof the weakest and the
meanest men are competent Judges. Sect. 4. Vnsetledness in Religion, shows we
have not learned it from our heavenly Master, or from Gods Exapostle: The Holy
Ghost being given us from the Father by the Son, shows there is no salvation
to them who believe not the Trinity: The mixture of praises with prayers in the
Psalms, was the Abba Father of the Old Testament, and proceeded from joy in the
Holy Ghost; which is a joy both unsequestrable and unspeakable; The sacrifices
and Hymns answerable to that Joy. Sect. 5. Folly and Filiation are together in
Gods best adopted children, whilst they are in this world; The three
privileges of the Saints (of Gods, not of their own making,) because of the
spirit of adoption; 1. That of enemies they are made servants of God; of
servants they are made sons. 2. That being made Sons of God, they have the
spirit of his Son. 3. That having the Spirit of his Son, they have also the
mind and language of his Son, crying Abba Father, having their hearts true to
God by inward affection, and their mouths true to their hearts by outward
profession. Sect. 6. The having the spirit and language of the Son farther
explained by three questions; 1. How Abba Father is called the language of the
Son, and whether Saint Mark borrowed not that expression from Saint Paul. 2.
Who it is that cries Abba Father, or that prays by the spirit, whether he that
has most cordial affections, or he that has most voluble effusions? 3.
Whether the spirit may be in the heart Believing, whiles it is not in the mouth
crying Abba Father, or, whether the spirit of Adoption once truly had, be not
retained to the end.
Christ received in the State of true Christianity: Has three Chapters.
The first Chapter is, of the state of true Christianity. The second Chapter
is, of the knowledge of that state. The third Chapter is, of the comfort of
that knowledge.
CAP. 1. Of the state of true Christianity: Has five Sections.
Sect. 1. THE happiness of Christians who have their conversation with Christ;
that lovers of themselves or of the world have not this happiness; for though
Christ spaek to all, yet he answers only to good Christians, that is, to sheep,
not to Wolves, or to Christians not to Heathen, for such he accounts all
persecuters; teaching the one to their instruction and contentation, the other
only to their conviction and condemnation; The reason why so many Christians
come not to the state of true Christianity. Sect. 2. Many Christians, not so
careful of their spiritual as of their temporal estate or condition: The state
of true Christianity is not external in the profession, but inetrnal in the
love of Christ, which will make us hate all sin: No malicious man can be in the
state of true Christianity: The ground of true Christian charity generally
abused to most unchristian uncharitableness; charity is more safely mistaken,
then not maintained. Sect. 3. That the state of true Christianity is best
taught by our Savior Christ, and best learned of him; and how far the Jews may
be said to have known Christ and Christianity: That Christ teaches us by his
voice in holy Scripture, more certainly then by his voice in holy Church, and
that the Scripture is to teach the Church, as the Church is to teach the
people. Sect. 4. That the state of true Christianity is to be learned only in
the Church of Christ. For there only does Christ teach by his word, which the
Church is bound to translate, that the people may understand it: And by his
Spirit, accompanying his word, which teaches both infallibly and irresistibly,
by taking away our resistance: That the state of true Christianity, is not
confined to any one particular Church, for that Christ teaches more or less in
all Christian Churches, and yet this is no ground for Sectaries to run from the
Church. Sect. 5. That the certainty in true Christianity or the state thereof,
is from the Word and Spirit of Christ; the uncertainty from our selves; Of
doubtings in good Christians concerning their state; That some are by way of
admiration, others by way of Infirmity, but none by way of Infidelity.
CAP. 2. Of the knowledge of the state of true Christianity: Has two Sections.
Sect. 1. THE knowledge of our being in the state of true Christianity, is from
our keeping the words of Christ. That Antinomians cannot be, much less know
they be in the state of true Christianity. Sect. 2. Three Practical principles
necessary to be maintained by all those who desire to be good Christians, and
to know themselves to be in the state of true Christianity. 1. That Christ has
words to be kept as well as to be believed. 2. That true love of Christ will
make us labor to keep his words. 3. That true faith in Christ was never yet
without this Love.
CAP. 3. Of the comforts that arise from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity; Has three Sections.
Sect. 1. THE first comfort arising from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity, is, That we are thereby assured of the Love of God.
Sect. 2. The second comfort arising from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity, is, That we are thereby assured of Communion with
God; The cause, the work, and the effects of that Communion: The cause of
Communion with God, is God; The work of it, contemplation of God, and
consultation with God; The effects of it, That it makes a man live for, to,
with, and in God. Sect. 3. The third comfort arising from the knowledge of our
being in the state of true Christianity, is, That we are thereby assured of the
continuance of our Communion with God; For his Desertion will be only for
Trial, not for Punishment, unless we become unfaithful and unfruitful.
Christ Retained in the true Christian Communion: Has a Prooem and three
Chapters.
The Prooem. Christian Communion is to be considered in its Authority, in its
Excellency, in its Sincerity. The first Chapter is, of Christian Communion in
its Authority. The second Chapter is, of Christian Communion in its Excellency.
The third Chapter is, of Christian Communion in its Sincerity.
CAP. 1. Of Christian Communion in its Authority; Has six Sections.
Sect. 1. CHrist requires our Communion by his own Authority, as our Head,
which has the most noble and most powerful influence upon the members: The
nature, the reasons, the cause, the proofs of our Communion with Christ. Sect.
2. That our Communion with Christ is as our Participation of Christ, External,
or Internal: The one may be the Communion of Hypocrites, the other only of good
Christians: The way to be a good Christian in a bad Church. Sect. 3. That our
internal Communion with Christ is through his Spirit and our Faith, which may
not be a fancy or fiction, much less a faction, but a faith Knowing by
Evidence, Approving by Adherence, Applying by Affection, and Working by
Practice; That such a faith will make our Communion with Christ real and
substantial in the thing it self, though in the manner it be only spiritual and
mystical. Sect. 4. Christian Communion begins with the Church, but ends
with Christ; both in the Word, and Sacraments, and Prayers: And that the Church
is bound in all these to advance not to hinder our Communion with Christ,
either by denying the People the use of the Scriptures, or by teaching them
superstitious prayers, as to Saints and Angels, wherein Christ neither can nor
will communicate with men: The ready way to have Communion with Christ, is by
Peace and Holiness, and wherein that Communion chiefly consists. Sect. 5.
That the Catholic Church requires our Communion by the authority of Christ, as
his Body: That the whole Christian Church is this Catholic Church, and that it
is known to be so, by the undoubted Word of Christ: And how a particular Church
may be sure to keep Communion with the Catholic Church. Sect. 6. The Catholic
Church, properly so called, has in it neither Heretics, Schismatics, nor
Hypocrites; but commonly so called, comprizeth all those Christians who
outwardly embrace the truth and worship of Christ: That our own particular
Church, keeping Communion with the Catholic, requires our Communion by the
authority of the Catholic Church: The Authority and Trust of particular
National Churches from Scripture and Councils: A sober and pious resolution not
to sin against the Authority of the Church, by wilful Schism, and the reasons
of that resolution.
CAP. 2. Of Christian Communion in its excellency: Has two Sections.
Sect. 1. THE excellency of Christian Communion, because of its large extent,
as reaching to all Christians, though of different persuasions and professions.
Sect. 2. The excellency of Christian Communion as holding of Christ, and from
him, having Immortality, Piety, Verity, and Charity; And that the Church is the
proper Place, Angels and men the Company, and God the Author of this Communion.
CAP. 3. Of Christian Communion in its Sincerity: Has four Sections.
Sect. 1. THE sincerity of Christian Communion consists in this, That it gives
all to Christ: Hence those Christians justified who do so in their Festivals:
The Sabbatarians questioned for not so doing: The Apostles new method of
teaching Christian Divinity, by interlining of prayers and praises, that Christ
might be the more glorified, and the Christian Religion the less adulterated.
Sect. 2. The sincerity of Christian Communion is the Bullwark of its authority,
and first to be regarded by every Christian Church, as being the glory of her
Prosperity, and the comfort of her Adversity: Such a sincere Communion never to
be deserted, when once happily attained. Sect. 3. The sincerity of Christian
Communion comprehends both the Purity. and the Solemnity of Religion, and is
the whole Duty of the first Table: The Purity or Substance of Religion being
enjoined in the three first Commandments; The solemnity or public exercise of
it, with the adjuncts thereto belonging, being enjoined in the Fourth; The
Exercise of Religion from the End, the adjuncts from the Letter of the Law. The
Sabbatarian the greatest opposer of the fourth Commandment, who cries up the
Day, but beats down the other adjuncts, and also the very Duty of the Sabbath:
That Duty being to glorify God in Christ by Public worship for the Redemption
of the world, whereas they discountenance Liturgy and Festivals, though both
instituted in honor of our Redeemer. Sect. 4. The sincerity of Christian
Communion may be violated, either Causally by a false Religion, or Formally by
an unjust separation: Both violations are abominable: The care which the
primitive Christians used to avoid both, by cleaving to the ancient Creeds, and
Gloria Patri, and also by their Communicatory Letters: The reason of that care
was, that both Priest and People labored only to serve Christ, not to serve
themselves of him; The Touchstone to try all Churches, is the Advancing Christ
both in their Religion, and in their Communion.
The Justification of the Church of England: Consists of three Chapters.
The first Chapter shows, That the Church of England is Gods Trustee for the
Christian Religion, as to the people of this Nation. The secend Chapter
shows, That the same Church of England has carefully discharged her Trust
concerning Religion, as a most Christian or most Catholic Church. The third
Chapter shows, That the Communion of the said Church of England, is
conscionably embraced and retained, by All the people of this Nation, and not
rejected, much less renounced by any of them, but against the Rules of
Conscience.
CAP. 1. That the Church of England is Gods Trustee for the Christian Religion,
as to the People of this Nation.
Sect. 1. CHrist delivered the Trust of his Word and Sacraments to his
Apostles; They delivered the same to Bishops and Presbyters their successors:
But the Apostles had an illimited, their successors have a limited Trust; The
necessity of the succession of these Trustees to the worlds end, yet is the
succession of Doctrine more necessary then the succession of Persons. Sect. 2.
The Trust and nature of the Catholic Church best gathered from particular
Churches; The first part of their Trust is concerning the word of God. Sect. 3.
The second part of the Trust of particular Churches is concerning the people of
God; What that Trust is, and how it comes to be derived to them; is showed from
Saint Paul's speech, Acts 20. to the particular Church of Ephesus, and from
Saint Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and from other several Epistles of
his to particular Churches. Sect. 4. The third part of the Trust of particular
Churches, is concerning the worship of God: The written Word of God is the Rule
whereby they are to manage that Trust, the readyest way to beget a Christian
Communion among all Churches, and a Christian Peace in each particular Church.
Sect. 5. The Prince, as the Supreme Governor of the particular Church in his
own dominions, is Gods Trustee concerning; the outward exercise of Religion,
not to manage or perform, but to propagate and to protect it. The ancient
Divines acknowledged this Trust, and the ancient Princes discharged it, and
Princes now are bound so to do, because it is their right by the Law of nature,
and because without the discharge of this Trust, there can neither be the face
nor the due order of Religion among, any People. Sect. 6. The limitation both
of the Princes and of the Priests Trust in matters of Religion; That neither
may deviate from the Law of God; And that the Authority of the Churches Laws is
most enfeebled by them, who make least esteem of the Law of God, casting the
aspersions of obscurity and of uncertainty upon the Holy Scriptures. Sect. 7.
The Trust of each particular Church is sufficient for the Peoples salvation, if
she take heed to her self and to the Doctrine God has given her in his written
Word, and in the ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church. Sect. 8. The Trust of
particular Churches is immediately from God himself, both in regard of the
Magistrate and of the Minister: That trust much stood upon in the Primitive
times, and ought to be so still, because it is founded in the Holy Scriptures;
And that this Doctrine concerning the trust of particular Churches, does not
Canton or dis-joynt, the Catholic Church. Sect. 9. What Trust is given to
other particular Churches in the Holy Scriptures, is also given to our
particular Church of England, from God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; That our
Church is accordingly bound to magnify her Trust, and therefore we bound not
to vilify it: And that it is both rational and religious to maintain the Trust
and Authority of our own particular Church.
CAP. 2. That the Church of England has most carefully discharged her Trust
concerning Religion, as a most Christian or most Catholic Church.
Sect. 1. GODS intent in Trusting the Church with Religion, was her Honor and
Happiness; which should cause our thankfulness to God, and our reverent esteem
of his Church. Sect. 2. The Churches Trust concerning Religion, is to see there
be right Preaching, Praying, and Administering the Holy Sacraments: Preaching
belongs rather to the knowledge then to the worship of God, and ought not to
thrust out Praying, which is the chiefest act of Gods worship, and most
regarded by him, especially when many Pray in one Communion. Sect. 3. Preaching
is twofold, either by Translating or by Expounding the Holy Scriptures: The
great excellency and necessity of both: And that our Church is entrusted with
both, and cannot justly be charged as defective in either. Sect. 4. Praying a
greater part of the Churches Trust then Preaching. The Church has God the
Fathers Precedent and Precept for making set forms of Prayer, and shall answer
for all the blemishes that may be in public Prayers, for want of a set form.
Sect. 5. The Church has God the Sons Precedent and Precept for making set
forms of Prayer, and is accordingly obliged both to make and to use them. Sect.
6. The Church has God the Holy Ghosts Precedent and Precept for making and
using set forms of Prayer. Sect. 7. The Church has Gods Promise for his
blessing upon set forms of Prayer. Sect. 8. The Church is obliged to make set
forms of Prayer according to the Pattern of the Lords most holy Prayer, that
there be no Peccancy neither concerning the Object, nor the Matter, nor the
Manner of public Prayer, and that our Church has exactly followed that
Pattern in hers, and that other Churches ought to follow the same in their
Liturgies: A short Historical Narration concerning our Common Prayer Book, and
the Anti-prayer book set up against it. Sect. 9. Reformation not to be
pretended against Religion. The abolishing of Liturgy, no part of a true
Reformation. That God has not given any Church power to abolish Liturgy; And
that no Church ought to assume that power, because Liturgy directly tends to
the keeping of the third and of the fourth Commandments. Sect. 10. Certainty is
more to be regarded in the public exercise of Religion then Variety: Hence the
Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue righteously taken into our Liturgy,
but unrighteously omitted by Innovators, who vainly obtrude Variety to men's
consciences, instead of Certainty. Sect. 11. The Gift of Prayer examined; That
it is not a Gift of sanctifying Grace: That Prayer as a Duty, is above Prayer
as a Gift; That the Spirit of Prayer is often without the Gift of Prayer, and
yet the Gift of Prayer is not perfect without the Spirit of it. Those
Christians who have attained the Gift of Prayer most completely, (that is,
jointly with the Spirit of it) are not thereby qualified to be the mouths of
the Congregations. Those Ministers who have not attained that Gift, are not for
that reason to be despised, as not sufficiently qualified for the Ministry; And
those Ministers who have attained it, may not for the exercising thereof be
allowed to reject set forms of Prayer in their Congregations, because set forms
in public, are more for the Ministers and the Peoples good, more for Gods
glory, and more agrecable with Gods command. Sect. 12. Set forms and conceived
Prayers, compared together; That set forms do better remedy all inconveniences,
and more establish the conscience; Are not guilty of will worship, nor of
quenching the Spirit, nor of superstitious formalities, and that it is less
dangerous, if not more Christian, to discountenance the Gift then the Spirit of
Prayer. Sect. 13. That forms of public Prayer are not to be disliked, because
they cannot, or at least do not particularly provide either Deprecations
against private men's occasional miseries, or thanksgivings for their occasional
mercies; yet our Church not defective in occasionals, though chiefly furnished
with eternals. The danger of contemning Religious forms of Prayer, and gadding
after conceived Prayers. Sect. 14. The third and last part of the Churches
Trust concerning Religion is touching the holy Sacraments: wherein our Church
is not faulty either in the number, or in the administration of Them, as
exactly following our Saviors Institution; Nor in the manner of Administering,
as following it with reverence.
CAP. 3. That the Communion of the Church of England is conscionably embraced
and retained by all the People of this Nation, and not rejected, much less
renounced by any of them; but against the rules of conscience.
Sect. 1. EVery particular man ought to labor to be of such a Communion as he
is sure is truly Christian both in Doctrine and in Devotion; The Rule whereby
to choose such a Communion, the Proofs whereby to maintain it. Sect. 2. That
the Communion of the Church of England is truly Christian in Doctrine, free
from Here^ie, and from the necessary cause thereof, a false ground or
foundation of faith; That is, Believeing upon the Authority of men instead of
God. Sect. 3. That the Communion of the Church of England is truly Christian in
Devotion, free from impiety, either by corrupt Invocation, or Adoration. Sect.
4. That the Communion of the Church of England obliges those in conscience who
are members of that Church, to retein ^^ and not to reject it, much less to
renounce it; by no less then five Commandments of the Decalogue.
Errata.
PAge 7. line 4. read Menologie; p. 26. l. 35. r. fatlest; p. 34. l. 19. r
Tria; p. 39. l. 4. r. brightness; p. 47. l. 3. r. ut; p. 56. l. 28. r. They; p.
60. l. 20. r. It is; p. 61. l. 11. and 12. r. likeness; p. 66. l. 22. r.
protension; p. 77. l. 26. r. This; p. 78. l. 28. dele not; p. 82. l. 17. r. as;
p. 100. l. 23. r. He; p. 101. l. 16. r. greater; p. 105. l. 3. r. Turning; p.
106. l. r. r. their; p. 116. l. 32. dele that; p. 120. l. 14. r. without; p.
126. l. 36. r. Nor; p. 148. l. 14. r. bring; p. 150. l. 14. r. of; p. 169. l.
1. r. we; p. 178. l. 2. r. fully; p. 178. l. 15. r. take; p. 180 l. 1. r.
iniquities; p. 182. l. 32. r. affective; p. 198. l. 22. r. before; p. 208. l.
17. 1. Quid; p. 208. l. 18. r. Nam; p. 292. in the Contents, l. 6. r. Them; p.
319. l. 5. r. comely; p. 345. l. 3. r. sound; p. 415. l. 31. r. Then; p. 449.
l. 1. r. persection; ibid. l. 31. r. such a division; p. 549. l. 19. ^. beats;
p. 634. l. 14. r. certainty; p. 656. l. 30. r. unpremeditated; p. 674. l. 5. r.
Obsecration; p. 680. l. 4. r. bind; ibid. l. 5. r. hands.

Christ wellcomed in his Nativity.
CAP. I. The Motives of Christ's welcome from God, and from his Church, both
Triumphant and Militant.
SECT. I. Christ's image repairs the loss of Gods image in man; The Churches
desire that Christ should be formed in us; and that Christ's humiliation, is the
Christians exaltation.
IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, one God
everlasting. Blessed be the Holy and undivided Trinity world without end, Amen.

I had once the image of God the Father in my creation, and I soon lost it;
wherefore I now desire to have the image of God the Son in my Redemption, which
I may never lose. O thou eternal Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son,
vouchsafe to breath in my soul this breath of life, that I may live eternally;
O thou who did form the eternal Son of God in the womb of a pure Virgin, be
pleased also to form him in my impure and sinful heart; That Christ being
formed in me, I may not be an Abortive to the life and light of righteousness.
Thy holy Apostle traveled as in birth till Christ was formed in the Galatians;
so does thy holy Church travail as in birth til Christ be formed in me; Oh then
let the end of her travail be the beginning of my rest, that my Savior being
formed in me, I may be fitted and prepared for his salvation: He once
condescended to be made man for me; Oh that he will now give me the benefit of
that condescension, and be made man in me: That I may put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, even as he has put on me: That as he dwells in my flesh by a
personal union, so he may also dwell in my Spirit by a powerful Communion: That
as by dwelling in my flesh he emptied himself, so by dwelling in my Spirit he
may fill me: For Christ's emptiness is the Christians fullness: He that filled
Heaven and Earth from the beginning of the Creation, did in the declining Age
of Time Empty himself, that he might fill us: Them he filled with his Majesty,
but us with his Mercy; And if his emptiness was our fullness, what is his
fullness but our glory? If his fall was our rising, what is his resurrection but
our salvation? If the humiliation of Christ was the riches of the world, how
much more his exaltation? If he enriched us by his Poverty, how much more will
he enrich us by his Glory? The Apostle can mention nothing but fullness, when he
treats of Christ emptiness, Gal. 4. 4, 5.

SECT. II. Christ's humiliation was in the fullness of time.
BUT when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, made under the Law, To redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons. The words do plainly set forth our Savior
Christ's emptiness, but they carry with them a threefold fullness. First a
fullness of Time, when the fullness of the time was come. Secondly a fullness of
Love, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law. Thtrdly a
fullness of joy, To redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive
the Adoption of sons. All which considerations are so fit to welcome Christ at
his Nativity, That I will conform to them the three Chapters of my ensuing
discourse. For though time be little or nothing in its continuance (an instant
only) but is all in its succession; yet the fullness of time which the Apostle
mentions, may be to us as a looking-glass wherein to behold and to contemplate,
if not the nature and duration, yet sure the work and the consultation of
eternity.

SECT. III. The fullness of time in which Christ came to humble himself was the
Perfection of time.
THE Hebrews call the perfection of every thing its fullness; so Cant. 5. 12.
The Church speaking of Christ says, His eyes were fitly set, but it is in the
Hebrew, (...) manentes juxta plenitudinum, sitting or set in fullness, that is,
In all manner of perfection; (...) says Aben Ezra, set so exactly as those
precious stones that are inlayed and set by measure.

And Saint Matthews (...), is not only ut Impleretur, but also, ut
Perficeretur, not only, That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophet, but also that it might be Perfected; To wit, That it might be
perfected and consummated in the Antitype, which had been only begun or
initiated in the Type; All the former Prophesies of the Old Testament,
receiving in Christ not only their fullness, but also their Perfection. So then,
(...), in the Apostles meaning ( Gal. 4. 4.) represents unto us two things,
Plenitudo Temporis, and Perfectio Temporis, the fullness of Time, and the
perfection of Time: And both these were joined together in that particular Time
which the eternal Son of God was pleased not only to honor, but also to
sanctify by his coming into the world; for it was a full Time, and it was a
perfect Time.

SECT. IV. God observed the fullness of time for the sending of Christ, to fill
our souls with Patience and with Piety: which two make up the true Christians
fullness.
AS God observes a time for every Gift, so he observes a fullness of time for a
full Gift: To endue our souls with a fullness of Patience and with a fullness of
Thankfulness; with a fullness of Patience whiles the full gift is yet coming;
and with a fullness of thankfulness when it is at last come: This twofold
fullness must be in every Christian soul to entertain our Savior Christ, or it
will have an emptiness of Christianity: They are both together in the Prophets
Hymn of Thanksgiving, Isa. 25. 9. Lo this is our God, we have waited for him,
and he will save us; This is the Lord, we have waited for him; we will be glad
and rejoice in his salvation: We have waited for him, there is the fullness of
Patience; we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation, there is the fullness of
Thankfulness.

First, God requires in all Christian souls a fullness of Patience; Hence it was
that though he promised Christ in the first beginning of the world, ( Genesis 3.
15.) yet he did not send him till toward the latter end of it; surely to make
us the more sensible of our own misery, and by it, the more capable of his
mercy; And to endear his everlasting love unto our souls, whiles we profess by
our waiting his leisure, That we cannot pretend Desert, where we are bound to
Patience; and consequently what we cannot expect with too much Patience, we may
not receive with too little thankfulness: But there is also another reason of
our Patience, that as Christ was long expected in his first, so he may also be
long expected in his second coming: For as we waited for the Savior, so also
must we wait for the salvation: God waits to give it; much more must man wait
to receive it; so says the Prophet, Isa, 30. 18. And therefore will the Lord
wait that he maybe gracious unto you; there is the first, God waiting to give
grace; Blessed are all they that wait for him, there is the second, man waiting
to receive Grace: And he waits not in vain; for he is blessed in and for his
waiting, and much more after it; So says the Apostle, Rom, 8. 24. By hope ye
are saved; Our salvation though it is unseen, for it is by hope, yet it is not
unsure, for we are saved; we must seek it with diligence that we may find it,
for it is unseen; and we must seek it with Patience; because we shall find it
by seeking, for it is not unsure; If there be diligence in seeking, there will
be joy in finding, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 71. 12. As for me,
I will patiently abide always and praise thee more and more; with the increase
of Patience is the increase of Piety; the more Patiently he abides, the more
Piously he praises; till at last from a fullness of Patience, he comes to a
fullness of Piety, that is to say, a fullness of Devotion and of thankfulness.

SECT. V. The Authority of God, and of his Church for a solemn Festival to
celebrate the coming of Christ; and that the Church did not more then her duty
in appointing that Festival, and an Advent Sunday to prepare for it; and that
we cannot justly or safely gainsay that appointment.
LEss then a fullness of time would not serve God to give his Son: Less then a
fullness of time may not serve us to acknowledge that gift: So that we have a
sufficient warrant for a long and a solemn Festival to celebrate the coming of
Christ into the world. God himself observing a time and a fullness of time to
send forth his Son to come to us, is warrant enough for us to observe a time
and a fullness of time to give thanks and to rejoice for his coming* Be ye
followers of me, even as I also am of Christ, was the Apostles irresistible
argument for the Corinthians obedience, 1 Cor. 11. 1. And it may still be the
Argument of every National Church, (which is the Grand Apostle of its own
Nation, and must be, till the worlds end) you are bound to be followers of me
when and where I do follow Christ, though no further may you obey me, nor may I
challenge your Obedience, then that we may both together follow our blessed
Savior. The Authority of the Apostle is under the Auhority of Christ; The
Authority of the Church, under the Authority of Scripture, the word of Christ:
But where the Apostle does indeed follow Christ, there to run away from the
Apostle, is in effect to run away from Christ; even as to follow him, is indeed
to follow Christ: The like must be said of the Authority of the Church, which
succeeds the Authority of the Apostles, unless we will suppose all the promises
of Christ to his Apostles, and all the Precepts of the Apostles to the People,
to have been merely momentary and temporal, and not to have been written for
our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. A
supposition so far from true godliness, that you see it is directly against the
express Word of God: Wherefore we may not doubt to follow the Church in those
things wherein the Church follows Christ; And the Church follows Christ in all
those things, for which she can allege either Precept or Precedent from the
Word of Christ, or can give a reason agreeable with his Word; And we cannot
deny but that in this case the Church has both Precedent, and Precept, and
Reason, drawn from the Word of Christ; The Precedent is in general from the
Jews appointing the Feast of Dedication without any peculiar command of the
Old, yet not without the approbation of the New Testament, John 10. 22. In
special from the Angels of God, who most zealously kept this Festival: The
Precept is from the general equity of the Levitical Law, which still obliges
Christians, as it is subservient to Moral and Religious, though not to Typical
and Ceremonious worship, and that plainly calls for Annual Festivals in honor
of Christ, unless we will say that less honor is due to him since he is come
in the flesh, then was due to him before his coming: The Reason is clearly from
the very institution of the Church; for God gave Pastors and Teachers for the
edifying of the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12. but the right way of edifying, is
to lay the foundation upon the chief cornerstone: And doubtless this was the
reason why the Church first appointed an Advent Sunday (which must needs be
very ancient, or else all the Order of the service could not depend upon it)
because she observed that all the Documents of the Old Testament, did aim only
at this, To fit and prepare men for the coming of Christ, and therefore was
desirous That we might so prepare our selves to receive Christ at his first
coming to save us, that we might not tremble at his second coming to Judge us:
Accordingly the Greek Church began their preparatory Feast for the Nativity of
Christ, on the 20. of December, (that is five complete days before the Feast
it self) as appears by their Chronology, where the 20. of December. is called
(...): the beginning of the Preparatory feasts of the Incarnation of our
blessed Savior. Lord, make me so to celebrate thy coming to us in our flesh,
that I may daily find and feel thy coming to me in my soul: God observed a
time; so may we, in that he teaches us by his example: God observed a time for
his Son; so will we, if he does also teach us by his Communion. Saint Peter
intimates both kinds of Gods teaching man, 1 Pet. 1. 15, 16. But as he which
has called you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of conversation, because
it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy: As if he had said, ye ought to be
holy not only for the example, but also from the Communion of my Holiness: It
is not for Christians to be guilty of profaneness, when Christ by his communion
calls them to holiness.

SECT. VI. Christmas no superstitions word; And Christmas day observed, not for
it self, but for its duty, takes off all controversies; and can fall under no
just exceptions; and may not fall under any unjust cavils, much less calumnies.
GOD observed not time for it self, but for his Son; so must we observe no
Festival for it self, but only for our Savior; no day for it self, but for the
Lord.

Were Christmas Day (for that word is no more Popishly superstitious to me,
then the spirit of Python, Acts 16. 16. or the signs of Castor and Pollux, Acts
28. 11. were Paganly superstitious to Saint Luke) I say, were Christmas Day to
be observed for it self, as the 25. Day of December, we had need to go not only
to the Roman Archives for a moral assurance, but also to the Christian
Archives, (the word of God) for a Theological assurance, That Christ was born
on that very Day, or we could not Religiously observe it in the assurance of
Faith; But since Christmas Day is to be observed for its Duty, which is to give
God thanks for the blessed Nativity of his eternal Son, who took our nature
upon him and was born of a pure Virgin to Redeem us from Sin, Death and the
Devil, a moral assurance is more then enough for the Day, (which indeed is the
best assurance we can have of any day) since we have a full Theological
assurance for the Duty. And here I cannot but say in zeal to my Savior, and to
the salvation of their souls, of whom Saint Peter prophesied when he said, That
there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts, 2
Pet. 3. 3. what Saint Paul once said to the Jews at Antioch, Acts 13. 40, 41.
Beware therefore least that come upon you which is spoken of in the Prophets,
Behold ye Despisers and wonder and perish: yea behold that ye may wonder, and
wonder that ye may not perish in your despisings of God and of his Church; For
whosoever shall scoff and mock at the keeping of Christmas Day, in relation to
the 25. Day of December, is guilty of Ignorance, Immodesty, and Indiscretion,
because he mocks at the Practice of millions of men much wiser then himself;
But he that shall mock at keeping it in relation to the Duty, must also be
guilty of Impiety, Infidelity and Irreligion, because he mocks at the
profession of an Article of the Christian Faith, and of that Article which is
indeed the Ground and Foundation of all the Rest; For if Christ had not been
born, he could not have suffered, nor have risen again; So that upon this one
Article of Christ's Nativity, are indeed grounded all the other Articles of our
Christian Faith; So nearly does it concern us to maintain our public
profession of this Article, least we should be thought to have forgotten or to
have forsaken all the rest.

And this is reason enough why amongst other days we should still observe this
day of Christ's Nativity, not for it self (for so happily it may not be safe to
observe any day) but for the Lord; so shall we not impeach our Christian
liberty, and we shall improve our Christian Piety,

SECT. VII. The difference betwixt a Jewish and a Christian observation of
days: This latter, a moral part of Gods service, and may not be neglected
without scandal.
THE Apostle establishing our Christian liberty, does much more establish our
Christian Piety, Romans 14.

He establishes our liberty, ver. 6. placing days and meats in the same rank
of indifferency; neither of them in it self ought to be reputed a matter of
Religion: But withal he does much more establish our Christian Piety, ver. 7.
and 8. That both days and meats; days wherein, and meats whereby we live, are
to be observed or not observed, as shall most conduce to his Glory by whom we
do, and to whom we should all live.

He overthrows a legal or Jewish observation of days for themselves, because
that was a typical worship; But he establishes an evangelical or Christian
observation of days for duties, because that is a real and moral part of Gods
service: For he that so regards a day, regards not it, but the Lord: And he
that so regards it not, being thereunto called by that authority which God
has set over him, were best take heed lest it be thought that he regards not
the Lord; He was best take heed, lest he give occasion of scandal or spiritual
ruin to his brother, whilst he gives him occasion to think that God is not
worth the regarding, or that those are given to superstition who do most
zealously regard him: For he that does this, may chance have the millstone in
his heart to harden him, but sure he must have the millstone about his neck to
drown him.

SECT. VIII. To oppose the celebration of Christ's Nativity is a scandal to
Christians, and a stumbling block to the Jews, keeping them from Christianity.
PER scandalum laeditur proximus in mente, ut per homicidium in corpore, per
furtum in possessione, says the School-man, ( Alensis par. 2. qu. ibi. m. 1.)
Scandal wrongs my neighbor in his mind, as murder wrongs him in his body, and
theft wrongs him in his possession* and therefore I have great reason to take
heed of being scandalous, as to take heed of being a murderer, or a thief. And
truly I cannot see, but that our Saviors determination concerning scandal
reaches this very case, Mat. 18. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little
ones, which believe in me, it were better a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of the Sea. For tell me, do they
not believe in Christ who set apart a time of purpose to make Profession of
their Belief in him? And if they do believe in him, how will you answer your
scandalizing and offending them, whiles they are professing or rather indeed
practicing that their belief; or your scandalizing others, whiles you keep them
from the same Christian Practice and Profession? Wherefore it can hardly be
denied but this is really a scandal or an offense to Christians, because it is
a way to cause some of them to forget, or to forsake our Savior Christ; But
surely it is a downright stumblingblock to the Jews, to keep them from
embracing the Christian Religion: For the main thing needful to their
conversion, is, to prove the Messiah is already come in the flesh, which the
Jews will take for granted is denied if not disproved by them, who will not
allow themselves nor others to celebrate the memorial of his coming: for the
whole course of their Religion taught them to acknowledge the receipt of far
lesser blessings, with much more solemn memorials; as the receipt of the Law
with the celebration of Pentecost: So that whatsoever may be urged for serving
God in Spirit and in Truth, to make Christians become sincere worshippers, yet
we had need keep up an outward solemn service and worship of Christ to make
Jews become Christians; For it is not imaginable they should leave the outward
decency and order that they are bound to use in their own Synagogues according
to the whole purport of their own Law, to come to the slovenliness and
Indecency that may be found in some Christian Churches, under the pretense of
the purity of our Gospel.

SECT. IX. The Jews equally scandalized by Idolatry and by Profaness,
especially that Profaness or Irreligion which immediately dishonors our
Savior Christ.
IT is much to be lamented that Christians who are bound to do what is in them
to convert the Jews* should so far scandalize them, (either by Idolatry or by
Profaness) as to hinder their conversion; (...), says the Jew in his
Disputation with the Christian; (in the second Nicen Council in the sift
Action;) I am scandalized at you O ye Christians, that you worship Images: And
is it not as great a scandal if they shall be able to say, I am scandalized at
you O ye Christians, that you do not worship God, or at least do not worship
him with fear and reverence, as God? Or, That you refuse to worship Christ,
whom you would have me believe to be the Son of God? For is it not an act of
Religious worship in Moses his Law, to dedicate days to the worship of God? If
then we deny the Dedication of days to the worship of Christ, How shall we
persuade the Jews that we do indeed worship him as our God? It is to be feared,
if we shall do so, they will rather think us turning Jews, then that themselves
will think of turning Christians.

SECT. X. That those Christians who oppose Christmas Day, do give occasion to
other Good Christians to suspect them as not well grounded in the Christian
Religion.
SInce it is the ground of our Christian Religion, That all Gods gifts and
mercies to mankind do concenter together in Christ, it is scarce possible those
Christians should be thought truly religious, who make it their work to oppose
the public worship of Christ on that very day, wherein, as Christ, he was
first capable of being publicly worshipped: They that are Jews, may think well
of this, for they denying him to be the Son of God, will easily deny that he is
to be worshipped: But sure good Christians cannot think well of it, who are
taught to glorify God in Christ, and much more for Christ: To glorify God in
Christ is our Religion; To glorify God for Christ, is our salvation. Religio
est motus creaturae rationalis ad Deum, ut ad primum principium and ultimum
finem; Christus autem ut Homo, est via per quam fit hic motus, says Aquinas,
(22^. qu. 81.) Religion is a motion of the reasonable creature to God, as to
its first beginning, and to its last end But Christ, as man, is the way whe^ein
the reasonable creature thus moves, so that once forget Christ as man, and you
shall soon forget all religion; Saint Bernard tells us of a threefold coming of
Christ; the first was in the infirmity of his flesh to redeem us: the second in
the power of his spirit to sanctify us: the third in the glory of his majesty
to judge us: I will thankfully receive him as my Redeemer, that I may securely
behold him as my Judge; For if I be ashamed of him in his infirmity, how shall
he not be ashamed of me in his glory? Therefore I dare not be ashamed of this
day, least I should seem to be ashamed of him also; no nor of his prayer, least
I should seem to be ashamed of his words, since himself has said, Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed when ^e comes in the
glory of his Father, with the Holy Angel., Mar. 8. 38.

SECT. XI. The first Christmas Day was kept by the Holy Angels; therefore no
will worship in keeping Christmas: but rather a necessity to keep it from Heb.
1. 6. The Kingdom of Christ as Creator and as Redeemer.
IN keeping of Christmas the Church militant follows the example of the Church
Triumphant; for the First Christmas Day that was ever kept on Earth, was kept
by the Holy Angels that came of purpose from Heaven to keep it; Luke 2. 13, 14
And suddenly there was with the Angel A multitude of the Heavenly Host,
Praising God and saying, Glory to God in the Highest, and on Earth Peace, good
will toward men: Shall that be accounted Superstition in men, which was
undoubted Religion in the Angels? or can we be called will-worshippers for
doing no more then they did, unless you will first call them so? Let
will worship go in Epiphanius his language for (...), for wilful and for
superfluous worship: for what it has of man's will or wilfulness, it cannot but
have of superfluity: But let us take heed of calling that will worship for
which there is a Precedent in the Text, and so great a reason for that
Precedent; for it is most certain that the blessed Angels in Heaven had great
reason to joy for the incarnation of Christ, since he was the Repairer of their
ruin in their fellows, and the confirmer of their ^^ay or standing in
themselves: whence Alensis tells us plainly, that the Angels joy and bliss was
greater after the incarnation of Christ then it had been before. For though the
substantial Joy of the Angels consist in the contemplation of the Divinity, yet
their accidental joy consists in the contemplation of the Humanity of our
blessed Savior, as it is united to his Divinity; Accrevit igitur gaudium
Angelorum, licet non quod substantiam, tamen quantum ad multitudinem, quia
pluribus modis habent modo gaudium in beatitudine quam ante Incarnationem;
(Par. 3. q. 12.) Therefore the Joy of the Angels is increased by the Nativity
of Christ, though not in its substance, yet in its Variety, for that now they
rejoice more several ways then before; for whereas before the Incarnation they
rejoiced to see God in God, now since it, They rejoice to see God in man; And
we find that they did sing and triumph that they might express their joy;
surely not to teach us Christians (who in that we are men, have much greater
cause of joy from thence, then the Angels could have) I say surely not to teach
us men a lesson of silence and of fullenss; But if we will not regard
Precedent, yet we must regard Precept; And the Angels seem to have a Precept,
to worship our Savior Christ at his Nativity; For the Apostles words seem to
look toward a Precept, Heb. 1. 6. When he brings in the first begotten into
the world, He says, And let all the Angels of God worship him: I know this
Text chiefly aims at the Proof of Christ's Divinity: but if the Holy Spirit
thought he had sufficiently proved the first-begotten of the Father though
brought into the world in the form of a servant, to be no less then God, when
he had said, And let all the Angels of God worship him; It is evident they do
what is in them to invalidate this Proof, who at the very time that he was thus
brought into the world, do cry out as loud as they can, let not the the sons of
men worship him: But where does the Holy Ghost say this? Epiphanius in his
Ancorate plainly cites Moses's song for this Text, which is in Deuteronomy. 32. where
v. 42. The Greek interpretation has these words, (...), Let all the Angels of
God worship him; but with some various lections, to make the Interpretation
disputable at least, if not questionable. However, since no such thing is to be
found in the Hebrew, and we are not assured that the Holy Ghost spoke in Greek
by the Septuagint, (supposing their Translation has been preserved
incorruptible) we may not ascribe this Greek Translation to the saying of the
Holy Ghost; we must therefore appeal to the Hebrew Original, which we are sure
came immediately from Gods holy Spirit, and then we shall find this Injunction,
Worship him all ye Angels of God, in Psalm. 97. 7. And indeed the whole Argument
of that Psalm is nothing else but a Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ, and an
exhortation both to Angels and men Joyfully to celebrate the magnificence, and
thankfully to acknowledge the power of his Kingdom; For the Kingdom of Christ
may be considered, either as he is Creator, Eternal God with the Father and the
Holy Ghost; and so the Jews themselves will not deny him to be their King* or
As Redeemer, God and man in one Person, and and so the Jews do stiffly deny his
Kingdom, and we Christians had need beware least we may seem to encourage or at
least to confirm and Harden them in that Denial.

SECT. XII. We must embrace all opportunities of glorifying Christ, that we may
not be thought to desert either our Savior or our selves, whiles we are
defective in our Devotions, either for want of Preparation before, (which has
hitherto made us so bad Christians in so good a Church) or of Affection in
them, (which will keep us from being good Christians) or of Thankfulness after
them, (which will keep us from worthily magnifying the name of Christ).
THe best course I know to prevent the hardening either of our own or of others
Hearts, is, to take all the opportunities that are offered us, of glorifying
our blessed Savior; for he that is willing to neglect an opportunity, can
scarce be zealously inclined to lay hold of another time: he that will not
Honor Christ on his own Day, will scarce pick out another Day to honor him,
though he may pretend to keep Christmas all the year; or if he be indeed
zealously inclined to honor Christ, yet other Christians cannot be easily
inclined to think him so: and Jews must necessarily think him not so: And
though we ought not to judge them also that are without, 1 Cor. 5. 12. yet we
ought not to offend them, (and much less them that are within) for this is the
way to cause God to judge us: we will therefore take that for granted, which
cannot be denied, that we have all great need to employ very much, (and cannot
employ too much) of our time in those Christian Duties and Devotions which tend
immediately to the Honor of our Savior Christ, that so we may not be defective
either in our preparation before them, or in our Affections in them, or in our
Thanksgivings after them.

First, That we be not defective in our preparation before our Christian
devotions, for this is a main cause of our great shame and greater sin, that we
have been hitherto so bad Christians, in so good a state of Christianity: that
whereas Christ has been so long and so powerfully applied unto us both in
Prayers and Word and Sacraments. (yet we have been so little benefited by that
Application, as scarce to perceive the loss of it, or at least scarce to grieve
for that loss: A shrewd sign of Edomites rather then of Israelites, to be
content to lose our Prayers, our true spiritual Birthright, that we might keep
our Pottage, our Temporal interests) of which we may now truly say, as he did,
Genesis 25. 30. Feed me with that Red, with that Red, for the just vengeance of
God has lately made it so with our own Blood: or at least a shrewd sign of
Ephraimites if not of Edomites; for they being armed and carrying bows, turned
back in the day of battle, Psalm 78. 9. The reason is given in the verse
before; they were a generation that prepared not their heart, and whose spirit
was not steadfast with God: They did not set their heart right, by preparation,
and therefore could not keep their spirit steadfast by perseverance; and it is
to be feared this is our case: For it had scarce been possible for so admirable
a form of public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments (which had in it
the most pithy Devotions both of Greek and Latin Churches, and the
superstitions of neither) to have been so long amongst us to so little
advantage of our souls, had there been good things found in us, and had we
prepared our hearts to seek our God, as that good King did, 2 Chronicles. 19. 3. and
has left his example as a mandate for us so to do, since no Scripture is of
private Interpretation, and much less of private Jurisdiction: The old
Testament in all precepts and precedents of morality no less commanding the
Christian then it did the Jew: but if any be contentious touching the Old
Testament, though we have no such custom nor the Churches of God; yet we have
both a Precept and a Precedent in the New Testament, to reprove and to reproach
his contention, and the fittest that can be alleged for this Argument, even
that of Saint John Baptist the forerunner of Christ: For he came preaching,
says the Text, and his Sermon consisted so much of this doctrine of
Preparation, that he was chiefly to be known by this character, The Voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, Mat. 3.

Secondly, We need employ our time readily and carefully in those Christian
duties which immediately concern the honor of Christ, that we be not defective
in our Affections whiles we are at our Christian Devotions, actually conversing
with our blessed Savior; For our Affections have been so long standing on the
lees and dregs of the earth, that they are not to be refined, and much less to
be elevated and lifted up to Heaven, without multiplied Essays of most holy
meditations: (...), says the Priest to the people in the Greek Liturgy: And
they answer him, (...): Let us lift up our hearts; we lift them up unto the
Lord: so we in our Liturgy, from theirs: But it is observable that neither
Greek Church nor ours used these words, till after many prayers were past, in
which the Communicants had poured out their souls before God, to be sanctified
by his Grace; And so likewise the Apostle requiring us to seek those things
which are above, does as it were pass through all the Creed, to the Article of
the Resurrection, before he hopes thoroughly to raise our Affections, Col. 3. 1,
2. If ye be then risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where
Christ sits on the right Hand of God: set your Affection on things above,
etc. He does not only say, Christ is risen, but also if ye be risen with
Christ; he is fain to presuppose and as it were to antedate the day of the
Resurrection of the bodies, that so he may persuade them to a Resurrection of
their souls. O God work in us this great miracle of thy Grace to raise our
souls, that we may all rejoice in that great miracle of thy power which thou will at the last day work on us, in the raising of our bodies.

Thirdly and lastly, we need employ our time readily and carefully in those
Christian Duties which immediately concern the honor of Christ, that we be not
defective in our thankfulness after our Devotions, after we have had the honor
and the happiness to converse with our blessed Savior. For if I may not give
mine alms without a full purpose of my heart, 2 Cor. 9. 7. Shall I think that I
may give my self without it? or does God indeed love a cheerful giver of the
hand, and not much rather a cheerful giver of the Heart? To what purpose is
ihis wast? Mat. 26. 8, 9. seems in it self a question of Piety, and in its
reason, For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor;
a question of charity; yet St. John brands him that made it, That for his
Piety, he was a Traitor ready to betray Christ; And for his Charity, he was a
Thief, not ready to relieve, but to pillage his poor members, John 12. 4, 6. so
dangerous a thing is it for men to begrutch any expense either of Time or of
Pains, or of Patrimony, that is bestowed upon Christ, and much more to disturb
the woman, the Church that bestows it; For wheresoever this Gospel (of the
great condescension and greater goodness of the Son of God,) shall be Preached
in the whole world, there also shall this be told for a memorial of her Duty
that wrought the good work upon her Savior, but of their undutifulness who
opposed her in working it, Mat. 26. 10, 13. Gods mercies in our Savior Christ
are too many and great to come all Ex tempore to us; so should our Devotions
be, to thank him for their coming, since it is every jot as good Divinity for
our Prayers and Sermons, (which we offer up for the parts of Gods public
worship) as it was for David's sacrifice, Neither will I offer burnt-offerings
unto the Lord my God, of that which does cost me nothing, 2 Samuel 24. 24. For
what can I profess by the unworthiness of my offering, but either That I have a
less worthy esteem of God, then David had, to whom I offer that which he would
not offer, or that I have a more worthy esteem of my self then he had, as if
forsooth God would at my hands accept of any offering?

SECT. XIII. A new song for the coming of Christ; God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost carefully observed the time of our Saviors coming into the world,
therefore it can be no true piece of Reformation for men not to observe it.
THE Church had a new song put into her mouth merely for the knowledge of the
great mercy of her Saviors Nativity; How much more then for the enjoyment of
it? He has put a new song in my mouth, says the Psalmist, even a Thanksgiving
to our God, Psalm 40. 3. And Saint Paul tells us wherefore this new song was
put into his mouth, in that he applies this very Psalm to the coming of our
Savior Christ, Heb. 10. 5, etc. Wherefore when he comes into the world he
says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me: which words are quoted out of this same very Psalm, and point as directly
at Christ's coming into the flesh, as that finger of the Baptist did point at
him after he was come, when he said, Behold the Lamb of God; which finger for
that very cause (as some would persuade us) could not be burnt with the rest of
his body. Gentiles ossa collegerant and cumbusserant: sed digitus ille quo
Dominum ad Jordanum venientem monstravit, dicens, ecce agnus Dei -- non potuit
comburi. Durandus in rationali lib. 7. de decollatione S. Johannis.

This was indeed a sufficient cause why a New song should be put in the mouth
even of the sweet singer of Israel, To show that great was his Thanksgiving,
yet greater his Thankfulness for this inestimable and undeserved mercy: as it
appears, Psalm 40. 6, 7. O Lord my God, great are thy wondrous works which
thou have done, like as be also thy thoughts which are to usward: If I would
declare them, and speak of them, they should be more then I am able to express:
And all these wondrous works and thoughts are summed up together by the
Apostle in this saying, when he comes into the world, as indeed they were
consummated and completed by Christ himself in his coming, [ when he comes
into the world, he says:] And yet the words were said above five hundred years
before he came: It seems God the Son was so long before observing the time of
his own coming into the world; surely not that the sons of men should labor to
forget, and resolve not to observe it.

And God the Father did the like. Heb. 1. 6. When he brings in the first
begotten into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him:
Pointing as it were at the very day of Christ's Nativity, or coming into the
world; yet some men persuade themselves they do enough if they believe his
going out of the world, and think only upon his Death and Passion: And God the
Holy Ghost did the same, as being the Penman and Interpreter of these Texts,
and the Applyer of them to our blessed Savior: For he it was that spoke both
by the Prophets and by the Apostles. God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost did look and point very punctually at Christ's coming into the world,
Telling the Angels of it, that they might worship him; and the Angels
accordingly sing a most heavenly Hymn of Thanksgiving at his Birth, not only in
heaven for their own Joy and Exultation, (for which they are always singing to
him there,) but also on the earth, (or at least very near it, so near as that
the Shepherds did both hear and see them singing) for our comfort and
imitation: And therefore it cannot justly be accounted a Piece of Reformation,
to teach men to look away as far as they can from that time, wherein the Church
does celebrate the memorial of Christ's coming, as if God who had bid the Angels
worship him, had bid men not worship him; which is surely a strain of very bad
Logic, and of far worse Divinity.

SECT. XIV. Everlasting Thankfulness is due to God for this Everlasting Mercy.
THE Psalmist teaches us a Lesson of everlasting Thankfulness for this
everlasting Mercy, as appears Psalm 72. The chief argument of the Psalm is
Christ, as is proved in the 8. and 9. verses, from the extent of his Dominion,
far beyond Solomon's, even to the worlds end; and much more in the 10. and 11.
verses from the excellency of his Person, That All Kings should fall down
before him, And particularly, That the Kings of Arabia and Saba should bring
him gifts (which was literally fulfilled in the Presents of the wise men, Mat.
2. who by the Ancients were both called and reputed Kings;) And the Conclusion
that is inferred from these Premises, is Thanksgiving. The argument of the
Psalm is everlasting mercy, even the mercy of God to man in Christ; and the
Conclusion of it is everlasting Thankfulness; for so it follows, ver. 18. and
19. Blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which only does wondrous
things, (and this wondrous thing above all the rest, That the Son of God was
made the Son of man, that we who were by nature the children of wrath, might be
made the Sons of God) there is the Thankfulness; And blessed be the name of his
Majesty for ever, and all the earth shall be filled with his Majesty, Amen,
Amen. There Is the everlasting Thankfulness. Heaven was from the first instant
of its creation filled with his Majesty; but now the earth was also filled with
it; And if heaven and earth are both filled with his Majesty, what shall we say
if our sinful souls be empty? For if we be not filled with his Majesty, How
shall we come to be filled with his Mercy?

SECT. XV. Time not perfect in Gods account from our Creation, but from our
Redemption. The Jews not destroyed, and Time not Vntimed, merely in relation to
the coming of Christ: Time still continued, for the world to make a right use
of his coming: No other Time perfect in Gods account, but that wherein he gives
his Son; and no other Time should be perfect in our account, but that wherein
we receive him.
GOD accounted that only the Perfection of Time, wherein he wrought the work of
our Redemption; as if all that had passed before that, from the beginning of
the Creation, had been but an imperfect Time: He had no rest in the Creation,
till he made man: He had no rest after it, till he Redeemed him: Divinely Saint
Ambrose in his Hexameron, (and not the less Divinely because he took it out of
Saint Basil, for the Latin Fathers borrowed of the Greek-Fathers, as later
Divines have since borrowed from them,) Fecit Deus coelum, non lego quod
requieverit: fecit solemn, lunam stellas, nec ibi lego quod requieverit; sed
lego quod fecerit Hominem, and tunc requieverit, habens c^i Peccata dimitteret:
God made Heaven, and I do not read that he did rest: He made the Earth, and I
do not read that he did rest: He made the Sun, Moon and Stars, nor do I read
there that he did rest; But I read that when he had made man he did rest,
because ^e then had one to whom he could forgive sins: God was not at rest till
he had made man, to whom he might forgive sins; And after he had made him, he
was not at rest till he had forgiven him: O my soul, how can thou be at rest
till thou have asked and obtained forgiveness?

God accounts the Perfection of Time not from his Power, whereby he created the
world, but from his mercy, whereby he redeemed it; as if the creation of the
whole world had been imperfect without man, and the creation of man had been
imperfect without his Redemption; and all other Time not worth the notice, save
only that which Christ honored with his coming, for whose only sake Time it
self deserved to be continued and not to be Untimed, after men had corrupted
it; For as no satisfactory reason can be given why God destroyed not the whole
people of the Jews in their so many Idolatries, Rebellions and Apostasies, but
only that Christ was to come of their Nation; So neither, why Time it self
should not have been destroyed long before Christ's coming, for the outrageous
sins and villainies which were acted by men, but only that Christ was promised
to come in it; And so likewise for the same reason is Time still continued,
notwithstanding all the defections of wicked men from God, and their defiances
against God, because Christ may not lose the end of his coming, which was to
save Repentant sinners; so says Saint Peter, The Lord is not slack concerning
his Promise, but is long suffering to usward, not willing That any should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. His will is, That
since his Son has been pleased to take upon him the nature of man, both sinful
man should come to Repentance, and Repentant sinners should come to salvation.

Thus, in Gods account, That is only the Perfection of Time wherein he gives
Christ: and why not also in ours, that wherein we receive him? For in truth all
the Time of our life is but an imperfect Time, till we have gained Christ;
There may be the Perfection of the natural man before, but not of the spiritual
man, till he come to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
4. 13. All the Time of our life, though we live to Methuselah's Age, is but
imperfection of Time, till with good old Simeon, we come by the Spirit into the
Temple, and there see and embrace the Lord Christ, Luke 2. 27, 28. And then our
life, though never so short, will immediately be so complete and perfect, that
we may pray for a nunc dimittis, and say, Lord now, at this very instant,
without any longer stay, Lord new let thou thy servant depart in peace.

Saint Paul tells the Galathians plainly, that though never so aged in
themselves, yet they were but mere children in his account till Christ was
formed in them. Gal. 4. 19. My little children of whom I travail in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you. Did we truly believe this, and seriously
reflect upon our own belief, we would look much less after the man, and much
more after the Christian; Less after our selves, more after our Savior; Less
after our Interests, more after our Devotions: Since that only is to be
accounted a perfect Time, which Christ by his presence did once make so in the
world, and still is pleased to make so in our hearts. Nor is it any
disparagement to those heavenly Spheres, by whose revolution Philosophy has
taught us to measure the duration of earthly things, to say, That though Time
do borrow its continuance from heaven, yet it borrows its Perfection only from
the God of Heaven: The continuance of Time leads to death, but the perfection
of Time leads to everlasting life: This moment in it self is not a part of
fleeting Time, but in its good employment, it is no less then a blessed
eternity: The motion of the first mover is exceeding glorious in the heavens,
but it is much more glorious in our hearts; I will admire that motion because
it produces Time, but I will rejoice and acquiesce in this motion, because it
produces eternity: For this is the motion which alone affords rest unto my
soul, whiles I consider my blessed Savior humbling himself, but exalting and
raising me. O thou blessed month of December, wherein the earth gives us
nothing, but heaven has given us all things, having given us him who is All in
All!

CAP. II. Containing the Reasons of Christ's welcome; the infinite love of God
the Father, and of God the Son and Holy Ghost in our Redemption.
SECT. I. Gods first gift to man was his Love in Christ; His second gift was
Christ in our nature. No gift can prove a blessing, unless God give it in love;
not Government, not the Gospel, though the one be the best Temporal, the other
the best Spiritual gift.
WE have passed through the Porch called Beautiful ( Acts 3. 2.) wherein all
mankind lame from their mothers womb had a long time laid expecting alms of the
Son of God, when he should please to enter into the Temple of his body; Let us
now go into the Sanctuary, and there contemplate and consider the infinite Love
of God which caused him to send his only Son for our Redemption, and we shall
never want Thankful hearts to bid him welcome, nor Pious Hearts to make a right
and conscionable use of his coming: That as he came at first for our
Redemption, so he may come at last for our salvation.

And this Part of Christian Divinity has been taught us by Christ himself, not
only by his Spirit (as all the rest) but also with his own mouth, Saint John 3.
16. For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have everlasting life; Where
it is evident, That the cause why Christ was given to man, was no other but
only the love of God: And consequently, the grand Reason of our joyfully
receiving this gift, must be this, That it proceeded from Gods infinite and
undeserved love toward us: For Gods first gift to man was his love in his Son;
His second gift, was his Son in our nature; So says Saint Paul, 2 Timothy 1. 9.
According to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus
before the world began. Gods first gift was grace given us in Christ; his
second gift, was Christ given us in our flesh: And the Master of Scholastical
subtilties makes this a rule of sound Reason, as well as of sound Religion,
Inter omnia dona dantis, primum donum quod dat, and quisquis dare potest, est
Amor ejus quem primo dat amato, quia est ratio cujuscunque alterius doni; nihil
enim habet rationem doni, nisi in quantum cadit sub actu Amoris. Scotus in 1.
lib. sent. did. 18. The first gift which every one gives to him whom he loves,
is his love; which is indeed the only reason of all his other gifts; for
nothing can have the nature of a gift, but as it proceeds from love. And
therefore God first gives us his love, before he gives us any thing else: and
he gives nothing as a blessing, but what he gives in love; as for example,
Government is the best temporal gift to any Nation, yet given in anger, is no
blessing, and consequently no gift: so says the Prophet, Dedi Regem iratus
eis, Hos. 13. 11. I gave them a King in mine anger; This was (...), A gift that
was no gift, because not given in love: And as it is in Regal, so also in
Popular Government; as appears from the 94. Psalm, the 20. ver. For whether we
read, (...), with the Septuagint, A Throne of wickedness, when Kings and
Princes sit thereon; or seeds iniquitatis, with the Vulgar Latin, a seat or
stool of wickedness, when mean People are got up to it, it is still a curse,
not a blessing, if the Government be not given in love: For then whosoever be
the Governors, They will imagine mischief as a Law, and gather them together
against the soul of the righteous, and condemn innocent blood. So Musculus, (an
excellent Protestant Divine,) glosseth those words of the Psalmist, That they
do note unto us judiciary meetings of wicked men, to oppress the Righteous, and
to Condemn innocent blood, by virtue of some unjust Laws or Constitutions, not
at consensus Judiciarios Hominum iniqu^rum, qui ad hoc conglobantur, ut Just^s
opprimerent, and sanguinem innocentem vigore Legum injustarum condemnarent.
Thus that Author glosseth upon the place, and we cannot gainsay his gloss,
since it is undeniable, that truth and righteousness does hold only of Christ,
not of man's Government, whether it be by one or by many.

Again, the Gospel of Christ is the best spiritual gift that can be given to
any People, yet given not in love, oft-times proves no Blessing, and
consequently no gift. Like Manna to the Israelites, in Psalm. 78. Manna was a
type of Christ, so owned by Christ himself. Joh. 6. 32. That was the Typical,
this is the real Bread from Heaven which nourishes our souls to eternal Life:
And it, is with this as it was with that bread; with the Gospel of Christ as it
was with the Manna; If given not in love but in anger, it will scarce turn to
our spiritual nourishment: And we may justly fear it is now with the Gospel as
it was then with that Manna. God gives it without his love, to those that
either tempt him in their hearts, as the Jews did, ver. 18. asking meat for
their lusts, looking after the Word more for curiosity then for conscience: or
that tempt him with their mouths, as the Jews did, ver. 19, 20. They spoke
against God, and said, Can God furnish a Table in the wilderness? can he give
bread also? can he provide flesh for his people? A sin that contentious men are
too much guilty of, who in the midst of Eden cry out as if they were in in a
wilderdess: in the midst of plenty repine as if they were in want: they do in
effect say, that God cannot prepare them a table good enough, unless their own
hands help to make it; or will not prepare them a table soon enough, unless
they overhasten his preparation. To complain against God instead of rendering
humble and hearty thanks unto him to complain against him out of mere
wantonness, not out of any want, save only of a thankful heart within our
selves, is to do as the Jews did in this place, and then we must look to fare
as they did; for a fire was kindled amongst them, and anger came up against
them, ver. 21. And if we make God angry as they did, we cannot but expect to
feel the same sad effects of his Anger, as it is said ver. 30, 31. But while
the meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, and slew the
fastest of them, and smote down the chosen men of Israel. Just so is it with
those that are of a quarrelsom religion, that will not receive Christ in the
way that God offers him; they commonly have Christ not in love, but in anger:
not to make them the more happy, but the more inexcusable: not to make them the
better Christians, but to bring them under a stricter account for their
defiance of Christ, and their abuse of Christianity: they know more of their
Masters will, but it is to do the less of it, that so they may be beaten with
many stripes: Luke 12. 47. Nay indeed they know less of their Masters will,
though they would be thought to know more of it. For those know least of
Christ, who seek to know most of him by contention and by faction: since he
that said, learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11. 29. will
never take contention for meekness, nor faction for lowliness (and therefore
will not teach such as love to be contentious and factions.) Saint Paul indeed
tell us of some who preached Christ out of Envy, Phil. 1. 15, 16. but he does
not tell us of any that ever learned him so: he said to the Galatians, Christ
shall profit you nothing, and Christ is become of none effect to you, Gal. 5.
24. but he had given the reason of that saying before he said it, in the first
chapter, and sixth and seventh ver. I marvail that you are so soon removed from
him that called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel; which is not
another, but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of
Christ: wherefore let those that make nothing of removing from the Church by
which they have been called to the Grace of Christ, take heed lest they cause
Christ to remove himself and his Gospel from them; let those that surfeit of one
Christ, take heed they have not many Christ's for one; for there are many false
Christ's spoken of Mat. 24. 24. who though they shall not deceive the elect, who
are constant to themselves, and to their Savior, yet may not only deceive and
delude, but also destroy the wicked, that love to gad after their own
Inventions, and please themselves in their own imaginations: For Christ
himself, if he be indeed given to such men, is not given in love; and that is
the reason that he profits them nothing, and becomes of none effect to them,
though to others he be all in all, working with great power to the
establishment of their hearts here, and with greater mercy to the salvation of
their souls hereafter.

SECT. II. Gods love in Christ, though it be universal in the diffusion, yet is
it particular in the obligation.
IT is observable that Saint Paul first rejoices in the love, and then in the
gift of Christ. Gal. 2. 20. I live by the faith of the son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me. First he gave me his love, then he gave me
himself; for even himself had been no gift to me without his love.

(...), says Saint Chrysostom, What do thou say blessed Apostle? did he love
thee only? did he give himself only for thee? no, he loved the whole nature of
man, all the world besides: (...); But I think my self as much bound to my
Savior, as if he had only loved me and given himself only for me: I think my
self as much bound to live to him, as if he had died* only for me: and to give
my self as entirely to him, as if he had given himself only for me. A large
soul which can readily comprehend, much more which does willingly embrace and
entertain the obligation of the whole world: and yet there is no Christians
soul but must be thus enlarged: For Gods love in Christ, though universal in
the diffusion, yet is it particular in the obligation: obliging every
particular man to love the Lamb of God as if he had been slain only for his
sake, as if in him alone he had taken away the sins of the world; For indeed in
him alone, (be he never so righteous) has he taken away both the sin of the
world, and a world of sin; the sin of the world, that is the original
corruption contracted in his nature; and a world of sin, that is, a numberless
number of actual transgressions committed in his person.

SECT. III. Gods love to man in Christ, was the ground of his consultation with
himself, how to bring us to eternal life.
WE have seen Gods eternal love given us in Christ, the main reason of our
Christian joy; and we must now endeavor to see the fruits and effects of that
love, that we may accordingly rejoice in him, even in our blessed Savior. And
truly Saint Paul makes eternal life to spring from no other root, but only from
this root of Jesse; when he says in his Epistle to Titus, cap. 1. v. 2. That
God promised eternal life before the world began; I ask to whom did he promise
it? Saint Hierom thinks to the Angels; but they not having been before the
world, it was impossible a promise made before the world began, should be made
to them; It is much safer to say, That this promise of eternal life was made to
our blessed Savior in our stead, and that God the Father promised to God the
Son before the world began, That as many as should live according to the Faith
of Gods Elect, and the acknowledgment of the Truth which is after Godliness,
should in him have eternal life: For thus the same Saint Paul makes a dialogue
betwixt God the Father and God the Son, in the Love and Communion of God the
Holy Ghost, to which the Angels were not admitted, Heb. 1. 13. To which of the
Angels said he at any time, Sit on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool? And the Psalmist tells us plainly the persons that were in this
Dialogue, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, etc.
Psalm. 110. v. 1. whence we may safely conclude that there was a great
consultation betwixt God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost concerning the
Redemption of mankind from the vassalage of sin and Satan; and what can we
think was the ground of this Consultation, but only Gods everlasting love to us
in our Redeemer?

SECT. IV. Gods love to man in Christ was not in vain, or without success,
though his Churches love to us in praying for us, and teaching us to pray for
our selves, often proves unsuccessful: And yet our best proof that God has
loved us in Christ, is that we love him again, both in his Authority, and in
his Ordinances, and in his Members.
GOD will have love for love, and never casts away his love in vain: Man may
love where he may be hated for his pains; it fared so of old with the best of
men; the Church of God among the Jews, whose sad complaint is registered* Psalm.
109. 3. 4. for the love that I had unto them lo they take now my contrary part,
but I give my self unto prayer; Thus have they rewarded me evil for good, and
hatred for my good will: we may be sure this complaint was made by the Church;
for none else could say, but I give my self unto Prayer, or as it is in the
Hebrew (...) but I am Prayer, save only the Church, which being more
peculiarly consecrated to the service of God, knew Her self bound more then any
other to Pray Continually: Thus it is said of the singers, chief of the Fathers
of the Levites, who remaining in the chambers were free, for they were employed
in that work day and night, 1 Chronicles. 9. 33. that is to say, in the work of
singing Gods praises; according to that of the 134. Psalm, ver. 1. Behold now,
Praise the Lord all ye servants of the Lord, ye which by night stand in the
house of the Lord.

But least we should think that these words, they were employed in that work
day and night, did only show the continual obligation of the Levites duty, not
their continued actual discharge thereof, we are told the particular times of
the day and night wherein they did actually discharge the same, 1 Chronicles. 23.
28, 30. Their office was to wait for the service of the house of the Lord, and
to stand every morning to thank and praise the Lord, and likewise at even: It
was their office every morning and evening to sing Gods praises publicly in
Gods house, and not to content themselves only with, and much less to confine
themselves only to their Sabbath, as if God by claiming or challenging that
day, had thereby denied and rejected all the rest: Had this practice of
praising God daily in the Temple been superstition or will worship in the
Jewish Church, we should have found it not commanded and commended, but
reproved and reformed by their Pious Kings and Prophets, (for their Kings did
not reform without the advice of their Prophets) but not finding this Practice
Reproved or Reformed by them, how comes it among some Christians to be
accounted as a main Piece of their Reformation, to shut up the doors of Gods
house all the week days, and to open them only upon Sundaies? and then in
truth to open them for such a worship of God as is public rather for its
accidents then for its substance; rather for its time and place, then for its
matter and form, rather for its notice and for its noise, then for its
Communion? For though a man may go to Church as a Judge, (wherein he chiefly
serves himself, and pleases his curiosity) upon unknown and uncertain terms;
yet he can scarce go to Church as a Communicant, (wherein alone he serves his
God, and satisfies his conscience) unless he be sure and certain of the terms
of his Communion; for the conscience cannot be satisfied, and much less can God
be served upon uncertainties: And since the Apostle has expressly said, That
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 13. 23. Those men do very indiscreetly,
who in their public worship do rather exercise their Phansies then their
Faith; and those do very irreligiously who labor all they can to spread and to
promote that exercise; For in the work of serving God, above all other works,
it is evident, That the diminution of Faith is the addition of sin; wherefore
men have little reason to bring themselves, and less Religion to seek to bring
others to any the least diminution of their Faith in Gods service; for that is
to come under the hazard of Judas his curse, Let his prayer be turned into sin,
Psalm 109. v. 6. We must then take it for an argument of true love, even the
love of our souls and of our salvation, that the Christian Church did in
imitation of the Church of the Jews, offer up daily Prayers and Praises unto
Almighty God for us, and also teach us to offer up daily Prayers and Praises
for our selves; And it is to be feared That men have rewarded the Church of
Christ evil for good, hatred for her good will, in that the dismal curse which
follows in the next verses, has fallen upon so many Nations of the Christian
world: For it is evident that this curse, set thou an ungodly man to rule over
him, and let Satan stand at his right hand, let his days be few, and his
children be vagabonds, etc. is ushered in with this sin, For the love that I
had unto them, lo they take now my contrary part, ver. 3. and is continued and
confirmed; for it is because his mind was not to do good, but persecuted the
poor helpless man, that he might slay him that was vexed at the heart: and ver.
16. His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen unto him: he loved not
blessing, therefore shall it be far from him. For nothing is more offensive to
God, then that men will not return love for love: And yet this has been always
the portion of his Church: she has still found returns of hatred for love; For
there is no true Christian Church, but may truly say with Saint Paul, 2 Cor.
12. 15. I will very gladly spend and be spent for you, (it is in the Original
Greek, for your souls) though the more abundantly I love you, the less I be
loved. No love affectionate like this, which loves the soul: no love abundant
like this, which makes the lover spend and be spent for his affection; and such
is the love of every true Christian Church, (which is the grand Apostle of its
nation,) it loves affectionately, it loves abundantly, (for what it wants of
this charity, it wants of true Christianity) but does seldom receive back
again love for love: It was Luthers complaint, that whilst he Preached and
practiced man's Inventions, he found too much love; but after he preached Gods
truth, (the Gospel in its own sincerity,) he found too little: so has it been
ever since his time with Protestant Churches: for those which have most
deserved the peoples thanks, (for teaching them the true and the right way to
heaven,) have least found their love.

Thus we see to our grief, no less then to our mischief, that the best of men
may love in vain: but God never loves in vain. For he never loves, but he is
beloved again: so says the beloved Disciple, 1 John 4. 19. We love him because
he first loved us. As he loves us, so we love him again; though he love first,
we afterward: and therefore if we love not him, the reason is, because he has
not loved us, in the Son of his love. I say not, if we love not God in himself,
for that's impossible; acccording to that excellent position of Aquinas, Deus
secundum essentiam suam a nullo potest odio haberi, sicut neque bonitas; At
secundum quosdam Justitiae suae effectus, potest. 22. qu. 34. God cannot be
hated by any man as he is in himself, no more then goodness can be hated; but
he is hated only for some effects of his Justice: therefore I say not, if we
love not God in himself, but if we love not God in his Vice-gerency or
Authority, (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical,) by our dutifulness and fidelity;
If we love not God in his Commands and Ordinances, by our Obedience and Piety:
Lastly, If we love not God in his image and likeness by our brotherly and
Christian Charity, we do indeed not love God: (for himself has said, I ye love
me, keep my commandments, Joh. 14, 15.) And if we do not love God, the reason
can be no other but this, because he has not loved us. And it were to be
wished that some men, who most think themselves the darlings of heaven, would
try their spiritual estate by this touchstone; for if we are indeed in the love
of God, and in the Son of his love, it will appear by our returning love back
again to him; And the Apostles consequence being as good for the Negative, as
for the Affirmative, it must needs follow, that if we love not God, it is
because he first loved not us.

SECT. V. Gods love to us in Christ was not vain or without a cause, for as
much as Christ was the ground of our Election, as well as the Author of our
reconciliation. More men reconciled by Christ to God then recommened by him, or
more men reconciled potentially, then actually.
GOD had a good reason of his love to us, thoug not in our selves, yet in our
Savior, the Son of his love. For he began his first Epistle or message of love
unto our souls, as Saint John began his second and third Epistles, Unto the
elect and welbeloved, whom I love in the truth: (the same in effect with
salutem in Christo, or dearly beloved in the Lord, which salutations have since
been used by the Church) God loves us in the truth, that is in our Savior
Christ, who is called the truth, John 14. 6. And as no man comes to the Father
but by him; so no man abides with the Father but in him: so says Saint Paul,
2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them; where is punctually set down, both the
meritorious cause of our reconciliation, Christ; and the formal cause of it,
Gods not imputing our sins to us for Christ's sake. For God cannot be reconciled
to a sinner, whilst he looks upon him as a sinner, because sin is directly
opposite to his own goodness, and therefore he cannot but hate sin, as he
cannot but love himself: and God cannot but look upon a sinner as a sinner,
whilst he looks upon him in himself, not in his Savior, who has expiated his
sin. Hence Scotus tells us how God proceeded in primo, secundo, tertio, quarto
Instanti, concerning Judas: and makes Judas a sinner before he supposes God to
hate him at all; and a final sinner before he supposes God to hate him
finally: and we being all sinners, by the same reason must needs also be under
Gods hatred, till he look on us in Christ, the only ground and reason of his
love: According to which the learned Grotius says, Distinguenda sunt tua, ut
ita dicam momenta divinae Voluntatis circa hominem peccatorem: We must
distinguish (as it were) three Moments in Gods will concerning sinful man:
(Grotius his Moment comes very near to Scotus his instant) Primum est ante
Christi mortem: The first moment is before the death and pason of Christ; In
this God is altogether angry. Secundum est posita jam Christi morte, the second
moment is after Christ's satisfaction made. In this God is willing to be
reconciled. Tertium est quum homo vera fide in Christum credit, and Christus
credentem Deo commendat: The third Moment is after Christ's satisfaction is
actually laid hold on by a lively faith, and Christ actually recommendeth the
believer to his Father: And in this Moment God is actually reconciled, and well
pleased with the sinner, and gives him all the benefits, if not the comforts,
of that reconciliation: For Christ may be said to reconcile, where he may not
be said to recommend: He is said in Saint Paul to reconcile the world unto God,
2 Cor. 5. 19. But himself says in Saint John, he did not recommend the world
unto God, John 17. 9. I pray not for the world. His reconciliation (it seems)
concerns the whole nature of man; but his recommendation concerns only the
persons of some particular men, even such as lay hold on his reconciliation by
faith and repentance, saying, Lord, I believe, help my unbelief. For there is a
meritorious or potential, and there is a personal or actual reconciliation
wrought by Christ: The potential reconciliation belongs to all mankind, because
it is founded on the infinite merit of Christ's satisfaction; But the actual
reconciliation belongs only to the true believers, because it is founded on the
Application of that merit unto our souls: Still the (...) is only in Christ:
God is well pleased in him for his own sake; but in us only for his sake.
Excellently Zanch. (lib. 4. de tribus Elohim. cap. 1.) glosseth upon those
words, Mat. 3. 17. This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased, (...):
Tria beneficia iis paucis verbis docet Pater per Christum nobis communicari;
dilectionis, reconciliationis, adoptionis, seu regenerationis; three blessings
does God the Father teach us in these few words to be communicated to us by
Christ: The blessing of dilection, of reconciliation, and of adoption, or
regeneration: we beloved in him, there is the dilection; we sons in him, there
is the adoption; we accepted in him, there is the reconciliation. And indeed
the words added to this voice, Hear ye him, Mat. 17. 5. plainly show that the
voice it self came not for Christ's sake, but for ours, that we might think our
selves in him beloved, and sons, and such in whom God is well pleased. The
voice was from heaven, and the comfort is heavenly; Blessed be the God of
heaven for them both. And we beseech him to repeat this heavenly voice, and to
renew this Heavenly comfort by his own Holy Spirit, unto our souls.

SECT. VI. Gods love in Christ is not a fond love: therefore he scourges whom
he loves. The Christian Church not taught in the New Testament to expostulate
for being scourged; though she be crucified (as Christ was) between two thieves.
AS God loves us in order to our Savior, and therefore not causelessly; so also
he loves us in order to our salvation, and therefore not fondly or
preposterously: Gods love is not a fond love^; for whom he loves, he
chastneth: but it is a saving love; for when he chastneth, he chastneth us for
our good, that we might be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. He loves not
like a fond mother, who had rather venture to break her own heart, then her
child's stomach. For God will make his sons by adoption, like his Son by nature,
whom he most loved, and yet he most scourged: He will make those whom he
intends to save, like the Captain of their salvation by wearing a crown of
thorns, before he will make them like him by wearing a crown of Glory. Hence
happily it comes to pass, that though we find many and great expostulations
with God in the Old Testament, concerning the persecutions of his Church, (as
particularly, Psalm 74. and Jer. the twelfth) Yet we scarce find so much as a
direct complaint (which is much less then an expostulation) concerning it, in
all the New Testament. The reason is plain, that the Christian Church might be
taught by Christ's Doctrine, as well as by his Example, not to look to fare
better then her Master; and sure she is, she cannot fare worse. Therefore is
the Christian Church in a manner ashamed to say with David, Psalm 74. 1. O God,
why have thou cast us off for ever? Since she knows the Son of God himself has
said, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? or with the Prophet, (Jer. 12.
1.) Righteous art thou O Lord when I plead with thee, yet let me talk with thee
of thy judgments. Since she knows Saint Peter has said, For the time is come
that judgment must begin at the house of God, (1 Pet. 4. 17.) or again, with
the same Prophet, Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Since Christ
himself has said, this is your hour, and the power of darkness, (Luke 22 53.)
Or lastly, with the same Prophet, Wherefore are all they happy that deal very
treacherously? Since our blessed Savior himself, had a Traitor among his own
Apostles? and has showed us that true happiness consists not in having power
to persecute, but in having patience to be persecuted for righteousness sake,
Mat. 5. 10. Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for
theirs is the Kingdom of heaven Christ himself was crucified between two
theives, and that's reason enough why his Church should not greatly complain,
though she be crucified, not only between, but also by two thieves. The one
robbing God of his honor, the other of his Patrimony; Saint Paul has given a
hint of them both in one piece of a verse, Romans 2. 22. Thou that abhorrest
Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? For in truth, Idolatry and Sacrilege have
a long time been the two grand scourges of the Christian Church; Idolatry
whipping God out of his Temple, to let in other petty Dieties; and Sacrilege
whipping him in it. They that abhor the Sacrilege, committing the Idolatry;
they that abhor the Idolatry, committing the Sacrilege.

SECT. VII. Christ's love to us, that he would come from his Father, to teach
and redeem us: The title of the chief corner stone, blasphemously applied to
the Pope; Christ was not an Apostle, one sent from God, but an Exapostle, one
sent out of God.
I must needs confess that being in this Eden of God, in this Paradise
contemplating the tree of life, I am unwilling to divert my eyes from that
tree, and much more my heart from that contemplation; but am desious to
persuade my self, that I see the Prophet Isaiahs vision turned into action, and
God acting it in heaven, no less then the Prophet acting it on earth, Isa. 6.
8. Also, I heard the voice of the Lord saying, whom shall I send, or who will
go for us? then I said, here am I, send me. For God the Father did as it were
consult with himself, saying, whom shall I send? and God the Son did forthwith
answer him, Here am I, send me. For as there was faciamus hominem, Genesis 1. 26.
God consulting and deliberating with his Son, (his eternal wisdom) and with his
Spirit, (his eternal power) about our creation; so there was redimamus hominem,
God consulting and deliberating with his Son (his eternal righteousness) and
with his spirit (his eternal love) about our redemption: For Gods goodness is
as infinite as himself, and that has made him impart to man, not only his
goodness, but also himself: Hence that saying of the sublime Areopagite, quod
ipse Deus propter amorem est exstasin passus, That love made God as it were go
out of himself: For great love is never without some kind of exstasie, and
therefore as it makes man go out of himself, and be not where he lives, but
where he loves; so it also made God the Son, as it were; go out of himself, and
come and be in man, whom he had loved with an eternal love. Thus has love
brought God from God to be in man: and thus should it also bring man from man
to be in God: For this is the end of that blessed Mystery, and more blessed
mercy which we commemorate when we celebrate the incarnation of the Son of God;
he was made of us, that we might be new made by him; he made one flesh with us,
that we should be one spirit with him. Saint Peter accounted it a great mercy,
that God had sent his Angel to deliver him from the hand of Herod, Act. 12. 11.
How much more ought we to account it a great mercy, that he has sent his only
Son to deliver us from the power of sin and Satan, which persued us much more
fiercely, and would have wounded us much more desperately? He considers his
deliverance, ( ver. 12.) and shall not we? especially since the Apostle has
showed us the way how to enlarge this consideration? Heb. 1. 1, 2. God who at
sundry times, and in diverse maaners, spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. It was a great
mercy that he spoke to the Fathers by holy men, a greater that he spoke to them
by the holy Angels (for that was one of the diverse manners of his speaking.)
But the greatest mercy of all was, that he has spoken to us by his son; and
the reason is intimated in the following words; for in time past was the
beginning, the inchoation of his love, when he spoke by his Prophets and
Angels; but in these last days has been the accomplishment and consummation
of it, when he spoke to us by his Son. Before, he had made the world and upheld
all things by the word of his power; but now he has redeemed the world, and
having purged our sins, upholds it by the hand of his mercy: For till our sins
were purged, it was only the power of God upheld the world, that he might purge
it; But now our sins are purged, it is the mercy of God upholds the world, that
he may save it: This is the only reason Saint Peter gives us why the last day,
that shall destroy all things by fire, is so long in coming, 2 Pet. 3. 9. The
Lord is not slack, but is long-suffering to usward, not willing that any
should perish, but that all should come to repentance. The same mercy that made
him hasten his first coming, makes him delay his second. And was it not a
mercy, not only beyond our expression, but also beyond our admiration, that the
Son of God, who was the brightness of his glory, should become the brightness
of his enemies, and the glory of his people? Yet so says Saint Luke 2. 32. to
be a light to lighten the Gentiles, there he was the Bridegroom of his enemies;
and to be the glory of thy people Israel, there he was the glory of his own
people.

It was a mercy that we could never deserve, and therefore must ever
acknowledge, that God was pleased to send his Apostles to teach us his saving
truth, and to show the way of salvation; for they were the pillars of the
Church, Gal. 2. 9. But infinitely greater was the mercy that he pleased to send
his own Son to teach the Apostles; for he is the chief corner stone, 1 Pet. 2.
5. For it is observable, that Saint Peter himself was content to be accounted a
pillar of the Church, and leaves it only for Christ to be called the chief
corner stone; And therefore that Preface of Bellarmine which he once made in
the Roman Schools, Praefatio habita in gymnasio Romano, and has since prefixed
before the third general controversy of his first Tome, which is de summo
Pontifice, had need of all the waters of Tiber to wash it from gross flattery,
if not from detestable blasphemy, since he is pleased therein to wrest those
words of the Prophet Isaiah, Behold I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a
tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation, and to apply them to
Saint Peter's Successor, which Saint Peter durst not apply unto himself, but
leaves them only for Christ, the eternal Son of God.

We cannot too much prize the voice of the Apostles; as for example, Saint
Paul's Epistles cannot be in too great esteem, which (says Saint Hierom) bring
him every day more glory, as Christ more converts: But the voice of the eternal
word, calling to Saint Paul from heaven, ( Act. 9. 4, 5.) and in him to us, who
can ever hear with sufficient care and attention, who can embrace with
sufficient reverence and estimation, who can follow with sufficient alacrity
and devotion?

Saint Paul was but (...), one sent from God, and yet how greatly does he
magnify that office in every one of his Epistles? but our Savior Christ was
(...), one sent out of God to man; for so says Paul, Gal. 4. (...), God sent
forth his son: that is, God sent him not only from himself as he sent the
Apostles, but also out of himself, as he sent none but only his beloved Son.

SECT. VIII. The Mother of Christ so a woman as still a Virgin; The Praise of
the seventy Interpreters: Christ's love to us, that he would be made the son of
a woman, whereby he has exalted men above Angels; a mercy not to be forgotten,
till there be no man left to remember it: That the Jews corrupted not the Text,
proved from the prophesies concerning Christ.
GReat was the love of the Son of God toward man, that he would be sent forth
from his Father; yet much greater (if greater can be) that he would be sent
forth after so mean a manner, as to be made the Son of man; And yet even in
this meaness was no less then a miracle; For our blessed Savior was so made
the Son of man, as that he was not made the Son of a woman, but of a pure
Virgin: and therefore Saint Paul saying that he was made of a woman, Gal. 4. 4.
does call the blessed Virgin Mother a woman, only to declare her sex, not to
dispute, much less to disparage her Virginity: for she was (...) semper Virgo,
always a Virgin, before, in, and after the birth of Christ, in the judgment
of the Catholic Church, which reputed Helvidius an Heretic for concluding
otherwise from some slight Grammatical notions, whereby he did rather blaspheme
the Text, then understand it, whiles he let the itch of his Criticism (as too
too many in these latter times have done) overspread and infect his Divinity:

Accordingly Saint Chrysostom justly finds fault with Aquila and Theodosius,
for rendering the words of Isaiah 7. 14. (...), that is, Behold a young woman
shall conceive: and he confutes them by the Authority of the Septuagint, (which
(says he) are to be preferred before all other Interpreters, (...), ( Chrysostom.
hom. 5. in Mat.) For their antiquity, for their number, and for their consent;
and they interpret the words, thus, (...), Behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a son: But Justine Martyr has sufficiently cleared this doubt to Trypho
the Jew; and I have not to do with Jews, (that I should need insist on this
controversy,) but with Christians; for such we are in our belief, and had need
labor to approve our selves to be such likewise in our practice, for fear our
practice should else subvert and ruin our belief: For he that has said, I
will show thee my faith by my works, (Jam. 2. 18.) has thereby assured us,
that contrary works do at least show, if they do not make a contrary faith: For
which cause they are certainly much to be pitied, who scoff and mock at our
most Christianlike commemoration of this great Mystery and greater mercy of
the Incarnation of the Son of God: for though the Angels were thought worthy of
the Mystery, and desired more and more to look into it, 1 Pet. 1. 12. yet it
was man only that had the blessing of the mercy; so says the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 2. 16. For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he
took on him the seed of Abraham. Hence it is the privilege of men, equally
with Angels, to be called the Sons of God; but above them, if we consider the
reason why they may be so called. For as the Sons of God is spoken of the
Angels, Job 1. 6. so the Sons of God is spoken of men, Genesis 6. 2. And Saint
Ambrose expounding those words thus, Viderunt Angeli Dei, (for he did not read,
but only expound them so, which if our late Critics had observed concerning
the rest of the Fathers, they would have found less various lections, but more
various Expositions of the text,) I say, Saint Ambrose expounding those words
of Genesis 6. 2. thus, Viderunt Angeli Dei, did not meant by his Angeli, the
spiritual and heavenly substances, (says Vellosillo in his Theological
Problems) but holy and religious men, of the Progeny of Seth, who because they
persisted, and persevered in the true Religion and worship of God, (when all
the rest of the world fell away from it, by a damnable Apostasy,) were by the
Holy Ghost honored with the glorious title of the Sons of God, and Saint
Ambrose for that same reason calls them Angels. O that we would consider how
far we have degenerated of late from being Angels in this sense, when for want
of constancy in Gods undoubted and everlasting truth, we may scarce justly be
reputed or called men! (...).


But holy men were indeed called the sons of God, not only because they were
holy, which gave the Angels that same title, but also because they were men,
and did carry about them that nature, which the Son of God was determined to
take upon himself: so that in the title it self, the sons of God, men are equal
with the Angels. But in the reason of that title, the son of God made man, they
are above them. And for this cause it is that men are often called his
brethren, as Heb. 2. 17. It behoved him to be made like unto his Brethren,
because he is of the same flesh and blood with men; but never was it said of
Angels, that they were brethren to the son of God. O mercy of mercies, the Son
of God made lower then the Angels, to exalt the sons of men above them! This
was the good Angels joy for us, and shows how much more it should be our own
joy for our selves. They have still joy in heaven for our conversion, Luke 15.
10. but they had once joy in earth also for our redemption.

Earth the place of sorrow, because of sin, till Christ came on it; and then
the place of joy because he came to take away the sin, and with the sin the
sorrow: This made earth at that time seem heaven to the Angels, and that made
them leave of looking on God in God, that they might look on God in men; leave
of praising God in heaven, that they might praise him in Earth; Luke 2. 13.
Lord keep us men from ceasing to praise thee for this mercy of mercies here on
earth, least we keep our selves from beginning to praise thee for it hereafter
in heaven; for this mercy, God made man, is a mercy not be forgotten, till
there be no man left upon earth to remember it: But if it should be forgotten
upon earth through our perverseness, or profaness, yet sure we are, it will
never be forgotten in heaven, where this very same son of man now sits on
the right hand of God; and shall at the last day come in the same flesh to judge
us, in the which we now acknowledge his coming to save us; Lord grant that we
may so praise thee in this day of salvation, that we may not be condemned of
thee in that day of Judgment. It is an excellent argument that Bellarmine
uses amongst others, to prove that the Jews never corrupted the Hebrew Text,
because they still in their Bibles retain all the prophecies concerning Christ,
insomuch that they are far more powerfully convinced from the Hebrew originals,
then either from the Greek or from the Latin translations. ( Bell. lib. 1. de
verbo Dei, cap. 2.) as for example (says he) in the second Psalm; (which the
Apostles applied more peculiarly to our blessed Savior, Acts 4. 25.) The Greek
(...), and the Latin Apprehendite disciplinam, Apprehend instruction, makes
nothing against the Jews: but the Hebrew (...) Kiss the Son, makes so much
against them that it wholly stops their mouths, because it bids them exhibit
worship and reverence to the Son of God. And shall we think that those men do
not open the mouths of the Jews to blaspheme our blessed Savior, and shut
their hearts from receiving him as the Messiah, who forbid others to exhibit
this worship or reverence unto him?

So little Reason is there, and less Religion, for us instead of kissing the
Son least he be angry, to be angry with others for desiring to kiss the Son,
even our blessed Savior, the Son of God from all eternity, but by his blessed
incarnation made also in time the Son of man.

SECT. IX.* Christ's love to us that he would be made under the Law. That man is
a Son of Belial, not a member of Christ, that will not be under the Law: all
good Christians follow Christ, both in active and in passive obedience.
OUR blessed Savior was therefore made under the Law, that we should not be
kept under it; He was made under the Obedience, that we should not be kept
under the curse of the Law.

Factus ex muliere, factus sub lege; He was made of a woman, and therefore made
under the Law: For nothing that is made of, but is also made under: This is the
Doctrine of heaven, Apoc. 4. 11. and the inhabitants there rejoice in it, that
as they were made by Gods power, so also for his pleasure: Therefore we say of
the eternal Son of God, that he was begotten of the Father, not made of him,
because he is not under him: but of the Son of man we justly say, he was made
of, and consequently he was made under God.

Debtor essentiae, and debtor Justitiae, Christ as man owed his being to God,
and therefore owed his service to him; as such, he was made by his power, and
therefore made under his Justice.

Christ was made under the obedience of the Ceremonial and Judicial Law, that
we should not be detained under the obedience of either: He was made under the
obedience of the moral Law, not that we should be exempted from under the
obedience, but that we should be exempted from under the curse and condemnation
of it. Christ himself as made, was made under the Law; for made, and made
under, cannot be severed; and there is no being under, without a Law. We cannot
consider the Son of God made under the Law, but we must needs condemn the Sons
of men who will make themselves above Law. Sin is the transgression of the Law,
says Saint John, 1 John 3. 4. (...); now this (...) is as well sine lege, as
contra legem; as well without Law as against it: (...) is only beside or
against Law, but (...) is also without Law: And we may a little Criticize upon
those words of the Greek Text, so as we teach our Grammar to be subservient to
our Divinity; (...) Omnis qui facit peccatum, and iniquitatem facit; whosoever
does sin, does also iniquity; for it is much more (...) then (...), much more
to do sin as our work, then barely to sin, as our misery: The latter may be
only (...), a transgression of the Law, but the former is also (...)* a
privation of the Law; that is a detestation, and as far as in us lies, an
abolition of it; For a willful sinner does not only contemn Law, but as much as
he can confounds it; as he sins against the Law, so he would fain sin without
the Law: He wishes there were no Commandment to restrain him, no Lord to
overruled him, no judge to over-aw him: And he that is of this temper, is
properly (...), a wicked man, a son of Belial, (...) sinc jugo, one that will
not be under a yoke, one that will have no Law, because he will not be under
any.

This temper should be far from Christians, because it was far from Christ: The
Text tells us, He was made under the Law; sure not for us to make our selves
above it; but that all good Christians should labor to follow him both in
active and in passive obedience: As for active obedience, the Text is plain; It
is said of Christ, Heb. 10. 7. Lo I come to do thy will O God; And Saint Paul
requires no less of every Christian, Ephesians. 6. 6. Doing the will of God from the
heart; Again, Christ says of himself, John 4 34. My meat is to do the will of
him that sent me; he could not live without his obedience; and he also tells us
that we have little hopes of eternal life without it; Mat. 7. 21. Not every one
that says unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, but he
that does the will of my Father which is in heaven.

And as for passive obedience, the Text is also as plain; for Christ says
concerning himself, when he was going to his sufferings, not as I will, but as
thou will, Mat. 26. 39. And Saint Peter says no less concerning the Christian,
1 Pet. 4. 19. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God,
commit the keeping of their souls to him in well doing as unto a faithful
Creator.

The obediential power in the creature is much more excellent then the natural
power: The power whereby we serve and obey our God, is much more glorious then
the power whereby we serve or preserve our selves: And when we are come to so
great a perfection of Christianity as to know this, then we shall truly know
Christ; For truly to know Christ is to follow him; and truly to follow Christ,
is to follow him to his Cross; which when we shall be content to do, we shall
then find that as his service is perfect freedom, so his affliction is perfect
consolation: but that belongs to another head, and shall be the argument of the
next Chapter, wherein the Spirit of God will afford us more consolations, then
the malice of men can load us with afflictions.

CAP. III. The joyful manner of Christ's welcome, as proceeding from joy in the
Holy Ghost: witnessing to our consciences that through Christ we are not under
the Law, but under Grace, and made the children of God by Adoption.
SECT. I. The Spiritual man more wants joy then the Carnal man, as being under
greater labors both of sense and motion: God the Holy Ghosts love to man, in
teaching him how to rejoice for his Redemption: Hymns expressing that joy, may
be only to the honor of God, and directed to him: The evil spirit silenced at
the coming of Christ, but the mouth of the good Spirit was opened.
THere is no man but naturally desires joy and delight as a remedy against his
labors ( naturaliter appetit delectationes and medicinas contra labores
sensuum and motuum, says Aquinas.) The reason why the natural man looks so
much after his delights, is, because he looks upon them as medicines to heal
his sicknesses, or as remedies against the continual labors of his sense, and
of his motion. And for this reason the spiritual man ought much more to look
after his spiritual delights, because he is much more under the labors of
sense and motion then is the natural man; for there is no sense so irksom as
the sense of Gods wrath, and of man's unworthiness: and no motion so toilsom as
that which seeks to climb up from earth to heaven: and this is the sense, this
is the motion of the spiritual man; he is continually feeling the burden of
flesh, and much more of sin upon his soul; there is his sense: He is continually
panting and ^ighing after God for rest; there is his motion: In so great a
labor, both of his sense and of his motion, how should he be able to subsist,
if it were not for the comfort of spiritual delight, which proceeds only from
Gods Holy Spirit?

For delight cannot be but from some good that is convenient and present, and
known to be so: Ad delectationem duo requiruntur; conjunctio boni convenientis,
and cognitio hujus conjunctionis, says the same Aquinas. A man cannot have
delight without two things; first the conjunction or acquisition of some
convenient good, then the knowledge of that conjunction; so is it in this case.
The Redemption of our souls from death, is undoubtedly both a convenient and a
present good; and yet few men have true joy and delight from it, because few
apprehend it as actually present. Wherefore it is the singular gift and love of
God the Holy Ghost to any man, to give him the true knowledge of his Savior,
that he may give him the true joy of his salvation. For this indeed is the joy
in the Holy Ghost, and comes only from him. It is he that teaches the Church
Militant to sing a new song on earth for her joy in Christ: it is he that
teaches the Church Triumphant to sing a new song in heaven for the same joy: O
sing unto the Lord a new song, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 98. and that Psalm is
nothing else but a song of Joy and Thanksgiving for the Redemption of mankind
by Jesus Christ; there is the new song on earth; and again, Rev. 5. 9. They sung
a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and to open the seals
thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood; there is
the new song in heaven, to express the joy of the same Redemption; For the Holy
Spirit teaches them to practice this new song in earth, who are to sing their
part of it in heaven: For those men are not like to come to Abraham's bosom, who
are not Abraham's sons: and those men are not yet Abraham's sons, who have not
his faith, and do not his works* Now this was the Faith of Abraham to see the
day of Christ; and this was his work, to joy in that sight* John 8. 56. Your
Father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad: (...),
exultavit and gestivit, He rejoiced, and he desired to express his joy. His
desire increased his joy, and his joy inflamed his desire: He did see it a far
off by faith, the eye of his soul: and he desired to see it nearer by sense
with the eye of his body: the joy of the one did not hinder, but advance the
joy of the other; for if the heart of them must rejoice that seek the Lord (
Psalm. 105. 3.) then much more must the heart of them rejoce that have found him.

Accordingly good Christians, do indeed show no other then Abraham's faith by
desiring to look on Christ; and no other then Abraham's work by rejoicing in
that vision: which we may well suppose was the cause that the Latin Church
anciently used (and still uses) some such peculiar hymns before the nativity
of Christ, as it is hard to determine whether they have more of desire in them
to see his day coming, or of joy to see it come; our Calander still retains
the memory of the first of those hymns, (which was O sapientia) on the 17 of
December; but the hymns themselves in the Latin Church hold out till Christmas
eve; I will give you a short scheme of them;

1. O Sapientia! veni ad docendum nos viam prudentiae. O Thou who art the
eternal wisdom of God, come and Teach us the way of true wisdom. 2. O Adonai!
veni ad redimendum nos in brachio extento. O thou who art the Lord of might,
come and redeem us by thy mighty hand. 3. O radix Jesse! veni ad liberandum
nos: O thou root of Jesse come and deliver us. 4. O Clavis David! veni and educ
vinctum de domo carceris: O thou Key of David, come and open the prison doors,
and let out the Prisoners. 5. O oriens splendour lucis aeternae! veni and
illumina sedentes in tenebris, and umbra mortis: O thou Dayspring of eternal
light, come and enlighten us who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death.
6. O Rex gentium! salva hominem quem de limo formasti: O thou who art the King
of the Nations, come and save man whom thou have formed of the dust of the
earth. 7. O Emanuel! veni ad salvandum nos Domine Deus noster: O thou who art
God with us, be also a God to us, and save us O Lord our God.
These greater and more solemn hymns (called Antiphone majores) were at first
made only in the honor of Christ, though in process of time (after the
Invocation of Saints had crept into the Church) there were two more added to
them, O Thoma Didyme, and O virgo Virginum, (as Hugo testifies in his
Commentary upon the 38. Psalm) which now the office it self of the blessed
Virgin blusheth at, and takes no notice of at all: and it were to be wished it
had left out other prayers to the Blsseed Virgin, which are as grossly
superstitious as were those Hymns: For they that believe Christ to be God, must
confess him to be a jealous God, and that he has said, I am the Lord, that is
my name, and my glory will I not give to another, Isa. 42. 8. and what is his
glory but that of Prayer, and of Praise? Accordingly it is observable that at
the time of his coming in the flesh, the Oracles of Jupiter, Apollo, Hecate,
were silent and gave no answer, as if by their silence they had proclaimed,
that the Word was only in Judea: which is not only historical, but also
rational, not only credible for the relation, but also for the reason; because
it was convenient that he who came to break the head of the Serpent, should at
the time of his coming stop his mouth.

Wherefore those Oracles that spoke from the false and evil Spirit, were all
silenced at Christ's coming, as being unfit witnesses to Gods Truth, because
they were from a false Spirit: and to his goodness, because they were from an
evil Spirit: But their mouths were then most open, who spoke by the Spirit of
God; The Angels that had been silent long before, then began to sing: Babes and
sucklings were advanced above men, to chant out their Hosanna's to the Son of
David, when he was made lower then the Angels: In a word, all tongues and
languages of the world, accustomed before to speak vanity, were then taught to
speak the wonderful works of God; and Saint Peter gives us the reason of it,
because God did then pour out his Spirit upon all flesh* Acts 2. 17. This is
the Spirit, that still fills the hearts of good Christians with Thankfulness,
and their Mouths with Thanksgivings, that they may continually more and more
rejoice in this Son of God* till they come to enjoy him: For as Christ is
called panis descendens, Joh. 6. 50. not qui descendit, the bread decending, to
show that he is always descending in his salvation: though he descended but
once only in his person: so our praise and thanksgiving to God for his descent,
may be called Cantus ascenden^, the praise that is always ascending, according
to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 71. 12. As for me, I will patiently abide always
and will praise thee more and more; for this praise never comes to its zenith
or vertical point till our souls be there where our Savior now is, and from
whence we expect him again to our salvation. For good Christians can never
meditate enough on their Redeemer, and never joy too much in that meditation:
They can never be weary of singing Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the
name of the Lord, because in their souls, they have tasted the sweetness of
that song; The Spirit of God making melody with their hearts, whiles they are
making melody with their mouths.

SECT. II. God the holy Ghosts love to man in giving him the assurance of his
particular redemption, without which there can be no joy of his creation. It
had been good for that man, if he had never been born, spoken of Judas,
according to our Saviors own judgment, not our apprehension; that gloss an
abusing of the Text: The joy of our Redemption is not to be lost.
WE cannot but have great joy, if we have true joy in our Redeemer: and we
cannot but have true joy in our redeemer, if we rightly weigh and faithfully
embrace the mercy of our redemption: therefore when the Holy Ghost has said,
Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, Psalm. 149. 2. he has much more said
in effect, Let Israel rejoice in him that redeemed him: for the Joy is not so
truly that he is made, as that he is made Israel: according to that of Saint
Augustine, frustra profuit hominem nasci, nisi redimi etiam profuisset, in vain
had man been made partaker of the Creation, if he had not also been made
partaker of the redemption. And agreeable to this is our Saviors doctrine
concerning Judas, who in that he betrayed his redeemer, forfeited his share in
this redemption; It had been good for that man if he had not been born, Mat.
26. 24. To seek to make the contrary true by Metaphysical quiddities, (as a
Divine of late has done) is so to be in Metaphysics as to be out of Divinity:
for though singly and simply in it self, being is better then not being, yet a
Metaphysical being which only exempts from nothing, accompanied with a moral
not being that makes worse then nothing, is certainly not better but far worse
then a bare Metaphysical not being: for it is clearly better to be nothing,
then to be worse then nothing, and consequently to be no soul at all, then to
be a damned soul, under an eternal enmity with and eternal separation from that
goodness which is the fountain of being, and which only does make our being to
be good: wherefore it must needs be a dangerous Position that requires such a
proof: but more dangerous* that admits it* For to admit this, is in effect to
say, that our Savior Christ is not a man of his word, as he that first
broached this desperate doctrine, being urged with the authority of our
Saviors forementioned words, It had been good for that man if he had not been
born, made his answer that our blessed Savior did there speak secundum captum
vulgi, according to the opinion of the common people; which is little less then
to put a fallacy in the mouth of Truth it self, and to fasten such a blasphemy
upon the word of Christ, as will easily enable us to elude the whole Text, and
verify his most wicked words by our more wicked practice, who once said in
zeal to his Church, but not to his Savior, Scripturam esse nasum cereum, that
the Scripture was a mere nose of wax. But we have not so learned Christ, and
dare not so revile his word, least we should so learn him; we will therefore
rejoice in him that made us out of nothing to be his creatures, because he has
also redeemed us from being worse then nothing, when we were his enemies: and
we will commit the keeping of our souls to him in well-doing as unto a faithful
creator, because we know him to be also our merciful redeemer: For the same son
of God who made the world, and upheld all things by the word of his Power, and
consequently was our Creator, has by himself purged our sins, and is now sat
down on the right hand of the majesty on high, there making intercession for
us; (Heb. 1. 2, 3. and Heb. 7. 25.) and consequently is also our Redeemer: The
joy of our Creation we have lost by losing our Innocence* but the Joy of our
Redemption is never to be lost, unless we lose our Repentance; which is so
true, so great a comfort to a man who is born in sin, lives in sin, dies in
sin, that if you deny him this, you can afford him no true comfort against his
sinfulness.

SECT. III. That this redemption, whereof the Holy Ghost assures us, is
twofold: 1. Privative, because we are not under the Law: that is, not under it
as condemning us, though we be under the Law as regulating and restraining us:
2. Positive, because we are under grace, and know that we are so: the right way
to attain that knowledge.
THat would not be so great a comfort to a good Christian which Saint Paul
gives him, Romans 6. 14. for sin shall not have dominion over you, were not the
reason of that a much greater comfort, for ye are not under the Law but under
Grace: For they that groan under the oppression of Tyrants, must needs be most
glad to be delivered from their unjust and unmerciful dominion; and here is
that deliverance: for sin (which is a greater tyrant over the soul, then any
monster of men can be over the body) shall not have dominion over you; but they
that have once been under the dominion of tyrants, cannot be sure they are
delivered out of their hands, till they see themselves actually under the
righteous and merciful dominion of their own rightful Governors. And we may
accordingly see that such is our deliverance from the dominion of sin, in that
it is said in the next words, for ye are not under the law, but under Grace:
the spirit of Grace now reigns in you, and therefore will not let sin reign any
longer in you; nor the Law reign any longer over you, as it is the strength of
sin to provoke it, or the judge of sinners to condemn and to torment them: For
if we lay not some such restriction upon the Apostles words, we shall never be
able to prove it is a mercy not to be under the Law; which is gloriously
magnified by the Spirit of God, as that which gives both holiness and wisdom,
Psalm. 19. 17. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul; there is the
holiness. The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; there is
the wisdom: we must therefore say that the Law had a threefold use, to
restrain, to condemn and to instruct; to restrain sin, to condemn the sinner,
and to instruct in righteousness.

The power the Law had to condemn sinners, and to wrack our consciences before
Gods judgment seat, is taken away by Christ; so that they who truly lay hold
on the Merit of Christ, are not thus under the Law, as condemning them: And
thus not to be under the Law is an invaluable mercy, because the Law works
wrath, Romans 4. 15. in showing Gods wrath against sinners, and us, as sinners,
subject to that wrath; But the power the Law had of restraining from sin, and
of instructing in righteousness, still remains uncontroled of God, and should
be undoubted and undisputed of men: for he that gave to the Jew an inheritance
on earth to have his Law kept, as it is said, Psalm. 105. 43, 44. And gave them
the Lands of the heathen, and they took the labors of the people in
possession, that they might keep his statutes and observe his Laws, has not
promised to the Christian an inheritance in heaven, to have his Law broken.

Therefore the Law must still restrain us from sin, and direct us in
righteousness, only with this difference: The power it has of restraining us
from sin, grows less and less every day in the regenerate, and can remain no
longer then this life, because sin it self in them shall remain no longer: But
the power the Law has to instruct and direct in righteousness, grows daily
more and more, and is as immortal as righteousness it self, and can never be
abolished, neither in this life, nor in the life everlasting: for it is easier
for heaven and earth to pass, then one tittle of the Law to fail, Luke 16. 17.
Nay the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, (2 Pet. 3. 10.) But this
power of the Law shall not pass away; for it follows ver. 13. that in the new
heavens dwells righteousness: And if righteousness dwell there, then also the
Law which is the rule thereof: for it is not possible that any creature should
have its own will, but only the will of God for the rule of righteousness, on
which will it must as necessarily depend for its doing, as for its being, since
nothing can be independent in its working, which is not independent in its
being: and he only is independent in his being, who is wholly in, and of, and
for himself; that is, God blessed for ever; who is the efficient and final
cause of all things, the efficient cause by whom, the final cause for whom they
are, and were created. In a word, the regulating power of the Law cannot be
abolished, for that shall still remain in heaven; the restraining power of the
Law is not abolished, but only changed, in that true faith makes us more
obedient for love, then the Law for fear: and the condemning power of the Law
shall never be abolished, for it shall still reign over the damned souls in
hell, and breed the worm of conscience that dies not: And yet it is this
condemning power of the Law that we are chiefly redeemed from; not that the
power of condemning is taken from the Law, but that we are taken from its
condemnation; so says the Apostle, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. He says not, There is no
condemnation from the Law, but he said, there is no condemnation to them which
are in Christ; because they that are in Christ do in him fulfill the Law, and so
cannot be under the condemnation of it. For though they perform not that legal
obedience which is able to satisfy Gods Justice, yet they perform that
Evangelical obedience which is undoubtedly acceptable to his mercy: Their
obedience though not worth acceptance in it self, yet is very well accepted in
Christ; and that makes them that are in Christ so exceedingly strive to show
themselves dutiful and obedient, because no other are made the Sons of God in
Christ, but only those who are made obedient to him by his Spirit.

And they truly are under grace, because they truly are under Christ, the
fountain of grace; for grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, John. 1. 17.
Gratia dupliciter dicitur, uno modo ipsa voluntas Dei gratis aliquid dantis;
alio modo ipsum gratuitum donum Dei, says Aquinas, 3a. 2. 10. cap. Grace has
two significations; First, it is taken for the love of God; Secondly, it is
taken for the gift of that love: and accordingly he that is under Grace, is
partaker of both these, both of Gods love, and of Gods free gift proceeding
from that love: And the latter is the infallible demonstration of the former,
the gift is the demonstration of the love. For grace as it is the love of God,
is the cause of no Religious operations in the soul, but as it is the gift of
Gods love: and therefore this phrase ye are under grace, does not bid us look
up to Gods decree, but look down upon our own souls, to see if we can find
there such Religious habits as may cause those Religious operations which are
the undoubted evidences and effects of the gift of grace, and therefore the
undoubted evidences, because the undoubted effect of it: For grace as it is the
gift of God in the soul, works not immediately by it self, or by its own
essence, but by virtuous habits as by its instruments; and therefore these have
the least reason to boast of grace, who least regard the virtuous habits
whereby it works, and so cry up Faith in Christ, as in effect to beat down
the chiefest duties of Christianity: For grace is the beginning of spiritual
actions, by the mediation of virtuous habits, even as the soul is the beginning
of vital actions by the mediation of its powers and faculties; And as the soul
works not immediately from it self the actions of the natural life: so neither
does grace work immediately of it self the actions of the spiritual life. For
grace indeed has two acts in regard of the soul, as the soul has in regard of
the body; Primus ad esse, Secundus ad operari. The first act is to give life,
and that is immediate from it self; the second act is to give the operations of
life, and that is mediate, by virtuous qualities and dispositions; so nearly
does it concern every Christian that desires to be under grace, to lead his
life in all Godliness and virtue: for there can be no assurance of life, but
from the operations of life; no assurance of the spiritual being, but from the
evidence of the spiritual working: Excellently, Aquinas, Potest aliquis
cognoscere se habere gratiam in quantum percipit se delectari in Deo, and
contemnit res mundanas, and non est conscius sibi alicujus mortalis peccati,
1a. 2ae. 112. 5. cap. A man may know himself to be in grace, if he find that he
delights in God, and contemns this world, and is not conscious to himself of
any grievous or mortal sin. There are but few signs or tokens, but they are
infallible; And we must conclude that those men who care not what sins they
commit against God, their brethren and their own consciences, either to get or
to keep the advantages of this world, as they show but little contempt of the
world, so they show a great contempt of God: And they that contemn God, cannot
be said to delight in him: and they that do not delight in him, cannot receive
comfort from him; wherefore it is an evil spirit, not the spirit of God which
does witness to such men that they are the Sons of God, when their own
consciences cannot but witness that they are his enemies.

SECT. IV. The great joy of Christians for being under grace, or for being
adopted in Christ; and how that joy is to be moderated by the consideration of
our own frailty, and of Gods impartial Justice in the judgment to come.
MAny men have a cheerful countenance, that have but a sorrowful heart; The
young man seems to be of this temper, whom Solomon so sharply reproves, or
rather so plainly derides, Eccles. 11. 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and
walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: there is
cheerfulness enough as to the outward man; but know thou, that for all these
things, God will bring thee into judgment; There Is sorrowfulness more then
enough, as to the inward man: whilst walking in his own ways, makes him lift
up his face; the thought of judgment cannot but cast down his heart: therefore
they alone do truly rejoice, who have such a joy as cannot end in sorrow: not a
joy for being the Lords over their Brethren, but a joy for being the servants
of their God: not a joy for overcoming others, but for overcoming themselves*
not a joy for having gained an inheritance on earth, but a joy for being
assured of an inheritance in heaven. Our Savior said to his own Disciple,
Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the Spirits are subject unto you; but
rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven, Luke 10. 20. If it be
not the cause of a true Christians joy to have power and dominion over evil
spirits, which is the peculiar privilege of Christ's own Church: much less can
it be the cause of a true Christian joy to have dominion and power over good
men, which is the common privilege of Christ's enemies.

The joy then of a Christian is not for having his name far spread on earth,
but for having his name written in heaven; not for overcoming his Brother, but
for overcoming his lusts: And to him that thus overcomes, will he that holds
the seven Stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the seven golden
Candlesticks, give to eat of the hidden Manna, ( Rev. 2.) which without doubt
affords a mavelous sweetness to all those that eat of it.

But who can eat of this heavenly Manna, save only they who have their names
written in heaven? for it is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast
it unto the dogs, (Mark 7 27.) Nor can the dogs eat so much as the crumbs that
fall from this heavenly table. We must be children before we can eat of this
bread; and then may we not always expect to eat our fill of it, least that
Scripture be fulfilled of us the second time, He that eats bread with me,
has lift up his heel against me. John 13. 18. For Jesurun waxed fat and
kicked; then he forsook God which* made him, and lightly esteemed the rock of
his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Therefore do the most judicious Divines advise us,
that though* we steadfastly believe our selves to be Gods adopted Sons, yet we
may not too suddenly make sure of our inheritance, but must work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2. 12. And though we be indeed the
called of Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 6. yet we must give diligence to make our
calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Saint Peter is very zealous in this
point, as by his own sad experience, having known the mischief of too much
confidence: And therefore although in Saint Paul's words, there be reason enough
for our fear and trembling, because our salvation is to be worked out, before
it can be enjoyed, (for no man but has cause more then enough to suspect his
own works, and much more the continuance of his good working,) yet Saint Peter
gives us another reason of our fear, because we must all be judged, before we
can be saved, 1 Pet. 1. 17. And if ye call on the Father, who ^hout respect of
persons judges according to every man's work, pass the time of your sojourning
here in fear. Here is supposed an adopted child, for he calls on the Father; but
he is not supposed to be puffed up with his adoption, for he is to pass his
time of sojourning in fear; and the reason is, because his Father is to be his
Judge, and will judge him according to his works; for which one reason are
alleged three reasons by Aquinas, when he says, Expedit quandoque praesentiam
Dei in nobis per gratiam ignorare, ut timor Divini judicii nos humiliet, ne
praesumpta securitas nos praecipitet, ut desideranter Gratiam Dei expetamus, It
is expedient for us sometimes to be ignorant of Gods grace in us, and (which is
all one) of his favor toward us, that the fear of Gods judgment may humble
us; that the presumption of our own secure state and condition may not ruin
us; and that the desire of Gods grace may daily more and more increase in us;
All these three reasons are intimated by Saint Peter, If ye callon the Father;
there is the desire of the increase of grace; who without respect of persons,
judges according to every man's works; there is the fear of Gods judgment; pass
the time of your sojourning here in fear there is against the presumption of our
own secure state and condition: As then I desire to be humbled, as I desire not
to be eternally ruined, and as I would increase in my soul more and more such
holy desires, so I must take heed that I be not puffed up with the conceit of
my adoption; for he that has given me that inestimable grace, when I did not
deserve it, has not promised to continue his gift if I will needs abuse it.

SECT. V. Our adoption in Christ, not spoken of by Saint John without a double
Preface, one practical, another speculative, and is here according to the
likeness of his grace, shall be hereafter according to the likeness of his
glory: The threefold Image of God in man.
ADoption is the assumption of a stranger into a son, Adoptio est personae
extraneae in filium assumptio, says the Civilian: so that our adoption implies
three things.

1. An assuming or taking of a man from his own kindred, into Gods family. 2.
An assuming or taking such a man as was a stranger, into that family. 3. An
assuming or taking that stranger to be one of the best of Gods family, to be a
Son.
A most blessed assumption which gives to the true Christian soul, not an
imaginary, but a real, not an anniversary, but an everlasting Holy day: Hence
it is that Saint John cannot speak of this infinite mercy without a double
Preface, 1 John 3. 1. Behold what manner of the love of the Father has
bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God!

Behold, there is one Preface, a practical Preface that concerns the person, to
fix his attention, to raise his affection, and to confirm his devotion; what
manner of love the Father has bestowed, there is another Preface, a Doctrinal
Preface, that concerns the thing; showing in it that sublimity which
challenges the best of our attention, that excellency which challenges the
purest of our affection, that immortality which challenges the firmest of our
devotion: There can be no Preface appositely made, but is either practical to
exite and move the reader, or didactical to make way for the explication of the
work; the end and scope of the first is to show that the thing taught is (...)
to beloved of us; the end and scope of the second is to show that the thing
taught is (...), lovely in it self, (for so is Aristotle's distinction 20. Magn.
Moral. c. 10.) (...):) The Apostle joins these two several ends and scopes of
Prefaces both together, before he treats of our adoption, saying, Behold, to
show this lovely and amiable to us, richly worth our looking after; and what
manner of love, to show it is most lovely and amiable in it self: And we may
easily see by the ensuing words that it is such a good as is not to be valued
by the judgment of the flesh, for the world knows it not, nor sufficiently to
be valued by the judgment of the spirit; for we our selves yet scarce know it;
it does not appear what we shall be. It does not appear to the world what we
are, nor to our selves what we shall be; only this we know, that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, ver. 2. as if he had said, there are at least two
degrees, if not two parts of this filiation or adoption of sons; one in this
life, when we are regenerated into the hope of everlasting glory; the other in
the next life, when we shall be admitted into the possession of it; When Christ
who is our life shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory, Col.
3. 4. The first degree of our adoption the world knows not of us; the second,
we do not, cannot, in this life, fully know of our selves: Of the first degree
of adoption speaks the same Saint John in his Gospel, John 1. 12, 13. As many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God: Of the second
degree speaks Saint Paul, Romans 8. 23. We our selves groan within our selves,
waiting for the adoption, to wit the redemption of our body; as if the adoption
were not to be obtained here, but to be expected hereafter; wherein however he
speaks as it were out of Christ's own mouth, as well as by his spirit; for our
blessed Savior himself uses these words, Luke 20. 36. They are the children
of God, being the children of the resurrection; not that they were not the
children of God before, but only that they were not completely and perfectly
children, till they were admitted to their inheritance, and were come to a full
similitude and likewise with their Father. For as a natural son of man is
partaker of his humane nature, or else he cannot be his son; so also is an
adopted Son of God, partaker of his Divine Nature; though not Originally,
because he is adopted; yet sure derivatively, because else he cannot be a Son:
for on the participation or communication of the Divine nature is founded our
adoption, or being the Sons of God, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.
4. That by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature, (...), Divinae
consortes naturae, consorts or companions of the Divine Nature, that is,
communicants in it as well as partakers of it. And upon this ground it is we do
assert, that as the participation of the Divine nature to us is different in
degrees, so also is our adoption different in degrees, as inchoate in this
life, and consummate only in the next. For in this life we are made partakers
of the Divine Nature but inchoately and imperfectly, that is, as it is
resembled in grace; but in the next life we shall be made partakers of it
consummately or perfectly, that is, as it will be revealed in glory: For there
is in man a threefold Image of God, Imago creationis, Imago recreationis, Imago
similitudinis, as says the angelical Doctor, (1 2ae. qu. 93. ar. 4.) The first
Image is by likeness of Nature, the Image of creation; the second, is by
likeness of grace, the Image of regeneration; the third Image, is by likeness
of glory, the Image of perfection. Tbe first Image has been so defaced and
blotted, and slurred by our sin, that we are all by nature the children of
wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. So that in and from this Image of God in us arises only
the necessity or want of adoption; for there is only so much of it left as to
show how great need we have to be made his children, that we may be made more
like him then we are by nature. But the adoption it self is founded in our new
begotten Image or likeness with our heavenly Father, which is after the
similitude of his only Son, by Grace in this world, and by glory in the world
to come; and may accordingly be called either incomplete or complete adoption:
Concerning the first Saint John says, that we are made the Sons of God, as
being already partakers of the Divine nature in the likeness of grace;
concerning the second he says, It does not yet appear what we shall be, but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him; that is, we shall
hereafter be made the Sons of God after a more perfect manner, by being made
partakers of the divine nature in the likeness of glory: Blessed be that
eternal Son, in whom we are made Sons; and blessed be that day wherein he took
on him our nature, that he might give us his.

SECT. VI. Christians are more eminently the Children of God in Christ then
were the Jews: The difference betwixt the Adoption and all other Spiritual
blessings of the Jews and of the Christians; That though they were adopted to
be heirs as we are, yet were they tutored as infants till the coming of Christ,
by whom was wrought a true Reformation.
THE Spirit of adoption, though it were given under the Law, yet was it not so
fully given, as it is now under the Gospel. For though it were the same
Covenant of Grace to the Jew and to the Christian, to be saved by Christ, yet
was this Covenant much different in the manner of its administration: And
therefore we must consider the Church before Christ came in the flesh, though
as an heir that had a right (from Gods fidelity, though not from his strict
Justice) to all Spiritual Gifts and Graces whatsoever, yet withal as an infant
that had not the full possession of that right: And this distinction Saint Paul
himself teaches us, Gal. 4. 1. Now I say that the heir as long as he is a
child, (or rather an infant, (...), such an one as cannot speak) differs
nothing from a servant, though he be Lord of all; but is under Tutors and
Governors until the time appointed of the Father. And himself plainly applies
this distinction to the Church before Christ's time, verse 3. saying, even so
we, when we were children (or infants) were in bondage under the elements of
the world; that is, as long as we continued in the Jewish Religion: For the
Church before the coming of the Son of God, was so an heir as that she was also
an infant: As she was an heir, so she was free; but as she was an infant, so
she was a servant under Tutors and Governors: As she was an heir, she had
spiritual hopes; but as she was an infant, she had carnal Ordinances, Heb. 9.
10. As she was an heir, she had the Spirit of adoption; but as she was an
infant, she had the Spirit of fear and bondage; which makes the Apostle say,
Romans 8. 15. For ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again, (ye had it
once, sc. whiles ye were under the Law, but ye have it not again, sc. now ye
are under the Gospel) to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father. Hence it is that the Jews had then the same
spiritual blessings in dark representations and figures, which we Christians
now have in full revelations and substance: I will set down some few examples
concerning the chiefest spiritual blessings, by which we may easily be able to
judge of all the rest, and not be mistaken in our judgments.

1. What a vast difference is there betwixt those words of Moses, The seed of
the woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3. 15. and those words of Saint
Paul, the God of peace (meaning our Savior Christ who was our peacemaker, and
gave himself to make it) shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly, Romans 16.
20. or those words of Saint John, For this purpose the Son of God was
manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil, 1 J^^n 3. 8. And yet
both alike speak of the same redemption.

2. What a vast difference is there betwixt that of Genesis 25. 23. the elder
shall serve the younger, and that of Romans 9 16. Not of him that wills, nor of
him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; yet both alike concern the
same Doctrine of Election.

3. What a vast difference is there betwixt Abraham's being called to go out of
his Country; and from his Fathers house, Genesis 12. 1. and our being called out
of darkness into his mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. and yet both alike confess
the same Vocation.

4. What a vast difference betwixt the sacrifices of the Jews, and the
sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross? and yet both alike assure us of the same
Justification, in so much that Saint Paul explaineth the one by the other, Ephesians.
5. 2. as Christ has loved us and given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling Savor.

5. What a vast difference is there betwixt the Sons of Abraham according to
the promise under the Law, and under the Gospel, (for as Isaac was, so also we
are the children of the Promise, Gal. 4. 28.) The one having the promise of an
earthly, the other of an heavenly inheritance, and yet both promises alike
belong to the same Adoption.

6. What a vast difference betwixt the Cirumcision of the flesh, and of the
heart, betwixt the outward purifications of the Jews, and the inward purgings
of Christians, ( for the blood of Christ purges our consciences from dead
works to serve the living God, Heb. 9. 14.) and yet both of them do set forth
the same Sanctification.

7. Seventhly and lastly, what a vast difference betwixt their entering into
Canaan, and our entering into the heavenly Jerusalem? and yet both of them
declare one and the same Glorification.

They were all partakers of the same spiritual blessings that we are; they had
the same Redemption, Election, Vocation, Justification, Adoption,
Sanctification and Glorification that we have; but they had them in a dark
representation, not in an open revelation, so that they could not so fully know
them; and they had them in types and figures, not in reality and substance, so
that they did not so fully enjoy them: For they all had carnal Ordinances
imposed on them until the time of reformation, Heb. 9. 10. that is, till the
time of Christ's coming to plant the Christian Religion: which was a true
reformation indeed, because it proceeded from a true cause, and to a true end;
from a true cause, a more perfect knowledge of Christ, who before had not been
fully discovered; and to a true end, a more perfect establishment of
Christianity, which before was not rightly practiced: This was truly (...), a
time of rectification or direction; for (...), is properly said of them who are
directed immediately to their journeys end, whereas before they were going the
farthest way about, and such indeed was the Jews way to heaven, God leading
them about through the wilderness into Canaan, as well in the Mystery as in
the History, as well in regard of the Celestial as of the Terrestrial
Jerusalem.

SECT. VII. A particular time appointed for rejoicing in Christ, not by way of
restriction, but by way of Application: The Christians Joy far above the Jews,
both for his Redemption and for his Adoption. The privilege of true Faith. And
how the Redemption by Christ is larger then the Adoption by him. And the
Adoption greater in his giving, then in our receiving.
TO be glad in the Lord and to rejoice in him, makes Christmas last all the
year, yet is that no better reason why we should not keep Christmass-Day, then
our rest and contentation in God, which we have or may have all the week, is a
reason why we should not keep the Sabbath, or the Lords own day: for it is very
bad Logic, and worse Divinity, which argues from the position of the Duty, to
the eversion of the Day wherein we ought to exercise it; for if the Duty must
be exercised, how can we reasonably deny the time of its exercise? Yet do I not
think that a particular time is to be allotted to rejoice in Christ by way of
restriction or limitation, as if we should not rejoice in him at other times;
(for that is the malignant gloss which some of late have put upon the fourth
Commandment, confining Gods solemn public worship only to the Sabbath, not
considering that the Jews had other grand festivals, not prescribed in the Law,
and yet were more strictly bound to the letter of that Commandment, then we
Christians) but I say that a particular Time ought to be allotted to rejoice in
Christ by way of application or of specification, that we may more eminently
and notoriously rejoice in him at some time, though our joy in him is to be
confined to no time: For the spiritual joy of the Jew was unconfined, and much
more the spiritual joy of the Christian, who in a larger proportion has
received the Spirit of joy.

And therefore its observable, that though in the Old Testament we are
earnestly called upon to rejoice in God, yet are we not called upon for so much
joy as in the New Testament; let this one instance serve for all: Be glad in
the Lord and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in
heart; so the Prophet concludes the 32. Psalm, and in the same strain
begins the 33. saying, Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous, for praise is
comely for the upright, calling for a very great proportion of Joy from the
Jew; but yet the Apostle in saying, Rejoice in the Lord always, again I say
rejoice, Phil. 4. 4. has called for a far greater proportion of joy from the
Christian; For here is not only the same joy that was before, to wit joy in the
Lord, but here is the same joy in a greater degree of extension; for he says,
rejoice in the Lord always; and in a greater degree of intension, for he says,
again I say rejoice: And if we further consider who are called the just and
righteous, and upon what terms they are called so, we shall find also a greater
degree of extension, for that where is the greatest measure and diffusion of
righteousness, there must needs be the greatest measure and diffusion of joy:
And it is evident that they who trust in the Lord (not in themselves) are by
the Psalmist called the just and the righteous, or the upright; For it is the
privilege of true faith not only to make us just, but also to make us upright;
not only to justify us, but also to rectify us; it justifies us in that it
absolves from sin; it rectifies us, in that it directs in righteousness; and
therefore the disobedient as well as the unbelieving heart, the stubborn as
well as the faithless generation is said not to trust in God, Psalm. 78. 7, 8*
and the faithless generation is there known as well by this Character, that set
not their heart aright, as by this, whose spirit was not steadfast with God: For
true faith has the privilege first to set the heart to God, then to settle it
in God; first to make the spirit right, then to make it steadfast: The heart is
made right when it points directly toward God, moving as a line from the
circumference to the Center; and the heart is thus made right, or set toward
God, by the same faith that it is made steadfast or settled in God; Wherefore
since true faith at the same time both Rectifies and Justifies the soul of man,
it is no wonder if it cause its unspeakable as well as its unmovable joy: And
where shall we look for this true faith, if not in Christians? for though the
act of faith is as expressly set down in the Old Testament as in the New; yet
the object of faith is much more plainly declared in the New Testament: So that
Christians having a more perfect faith in Christ then had the Jews, must needs
have a greater joy in Christ then they could have.

And indeed, what joy like the joy of the Redeemed by Christ, or rather what
joy like the joy of the adopted in Christ, Since the joy of the Redemption is
not to be had without the joy of the Adoption? For many more have been Redeemed
by Christ, then do truly rejoice in him; because many more have been Redeemed,
then are adopted: For the Redemption which man has by Christ, is of a greater
latitude then is the Adoption; because the Redemption concerns all mankind in
general, but the Adoption is restrained to some particular persons; sc. to
those only within the Pale of the Church; and that not only in their number and
outward profession, but also in their merit or inward affection, as Aquinas
has laid the ground of that distinction, 22^. qu. 1. art. 9. ad tertium, in
these words, Talis enim fides (sc. formata) invenitur in omnibus illis qui sunt
numero and merito de Ecclesia: A true and lively faith is found in all those
who are meritoriously as well as numerically members of the Church: And where
the true faith is found, there and there only is the true joy in Christ, or the
joy of adoption. And these two may very well agree, that the Redemption it
self should be universal, and concern the whole nature of man, which Christ
assumed, and therefore redeemed; but yet the benefit thereof in the adoption of
sons, should be only particular, that is concern those alone to whom God does
give special grace to make a right use of Christ; nay concerning adoption it
self Saint Paul seems to speak as if it were in some kind a potential, and
not all together an actual blessing or mercy, when he says, (...), ut
adoptionem acciperemus, that we might receive the adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 5.
thereby intimating, that many more might be adopted Sons, then are, were it not
for their own default; and those that are adopted, might (if they had made a
timely and full use of Gods grace in their Redemption) much sooner have
received their Adoption: Nay yet more, if the Greek Orators Criticism be
justifiable, (for Libanius is loath to ascribe the Oration, (...) to
Demosthenes) That (...) may be to take or receive what we never had before: but
(...) is properly to receive that which we had lost; then the (...) used by the
Apostle, will tell us, that the gift of Adoption was once ours before (to wit
by the innocence of our nature) till we lost it; and is ours so now by the
Sanctification of our persons, that if we should lose it in our selves, we may
again recover and receive it in our Savior: it was once ours by nature, and so
we lost it; and do now receive it by grace the second time: And we now so
receive it by grace, that if we should lose it, we may yet hope to receive it
again: Which consideration ought to fill our souls, not with carelessness but
with comfort, that as by our own weakness and unworthiness we daily fall and
deserve to be put out of the number of Gods servants: so by our blessed
Saviors Merits and Mercies we daily rise again, and are still accepted and
continued as his sons.

SECT. VIII. Christ's most holy prayer a very comfortable Testimony and
Assurance of our Adoption in him: How nearly it concerns us to say Our Father,
not our Brother which art in heaven: The conclusion of the Lords Prayer,
answerable to this beginning, and not to be questioned: It is ill quarrelling
with that prayer, and much worse discountenancing and deserting it.
AS there is no greater comfort then the comfort of Adoption, so there is not a
more comfortable, if there be a more evident, testimony to assure us thereof,
then that most holy prayer which our blessed Savior has sanctified by his
lips, no less then he has commanded and commended in his Word: For this prayer
teaches us to say to God, Our Father, which cannot be true and right in the
Invocation, if it be not true and right in the Doctrine: for if it be not an
undoubted truth that God in Christ is Our Father, then can we not truly in our
worship call him so: Wherefore since we are taught by Truth himself to call God
Father in our worship, we are sure it must be true in our Doctrine, That God is
our Father in Christ, and consequently we his adopted Sons; or we must assert
the same Thing to be a Truth and not a Truth: a Truth in our Prayer, and not a
Truth in our Belief; and moreover say, That we pray in Faith, when we do not
pray in Truth: For if we pray not in faith we sin; and we cannot pray in Faith,
if there be an untruth in our Prayers: Wherefore this expression Our Father,
being recommended to us by our Saviors own mouth, as it teaches us to pray in
his Communion in and through whom we are adopted, so it affords us an
undoubted testimony and proof of our Adoption; for under what pretense can we
say to God Our Father, if we be not his sons? and how are we his sons, so as to
expect any blessing from him, but only by the grace of Adoption? Accordingly as
we cannot but say, (with Saint Augustine) that all other prayers are reducible
to the matter of this short prayer: so we may likewise say with him, (for he
alleges not one precedent or petition which is not immediately directed unto
God) that all other prayers are reducible to this form of saying Our Father;
and by this rule, those prayers which rather say Our Brother, then Our Father
which art in heaven, cannot be said in Faith, and do not proceed from the
Spirit of Adoption; and they that so pray, do not communicate with Christ in
their prayers, who neither prayed himself, nor taught us to pray to any but
only to his Father: And it is not sapient nor safe for us to pray out out of
Christ's communion, since we are sure our prayers will not be heard, but through
his Intercession.

Yet in all probability, that humor of praying to petty Deities, if it did not
at first help to thrust out the conclusion of this prayer, yet it has since
helped to keep it out, because we cannot with any color of truth say to any
but to God alone, for thine is the Kingdom, the power and the glory for ever
and ever: For this Doxologie is without doubt the conclusion of the Lords
prayer in Saint Matthews. Gospel, as it has been generally received both by
the Greek and the Latin Church, neither of which has set down that prayer in
Saint Matthews Gospel in Greek, without the addition of these words at the end
of it: and for that allegation that it is not so in Saint Luke, it is of no
force, since it is against that common maxim, Argumentum ab authoritate non
valet negative, An Argument from authority is worth nothing in the negative,
but only in the affirmative: and we should lose very much of the Gospel, if we
should expunge and blot that out of one Evangelist, which we cannot find in
another: Yet some Critics have gone so far as to persuade the world, That this
heavenly conclusion did not at all belong to the Lords prayer, but is both an
unnecessary and an unwarrantable addition: One is pleased to call it a foppery,
( non veriti sunt tam divinae precationi suas nugas assuere) If this Doxologie
be a foppery, then what is true wisdom? but if it be indeed true wisdom, then
what is this censure of it, but plain blasphemy? And is not that true wisdom,
which proceeded immediately from the mouth of the eternal wisdom? Yet the
learned Grotius complieth so far with those that have opposed this Doxologie,
as to persuade himself it came at first out of the Greek Liturgies into the
Bible, not considering that there cannot be allowed such chopping and changing
of the Text, but we must reproach the Catholic Church of Christ first as
uncareful in suffering such changes, then as unfaithful in obtruding them for
Text; First as uncareful, in suffering men to make havoc of Gods Word which
was committed to her charge to keep; then as unfaithful, in obtruding the Word
of man upon us, instead of the Word of God; and what authority or repute will
be left to the Church, if we suppose her to want both care and trust? for God
entrusted his Church with his Holy Word, that she should first faithfully keep
it, and after that faithfully interpret it; wherefore to say the Church has
falsified her trust in keeping Gods Word, is in effect to say, she is not
trustworthy to interpret it: which is bring all Religion to doubts and
uncertainties in the knowledge: to schisms and divisions in the practice
thereof. For surely if the Lords own most holy prayer has been so ill kept by
the Church, which in all ages has been looked upon as the sum of the Gospel,
and as the platform, or rather the groundwork of all true Religion, then we
must needs have but very little or no assurance concerning the rest of the
Scriptures: wherefore it concerns all Christian Divines in the first place to
vindicate the Church of Christ, concerning her faithful keeping of this Prayer,
which would have been altogether needless, had not some Critics of later years
obtruded their own observations for various Lections, and by that means not
cleared the Text but puzzled it: But let us ask them, Are the unknown
manuscrips, or the known and received Copies of the Church to be taken for the
Text? If the former, we trust private men and private spirits, which God never
entrusted with his word: If the latter, we have as unquestionable a Lords
Prayer, as if we had heard it immediately from his own mouth: For we have it
thus exactly delivered us by the Greek and the Latin Church, in the undoubted
Originals of Saint Matthews Gospel. For the Greek Church, let Saint Chrysostom.
speak, who has so elegantly and so exactly expounded at this Doxology, in his
nineteenth Homily upon Saint Matthew, plainly showing the necessary connection
thereof to the last Petition of the Lords Prayer, that it is evident he
accounted it as a part of the Prayer, though as no part of the Petitions; for
(says he) Our Savior having told us of that evil one which we were to fight
against, (for so he expounds, (...), deliver us from that evil one, that is,
the devil, thought fit to encourage us to the fight, by telling us also of the
King that would lead us to the battle: (...): and therefore he says, For thine
is the Kingdom, etc. showing, that if the Kingdom be his, we ought to fear no
other but him, for that the power is his to defend us, and the glory is also
his to reward us: Thus in effect Saint Chrysoft. upon the place, so that it is a
wonder to see Beza has reckoned him among those Fathers who expounded the
Lords Prayer of purpose, and yet omitted these words in their Expositions; for
sure he omitted them not who expounded the Original Greek, though Saint
Cyprian, and Saint Augustine, and Saint Ambrose omitted them; happily because
they looked no further then the Latin translation, which adds Amen at the end
of libera nos a malo, and takes no notice at all of the Doxology; And yet Saint
Ambrose, (lib. 6. de Sacram. cap. 5.) asserting that our Prayers ought to begin
and end with the praise of God, after the example of the Lords own Prayer, (
habes hoc in oratione Dominica, etc.) does in effect allow the Doxology to be
the end of that Prayer, since it is evident that Deliver us from evil, is no
matter of praise; nay indeed he does rather allege it in sense, though not in
words, in saying that the priest concludes with such a form of praise, as is in
truth no other then an exposition of this Doxology, only applied to all three
Persons of the blessed Trinity: Per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, in quo tibi
est, cum quo tibi est honor, laus, gloria, magnificentia, potestas cum Spiritu
Sancto, a seculis and nunc and semper, and in omnia secula seculorum. But
however, if that be a good Argument why we should leave the Doxology or the
conclusion out of the Lords Prayer in Saint Matthew. (because it is not in the
Vulgar Latin) it must be as good an argument why we should leave the
introduction and the last petition out of the same Prayer in Saint Luke, for
there in the Latin translation is no mention of noster qui es in coelis, nor
of libera nos a malo: whereas the Greek Text gives us that Prayer with its
conclusion in Saint Matthew, and the same Prayer not mangled but whole and
entire, though without its conclusion in Saint Luke; and there is no greater
reason, but only some men's bold conjectures, to say that the conclusion of that
Prayer was added to the Greek Text in Saint Matthew, then to say that the
introduction and last Petition of it was added to the Greek Text in Saint Luke;
for both alike are left out of the Latin translation: But though they have
been both left out of the Bibles by the Latin translation, yet we cannot say
that either has been left out of the Bibles by the Latin Church; For the
Greek copies of Saint Matthews Gospel, this day agnized by the Latin Church,
are ready to depose the contrary, all of them having the Doxology annexed to
the Petitions, as the conclusion to its premises, without any the least
interruption, and then at last adding' A (...) at the end of the whole, which
is an invincible argument that the Latin Church received those words of the
Doxology as an undoubted part of the Greek Text, and therefore durst not leave
them out of their Bibles, though they found no footsteps at all of them in
their own Latin translation. Wherefore it is evident that this Prayer both in
its Petitions and in its conclusion, has always been received as an
unquestionable part of Saint Matthews Gospel, both by the Greek and the Latin
Churches; and consequently those men have disparaged the Church of Christ, and
disadvantaged the Christian Religion, who have either commenced or continued,
either begun or maintained any quarrels against this most holy Prayer, either
in it self, or in its use: Nay, in truth such men have disparaged and
disadvantaged themselves; for cavilling with that Prayer which so plainly
teaches them to say Our Father, must needs be accounted an ill sign that they
have received, and a worse means, that they may retain the adoption of Sons:
Surely Saint Cyprian who whipped those Sectaries with scourges that refused to
communicate with Christ's Church, as not caring by their obedience to say Our
mother, would further have whipped them with scorpions, had they refused to
communicate with Christ himself, as abhorring in their Prayers, to say Our
Father: And doubless it may reasonably be demanded of us, with what certainty
of faith, or satisfaction of conscience we do communicate with them in their
Prayers, who will not communicate with Christ in his Prayer? And how we shall
answer it to our Savior, when he shall come to be our Judge, that we have
indeed renounced his Prayer, and have given occasion to sober men to fear that
we have also renounced his Communion? since it is evident, that no man can
renounce his Prayer, but must also by consequence renounce his Communion: But
let Saint Cyprian speak to this argument, that we may be sure to have a good
spokesman, who in his Book de Oratione Dominica, says thus: Qui facit vivere,
docuit and orare, ut dum prece and Oratione quam filius docuit apud Patrem
loquimur, facilius audiamur: He that made us to live, taught us to pray, that
speaking to the Father in the words of his Son, we might be sure not to speak
in vain: Again, Que enim potest esse magis Spiritalis oration, quam quae vere a
Christ^ nobis data est, a quo nobis and Spiritus Sanctus missus est? What
Prayer can be more spiritual then that which he gave us who has also given us
the holy Spirit? Lastly, Oremus itaque fratres dilectissimi sicut Magister Deus
docuit, Let us pray my beloved brethren, as God our master has taught us;
Agnosca^ Pater Filii sui verba cum precem facimus; qui habitat intus in
pectore, ipse sit and in voce: Let God the Father see his own Sons words in our
Prayers, and let him also that dwells in our hearts, be also in our tongues.
Here is such a threefold cord as is not to be broken, an argument drawn from
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, why we should often say Our Father, as
becomes dutiful children: That God the Father may own and hear us; God the Son
may pray with us; and God the Holy Ghost may accompany and assist us in our
Prayers.

SECT. IX. Whether a man that is not assured of his adoption in Christ can
truly and rightly by virtue of his Baptism only, (the outward seal of
adoption,) say to God Our Father, or can lawfully and laudably use the Lords
Prayer: That the assurance of our adoption, is according to the assurance of
our conjunction with our Savior Christ.
THere is nothing that so much prevails with God to give us his grace, as our
frequent and fervent praying; and nothing that so much calls upon us to make a
right use of Grace when it is given, as our serious consideration and devout use
of the Lords most holy Prayer: for he that does cordially say to God Our
Father, will not easily forget the duty and, obedience that belongs to a son;
according to that truly Theological observation of Saint Chrysostom in his
nineteenth Sermon upon the Epistle to the Romans, (...): When in our own
Prayers we say to God Our Father, we do not only call to mind his great grace
and goodness, but also our own obligation to virtue and righteousness, that we
may not do any thing unworthy of so honorable a descent or alliance: For
though the title of Father belong to God by virtue of the creation, (in which
respect we profess to believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and
earth) yet in the Lords most holy Prayer it is understood of him only as he is
our Father by adoption; having made us that were his enemies, sons in his
eternal Son, and called us first to be heirs of his promises, and at last to
be heirs of his Kingdom: So that in saying to God Our Father, we do implicitly
and virtually give him thanks for our happy estate through his eternal Son,
that though by nature we were the children of wrath, yet by him we are made the
children of God; that though in our selves we were enemies, yet in our Savior
we are made sons: and we do beseech him to confirm in us this assurance we are
his children, by framing us daily more and more to the Image of his only
begotten Son, whilst he fills our souls with heavenly affections, and our
lives with a heavenly conversation, such as may show all manner of dutifulness
to our Father, and all manner of love to our brethren: This happy estate we
acknowledge he conveyed unto us in our Baptism, when he made us Christians,
that is to say, members of Christ, children of God, and inheriters of the
Kingdom of heaven; as our own Church teaches us; or when we put on Christ,
(Gal. 3. 27.) or when God sanctified and cleansed us with the washing of water
by the word, (Ephesians. 5. 26.) when he saved us by the washing of regeneration,
and renewing of the Holy Ghost, (Tit. 3. 5.) as Saint Paul teaches the Church:
that is, to say yet in plainer terms, when God first made us his sons, and gave
us the privilege of calling him Father; For they that have not been baptized
into Christ, have no right to say unto God Our Father; for whence should they
have it, being born the children of wrath, and not yet incorporated into
Christ, to be made the children of God? Wherefore it was not lawful heretofore
for the Catechumeni or such as were not yet baptized, to say the Lords Prayer,
as not being yet exempted from the dominion and power of the Devil, and
consequently not reckoned or reputed amongst Gods children; whence that
memorable saying of Saint Ambrose. (lib. 5. de Sacram. cap. 4.) Primus Sermo,
quanta sit gratia! O homo faciem tuam non audebas ad coelum attollere, and
subito accepisti gratiam Christi; ex malo servo factus es bonus filius: The
first word of this Prayer, sc. our Father, how much grace and favor does it
import? Thou did not dare lift up thine eyes to heaven, and thou did
suddenly receive the grace of Christ; thy sins were forgiven thee, and of a bad
servant thou becamest a good son: Ergo attolle oculos ad Patrem qui te per
lavacrum genuit, ad Patrem qui te per filium redemit, and dic Pater noster;
Therefore (now being baptized) lift up thine eyes to thy Father who has
regenerated thee, (by Baptism) who has redeemed thee by his Son, and say Our
Father: concluding he had no right to say so before he was baptized; and
doubtless the Text which says, The Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the Counsel
of God against themselves, being not baptized with the Baptism of John, Luke 7.
30. does much more declare, that those Christians do reject the counsel of God
against themselves, who will not be baptized with the Baptism of Christ: Ergo
Baptismus consilium Dei est: Quanta est gratia, ubi est concilium Dei? Audi
ergo; nam ut in hoc seculo nexus Diaboli solveretur, inventum est quomodo homo
vivus moreretur, and vivus resurgeret, says the same Saint Ambrose, (lib. 2.
de Sacramentis cap. 6.) Therefore is Baptism the counsel of God: And how great
is the Grace of God where we have the counsel of God? Hear it therefore; For
God that he might destroy in man the power of the Devil (that is sin) whiles he
is yet in this world, has in his counsel appointed Baptism, whereby being yet
alive, he might both dye and rise again; dye unto sin, and rise again to
newness of life. This is the happy estate we acknowledge God conveyed unto us
in our Baptism, (for other visible conveyance there is none) when he made us
Christians; for then he gave us the right of calling him Father: and we by
saying unto him Our Father, do beseech him to confirm this some happy estate
unto us, in making us good Christians: But how shall those that are bad
Christians, and cannot be assured of the adoption of sons, (as having defiled
themselves since their Baptism,) say unto God, Our Father? I answer if they
heartily repent, and desire to be adopted, and to become children of God, they
may say so (by virtue of their desire) though they have not yet actually
received the inward seal, and have actually defaced the outward seal of their
adoption: wherefore those only have no right to their Pater noster, but do
hypocritically and falsely say the Lords Prayer, who neither are the children of
God by adoption, nor desire to be so: But those that heartily desire to be
adopted (supposing they have been baptized) may rightly and truly say to God,
Our Father; because they are accepted as sons in Christ, though not in
themselves. I will rise and go to my Father, and say unto him, Father I have
sinned, says the Prodigal Son, Luke 14. 18. He was not yet risen he was not
yet gone, he did only desire and resolve to rise and go to him, and this desire
and resolution gives him a right of calling God Our Father, as if he had still
continued a dutiful son; our blessed Savior teaching us in that chapter, both
by his Doctrine and by his example, that God is ready to receive sinners, when
they truly desire to draw near to him. The Pharisees and the Scribes murmured
at the example, but they were ashamed to murmur at the Doctrine; The lost sheep
and the lost groat had opened their eyes; but the lost son was enough to open
their hearts; the lost sheep and the lost groat had made way in their
apprehensions for the receiving of the lost son, when he returned to his
Father; but the lost son was enough to make way in their hearts for their own
returning, that they also might be received: they were convinced that there was
joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that repents, (ver.
10. And they were ashamed least what was the Angels joy, should be thought
their sorrow: Therefore though they were still enemies to their own souls, in
not embracing this Doctrine, yet they were ashamed to show themselves enemies
to other men's souls in gainsaying it; nay indeed to show themselves enemies to
God himself, who must be excluded out of heaven, or he cannot be excluded out
of thy joy; for it is said, ver. 6. Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that
repents: And our Savior having taught us to say to God Our Father which art
in heaven, will not have us exclude him out of this joy, which is proper to
those in heaven; nay indeed the parable directly includes him in it, ver. 32.
It Was meet that we should make merry and be glad; and without doubt God is so
well pleased in the righteousness of his Son, that he joys to see penitent
sinners made righteous in him; and willingly bestows upon them his
righteousness, when with unfeigned lips, and penitent hearts they call upon him
for it; For as through Christ's satisfaction they have a right to the adoption
of Sons, so also through his intercession, (which is always ready to accompany
his own prayer) they are sure to obtain that right, if they continue heartily
praying for themselves, that so they may have the benefit of his intercession:
For as far as we are made partakers of Christ, so far can we truly in his merit
and with his Spirit, say unto God Our Father: For the right of filiation
belongs Originally to Christ, and but dirivatively to us: He is the Son of God
in himself, we are the Sons of God in and through him; and it is happy for us
that we are so; for else we could not but fear the loss of our adoption, as
often as we did find the loss of our obedience: For there can be no assurance
of such an adoption as shall last till we be instated in our inheritance, from
our selves, but only from our Savior Christ: God indeed is pleased to call
good men his sons; but none was ever called the Son of God, with this promise
and Prerogative, that God always was and always would be his Father, but only
Christ: or else Saint Paul's Argument would lose much of its strength, when he
proves our Savior Christ to be above all the Angels, because God had not said
to any of them, but had said only to him, Thou art my Son; And again, I will be
to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son: For Angels and men are so the
Sons of God, as to be his Sons in Christ, not in themselves; and therefore no
sooner nor no longer his sons then they were and are in Christ: For which cause
we can be no farther sure of our adoption in Christ, then we are sure of our
conjunction and communion with him: and that not of a corporal conjunction in
the same flesh, but of a spiritual conjunction in the same Spirit: For our
corporal conjunction with Christ does not only make us capable of being adopted
in him; but it is our spiritual conjunction with him that gives unto us the
seal and benefit of our adoption whereby we are joined with Christ in the same
mystical body here, and shall be joined with him in the same glorious body
hereafter: Thus may every good Christian says with Saint Paul, Phil. 1. 21.
For to me to live is Christ; and to die is gain; to me to live is Christ,
because I am now with him in the communion of the same Mystical body; to me to
die is gain, because I shall hereafter be with him in the communion of the same
glorious body: There needs no dissolution for my union with Christ in the same
mystical body, but only of my sinful being, the dissolution of sin from my
soul; but for my union with Christ in the same glorious body, there needs also
a dissolution of my natural being, a dissolution of my soul from my body: I
will then labor for that union with my blessed Savior in my life, which will
keep me from the fear of my own dissolution at my death: For I shall not make a
right use of his corporal union with me, unless I lay it for the ground and
rise of my spiritual union with him, whereby to be united with my Savior, not
only in the same natural, but also in the same mystical body inchoately in his
Church militant, consummately in his Church Triumphant: And this is the way for
me so to welcome the Son of God in his Nativity, as much more to see and enjoy
him in his immortality, Amen.

Christ admired in his Passion.
I Cannot admire my Savior in his sufferings, unless I admire him in his
person, which made him liable to suffer; and in his propitiation, satisfaction,
application, whereby I have the benefit of his sufferings: And in all these
respects has the holy Apostle Saint Paul admired my Savior for me, 1 Cor. 5.
7. when he said, for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us: for these few
words afford no less then four considerations of our blessed Savior; the first
is of Christ in his person, for Christ; the second is of Christ in his
propitiation, our Passover; the third is of Christ in his satisfaction, is
sacrificed: the fourth is of Christ in his application, for us: So that I have
a very good precedent for making these four considerations of Christ, the four
Chapters of my ensuing discourse.

CAP. I. Christ admired in his Person.
SECT. I. That the eye of man cannot be fixed with comfort upon God in himself,
but only upon God in Christ.
THE contemplation of God in himself, is not a ground of joy to us on earth,
though it is to the Saints and Angels in heaven: not that the beatifical vision
does not consist in seeing God, but that the eye of mortal man must be
strengthened before it can see him, and the eye of sinful man must be cleansed,
before it can see him with comfort, and without confusion: for if Aristotle
could allege his (...), noctu^ oculus ad solemn, an Owl or Bat looking upon the
Sun, to excuse the imperfect contemplation of some inferior Truths: how much
more may we plead this excuse for our imperfect contemplation of the first
truth? since there is much more in this case, an Owl or a Bat looking upon the
Sun: for there is not only a weak but also a sinful eye looking upon God: A
weak eye, because not accustomed to light: A sinful eye because not
unaccustomed to darkness: Such a weak and sinful eye is it wherewith man in
this life looks upon the Sun of righteousness; an eye which cannot steadfastly
behold him for its weakness; an eye which cannot comfortably behold him for its
sinfulness: Therefore man whiles he is clothed with sin and mortality, must
look on God not in God but in man; not in the majesty of the Spirit, but in the
humility of the flesh: or else he will be more confounded then comforted with
the vision. The Apostles saw but a glimps of our Saviors Divinity in the
transfiguration, and they fell to the ground, Mat. 17. 16. and what then do we
think they would have done, had they seen the full luster and brightness of the
Sun of righteousness? Jacob tells Laban of the God of Abraham, but only of the
fear of his Father Isaac, Genesis 31. 42. The reason we may conceive to be this,
because Abraham was dead, but Isaac was yet alive; for it is impossible but the
Divine majesty should strike terror and consternation to the most upright man
that is, whiles he is clogged and burdened with flesh, and much more with sin:
And this observation does Solomon Jarchi intimate in his gloss upon the place,
saying thus, (...) God is called the Fear (not the God) of Isaac, because he
does not appropriate his name to just men whiles they are yet alive: The reason
cannot be, That they are less his Favorites, but that they are not so much
capable of his Favor; he is the same God to the living and to the dead, but
the living have him for their fear, because they are in a state of weakness and
unworthiness; the dead have him for their love and their reward, because they
are in a state of glory and of blessedness: And therefore said God himself to
Moses, No man shall see me and live, Exodus 33. 20. If we see God in himself,
that sight will destroy our life: but if we see him in his Son, that will
preserve it; for as the Crystal glass may afford much glittering light, but
not any delightful reflection to the beholder, till it be clouded and darkened
with a back of some grosser metal; so the Divinity of Christ may afford many
glorious speculations of his Majesty, but no one comfortable reflection of his
mercy till it be as it were darkened and shadowed with his humanity: Then me
thinks I can easily (without the help of a Crucifix) see in him a head bowed
down to hear me, an eye carefully looking after me, an hand stretched out to
defend me, a mouth open to call me, and a bosom as open to receive me: So that
I cannot but still desire to see my Savior in the flesh, though not with the
eye of my flesh, but with the eye of my faith* for if I see him in God he is my
consternation; but if I see him in man, he is my salvation.

SECT. II. In what sense Saint Paul cared not to know Christ in the flesh; and
yet Christ in the flesh only is comfortably known.
IT is impossible that a good Christian should either desire not to know Christ
because he loves him, or not to know him in the flesh, because so he has most
reason to love him: and yet Saint Paul has said, Henceforth know we no man
after the flesh, yea though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now
henceforth know we him no more, 2 Cor. 5. 16. But sure the Apostle speaks not
positively, but comparatively: Henceforth know we no man after the flesh, not
so as to forget the relations and substance of the flesh in others, which we
carry about our selves, for that were to forget the Law of nature: But so, as
not to overprize the seeming pre-eminencies, but indeed real vanities of the
flesh, (beauty, honor, riches and the like) when they are destitute of the
gifts and graces of the Spirit, as if Christian love and conversation more
concerned the outward then the inward man; for that were to forget the Law of
Grace: Thus we must know no man after the flesh, no not Christ himself, that is
in the external representation of his flesh, or more admiring the image of his
person, then the power of his Redemption: or in the external presence of his
flesh, as desirous to enter a carnal instead of a spiritual communion with him,
and bringing rather our mouths then our hearts to feed upon his precious body
and blood: Thus must we no more know Christ himself after the flesh; but yet we
may not, we must not forget the substance of his flesh, in which the Son of God
and the Son of man is but one Christ, unless we will forget the substance of
our own salvation: For in that same flesh he was our Redeemer, in that same
flesh he still is our Mediator and Intercessor: In that same flesh was his head
crowned with thorns, that ours might be crowned with glory: in that same flesh
be often bowed down his head to look upon us; he once suffered his feet to be
fastened to stay for us; his hands to be stretched out to embrace us, and his
side to be pierced to send forth water and blood, his (two blessed Sacraments)
to cleanse and strengthen us: by that same flesh was he made liable to
suffering, and in that same flesh did he actually suffer all those things,
which at first bought the purchase, and which do still bring to us the joy of
our salvation.

SECT. III. True knowledge of, and Faith in Christ, is not without true
knowledge of, and Faith in the blessed Trinity: That the Protestants Faith; The
great loveliness of Christ in the flesh, as (...) as God and man, and the great
mysteries of his two natures in one person.
KNowledge in the natural man exalts him above other men; but knowledge in the
good Christian, (who always loves what he knows of Christ,) exalts him above
himself; By knowing natural truths I do improve my reason; but by knowing
supernatural truths I do also improve my Religion. The improvement of my reason
exalts me above other men; but the improvement of my Religion, exalts me above
my self: And what knowledge can improve my Religion, but only the knowledge of
Christ, who is both the Author and the Finisher of my Faith? Therefore let me
ever say with Saint Paul, I count all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3. 8. for indeed truly to know Christ
in his person, is truly to know the whole Christian Faith in the ground and
substance of it: For what is the ground or substance of our Christian Faith,
but that which Saint Paul has set down, 2 Cor. 5. 19. That God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them;
which is in effect a short sum of the Apostles Creed; for that treats of
nothing but of God and of Christ reconciling us to God, and of the benefits of
that reconciliation, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and
the life everlasting: Accordingly Aquinas makes it equally necessary to
salvation to believe explicitly the mystery of the blessed Trinity, and to
believe explicitly the mystery of the incarnation of Christ: 22 ae. qu. 2.
art. 7. and 8. There is an absolute necessity (says he) of believing the
Incarnation of Christ, for that is the only way for a man to come to eternal
blessedness, because it is said, Act. 4. 12. Neither is there salvation in any
other; for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved: And there is (says he) as absolute a necessity of believing the
blessed Trinity; for the Incarnation of Christ cannot be explicitly believed
without faith in the Trinity; for we cannot believe that the Son of God did
take our flesh upon him, but we must acknowledge God the Father, and God the
Son; and we cannot believe that he took this flesh of a Virgn, by the operation
of the Holy Spirit, but we must acknowledge God the Holy Ghost; so that truly
to believe and confess the incarnation of Christ, is truly to believe and
confess God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: Wherefore it was not an objection
but a calumny in him that said of the Protestants, For these good Gospellers
have a faith and a justifying faith, whereby they apprehend eternal life
without Father, Son and Holy Ghost, without Christ and his Passion, or any of
those other matters which are rather subtle points of the Papists historical
faith, then of the lively justifying faith, wherewith these Evangelical
Brethren in all security are warranted of the certain favor of God in this
life, and assured glory in the next (Reynolds against Whitaker, p. 282.) for no
true Protestant does believe, and indeed no true Christian can believe that to
be a true Faith in Christ, which believes not the Holy and Undivided Trinity,
and all other Articles of the Apostles Creed; For such a faith cannot justify
it self, much less can it justify the man that has it; wherefore Protestants
do not, dare not say, That justifying Faith does not believe the Trinity and
Judgment to come, as well as the Merits of Christ and the forgiveness of sins:
They only say, the former truths are believed with the greater astonishment and
admiration, the latter truths with the greater affiance or affection; but
neither with a greater certainty or confidence then the other. Fides ex ae quo
assentit omnibus articulis fidei quoad certitudinem, sed non quoad modum: Faith
does equally assent to all the Articles of the Creed, as to the certainty of
assent, though not as to the manner of assenting: The sublim truth of the
Trinity she believes with admiration; the comfortable truths of Christ's dying
for sinners and the forgiveness of sins, she believes with joy and consolation;
the dreadful truths of hell and judgment to come, she believes with sorrow and
contristation: but all the truths contained in the Creed, whether sublime, or
comfortable, or dreadful, she believes with one and the same certainty or
undoubted confidence; And those who teach us that to believe in Jesus Christ
our Lord is the proper act of justifying faith, (for to believe the forgiveness
of sins is rather an effect then a cause of justification,) do not confine our
justifying faith merely to the belief of this one Article, but do only profess;
that though true faith has as many acts as objects, and has as many objects
as supernatural truths revealed from God, yet it justifies the sinner only by
this one act of believing in Christ, and relying wholly upon his merits and
mediation; Thus do we desire with Saint Paul to be found in Christ, not having
our own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith, Phil. 3. 9. But we dream
not of a righteousness either by a vain or by a false faith; either by a vain
Faith that believes not entirely with affection; or by a false faith that
believes not truly, without mistake or deception: Wherefore Antitrinitarian and
Antichristian may go for all one in the Protestants, as well as in the Papists
account; for indeed they have always gone for one in the account of the
Catholic Church. We have heard Aquinas speaking the sense of the Western, let
us now hear Damascene speaking the sense of the Eastern Churches; for so he
tells us in his third Book de Orthodox^ fide, and fifth chapter; That the two
chief heads of the Christian Faith, are (...), that is to say, the Doctrine of
the blessed Trinity, which he calls (...), because it treats only of God; and
the Doctrine of the incarnation of Christ, which he calls (...), because it sets
forth the wonderful dispensations of God about the salvation of men: And these
two heads he not only joins, but also compares together in one chapter, showing
wherein they agree, and wherein they differ: They agree (says he) in four
particulars. 1. That each article is a mystery. 2. That each article is made
known to us only by Divine revelation. 3. That neither article can be
sufficiently explained in this life. 4. That either article calls for our Faith
to believe it, not for our understanding to scan it; And they differ, (says
he) in these two particulars. 1. That in the Trinity there is one substance,
and three Persons; but in Christ three substances, the soul, the body, and the
Divinity, but one person. 2. That in the Trinity there is another and another
person (...), for the Father is one person, the Son another, the Holy Ghost a
third: but not another and another thing, (...), for Father Son and Holy Ghost
are but one God: But in Christ there is another and another thing, to wit, the
Divine nature, and the humane; but not another and another person, for these
two natures of God and man, make but one Christ.

Accordingly the same Greek Father tells us most excellently ( lib. 3. cap. 7.)
that though Christ was twice born, yet he was but once a son; he had indeed two
Nativities as well as two Natures; one from his Father, which was eternal,
(...), above cause, reason, time, and Nature; the other temporal, (...) for our
sakes, (...) after our manner, as to the time of his birth; from the time he
was conceived; but (...) above our manner, as to the way both of his birth and
conception; yet notwithstanding these two different Nativities, as well as two
different Natures, we must say that Christ was but one Son, or but once a Son;
for to say that he was twice a Son, or two Sons, were to say that he had two
subsistences, and consequently was two persons: wherefore the Council of
Ephesus did justly decree that the blessed Virgin should be called (...) The
Mother of God, because the Manhood which our Savior took from her, had no
other personal subsistence but only in the Son of God.

I will not here insist upon those four words, which in all probability made
the four first general Councils to be received as four new Gospels: The council
of Nice defining (...), that our Savior Christ was truly God, against the
Arrians: The Council of Constantinople defining (...), that he was perfectly
man, against the Apollinarians: The Council of Ephesus defining (...); that he
was indivisibly God and man in one person, against the Nestorians: and The
Council of Chalcedon, defining (...), that he was distinctly and inconfusedly
God and man in two natures, against the Eutychians: To which four words all the
Doctrine concerning the Person of Christ may be reduced; and by which all the
heresies that oppose that Doctrine may be refuted: Nor will I insist upon the
Creed of the Council of Chalcedon, which alone has set down five words to show
the manner of the union of God and man in one Christ, that it was, 1. (...)
without conversion of one into the other: 2. (...), without confusion of the
one with the other; 3. (...) without alteration or change of the one by the
other. 4. (...) without division of the one from the other. 5. (...) without
distance of the one from the other; for it is sufficient for my purpose to
declare that in the person of Christ was such an union of the two several
natures of God and man, as was without conversion of one into the other; for
God was not turned into man, nor man into God: without confusion of the one
with the other: for the Godhead was not confounded with the manhood; nor the
manhood with the Godhead; and without division of the one from the others:
for God is not to be separated from man, nor man from God: In so much that we
may boldly and truly say, and therefore boldly because truly, that this Jesus
Christ in our humane flesh is the second Person of the most holy blessed and
glorious Trinity, not that our flesh is coessentially or consubstantially of
the Trinity: but that it is hypostatically or personally of it; (...), as the
Greeks distinguish, not in, for, or of it self, by virtue of its own essence;
but in, for, and of the Son of God, with whom it is personally united; so that
in one Christ we may contemplate and must confess all the beauty and loveliness
both of heaven and earth; The beauty of heaven is God; The beauty of earth is
man; the beauty of heaven and earth together, is this God-Man.

CAP. II. Christ admired in his Propitiation.
SECT. I. The manner of knowing Divine truths, what it ought to be, and the
great benefit of knowing Christ in his Propitiation; He that will read the
Scripture to the benefit of his soul, must have Christ crucified in his
thoughts.
THough in speculatives the bare act of knowledge makes a man learned, yet not
so in practicks; there the chiefest thing that advances our learning is the
manner of knowing: And Christianity being chiefly a practical Science, it is not
the bare knowledge of Christ, but the manner of knowing him, that makes a man a
well grounded Christian: Hence Saint Paul says to the Ephesians, But ye have
not so learned Christ, (Ephesians. 4. 20) that is, so as not to practice him; he
looks not only after their knowledge of Christ, but also after their manner of
knowing him, which he would have to be such as might work upon their lives and
conversations: Accordingly he advises the Colossians, that as they had
received Christ Jesus the Lord, so they would walk in him; for that was their
only way to be rooted and built up in Christ, and stablished in the faith,
abounding therein with thanksgiving: Col. 2. 6, 7. Excellently Saint Bernard,
like a very good Divine, and a far better Christian, (Sermon 36. in Cant.)
Modus sciendi est ut scias quo ordine, quo studio, quo fine quaeque nosse
operteat; quo ordine, ut id prius quod maturius ad salutem; quo studio, ut id
ardentius quod vehementius ad amorem; quo fine, ut non ad inanem gloriam, aut
curiositatem, aut aliud quid simile, sed tantum ad ^dificationem tuam vel
proximi: The manner of knowing Divine truths, is this, that we know them in a
right order, with a right zeal, and for a right end; The right order is to know
that first which first procures salvation: The right zeal is to desire to know
that most which most enflameth our affections: And the right end is to use all
our knowledge to edification; and in these three respects the knowledge of
Christ in his Propitiation, does challenge our best endeavors that we may gain
it, and our greatest contentedness when we have gained it: because this
knowledge does most procure our salvation, most inflame our affections, most
conduce to our edification: Therefore Saint Paul said to the Corinthians, that
he determined not to know any thing among them, save Jesus Christ and him
crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 2. That is to say, 1. Not to know any thing before Christ
crucified; for he would have that knowledge first in order, which was most
necessary to their salvation; that is, the knowledge of God, not in himself,
but in his Son, not as our maker, but as our redeemer. 2. Not to know any thing
with the same activity and fervency of spirit, as Christ crucified; for he
would have that knowledge most predominant in their hearts, which most inflamed
their affections, and that was the knowledge of Christ upon the Cross,
overcoming the power of hell, and opening the gates of heaven, which cannot but
beget an immortal love of Christ in all those souls which truly consider what
it was to be under the fear of death, what it is to have an assured hope of
everlasting life. 3. And lastly, not to know any thing but with relation and
subordination to Christ crucified; for he would have that knowledge chiefest in
their aims and intentions, which alone could make all other knowledge tend to
theit edification; And such was the knowledge of Christ crucified; for if
Christ's Cross pass not through the whole Alphabet of our Divinity, all the
words we can use will signify nothing to a sin-sick soul, which must first be
healed, (and what balm can heal a wounded Spirit, but only the blood of
Christ?) before it can be saved: yea though we speak with the tongues of men
and Angels, and show not this charity, this love of our Savior to our
perishing souls, we shall become but as sounding brass, or as tinkling Cymbals,
make a great noise to very little or small purpose: Therefore does an excellent
late Divine, ( Zanchys by name) advise all men when they go to read the
Scriptures, to have Christ in their thoughts, if they desire to profit by their
reading; for so they will be sure to find nothing in the Text to make them
either Heretics or Schismatics, but very much, to make them good Christians,
and zealous in the love and practice of good Christianity: Aedificat ad
gehennam, was an improper speech of the Canonist, yet we find it in Gratian, in
his decree; for to edify to damnation is to build downwards, that is indeed to
destroy and raze all building; but aedificat ad salutem, is properly spoken, to
edify to salvation, for that building still rises upwards, till it come to the
heavenly Jerusalem: And the reading of the Scriptures, with Christ crucified
before our eyes, will thus edify us.

SECT. II. Christ set down in the Scripture as our Propitiation, under the
Title of our Passover: And what that signifies to our souls.
SAint Paul calls Christ our Passover, 1 Cor. 5. 7. Pascha nostrum; the word
in the Hebrew from whence this Pascha is derived is, (...) Transitus; and
Christ is called Pascha, i. e. Transitus, Quia per eum transimus ab host ad
partrem, a Tenebris ad lucem, a reatu ad gratiam, a Poena ad gloriam, a pugna
ad victoriam; says Durand. Christ is called our Pass or Passover in five
respects; because by him we have passed from our Enemy to our Father, from
darkness to light, from sin to righteousness, from misery to glory, from a
combat to victory: The enemy was implacable, the darkness was uncomfortable,
the sin was full of deformity, the misery was full of vengeance, the combat was
full of danger; wherefore it was surely a most blessed Passage, whereby we
passed from this enemy to our Father to be reconciled and beloved: from this
darkness to light, to be rejoiced and comforted; from this deformity, and
vengeance, and danger, to a state of glory, of peace, and of security: And
hence the Latin Church has turned these words of Saint Paul forecited into an
Hymn, and appointed that Hymn to be sung for the first Hallelujah on every
Lords day from the Resurrection to the Ascension of our blessed Savior, who
was this our Passover, saying, Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus,
Alleluja; it aque epulemur in Azymis sinceritatis and veritatis, alleluja,
alleluja, alleluja; Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, allelujah;
therefore let us keep the feast with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth,
alleluja, alleluja, alleluja; There is certainly no superstition, but there is
a very great obligation for all Christians to sing such an Alleluja as this,
for which we have so excellent a precedent, Rev. 19. 1. I heard a great voice
of much people in heaven saying, Allelujah; salvation, and glory, and honor,
and power unto the Lord our God; and so say we, that the Church Militant may
join with the Church Triumphant, in one and the same Communion of praise and
thanksgiving to our Almighty and most Merciful Father, not only for that true
and righteous are his judgments, but also, and much rather, for that great and
many are his mercies, his inestimable and undeserved mercies, in providing for
us such a Passover whereby we might pass from sin and misery, to
righteousness, and bliss, and eternal glory; and for causing us to pass to
himself through his only begotten Son, for as much as there was no other way
for men to come to God, but through that man who came from God.

SECT. III. Christ set down in the Scripture as our Propitiation, under the
title of the Paschal Lamb; and how many excellent Doctrines and Comforts of
Christianity are to be learned from that title.
MEN and Angels might stand amazed to see so much mercy where they had seen so
little innocence, were it not that they could not but see so much merit, where
they had seen so much mercy. No wonder then if this mercy was contrary to our
doings, when the merit was according to his doings and sufferings, who died for
our sins, and rose again to make us righteous: He is brought as a Lamb to the
slaughter, said the Prophet Isaiah some hundred of years before he was actually
slain, Isa. 53. 7. But he comes nearer the fountainhead of this mercy, who
tells us of the Lamb that was slain before the foundation of the world, 1
Pet. 1. 20. Wherefore we must needs confess that the Church of Christ well knew
the powerful invocation, and desired we should find the comfortable persuasion
of this mercy thus purchased for us, when it thus taught us to pray for it, O
Lamb of God that take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us: For the
Son of God was called the Lamb of God for no other reason, but because he was
slain as a sacrifice to take away the sins of men: And if we shall compare the
Paschal Lamb and our Savior Christ both together, in the most remarkable
circumstances, we shall then see how properly our blessed Savior was called
the Lamb of God. First the Paschal Lamb was one of the flock, Exodus 12. 5. So
Christ was one of us, and dwelt among us, Saint John 1. 14. And the word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us; This consideration, That the word was made
flesh, as it may inflame our devotions because our Savior is in our own flesh
to pity us, and to relieve us; so it must cool and allay our distempers, That
he is in that same flesh which we so easily suffer in our selves to be
excessively passionate, and either distracted by sinful factions, or
distempered by sinful affections: So that now what sins I commit in the flesh,
I commit not only against that flesh which in my self goes creeping and
growling on the earth; but also against that flesh, which in my Savior is
exalted into heaven, and there sits at the right hand of God: This is the
Apostles most pathetical argument against all the sins of uncleanness, and
should be mine in the like case or temptation, Know you not that your bodies
are the members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ and make
them the members of an Harlot? God forbid, 1 Cor. 6. 15. as if he had said, I
must abandon and abhor all uncleanness of the flesh, in that thereby I shall
sin against mine own body; How much more in that thereby I shall sin against my
Saviors body?

Secondly, the Paschal Lamb was without blemish; so Christ was without sin, the
only spot and blemish of the soul; In peccato sunt reatus and macula, says the
School: All sin as it brings a guiltiness with it, so it leaves a spot and
blemish after it: Our Savior Christ was without this spot, and we must labor
to be without it likewise, by being made conformable to him: So should we
rightly understand the hidden mystery of predestination, more by our practice
then we can possibly by our speculations or disputes, if every one of us would
really endeavor to fulfill that part of it, To be conformed to the image of
his Son; Romans 8. 29. For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his Son: The great quarrel of Christendom at this day
is about conformity, that all Churches will not be conformed to one; And yet
even that conformity, if it were brought to pass, would not, could not put an
end to other differences; But here is such a conformity that would soon end all
quarrels whatsoever, if men would make it their study and business, to conform
themselves to the image of the Son of God: If men would seriously endeavor a
conformity with Christ, by holiness, meekness, patience, obedience, (virtues so
much out of our use, that they are almost out of our knowledge, but quite out
of our remembrance) they would never be Non-conformists in any lawful thing,
nor require conformity in any that is unlawful, much less would they brand one
another as reprobates; but every one would strive to make his own Election
sure, and Hope well of another, and so we should all forth with prove unerring
students and unblamable proficients in that grand controverted Doctrine of
Predestination; if we did but truly follow the meekness of this Lamb.

Thirdly, the Paschal Lamb was slain as a memorial of the Jews deliverance from
the bondage of Egypt: So was Christ's death our deliverance from the bondage of
sin and Satan: Let me then stand fast in that spiritual liberty wherewith
Christ has made me free, and be no less afraid of returning to my former sins,
then the Israelites were of returning to their former bondage, always
remembering that dreadful sentence in the Apostle, who in that he had fallen
himself, was the more careful to keep others from a relapse, the latter end is
worse with them then the beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

Fourthly, the blood of the Paschal Lamb sprinkled on the door posts, made the
destroying Angel pass over the Israelites, when he smote the Egyptians; So the
blood of Christ sprinkled upon our souls, preserves us from the destroying
Angel: A mercy to be remembered with an everlasting thankfulness, and to be
commemorated with an everlasting thanksgiving; for this is a part of the new
song in heaven, Rev. 5. 9. Thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God with
thy blood. What was the ground of their thanksgiving in heaven, must be the
ground of our supplication on earth, that we lose not the benefit of this blood
which is the price of our Redemption: that neither through the infirmities of
the flesh, nor the anguishes of the Spirit, nor the backslidings of the world,
nor the temptations of the Devil, we be drawn or driven from faith in the blood
of our dearest Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And accordingly we must take care
that we be not driven or drawn from the outward profession and exercise of this
faith, least we come by degrees to be driven or drawn from the inward
settlement and assurance of it.

Fifthly, the Paschal Lamb was to be eaten with bitter herbs, and without
leaven; so Christ is to be received with repentance, and without malice or
hypocrisy; which is the most common, but the most unsavory leaven of the
soul; for a small parcel of either of these will infect and corrupt all our
best Religious performances, even as a little leaven leaventh the whole lump:
Accordingly the Apostle is most industrious to chase this leaven out of our
hearts, when he bids us to keep the feast, not with old leaeven, that is,
the leaven of hypocrisy, when we pretend to be new men but are not: Nor with
the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity
and truth, 1 Cor. 5. 8. (...), in azymis sinceritatis and veritatis; for (...),
sincerity is a righteous judgment against the sophistications or delusions of
malice; and (...), Truth is a righteous practice (for there is a moral, as well
as a Metaphysical truth) against the prevarications of Hypocrisy: They
generally go both together, hypocrisy in the tongue and malice in the heart,
fair pretenses and foul intentions; The hypocrite being most commonly
malicious, as having the Devil in his heart; and the malicious needing the
hypocrite to disguise his malice, by seeming to be an Angel in his tongue: But
what ever the leaven be, whether these or any other infectious sins, our care
must be first to find it, and then to cleanse it: wherein it will not be amiss
if we follow the great scrupulosity of the Jews, who to the intent that not so
much as the suspicion of leaven should be amongst them at their feast of the
Passover, did first cleanse their ordinary vessels of it; then searched every
cranny or chink of their houses after it, then burnt all they found, then
execrated or cursed all that might possibly be left behind, which they could
not find; So should every one of us keep the feast of our Christian Passover,
cleanse our vessels from the leaven of all sin and wickedness, then search the
corners of our hearts to find it out; then burn and consume what we have found,
then detest and abandon what we cannot find, crying out with a hearty sorrow
and repentance never to be repented of, Who can tell how often he offends, O
cleanse thou me from my secret faults, Psalm. 19. 12. Secret not only to others,
but also to my self: He that so heartily repents of the sins he knows not, does
much more repent of those he knows: And indeed the Paschal Lamb might not be
eaten without bitter herbs, nor can Christ be received without sorrow and
bitterness of Spirit, so as to become the nourishment of our souls; and those
men are grossly mistaken, who think they can receive him by faith alone, without
repentance; for who dares preach Christ otherwise then he preached himself? and
that was by repentance; So says the Evangelist, Jesus began to preach and to
say, Repent, Mat. 4. 17. We cannot fancy, but we may weep our selves into our
Saviors mercy; nor can we truly rely upon his righteousness by faith, till we
have first bewailed our own unrighteousness by repentance: And indeed the
strange faith that some of late have desired and devised, (and therefore
devised because they desired it) of being in Christ whiles they be in malice,
injustice, disobedience, profaneness, perverseness, and other such like grievous
sins, is much like the strange woman spoken of in the Proverbs, Her lips drop
as a honeycomb, and her mouth is sweeter then oil, but her end is bitter as
wormwood, Porv. 5. 3, 4. for such a faith begins in honey and oil, promising
salvation with much sweetness and smoothness, but its end is as bitter as
wormwood, for it brings death and damnation upon the soul.

Sixthly and lastly, The Paschal Lamb was to be eaten whole, and to be eaten
only by the circumcised; So Christ is to be taken whole, in all the Doctrines
of the Christian faith; That which he has commanded is as necessary to
salvation, as that which he has promised; and we may not expect to inherit his
promises, if we neglect and disobey his commands; not a bone of his natural
body was broken by the Jew; nor may a bone of his spiritual or of his mystical
body be broken by the Christian: They brake the legs of the malefactors who
were not yet dead, but they brake not the legs of Christ, (Saint John 19.) so
may the Magistrate break the legs, and stop the proceedings of malefactors,
(especially if they be not yet dead to their sins by a hearty repentance and
amendment of life) but he may not break the legs of Christ, or crush any of
those whom Christ has appointed to be the supporters of Christianity: Again,
we must remember, that unless the Jew was circumcised, he had no right to eat
of the Paschal Lamb: So we Christians may not hope to receive Christ, unless we
be spiritually circumcised in our ears and in our hearts; in our ears to hear
his voice, in our hearts to obey it; Else it were possible for us so to receive
God the Son, as to resist God the Holy Ghost; for so says Saint Stephen, Act.
7. 51. ye stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost: The uncircumcised in hearts and ears cannot be the
receivers of Christ, because they are the resisters of his Spirit; because they
resist the Holy Ghost.

SECT. IV. The great virtue of this Propitiation, and the great goodness,
wisdom, justice and power of God, in finding it for us, and giving it to us.
WHere shall a good Christian look for comfort but in the Word of comfort? what
word of comfort like that which proceeded immediately from the Comforter? And
what text so comfortable in that word, as that which assures us not only of God
the Holy Ghost, but also of God the Son to be our Assistant and Advocate to
intercede for us? For we may have the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and yet
say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, when we seriously consider how
often we have deserved to be forsaken: But there is nothing to discomfit or
dismay an offender, (though his offenses be never so many and great) if he may
be sure that his Judge will be his friend to absolve and to acquit him. Now we
all believe that the Son of God is to be our Judge, and therefore must needs be
most rejoiced with that saying that assures us, he will be our friend in the
Judgment; and that saying is recorded, 1 John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have
an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. No greater friend to a
poor Client, that has a bad cause, then a good Advocate to plead for him,
unless it be a favorable and friendly Judge to absolve him. And behold the
Penitent sinner has here both these joined in one; for the same Christ that is
his Advocate to plead for him, is also his Judge to absolve him: And therefore
he is called in the Greek (...), that is, a Comforter; the same title which is
given to the Holy Ghost, John 14. 16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give
you another Comforter* (...): not only an Advocate, but also a Comforter. The
Spirit of God is both; the Son of God is both to the true Penitent: The Spirit
is our Advocate to make intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be
uttered, Romans 8. 26. And he is our Comforter to assist us in our Temptations,
and to stengthen us against them: And so also is the Son our Advocate to make
intercession for us, with the Father: And our Comforter, in that the Father
will not refuse, nay more, cannot resist his intercession; For the same Christ
who is the Advocate to plead for penitent sinners, is also the propitiation for
their sins, to make good his own Plea, as it follows, and he is the
propitiation for our sins: So that as he is our Advocate to undertake our
cause, so he is our Comforter to assist and to deliver our souls: by one and
the same Plea defending us against the Devil, who will busily accuse us; and
delivering us from the fear of hell, which will be ready to receive us; in that
he is our Advocate to plead for us before him, and to prevail for us with him,
who alone is able to destroy both body and soul in hell: So that our blessed
Savior is our (...) in both senses, as it signifies an Advocate, and as it
signifies a Comforter: and indeed in one and the same respect as he is our
Mediator, is he both our Advocate and our Comforter: Our Advocate to plead our
cause, our Comforter to rescue and to free our persons: Wherefore we may with
reverence and without derogation to the Spirit of God, say of our Savior
Christ, That he is Paracletus super Paracletum, a Comforter beyond the
Comforter: For the Spirit of God is our Comforter to speak for us only in the
day of mercy, whiles we are speaking for our selves, that we may be able to
pray acceptably; but is not our propitiation to make our persons or our prayers
to be accepted: But the Son of God is our Advocate to speak for us, when we
shall not be able to speak for our selves, even in the day of Judgment, when
all flesh must keep silence before God, according to that of holy Job; for how
should man be just with God? if he should contend with him, he cannot answer
one of a thousand; And he is also our Propitiation, to make both our persons
and our prayers accepted with God: And it is impossible he should not prevail
in making the intercession, who has already prevailed in making the atonement:
This is the inexpressible, the inestimable comfort of a distressed sinner, who
bewaileth his sins, and flies to the Son of God for mercy, that the same Jesus
now is, and will be at the last day his Advocate, who has already been his
propitiation: And this is a comfort, that men and Devils cannot deny unto us,
and therefore we may not deny it to our selves; For the sinner comes under
accusation no longer then tell his sin is expiated; but when that is fully
done, then he comes under absolution: wherefore since my sins are expiated by
my Savior, I will not fear that the Devils shall accuse me; for I have an
Advocate to answer their malice: I will not doubt but God will absolve me, for
I have a propitiation to satisfy his justice.

So that by this means Elies question, which otherwise is unanswerable, may be
fully and easily answered: But if a man sin against God, who shall entreat for
him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. for here is an Advocate that will entreat for us, if we put
our selves under his Patronage and Protection: And surely it is concerning this
Advocate that Saint Peter has spoken, Casting all your care upon him, for he
cares for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. All our care is or should be how to save our
souls; and therefore the first thing we should all do, is to put our selves in
such a condition that our blessed Savior may take care of us, that so we may
securely cast all our care upon him: Then will Saint Paul's Problem be turned
into a Position, Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods
Elect? it is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us: and that position will carry this sense, Good
Christians ought not to be afraid of condemnation, since they have so many sure
and certain arguments of Gods love and favor toward them; for none can justly
accuse them, because God himself, (before whom the accusation must be made)
has already absolved them; and none will be able to condemn them, because
Christ, (who alone is to be the Judge) dyed for them, to deliver their souls
from death; or rather is risen from the dead, to open to them the gate of
everlasting life: And he has power to give them life* for he is at the right
hand of God: and he has a will and a desire to give it, for he makes
intercession for us. We may reduce all these benefits and mercies to those four
heads, which Alensis says are the effects of our Saviors Passion, Effectus
Passionis Christi ponuntur quatuor; Primus, Justificatio a peccatis; Secundus,
Reconciliatio ad Deum; Tertius, Religatio potestatis Diaboli; Quartus, Apertio
januae Paradisi* (Par. 3. qu. 18. m. 6.) There are four effects of our blessed
Saviors Passion: the first is our Justification from sin* the second our
Reconciliation with God: the third is, the restraining of the power of the
Devil: the fourth is, the opening of the gate of heaven. O my soul, evermore
give him hearty thanks for this Passion, which has purged thy sins that did
both defile and oppress thee; which has satisfied and appeased thy God who was
angry with thee; which has stopped the Devils mouth that he cannot claim thee;
which has opened the gate of heaven, that it will receive thee. We now fully
see the virtue of this Propitiation; we are in the next place to consider the
great goodness, wisdom, justice, and power of God in finding it for us, and
giving it to us; wherein we shall do best to follow his method, who first put
the Divinity of the Greek Church into a Methodical System, and that was
Damascene, who lib. 3. de orth. fide, c. 1. says, That this giving of Christ
to be made our Propitiation, did in one and the same act, show the goodness,
the wisdom, the justice, and the power of God; (...) First the goodness of God,
in that the Creator did not despise the infirmity of his creature, but did
rather communicate therein, and take it upon himself; which should make us say
with great devotion, and greater thankfulness, O that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for the
children of men, Psalm 107. Words of thanksgiving which the Psalmist did not
think they could repeat too often, when he considered of man's temporal
preservation; and therefore sure we cannot repeat them often enough, when we
think of our eternal salvation, and of the infinite goodness of our Savior in
purchasing and procuring it for us.

Secondly the wisdom of God, That there was so miraculous a way found out to
pay the price of our Redemption, that he who was exalted in the highest and
could not be humbled, yet was so humbled to the lowest, as not to lose any jot
of his exaltation; (...).

Thirdly, the Justice of God, that though man was his choicest workmanship, and
after his own image, yet he would not pull him by violence from the Tyrant who
had unjustly got Dominion over him, but paid such a value for the redemption of
his captive, as was indeed above all valuation; which had in effect been said
many years before Damascene by Leo the great in one of his Christmas Sermons,
( Sermon. 2. de Nativ.) hanc potissimum consulendi viam elegit, qua ad
destruendum opus diaboli non virtute uteretur potentiae, sed ratione Justitiae:
He followed that counsel whereby he might destroy the Devils work, not by the
strength of his power, but by the reason of his Justice.

Fourthly, the power of God; for nothing could be an act of greater power, then
to make God become man, according to that of Saint Basil in his homily upon the
44. Psalm, (...). It was the demonstration of the greatest power, that God
could be in the nature of man; For not the constitution of heaven and earth and
all things in them, above them and below them, did so fully set forth the power
of God, as did this condescension, that God was made man, says the same
Father; He looked upon it as an act of great power, That God had emptied
himself, then that he had filled all the world.

CAP. III. Christ admired in his Satisfaction.
SECT. I. The necessity of Christ's satisfaction, for that he was the only
sacrifice to expiate sin.
NExt those Heretics that oppose Christ in his person, they are in the saddest
condition who seek to oppose him in his Satisfaction; for as the one
overthrows the foundation, so the other hinders the edification of the
Christian Faith; both acting the wicked parts of Sanballet and Geshem, whiles
true Christians (with Nehemiah) are laboring to build up the Temple of God.
For if there needed no satisfaction for sin, why was the eternal Son of God
offered up as a sacrifice for our sins? And if we be indeed pattakers of his
satisfaction, what madness is it for us to rely upon our own? Let the first
question be seriously pondered, there will be no Pelagian to deny original sin,
for fear he find not cause enough for the death of Christ, if there were no sin
of man's nature to be expiated: Let the second question be seriously pondered,
there will be no Pharisee to maintain personal righteousness, for fear he make
not a right use of Christ's death; in that he thinks he has not so great need
as others, of that his expiation. Alexander Hales who was reputed and called
the irrefragable Doctor, is opposed by Aquinas, (his greatest admirer) and by
Bonaventure, (his choicest Scholar) for teaching that Christ should have come
into the world, though with flesh not capable of suffering ( ^arne tamen
impassibili) if so be that Adam had not sinned. The Angelical and Seraphical
Doctors thought it unreasonable, that Christ should come in the flesh not to
suffer; and shall not we think it irreligious to extenuate the virtue of his
sufferings? Sure we are that the whole creation of men and Angels are not able
to satisfy the justice of God for one sin, because there is no proportion
betwixt their Satisfaction and his Justice; for the one is finite, the other is
infinite; And as sure we ought to be That God did not give us his Son to
satisfy for our sins, that we should question the necessity, much less that we
should undervalue the efficacy of his satisfaction. For all other sacrifices
were but Types of this great sacrifice, which in the end of the world appeared
to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9. 26. Judah desired to be a
bondsman for Benjamin, but he was his brother; Saint Paul said, He could wish
himself accursed for the people of the Jews, but they were also his brethren
and his kinsmen; But our Savior Christ was contented to be made both a bondsman
and a Curse for us, whiles we were yet his enemies; His bondage was our
freedom; His Curse was our blessing; but let not his love be our enmity; for
though he came to save us whiles we were his enemies, yet he will not save us,
if we continue so. O thou art my Priest to bring me unto God, and my sacrifice
to reconcile me to him; make me to present my self, body and soul as a living
sacrifice unto thee* that thou may at the last day present me both in soul
and body without spot and blemish unto thy heavenly Father, in thine eternal
and everlasting kingdom, that though thou will then cease to be my Priest, yet
thou may never cease to be my King.

SECT. II. The commemoration of Christ's sacrifice enjoined, not the repetition
of it; and that the Ordination of Ministers for administering the Sacraments,
not of Priests for the offering of Sacrifice, is most agreeable with the
institution of Christ, and the constitution of a true Christian Church.
WE cannot consider Christ as a sacrifice, but we must consider that sacrifice
as a full expiation of, and satisfaction for all our sins, and consequently we
must look upon it as such a sacrifice as may only be remembered, but not
repeated: For other sacrifices showed their own insufficiency by their often
repetition; they were offered year by year continually, because they could not
make the Comers thereunto perfect: (Heb. 10. 1.) But this sacrifice is proved
to have been sufficient, because it is not again to be repeated; So says the
Apostle ver. 10. We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus
Christ once for all; (to say there is more offering, were to say there is less
Sanctification; to say his body is more offered, were to say, that our souls
are less Sanctified:) ver. 11. And every Priest stands daily ministering, and
offering oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never take away sins (This
saepe in the Sacrifice is nunquam in the Satisfaction; because there is an
oftentimes in the offering, there is a Never in the taking away of sins:) ver.
12. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat
down on the right hand of God; (This man has so fully expiated all sin by one
sacrifice, that it is as absurd to think he may be sacrificed again, as to
confound his state of exaltatation with his state of humiliation, or to think
he may be brought again to his cross, now he is sat down at the right hand of
God:)

And indeed our blessed Savior himself in that he says, Do this in
remembrance of me, does evidently call for the commemoration of his sacrifice
upon the cross, till his coming again, (for as long as he shall be out of
sight, He may not be out of mind; whiles he cannot be seen, he must be
remembered) But he that calls only for a commemoration* does in effect, dissallow
of a Repetition.

So that the burning of the blessed Sacrament into a sacrifice properly so
called, is neither sound divinity as they teach it, nor sound devotion as they
use it, who by pretending to repeat and renew the corporal Sacrifice of Christ,
do in effect (according to the Apostles rule) bring it under the suspicion, or
at least leave it under the imputation of insufficiency: for what is done once
sufficiently as to all intents and purposes, is in vain desired to be done
again; yet we deny not that Christ is offered in the holy Eucharist, but we say
he is offered mystically, not corporally; We deny not that he is also there
Sacrificed, but we say it is by way of Commemoration and representation, not by
way of renovation or repetition: when Christ was corporally offered and
sacrificed, he himself alone was the Priest who was the Offering and the
Sacrifice: But he is still mystically offered and sacrificed by those Priests
or Ministers, who are obliged to continue the representation of his corporal
offering and sacrifice, though not the repetition of it,

Accordingly it is much to be observed, that such as was the difference of
opinion concerning this sacrifice, such was also the difference in the
ordination of those men who were appointed to offer it;

For the manner of ordination in the Greek Church supposed the man ordained
only as a Minister to the administration of the sacrament; for the Bishop that
ordained him, put the consecrated bread into his hand saying; (...), etc. Take
this (holy) thing committed to your charge, and keep it till the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, when he will call you to an account how you have dis^osed of
it; This man so ordained had delivered to him the Trust and charge only of a
Sacrament. But the manner of ordination in the Latin Church, supposes the man
ordained as a Priest to the offering of a Sacrifice; for the Bishop that
ordained him put the Communion plate and chalice into his hand, saying, Accipe
potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo, Missamque celebrare tam pro vivis quam pro
defunctis in nomine Domini, etc. Receive the power of offering a Sacrifice to
God, and of celebrating the Mass both for the quick and the dead, in the name
of our Lord, etc. And agreeable to this is the benediction of the Presbyters
after this ordination in the same Church, Benedictio Dei omnipotentis, Patris,
filii and spiritus Sancti, descendat su er vos, ut sitis benedicti in ordine
sacerdotali, and o^feratis placabiles hostias pro peccatis atque offensionibus
populi, etc. The blessing of God, the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, descend upon
you, that you may be blessed in the order of Priests, and offer acceptable
sacrifices for the sins and offenses of the People; ( Pontifical. Romans Venetiis
editum, An. 1561.) This man so ordained had delivered to him the trust and
charge, not of a Sacrament, but of a sacrifice; But in the ordination of the
Church of England (and some other Protestant Churches) the Bishop says to him
that he ordains, Receive the Holy Ghost; whose sins you forgive they are
forgiven* whose sins you retain they are retained; but be thou a faithful
dispencer of the word of God, and of his holy sacraments, in the name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; This man so ordained has
delivered unto him the trust and charge of no sacrifice, but only of the
Sacraments and also of the word; and it were to be wished, that those whom it
nothing concerns, would neither invade nor disturb this trust; especially since
it is so exactly agreeable with the Text, which in all the new Testament has
not recommended to the Church the trust and charge of a Sacrifice, but only of
the Word and Sacraments: And it can be no shame for us to confess that in the
judgment of our Church the holy Eucharist is a Sacrament, not a Sacrifice,
unless it be in a mystical sense, a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; or in
a figurative sense, a commemoration or representation of a sacrifice, but by no
means a repetition of Christ's corporal sacrifice, since the Apostle has
expressly said concerning that, We are sanctified through the offering of the
body of Jesus Christ once for all, Heb. 10. 10. According to which our Church
does believe and profess in different words the very same truth, saying, That
Christ made upon the cross by his one oblation of himself once offered, a full
perfect, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins of
the whole world; and I will ever rejoice in this belief and profession, since
he that has made a full satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, has not
left his father unsatisfied only for my sins.

CAP. IV. Christ admired in his Application.
SECT. I. Christ in his Propitiation and Satisfaction does not benefit us
without a particular Application.
TRuly to know Christ, is truly to know the whole Christian Faith, as has been
said; For truly to know Christ in his person, is to know the Christian Faith in
the ground or substance of it: And truly to know Christ in his Propitiation,
Satisfaction, Application, is to know the Christian Faith in the power or
virtue of it: Accordingly Saint Paul is not content to know Christ only in his
Person, saying, that I may know him, but he will also know him in his
Propitiation, Satisfaction, and Application, saying, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to
his death, Phil. 3. 10. To know Christ in the power of his resurrection, is to
know him in his propitiation; for he was delivered for our offenses, and raised
again for our Justification, Romans 4. 25. To know Christ in the fellowship of
his sufferings, is to know him in his satisfaction, whereby he slaked body for
body, soul for soul in our stead, that he might satisfy for all the sins both
of our bodies and of our souls: And to know Christ so as to be made conformable
to his death, is to know him in his Application; for we cannot apply the merit
of his death, till we be conformed to it by dying unto sin, and rising again to
newness of life: for the Application of Faith does no less require that man
apply himself to God by hol^ness of conversation, then that he apply God unto
himself by strength of persuasion; And truly the one cannot be without the
other, since it is impossible for that man to lay hold on Gods promise of
mercy, who looks not after the conditions on which it is promised; to wit, a
hearty repentance of his sins, and an amendment of his sinful life: for Gods
promises of mercy are not made to all sinners, but only to penitent sinners: so
that where is no true repentance, there can be no true faith; and where is true
repentance, there cannot be too much: for if man perform his part of the
Covenant of grace, he may assure himself that God will perform his part; nay he
must assure himself so, unless he will remain in the state of infidelity: For a
true and lively faith is a full persuasion of the heart, grounded upon the
promises of God, that whatsoever Christ has done or suffered for the salvation
of man, he has done and suffered for me as well as for others: And I must
never be satisfied with my self, nor think I am in a good state or condition,
till I have gotten such a faith as will give me such a persuasion: For the
satisfaction of Christ in general will afford me but little comfort, without
the application thereof in particular to mine own soul: Wherefore my labor
must be to put my self in such a condition, that though I cannot but think my
self unworthy of the invaluable blessing of this satisfaction, yet I may not
think, much less make my self incapable of it.

SECT. II. The ground of that application, i^ Christ's threefold conjunction
with us: in his person, in his nature, and in his office; from which proceeds
the marriage of the soul with Christ.
I Do not find any desert in man that entitled him to a property in the
creature; but sure none can be found to entitle him to have a property in the
Creator. Yet he that says unto his Savior as Saint Thomas did, My God and my
Lord, seems to claim a property in him: For how can a man assume or apply that
unto himself, in which he has no property? Wherefore it is necessary that we
examine how Christ is made ours, that so we may see the ground both of our
property and of this application: I say then that Christ is ours in a threefold
respect, because of a threefold conjunction of Christ, with us, in his nature,
in his person, and in his office.

First, Christ is ours in his nature by a real conjunction, having taken our
nature upon him: and in that respect he is ours as we are men, and he has
bestowed on all mankind a greater capacity of his Grace, then otherwise they
would have had, by reason of their corrupt nature: for which cause the
Evangelical Promises which God makes to man in Christ, are universal, as
excluding none, because Christ has taken the nature of all: but yet
conditional, as including only those who repent and believe the Gospel: for no
others make a right use or attain the end of Christ's Merits and Mercies.

Secondly, Christ is ours in his person by a voluntary conjunction, having
taken our sin upon him, as our surety or pledge; for he has born our griefs,
and carried our sorrows, Isa. 53. 4. And in that respect he is ours as we are
Christians, and has bestowed on us the knowledge of his grace, though very
many of us by our own infidelity and impenitency, make but a little and a bad
use of that knowledge.

Thirdly, Christ is ours in his office by a mystical conjunction, such as is
between a King and his Subjects, both making but one mystical body; and in that
respect Christ is ours only as we are good Christians, and has bestowed on us
the communion or rather the communication of his grace, incorporating, nay more
inspiriting us, as his members, into himself. And this is the happiest
conjunction that we can have with Christ whiles we live here on earth; To be
one with him in the same mystical body, or in the same actual communion, not
only external of his nature or of his person, as many are that are little
benefited thereby, but also to be one with him in the same actual internal
Communion of his grace; to the inestimable benefit of our souls, which are
first sanctified, and at last saved by this communicating with Christ.

For all the privileges and blessings of his Regal, of his Prophetical, of his
Sacerdotal function; of his power as King, of his instruction as Prophet, of
his sacrifice or intercession as Priest, are made ours by this blessed
conjunction, according to that comfortable assertion of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.
22, 23. All are yours, and ye are Christ's: for the words are not spoken
consequutive sed causaliter, not by way of consequence, but by way of
causality, and accordingly import this sense, All are therefore yours because
ye are Christ's: Ye are Christ's, and Christ is yours, and he being All in All,
in and through him, All is yours; but without him, All is nothing, and you are
worse then nothing O then let me so rejoice for his coming to me in the body,
as much more to desire and long for his coming to me in the soul: That as the
Lord of all is joined with me in one flesh, so I may be joined with him in one
Spirit; that I may dwell in him, and he may dwell in me for ever: There is a
mutual Inbeing betwixt Christ and every good Christian (says Saint Bernard)
even as betwixt Christ and God: As the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in
the Father; and therefore Father and Son make but one essentially: So Christ is
in the good Christian, and the good Christian is in Christ; and therefore
Christ and the good Christian make but one mystically: If either the Father
were not in the Son, or the Son were not in the Father, they could not be
perfectly one by essential Unity. And if either Christ be not in the Christian,
or the Christian be not in Christ, they cannot be one by mystical Unity: Sic
igitur Anima cui adherere Deo bonum est, non ante se existimet ipsi perfect
unitam, nisi quum and illum in se, and se in illo manentem persenserit, (Bern.
Sermon. 71. super Cant.) Therefore let not the soul, which is happy only through
her union with Christ, think her self perfectly united unto him, till she
perceive that he so dwells and abides in her, as that she also dwells and
abides in him, and desires so to dwell and abide for ever.

O happy soul that is thus wedded to her Savior by a spiritual marriage! for
man and wife are not more nearly and more indissolubly joined together by being
one flesh, then Christ and the Christian soul by being one Spirit: Vere
Spiritualis sanctique connubii contractus est iste; Parum dixi contractus,
complexus est: Complexus plane, ubi idem velle, and nolle idem, unum facit
spiritum ^ duobus. This is more then a spiritual contract, it is a complete
marriage, when the same will being in two persons, shall make them both but one
Spirit: So the same Saint Bernard, and so likewise says Saint Paul, He that is
joined unto the Lord, is one spirit, 1 Cor. 6, 17. Then let me be joined to
him, that I may be one spirit with him, and that my spirit may be his, rather
then mine own: For mine own spirit will be death to me because of sin, but his
spirit will be life to me because of righteousness; ( Romans 8. 10.) In my self I
can see nothing but sin and death; In my Savior I see both righteousness and
life; righteousness to deliver me from sin, and life to deliver me from death:
Therefore I will greatly rejoice in the Lord; my soul shall be joyful in my
God; for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation; he has covered me
with the robe of righteousness, Isa. 61. 10. A fit Epithalamium to celebrate
this spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and the good Christian, wherein though
the Angels be ready to make up the Chorus, yet the devout soul her self alone
sings the song: There is joy in them, but much more in us for this marriage,
because we have such a wedding garment bestowed on us, as expells the fear both
of a Divorce and of a Dissolution; the first of which may be, the second of
which must be in all other marriages; They may be under a divorce by sin, they
must be under a dissolution by death: But the marriage betwixt Christ and the
good Christian, if it be once indeed truly consummated, is under neither; for
the blessed Bridegroom of souls bestows both righteousness and salvation upon
all those who are espoused unto him: Such a righteousness as will keep off sin
from causing a Divorce; He has covered me with the robe of righteousness: such
a salvation as will keep off death from causing a dissolution in their
marriage; He has clothed me with the garments of salvation: Therefore I will
greatly rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; for neither
shall my sins disturb this joy since, I am covered with his righteousness; nor
shall my death diminish, it since I am clothed with his salvation: To him be
glory for this righteousness, and for this salvation for evermore, Amen.

Christ adored in his Resurrection.
CAP. I. That Christ is to be adored chiefly in his Resurrection.
SECT. I. The resurrection of Christ the grand cause of joy to Christians, but
strongly opposed by the Jews; whose Commentaries are not to be followed on
those texts which concern our Savior Christ, though even those texts have not
been corrupted by them.
WHat is the sorrow of the soul for sin, we may partly see by every true
penitent, who cannot but say for his sins as our Savior once said for them;
(...), My soul is exceeding sorrowful even to the death, Mat. 26. 38. But what
is the sorrow of the soul for death, the wages of sin, God make us such true
penitents, that we may never see; for if we are so unfit by reason of our
impatience, and so unable by r^^son of our infirmity to pass over the momentary
sor^o^^ of the earth; it must needs fill our souls with astonishment and
confusion but once seriously to think of the sorrows, the everlasting sorrows
of hell. Wherefore most welcome to the Christian soul is that joy which delivers
it from this sorrow, and that is the joy of Christ's resurrection, whereby we
have been delivered from the sting and mischief of the temporal, and from the
pangs and horrors of the eternal death. Accordingly it has been observed by
Christian Chronologers, that our blessed Savior did rise from the dead on that
very same day of the year, on which Moses and the children of Israel had
(almost two thousand years before) passed safely through the red Sea; And
indeed as their deliverance by Moses from the Egyptians, was a type of our
deliverance by Christ from our spiritual bondage; so their joy may well be in
our hearts, and their Song in our mouths, only heightened by a greater measure
of thankfulness and of thanksgiving, for as much as ours has of the two been
infinitely the greater deliverance.

Therefore let me say as they did, but let me say it with a more thankful
heart and with a more cheerful voice; for greater is my duty, though lesser is
my ability; I will sing unto the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously, Exodus
15. 1. Never was so glorious a triumph as this, which triumphed over the grave
that devours all this worlds triumphs; nay over Hell, which makes the bare
memory of them odious and detestable, either that they were gained unjustly, or
used immoderately, or abused intemperately: The Lord is my strength and song,
and he is become my Salvation, ver. 2. What can my soul say more? what should
it say less for being delivered from the pangs and horrors of the temporal and
eternal death, but that the Lord is my Song, for being my strength to rescue
and to redeem me; much more for being my salvation to receive me and to crown
me? Again, Who is like unto thee O Lord amongst the Gods, who is like unto thee
glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders? ver. 11. Let me but
think of the Son of God dying for my sins, and rising from the dead to make me
righteous, and I must needs say he was glorious in holiness, and ought to be
fearful in praises for doing such wonders as to bring glory out of shame,
holiness out of Sin, and life out of death; Lastly, Thou in thy mercy have led
forth the people which thou have redeemed; Thou have guided them in thy
strength to thy holy habitation, ver. 13. All those Saints that did rise from
the dead when our Savior Christ arose to go along with him into heaven; and
all those Saints that shall rise hereafter by virtue* of his resurrection, to
follow him thither, can say no more then this to express their joy and
thankfulness, Thou have led us forth from the grave; thou have redeemed us from
death, thou have guided us in thy strength to thy holy habitation, there to see
and bless and enjoy thee for ever.

So that those late* Hebr. Critics are too much in love with the glosses of
the Jews, who oppose them against the Judgment of the whole Catholic Church,
that they may enervate one of the soundest proofs of the Resurrection that is
to be found in all the Old Testament: And that proof is, Job 19. 25, 26, 27. I
know that my redeemer lives, and that I shall rise out of the earth at the
last day, and shall be covered again with my skin, and shall see God in my
flesh; Yea and my self shall behold him not with other, but with these same
eyes; Words so expressly spoken of the resurrection, that the Church has
thought fit to use them at the burial of the dead, as the chiefest comfort and
consolation against death; yet upon these words thus says the Learned Mercer,
Nostri fere omnes tam veteres quam recentiores hunc versiculum cum duobus
sequentibus ad resurrectionem referunt; s^d ego cum* Hebraeis aliter accipio:
Quod si de resurrectione futura hic loqueretur Job, non erant haud dubie id
praetermissuri Hebraei, qui and ipsi resurrectionem credunt; At ne unum quidem
ex sex aut septem Hebraeorum commentariis invenies qui eo referat. Almost all
Christian writers ancient and modern do expound these three verses of the
Resurrection; but I with the Jews do expound them otherwise: For if Job had
here spoken of the resurrection to come, doubtless the Hebrew doctors would not
have pretermitted it in their Commentaries, since they also believed this
Doctrine; but in six or seven of their Expositors, there is not one that
expounds these words of the resurrection: This reason is unsound in it self and
therefore unsatisfactory in its Proof: For the Jewish expositors labor after
nothing more, then not to see Christ in the Old Testament; And their Doctors
knowing that the Christians did believe and profess the Resurrection of the
dead, by virtue of Christ's resurrection, had rather leave the doctrine of the
resurrection out of their glosses, then allow it to be by virtue of our blessed
Savior, whom their fathers had crucified, and whom themselves not only hated,
but also accursed and blasphemed every day: Thus Saint Matthew tells us plainly
that the Jews gave the Soldiers money to say that our Saviors disciples came
by night and stole him away; And they that were so willing to put a lie in
other men's mouths, were as willing to put the truth out of their own Hearts;
for so says the same Evangelist, And this saying is commonly reported among
the Jews until this day, Mat. 28. 15. Nor is it easy for any man to show
another Day wherein they first left off this Report.

Sure we are that when the Apostles preached through Jesus the resurrection
from the dead, (Act. 4. 2.) that the Jews were greived, and with might and main
opposed their Doctrine; and this spirit of contradiction continued in them
throughout all that age wherein the New Testament was written; and
Ecclesiastical writers do show us that by its long continuance, it was rather
increased then abated in their successors: Wherefore it must be unsound and
unsafe for any Christian Divine to appeal to the Jewish Comments for the true
sense of any Text in the Old Testament concerning Christ; For although they
unanimously maintain and justify the Letter of the Scripture, (wherein they
have showed themselves more thankful, if not more faithful, then many of our
late Christians, who would teach the translations to justle out the Original)
yet they have labored to corrupt and deprave the meaning of it, in most of
those prophesies which they found the Christian Church had applied unto our
Savior Christ. I speak especially of the latter Jews who are the chiefest
Commentators we now have upon the Old Testament; for those Rabbis who were
before Christ, did interpret many Texts of the Messiah, which the later Rabbis
have since wrested to, and obscured by another Interpretation; so that in truth
those later Rabbis whose comments we now have upon the Bible, have used what
Art* they could to obscure the Prophesies concerning Christ, and therefore must
needs be ill guides in any Doctrine that concerns the Christian Faith: As for
example, Isa. 7. 14. the place which Saint Matthew quotes to prove that Christ
was to be conceived and born of a Virgin, yet Kimchi who is one of the chiefest
and the best of the late Jewish Expositors, expounds it of the Prophets, or of
Ahaz his wife, and says that (...) is not there put for a Virgin, but only for
some younger woman; (...) He is willing to distinguish Almah from Bethulah,
because Bethulah must be an incorrupt Virgin, but Almah may signify a maid
that had not an incorrupted Virginity, as Prove. 30. 19. And Aquila had too much
of the Jew in him to follow the Septuagints interpretation of this place,
(...), Behold a Virgin, therefore he says, (...), Behold a young woman shall
conceive; for the Jews did merely out of envy render the Hebrew word, (...), a
young woman, instead of (...), a Virgin; And sure we are, the infallible spirit
of God has thus rendered it, (...), Behold a Virgin shall be with child, Mat.
1. 23. So again Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a child is born, etc. Kimchi labors to
prove this child to be Hezekiah, though he be fain to divide the predicate from
the subject in the same proposition, contrary to all Logic, and to divide the
relative from the antecedent in the same sentence, contrary to all Grammar,
that he may wrest the latter part of the words, His name shall be called
wonderful, Counselor, etc. which are unappliable to any man, and expound them
of God the Father, because he will not allow the Prophecy to concern God the
Son. So again, Isa. 53. A place which Bellarmine alleges to prove that the
Jews did not corrupt the Text, for that the Original Hebrew did plainly assert
the Divinity of Christ, calling him (...) a smitten God, when as our
translations only say, he was smitten of God; This place making more against
the Jews in the Hebrew Original, then either in Greek or Latin translations,
is a substantial proof indeed that the Jews did not seek to corrupt the letter
of the Text; but yet this same place does as plainly prove that they did seek
to deprave the sense of it; for Jarchi and Kimchi both would fain persuade us
that all this Chapter is to be interpreted of the Jews in their present
captivity, (...) of the captivity of Israel, although the expressions be such
throughout the whole Chapter, as can belong only to one single person. ( He
shall grow up, he is despised, he was wounded, etc.) and there be many passages
which cannot possibly be applied to Israel: I will insist that but on three. 1.
That it is said, he was wounded for our transgressions, whereas Israel was
afflicted for their own sins. 2. That it is said, He had done no violence,
neither was any deceit in his mouth, whereas every man is a liar, and God only
is true, who is the first truth. 3. That it is said, He made intercession for
the transgressors, whereas the Jews are so far from praying for the Christians,
who, they say, hold them in captivity, that they revile and curse them every
day, and pray for their destruction.

Lastly (that I may instance in one placec which nearly concerns this Doctrine
of the resurrection, which the Jews care not to see in the forenamed testimony
of holy Job) It is most evident that the ninth and tenth verses of the
sixteenth Psalm do expressly prophecy of the resurrection of Christ; and Saint
Peter plainly proves as much, ( Acts 2.) to the conviction of all those Jews
that heard him, and to the conversion of some thousands of them; yet the late
Jewish Expositors will find no such piece of Divinity in it, but Jarchi will
needs expound it of David, contrary to all sense and reason, and Ezra slubbers
it over with a Platomical (...) called by the Jews (...) Volutatio animarum the
tumbling and jumbling of souls, whereby they phansied one soul to pass through
three several bodies, as that the soul of Adam was afterward in David, and
shall hereafter be in the Messiah, which say their Cabbalists, is intimated in
the word (...) which has in it the initial letters of Adam, David, Messiah; to
show that his soul should also possess their two bodies: And Elias in his (...)
in radice (...) tells us of a Text which they quote to make good this their wild
position, (of one and the same humane soul receiving, as it were a threefold
creation, and possessing three several bodies,) and that Text is Job 33. 29.
Ecce omnia ista operatur Deus cum homine tribus vicibus, Lo all these things
works God with man three times; It were the loss of my labor, and of the
Readers patience, to insist upon the confutation either of their opinion, or of
their proof they allege for it, since both are equally absurd and erroneous;
And yet Ab^n Ezra would needs shuffle in this frantic opinion into his Comment
upon those words of the sixteenth Psalm, for thou will not leave my soul in
hell, neither wilt suffer thine holy one to see corruption, rather then he
would allow them their own plain proper sense whereby they did necessarily
infer his resurrection from the dead, in whose person they were spoken: which
is the more to be observed, for that himself had acknowledged some peculiar
eminence of this Psalm from the Title of it, (...) which he therefore had thus
glossed, (...) It Is glorious or precious as Gold, it is a Golden Psalm; and yet he
would not see that mystery in it, which alone had given it that glorious title
(in the judgment of the best Divines,) even the Mystery of Christ's
Resurrection.

SECT. II. The necessity of our Christian Festival, called Easter, as it is an
Anniversary feast, to express the Christians joy for the resurrection of
Christ; that thereby the Christians Jubilee or joy in Christ is not confined but
enlarged; and that by the same reason the Spirit of Prayer is not confined or
hindered, but rather assisted and helped by a set form of words.
SInce we cannot deny the Christians unspeakable joy for the Resurrection of
Christ; why should we go about to diminish it by opposing the grand Christian
Festival which has been instituted to express that joy? For excellently Greg.
Naz. and most like a true Divine, (...) ( Orat. 39.) the sum or business of a
Festival, is the remembrance of God; and to put the Thesis into an Hypothesis,
the sum and business of this Festival is to remember Christ, in whom alone we
Christians must remember God: so that to oppose this Festival, is in effect to
oppose the remembrance of God in Christ, and to shake the very foundations of
Christianity. For we cannot oppose this Anniversary, but we must also oppose
our weekly Lords day: Therefore did that Council judiciously, which began its
reformation of abuses in the Church with this Canon, Custodite diem Dominicam
quae nos denuo peperit and a peccatis omnibus liberavit; estote omnes in hymnis
and laudibus Dei, animo corporeque intenti; and si aliter fecerit rusticus aut
servus, gravioribus fustium ictibus verberabitur: (Council. Matiscon. 2. cap.
1.) Keep the Lords day which has begotten us anew, and delivered us from all
our sins: Be all of you intent in body and soul to the praises of God, and if
any country man or servant do otherwise, let him be soundly cudgelled for his
pains: And Bullinger in his Decades upon the fourth Commandment, gives an
excellent reason why set times and seasons should be consecrated and set apart
for the public worship and honor of God, saying, Oportet autem definitum
tempus consecratum esse exercitio religionis, ut Dominicum: idem sentiendum
arbitror de pauculis quibusdam Christi Domini festis, quibus peragimus memoriam
Nativitatis, incarnationis, circumcisionis, resurrectionis, ascentionis in
coelum, and missionis Spiritus Sancti in discipulos; libertas enim Christiana
non est licentia, and dissolutio Ecclesiasticae piaeque observationis, juvantis
and provehentis gloriam Dei, and charitatem proximi: There must be some set and
certain time consecrated to the exercise of Religion, (by virtue of this fourth
Commandment) as the Lords day: and I think the same of those other Festivals
instituted and observed in memory of Christ, as his Nativity, incarnation,
circumcision, resurrection, ascension into heaven, and sending down the Holy
Ghost upon his Disciples: For Christian liberty is not a licentious dissolution
of such holy and pious Ecclesiastical observations as tend wholly to the glory
of Christ, and the edification of our Christian Brethren. Yet do we most
willingly confess that the Christians feast of Jubilee is not to be confined to
a day, because he that is the cause of it, Jesus Christ, is the same yesterday,
and to day and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. And indeed so does Saint Chrysostom
expound that Text of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep the feast,
(...): He says not Let us keep the feast because it was then Easter or
Whitsuntide, when he writ this Epistle, but to show that a good Christians life
is a continual Feast, and therefore every day might serve him for a Festival:
So that in Saint Chrysostomes judgment, Saint Paul's Let us keep the Feast, is
little other then a short extract of the Psalm of Jubilee, Jubilate Deo omnis
terra, O keep your Jubilee in the Lord all ye lands, Psalm 100. 1. Only the
reason is much more express in the New, then in the Old Testament; Be ye sure
that the Lord is God, says the Psalmist: It is he that has made us; but much
more forcible is the Apostles reason, It is he that has redeemed us: We are
his people, and in that regard ought to hold a feast unto him, (Exodus 5. 1.)
but much rather because he has been a sacrifice for us, that we might be his
people: we are the sheep of his pasture, and ought to hear his voice; much
rather because he has been our Paschal Lamb that we might be his sheep. The
whole Psalm is nothing else but a song of Jubilee in one verse, and the reason
of it in the next; as ver. 1. O be joyful in the Lord with gladness and with a
song, there is the Jubilee; but ver. 2. The Lord he is God, it is he that has
made us: there is the cause of it. And again, ver. 3. O go your way into his
Gates with thanksgiving, and into his Courts with praise, and be thankful unto
him; there is the Jubilee. But ver. 4. For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is
everlasting, and his truth endures from generation to generation, there is the
reason of it. Grace, mercy, and truth, are all met together in the Lord, says
the Psalmist; a grace without repenting; the Lord is gracious, that is, still
continues so, notwithstanding our multiplied provocations; a mercy with ending,
His mercy is everlasting; and a truth without failing, His truth endures from
generation to generation: But the Apostle tells us moreover in whom they are
met, and the ground of their meeting, when he says, For Christ our passover is
sacrificed for us: For the cause of the grace, is, that this Christ is ours,
made ours by conjunction: The cause of the mercy, that he is our sacrifice by
propitiation: and the cause of the truth, (which is one and the same from
Genesis to the Revelation) is this, that the same Christ was this sacrifice of
the passover, according to the prediction so long foreshewed in the Paschal
Lamb, Exodus 12. and so long foretold in the Prophets; particularly, Isa. 53. 7.
He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter: so that though a stranger from the
Commonwealth of Israel could ask the question, Of whom speaks the Prophet
this? he was led, like a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before
the shearers, so opened he not his mouth, Act. 8. 34. Yet the Israelites did
all so generally know the meaning of this phrase, that Saint John the Baptist
used no other title to proclaim the Messiah but this, Behold the lamb of God,
(John. 1. 29.) which was so well understood, that two of his own Disciples
presently left him and followed Jesus, ver. 36, 37. And Saint Philip
acknowledges the person typified and foretold to agree exactly with the Type,
and prediction, when he says, ver. 45. we have found him of whom Moses in the
Law and the Prophets did write; as if he had said, All that the Law and
Prophets had promised was now fulfilled: Grace in the conjunction, mercy in the
propitiation, and truth in the prediction; All met together in Christ our
Passover; therefore Jubilemus, let us keep our Jubilee, or in Saints Paul's
language, (...), Let us keep our holyday; or yet farther, (if you please,) let
us keep this Holyday, that is the feast of the Passover, called by the Council
of Antioch, c 1. (...), the Holy feast of the soul-saving Passover: For Aerius
his objection against keeping of Easter, from this very text, saying, (...), we
ought not to keep the the Passover, for Christ our Passover is sacrificed for
us; though it overthrow the Jewish Passover, which was a type of Christ, yet
it rather establishes a Christian Passover, which is a memorial of him;
unless we will say that Christ was therefore our Passover and sacrificed for
us, of purpose that we should for get him and his sacrifice; For as we may not
now retain any types of Christ, because that were in effect to deny that he is
come in the flesh; so we may not let go the memorials of Christ, because that
in effect is to be unthankful for his coming: And our Savior himself by
saying do this in remembrance of me, has showed that he will look upon those
Festivals which should be appointed for memorials of him as upon so many
religious and Christian like Institutions, since he that has prescribed to do
this, has also prescribed, or rather presupposed a set and solemn time of
doing it. For though the Christians joy in Christ is not to be limited or
confined to a day, yet that is no reason why a day should not be limited and
confined to that joy: Let spiritual joys be eternal in themselves, but for
that very cause let our time be subservient to their eternity, that they may
likewise be so to us: For God appointing a set time for a spiritual duty, has
not thereby debased the duty, but exalted the time, even as our blessed Savior
appointing a set form of prayer, has not thereby confined the spirit of
prayer, but rather enlarged it: And the Holy Ghost having given us so many set
forms of prayer and praise in the Psalms and the rest of the ible, Bhath not
therefore taught the duty of prayer to be the less spiritual, but has taught
us to be the less carnal, that we should not in pouring out our souls to God
rely upon our own phansies or inventions, but upon his holy dictates and
directions: For there is the same reason both of hic and of nunc in matters of
Divinity; the same reason of these words and of this time; God having
consecrated words to his service as belonging to the substance of it, and
having consecrated times, places and persons only as accidents and
circumstances belonging to the solemnity thereof; And therefore it is strange
to see those men who are most zealous for the set times and Days of serving
God every week, to be so impetuous against the set forms of serving him, as
thinking the set time to help devotion, but the set form to hinder it; whereas
it is evident that setting a time to the spirit must needs be a confinement of
him, as well as setting of words: And to say to the Spirit of prayer, Pray now,
is as great an intrusion and encrochement upon him, as to say to him, Pray this?

But in truth nither are confinements to Gods spirit, and both alike are
intended for the enlargements of our spirits: Set times and Set words, that we
pray in the greater assurance of faith, knowing we cannot be willworshippers,
whiles we conform our selves to his will whom we worship.

SECT. III. The memorials instituted by God, are chiefly of his justice and of
his mercy; There is but one terrible memorial of Gods justice (against those
who invaded the Priesthood,) but many memorials of his mercy; and that it is a
vain fear which possesses some men, as if the (anniversary) memorial of
Christ's Resurrection was not instituted, and cannot be observed without
willworship or superstition; that the general equity of the Levitical Law (as
far as it was not Typical) is still in force concerning the Solemnities of
Religion; and that approves Anniversary as well as weekly Festivals.
AMong all Gods Attributes, none are so remarkable in our lives and deaths, as
his mercy and his Justice. His mercy in our preservation, his justice in our
destruction: And accordingly God himself requires us most especially to take
notice of the great effects of his justice and of his mercy: Hence is it, that
we find him instituting few or no memorials of his wisdom or of his Power, but
very many of his Justice and of his Mercy, though not so many of his justice as
of his mercy: we find but one memorial of his Justice more particularly
recommended to the care of his Church, and that is against those men who had
said to Moses and to Aaron, to their Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors, Ye
take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every one of
them, and the Lord is among them, Numb 16. 3. These men because they had
invaded the Priests office in burning incense, had their censers nailed upon
the altar of incense, and the Text says, to be a memorial unto the children of
Israel, that no stranger which is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to offer
incense before the Lord, that he be not as Corah and his Company, ver. 40. Te
miror Antoni quorum facta imitare, eorum exitus non perhorrescere, said the
Orator most pathetically; I much wonder that since you do follow their sins,
you do not fear their punishment: And how can any Christian Minister say less,
since it is evident that the Gospel, in this case, still retains the sentence,
and consequently revives the severity of the Law; For so says the Apostle, No
man takes this honor unto himself that is not called of God as was Aaron,
Heb. 5. 4. as if he had said, no man rightly takes the office of a Priest upon
him, but he that is externally and publicly called of God as was Aaron, so as
all the Congregation may take notice of his calling; And if he do take Aarons
office that is not called as Aaron was, he has great reason to fear least the
earth should open under him, and heaven should be shut above him, and against
him; for that he is a sinner against his own soul, Numb. 16. 38. and does
provoke God to make him as Corah and his company.

In this one case we have a memorable example of Gods justice, and as exemplary
a memorial thereof, and we have scarce any other such as this: but we find very
many exemplary memorials of his mercy: Scarce any singular blessing bestowed
upon the Jews, but there was a special feast appointed in the Church to
propagate and to perpetuate its remembrance: Thus was the feast of tabernacles
instituted, that your generations may know that I made Israel to dwell in
bothes when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, Levit, 23. 43. Thus
without Gods immediate command was ordained the feast of Purim, Esther 9. which
yet was faithfully observed, and the observation thereof looked on as a
religious, not as a superstitious practice, by God and man. Nay yet more, we
find another feast after this, not mentioned in the Canonical Scripture, but
only in the Apocrypha, the feast of the Dedication of the Altar, (1 Macchab. 4.
59.) and yet this feast was not only carefully observed by the Jews, but the
observation of it was also approved by our Savior himself, John 10. 22, 23.
which is warrant more then enough both for the Church to constitute still such
festivals to the honor of God, and for us to observe the Festivals that are so
constituted: And it is also check more then enough to their insolency and
perverseness, (if they would take notice of it) who in matters of the Christian
Religion will pretend to be wiser not only then Christ's Church, but also then
Christ himself. For if the argument be undeniable concerning marriage, from
John 2. 1, 2. which holy estate Christ adorned and beautified with his
presence, and first miracle that he wrought in Cana of Galilee: Then it is as
undeniable concerning Festivals from John 10. 22, 23. which holy institution
Christ himself adorned and beautified with his presence, in that he went to the
Temple at the feast of the Dedication, as well as at other feasts, which were
immediately commanded in the text.

In a word, Thus the feast of the Passover was instituted* to commemorate to
the Jews how God had passed over them when he slew the Egyptians, Exodus 12. 12.
And the Christian Church has appointed this Gospel Anniversary feast of
Easter; to succeed that legal Anniver^y feast of the Passover; not so much to
show her Authority; (which however cannot be denied without Heresy, nor
resisted without Schism) as to discharge her trust: For the Apostle 1 Cor. 9,
10. saying, that those words, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that
treads out the corn, were written no doubt for our sakes, has laid it for an
immovable grouud of our Christian faith, that the general equity even of the
Levitical Law (as far as it was not typical) is still in force among
Christians, (concerning the solemnities of Religion) and must be so, till the
worlds end: And if we will stick fast to this ground, All our late contests
about the times, places, and persons belonging to Gods public worship, will
soon be determined; if we will not stick to it, we shall in effect put aside
the Apostles Divinity, that we may bring in our own. By this ground Aerius his
Heresy will soon be ejected out of the Church, who taught, That Imparity of
the Ministry was condemned, and Parity commended in the word of God, (as says
Saint August. lib. de haeres. haeres. 53.) Dicebat Presbyterum ab Episcopo
nulla differentia debere discerni.) For it is evident out of the Levitical Law
alone, That God himself ordained and instituted an Imparity in the Priesthood;
and as evident, That he has since not reversed but plainly approved (if not
established) an imparity in the Ministers of the Gospel, as appears by the
power of Jurisdiction given by Saint Paul to Timothy over Presbyters, 1 Timothy 5.
19. unless we will say, That he might receive accusations against Presbyters,
and pass sentence upon them, without having jurisdiction over them: Again, By
this ground tithes and all other provisions made for the Ministry will rather
be increased then diminished; for the Gospel being so much above the Law, does
rather call for a greater, then for a lesser maintenance: so that if the Ox
that trod out the corn might not be muzzled then, much less now: Churches will
no longer be nicknamed, much less unfrequented or profaned; and the Sabbath
will no more afford us matter of Disputation but of Devotion, if we will stick
to this ground: for that God himself has said, Keep my Sabbaths* and reverence
my sanctuary, Levit. 19. 30. and the same God that has forbad us to profane
the time, has also forbad us to profane the place of his worship, Levit. 21.
23. that ye profane not my sanctuaries, for I the Lord (...) sanctify them: I
say, by this ground all our late contests about the times, places and persons
belonging to Gods public worship, may easily be determined, ^nless we will
needs say, (for wilful men will say any thing) That Gods commands about Oxen
contain in them matter of precept for our Christian conversation, and
obedience, (though the Apostle plainly tells us, That God cares not for
Oxen) But not so his commands about the time, and place, and persons of his own
worship, concerning which God himself has professed that he is solicitous and
careful even to a jealousy. And by this same ground it is evident, That as the
Jew under the Law ^as, so the Christian under the Gospel is obliged to
commemorate Gods extraordinary benefits to his Church, with extraordinary
thanksgivings. And as God prescribed the Jews a set form of Catechism to
instruct their children in the reasons of this solemn festival, Exodus 12. 24,
25, 26. which Solomon Jarchi calls (...) (upon Exodus 13. 8.) that is to say,
The Annuntiation of the Passover; so did the Christian Church think fit to
require catechizing, specially against Easter, and more particularly because of
those who addressed themselves to the Holy Communion, which never failed
heretofore to be administered at that time, and is our true (...) a most full
and exact Annuntiation of our spiritual deliverance: nor is it improbable that
Saint Paul alluded to this very Text of Exodus 13. 8. and Annuntiabis filio tuo,
and to this very custom of the Jews grounded thereon, of making their
Catechetical annuntiations when he used the very same word concerning the
blessed Sacrament, saying, (...), Annuntiatis mortem Domini, 1 Cor. 11. 26.
thereby himself calling, or at least licencing us to call the holy Eucharist
the annuntiation of the death of Christ: And it is remarkable that the Jews
used this manner of Catechizing only at this feast; and their Catechism
consisted of these three heads, (...) Pascha, (...) herba amara, and (...)
Azymus: Their Annuntiation belonging to the Passover was, how God passed their
Fathers over that night wherein he destroyed the first born of the Egyptians;
Their annuntiation belonging to the bitter herbs, was of their Fathers grievous
servitude and bondage in Egypt, which made even their lives bitter unto them:
And their annuntiation belonging to the unleavened bread, was their happy and
sudden deliverance from that bondage; for the Egyptians were so urgent upon the
people, that they took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading
troughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders, Exodus 12. 24.

We had at the same time a much greater deliverance; and why should we have a
less Annuntiation? For where the mercy it self is much greater, why should the
memorial thereof be so much less?

God gives a signal intimation to the Jew, Exodus 12. 42. (...) Haec ista, non
illa, This is that very night, as if there were not demonstrative pronouns
enough to show, that this mercy was to be as particular in their thankful
commemoration, as it had been in Almighty Gods free donation; And Saint Paul
seems to speak as signally to the Christian, when he says, The same night that
he was betrayed, 1 Cor. 11. 23. as if he would not have us forget the
particular time, when he comes so near the very words of Moses, This is that
very night to be observed to the Lord: And indeed, why should not we keep a
Christian Passover, as well as a Christian Sabbath? were they not both alike
feasts of the Jews, and as so, are they not both alike abolished by the
Apostle, Gal. 4. 10. saying, ye observe days, and months, and times, and
years, I am afraid of you least I have bestowed upon you labor in vain; A
Jewish observation of days, which observes days for themselves, is without
doubt destructive of Christianity, for it places Religion in things merely
ceremonial: Not so a Christian observation of days for duties, for that places
Religion only in morals: Again, why has not the Christian Church as good
Authority, if not as justifiable warrant, to observe an Anniversary, as it has
to observe a Weekly festival? as well the feast of the Christian Passover once
a year, as the feast of the Christian Sabbath, once a week? for both are alike
recommended in the Law, and neither is directly commanded in the Gospel, and we
may not add to Gods commands, no more then we may take from them; nor may we
think the New Testament defective in any necessary command or doctrine, unless
we will advance Judaism above Christianity. Therefore since it will pose the
best Divine in Christendom to show that Text in the New Testament, which
commands the observation of a Sabbath: and we cannot run to the letter of the
fourth Commandment, to keep the first day in stead of the seventh; we must be
contented in this case with the general equity of the Law, and that gives the
Church power to consecrate Annual as well as Weekly Festivals to the honor of
God, and condemns our profaness in neglecting, our perverseness in despising
the one as well as the other: Besides, it is evident we cannot, (or if we can,
sure the Apostles could not) keep a Lords day all the year, but as a repetition
of Easter Day, which was the first Lords day, even the very day of his
resurrection: wherefore we must either say, it is a Jewish, not a Christian
Sabbath: or say, it is a Lords day from the great Lords day, the day of our
Lords resurrection: For though Saint John telling us, He was in the Spirit on
the Lords day, points clearly at our Sunday, the weekly remembrance of
Christ's resurrection, and not at Easter Day, the annual remembrance of it,
because in those Churches of Asia, to which he writ, Easter Day was not yet
confined to the first, but might be kept on any other day of the week; yet
without doubt he called it (...) the Lords day, for that it was a weekly
repetition of that very day which our Lord had consecrated to himself by rising
from the dead, called for that reason (...) the great Lords day by the
primitive Christians.

And shall we then not think it worth our notice that our blessed Savior
himself chose such a time for his Passion and Resurrection, as by the unerring
Characters of heaven might be exactly observed all the world over to the worlds
end, were it so that our Civil year were made agreeable with the Tropical: or
that the Catholic Church of Christ in its first and purest age would have been
so careful to find out, and so zealous to settle the time of this Festival, if
the Fathers of these blessed ages (which were less quarrelsom, but more pious
then any have been since) had not thought it highly concerned the honor of
Christ, and the propagation and justification of the Christian Religion? Surely
we cannot easily more gratify the Jews, then by putting down the memory of
that time wherein they crucified Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the
seed of David according to the flesh; nor can we more easily scandalize good
Christians, then by putting down the memorial of that time wherein he was
declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness,
by the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 3, 4. And God deliver his Church
from such practices as are fit to gratify Jews, but to scandalize good
Christians.

SECT. IV. Of the ancient contention about the observation of Easter. That the
Apostles zeal more about Duties then about Days, does not overthrow the
observing of particular days in the service of God: And that those days ought
to be observed by Preaching, Praying, Administering of the Sacrament, and also
by Almesdeeds: So that false administration, (sc. of the Holy Eucharist in one
kind) and false Devotions and false Doctrine, and sordid illiberality in not
relieving the poor, are all^ alike Profanations of a Festival.
FAmous was the controversy betwixt Policrates and Victor, the one Bishop of
Ephesus, the other Bishop of Rome, concerning the celebrating of Easter Day:
For the Churches of Asia would needs keep the very day of the first full moon
in Spring, conceiving the Apostles condescension to the Jew, to have been a
dogmatical sanction to the Christian; but the Western Churches who had no
conversation with the Jews, and therefore were not moved, through compliance
with them, at first to forsake their Christian liberty, and at last the
Christian truth (for the Quartadeci^ were in pro^ess* of time declared
Heretics) would not keep the very day of that full Moon, but the Sunday after
it, for their Easter Day; the learned Scaliger gives this reason for their
difference: The Jewish Converts following their old custom, kept still (...) a
Passover in remembrance of Christ's Passion, and therefore sought after the
very day of the month on which the Paschal Lamb had been slain, and our
Savior had been crucified; But the Gentile Converts kept (...), the Passover
in remembrance of Christ's resurrection; and therefore deferred their feast till
the first day of the week that followed next after that day of the month: So
we see, that both Churches agreed about the feast it self, and thought
themselves bound to observe a Passover once a year; and that they agreed also
about the time of the year, wherein it was to be observed; their disagreement
was only about the very day; For the Churches of Asia had mistaken Saint John's
condescension to the Jew, for an approbation to themselves, as if because he
had allowed this manner of celebrating the feast of the Passover according to
the known and received custom, among the Jews, he had also approved, and by
consequent established the same among the Christians. The like mistake
whereunto might also have been in other Eastern Churches concerning the Jewish
Sabbath, had they retained the observation of it with the same opinion of
necessity: For that the Sabbath was at first jointly observed with the Lords
day, by the Christian Churches, appears from ancient canons, (...), says
Clement, cap. 33. And Scaliger takes it for granted that those Churches were
converted betimes, which retained that old custom: Quod Ethiopes sabbatum ^que
ac Dominicum ab opere immune habent, id non est argumentum Judaismi, sed
veteris Christianismi (says he lib. 7. de emend.) That the Churches of
Aethiopia do keep Saturday a Holy Day as well as Sunday, is not a proof that
they are new Jews, but that they have been old Christians: The truth is, the
Apostles zeal busied and spent it self wholly upon duties, not upon days, and
so should ours: They continued daily in the Temple, Acts 2. 46. and again,
daily in the Temple and in every house they ceased not to teach and preach
Jesus Christ, Acts 5* 42. This daily preaching showed their chief zeal was for
duties, not for days; and yet their every day does not forbid their particular
choice of one principal day, for those holy purposes and performances, at the
same time; for so we read, Acts 20. 7. Upon the first day of the week when the
Disciples came together to break bread* Paul preached unto them: Here Is a
particular day culled out from the rest of the week, both for preaching the
word, (and consequently for praying) and for administering the holy Communion:
for so we may well expound the breaking of bread with some ancient
Interpreters, though it be an ill inference that some of late have made from
thence, that they may lawfully leave out the other part of that blessed*
Sacrament: By the same reason they might tell us, that the Church has
authority to change the very form instituted in Baptism, because we read in the
Acts of the Apostles, that many men were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus, Acts 8. 16. and 19. 5. For without doubt if Christ's institution may be
dispensed withal in the one, it may also in the other Sacrament; and if not in
the one, then not in the other: Wherefore it is ill arguing from a Synechdoche
partis in dicto, to a Synechdoche partis in facto, from a part for the whole in
speaking. to a part for the whole in doing. The bread may be named without the
wine, but it follows not therefore it may be given without it: We may admit of
half speeches, but we must be sure of whole Sacraments. For though words are
not sacrilegious in putting a part for the whole, because that is a right way
of speaking; yet works may be guilty of sacrilege by doing but a part for the
whole, because that is not a right way of working; for in speaking we may
follow the custom or practice of men, but in doing, we must follow the precept
and prescription of God. Nor can a man that wilfully transgresses the
institution of Christ, be excused from infidelity if we will embrace (as we
cannot justly reject) Aquinas his distinction, Infidelis non ut habeus malam
voluntatem circa finem, Sc. Christum; sed tamen ut deficiens in Electione
mediorum, quia non eligit quae sunt a Christo tradita; a Christian may be an
infidel, not as erring about the end, for he aims at Christ; but yet as erring
in the choice of the means, when he follows not those ways which Christ has
prescribed him.

And thus have they erred about the administration of the holy Eucharist, who
would be accounted very strict observers of the grand Christian Festivals;
although in truth they cannot keep a Festival in honor of Christ, who falsely
administer the Eucharist, no more then they who Preach false Doctrine, or use
false devotions: For it is evident from this practice of the Apostles, that
Christian Festivals ought to be celebrated by preaching the word, and
administering the holy Eucharist, and much more by holy and religious prayers,
which may not be left out either in preaching of the word, or in administering
of the Sacrament, unless we will not regard Gods blessing on the one, nor his
presence in the other: Nay indeed, holy and religious Prayers do in effect
partake both of the word and of the Sacrament; of the word as they are
professions of our faith; of the Sacrament, as they are remembrances of our
Savior. And it is accordingly observable that in all the collects of the
Church, there is in the first part of them a recognition or profession of some
heavenly Doctrine which we are bound to believe; as in the latter part there is
a special remembrance of our blessed Savior, whom we are bound to honor
always, concluding Per Jesum Christum, Dominum nostrum, through Jesus Christ
our Lord; so that false devotions, (that is, not true in themselves, or not
true in his certain knowledge who uses them) False Doctrine, and false
administration do all alike profane a Festival. Nay, Saint Paul thinks the
Lords Day not sufficiently celebrated by words and Sacraments and prayers, but
he requires also the giving of alms; Upon the first day of the week let every
one of you lay by him in store, 1 Cor. 16. 2. And Saint Chrysostom tells us he
chose such a day for it, as could not but very much advance the duty: (...),
etc. He argues from the day to the duty, bidding them consider what great
mercies the Lord has bestowed on them that very day, for that alone would make
them willingly and liberally show mercy to his distressed members: This was the
ancient practice of the primitive Christians, to offer up their alms as well as
their prayers to God upon those Festivals which they celebrated in a thankful
remembrance of his mercies conveyed unto them by his Son, and therefore they
might beseech him mercifully to accept their alms as well as to receive their
prayers which they offered to his Divine Majesty: But our charity and our
devotion are both grown cold, and our charity so cold, that it has quite
chilled our devotion; we are loath to be at the charges to honor Christ with
set anniversary Festivals, for fear of continuing or reviving the formerly
accustomed alms to his poor members; for we cannot deny but giving something to
the poor is a most fitting Concomitant or proper adjunct of a Festival, being
so taught, John. 13. 29. where our Saviors words to Judas, That thou do do
quickly, being spoken against the feast, ar^ thus interpreted, that he should
give something to the poor: And indeed they are so rightly interpreted. For
since our Savior has suffered so much for us, we connot do enough for him,
and our doings for him, must needs then be most seasonable when we record his
sufferings for us: And as he was so willing to suffer for our sakes, that he
called upon the Traitor to dispatch quickly; so we should be as willing to do
for his sake, and in all matters of charity that may be helpful unto our
brethren, every man say to himself, what thou do do quickly: Wherefore let me
seriously and constantly pour out my soul to God in unquestionable devotion,
meditate on Gods holy word, hunger after his body, thirst after his blood, and
willingly and frequently relieve and refresh his poor members; and though I may
be able to keep nothing else, yet I shall be sure to keep a good conscience,
which will be to me a continual Feast; yea though all the Holy Days that are
instituted in the remembrance of Christ should be forbidden and forgotten by
others, yet the performance of these holy duties, will never let me want my
Christian Festivals.

SECT. V. The practice of the Primitive Christians in observing the Feast of
Easter; and that there was no superstition in that practice*
THE Primitive Christians did exceedingly rejoice at the Anniversary Feast of
our Saviors Resurrection, and did long continue that their rejoicing, even
till the day of his Ascension, or rather till the day of his descending again
in the gift of the Holy Ghost; so says Balsamon of some in the Greek Church,
(...), that they accounted the whole time from Easter to Whitsontide, but a one
continual Lords day: And it is evident that the first Council of Nice, which
has but twenty Canons in the whole, has bestowed one of them (and that is the
last) merely upon the manner of celebrating this solemnity, requiring all
people to say their prayers standing on every day of the week betwixt Easter
and Whitsontide, no less then on the Lords days all the year after, to proclaim
their joy for, as well as to profess their faith in their Saviors
Resurrection: Nor were they acquainted with any other salutation at that time
of the year, but only this, (...), the Lord is risen; and the party thus
saluted made answer, (...), true, he is risen indeed; they thought they could
not wish one another any joy like the joy of Christ, nor any joy of Christ like
the joy of his Resurrection: The like salutation was in the Latin Church;
Resurrexit Dominus, the Lord is risen, said he who saluted his neighbor; and
the other answered, Deo gratias, the Lord be thanked, or Apparuit Simoni, he
has appeared unto Simon: This was all their Good morrow and Good even one to
the other in the more ancient and more innocent times, (of the Church:) Nay yet
more, on every Sunday from the Resurrection to the Ascension did the Latin
Church repeat the collect for Easter day, Deus qui per Vnigenitum tuum
aeternitatis nobis aditum reserasti, Almighty God which by thy only begotten
Son have opened unto us the gate of everlasting life, leaving out only hodierna
die, on this day, because they could not make one day hold out to forty. And as
they did so long continue the same prayer, so did they as long continue the
same praise; singing three several Alleluiahs on every one of these Sundays for
this infinite mercy and eternal consolation in our Savior Christ, for a
heavenly comfort expressing a heavenly joy, as if they had already passed from
the Church militant, to be of the Church triumphant, and would have no more to
do with the earth, since our Savior was risen from it, and going into Heaven.
Surely Saint Augustine calls the whole three days of our blessed Saviors
passion, death and Resurrection, sacratissimum triduum, the three most holy
days in the circle of the whole year; and the chief of the three was that of
his Resurrection, which was therefore anciently accounted not only the first
day of the week; (for so is any other Sunday) but also the first day of the
year, that is to say, the first in dignity as well as in order. Veteris anni
Ecclesiastici initium a Pascha; and Pascha dicebatur annus novus, says
Scaliger, ( lib. 1. de em. tem.) The beginning of the Ecclesiastical year was
anciently at Easter, and that was called the new year: And in the Greek Church,
(...), new years week, was the same with Easter week; and how this account came
afterward to be altered in the Church, and the new year translated from Easter
to Christmas, the same Scaliger shows ( lib. 6. de emend. temp.) in these
words, Institutum vetus in Ecclesia fuit in natali Domini Pascha proximum,
ejusque diem indiculis aut breviculis notare; Ab hoc more fluxit ut a natali
Domini anni passionis ejus numera^entur; hoc est, ut annum passionis inciperent
putare a natali Domini, qui tamen putandus erat a sequenti Pasch^: Because at
Christmas they did anciently give out the Calender for the ensuing Easter,
thence it came to pass that some began the account of the year of Christ at
Christmas, which they should not have begun till the Easter after. But for a
long time in the account of the Church, Easter day was the first day, and
Easter week was the first week in the whole year, which was the occasion that
the common days of all the other weeks were by the Latin Church called
feriae, that is, holy days; as feria secunda, tertia, quarta, the second,
third, and fourth holyday, instead of Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, because they
followed the account of Easter week, whereof every day was a holy day: So the
same Scaliger (lib. 7. de emend. temp.) Quare prima, secunda, tertia, quarta,
quinta Septimane dictae sunt feriae, quum in omnibus hebdomadibus feriandi
necessitas nulle incumbat, haec ratio est, quod annus Ecclesiasticus incipiat a
Pascha; septimana autem Paschatis erat immunis ab opere faciendo, and feriata;
unde quum sex illi dies post Pascha feriati esse^, and ea esset prima anni
hebdomas, inde factum ut omnes di^s septimanae vocarentur feriae. Lex enim est
Constantini M. (...): non solum hebdomadem post Pascha, sed and antecedentem
excipit ab opere faciendo; sed de posteriore hebdomade usus tantum obtinuit.

The sum of all is this; Because Easter week was the first week in the year,
and the days of that week were all accounted and kept holy, and accordingly
were thus computed, the first, second, third, fourths fifth holy day: Hence it
is that the same computation still hold: of the days in the other weeks
throughout the whole year, that instead of the first, second, third, fourth and
fifth day, it is said, the first, second, third, fourth and fifth holyday: For
the Emperor Constantine the great, made a Law that all Easter week, and the
week before it, should be kept as one Holy Day; And though in our age this Law
holds only of Easter week, yet we have some footsteps of that observation still
in the week before it; for our Church appoints Epistles and Gospels for every
day of the week before Easter, and most Churches beyond the seas, still call it
the holy week; and some make it so: For which Religious practice, it is not to
be doubted but the Church of Christ has warrant enough from that Text, Mark.
14. 8. She has done what she could, she is come aforehand to anoint my body
for the burying, or rather, to anoint her self for my body, to prepare her self
for to receive the Holy Eucharist, and to celebrate the Resurrection: Wherefore
it is evident that in the judgment of the first and best Christians, Easter
day was a greater Sunday then any other all the year after it; even as the
Sabbath of the Passover was, in the Jews account, a greater Sabbath then any
other of all the year; nor was this judgment any way superstitious, but truly
Religious, since we find it authorized by the Text, saying, for that Sabbath
day was an high day, John 19. 32. as if he had said, that Sabbath day was
higher then any other Sabbath, because the Passover was joined with it. I will
not then quarrel with the Church for preferring one Sunday before another,
since she observes them all as holy to the same Lord; there was the Holy of
Holyes in the Sanctuary, without any disparagement to the rest of the Temple;
The Paschal Sabbath was a high day, and yet the other Sabbaths not put down the
lower. By taking off the opinion of holiness I see much profaness and
irreligion in all respects, which makes me conclude, that though the Church
should proclaim, Holy, Holy, Holy, never so much before the place and time of
Gods worship, yet all would be little enough to beget the love and practice of
holiness in the worshippers.

SECT. VI. That the Lords day, which is observed weekly, is to be observed in
memory of our Saviors Resurrection; and has a double sanctification, one by
relation to its du^y, which is publicly to serve God and to give him thanks
for our Redemption by Christ, and is the principal; The other by institution as
consecrated to this duty, and is the less principal: That the Antisabbatarian
Doctrine, which advances duties above days, is not only of Christ's, but also
of Moses his own teaching, and makes most for the true observation of the
Sabbath, which yet is more properly called the Lords Day then the Sabbath.
WE may not pass by that memorable Canon in the Council of Trullo (cap. 66.)
which has these words; (...): From the Holy Festival of the Resurrection of
Christ our God until the New Lords Day, all true believers ought to go to
Church, and there uncessantly praise God in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual
songs.

It Is worth our notice that the Fathers of that (...) holden in the Emperors
Palace, called Easter day it self (...), The Resurrection day; but the Sunday
after it (...), The New Lords day; not simply the Lords Day, of its self or by
its own virtue, but as it was a repetition or renovation of the former, (...),
of the day of our Lords Resurrection.

For to say it was called the New Lords Day, because of the renewing by
Baptism, (which anciently was administered at that time) is not satisfactory;
for besides that other Sundays must have been called New as well as that, (upon
the same account) to wit those of Easter and Pentecost, it is manifest that
Baptism cannot justly cause any Sunday to be called the Lords day, and
therefore surely not the New Lords day: Whence it follows, that if this Sunday
was called the New Lords Day as renewing the day of our Lords Resurrection,
this and all other Sundays do belong unto the Lord, chiefly upon this account
that they are memorials of his Resurrection: So that though the Law of the
Sabbath (as well as of other things) came by Moses, yet the grace and truth of
it came by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17. And for this reason was the Sabbath
translated from its own day to our Lords Day, that the Law of Moses might give
place to the grace and truth of Jesus Christ; and happily for that cause
(amongst others) has the Church appointed some annual memorials of the grace
and truth which came by Jesus Christ to be solemnized as so many Sabbaths,
least we should think that in this weekly memorial she did rather follow the
Law given by Moses; then the grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ: And
doubtless when we have said all that we can, there can be no entire keeping of
a Sabbath from Moses but only from Christ; because in him alone the soul may
seek for rest, and in him alone is sure to find it. For as the souls trouble is
from sin; so her rest is from the expiation and forgiveness of sins: Therefore
as her trouble is from her self, so her rest is from her Savior; Saint Paul
has taught us both together in his Sermon* and our own Church in her Anthymn
of the Resurrection, For seeing that by man came death, by man also comes the
Resurrection of the dead: for as by Adam all men do dye, so by Christ all men
shall be restored to life: By man came death, by Adam all men do die. There Is
the souls trouble from her sin for the wages of sin is death: By man comes
the Resurrection of the dead: by Christ all men shall be restored to life,
there is the souls rest or Sabbath, from her Savior: for the gift of God is
eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. If we will needs gainsay the
Judgment of our own Church, to set up the Sabbath instead of the Lords day,
yet we may not gainsay the Doctrine of Saint Paul, which requires us to set up
the Lords day instead of the Sabbath: so that if we will needs borrow the name
from Moses, yet we can have the thing it self only from Christ; for it is not
Moses but Christ which can give the soul a Sabbath, or make it truly to rest in
God: And indeed i^ our Sabbath be grounded on this foundation, the gates of
hell will not be able to prevail against it, because on it our Lord and Savior
prevailed against the gates of hell; And all Christians will see cause enough
to observe it not only religiously but also joyfully, because as many as are in
the communion of the blessing, ought also to be in the communion of the Joy and
thanksgiving, and wholly devote themselves to the public profession and
acknowledgement of Gods infinite and undeserved mercies (and as undeserved as
infinite mercies) conveyed unto us, in and by our blessed Saviors
Resurrection: If we keep the Sunday (or Sabbath) upon this ground, we shall
find a double reason of strictly keeping it; one from the duty which is to
serve God, and to praise him for our Redemption by his Son; the other from the
day it self, which by his own Apostles, (if not by his own Son) htah been
consecrated to this duty: But we must be sure to take the duty for the
principal, the day for the less principal, unless we will prefer accidents
before substances; For the worship of God belongs to the substance of Religion,
but the time of worshipping is merely an accident of it; though being
consecrated thereunto by God himself, we may well admit it for an inseparable
accident. Wherefore men had need take heed of that Sabbatarian Doctrine, which
seeks to advance the day above the duty, as if the public exercise of Religion
had been appointed for the Sabbath, and not rather the Sabbath for the public
exercise of Religion; for this is not in truth to allege the fourth
Commandment, but to mistake it: For the moral or substantial and eternal part
of the fourth Commandment consists of these two particulars. 1. That there be a
public solemn worship of God, or exercise of Religion for our souls to rest in
God. And this is morale naturae, moral by the Law of Nature, that man should
desire and declare his rest to be only in God. 2. That some certain days (and
consequently other requisites or adjuncts) be consecrated or made holy for that
public worship, and in relation thereto be esteemed holy and religious, as set
apart to serve our God, not to serve our selves. And this is Morale
Disciplinae, (as says Halensis) or ex instituto; moral by way of Discipline,
or by way of institution, and is also a substantial part of the fourth
Commandment, belonging not only to the Jew, but also to the Christian.

But the determination of those days to the seventh was merely ceremonial (as
a sign to the Jew) and to a seventh, cannot be moral (as a duty to Christians)
by virtue of this commandment, save only according to the rule of general
equity, that Gods proportion is the best proportion; and that, if one of seven
were apportioned for the lesser, how much more for the greater blessing? Yet
still in asserting thus much, we must take heed that the institution of the day
which belongs to the letter, be not alleged to confine the obligation of the
duty which belongs to the end of this commandment; for that were to set up the
second and lesser, against the first and greater morality of the Sabbath; In
which respect it is probable that Damascene so plainly averreth, That whiles
there was no Law, no Scriptures, there was no Sabbath, (...): Dan. lib. 4 de*
orth. fide cap. 24.) But after the holy Scripture was given by inspiration from
God to Moses, then, was the sabbath consecrated to God, for men to exercise
themselves in his holy Scriptures: So that according to Gods own example (if
this author say true) we are first to provide for the duty, then for the
solemnity of Religion; And we may the better believe him, because his saying is
according to Gods command; For the fourth commandment, being the commandment of
consecrations, yet first requires a worship intrisically and essentially* holy,
before it requires the adjuncts of that worship to be made extrinsically or
accidentally holy: So that clearly by the fourth commandment it self, rightly
understood, the duty is above the day, and the exercise of Religion is to be
preferred above the Solemnities of time and place, wherein it is exercised; and
consequently if the public exercise of Religon that is in use, does not truly
glorify God, a man may better keep the sabbath in his own, then in Gods house,
supposing he worship God better in his own house, then he can in the Church: So
nearly does it concern us all to be sure of the substance of our worship,
before we can pretend to be true keepers of the sabbath; for if the Prayers or
Administrations wherein we communicate, do not in very deed rightly glorify
God, it is not going to Church can make us keep the sabbath (for infidels and
heriticks may do that as well as the best Christians; and the best Christians
may be kept from doing it) because what we get of the day, we lose of the duty,
^^t is not possible that any thing of superstition or of irreligion should
afford the soul of man any true rest in God which is the end of the sabbath:
And this seems to be our Savior own doctrine at that same time when he
reproved the blindness of the Pharisees about the observation of the sabbath,
by scripture, by reason and by a miracle; (Matthew 12.) three such arguments as
were sure to leave none of them unconfuted; for if they had judgment, reason
would be their confutation; If they had Faith, the Scriptures; But though they
had neither judgment nor faith, yet a miracle was able to do the work; and we
may well suppose the error was very dangerous which our blessed Savior did
confute with so much industry, and so many arguments, as he did scarce any
other in all the Gospel: In this case he said to the ruler of the Synagogue,
Thon Hypocrite, Luke 13. 15. In this case he looked round about on the
Pharisees with anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, (Mar. 3.
5.) He employed his tongue, his eyes, his heart, his head all to beat down this
Heresy, or rather this Hypocrisy, which under pretense of being zealous for
Gods commandments, did in truth not only secretly undermine, but also openly
oppose them. Accordingly our blessed Savior and Master has in one chapter, (
Mat. 12.) fortified us with no less then four limitations of this or any other
positive or Ceremonial Law, wherein it does not bind and oblige: or at least
four interpretations to mitigate the rigor of its obligation: The first is,
Lex naturae or necessitatis: it must give place to the Law of nature or of
necessity, as in the case of David's Hunger, ver. 3* 4. The Second is Lex
cultus: it must give place to the Law of Religion, as in the case of the
Priests working about the sacrifices on the Sabbath, and yet they were
blameless, ver. 5. The third is Lex charitatis: it must give place to the Law
of charity, as is proved from the saying of Hosea, I will have mercy and not
sacrifice, ver. 7. The fourth is Authoritas legislatoris: the authority of the
lawgiver; for he that made it may abrogate it, (an argument not used in the
Text concerning any (intrinsically) moral law or duty) The Son of man is Lord
also of the Sabbath, ver. 8. We may add a fifth from the repetition of the same
story, and that is Intentio legislatoris: it must give place to the intent of
the Lawgiver, which is the good, not the mischief of those to whom he gives his
Law; And this Limitation or Interpretation we find Mar. 2. 27. in these words,
the sabbath was made for man; that is, for man's good, to wit the outward rest
of his body and the inward rest of his soul; and therefore it is not his intent
who made the Sabbath for man's good, both in corporal and spiritual rest, that
it should bind him to any real mischief either in his body or in his soul:
wherefore it is evident by our blessed Saviors own determination, That though
great is the obligation of those ceremonies which are of Gods own immediate
appointment, yet greater is the obligation of the least moral duty then of any
of those ceremonies, when that Moral duty concerns either our selves or our
neighbors, and not only when it concerns our God.

For ceremonials are appointed for Morals; but Morals are appointed for
themselves: Positive constitutions are for the inforcement of natural
institutions, but natural institutions are for the God of nature. Wherefore
since Gods worship is not ceremonial but moral, not positive but natural, and
the Sabbath is both positive and ceremonial, it must follow that the worship
was not ordained for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for the worship, and
consequently the worship is clearly above the Sabbath: And this same
Antisabbatarian doctrine, is not only of Christ's, but also of Moses his own
teaching, if we may believe the Jewish Doctors themselves, upon those words of
Exodus 12. 16. And in the first day and in the Seventh day shall be an holy
convocation; For there this is Aben Ezzra's gloss in the first day, because
that was the day of their going out of Egypt; and in the seventh day because
that was the day of Pharaohs being drowned: therefore those two days were more
strictly observed then any of the rest that came in betwixt them; And yet if we
look narrrowly into the matter, not the days themselves, but the duties
performed on them, made the holy convocations; for it is evident from the Text,
that the first day was sanctified by eating of the Passover, and the Seventh
day was sanctified by the heavenly Songs and thanksgivings of Moses and Miriam;
so it was the Passover and the thanksgiving; not the first and the seventh
day; that is Holy, duties, not holy days, which made the Gathering of the
people to be an holy convocation, and showed it to be so.

We ask no more of Christians but this, That they will allow Duties to be above
days in making of holy convocations, and consequently the public worship of
God to be above the Sabbath, the day wherein he is to be so worshipped; And
this being granted (which cannot well be denied) it must needs follow that they
best keep the sabbath who have the best public worship of God, which is the
duty; not they who are strictest in observing of the day which is the ceremony,
who talk much of the Sabbath, but follow such a service or worship of God as
is more agreeable with man's humors, or with humane invention, then with Gods
word or divine institution; A Service or worship which though it may be solemn
and public in regard of the Convention, yet not in regard of the Communion,
since no man can come as a Communicant to that worship concerning the which he
is not well assured, that it is according to the analogy of Faith: For he may
neither give up his conscience in a blind obedience, nor may he retain it upon
uncertainties, the one being against the evidence, the other against the
assurance of faith; and whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Rom, 14. 23. Whether
it be not of faith for want of evidence, or for want of assurance.

Nor does this divinity whereby we ^ollow the best Divine that ever was in
preferring substances above accidents, morals above ceremonials, Duties above
days, any whit diminish the true Santification of the Sabbath, but rather
improve and advantage it: For it is an undeniable rule of reason, and much more
of religion, That all moral duties must have moral antecedents, concomitants,
and consequents, which if we will apply to this moral duty of Gods public
worship, we shall find any day consecrated there to, whether weekly or yearly,
little enough either for our preparation before we go to worship, or for our
attention whiles we are worshipping, or for our meditation and thankfulness
after we have worshipped.

In a word, a Sabbath in general is doubtless moral by the fourth commandment,
which requires a day to be set apart or made holy for Gods public worship, and
requires that the day so set apart, be esteemed holy and religious, though not
so much for its own sake, as for its works sake, according to St. Paul's command
concerning the Ministers that are set apart for the same worship, 1. These. 5.
12, 13. We beseech you brethren to know them which labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord, and admonish you; And to esteem them very highly in love
for their works sake: which text plainly convinces those men to be the
greatest sabbathbreakers, and contemners of the fourth commandment, who will
not know those which labor among them in the Lord, unless it be to contemn,
and to revile and to oppress them; and are so far from acknowledging those
laborers to be over them in the Lord, that they strive both to bring the
labor under their girdles, and to tread the laborers under their feet; for
the Apostle says expressly, they are to be esteemed highly, if not for their
own, yet surely for their works sake; and in saying so teaches us to say the
same of the time and place that are consecrated to the public worship of God;
For by the rule of proportion what is commanded concerning one adjunct of
Religion, is commanded concerning the rest; and we may not think we have
dicharged our duties to the fourth commandment by honoring the time, but
pillaging and defying both the Places and the Persons that are consecrated to
Gods service; or to speak yet more plainly, by crying up the Sabbath, but
beating down both Churches and Ministers.

And indeed the fourth commandment it self hints no less, which deriveth the
reason of the Sabbaths being sanctified above other days, not from any
holiness in the day it self, or any set number of days, but only from the
holiness that is in God: ( Wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it:) The Sabbath in respect of its duty, is without doubt of Divine
right; in respect of its day, may without derogation to the fourth commandment,
in the Judgment of many good Divines be said to be of Ecclesiastical right;
For the duty is matter of Religion, which God has reserved wholly to himself;
the day is matter of order, which God has in part left unto his Church, even
in this very case; for though he has determined a set day for his public
worship, yet he has not confined his Church to that day (as he has to the
worship it self) by his determination: Therefore we may not deny Gods Church
that liberty which he has given her, though we are willing to say he has
given it with this limitation or restriction, that where the Apostolical Church
has positively determined any thing in the practice of Religion, (as in the
weekly festival for the honor of Christ,) (...) Church after it may not
lawfully alter the determination; And where the Catholic Church has
determined to the same purpose, (as in the yearly Festivals for the honor of
Christ,) particular national Churches may not with sobriety or with safety
determine against it; For though neither of these in it self is against the
substance of Religion, yet both are against the order and exercise of it, and
therefore against God, who is the God of order, and has commanded the exercise
of Religion.

We conclude then, that though the Sabbath in special is abolished, that is to
say, that determinate set day, no less then that Temple and that Priesthood,
yet not others instead of them; which having been since determinately pointed
out, and appointed by the authority of Christ and his Apostles, have as much
real holiness in them as the other ever had, and that by virtue of the same
Commandment, which requires as a holy a public worship now as it did then,
since the same God who said to the Jews in the old, has said to the Christian
in the new Testament, be ye holy for I am holy, 1 Pet. 1. 16.

Wherefore the name Sabbath, cannot add to the Religion of the worship, but it
may add to the superstition of the worshippers: And it is safest for us now to
look upon it as a name of the old use, though it signify a thing of the new
use: wherein it is not amiss to take notice of Eustathius his Criticism upon
the third of the Iliads, concerning (...), words that are still of the old
usage; as (...) still signifies a headpeice, though now it be not made of a sea
dogs skin, for which cause it was first called so; And (...) signifies Arms,
though now they are not made of brass but of iron: So (...) is still used for
to write, though now our writing be not by ingraving or making any hollow
impressions: many other of the like kind may be observed both in the Greek and
Latin tongue, wherein the same word is still retained, though the thing be
quite out of use; And by this rule we may still retain the words, Priest,
Altar, Temple, Sacrifice: as well as sabbath, viz. all of them by way of
custom, but none of them all by way of contestation; And God himself calling
the day of Atonement a sabbath, (Lev. 16. 31.) though it came but once a year,
has licenced us to give the name Sabbath as well to our Aniversary, as to our
weekly Festivals. But indeed the question is not about Sunday a Sabbath, as if
Caesar-like it would admit of no Superior; but of Sunday the Sabbath, which
Pompey-like, will admit of no Equal: and I answer, That to call Sunday the
Sabbath, by way of eminency, though it were lawful, yet it is not laudable; and
is therefore better omitted then practiced: for besides that every language in
the Christian world takes the Sabbath day for Saturday, save only our late new
English, and God himself has taken the seventh day and the Sabbath for terms
convertible, and all the wit of man cannot take the first day for the seventh
day, it is neither safe for us nor for our festival to seek to derive its
holiness from the Jewish Sabbath; not safe for us, because it will make us
Judaize, at least in other men's judgments, if not in our own, which is a thing
that Saint Paul, if he were amongst us, would be much afraid of for our sakes,
( Gal. 4. 10, 11.) and therefore much more should we be afraid of it for our
own sakes: Not safe for our festival, which by that means will be made rely
upon a broken reed (for the broken reeds are more now in Judaea then in Egypt)
and so be subject to a downfall; For the Sabbath is as alterable to the
Christian, as to the Jew: but the Lords day is eternal. And if we have such a
Sabbath as is subject to alteration, we must have such a Sabbath as is subject
to annihilation; for the one is naturally not only a forerunner of, but also a
preparation to the other.

Wherefore let my soul look after such a Sabbath, as may lead me not to an
outward and temporal, but to an inward and eternal rest, of which the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 4. 9. There remains therefore a rest to the people of God:
(...), the keeping of a Sabbath; but it is such a Sabbath as hypocrites cannot
keep, nor Atheists hinder good men from keeping; whereas this outward Sabbath
may be most observed by hypocrites, and altogether opposed by Atheists: But
this is such a Sabbath as Hypocrites cannot keep; for it is (...): only for the
people of God; And such as Atheists cannot hinder good men from keeping; for
the text says, (...), relinquitur; They that can take away all other things,
cannot take away this Sabbath from us: they must still leave that behind them,
though they have played at sweep-stakes with all the rest; This is a Relic
that I must highly prize, because they cannot plunder; according to that
admirable gloss of Epiphanius (adver. Her. Manich.) upon these very words of
Saint Paul, (...), The Lord Jesus Christ himself is our Sabbath and our rest;
and in this sense we had need both labor and pray that we may be Sabbatarians.

SECT. VII. That Sunday has a better title to holiness and unchangeableness as
the Lords day, then as the Sabbath: And that the Lords day, and the Lords
Laborers or Ministers are both to continue to the worlds end by virtue of Gods
command in general, and of Christ's determination and institution in particular.
WILL you plead for a Sabbath in Paradise from Genesis 2. 2? you will not from
thence be able to advantage our weekly Festival; For besides that the Fathers
are of another mind, (particularly Justine Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho,
who quarrels not with him about that Tenent, though being a Jew, he would have
been zealous to have proved his Sabbath before Moses, could he have made good
his proof?) and that these words seem to be spoken by way of anticipation, to
continue the history, like that of the Saints rising at our Saviors death,
Saint Mat. 27. 52. which yet was not so, till after his resurrection, for
Christ was to be the first that should rise from the dead, Act. 26. 23. The
reason of the name Sabbath depends upon the creation, of which God repented
soon after, as says Moses, it repented the Lord that he had made man on the
earth, and it grieved him at his heart, Genesis 6. 6. when as the reason of the
name Lords day depends upon the Redemption, of which he cannot repent: For
Christ rising again from the dead now dies not, death from henceforth has no
power upon him: for in that he died, he died but once to put away sin: but in
that he lives, he lives unto God, Romans 6. 9, 10. And as Christ being raised
from the dead dies no more, so neither can this Festival die which is
consecrated to the memory of his resurrection: but as long as the first day of
the week shall last, so long it must be our Lords day, and not our own: As is
the mercy immortal, so is the duty that records it; and as is the duty, so is
the day on which it is recorded: As is the Lord himself, so is his day, as much
as a day can be, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: The same in all
ages and successions of the Church; Not changeable now by the Authority of his
present Catholic Church, because that has a power for edification not for
destruction, 1 Cor. 10. 8. and in this change the Church that is now, would but
pull down, what the Church, when it was under the master builders hands, did
set up: Not changeable by the Authority of Angeis, for they in so doing would
in effect preach another Gospel, another Christ delivered for our offenses, and
risen again for our Justification, and so being themselves under Saint Paul's
anathema, Gal. 1. 9. I dare further say, (and I hope it is no presumption, sure
it is intended with reverence) not changeable by Christ himself, according to
his power of excellency whereby he is head of the Church, and founder of all
Christian Institutions; because though the change be Metaphysically possible,
that is, in its own nature, for that all days are alike in themselves, as to
Gods worship; yet it is not morrally possible, that is, in the end and reason
of the change, because Christ cannot rise again from the dead, and
consequently, there cannot be another day, as a memorial of his resurrection.

More days then this may be set apart for the honor of Christ, by the example
and from the reason or end of this; for the duty is of extent large enough to
employ many days, and God having consecrated time to his own service, has
made it lawful, or rather necessary for the Church to do so too; and we find
the Jews did ordain the feasts of Purim and Dedication, without any peculiar
precept from the text, and yet are justified for so doing: But this day must be
set apart by the example of Christ himself, who made it his free-will-offering
to God, by making on it the first ordination of the ministers of his Gospel.
Other days are authorized by virtue of this: but this day is authorized by
virtue of Christ, who chose it for the day whereon to ordain his Apostles the
Teachers and Governors of his Church; and also to give unto them the power of
ordaining others: So that both the circumstances of time and person, the day
and the Ministers of Gods public worshp, have no less then the chief corner
stone for their foundation: For they both are grounded upon the practice of
Christ on the day of his resurrection, though builded upon the practice and
precepts of his Apostles. So we read, John 20. 19. The same day at evening,
being the first day of the week, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says
unto them, Peace be unto you; the same day at evening; the evening follows the
morning in the Christian, but went before it in the Jewish account of days.
The evening and the morning made the first Sabbath, but the morning and the
evening made the first Lords day; what other reason can we give of the change,
but because the Lord rose from death in the morning, Being the first day of the
week? Why is the first day of the week so punctually named? Surely not to tell
the Apostles what day it was, but to tell us that should be after them, that we
might know the very day on which Christ had purchased for, and bestowed on his
Church such unvaluable mercies, and so know it as to keep it, as it follows,
ver. 21. Theu said Jesus unto them again, Peace be unto you; Now it is more
then an ordinary salutation, it is certainly a most solemn benediction: Peace
be unto you; as my Father has sent me, even so send I you and when he had said
this, he breathed on them, and says unto them, receive ye the Holy Ghost. We
have here the practice and example of Christ, for solemnizing the day of his
resurrection, and for the ordaining of his Ministers: We have his example for
the observation of the Lords day, which as he made holy by his own rising, so
he kept holy by his blessing, and ordaining the Apostles on it: And we have his
example for the ordination of the Lords Ministers: and there is little reason
why we should easily, and much less slightly, pass by the former, since we are
sure that the latter is to continue till the worlds end; for this is the full
meaning of the words, As my Father sent me, and endued me with the Holy Ghost,
or with spiritual authority to be the teacher and governor of his universal
Church: So I send you, and endue you with the Holy Ghost, or with spiritual
authority and power, to be teachers and governors of the Church after me: And
as the Father sent me with power and authority of sending others, and of giving
them the Holy Ghost, or my spiritual power: So do I send you with the power of
sending others, and giving unto them the Holy Ghost, or this spiritual
authority and power of sending others still after them, even to the worlds end.
This is the full meaning of those words, and therefore the ancient Fathers,
(particularly Saint Cyprian and Firmilian) did rightly apply this Text to prove
by it the authority of the Church in their days, and we may as rightly allege
it now to justify the same authority: For the Bishops are obliged by this Text
to ordain a succession of Ministers even to the worlds end, One must be
ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection, says Saint Peter, Acts
1. 22. If God say, One must be ordained, it is not for boisterous men to say,
ye shall nor ordain; nor for timorous men to say, we dare not: They that are
enemies to the ordination to the witnesses, can scare be friends to the
Doctrine of the resurrection. The Lords days and the Lords Ministers will
stand or fall both together; and there is no opposing the one, without opposing
the other; and no opposing either, without opposing Gods command. For indeed
they are both alike in general commanded by the fourth Commandment, though only
one be named, (even as uncleanness and fornication are both forbidden in the
seventh, though only adultery be mentioned) and they are both alike in special
determined by the example of Christ and of his Apostles, and the constant and
universal practice of the Christian Church: As there is an order from the Holy
Ghost that concerns the time or the day proved from the first of the
Corinthians 16 2. As I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do
ye: that is, the same order that I gave to them concerning the first day of the
week, I give also to you, and in you to all other Churches; (which order was
accordingly speedily and generally obeyed, because there was an irresistible
reason for that obedience;) so also there is an order from the Holy Ghost
concerning the persons, proved from Acts 20. 8. The Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers or Biships; and Titus 1. 5. That thou should ordain Elders or
Presbyters; whence it must needs follow, that to disturb the persons ordained
to be in the Church of God is equally sacrilegious, as to disturb the day that
was settled by the same order* For the determination of the persons appointed
to be the Lords Ministers, is full as plain (to speak but sparingly) both in
the prescript of the Text, and in the practice of the Catholic Church, as is
the determination of the Lords day; and those men are equally inexcusable, who
make bold to alter Gods determination in the one, as those who make bold to
alter it in the other; for both being established by the same authority, are
alike unalterable.

An universal obligation binds equally all persons, at all times, and in all
places; and therefore only moral and eternal duties of the Text, can
immediately and from themselves have such an obligation, as the duties of
faith, hope and charity: But yet a determination of the Text, though by way of
example only, concerning the public exercise of those duties, which is without
controversy in the Gospel of Christ given to us Christians, may also
immediately and by virtue of the said duties, have an universal obligation;
because to occasion the disturbance or disesteem of the true and laudable
exercise of Religion, whether by profaness or perverseness, whether by throwing
aside or pulling down the time, place or persons appointed for that purpose, is
certainly ungodly and irreligious, and it is at no time lawful to do an act of
ungodliness or irreligion.

SECT. VIII. That Sunday, as the Lords day, is most truly a Christian Festival,
and ought to be most Religiously observed; and so ought also other Festivals
instituted in honor of Christ, as being likewise our Christian Sabbaths.
NO Christian festival whatsoever, but must be wholly Christian, both in its
foundation, Christian Verity; and in its institution Christian authority; and
in its observation, Christian service or duty; For the day is holy for the
duty, not the duty for the day: and they who teach or practice otherwise, are
like those Priests of Spain, mentioned and reproved in the fourth Toletane
Council, ( can. 9.) who would not say the Lords Prayer, but only on the Lords
day, Orationem Dominicam tantum die Dominico dicere voluerunt, as if Religion
were an adjunct of time, and not rather time an adjunct of Religion; Christian
Verity, Christian Authority, Christian Duty: no man can wilfully go against
either of these principles, but he must profess himself either Unchristian or
Antichristian: And behold our weekly festival in honor of our Savior Christ,
is justifiable by all these three, and consequently being truly Christian in
all these respects, that is to say, in its foundation, in its institution, and
in its observation, must needs be an universal feast for all Christians to be
partakers of, for that it is annexed to the Christian Religion as necessary (by
the necessity of Justice) from the duty and thankfulness we all owe to our
Savior Christ, and therefore may not be carelessly neglected, much less
irreverently profaned without the Imputation of injustice and unthankfulness:
The Casuists speak louder, and say; not without the imputation of Sacrilege;
So Cajetane in his summulae; Festos dies in honorem Dei sanctificat^s violare,
peccatum est Sacrilegii, quia injuria fit tempori sacro, quantum ad illud ad
quod sanctificatum est; To profane a Holy day, that is made and kept holy in
honor of God, is a sin of Sacrilege, because the profanation of time that is
sanctified, is an affront and defiance of its sanctification; so that in effect
it is a double Sacrilege, for it robs time of that holiness which belongs to
it, and it robs God of that time which belongs to him. This great Sacrilege is
yet further accompanied with one of the seven deadly sins (commonly so called)
and that sin is spiritual slothfulness: So says Alensis, Accidia opponitur
praecepto de sanctificatione Sabbathi; In peccato enim Accidiae, Tristitia est
de spirituali laborioso, cum amore quietis carnalis; e contra vero, in illo
praecepto est Amor sanctae quietis, quae est cum gaudio in bono spirituali;
(par. 2 qu. 140. m. 10.) The sin of slothfulness is opposed to that precept of
the sanctification of the Sabbath; for in the sin of slothfulness there is
sorrow for spiritual labor, and love of carnal rest. But in the precept
concerning the sanctification of the Sabbath, is commanded the love of a Holy
Rest, or Joy in our spiritual good, which as it is not obtained without great
labor, so it is not enjoyed without great rest, even the sweet and most
comfortable rest of the soul in God, for his everlasting mercies in Jesus
Christ: so that all those Festivals which commemorate to us the mercies of God
in Christ, are to be accounted as our Christian sabbaths, and we shall be
little less then enemies to our own souls (if not to be our blessed Savior)
unless we seriously endeavor to make them so: Surely if men did truly believe
and earnestly desire the life everlasting, they would be as careful not to
defraud their souls of due nourishment, as they are not do defraud their
bodies, and would no more begrutch the time for the one then for the other; but
would rather be more industrious to save their souls, then they are to preserve
their bodies, and consequently more solicitous how to lay in provision for a
supply against their spiritual, then for a supply against their corporal
necessities; always remembering that Motto Ex hoc momento aeternitas, as we
spend our time here, so we shall find our eternity hereafter.

For God who has given us time only to prepare and provide for eternity, will
certainly call us to a strict account for all our time; but to the strictest
account for that time which he has more immediately allotted and consigned us
to make that preparation.

SECT. IX. The fourth commandment was not given to limit the first; and
therefore excludes not other Festivals, showing our true love of Christ, but
rather commands them: The true manner of ob. serving any Christian festival,
(particularly Easter) is to account and make it a day of Observations, by
observing our selves, and our Savior: our selves what we have been, what we
are, what we desire to be: Our Savior what he was in his humiliation, what he
is in his exaltation, what he will in his retribution.
CHristian Feasts were not ordained not so much for the outward as for the
inward man; Hence excellently the divine Nazianzen, (or at. 44.) (...): No
beauty does so much enamour and delight the most affectionate lover of
beauties, as our spiritual keeping of public assemblies does delight a
Christian lover of Festivals: We will therefore enquire how a good Christian
may best keep a spiritual feast unto the Lord, and we hope thereby not to
overthrow but rather to establish our set temporal Festivals: And indeed we
cannot better keep a spiritual feast unto the Lord, then by accounting it a day
of observations; as Moses said of the feast of the Passover, that it was a
night of observations, (...), and Solomon Jarchi gives this gloss upon the
place, (...) because the Lord observed himself that night, and watched that he
might deliver Israel according to his promise. And sure we are, that our
blessed Savior thus observed and watched himself that he might deliver us from
sin and death; and as sure that this day of our deliverance ought be a day for
every good Christian most especially to observe himself, and yet much more to
observe his Savior; That sabbath day was an high day, to the Jew whereon was
celebrated the Passover, ( John 19. 31) And since there is much greater reason
it should be so to the Christian, it is not possible there should be greater
supestition in it: For reason and superstition could never yet agree so well
together, that what was truly Rational, could by the wit of man be proved
superstitious.

We must then account this day an high day, and not confine our devotions so to
our weekly Festival, as if that alone were within the compass of the fourth
commandment; For we may not limit the first commandment by the fourth, since
the first is the great commandment to which all the rest, in that Table, are to
be reduced, according to our blessed Saviors own determination, Mat. 22. 37,
38. Jesus said unto him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
with all thy soul; and with all thy mind; this is the first and great
commandment.

By which his determination, our infallible Doctor has concluded the fourth
commandment to be moral, in that he makes it reducible to the first, but
withal, to have its chiefest morality merely by virtue of that reduction: And
in this respect we may pray in faith, Incline our hearts to keep this law, as
well as any of the rest in the Decalogue, looking on the duty as moral for it
self; on the day as moral for its duty; for the duty is clearly reducible to
the love of God, and consequently to be most religiously observed for it self;
and by virtue of that comes in the day, (with its other adjuncts,) to be most
religiously observed for the duty: We have a Theological certainty concerning
the duty, which is the rest of our souls in God; we can have but a moral
certainty concerning the day, as set apart for that rest; yet we need not fear
a mistake in the day, being sure of no mistake in the duty; and consequently
observing the day for the duty, we cannot but pray in faith for mercy, because
we have transgressed, (for who did ever rest in God as he was bound to do?) and
for grace, that we may not transgress; but may still more and more rest in him,
till we come to our eternal rest. Therefore we may not limit or restrain the
end of the fourth Commandment by the letter of it, advancing the day above the
duty; for that is the way not to pray in faith that we may keep this Law; much
less may we limit and restrain the first Commandment by the fourth; for that is
the way not to be able to pray in faith, that we may keep any other Law, since
it is evident that the love of God is the foundation of faith in all our
prayers, and that Love is required in the first Commandment, so that to
restrain that Commandment is to restrain our love of God; and to restrain our
love of God, is to restrain our faith in God: Again, we may not limit the first
Commandment by the fourth; for that were to limit the greater by the lesser;
and it is evident, the fourth was given to establish the exercise of the first,
not to enfeeble its obligation; since then the first commands us to love God
with all our hearts and with all our souls, we may not think that the fourth
was given to confine this love in any one particular member of Christ, much
less in his whole mystical body, as if Christians were bound to make use of
their hearts and souls in the public exercise and profession of their love to
God only upon Sunday, or upon one day in seven.

Accordingly we must account every Christian Festival that is truly in honor
and for love of Christ. (and particularly this of the Passover) An high day;
and to show that we account it so, our best way is to endeavor to make it so,
by making it a day of observations. Now observations cannot be less then two;
and that two may indeed serve our turns one of these observations must be of
our selves, another of our Savior: The observation of our selves must be
threefold, what we have been, what we are, what we resolve to be. First, what
we have been; miserable sinners; Thus the Psalmist observed himself, when he
said, for innumerable troubles are come about me, my sins have taken such hold
upon me, that I am not able to look up, yea they are more in number then the
hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me. O Lord, let it be thy pleasure
to deliver me; make haste O Lord to help me, (Psalm 40) I have been hitherto a
miserable sinner, but I beseech thee to deliver me both from my misery, and
from my sin.

Secondly, what we are, penitent sinners; Thus holy Job observed himself when
he said, wherefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes, Job. 42. 6.
It Is in the Origin (...) Idcirco reprobabo, therefore I will reject and
reprobate; what? (...) says Ezra, all my words; we may say more: all my
thoughts words and work* which have been against thee, I will account them all
as reprobate, for fear they should make me so: and I will repent in dust and
ashes, that I have so frequently, so undutifully, so unthankfully sinned
against that great Majesty which was able to confound me in my sins, and much
more that I have thus sinned against that good mercy that is willing to save me
from my sins, and daily inviteth me to that salvation.

Thirdly, what we resolve to be; amended sinners: Thus the Prophet Jeremiah
advises us; therefore now amend your ways, Jer. 26. 16. I appeal to all the
consciences of all men now living, whether ever any ways of men so much needed
amendment as ours do, who have made Saint Paul's general Doctrine of all
mankind, as it were a particular History of our selves; They are all gone out
of the way, they are altogether become unprofitable, (that is too mild, take it
as it is in the Psalmist, they are altogether become abominable) there is none
that does good, no not one: Their throat is an open sepulcher, with their
tongues have they used deceit, the poison of asps is under their lips, their
feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and misery are in their ways, (1.
quacunque incedunt, solitudinem and vastitatem faciunt omnia perdendo, says
Beza, where ever they go, they carry desolation along with them;) and the way
of peace have they not known; 1. Vitam innocentem and pacisicam, says Beza,
they have not known what belongs to an innocent and a peaceable life; and
indeed how can they know what belongs to peace, who will not know what belongs
to innocence? These words were spoken in the Old Testament of the best of men,
the Jews; and of them in the best of their times, that is, when King David, and
King Hezekiah governed them; for all the Testimonies are taken out of the
Psalms and the Prophecy of Isaiah; And hence it is, the Apostle by an argument
a majori ad minus makes them Doctrinal of all men whatsoever; for though they
were particular in their occasion or in their example, yet they were universal
in their instruction and in their document. They were spoken only of some men,
and that occasionally; but they are true of all men, and that Doctrinally, till
God please to purify their hearts by faith, and their lives by repentance: But
we have again made them particular and occasional, and merely Historical of our
selves, who have been called to the knowledge of faith and the practice of
repentance above all other Nations, and yet have outstripped them all in our
works of infidelity and impenitency: Our infidelity whatever we vainly talk of
faith) has made us guilty of all this impiety and wickedness both against God
and man; and our impenitency makes us still persist and continue in our
guiltiness: Surely Saint John Baptist if he were now alive, would think himself
bound to teach us, (though he were sure to lose his head for his Doctrine) that
therefore the Kingdom of Heaven, the power of the Gospel, is so far from us,
because we are so far from repentance. For he that might not preach the Gospel
in vain, first preached repentance, saying, repent ye, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3. 2. (...) resipiscite, repent ye; so Beza and our new
translation, looking to the inward contrition and conversion of the heart:
poenitentiam agite, says the Vulgar Latin, do penance, looking to the
outward confession of, and humiliation for the sin. Amend your lives, says our
old translation (as it is still in the sentences before the common prayer)
looking to the real correction and amendment of the sinner: contrition for the
heart, confession for the mouth, correction for the life and conversation; not
one of these must be wanting in him that desires and resolves to be an amended
sinner: This for the observation of our selves.

The other observation must be of our Savior, and that is also threefold, what
he was, what he is, and what he will be. What he was in his humiliation, what
he is in his exaltation, what he will be in his retribution.

First, what he was in his humiliation; our Surety and pledge to undertake for
us: surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, Isa. 53. 4. And
again, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, ver. 5, that is, what
chastisement was fit to have come upon us, that we might be in peace, did come
upon him in our stead: So does Aben Ezra gloss the words aright, though he be
grossly (if not wilfully) mistaken in the person, applying this text to the
Jews, as bearing the chastisement of the Gentiles, and not to Christ as bearing
the chastisement of both Jews and Gentiles: where as it is unreasonable that
the Jews should be punished for us Gentiles, and unpossible that their
punishment should expiate our transgressions: No, it cost much more to redeem a
soul, so that only he who was worth infinitely more then the whole creation,
was able to pay the price of our Redemption: Excellently Saint Athanasius,
(...), (Athen. (...),) The eternal Son of God brought the Temple of his Body
for our pledge and ransom: The Grecians call a pledge or surety, (...), one
that stakes soul for another; so was our blessed Savior our pledge, to stake
body for body, and soul for soul in our stead; we should also be his (...) in
another sense: (...), says Hesychius, the birds which (according to the Poets
fiction) sprung out of Memnons ashes, were called (...), because they
sacrificed their life to him from whom they had received it; we are bound to
sacrifice our lives to our blessed Savior, and much more to offer our selves
to him as a living sacrifice.

Secondly, what he is in his exaltation, even our Mediator and Intercessor: He
sits at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us, Romans 8. 34.
We cannot be so ready to pray for our selves, as he is to pray for us, and yet
it is to be doubted whether he will pray for us, if we will not pray for our
selves; Whether his offering himself to God will be available to our salvation,
unless we also offer our selves unto him; for so the Apostle seems to intimate,
Heb. 7. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. For whom?
For them doubtless that came unto God by him; but scarce for others who either
come not to God at all, or come not to God by him, but by some other Mediator:
It Is a dangerous matter not to look on Christ in his passion; and as dangerous
not to look immediately on him in his intercession: The first shows us what he
was in his humiliation; the second, what he is in his exaltation; and yet the
eye of faith will still look further after him, not only as a Savior, and as a
Mediator, but* also as a Judge: for that is the third observation concerning
Christ, what he will be in his retribution: Not a severe but a merciful Judge,
to judge us according to the Gospel, which will condemn only the unrepenting
and unbelieving sinners; not according to the Law which will condemn even the
most righteous.

A merciful Judge to acquit us by the Merits and righteousness of that blood
which he himself has shed for us; according to that most comfortable Prayer in
the heavenly Hymn of Saint Ambrose, (which alone was of merit enough to entitle
the Ambrosian office, so long to keep its station against the Gregorian) We
believe that thou shall come to be our Judge; we therefore pray thee help thy
servants when thou have Redeemed with thy precious blood: We are sure thou will
not lose thine own blood, and that makes us hope thou will not lose us, for
whom thou have been pleased to shed it.

Thus to draw near to Christ, is to draw near to him with a true heart, as we
are commanded, Heb. 10. 23. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full
assurance of Faith: The heart with which we must draw near to Christ, ought to
be true to itself by examination, contrition, conversion; for it is a false heart
to it self that wants this repentance; and it ought to be a heart true to its
Savior, by a lively faith in his death and passion; by a constant faith in his
mediation and intercession; by a conquering faith in his aquitment and
absolution; for the heart is false to its Savior, that wants this faith and
being false to its Master, cannot enter into his joy: O my God, make my heart
true to it self by repentance, that it may be true to its Savior by faith;
then though I have sorrow in my self, yet I shall have joy in him, whose joy
alone is an eternal joy.

SECT. X. That the end of this and of all other Christian Festivals, is our
spiritual communion with Christ, and therefore they ought to be celebrated more
with spiritual, then with carnal joys: That though our carnal joys are greater
in their proportion, yet our spiritual joys are greater in their foundation.
A Carnal heart receives not the things of the Spirit of God, (1 Cor. 2. 14.)
and much less the joys of that Spirit; wherefore we must look for a spiritual
Feast, that we may have a spiritual joy: And accordingly the Church of Christ,
as it has not a carnal but a spiritual communion with Christ, so it has not a
carnal but a spiritual Feast, wherein it does communicate, feeding on him in
the heart by faith with thanksgiving: for without that, we may call the holy
Eucharist a Communion, but shall not find it so, because we do not Communicate
with our blessed Savior; and so our souls may starve, whilst we are at this
Feast, if we do not Spiritually eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood.

(...), says Suidas, diem festum agebant. 1. Sacrificium offerebant, They kept
a Feast, that is, they offered sacrifice; nor can we rightly celebrate this
holy Feast, unless we offer unto God our sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving:
And what sacrifice is left for Christians, but the living sacrifice of their
souls and bodies, spoken of Romans 12. 1.? For the soul though not named, must
also be in the sacrifice, or else it cannot be a reasonable service. It Is not
offering our Savior, but offering our selves to God, that makes the accehtable
sacrifice; not observing the holy institution, (yet I could heartily wish that
were better observed by them who best observe it) but observing it with a holy
intention that makes a spiritual Feast; and therefore our Church at the
celebration of the holy Eucharist does in Gods name invite us not so much to a
corporal as to a spiritual feeding on the body and blood of Christ: And though
some do scruple the offering up of Christ's real body in that sacrifice, for
they had rather say it is commemoratio sacrificii, then commemorativum
sacrificium, yet none scruples the offering up of his mystical body in it;
never any Christian did think he might leave himself out of the offering,
though many have thought they might leave their Savior out of it, (as to his
carnal presence) for every man believes he is bound to offer the sacrifice of
praise to God, and therewith also his own soul: so that even this our Feast
must likewise be a spiritual Feast, or though the outward Elements may nourish
our bodies to this natural life, yet the inward grace will not nourish our
souls to the life eternal.

We conclude then, that no Feast can truly honor God, the God of Spirits but a
spiritual Feast; And that whosoever has once kept this, will endeavoor to turn
all others into it, or at least to extract this out of them: he will feast his
soul more then his body, as one that cannot well relish the carnal, because he
has tasted the spiritual delicacies; for most undoubtedly, our spiritual joys
though they come short of carnal joys in their measure and proportion, yet they
far exceeed them in their cause and foundation: we are more zealous for our
carnal joys, because they are connatural to us whiles we are clothed with our
flesh, but our spiritual joys, which are supernatural, do more deserve our zeal.

I will say to my soul, Soul take thine ease, eat drink and be merry, said the
rich glutton, Luke 12. 19. What a great preparation is here to carnal joy? I
will say unto my soul what a great proportion of it? take thine ease, eat,
drink and ^e merry; (...), Rest that thou may eat and drink, eat and drink
that thou may delight thy self and be merry; (...), says Saint Basil; If
thou had the soul of a swine, what could thou say or do more? so great a
proportion is there of joy in the carnal man from carnal delights, as if even
the spiritual part of him were made carnal, as if the soul it self were
incorporated into flesh, and that flesh incorporated into swine, made the most
brutish and sensual in the whole world, even swines flesh* yet so little a
foundation is there of this joy, that it is grounded only on the man's own fancy;
(...), ver. 17. He made his reckoning, but it was a false reckoning merely of his
own making, and not agreeable with the truth of the account: For the word is
fit to express the condition of worldlings, says Beza, quia totam vitam in
subducendis rationibus consumunt, because they spend all their days in making
reckoning; they spend all their time in casting up accounts either for their
pleasure or for their profit; but it is by a false Arithmetic, an Arithmetic
that is only in their own fancy, by which they cast up that which is not, and
so must needs be out in their account. For they cast up for the time to come,
making that a part of their reckoning; and by that, their life longer in their
fancy then it is truly in it self, or in Gods appointment: which is so
unimaginable folly, that it causes the Son of God to thwart his own
instructions; and though he much dislike the language of thou fool, Matthew. 5.
22. Yet here he uses it, saying, verse 20. Thou fool, this night thy soul
shsll be required of thee.

Thus are our carnal joys great in their proportion, not so in their
foundation; but contrariwise our spiritual joys are greater in their
foundation, then in their proportion; which shows that even the best of us, do
so live in the flesh, as to live too much after it; contrary to that profession
which should be ours, as well as Saint Paul's, for though we walk in the flesh,
we do not war after the flesh, 2 Cor. 10. 3. Hence it is that the cause or
foundation of our joy in Christ is infinitely greater then the measure and
proportion of it: But yet the man after Gods own heart, the Prophet David, sets
it out to the full; He was a man after our hearts in his carnal failings, but a
man after Gods heart in his unfeigned repentance, which caused his spiritual
rejoycings; And his spiritual joy was so great that he calls for company to
rejoice wirh him, saying, Rejoice in the Lord O ye righteous, for it becomes
well the just to be thankful, Psalm. 33. 1. As if he had said, since ye are
truly righteous and just, being made righteous by his propitiation, and just by
his satisfaction, it becomes you well to rejoice in him, that you may be
thankful for this transcendent salvation: So let me be just; so let me be
joyful.

SECT. XI. A zealous observation of this Christian Festival, proceeds from
the true love of our Redeemer, and thankfulness for our Redemption: A set form
of Praise fittest to express that thankfulness.
IT were a fowl shame for Christians, who are most obliged to serve God, to be
least devoted to his service; and therefore we must beware of showing less zeal
in our moral, then the Jews showed in their ceremonial worship. When they
celebrated their Passover, they did sing some Psalms of Repentance, as a
lamentation for the sinner; other Psalms of thanksgiving, as a triumph and
rejoicing for the righteous: Canebant quaedam (...), quaedam (...), says Scal.
lib. 6. de emend. temp. They did sing some Psalms for propitiation, some for
thanksgiving: And this was their hymn for thanksgiving, Blessed art thou O Lord
our God King of heaven and earth, who have sanctified us by thy Commandments,
and have commanded us in this manner to bless and praise thee: which hymn of
theirs holy Zachary seems to have imitated, but withal to have amplified in his
Benedictus, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people, that we being delivered from the fear of our enemies, might serve
him without fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life: A
main ground of his blessing God is this, That God has enabled his people to
bless and praise him; Which invaluable mercy the Greek Church always thought
worthy of a particular thanksgiving, saying, (...), we give unto thee humble
and hearty thanks, that thou have given us this Liturgy, this good form of
serving thee: That thou have called us to this duty of public thanksgiving:
That thou have vouchsafed us this great honor, who are dust and ashes, and
greater mercy, who are sinful dust and ashes, to bless and praise thee and to
call upon thy holy name. And they have this reward of their thankfulness, that
in the middst of the greatest and bitterest enemies of the Christian Religion,
they do still enjoy their Liturgy, groaning indeed under the bondage and
oppression of their bodies, but infinitely rejoicing in the liberty of their
souls: the Turks themselves thinking it too inhumane a tyranny to bring that
people into bondage both of body and of soul: And as for the Jews, they would
have laughed at any man that should have offered them whimsies instead of
certainties, and would sooner have let their bread be taken out of their
mouths, then this their hymn of blessing and praising God; So great, so
fervent, so constant was their zeal, for that which they knew to be true
godliness.

This, I say, was the general thanksgiving of the Jews at all their great
Feasts, to the which they added those particular forms of thanksgiving, that
most properly concerned the occasion.

And this was their spiritual manner of feasting, God himself suggesting no
less, in that he commanded them to take their Lamb the tenth day of the month,
which was not to be slain till the fourteenth; for why was the Lamb to be taken
so long before hand, but only that their souls might feed on the goodness of
God, before their bodies feasted on the Lamb? And the Jewish Authors tell us,
that during those four days, the Lamb was tied to their bed-posts, that not
only eating and drinking (as Saint Paul requires of us, 1 Cor. 10 31.) but also
sleeping and waking, they might glorify their God. And so will we too, if we
have the true love and zeal of godliness, saying with those three holy men, for
the same cause that they did, even our deliverance from the fiery furnace, not
of temporary but of everlasting burnings, O ye servant of the Lord, bless ye
the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever: O ye spirits and souls of the
righteous, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for ever: O ye holy
and humble men of heart, bless ye the Lord, praise him and magnify him for
ever. So that unless we will profess that we serve our selves, not our God,
that we are men whose spirits and souls are unrighteous, and that we are
unholy, and proud of heart, we must bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify
him for ever.

This is the zeal we should bring with us to this and all other our Christian
Festivals, as the Prophet requires, saying, If thou turn away thy foot from
the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath a
delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and shall honor him, not doing
thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words,
Isa. 58. 13. which text (in Kimchies gloss) is to be interpreted of the Sabbath
in general, for (says he) the feast of expiation was strictly to be observed
as a Sabbath, though it was placed on the 10. day of September (which might
fall on any day of the week.) And he proves a strict observation from the
words themselves, wherein are both a negative and an affirmative Precept, which
betwixt them do comprize the obligation of the whole Law: There Is a negative
Precept (...) in that he says, You may not do your own pleasure, nor speak
your own words: And (...) an affirmative Precept, in that he says, you must
call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and must
accordingly honor him therein: Nor can we reasonably think our selves
unconcerned in this Precept, unless we will think (or make) our selves
unconcerned in the promise that is annexed to it, of delighting our selves in
the Lord, and being fed with he heritage of Jacob, (v. 14.) so that this text
was without doubt written also for our instruction, though not as Jews, yet as
Christians: And therefore as the Apostle has said, We have an Altar, whereof
they have no right to eat, which serve the tabernacle, Heb. 13. 10. So may we
say, we have a Sabbath, whereof they have no right to be observers, who serve
the Tabernacle: And this text of the Prophet will as much concern our Sabbaths
as it did theirs: For we must turn away our feet, that is, our affections from
these Sabbaths, not seeking on them any rest or delight in our selves, but only
in our God. Thus did the primitive Christians keep their feasts, as is affirmed
by Nazianzene, (orat. 44.) (...). We also keep holy day, but as it seems good
to the Holy Ghost, either saying or doing something of our duty: So that our
keeping of a Feast is nothing else but laying up treasure for our souls, or
laying in provision upon which we may live in another world.

Wherefore it shall be my labor and my prayer, so to keep all the Feasts which
are kept truly in honor of my Savior, That I may at last be a guest at his
own wedding Feast, and be numbered among those of whom it is written, Blessed
are they which are called unto the marriage Supper of the Lamb, (Rev. 19. 9.)
And though I cannot deserve it by my service, yet I will hope by being his
constant and faithful servant, That he who makes the marriage Supper, will
bestow on me the wedding garment, and clothe me with his own righteousness,
that I may be a guest prepared to come to, and set at his heavenly table, to
keep one everlasting Feast with him and his, world without end, Amen.

CAP. II. That God is to be adored only in Christ.
SECT. I. That no man whiles he is in the state of sin, cares to come near God;
and that Adam after his sin, could not have adored God rightly, if Christ had
not been revealed to him, as the propitiation for his sins.
IT is the property of a sinner to run from God; and therefore no man that is a
sinner, and looks upon God as angry for his sins, can truly worship him: For
he that will worship God, must come unto him; but he that looks upon God as
angry, will be sure to fly from him. And it is much to be observed, that after
Saul knew God had rejected him for his disobedience, he desired to worship him
only in show, not in reality, 1 Samuel 15. 30. Then he said, I have sinned, yet
honor me now I pray thee before the Elders of my people, and before Israel,
and turn again with me that I may worship the Lord thy God: Here was a
worshipper, but such an one as worshipped more to honor himself then to honor
his Maker: Honor me now I pray thee before my people; not a word of honoring
God by his worship; which is still the practice of such wicked miscreants, and
will be to the worlds end, to make a show of Religion, not for Gods sake but
for their own; not to serve him, but to serve themselves: For where is much of
sin, there must be little of Religion, (little in truth, though perhaps not in
show) it being the property of sin to drive us from God, but of Religion to
draw us to him: And accordingly Saul being in the state of sin, professes in
effect that he was desirous to keep at a distance from God, saying unto Samuel,
Turn again with me that I may worship the Lord thy God: He durst not say, the
Lord my God: for he had too much provoked him by his sin, and too little sought
to be reconciled to him by repentance, to claim any interest in his mercy: Sin
wilfully committed drives a man from God; sin carelessly unrepented, keeps a man
from him; so that whiles the man is in sin, whether it be wilfully, or
carelessly, he cannot come near God, but is either driven or at least kept from
him; yea let him come never so near to God, yet by his sin he is sure to be
kept far from him; for he so draws near him with his lips, as to be far from
him with his heart; It is not to be doubted but David made many a fair show of
worshipping God during that year that he continued in the guiltiness of his
murder and of his adultery: And yet it is not to be thought, much less
believed, that during that guiltiness he was a true worshipper; for it is plain
from his own mouth that sin had shut up his lips because he prayed God to open
them: and as plain, that sin shuts not up the lips, but where it has first
shut up the heart, since the heart is the first mover in the order of Religion,
and consequently the first stander-still in the neglect of that order.

No wonder then if the Text says, God hears not sinners, (John 9. 31.) for
how can he hear those that do not speak? or if they do speak, yet they do not
pray, because they have only Verbum oris, non verbum mentis, because they speak
only with their lips, not with their hearts: God is not as man to be approached
unto by outward addresses and applications; if the tongue move without the
heart, the man sits still, and does not at all draw near, in Gods account,
whatever he may do in his own: Therefore the Apostle ascribes it to one and
the same faith that we please God, and that we come unto him: Heb. 11. 6.
Without faith it is impossible to please God; for he that comes to God must
believe: The words will afford this Syllogism; He that does come to God, does
alone please God; he that has not faith does not come unto God: Therefore he
that has not faith, does not or cannot please God: And this Syllogism will
afford us this Doctrine, That we must come to God if we will please him, and
must have faith if he will come unto him: For he that comes to God, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him:
That he is God, the fountain of all goodness; and that they who thirst after,
shall drink deep of this fountain: Nay yet more, as the words are alleged to
prove Enoch had faith, they must have this exposition, He that comes to God,
must believe that God is his God, and that he will be his rewarder, if he
diligently seek him; for so did Enoch believe, when he did forsake, and by
forsaking did provoke the men of that wicked age of the world, (foul enough for
a flood to wash it, though no washing could cleanse it) only that he might walk
with God: His Faith strengthened him against his fears, whiles it represented
God thus speaking unto him, Fear not, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great
reward, Genesis 15. 1. Wherefore though Moses spoke not one word of Enochs faith,
yet Saint Paul takes it for as good a proof that Enoch had faith, because he
pleased God; as that he pleased God, because God took him.

And is it possible that this faith should be in any man who is yet in his
sins? No certainly; for he cannot believe God to be his shield, whom he has
made his enemy; nor to be his rewarder, whom he has made his avenger: Look
upon your first Father Adam after he had sinned, and you will see your self in
him, and your sin his: God called unto him, and said, Where art thou? but he
said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked,
and I hid my self, (Genesis 3. 10.) A strange folly that made him think he could
hide himself from Gods All-seeing eye; A stranger fear that made him desire to
hide himself from Gods All-saving Presence; He knew that in God alone he lived,
and moved, and had his being, and yet was afraid of him, when he was yet scarce
fully entered into the possession of his life: The reason was, he had taken such
an inmate into his soul as he knew God could not but hate, and could not but
confound and destroy. Whiles he continued in his innocence, nothing that God
said could fright him; nothing that God did, could hurt him: But when once he
had sinned, Gods voice that only called for his appearance, was more terrible
then his hand before that had taken away his rib; a still small voice in the
cool of the day makes him fly into a thicket, as thinking thereby to secure
himself. In this miserable condition he would have lived and dyed; (for the
same cause must have produced still the same effect,) had not God promised him
that the seed of the woman should bruise the Serpents head, and in that promise
revealed Christ unto him as a propitiation for his sins; After that, though he
was immediately thrust out of Paradise, yet he could think of coming into Gods
presence with sacrifice and burnt offerings, (for sure it was he taught his sons
those offices of Religion,) because he saw he had a Mediator to intercede for
him; whereas before that promise, though he was actually in the Garden of God,
yet he durst not come near him, as not knowing how to intercede for himself:
For his sin had cast such a confusion, such an amazement upon his soul, that he
durst not open his eyes to look on God, and could not open his mouth to make
supplication to him, because he knew he was first to make satisfaction, before
he could be admitted to make intercession; for that Gods offended justice was
to be satisfied, before his undeserved mercy might be implored: And so is it
with all mankind ever since, being all conceived and born in sin, we cannot but
come into the world with a natural aversion from God, that is, with a fear to
come near him, and with a desire to go and keep far from him, if it were
possible, always out of his sight. And as we come into the world, so we abide
in it with a total aversion from God, till he be pleased to reveal his Son to
us that we may know him, or rather in us that we may love him: Nor would any
man that is descended from the corrupt loins of Adam, ever have thought, much
less have desired to come near God to worship him, had there not been revealed
a sufficient atonement for his sin; For till our sins be expiated, we cannot
hope that our worship should be accepted: And as for the heathens and Jews who
worship God without the knowledge or with the contempt of Christ, we must say
their worship is not good, and is rather out of a good custom, then out of a
good conscience, (as too many Christians still worship God, who know not Christ
effectually or practically) And it is better saying so, then to say they can have
either a good conscience or a good worship, who have not faith in Christ.

Wherefore let my soul evermore bless God, for having revealed this great
mystery and greater mercy of godliness, that he is reconciled to me in Christ,
having blotted out my sins by his precious blood; And let me now be as much
afraid of not coming into Gods presence to beg and gasp for his mercy, as I
should have feared to come to him, if he had not made known to me the means and
way of this reconciliation: For the Son of God having expiated all my sins,
that by him I might come unto his Father, has in effect told me that my sin of
not coming to God is now like to prove of all others the most inexpiable.

SECT. II. That no religion adoreth God rightly, which adoreth him not in
Christ; and of the excellency of the Christian Religion; That no other
Religion teaches such conformable truths to right reason, declares an
expiation for sin, promises so great a reward, shows so pure a worship, or
so innocent a conversation.
REason teaches all men to adore and worship God; but it is only Religion that
teaches some few men how he is truly and rightly to be adored and worshipped;
and those few men were heretofore the Jews, and are now the Christians; for
they alone rightly worship God, who worship him in his Son, that is, in Christ;
So says the beloved Disciple in honor of, and in justice to his master,
Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father, 1 John 2. 23. That is,
he that has not the Son for his God, has not the Father for his God; For the
nature of Relatives evinceth thus much, that if there be a Father there must be
a Son; and if there be not a Son, there cannot be a Father; wherefore it is a
gross mistake or rather a great blasphemy, to say that the Jews or Turks, or
other Infidels do worship the same God with us Christians; for they not having
the Son, cannot have the Father, and not having the Father, have not the true
God: but an idol of their own making, nay a liar instead of God, as says the
same disciple, He that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he
believes not the record that God gave of his Son; And this is the record, that
God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son: He that has
the Son, has life; and he that has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5. 10,
11, 12. Wherefore that Religion which has not the Son, has not life; and the
Religion which has not life, what can it have but death? Nor is it lawful,
and much less laudable in any man, to account those men Christians who doubt
the divinity of Christ: much less, who deny it: For they that have not Christ
for their God* cannot have the true God for their God: And therefore Saint Paul
takes these two for one and the same mischief, to be without Christ and to be
without God: saying to the Ephesians, At that time ye were without Christ,
being Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the Covenants
of promise, having no hope and without God in the world, Ephesians. 2. 12. Saint
Cyril in his Catechism expound these words of the Heathen, saying thus, (...):
Some of them made the Sun their God, that all the night long they might be
without God; others made the Moon their God, that they might be without God all
the day: But in truth the words will concern many men that are far from that
stupid and gross Idolatry, even all Jews and all Turks, and too too many that
are called Christians, even as many as question the divinity of Christ for all
these alike are (...), All Atheists alike as being without the true God: And if
their Religion make them Atheists, what shall we call it but Irreligion or
Atheism?

But I will not insist any longer upon the proofs of the Text to justify the
Christian Religion, since even common sense it self does make known this
Tenent, and common experience does make it good: For it is a very substantial
and sufficient proof, that no other Religion has in it those truths which are
really conformable to a rational man's understanding, but only the Christian;
for that no other Religion subsisteth any longer then the sword that forces
it: whereas the Christian Religion still abides and continues in the world,
not by the violence but by the patience of those that uphold and maintain the
same, nowithstanding the many and great difficulties that are in and with it,
and the many and great oppositions and persecutions that have been and are
against it: which must needs argue an inward consonancy or congruity of the
Christian Religion with the very soul of man, as alone having truths able to
satisfy it, and alone showing means able to save it.

And indeed these three excellencies (among many other,) do give to the
Christian Religion the pre-eminence above all other Religions.

The first is, That no other Religion declares au expiation for sin: The
Jewish Religion it self being defective in this particular, (but as it was
Christian and looked unto Christ,) the Apostle plainly and positively assuring
us, That it is not possible the blood of bulls and of goats should take away
sins, Heb. 10. 5. So that no Jew could have this opinion of his own Religion,
that it taught a way of expiating sin, unless he would be mad, that he might be
thought religious; for there is no room for any the least probability against
an absolute impossibility; but the Apostle says it is not possible. And yet
there can be no comfortable nor cordial practice of Religion to a man that
groaneth under the burden of his sins, unless he have this persuasion that his
sins may be expiated, and his person accepted, since it is impossible that any
man should care to worship or serve God being offended with him, if he had no
hope to appease him; Let this then be the peculiar excellency of the Christian
Religion, that it may be most comfortably and most cordially practiced, because
it most teaches that God may be appeased: nay indeed it teaches how he is
appeased, even by the merits and mediation of his son, who is both founder and
the foundation of our Christian Religion.

The Second excellency is, That no other religion proposes, much less
promises, so great and glorious a reward to those that embrace it, as is the
eternal and everlasting glory both of the body and soul; for to let pass the
disputes of the Heathen in this kind, which were all either vanities or
uncertainties, even Moses himself in the institution of the Jewish Religion, if
we look upon the express and explicit Covenants of the law, went no farther
then a a land flowing with milk and honey, and a long and prosperous
continuance of them and their seed in that land; But for what concerns a better
life after this, it is either darkly included in this promise, or rationally
concluded from it, not without strong collections of a searching Judgment,
such as was that of our blessed Savior; Now that the dead are raised, even
Moses showed at the bush, when he calls the Lord the God of Abraham, and the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; for he is not a God of the dead, but of the
living, Luke 20. 37, 38. Where the conclusion was virtually in the premises,
though not found out, till the eternal wisdom of God discovered it: and since
that discovery, we see it is undeniable in our own humane reason: yet if the
Jewish Doctors could have seen so much before, it is scarce imaginable that one
of their chiefest Sects or Parties (I mean the Sadduces) would have denied the
resurrection: Let this then be another peculiar excellency of the Christian
Religion, that it teaches the body shall live again with the soul in the life
everlasting: for this doctrine must needs terrify us from the sins of the
flesh, because we shall all rise again with our own bodies, and give account of
the works done in them, and be acquitted or condemned according to that
account: And this same doctrine must also needs comfort and strengthen us
against all the maladies and miseries of the flesh; for what is a momentary
sickness or misery, to an endless and everlasting glory? Wherefore since it is
the work of Religion to subdue the flesh to the spirit, both in its doings and
in its sufferings, and thereby to subdue the spirit to God; and since the
Christian Religion alone can do this work, subduing the flesh to the spirit in
its doings, by terrifying it from sin; and in its sufferings, by strengthening
it against miseries, I will evermore bless my God for calling me to such a
Religion, which maugre all the mischief and malice both of men and devils, will
neither let me be impenitently sinful, nor uncomfortably miserable.

The third excellency of the Christian Religion above all other religions
consists in that admirable holiness and Purity which it requires in the worship
of Christ, and in all other duties and works of Christianity; whereas the Pagan
sacrifices were full of cruelty, delighting in the blood of men, and their
mysteries full of obscoenity invading the modesty of women; And the Jewish
Religion, though it had nothing unlawful or immodest, yet it had many things
in themselves unusefull and unnecessary (though both useful and necessary in
regard of the Jews, to keep them in obedience and from idolatry;) as
circumcision, sacrificing of beasts, the distinction of meats, and the rigorous
observation of the Sabbath: But the Christian Religion requires nothing of us,
save what is useful and necessary in it self, though it were not commanded* as
it requires us not to circumcise the foresking of our flesh but of our hearts;
not to keep a Sabbath by the external rest of the body ceasing from motion, but
by the internal rest of the soul, ceasing from sin; and taking its repose in
God; Not to offer the blood of bullocks, but to be ready to offer our own blood
for Gods glory: not to abstain from certain kinds of meats, but to use them all
with sobriety, for the chastisement of the body, and sometimes to use none at
all, for the advantage of the soul; And whereas other Religions have too much
of Mammon in them to teach men to forsake their estates, ours teaches us to
forsake our selves: nor if I had the tongue of men and Angels, were I able to
express the incomparable purity of that faith whereby we are taught to hope in
God, not only above hope, but also against it: in the midst of death to hope
for life, in the extremity of Justice to hope for mercy: and so wholly to trust
God with our souls, as not to hope for salvation but only to glorify him
thereby, desiring his glory equally with our own eternal bliss, or rather above
it. Nor if I had a Seraphins quill, were I able to delineate the purity of that
worship, which teaches us to pray for nothing but in relation to the honor,
and with subordination to the will of God: and to rest secure in the denial of
temporal blessings, whiles we rely upon the promises of those which are eternal.

This being such a purity as is above our Praise, and yet required to come
under our Practice, plainly shows that our Religion is too much above our
selves, either to proceed from our own understanding, or to depend upon our own
wills: and consequently that God alone was the first founder, and is still the
Master Builder and defender of it.

Nor does our Christian Religion teach us this admirable purity and holiness
only in conversing with our God, but also in conversing with our selves: not
only in our duty toward God, but also in our duty toward our neighbor; Do
but consider the ordinary offices of humanity, and the Christian Religion will
show you there is some thing of Divinity in those offices: for that teaches
you to relieve your brother not only as a member of your own body, having the
same flesh and blood with your self, which is according to the office of
humanity, but also to relieve him as a member of your Saviors body* as a
member of God the Son, as a* temple of God the Holy Ghost, which adds something
of divinity to that office: Humanitas quam sit proprium hominis, ipsum nomen
indicat; show the offices of Humanity to another man for your own sake because
you are a man, unless you would be accounted a beast, was a forcible argument
for men to be courteous and friendly one to another, before Christ came in the
flesh: But now that argument must be strained to a higher pitch, and we must
say, show the offices of humanity to another man for the Son of Gods sake
because you are a Christian, unless you would be accounted not a beast, but a
devil.

So undeniable is the argument of the Christian Religion for the practice of
Charity: So inexcusable are Christians above other men for the practice of
uncharitableness: For surely we cannot deny but this doctrine of doing good to
all, and hurt to none for Christ's sake, is nowhere to be found but among
Christians, though their practice in this iron age of the hard-hearted world
has much disagreed from this doctrine: As for the Turks religion, it was born
in the camp, smells of the camp, lives by the camp; it was brought in by the
sword, savours of the sword, is preserved and propagated by the Sword: And yet
in this respect, (shame it is to say it, but the shame is theirs of whom it may
be truly said,) many Christians are of late turned Turks: So that the
black-mouthed calumny of Calvino-Turcismus is in this sense a Truth, and the
retaliation of that by Papismo-Turcismus, is in this sense not to be thought a
calumny; for both Protestants and Papists as much as they have of cutting of
purses and cutting of throats in their late inhumane rapines and butcheries, so
much they have of Turcism, not of Christianity: For that has said, If thine
enemy hunger, feed him, if he thirst, give him drink, Romans 12. 20. That is,
strive to make thine enemy thy friend by overcoming evil with good, but in no
case to make thy friend (and much less thy God) thine enemy by overcoming good
with evil. And indeed this mild voice is only the voice of the Christian
religion: For even the Jew who came nearest to God and his goodness, did
nevertheless say, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; and thou shall
love thy neighbor, but hate thine enemy; It Is only the Christians has learned
this lesson from the mouth of their master, Love your enemies, bl^ss them that
curse you, and do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you and persecute you, that ye may be the children of your
father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 42. As much then as love is above hatred,
blessing above cursing, forgiving above reviling, relieving above revenging,
and praying above persecuting, or in one word, heaven above hell, so much is
the Christians Religion above all other religions in the offices of humanity,
or in the conversation of man with man.

Again, look upon the conversation of man with woman, and you shall find the
Christian is taught, and the good Christian does practice a greater chastity in
his marriage, then other men look after in their virginity. He knows he is
bound to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor; not in the lust of
concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God, 1 These. 4. 1. and
therefore will take heed of making his remedy his disease, of adding oil to
the fire, of provoking that lust of concupiscence, which he should banish and
expel; for what he retains of lust, that he loses of sanctification and honor
in his body, and of the knowledge of God in his soul: This chaste consideration
being grounded in the hearts of good Christians, will either keep them innocent
or make them penitent; whereas other men that know not this Doctrine, or regard
it not, do let loose the rains of their concupiscence, and are further from
chastity in their virginity, then these men are in their marriage: For the one
follow the Apostles advice, It remains that they who have wives be as though
they had none, 1 Cor. 7. 29. The other follow their own unbrideled distempers
which makes them that have no wives, to be as though they had them; And surely
of the two, these are the further from chastity: The Heathen did glory of rapes
and adulteries in their Gods, and therefore could not easily be ashamed of
rapines and adulteries in themselves; And the Jew though he was tied from
fornication and adultery, yet whiles he practiced his polygamy, he did in
effect commit fornication with his second wife; and whiles he exercised his
divorce, he did in effect invite others to commit adultery with his first wife:
For the best that we can say in this case of Polygamy, is, that the text which
forbad it, ( Genesis 2. 24.) was not so fitly explained to the Jews, as it has
been since to the Christians; and so the Jews were excusable because of their
ignorance: For the words of Moses did leave them some liberty of thinking a man
might be one flesh with as many women as he made his wives; for there it is
only said, and they shall be one flesh: But our Savior Christ has plainly
showed us that those words are in truth to be confined to two persons, one man
and one woman, by saying; And they twain shall be one flesh, Mat. 19. 5.
whereby it appears to us Christians that Polygamy was a sin from the beginning,
for it was against the law; but in the Jews, it was a sin of ignorance, and by
that means not without excuse; for not being able to prove that God gave them a
dispensation to make more wives we must either say their ignorance excused
them, or their conscience condemned them; but it is not safe to say their
concience condemned them, since no man can be saved that sins against his
conscience, and does not repent him of his sin, whereas without doubt the
Patriarchs and King David were saved, though we find not they repented for
having been Polygamists.

However it is clearly evident that the Christian Religion teaches a far more
chaste, modest and innocent conversation of man with woman, then did that of
the Jews; and what can we require more in that conversation, then chastity,
modesty, and innocence? And yet Saint Peter does moreover add piety, bidding
the husband and wife to dwell together, that their prayers be not hindered, 1
Pet. 3. 7. Others may look only after pleasure, or profit; but Saint Peter bids
all Christians look after prayer and piety in their marriages.

SECT. III. The reason why God cannot be rightly adored but only by Christians,
is because he cannot be truly known and loved but only by those who know and
love him in Christ; the true way to gain that knowledge, and to show and keep
that love, is universal obedience both to his affirmative and to his negative
precepts, without which there can be no saving knowledge of God: That the
Christians do know and worship God in Christ clearly and substantially; and
that the Jews did so know and worship him in types and figures; so that the
Jewish and the Christian religion, differ not in substance, but only in degrees
of perfection.
GOD cannot be rightly worshipped by those, by whom he is not truly known nor
loved; and he cannot be truly known or loved by those who know and love him not
in Christ; For he is the brightness of his glory, and the express image of his
person, Heb. 1. 3. The brightness of his glory, so that we cannot love God but
for his brightness; and the express image of person, so that we cannot know God
but by this image: which being a Doctrine that contains something of ambiguity
in regard of the several states of men, some having been trained up as Jews,
others as Christians in the true knowledge and love of God, though it contain
nothing of uncertainty in regard of it self, yet will not unfitly be explained
by way of Catechism, and that in these three questions.

1. Whether a man can love God save only in Christ? I answer he cannot, with an
elective or deliberative love as a man, though he may with a natural love as a
creature; The reason is, because having defiled and corrupted both his nature
and his person by his sin, he has lost the innocence and the comfort of his
being, though he cannot lose the obligation of it; And consequently if he look
upon God without Christ, he cannot look upon him as a merciful Father that will
relieve his infirmities and forgive his infirmities, but only as an angry
Judge, that will pass against him the sentence, and will bring upon him the
vengeance of eternal condemnation.

2. Whether a man can love God in Christ, till Christ be revealed or manifested
to his soul? I answer again, he cannot: Ignoti nulla cupido; As a man cannot
desire, so neither can he love what he does not know; and he does not know God
in Christ, to whose soul Christ is not yet manifested or revealed: So that in
this case, most true is that common Axiom of the Law, idem est non esse and
non apparere; It is all one for a thing not to be and not to appear: All one to
me if I know not God in Christ, as if he were not at all to be known in him:
For which cause it is worth our enquiry how it comes to pass that so many who
are called Christians, (and who perchance think and call themselves the best
Christians,) yet do not truly know God in Christ: and I must say, it is because
they desire to receive Christ only according to the promises, and not also
according to the precepts of the Gospel, or only for the speculation and
knowledge, not for the practice and obedience of faith; so that indeed they do
not desire truly to know Christ; and therefore he is not revealed or manifested
to their souls: And this is the reason there is so little love of God amongst
us, because there is so little manifestation of the Son of God in us: We think
and say we know Christ more then all other men; but sure we know him less, or
else we would not love him less then others: For what shall we say, that the
wise men from the East were mistaken in their love of Christ, when they offered
him gold, frankincense and myrrh, ( Mat. 2.) but that we are now better
instructed and directed in the love of Christ, whiles we take away all that we
can rape and rend from him? This is in truth as unquoth an argument that we
know him, as it is an unkind proof that we love him: himself has taught us
another lesson, saying, he that has my Commandments and keeps them, he it is
that loves me; and he that loves me shall be loved of my Father, and I will
love him, and manifest my self to him; John 14. 21. We must love his
Commandments that we may love him; and we must love him, that he may love us,
and manifest himself unto us; for he will not manifest himself to those whom he
does not love; and he does not love those who do not love him; and they do not
love him, who do not keep his commandments; This is such a Doctrine as our
Savior did not think he could teach too much, and therefore sure we cannot
learn enough: If ye love me keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. and ye are my
friends if ye do whatsoever I command you, John 15. 14. Love is the inchoation
of friendship, and that is not showed without some obedience. If ye love me
keep my Commandments: But friendship is the consummation of love, and that is
not showed without an universal obedience; Ye are my friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you; he that will be thus universally obedient, must be
sure to interpret all Christ's commands after the true rules of Logical
supposition, that an universal Affirmative must hold in every particular, (as
thou shall love thy neigbbour as thy self) must reach to all mankind, and to
all offices of love; thou shall honor thy father, must reach to all our
governors, and to all offices of reverence and honor; We may not leave out
any one particular either of the subject, or of the predicate, but we shall
make a false supposition in Logic, and a false interpretation in Divinity: And
so on the other side, that an universal negative must hold in no one
particular; as do no wrong, binds us to our good behavior, not only in our
word^ and deeds, but also in our very thoughts, and that in regard of all men
whatsoever, (and much more in regard of those to whom we have been obliged
either for natural, or civil, or spiritual benefits:) So that if I have but an
uncharitable thought of any man living, I do him wrong, but I do my self more
wrong, in sinning against this Commandment: Wherefore though other men be never
so confident of their own innocence, yet will I weigh my self in this balance;
for this is the balance of the sanctuary, and I am sure God will one day weigh
me in it; that seeing I have many ways been a delinquent for want of
obedience, I may not accumulate my delinquencies by want of repentance: For
this I cannot but see, that if Zaccheus had not at last been as willing to give
and to restore, as he was at first to take away, he would not easily have
gotten that comfortable saying from our Saviors own lips, (to which all the
comforts of this world are comfortless) This day is salvation come to this
house, for so much as he also is the son of Abraham, Luke 19. 9. And let not my
profit be the impediment of my piety; for what is a man profited if he gain the
whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his
soul? Mat. 16. 26. I know that my Savior has given his blood in exchange for
my soul, that he might redeem it from death and damnation; and therefore as I
will love my soul above my estate, because it was redeemed at so great a price,
so I will love my Savior above my soul, because he paid that price for my
redemption; to make me of an enemy a servant, of a servant a friend, that I
might not only be in his love, but also abide in it: Therefore I will offer my
soul to him, to do whatsoever he commands me; for I cannot hope to be
confirmed in his love as his friend, unless I be desirous to offer unto him
this universal obedience, or at least be sorry that I have not offered or
cannor offer it.

A little of this affection will more strengthen my faith in Christ, then my
greatest persuasion can strengthen it: And I shall more truly know my Savior
by devoting my will then my understanding to him, by obeying his law, then by
studying it; Therefore I will pray the Lord to make me increase and abound in
love, to the end he may establish my heart unblameable in holiness, 1 These. 3.
12, 13. For himself has told me, If any man will do his will, he shall know of
the Doctrine whether it be of God, John 7. 17. That is, he, and he only shall
have an experimental knowledge of Religion, that it will bring him to God, who
labors to do the will of God; such a man shall know that Christ is the way,
the truth and the life, and that the Christian Religion is the way to Christ,
not only by a speculative knowledge which swims in his brain, and may be
ejected thence by arguments of Sophistry; but also by an effective knowledge
which sinks into his heart, and which he will keep as carefully and as
faithfully as he will keep his heart.

Thus to know Christ is truly to have him manifested in our souls: and this
manifestation is not gotten so much by speculation as by practice, not so much
by knowing Gods will as by doing it: For it is undeniable by Saint Paul's
argument, Gal. 3. 1. That though Jesus Christ were evidently set forth
crucified among the Galatians, yet it was before their eyes only, not in their
hearts, whilst they obeyed not the truth; And that the Jews had not known
Christ, though he had stretched out his hands unto them all the day long,
because they were still a disobedient and a gainsaying people, Romans 10. 20, 21.
And Saint John says expressly, hereby we do know that we do know him, if we
keep his Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. Telling us of a twofold knowledge of God
and of Christ, the one inefficacious to salvation, such as hypocrites may have,
who know God, but glorify him not as God, Romans 1. 21. or who profess that they
know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. The other is a saving knowledge of God
and of Christ, such as only good Christians can have, who keep his
Commandments; for this knowledge is joined with obedience, and that is the
chief ground of its assurance; hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his
Commandments: A man may have some evidence of faith without obedience, but he
cannot have the assurance of faith without it: Whence we may gather that the
true knowledge of God is not that which enables a man to talk sublimely of his
essence, or to talk confidently of his secrets, but that which knows him in his
precepts, and in his promises, seriously obeying the one, no less then truly
relying on the other; And only he that thus knows God, knows him truly to
salvation, because he only knows him truly in his Savior: and only he so knows
God as to love him, because only he knows him in the Son of his love.

Thirdly, it may be demanded, whether the Jews before the coming of Christ had
the same love of God, that we Christians now have; since they seem not to have
had the same knowledge or manifestation of Christ? I answer, yes they had the
same love of God; for they had the same knowledge or manifestation of Christ in
substance, that we now have, though not the same in manner, nor in degree; They
knew him to be the Mediator between God and man, as well as we, but they know
this confusedly and imperfectly, we now know it clearly, distinctly and
perfectly: The difference was not in the substance of the knowledge, but in the
manner and degrees only: So that the Jews worshipped God in Christ as we
Christians worship him; for in all their sacrifices they did look upon the
Messiah as the only propitiation for their sins: Hence the 22. Psalm was a part
of their daily morning service, which may not unfitly be called Christus
Patiens, for that it does rather Historically then Prophetically set forth the
passion of our blessed Savior: For Christ upon the Cross appropriated this
Psalm unto himself, by using the first words of it, My God my God, why have
thou forsaken me? And Saint Matthew applies it unto him in the eighth verse,
He trusted in God, let him deliver him now if he will have him; Saint John in
the eighteenth verse, They parted my raiment among them, and for my vesture
they did cast lots: And Saint Paul in the twenty second verse, I will declare
thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the Church will I praise thee, (Heb.
2. 12.) Christ assumes this Psalm to himself, whilst he is in his passion, and
the Apostles apply it to him whilst they are describing of it; And this very
Psalm, amongst all the rest, was chosen out by the Jews to be a part of their
daily morning service, nay indeed it was composed of purpose by the Spirit of
God, that it might be so; As plainly appears from the title or inscription
thereof, (...), ad primordium aurorae, for the dawning of the morning; Sensus
est Psalmum hunc sacerdotibus and Levitis fuisse traditum, ut singulo quoque
mane in Ecclesia quamprimum aurora erumperet, caneretur; Sic voluit Deus
Ecclesiam veterem singulis diebus recolere fiduciam de expectatione Christi,
says Junius: The meaning of the title is, That this Psalm was delivered to the
Priests and Levites to be sung in the Congregation every morning, at the break
of day: For so would God inure the Church of the Jews, to have a daily recourse
to Christ, and to revive the hope they had of his coming in the flesh.

And indeed the Chaldee Paraphrase says no less on the inscription of this
twenty second Psalm, (...) pro robore seu virtute sacrificii jugis and
matutini, For the virtue or strength of the daily morning sacrifice or
oblation, (for (...) comprizeth both (...) and (...) both sacrifice and
oblation,) The meaning of the gloss is this, that this Psalm concerns him who
is the virtue and strength of all their service or Religion; And that all their
sacrifices and oblations had their virtue only from the Messiah, who was
exhibited unto them in this Psalm, as offered upon the Cross.

The Jews offered all their sacrifices in hopes of being accepted in this
Mediator; and what do we Christians more, but believe and profess that our
persons and our prayers are accepted in him? Only here is the difference, the
Jews worshipped God in the Messiah that was to come, the Christians worship him
in the Messiah that is come: The Religion is but one in substance, though two
in circumstances: And we may say, that the worship of the Jews was the
inchoation of the Christian, but the worship of the Christians is the
perfection of the Jewish Religion: For whom they worshipped implicitly in
Types, we do worship explicitly in spirit and in truth: All the fault is, they
were more zealous in their typical, then we are in our substantial and real
worship: For the Babylonian captivity could not make them forsake their
Religion, but we have captivated our Religion of purpose that we might forsake
it, and so are fallen under that severe reprehension, (...); O Insensati, quis
vos fascinavit? O ye that are mad and senseless, who has bewitched you not to
obey the truth? For we who could not be seduced not to receive the truth, are
little less then bewitched not to obey it.

SECT. IV. That those Christians who adore God by any other Mediator then by
Christ alone, do not rightly adore him; And that those who do rightly adore
him, ought not to be discouraged in their Religion, and much less be deterred
from it.
GOD never yet had, never can have any true worship or glory, but only in
Christ; Hence Saint Paul says, To God only wise be glory, through Jesus Christ
for ever, Romans 16. 27. Take away Christ from the glory, and you were as good
take away the glory from God: And again, unto him be glory in the Church by
Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end, Ephesians 3. 21. This is the
true Catholic Religion or worship of God, that obliges all persons in the
Church, at all times, throughout all ages, and in all places, in heaven as well
as in earth, world without end: for no worship can be world without end, but
that which shall be in heaven: And sure we are the worship whereby we
Christians glorify God, in and by Jesus Christ, shall be in heaven: The Jews
worship, though in substance it was Christian, yet the manner being figurative
and typical, in extent it was but National, and in duration it was but
temporal; But the Christians worship being wholly in Spirit and in truth, in
the manner of it is angelical, in the extent of it is universal, in the
continuance of it is eternal: The same to all ages that it is in this, the same
in heaven that it is in earth: It is not safe for Christians to worship God so
now, as they cannot worship him world without end. If they worship him now by
his Son, they may so worship him for ever: But if they worship him now by any
other Mediator, they are sure they must leave that worship behind them, when
they leave this world: and therefore they are on the surer side who had rather
not take it, then be forced to leave it. For the Angels and Saints in heaven do
not go to God by one another, but all go to him by his Son: and why should we
men on earth go to him by any other, then by him by whom they do go with us
now, and we shall go with them hereafter? Shall the Church Militant set up a
Communion of Saints disagreeing in the worship of God from the Church
Triumphant? And why then does the Canon of the Mass begin with an Illative
particle that hints a conclusion rather than a beginning, saying, Te igitur
clementissime Pater per Jesum Christum filium tuum Dominum nostrum supplices
rogamus,: Therefore O most merciful Father we humbly beseech thee by Jesus
Christ thy Son and our Lord, that thou will accept those our gifts and
sacrifices; Why does this particle Therefore begin the Prayers at the Mass, but
only to show (as says the Ritualist) that the Angels and Saints in heaven have
begun, and that we men on earth do but only continue and as it were conclude
this sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to Almighty God? And why then should
we otherwise continue or conclude then they have begun it? Will they join with
us in this our new worship? or is that not a new worship (merely of our own
inventing) wherein they cannot, will not join with us? Since they glorify God
only in Christ, how shall we venture to glorify him in any other? unless we
will persuade God to accept one manner of glorifying him whiles it is our duty,
and another manner of glorifying him, when it shall be our reward, and so make
grace not the inchoation, but as it were the contradiction of glory? or unless
we will persuade our selves, that it is not best practicing such Songs on
earth, as we know we shall sing in heaven, but such as we know we shall not
sing there, if so be our singing them here, do not indeed keep us from coming
thither, and from singing there: nor is this a causeless fear; For he that in
the case of his worship has proclaimed himself a jealous God, has in effect
told us that in that same case it is the best and surest way for every man to
have his fears and jealousies. Those holy prayers and praises which are offered
up to God through Christ Jesus, we are sure do glorify him: and consequently
we cannot but fear that those which are offered up unto him through any other
Mediator, or Intercessor do not, cannot tend to his glory: Nor is it either
just or safe to appeal to the practice of Gods Church at any time, much less in
the corruptest times, against the Precept of Gods Word: For we cannot be
assured that any Church is his Church but from his word; and we are sure that
we have indeed the determination of a most infallible Doctor, if we can truly
say that we have the determination of his spirit, in his holy Word: For as what
prayers go from man to God by our Savior Christ are undoubtedly true worship:
so what precepts come from God to man by him, are unquestionably true Doctrine;
Wherefore since, See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy
brethren thaet have the testimony of Jesus, worship God, is one of his
precepts, and that twice repeated almost in the very same words, Rev. 19. 9.
and 22. 9. How shall we dare to do it, and not think to make his Doctrine as
well as our own worship, both alike questionable?

Saint Augustine gives us such a definition of a Mediator as will quite exclude
all but one, and that is our blessed Savior: Qui pro omnibus interpellat and
pro quo nullus, is verus est Mediator ac Intercessor noster, (lib. 2. contra
Parmen. cap. 8.) He that intercedeth for all, and none intercedeth for him, is
our true Mediator and Intercessor. Mark how he makes Mediator and Intercessor
both one, though some of late would make a great difference betwixt them, by
that new distinction of Mediator redemptionis and intercessionis; saying that
Christ alone is a Mediator of Redemption, but Saints and Angels may also with
him be Mediators of Intercession: A distinction not known in Aquinas his days,
who concludes positively that to be a Mediator betwixt God and man, is proper
only to Christ, and proves his position by Saint Paul's words, There is one
Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. He did not
think of eluding this text by saying, Mediator est duplex, redemptionis and
intercessionis: A Mediator is twofold, of Redemption and of Intercession; for
that had been to say, Vnus est duplex, one is two, a singular is a plural; for
there cannot be the ground of a distinction unless there be two, and therefore
a singular subject cannot be distinguished but by making one two, or a singular
a plural; and the Apostle having said Vnus Mediator, declared the subject of
his proposition so numerical and singular, that it could not be capable of a
distinction: For it is not possible to make of one subject numerically the
same, two specifically distinct: And it is evident that a Mediator merely of
intercession and not of redemption, is not a Mediator in the Apostles account;
for he proves that Christ only is a Mediator for all, because he gave himself a
ransom for all, ver. 6. How then can any be a Mediator to intercede for me, who
has not been a Redeemer to ransom me? or why should I go to them for
Intercession, to whom I cannot go for Reconciliation? Does not the blood of
Christ speak better things then the blood of Abel to my soul? and why should I
then not wholly pant and gasp after his blood? Is it not folly in me to leave
the better and take the worse? Nay is it not impiety in me to neglect the Son
of God, and go a gadding after the sons of men? To neglect the Mediator God
has given me, and to set up others of my own making? Can I bestow any of my
hope in praying to Saints and Angels, and none of my Faith and Charity go along
with it? or have I too much of these excellent virtues in my soul, that I could
take or translate some part of them from my God, were they indeed to be fixed
on any creature? Can I devote my self too much to a true Invocation? or, will
not a false Invocation set up a false Religion, and a false Religion calumniate
the truth, and endanger the benefit of my redemption?

Well then, and Tutior and Sanior pars must needs be my rule in a matter that
so nearly concerns my Saviors honor, and mine own salvation; and I will leave
the Saints out of my prayers, because it is both safer and sounder so to do:
For all the world cannot object against me for going to God only by his Son,
but I must object against my self for going to God by the best of his servants
in conjunction with, much more in derogation to his Son: Wherefore I must
resolve to let the Saints stand in my Calander, but not let them come into my
Liturgy, for fear I should either exclude my Savior out of his own office of
Intercession, or at least exclude my self and my prayers out of the blessing of
his Communion: For this I am sure of, He will not join with me in my prayers
which I make to any but only to his Father; and it is dangerous for me to pray
without his Intercession, if not damnable for me to pray out of his Communion:
Wherefore though others be careless in this point who pretend to a perfection,
if not to a supererogation of righteousness, yet I have work enough to pray
against my sins, dare not willingly admit a sin into my prayers; for it was the
curse of Judas, Let his prayer be turned into sin; and I dare not venture to
bring that curse upon my self: For I that now ask pardon for the sins of my
prayers, if I make my prayers more sinful then my infirmities do make them for
me, what shall I have left whereby to ask pardon for the sinfulness of my sins?

I will therefore ever give God humble and hearty thanks, that he has caused
me to be educated in a Church which has taught me to make my addresses to him
only in and by his Son; and I will never cease so to make my addresses to him,
in behalf of that distressed and oppressed Church; For he that has given us
the parable of the importunate widow, to this end that we should always pray
and not faint, will certainly hear our prayers and the prayers of his Church
that is now a widow, and therefore brought to the state of widow-hood and
desolation, because we her sons have hitherto been so slothful and sluggish in
our prayers, suffering them infinitely to outstrip us in the practice, who
came far short of us in the purity of Devotion, and not showing that zeal
toward the eternal Son of God, which others have showed and do still show
toward their petty Deities; This our abominable neglect or rather contempt of
God, has made him jealous, and his jealousy has made him for a while cast us
off; but we hope he will not cast us off for ever even for his Truths sake, for
his mercies sake, for his names sake; yea though we have slighted his Truth,
abused his mercy, and blasphemed his most Holy name; by throwing away our
Prayers with as much fury as if Truth had been a lie, Invocation had
Superstition, and Piety had been Idolatry; yet we will still hope that he will
not cast us away for ever, for his Sons sake, because in him he is well
pleased, though with us he be most justly displeased: For in him alone, in his
merits, in his righteousness, in his intercession, have we called and do call
for grace and mercy; and therefore cannot doubt but in him and for his sake we
shall be heard at last and relieved, and shall see the salvation of our God:
For the unrighteous Judge himself could say, Though I fear not God, nor regard
man, yet because this widow troubles me I will avenge her, least by her
continual coming she weary me; Much more shall the righteous Judge say so: Yea
O Lord we know that thou fear not thine enemies, but yet regardest thy
servants, and therefore we thy most unworthy servants will never leave
troubling thee with our continual addresses, nor wearying thee with our daily
prayers, till thou arise and maintain thine own cause, and either avenge our
injuries, or vindicate our innocence: If our Church was once thy Spouse, she is
now thy widow; O let not her, nor us for her, cry any longer in vain to thee:
But we beseech thee to avenge her of all her enemies, not by confounding, but
by converting them: For this will be a vengeance worthy of thy Justice and of
thy Mercy both together, when thou shall indeed destroy the sin, but yet save
the sinners: However we cannot but profess our selves so well assured of the
truth of our Religion, whiles we adore and worship thee only in thy beloved
Son, that though all the world discountenance, yet we dare not discontinue,
much less forsake it; And though for our many and grievous sins, thou still
suffer us to be eaten up like sheep, and sellest thy people for naught, and
make us to be rebuked of our neighbors, and to be laughed to scorn, and had
in derision of them that are round about us, yet we will not forget thee, nor
behave our selves frowardly, much less falsely, in thy Covenant; nor suffer our
hearts to be turned, nor our steps to decline from thy way. Yea though thou
still more and more smite us into the place of Dragons (creatures that are both
mischievous and venomous) and cover us not only with the shadow, but even with
the body of death; yet we will ever resolve, and we beseech thee to confirm and
consummate our resolution*) not to forget the name of our God, nor to stretch
out, or hold up our hands to any strange God; For thou have told us, This is
life eternal that we might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom
thou have sent, (John 17. 3.) Lord, we desire so to know thee as to love thee,
so to love thee as to worship thee, so to worship thee as to glorify thee, so
to glorify thee in this world, as to be glorified by thee in the world to
come; Thou have commanded us to forsake all to follow thee; Lord make us
readily to obey this command, that we may so follow thee, as at last to come to
thee, to be with thee, and to abide in thee for ever. For those who saw thy Son
but in tpyes and figures, have taught us this lesson of sincerity and of
constancy, not to be careful to answer any of our adversaries in this matter:
but readily and cheerfully to say, Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us;
and he will (in his good time) deliver us: But if not, be it known unto all the
world, that we will not worship the images which our Fathers have set up, nor
the imaginations which our children are now setting up; for our God is too
spiritual to be worshipped with images, and too substantial to be worshipped
with imaginations: He is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth, (Joh. 4. 24.) His worship has too much of Spirit to
consist in images, and too much of Truth to consist in imaginations: Wherefore
we knowing that our worship of God is both in Spirit and in Truth, are sorry to
see that any should oppose it, (for it is prodigious, as well as odious, for
any Christian to oppose the glory of Christ) but will not give them that
occasion of joy, to see that their opposition should make us forsake it; For he
that has said, Seek ye after God, and your soul shall live, (Psalm. 69. 33.)
has taught us to say in our Doctrine, What shall we do with a Religion that
seeks after any but God, since our soul cannot live in any but in him? and much
more has he taught us to say in our devotion, Lord, we make our prayer unto
thee in an acceptable time: Hear us O God in the multitude of thy mercies, even
in the truth of thy salvation, Psalm 69. which is a prayer in times of
persecution for the cause of Religion; For as long as we make our prayers only
to thee O Lord, we are sure that we do pray in the truth of our Religion; and
therefore may not doubt but thou will at length hear our prayers in the truth
of thy salvation; and that for our blessed Saviors sake, to whom with the
Father and the eternal Spirit be all honor and glory now and for ever, Amen.

Christ glorified in his Ascension.
The Prooeme. That our blessed Saviors Ascension is not so truly observed by
our commemoration, as by our imitation; and the manner how to consider the
History of his Ascension.
THere is no blessing of Christ but imposes upon a Christian the necessity of
commemorating it; and withal affords him exceeding great joy in its
commemoration, if he so observe it with other Christians, as also to imitate it
with good Christians.

For at Saint Luke gives a full definition of Christ's Gospel, when he calls
it a Treatise of those things which Jesus did do and teach, Acts 1. 1. as if he
had said, A Book that contains Christ's sayings and doings: so may we give
this definition of a true Gospeller, or of a good Christian, He is a lively
representer of the sayings and doings of Christ; of the sayings of Christ by
his profession; of the doings of Christ by his practice and imitation: For that
man alone has a true faith in the Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of
Christ, who shows his faith by his works, dying with Christ that he may live
to him; rising with Christ that he may live with him; and ascending to Christ
that he may live in him; who shows his faith in Christ's Cross by crucifying
his own sinful lusts, in Christ's resurrection, by rising to newness of life:
and in Christ's ascension, by ascending thither in heart and mind, whiher his
Savior is gone before him.

Thus did the holy Apostles follow their Master with their eyes and with their
hearts, when they could not follow him with their bodies; They looked
steadfastly toward heaven, as he went up, Acts 1. 10. Surely the more to fix
their hearts on him when he was above: And so must we too; we must go up with
him thither, that we may tarry with him there; accordingly as Christ's own
Church has taught us to pray, Grant we beseech thee Almighty God, that like as
we do believe thine only begotten Son our Lord to have ascended into the
heavens; so we may also in heart and mind thither ascend, and with him
continually dwell, who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, one
God world without end: which is such an heavenly prayer, That we are infinitely
bound to bless God for putting it into our devotions, but yet more bound to
beseech him that he will also put it into our lives and conversations.

For which cause I will enlarge my considerations concerning the ascension of
our blessed Savior: And as Binius in setting down that vast and voluminous
Council of Ephesus, digesteth his work into three Tomes, in the first tome
reciting, (...), the acts before the Council: in the second Tome, (...); the
acts done in the Council; in the third Tome; (...), the acts done after the
Council; So will I consider the history of our blessed Saviors Ascension,
first insisting upon those things which are recorded before it, His
apparitions, his instructions, his consolations, and his benedictions:
Secondly, insisting upon those things which are recorded concerning the manner
of his ascending: And lastly insisting upon that one thing which is recorded of
him after he was ascended, viz. his sitting at the right hand of God.

And I have warrant enough so to do from the two Penmen of that very History:
For Saint Mark describes the Ascension with reference to Christ's Apparitions
upon the very day of his resurrection, though that was full forty days before
he ascended; for so we read, Mar. 16. 14. Afterward he appeared unto the eleven
as they sat at meat, and upbraided their unbelief and hardness of heart; which
apparition was clearly on the very day of his Resurrection, unless we will say,
that unbelief and hardness of heart remained in the Apostles, when it scarce
remained in any of the other Disciples: for he had appeared unto them no less
then five several times on that very day, for the confirmation of their faith:
And yet without any mention of more apparitions, it follows, v. 19. So then
after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven.

But Saint Luke describes the Ascension with the sending down of the Holy
Ghost, which was not till ten days after our Savior Christ was actually
ascended, as appears, Acts 1. 8, 9. But ye shall receive power after that the
Holy Ghost is come upon you: And when he had spoken these things, he was taken
up; The Ascension is so placed in the narrations of these Evangelists, as both
to look backward to the Feast of Easter, and forward to the Feast of Pentecost;
To look backward upon the Resurrection of God the Son; to look forward upon the
Descention of God the Holy Ghost: Happily to teach all Christians, That they
must first arise from sin, before they can ascend up to God; there is the
Resurrection before the Ascension: And that they must ascend up to God, before
they can receive the gifts and graces of his Holy Spirit; there is the Ascension
before the coming of the Holy Ghost. However this is ground enough for me to
look a little backward and a little forward in my considerations of the
Ascension, because the Evangelists have thus related it with its antecedent
apparitions and words, and with its consequent exaltation, or sitting on the
right hand of God.

CAP. I. Christ Considered before his Ascension.
SECT. I. Christ considered in his Apparitions before he ascended; as to Mary
Magdalen, and to Saint Peter, etc. The wrong use that has been made, the right
use that may be made of those Apparitions.
IT is much to be observed; That since in the Gospel are mentioned but ten
apparitions of Christ between his Resurrection and his Ascension, yet no less
then five of them are recorded on the very day of his Resurrection; For he
appeared five several times, to several persons, on that same day: which Durand
would persuade us the Latin Church did intimate in her very Church music of
that day, singing that Invitatory Hymn, The Lord is risen indeed, in the fifth
musical tone; Et est quinti toni, propter quinque apparitiones Domini in ill^
die, says he. This Anthymne, Surrexit Dominus vere, The Lord is risen indeed,
is sung in the fifth Tone, because the Lord appeared five times on that very
day; This is an elegant way of teaching mysteries, by musical tones; somewhat
above that gross invention of turning pictures into Laymens books; but yet
whatsoever is to be said of the music, we are sure the thing it self is
consonant to the Truth; For our blessed Savior did appear five several times
on the very day of his resurrection, that as soon as he had raised his own body
from the Grave, he might raise his Apostles souls from incredulity, and prepare
them to receive those Heavenly doctrines pertaining to the kingdom of God,
concerning which he resolved to speak with them from that day till the time of
his Ascension.

The first apparition was to Mary Magdalen alone, as says St. Mark, Now when
Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, He appeared first to Mary
Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven Devils, Mark 16. 9. Which must needs be
the grand comfort of any sinful, and sin-sick man that though he has very
impure and unclean thoughts and inclinations which do possess him, like so many
devils, yet if he fly to his Savior for relief, he will immediately cast out
those devils, and likewise show himself unto him in the bright beams of his
grace and mercy, as soon as to others that can boast of a much greater Purity:
But yet sure this first appearing of Christ to Mary Magdalen, did neither give
nor bespeak her any privilege or prerogative above others; It only showed that
he who came into the world to save sinners, would not have them discouraged or
dis-heartned because of their sins, after their consciences had been thoroughly
purged from dead works by faith and repentance.

Yet some men in these latter ages of the Church, thinking those had a real
pre-eminence above others to whom Christ first showed himself after his
resurrection, would needs fancy our blessed Savior to have appeared first to
his own Mother; So Durand in his Rationals, (lib. 6. in rubrica de septem
diebus post Pascha) Quidam dicunt, in ipsa etiam resurrectionis die primo
apparuit Matri; Some men say that on the very day of his resurrection he first
appeared to his mother; which is directly contrary to the Text; for if first to
his mother, then not first to Mary Magdalen; These men were so resolved to
accumulate preheminencies upon the blessed Virgin, that they feared not to
invade the Text, merely to force upon her this imaginary privilege or
prerogative.

The like is Baronius his Logic, (Anno Christi 16. number. 8.) Vnde inferri
potest in titulo crucis Domini, non eo ordine quo recensentur ab Evangelistis,
Inscriptiones esse positas: His drift being to advance the Latin tongue, (that
all the world forsooth might use it in their Liturgies) he would fain persuade
us that the Inscriptions upon our Saviors cross were not reckoned up in order
as they were written, but that the Latin was before the Hebrew and the Greek
Inscriptions. His aim was to extol his Churches language; but this was no
right way of extolling it, to give it a priority of order against the Text, nay
against the Relics of our Saviors cross, that are daily showed and
worshipped at Rome, where the first inscription is in Hebrew, the second in
Greek, the last in Latin; so that either Baronius is false, or the Relics
are false, says Causabon, Ergo vel Baronius falsus, vel reliquiae falsae. It
seems he thought not of the relics, or happily he would not have disproved
them; but it is evident he thought of the text, and cared not to disprove that;
This is the jumbling of Scripture, which some will rather use then want
arguments to justify their own parties or phansies; One says the Latin was
first written, though the Hebrew and Greek be first named; others say, though
Mary Magdalen was first named, yet she was not first meant, but that the
blessed Virgin Mary must step in before her. These Divines are not so moderate,
so ingenuous in their Divinity, as Gregory Naz. was in his Poetry, in his
tragedy of Christus Patiens. For although he allows Saint Mary Magdalen to say
to the blessed Virgin, (as he supposes them both going together to the
sepulcher,) (...), Sure you shall see him above any other, yet when Christ
comes indeed to be seen, It Is Mary Magdalen first spies him, and first speaks of
his appearance. For when the text says expressly he appeared first to Mary
Magdalen, it is no less then blasphemy to say he appeared first to his own
mother; for it is in effect to contradict the Holy Ghost, and to call that
second which he called first.

The second apparition was to the same Mary Magdalen together with other women,
even those who had prepared their spices and ointments, Luke 24. 1. and 10. O
my God, let me never cease to prepare for thee spices and ointments, even the
sweet odours of praise and thanksgiving joined with the tears of an unfeigned
repentance and the oil of good works, that the Sun of righteousness may arise
to me with healing in his wings, and show me the light of his countenance, and
I may be healed of all those wounds whereby I have so long weakened, and so
grievously tormented mine own soul.

The third apparition was to Saint Peter alone, as says Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15.
5. He was seen of Cephas, then of the twelve, which is Saint Peter's ninth
prerogative in Bellarmines account; Nona est quod Christus resurgens primum
omnium ex Apostolis Petro se videndum praebuerit; (lib. 1. de Pontif. Romans cap.
18.) But if this third apparition to Saint Peter, did advance him above the
rest of the Apostles, how did not the first apparition to Saint Mary Magdalen,
advance her above Saint Peter? Why should we not rather suppose, that our
blessed Savior made such haste to appear to Saint Peter, because he knew he
was still under the sorrow and burden of his threefold denial; for some of the
ancients were of opinion that Saint Peter never left weeping for denying his
Master, from the time of his death tell he saw him risen again from the dead:
So Sabellicus, lib. 5. exemp. cap. 5. Tribuunt lachrymis impendisse, etc. He
wept bitterly all those three days wherein he had lost his Master; and the
rather certainly, because he had denied him, before he lost him; This reason is
in effect the same with that before, concerning the first apparition to Saint
Mary Magdalen; and it is more agreeable with true Divinity to magnify Saint
Peter for his Repentance, then for his Primacy; and questionless he himself had
rather be so magnified; However this we are sure, that some very good Divines
have given us this same gloss, though upon another text: For upon those words
of Saint Mark, Go ^ell his Disciples, and Peter, (Mar. 16. 7.) The reason why
Saint Peter is particularly named, is thus given by Theophylact, ut scrupulus
illi adimeretur quo poterat jure solicitari, ne propter trinam abnegationem,
discipuli jure excidisset, To take that scruple out of his mind which might
then justly trouble him, least by thrice denying his master, he had lost the
privilege or right of a Disciple, (...), (are the fathers own words,) Christ
first appeared to Saint Peter, that he might show him, he was not cast off
because of his threefold denial. The same reason is in effect given by Saint
Chrysostom, as says the learned Causabone, in these words, because he alone
had denied his Master, and had reason to be afraid of appearing in his presence.

The same reason is moreover given by Saint Gregory the great; Si hunc angelus
nominatim non exprimeret, qui magistrum negaverat, venire inter Discipulos non
auderet: If the Angel had not particularly expressed his name who had denied
his Master, he would never have durst to come with the other Disciples: All
those Expositions are cited by Causabone against Baronius, in his sixteenth
Exercitation, for alleging this text to prove Saint Peter's Primacy. And to all
these I will add yet one more, the Exposition of one as much addicted to the
Papacy as Baronius, but much more to substantial Divinity, and that was
Franciscus Lucas Brugensis, who thus glosseth the words, Dicite discipulis, and
Petro; Petrum nominatim exprimit ne ille existimaret se ex discipulis non
haberi, qui praeceptorem negasset; ne putaret se loco excidisse, qui turpiter
adeo offendisset: Sciret contra, se ob poenitentiam, quae and Deo placuerat and
Angelis, in gratiam ac pristinum inter discipulos locum receptum esse, sibique
proinde ut capiti, caeteros in Galilaeam esse ducendos: He expressly names
Saint Peter, lest he should think himself not one of the Disciples, who had
denied his Master; lest he should think himself fallen from his place, who had
so shamefully offended; contrary, that he might know how by his repentance,
which had pleased both God and Angels, he was restored into favor and to his
former place among the Disciples, and that all the rest should be gathered to
him as to their head, in Galilee.

He was willing enough to bring in the Primacy, (as appears by this last
clause) but he would by no means leave out the repentance; taking it for
granted that our blessed Savior had the greatest regard to Saint Peter,
because he saw him so exceeding penitent. O my God, give unto me a heart truly
sorrowful for what evil I have committed and daily do commit, that thou may
give unto me a heart truly thankful for what good I have received and daily do
receive, and that thou may make me fully capable of receiving the greatest
good thou have in store for a penitent sinner, even the forgiveness of my sins,
and the comfortable assurance of that forgiveness sealed unto my conscience by
the Testimony of thy holy spirit, and the amendment of mine own sinful life,
that so thou may show unto me the merits of my Savior, and give unto me the
joy of his salvation. O thou who of thine infinite mercy and inestimable
goodness have granted repentance unto life, ( Act. 11. 18.) grant me also thy
grace to repentance, that I may live in continual sorrow for my sins, and may
have thy comforts in my sorrows, looking for that blessed hope, and the
glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; (Tit. 2. 13.)

The fourth apparition, which our blessed Savior made on the very day of his
resurrection, was that to the two Disciples as they were going to Emmaus: which
was next after that to Saint Peter; for it is plain that when they returned to
Jerusalem, they found the eleven gathered together, saying, The Lord is risen
indeed, and has appeared unto Simon, (Luke 24. 34.) And how was it that he
appeared to those two? The text says, they talked together of all those things
which had happened, and it came to pass that while they communed together, and
reasoned, Jesus himself drew near, and went with them, (Luke 24. 14, 15.) They
were making great lamentation that the chief Priests and Rulers had condemned
to death and crucified one that was a Prophet mighty indeed and word before God
and all the people, ( verse. 19, 20.) for as yet they took Christ only for a
Prophet: Could the loss of one Prophet so afflict them? and shall not the loss
of many Prophets more grievously afflict us? Can we see the destruction of a
whole national Church, wherein God was so truly glorified, and Gods truth so
impartially maintained, to the envy of her enemies, to the admiration of her
friends, and not be troubled for Gods sake, as well as for our own, that we
should be so grossly unthankful to God for not removing his Candlestick, as our
selves merely out of wantonness, playing with the light to put out the Candle?
Can we see the desolation of so many Prophets together, (as if they had rather
been Felons then Prophets) without tears in our eyes, complaints in our mouths,
and sorrow in our hearts? Is it not a most terrible sight to see a whole member
at once torn away from Christ's mystical body? or can there be any thing more
terrible then this dividing of a member from the body, unless it be the
dividing of the body from the head? and where the one is actually done, may not
the other justly be feared? In such a dismal conjuncture of so many sins and
sorrows together, (but yet more sins then sorrows) what has any good
Christians left to do but to go to Emmaus, to retire himself to some place of
solitariness, and there to lament and bewail his own sad condition, that by his
sins he has caused so many laborers to be cast out of the Lords Vineyard,
when as he is no more able by his righteousness to deserve, then others are
able by their power to make so much as one true labourer: And sure he is, he
can never want such lamentations as God will accept, whilst he has such as God
himself has made, and practiced; and such are to be had in the Lamentations of
Jeremiah. For God the Holy Ghost made those Lamentations, and the Prophet
uttered them in the person of God the Son; So that the badness of the occasion
being more then recompensed by the goodness of the company, let him sigh with
himself and say, Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done unto me; wherewith the
Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fierce anger, Lam. 1. 12. For he may
well say this, when he cannot but say what follows, cap. 2. ver. 6. The Lord
was an enemy, he has swallowed up Israel, and he has violently taken away his
Tabernacle; he has destroyed his places of the assembly; The Lord has caused
the solemn Feasts and Sabbaths to be forgotten in Zion, and has despised in
the indignation of his anger the King, and the Priest; I will then leave the
pomps and vanities of this wicked world before they leave me, and go to Emmaus,
to some place of privacy, and there sit down and consider what I have lost,
(not of my temporal, but of my spiritual inheritance,) that I may accordingly
bewail and lament my losses; for I who regarded not my Savior as the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace ( Isa. 9. 6.) must now regard
him as he is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief, ( Isa. 53. 3.) till by my hearty sorrow and incessant supplications I
may get him to return again as it were by a glorious resurrection after death,
and in his power as the mighty God to restore his Church, in his mercy as the
everlasting Father to bless it; and in his dominion as the Prince of peace, to
govern and establish it for ever: Thus had I rather suffer with him in his
shame, then reign with his enemies in their glory; and I shall rejoice more in
my sorrows, then they shall in their joys; For in their joys, they may if
they will, see their sins; but in my sorrows, I shall see my Savior.

The fifth and last apparition which our blessed Savior made on the day of his
resurrection, was that which Saint Mark has recorded in these words, (Cap. 16.
ver. 14.) Afterward he appeared to the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief and heardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. Our blessed Savior
upbraided them, yet were they more truly believers in their unbelief, then many
of us are in our faith; for Saint Luke faith, They yet believed not for joy and
wondered (Luke 24. 41.) They believed not for joy and admiration; but many of us
so believe, as neither to rejoice nor admire at the grounds of our belief; in
so much that their infidelity was much better then our faith; for we have too
hasty a faith, to have a sure and a sound faith, and that makes us fall away in
these times of temptation, and rather then want temptation, become our own
tempters: Whereas if we did with the Bereans examine whether these things were
so before we believed, or with the Apostles did rejoice and admire to see them
so when we believe, it would not be possible for those that can so easily turn
the times, more easily to turn our faith, but being sure that we are indeed in
a true conjunction and communion with Christ, we would never suffer any thing
of this world to separate us from that holy conjunction, nor to divert us from
that blessed communion. Thus it is for want of joy and admiration that we daily
turn unbelievers, whereas the Apostles did not yet believe for joy and wonder;
therefore were they the more true believers; for what kept them from believing,
did in truth strengthen their belief.

And accordingly we may suppose our blessed Savior checked their incredulity,
not so much that he might blame and reprove their faith, as that they might the
more labor to increase and to improve it; for that they could never have that
faith too much settled and fixed in themselves, which they were now bound to
preach to others: And withal, that they should not be soon discouraged in
their preaching, if they found not the event presently answerable to their
pains, since it was long before they themselves did believe, though they had
met with infinitely a far better Preacher: For this Rule, When thou art
converted, strenghthen thy brethren, (Luke 22. 32.) holds not only in the
substance but also in the degree of that charitable duty, those being bound to
take the greatest pains in converting others, who most know, how much the
spirit of God has labored about their conversion; For he that considers how
long his Savior has tarryed for him, will never think that he can tarry too
long for his brother. And yet there is one more particular very observable in
this apparition, that it was when the Apostles were gathered together to hear
what Saint Peter and the rest could say concerning their Masters resurrection;
And as they thus spoke, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, Luke 24. 36.
That is then, and not till then, he appeared to them, when they were thus
prepared to receive him. O my God, make me zealously to follow all those means
which thou have given me of knowing thy eternal Son, my blessed Lord and
Savior; that pursuing after those means with an active industry, I may
overtake them with a happy speed, and lay hold on them with immortal joy, and
make use of them with unwearied care and constancy: Let me never absent my self
from the assemblies and meetings of thy Apostles, the guides and governors of
thy Church, for fear I should lose the opportunity of seeing thee, whilst I am
absent from them; For thou have promised to be with them always, even to the end
of the world; if therefore I will not be with them, how can I hope thou will be
with me? For surely of all men that are gathered together in thy name, upon the
face of the earth, they are most so gathered whom thou have commanded to gather
others, and therefore thou have promised to be most in the midst of them; for
as much as they are thy Trustees, whom thou have entrusted with thy name, and
with thy truth, and with thy blood; with thy name, lest Atheists should
blaspheme it; with thy truth, lest Heretics should corrupt it; with thy blood,
lest Apostates should profane it; O then let thy unworthy servant be always
gathered together with them, that I be never guilty either of Atheism, or of
Heresy, or of Apostasy: And when I am gathered together with them, make me to
open mine eyes to look, and mine ears to hearken diligently after thee, and not
only after them, that thou may open my heart to receive thee.

And make all guides and governors of thy Church still to follow the footsteps
of thy Apostles, and to enquire what is written in the Law of Moses and in the
Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning thee, ver. 44. For how shall they know
thee, to whom thou do not reveal thy self? or where do thou reveal thy self
but in thy word? Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand
the Scriptures, (Luke 24. 45) that is, when they had used all the means they
could to understand them, then and not till then he opened their understanding.
And who can tell but it is a judgment immediately from God, and a judgment
worthy of God, inflicted upon many great Scholars, not to understand the
Scriptures so much to their salvation, as some private unlearned men do
understand them; because they had rather cast their reproaches then their
affections upon Gods most holy word, inventing arguments to keep others from
reading it, whilst they should be making prayers that God would bless their own
reading of it! for unless he that has the key of David open the understanding,
in vain do we labor to open the Text: Wherefore the Church of England did upon
unquestionable grounds recede from the Latin Liturgy in the second Sunday of
Advent, to bring in this most excellent prayer, Blessed Lord, which have caused
all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning, grant that we may in such
wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly digest them, that by patience
and comfort of thy holy word, we may embrace and ever hold fast the blessed
hope of everlasting life which thou have given us in our Savior Jesus Christ;
I doubt not but the Church might for her liberty have changed more of those
Collects then she thought fit to change, but infinitely bless God that she
valued her Christian charity above her Christian liberty, so that she has
never at all changed but for the better; not desiring to depart from other
Christians, but only to come nearer to our Savior Christ: And truly when the
Contest was once broached, between the Church and the Scriptures in point of
authority, (the most unhappy Contest that ever was broached among Christians,
for some Church men; by laying aside the Authority of Christ did in effect
teach other men to lay aside the authority of the Church) I say when this
unhappy Contest was once broached between the Church and the Scriptures in
point of Authority, it was high time for our Church to cleave to the
Scriptures, that she might profess her desire and intention of remaining truly
Christian, wherein she did but follow Saint Peter's own example, saying, Lord,
to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of eternal life: John 6 68. For surely
our blessed Savior did not bring down with him the words of eternal life to
carry them back again to heaven, but to leave them here on Earth; and where
has he left them, if not in the holy Scriptures? Wherefore since Christ
himself alleged the Scriptures to confirm the Apostles in their faith, who
yet believed because they had seen him with their their own eyes, ( John 20.
29) How shall any Christian Church deny the People to read the Scripture, etc.
and not hinder the confimation of their faith in Christ? For when the Church
has done all that she can to make true believers, she must confess that their
faith does not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God; (1 Cor. 2.
5.) and that the word of God is the chiefest instrument of his Power, according
to that of the holy Apostle, For the word of God is quick and powerful, and
sharper then any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul
and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts
and intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. In which words, the Spirit of God sets
forth the excellency of the word of God, from its nature, and from its effects:
from its nature that it is quick and powerful, neither a dull nor a dead
letter, but quick in motion and powerful in operation; from its effects, that
it pierces, that it devideth, that it discerns the thoughts and intents of
the Heart; Piercing the thoughts by entering into the botom of our hearts, to
make us sound and sincere Christians against Hypocrisy; Dividing the thoughts
by separating good from evil, Truth from falsehood, in our Religion, to make us
Orthodox Christians, against Heresy; and discerning the thoughts, by showing
us the first truth and the chiefest good in our religion, to make us firm and
constant Christians, against Apostasy; For that man never yet discovered
Christ in his Religion, who could be persuaded to fall away from it. He was at
the best but a divider of the truth from falsehood, He was not a Discerner of
the first Truth in that Truth which he professed; for then he would have been
immovable in his Profession; Wherefore if you would indeed persuade or rather
tempt me, (for it is properly a temptation, which induces to evil) to leave the
Scriptures that I may cleave to the Church, you must first be able to show so
much in behalf of the Church as is here said in behalf of the Scriptures, or
you were as good persuade and tempt me to quit my reason, that I may get
Religion; or to cease to be a man, that I may begin to be a Christian.

SECT. II. The Apparition to above five hundred at once, cleared: And Christ
considered in his Instructions before he ascended; That these Instructions are
more particularly to be observed, as more directly conducing to the
Constitution, and the Conservation of his Church; Those Instructions briefly
explained, as they are set down, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
THE proper work of a Christian is to consider and contemplate his Savior
Christ, in all his sayings and in all his doings; (for never any speak like him
who was the eternal word of God, never any did like him who was the eternal son
of God:) but more particularly in those which come nearest his Ascension; for
all those his sayings and doings do more immediately and directly concern the
Constitution and the conservation of his Church, it pleasing the blessed
Redeemer and lover of Souls to give his special directions and instructions to
his holy Apostles, when he was even now to be taken away from them; that so he
might leave behind him in their minds the stronger impressions of his
all-saving Truth, and the greater assurance and persuasions of his everlasting
love. Wherefore though no one word that ever our blessed Savior was pleased to
speak either concerning his love toward us, or our duty toward him, should be
let fall to the ground without our observation, because he was so much our
friend: yet the words that he spoke last of all should most diligently be
received, most carefully retained, and most conscionally regarded, because they
were the words not only of a loving but also of a parting friend: and by
consequent such words as should both represent him, and comfort us during his
absence, though never so long, and keep him in our remembrance till his coming
again, when he will undoubtedly exact a severe account both of the Ministers
and of the people how they have observed those words. For this cause though our
blessed Savior did after the day of his Resurrection, make five more
apparitions before his Ascension, as that after eight days when S. Thomas was
now with the rest of the Apostles, Joh. 20. 26. And that to his Disciples who
went a fishing, Joh. 21. 4. And that to his eleven disciples on the mountain in
Galilee, Mat. 28. 16. And those two spoken of by S. Paul which are not at all
mentioned by the Evangelists, the one to above five hundred brethren at once,
the other to S. James alone, 1 Cor. 15. 6, 7. Yet I will omit all these,
because the words he spoke to his Apostles, were spoken on the very day of his
Resurrection as well as at the time of his Ascension: Only I cannot but wish
that Beza had spared his Criticism upon S. Paul's words, 1 Cor. 15. 6. (...),
Quod si vero scriptum erat (...): i. e. Quinquaginta; Non certe mirum est
quingentos hic fratres commemorari quum postea coacto universo coetu,
numerentur duntaxat centum and viginti, Act. 1. 15. What if it were at first
written by the numeral letter^, which signifies fifty, (and that fifty come
after to be made five hundred) for we see that all the Disciples who were in
Jerusalem at S. Peter's first Sermon were but 120. He is afraid of an imaginary
miscief, but falls into a real inconveniency; the mischif was merely imaginary,
as if S. Paul to the Corinthians had clashed with S. Luke in the Acts; whereas
Saint Luke says not there were then in Jerusalem, but 120. disciples, only
there were but one hundred and twenty of such note, as the Apostles had called
together to consult about the election of a new Apostle; accordingly he says
(...), the number of the names, that is, such as were notorious and eminent in
the Church, not denying but there might be many hundreds of the inferior sort
of people, (which are called by the Poet, sine Nomine turba, the common sort
that are without a Name) who were at that time reckoned among the disciples,
though they had not been called to the election of Saint Matthias: Thus the
mischief he feared was merely imaginary, but he fell into a real inconveniency:
For this supposition, that it is possible there should have been such chopping
and changing in the Text, tends directly to the enervating of the Authority of
the Scriptures, and the fidelity and veracity of the Catholic Church; for both
Greek and Latin Churches do now read (...) five hundred; and if they read not
now as they found it delivered to them, they are defective in their Veracity;
if it was not delivered to them; as it was at first written, their forefathers
were defective in their Fidelity; for this is too great a change to come in by
the mistake of a writer, though it is very improbable that the whole Church
should be so careless as to suffer any such mistakes; However in this
particular Eusebius will justify our present reading of the Text against all
conjectures whatsoever; for he lib. 1. Histor. Eccles. cap. 12. sets down
this very apparition of our blessed Savior, totidem verbis, not by numeral
letters, but in so many several express words as Saint Paul had before, saying,
(...), which is an undeniable argument that these words were so writ at large
from Saint Paul's own hand.

Having given this hint only out of zeal to Gods holy word, which must sway my
faith against the practice of whole Churches, much more against the phansies of
private men, I pass to the words which our blessed Savior spoke immediately
before he ascended; for without all question he then again repeated them,
though he had spoken them several times before; Saint Luke records them as
spoken on the very day of his Resurrection, Luke 24. 47. Saint John records
them as spoken, also on the very same day, John 20. 19, 20, 21, 22. Saint
Matthew records them as spoken after that day, sc. on the mountain in Galilee,
Mat. 28. 16, 19. And Saint Mark records them as spoken both on the day of his
resurrection, for so was the Apparition to which he annexeth them, and also on
the day of his Ascension, for such is the manner of his annexion; So then after
the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up into heaven; For what was it
that the Lord had spoken unto them, but these words concerning the discharge of
their Apostolical Office or Function, Go ye therefore and teach all Nations,
etc. which is yet more evidently attested by Saint Luke, Acts 1. 9. where it is
said, when he had spoken these things, (that is those things which concerned
their Function) whiles they beheld, he was taken up* For Saint Matthew's Go ye
therefore and teach all Nations; And Saint M^^k's, Go ye into all the world:
And Saint Lukes, ye are witnesses of these things: And Saint John's, As my
Father sent me, even so send I you, do all of them concern one and the same
office of preaching the Gospel, and administering the Sacraments, and whatever
else the Apostles were bound to do in order to the gathering, or preserving, or
governing the Church of Christ. And we cannot deny but these same words, or at
least words to this effect, were solemnly spoken at three several times by our
blessed Savior to his Apostles, that is to say, On the day of his
Resurrection, and afterward again in Galilee, and yet a third time also after
that immediately before his Ascension, to show what a necessity was laid upon
them to discharge that sacred function, when he thought it necessary so often
to repeat their charge, as if it had been his only business from his
Resurrection to his Ascension.

And doubtless, if we seriously consier the words themselves, we shall easily
see and willingly confess, that as they did concern the constitution of the
Church at that time, so they do concern the constitution of the Church at this
day, and will concern both its constitution and conservation to the worlds end.
I will accordingly explain them briefly, as I find them in the Evangelists, yet
so as to make Saint Matthew the standard for the rest, having already explained
the words, as they are recorded by Saint John: And thus Saint Matthew records
the words, All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth; our blessed
Savior had all the power of heaven and earth given to him from the Father,
both as he was the Son of God, and as he was the Son of man; as he was the Son
of God, so this power was given him by eternal generation; as he was the Son of
man, so the same power was given him by free donation: partly at his first
conception, by virtue of his union with the Godhead, but more fully after his
resurrection, for the merit of his death and passion: So that though he
exercised this power in his life time by choosing Apostles; and instituting the
Holy Sacraments, yet after he was risen again he exercised the same much more
eminently in a threesold respect, Quoad modum, quoad statum, quoad usum: First
because he was possessed of it after a more excellent manner, as having merited
it by his death: Secondly because he was possessed of it in a more excellent
state, as now being past all fear and danger of dying: Thirdly because he was
possessed of it for a more excellent end, as being how to use it, not for the
conversion of one people, but of all the world, as it follows, Go ye therefore
and teach all Nations: Go ye therefore, relying upon my authority which is
founded upon all power both in heaven and in earth, whereas any authority that
can forbid you to go, is founded only upon the power in earth.

And teach all Nations,) This the Apostles could not do; (no more then they
could continue to the end of the world) in their own persons; Therefore our
Savior Christ speaks these words to their Successors, as well as to them; And
so this Precept was given to make good that Promise, Mat. 24. 14. The Gospel of
the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations;
and then shall the end come. For the Apostles themselves did not, could not,
preach the Gospel in all the world, and unto all Nations: therefore they were
to ordain others to preach it after them, nor may we suppose the Ministers of
the Gospel to have been a Temporary calling, or oppose them in their Ministry,
unless we will resist the fulfilling of Cbrists promise, and do what we can to
make Truth himself a liar.

Baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost) The Apostles were commanded to baptize in this form for three reasons;
1. To distinguish Christians from Jews; for they worshipped God only in the
unity of essence as their Creator; but the Christians are to worship him in the
Trinity of persons, as their Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier. 2. To show that
here was nothing of humane invention or power to be given or received in
baptism, which was in the name of God only. 3. To show that there was great
virtue and efficacy in Baptism, even such as did concern our reunion with God,
by remission of our sins, and sanctification of our souls, or why else should
we be baptized in the name of God? And also, that all that virtue and efficacy
did wholly depend upon God alone, in whose name only we are to be baptized.

And this efficacy of Baptism is more fully expressed by Saint Mark saying, He
that believes and is Baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16. 16. where it is plain
that the Apostles are required to invite men to the Christian Faith and Baptism
by the promise of salvation; and consequently are forbidden to preach salvation
upon any other terms then those of believing and of being baptized: And those
men who make so slight account of Baptism, will one day find the Heathens and
Infidels of Syria to rise up against them in judgment, who said to their
Master Naaman, My Father, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing,
would thou not have done it? how much rather then when he says to thee, Wash
and be clean? 2 King. 5. 13. For they dare not deny but they are as unclean as
Naaman was in his leprosy, unless they will deny themselves to be of the same
mould and make with other men; for David has spoken in the person of every man
that is born of a woman, Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me, Psalm 51. 5. And they cannot deny but that God (since
Naamans time) has most eminently sanctified the flood Jordan, and (in that)
all other waters, by the Baptism of his well beloved Son Jesus Christ* to the
mystical washing away of sin: And yet moreover, That not only the man of God,
but also the Son of God has said unto them, Wash and be clean; unless they
will divide the precept, wash, from the promise, and be clean, since the words
have been in our Saviors mouth, which the Infidels durst not do when they were
only in Elisha's mouth.

For it is most certain that Baptism is necessary to salvation as commanded, (
wash) and it is most probable, that it is also efficacious thereunto ( and be
clean) because it is commanded: For he that has commanded it was able to make
it so, nay rather has made it so, to show that he delights not in
unnecessary or unprofitable commands: What need we then to say That Baptism is
necessary only as a profession of our faith, or as an outward sign or testimony
of Gods grace, whereas we may with much confidence and without any
inconveniency acknowledge it to be moreover an instrumental cause whereby our
blessed Savior is pleased to work Grace and Salvation? For who can hinder the
first cause to work by what instrument he pleases? and sure we are, the word
of God does plainly ascribe unto Baptism the operation of an instrumental cause
in working the effect of grace, when Saint Paul calls it The washing of
Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. which was the language he had been taught by God
himself at his first conversion, saying to him by Ananias, Arise and be
baptized, and wash away thy sins, Acts 22. 16.

Wherefore we will conclude that both Faith and Baptism may be rightly called
instrumental causes of our salvation, but in different respects; Faith as
instrumental on our parts, whereby we prepare our selves for Christ; Baptism as
instrumental on Christ's part, whereby he prepares us for himself: This being
granted, which can scarce reasonably be denied, we shall not delay our
childrens Baptism because it is instrumental to salvation on Christ's part, though
not on their own; and yet not tie God to outward means, because we acknowledge
Baptism to be instrumental to salvation only upon his own choice and
appointment, and therefore he can save without it, if himself so pleases. Nor
shall we need fear a falling away from the state of salvation any more in the
baptized Infants, then in the believing men, since our blessed Savior in
saying, he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, does suppose or
rather include the same condition as alike necessary to both, to wit, of
leading their lives according to their good beginnings: For the promise of
salvation upon a man's believing and being baptized, is not absolute but
conditional, that is to say, If he lead his life answerable to h^s faith, and
to the grace given him in his Baptism; as if it had been said, his faith and
his Baptism shall save him as far forth as is possible for instrumental causes,
or as far forth as belongs to them* that is, they shall really and effectually
conduce to his salvation, unless he himself be in the fault, and hinder their
working, either by forsaking his Faith, or by polluting and profaning his
Baptism; and not returning back again to God by his repentance. This
interpretation must be given of our Saviors words, as appears from the
foregoing part of his speech, Go and preach the Gospel; for it is most certain
that he would not have his Apostles preach any other Gospel then what himself
had preached, and that was, Repent ye and believe, Mar. 1. 15. Wherefore
Repentance must also come in as a necessary condition to salvation no less then
faith and Baptism, because all men do fall away from the purity which they had
through their Faith, and through their Baptism, by their daily sins; and there
is no promise of salvation to any man that continues and abides in his sins;
so that they must rise again by repentance or they cannot be saved.

Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you] After you
have made them my Disciples by Baptism, then keep them so by right doctrine,
for (...), is no more then Discipulate omnes gentes baptizantes eos, make all
nations my Disciples, baptizing them; so the command is to make Disciples unto
Christ; and the manner is explained how they are to be made, even by baptizing,
not by preaching; according to that of John 4. 1. Where (...); To make more
Disciples, and (...), To Baptize, are put for one and the same thing. And this
may properly be the signification of (...) in this place, only to make
Disciples by baptizing them, without any preaching, or else the words cannot
concern all nations; for they cannot concern children, since it is in vain to
labor to make them Christ's Disciples by preaching, but not in vain to make
them so by baptizing; But if we will needs have (...) signify to teach, then
we must distinguish upon the Doctrine; And these two words (...) and (...) may
be so distinguished, as to show that it is not the same Doctrine which is to be
zealously preached before, and after men are made Christ's Disciples; as if he
had said, Teach strangers and aliens the Doctrine of faith to make them my
Disciples; but teach Converts and Christians, the duties of life to keep them
my Disciples, and to make them good Christians: Though I must confess that
Epiphanius has found out all this only in the first word (...), which he has
thus explained, (...): ( Epiph. Haer. Herodiani.) That is, Bring them over from
their wickedness to the truth, and from diverse Sects and Heresies to one
communion: which is all one with Make them my Disciples, or teach them to
observe all my commands: Whence we may gather this definition of Christ's
Disciple, he is one that observes all Christ's commands, and therefore carefully
embraces the Christian truth, and as carefully maintains the Christian
communion; Whence it necessarily follows, that neither Heretics nor
Schismatics are to be accounted Christ's Disciples, since the one embrace not
his truth, the other maintain not his communion.

And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world.) I that have the
power of life and death, do promise or rather give you my actual assistance and
favor and grace, as if I were still actually present with you; And this
presence of my power and grace shall never be taken away neither from you nor
your successors as long as this world shall last; so that both you and they
(for they are also necessarily included, since this promise cannot be made good
without a succession in the Ministry) may cheerfully undertake and courageously
discharge your callings, notwithstanding all the contradictions and
persecutions you shall meet with from disobedient and gainsaying people; For I
that am above all the world, have placed your Doctrine above their
contradictions, and your life above their persecutions; and the worst they
shall be able to do, shall be to send you the oftener to your Master for
instruction, or the sooner to your Master for reward: Surely the Apostles
understood more in this promise then we can express, and therefore they made
neither excuse nor delay, when they were bid to go, though they were sent out
into the wide world, already destitute, and very speedily to be afflicted and
tormented; Of whom the worl^ ^as not worthy, if we consider them in their
persons; much less if we consider them in their calling; yet were they sent
into the world to be despised in their persons, and to be opposed in their
calling, and sent with no other credential letters to countenance them, with no
other guard to protect them, but only this, And lo I am with you always.

This was the answer that put Moses to silence, though he had been almost
refractory in objecting that he was slow of speech; Now therefore go, and I
will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say, Exodus 4. 12. This
was the answer that silenced the Prophet Jeremiah, so that he replied no more
Ah Lord, I am a child and cannot speak, after God had once said unto him, Be
not afraid of their faces, for I am with thee to deliver thee, Jer. 1 8. And
this answer must silence all our objections in Saint Chrysostomes gloss, (...):
Talk not to me of the difficulties that are in the work, for I am with you who
make all things easy; and if all things, then surely not only our doings, but
also our sufferings in his service and for his glory: He will make all easy;
those who are called by him, shall labor with more ease then others loiter;
and suffer with more pleasure then others domineer: But those only are called
by him to whom he has said, Go and teach: To those alone he has given the
command of teaching; and to those alone he has given this promise, Lo I am
with you always: They that are concerned in the precept, (which can concern no
other but such as can justly plead a succession to the Apostles in the Ministry
of the Gospel) are also concerned in the promise; And they that are concerned
in this promise, may turn Preache^s with confidence, and preach with comfort;
But they that are not concerned in this promise, as it is to be admired how they
can have the confidence to be Preachers, so it is to be affirmed, they can have
no true spiritual comfort in their Preaching: Nor would the world so abound
with uncommissionated Preachers (that dares not abound with uncommissionated
Soldiers) were not their confidence more in themselves, then in their Savior;
more in their own swords, then in his word, for the support of their preaching,
which is a very sinful confidence: Nor would such Preachers be so zealously
disposed to preach, did they not more rejoice to advance their own then their
Saviors glory and interest, by their Doctrine, which is a very miserable
comfort.

But I will conclude all with Prospers gloss upon this Text, as I find him
cited by the learned Brugensis, Nolite trepidare de vestra infirmitate, sed de
med potestate confidite, qui vos in hoc opere non derelinquam, non ad hoc ut
nihil patiamini, sed quod multo majus est, praestiturus ut nulla saevientium
crudelitate superemini. Be not afraid of your own weakness, but rely wholly on
my strength; for I will never forsake you in this work: not that you shall not
suffer very much from your cruel adversaries, but that notwithstanding all
their cruelties I will make you more the conquerours in your sufferings.

SECT. III. That the words which our Savior Christ spoke to his Apostles
before he ascended, may be reduced to these three heads; words of instruction,
consolation, benediction: That the effect of them all is registered in the Text,
not left to unwritten tradition: That the Apostles though thus instructed,
comforted and blessed, yet preached not the Gospel till the coming of the Holy
Ghost upon them, whereby they had not only ability, but also authority, or
mission and commission in a full degree.
IT may not be amiss to consider some of our blessed Saviors consolations and
benedictions as well as instructions, which he bestowed on his Apostles before
he ascended: And to this purpose we may not unfitly reduce all the words which
he spoke from his Resurrection till his Ascension, to these three heads, verba
instructionis, verba consolationis, verba benedictionis; words of instruction,
words of consolation, and words of benediction: or words of grace, mercy, and
peace; For like as Saint Paul said to Saint Timothy whom he called his own son
in the Faith, Grace, Mercy, and Peace; so did God from the beginning speak to
his Apostles, and so does he still speak to all those whom he accepts as his
sons, (though unworthy to be his servants) the words of grace by instruction,
the words of mercy by consolation, and the words of peace by benediction.

Saint Luke says our Savior was full forty days with his Apostles after his
Resurrection, speaking of the things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, Act. 1.
3. He had so fervent a desire of teaching them, (and in them us) the right way
of salvation, that he differred to enter into his own glory, which he had so
dearly earned by his sufferings, till he had fully instructed and confirmed
them in that way: He was willing to leave the impression of heaven in their
hearts, before he was willing to take possession of it in his own body: Oh that
we did imitate our Master in this his unspeakable charity; for though it be
above our expression, yet may it in some sort come under our imitation, by
truly desiring and zealously promoting one another Salvation: This would be
indeed to show, not to speak our selves Christians; This would be indeed not
Verbally but Really to put on the Lord Jesus Christ: He was unwilling to leave
his Apostles before he had given them all manner of Instructions both how to
teach and how to govern his Church; the one, that he might keep all after-ages
from heresy, the other that he might keep them from schism: Oh that all
Christians would accordingly consider what a grievous sin it is not to hearken
to Christ's own Teaching, not to obey Christ's own Government; And what a Severe
account he will call them to, when he shall come again as Judge of quick and
dead: for being heretics against his doctrine* put afterward in writing in
his word, or for being Schismatics against his discipline, put immediately in
practice in his Church. For if he kept himself forty days from heaven to
settle his Church, how shall any that is called a Christian, think the best way
thither is to unsettle it? Our blessed Savior gave instructions, and not only
so, least we should think any thing of Religion to be arbitrary, but he also
gave commands That we should know and acknowledge all matters of Religion to be
necessary. (...), After he had given commandments unto the Apostles, Acts 1. 2.
But where are these commands? Are they, or any of them, devolved down unto us
only by unwritten Tradition? we dare not say so; for that were to make the holy
Apostles so regardless of Christ's instructions, as to care to teach them only
to those men who had the happiness to live in their days, since verbal
Tradition is as changable as the breath that derives it: whereas what is spoken
of Abel, is much more to be verified of Saint Peter or Saint John, God
testifying of his gifts, and by it (that is by his faith) he being dead, yet
speaks, Heb. 11. 4. Nay more, yet Preaches; for the reading of the law of
Moses is called Preaching, Acts 15. 21. For Moses of old time has in every
City them that preach him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, and
if reading in the Law of Moses was Preaching, who dares deny it to be so in the
Law of Christ? Therefore the books of the New Testament do certainly contain
the Instructions and commands which Christ gave to his Apostles by word of
mouth during those forty days he abode with them; And we need go no farther
then the written word to know our Saviors mind, for it is therein taught us
either by Precept or by Promise, or by Precedent; And consequently what we find
not there written for our instruction in one of these three ways, that we must
not ascribe either to his dictating or to their Preaching, unless we will
impute gross forgetfullness to the Registers of Christ, as not remembering all
things necessary (when as our Savior himself promised them such a Comforter as
should bring all things to their remembrance, Joh. 14. 26. or supine negligence
to the Penmen of the Holy Ghost, as not writing what was necessary to be
remembered: For if the words which Job spoke concerning Christ were to be
engraven with an iron pen and lead, in a rock for ever, Joh. 19. 24. then much
more were those words to be so engraven which Christ himself spoke to his
Apostles; words engraven in a rock with an iron pen are lasting, but they are
not so legible unless they be also drawn over or colored with lead to make
them conspicuous; So Solomon Iarchi glosseth this Text: he would have the
Characters of his Letters engraven with iron to make a deep impression: but
after that, he would have those same Characters colored or died with lead
(...) dare litteris aspectum nigrum ut cognoscantur; That their black tincture
might make them the more legible.

And without doubt, our blessed Savior took such a course, that the main
effect of his words should be so engraven as to be both lasting and legible, to
the worlds end, when himself has said, that heaven and earth shall pass away,
but my words shall not pass away: Mat. 24. 35. and amongst the rest, sure not
his last words.

Saint Luke records this for one of them, that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the father, Acts 1. 4. And this word
does our Savior Christ still speak to every good Christian, saying unto him,
depart not from Jerusalem, though it were in truth, what some have made it
reputed by their false clamours, profane, unclean, impure Jerusalem; For you
may not hope to fare better then Christ and his Apostles wherever you stay,
and you are sure not to fare worse then they did, though you stay in Jerusalem.

Jerusalem the City of God, had been turned into Sodom, a cage of unclean birds
for its impurity; into an Aceldama, a field of blood for its cruelty; yet here
is such a promise annexed to it, as makes Christ's Disciples willing to bear
with the impurities and to bear the cruelties; For it is an Elisha promise,
which signifies, My God saves; And no wonder then if it has the power of
reviving the Soul, as Elisha's bones did revive a dead body; And when the man
was let down and touched the bones of Elisha, he revived and stood upon his
feet, 2 Kings 13. 21. So if the soul be let down never so low into the pit of
destruction, yet if it touch this Elisha, this promise of My God saves, with a
true and lively faith, it will make the man revive, and stand again upon his
feet.

And those men who are so ready to depart from our Jerusalem for every petty
dislike of the high Priests and Elders in it (though the dislikes be rather
phansied then found,) do show that they are not so well instructed in the faith
as to know the promise of the Father, or not so well grounded in hope and
rooted in charity, as to wait for that promise according to the appointment of
the Son: He bids all tarry in Jerusalem that look after his promises, and
therefore does not allow any to call Jerusalem Babel, much less to make it so,
that either themselves or others may have a pretense to go out of it.

But what was this particular promise of the Father to the Apostles? it was the
promise of sending the Holy Ghost to enable them to be his wtnesses unto the
uttermost parts of the Earth.

A promise which much concerns carnal men to look after, that they may have the
spirit of God; A promise which much concerns spiritual men, that they may have
him more: Both must tarry in Jerusalem; in the unity of the Church; for the
mercy is not without the promise, and the promise is not without Jerusalem:
Depart not from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the father; till
therefore the carnal man shall need no spirit who has none at all, and till
the spiritual man shall need no more spirit who cannot have too much, both must
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, labor for the peace of the Church, in their
prayers and in their practices, neither may recede from the Apostles nor from
their Successors, to whom was made the promise of the Holy Ghost: And it is
worth our notice, that though the Apostles had forty days conversation with
Christ, and were fully instructed in the knowledge of Christianity, yet they
did not presently go and preach the Gospel; Nay Christ himself bad them not go
till they had received Commission from the Holy Ghost: So that there are two
things required to constitute a true Preacher of the Gospel; Ability, and
Authority; or, Mission, and Commission: He must first be enabled to preach, by
conversing with Christ in his holy Word: Then besides his Ability, he must also
have Authority or Commission from the Holy Ghost, though not immediately by an
extraordinary, yet mediately by an ordinary calling, or he has not leave from
Christ to preach the Gospel: For so it is said, Acts 1. 8. But ye shall receive
power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you, and ye shall be witnesses
unto me: Without this coming of the Holy Ghost men may be witnesses to
themselves, but they cannot be witnesses unto Christ, because he has not
enabled or not authorized them: For which cause it is, that in the Ordination
of a Minister, the Bishop pronounces those words of our Savior, (the first
Bishop that ever pronounced them) Receive ye the Holy Ghost, thereby giving him
a Commission to be one of Christ's witnesses unto the people: For this promise
of being baptized with the holy Ghost, to be Christ's witnesses, did certainly
belong to the Apostles, not as members, but only as ministers of Christ's
Church: those words he spoke to them only as his Ministers, though other words
he spoke to them as his Members.

Receive ye the Holy Ghost] are words both of consecration and of benediction;
words of consecration, as they set a man apart for Gods service; words of
benediction, as they enable and authorize a man to serve him: if not as a
member, yet doubtless as a minister: if not by Gratia gratum faciens, yet by
Gratia gratis data (as the School distinguishes) if not by gifts and graces
that tend to his own regeneration, yet surely by gifts and graces that tend to
others edification: And as it is said, The Lord blessed the seventh day and
hallowed it; so we may say, The Lord blessed his Apostles and hallowed them:
for his hallowing was and is a blessing: And as our Savior Christ is said to
have blessed the bread and the wine, when he consecrated them to be his own
body and blood: So he also blessed the Apostles when he consecrated them to be
his own peculiar servants, thereby showing, That there cannot be a greater
blessing then to serve him. And accordingly we must look on those words whereby
he consecrated his Apostles, as words of his Episcopal benediction, no less
then of his Episcopal consecration. Wherefore the Ministers of the Gospel,
rightly ordained, are no less blessed then they are hallowed in their callings,
(whatever they may be, or may be thought in their persons) and may comfortably
make this answer to their Revilers and Persecutors, Though they curse, yet
bless thou, and let thy servants rejoice, Psalm. 109. 27. or rather, Thou have
blessed, and therefore we must, and will rejoice though they curse us: For he
that loved the wages of unrigh^^ousness, could not withold from the world
this word of truth and righteousness, He has blessed, and I cannot reverse it,
Numb. 23. 20. so that unconscionable men by reviling their Ministers whom God
has blessed, do in effect revile, though they cannot reverse, Gods undoubted
blessing and though by so doing they may hinder themselves, yet surely they
cannot hinder their Ministers from being the blessed of the Lord: For Saul in
the midst of his Apostacy and falling from God, when he was even now ready to
butcher Abimelech and all the Priests, yet gave his Testimony to this Truth,
saying unto Samuel, Blessed art thou of the Lord: for so it is in the Hebrew,
(...), Benedictus (...) Domino, Blsseed art thou of or to the Lord; or as
Targum ^enders it, Blessed art thou before the Lord; Though they be as a cursed
thing in the eyes of men, yet they are Blessed before the Lord: Let the world
vilify them as it pleases, yet doubtless God has magnified them, in that he
has blessed them, and commanded them to bless in his name: And bless they
must, though they be more and more cursed of those whom they bless; for being
Gods Ministers, they must speak no other but Gods word, and his words are the
words of blessing. The words of God in themselves are the words of Majesty and
Verity; calling for our fear and reverence, because words of Majesty; for our
attention and diligence, because words of Verity: and consequently calling for
some of our reverence and attention to those who are entrusted with them, and
licensed to say, Harken to the word of God: The Prophet Isaiah said, Hear O
Heavens, and give ear O earth, for the Lord has spoken, Isa. 1. 2. Where we
find an undeniable connection in the position, Gods speaking and our hearing;
but a more undeniable confutation in the supposition, if he should speak and we
not hear: For his words are words of Majesty, able to bow down the highest
heavens; and words of Verity, able to quicken the dullest earth: Such are the
words of God in themselves; but to us (blessed be his condescension and
goodness) they are the words of Grace, Mercy and Peace: The words of Grace by
instructing, of Mercy by promising, of Peace by blessing: And this word of
blessing is so much his delight, that he chose it for his very last word here
on earth; and whiles he was speaking this word, he was parted from them, and
carried up to heaven, Luke 24. 51. The word of blessing is certainly the word
of Peace, There being no Peace in any condition or kind of life but merely from
Gods blessing: Therefore in every thing we go about, we should first look after
Gods blessing, then after our own peace and contentment; for he does justly
punish us with the loss both of his blessing and our own peace, when we look
for the peace either before or without his blessing, expecting contentment and
satisfaction in such a thing as he will not, or in such a way as he cannot
bless.

Whiles he blessed them, he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven:
The last word in his mouth was blessing, and must be the last in ours if we
hope to part from earth as he did, and be carried up into heaven: Therefore let
every word that comes from us be blessing, for fear it should be our last word:
He that went up to heaven with blessing, will not take us up thither without
it: Saint Peter could not forget that Christ parted from him and the rest of
the Apostles, blessing them; and takes what care he can, that cursing and
railing should not make one man, and much less one Church, part from another,
and both part from the eternal Son of God* Love as Brethren, (says he to those
of the despersion, that is, to several Nations, much more to those of the same
Church and Nation) be pitiful, be courteous, not rendering evil for evil, or
railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing, knowing that ye are thereunto
called that ye should inherit a blessing, 1 Pet. 3. 8. 9. Where we see that
railing is opposed to blessing; which opposition must teach us that not only
blasphemies against God, but also revilings and reproaches against men
(especially those who have a peculiar stamp of God upon them, as our Teachers
and our Governors) are in the guilt, and consequently under the condemnation of
cursings: And though this sin be now the common road of men upon earth, who
blazen their own righteousness chiefly by others pretended sins, yet it can
never be the right way to heaven: And we must forsake it, as we will stick to
our calling, and to our inheritance; knowing that we are thereunto called, that
we should inherit a blessing: So that if we part not with this sin of railing,
it will either part us from our calling, or part both us and our calling from
our inheritance: it will either make us to be no Christians, or such Christians
as not to inherit a blessing: But what was this blessing, which our Savior at
parting bestowed upon his Apostles? (for we have yet only spoken of that which
was on the very day of his Resurrection, Joh. 20. 19.) May we not give a fair
guess at it from that curse or malediction, since commonly used by his
pretended Vicar General, Indignationem omnipotentis Dei and Apostolorum ejus,
Petri and Pauli sentiat in aeternum? May we not here put Indulgentiam for
Indignationem, and avow that it came from our Saviors own mouth by unwritten
Tradition? If ever Tradition will help out the Text, let it be now, that we may
not lose our Saviors last word and his best word both together: But Tradition
cannot help us; and sure we are from the Text, That our Savior never taught
his Apostles to join themselves in Commission with his Father, (creatures with
their Creator) either to bless or curse, although not only they, but also their
Successors can rightly do both in his name, and by his power. We have here only
a probable conjecture, That the benediction which Christ gave to his Apostles,
was the same in effect which the Apostles afterward gave unto the Church in
his name, as having received it from his own mouth; Grace unto you and peace be
multiplied, says Saint Peter: Grace be with you, mercy and peace, says Saint
John: It seems grace and mercy were reserved till Christ's ascension; for we
find only Peace be unto you, after his Resurrection; and Saint John hints a
reason of it; for the Holy Ghost was not yet given, because Jesus was not yet
glorified, John 7. 39. upon which ground we may not unreasonably build this
Position, That Grace and mercy were reserved for Benedictions after his
Ascension, or till the giving of the Holy Ghost.

But seeing we cannot tell certainly the exact word of Benediction which Christ
left to his Apostles when he parted from them: we shall do well to lay hold on
that which we are sure came from his own mouth whiles he was yet with them,
even that recorded, Luke 11. 28. Blessed are they that hear the word of God and
keep it; that is, keep it in their memories, and in their consciences, and in
their conversations: Keep it in their memories, that it may sink into their
consciences; and keep it in their consciences that it may break forth into
their lives and conversations: Let us be sure to lay hold on this, and we shall
be sure not to want his last blessing, though perchance we may not know it till
we come to enjoy both it and him.

CAP. II. Christ considered, whiles he was Ascending.
SECT. I. That the words used to express Christ's Ascension, did manifest his
twofold claim or title to heaven; the one by Inheritance as God, the other by
merit or purchase as man: And that Christ in his Ascension wrought a twofold
Miracle; one in the conquest of earth, the other in the conquest of heaven: And
what comfort and benefit redounds to us Christians from these titles, and these
miracles.
THE considerations that are most remarkable in our blessed Saviors Ascension,
are best discovered from the words that are used to express it. In the Apostles
Creed, the word for He Ascended, is, (...), He went up; borrowed from Saint
Paul, Ephesians. 4. 8. (...), when he ascended up on high: But the word used by
Saint Luke is (...), He was carried up, Luke 24. 51. He was carried up into
heaven; But Saint Mark yet uses a third word, (...), He was received up; Mark
16. 19. He was received up into heaven.

This twofold expression, he went up, and, He was carried or received up, shows
our Saviors twofold title or claim to heaven, if we consider Christ in his two
several natures: For as God, he claimed heaven for his Inheritance, (...), He
went up as unto his own: As man he claimed it as his reward, and so (...), He
was carried up, or (...), He was received up as unto that which he had so fully
merited and deserved.

Again the same twofold expression shows a twofold miracle, if we consider
Christ in the unity of his person; as those two natures of God and man made but
one Christ* the first miracle, was the conquest over earth in his body, which
was taught to ascend upwards, contrary to the nature of Earth; (...) He went up
in that body: The second miracle was the conquest over heaven in his soul;
which for his singular piety was taught in some sort to descend downwards,
contrary to the nature of heaven, in that the light clouds were made to come
down, that they might minister to his Ascension; So that these must be our
considerations of our blessed Savior from the act and manner of his Ascending,
his twofold Title in claiming heaven, and his twofold miracle in possessing it;
his first title to heaven was as the Son of God; for so he claimed heaven by
inheritance, and the word used in the Apostles Creed intimates that claim or
title, (...) he went up, sc. to take possession of his own: he went by his own
power to enter upon his own right, claiming heaven as his natural inheritance,
because he was the Son of God: And this right of his, Saint Paul exactly
describes, Heb. 1. 2, 3. Where he says, God has appointed his son heir of all
things, by whom also he made the world, who being the brightness of his glory
and the express image of his person, and upholding all things by the word of
his power, when he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand
of the Majesty on high: In which words the Apostle teaches us to say to the
son of God, what the Son taught us to say unto the Father, For thine is the
Kingdom, the power and the glory: For he fully sets forth unto us the
Kingdom of Christ, both as Redeemer and as Creator; As Redeemer, when he says,
God appointed him heir of all things, in which respect Christ himself says,
All things are delivered unto me of my father, Mat. 11. 27. and all power is
given unto me, Mat. 28. 18. and, the Father loves the Son, and has given all
things into his hand, John 3. 35. And he sets forth unto us the Kingdom of
Christ as Creator, when he says, By whom also he made the worlds; for in that
respect our Savior had all power in heaven and in earth without its being
given or delivered unto him, as he was the eternal Son* of God, coequal with
his Father: Which his coequality the Apostle expresses from three particulars:
First, in that he was the brightness of his glory: that is, the natural
brightness of his glory by necessary generation, not by voluntary
communication, even as the Sun naturally begets brightness, and not voluntarily
upon choice or deliberation. Secondly, In that he was the express Image or
character of his person, not only representing his essential glory as God, (of
which representation it is said, No man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him, John
1. 18.) but also representing his personal glory as father, because the person
of the Father is wholly and fully expressed in the person of the Son, as in a
lively Image, or Character thereof, in which respect Christ himself says, If
ye had known me ye should have known my Father also; and from henceforth ye
know him and have seen him, John 14. 7. and again, he that has seen me has
seen the Father, ver. 9. Thirdly, In that he upheld all things by the word of
his power, to wit, by the same word by which he had made them, ver. 2. All this
being said, it is no wonder if it follow immediately after, that he sat down on
the right hand of the Majesty on high, as taking that place in the nature of
man, which was his proper right as the Son of God. But what comfort is this to
us who are born the Sons of wrath, and so have title only to the place of wrath
and vengeance as to our inheritance?

It Is true, we have no title from our selves save only to hell, such a title as
we care not to claim, though we labor to make good: But we have also a title
of inheritance to heaven, from our blessed Savior, as says the Apostle, And
if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17.
For the Son by adoption is admitted to the inheritance as if he were a Son by
nature: And we being adopted in Christ, cannot be denied to have a title to his
Inheritance: But we were best take heed that we abuse not this title, or at
least mistake it not, as some, do who cry Abba Father, and are no sons, or who
are so the Sons of God as not led by the Spirit of God; or so led by the Spirit
of God, as not doing the works of the Spirit but of the flesh, being guilty of
hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, (such horrid murders as have out-faced heaven, and amazed the earth,)
and will not believe the Apostle, though, he tell it before and after, though
he say it and say it again that they which do such things, shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. 21. Let the man after Gods own heart both ask and
answer this question for us, Psalm 24. ver. 3, 4. Who shall ascend into the
hill of the Lord, or who shall rise up in his holy place? Even he that has
clean hands, (not defiled with blood) and a pure heart, (not corrupted with
Faction or Sedition) and that has not lift up his mind to vanity (by taking
fancy for faith, or vain imaginations for holy inspirations) nor sworn to
deceive his neighbor (convenanting for spoil and robbery, to be not only
impiously, but also blasphemously guilty of theft) He shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation: For
such a man as has clean hands and a pure heart, is led by the Spirit of God,
and with his pure heart thinks the thoughts, with his clean hands does the
works of the Spirit; This man is heir to an inheritance in heaven, because he
is the Son of God; and he is the Son of God, because he is led not by his own
private Spirit, but by the Spirit of God; for as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, they are the Sons of God, Romans 8. 14. He that says, as many, does in
effect say, no more; they are, and none but they are the Sons of God, who are
led by the Spirit of God: He that lifts up his mind to vanity, cannot lift up
his mind to heaven; he that has sworn to deceive his neighbor, is sure to
deceive himself; he that has no share in the righteousness, may not look to
have a share in the blessing: And therefore Aben Ezra's gloss is not to be
rejected, who observes the same word used in the reward and in the work; (...)
He shall receive the blessing, because he did not lift up his soul to receive
the vanity; The Lord shall lift him up by true sanctification, because he did
not lift up himself by pride and presumption: For no man more truly lifts up
his soul to vanity, nor more truly labors in vain, then he that thinks to go
to heaven only by the strength of his own persuasion, since it is not possible
for him to receive the blessing, who cares not to receive the righteousness.
For these two are joined together, he shall receive the blessing from the Lord,
and righteousness from the God of his salvation; not the blessing of salvation
without the righteousness thereof: For it must be a real not an imaginary
ascension, whereby we get up to heaven; the soul that will be there must be
lifted up by devotion, not by opinion: For the Righteousness of salvation is
not opinionative, but affective, and active* not in conceit, but in practice:
Take heed of a mock-Ascension into heaven, which will make that be truly spoken
of thee, which those mistaken novices did falsely put upon Eliah, Lest
peradventure the Spirit of the Lord has taken him up, and cast him upon some
mountain, or into some valley; (2 King. 2. 16.) It was their fond fear
concerning Eliah; it ought to be the just fear concerning thy self: For if thou
lay hold of the Spirit of adoption only to cry Abba Father, but not to become a
dutiful Son; or to confine thy dutifulness to observe only those of thy Fathers
commands that suit with thine own humor and advantage, (which is the lame and
limping godliness of this hypocritical age, wherein men cry up their duty
toward God, merely to beat down their duty toward their neighbor) If thou
thus lay hold of the spirit of adoption, others may justly fear concerning
thee, and thou ought to fear concerning thy self, Lest peradventure the
spirit of the Lord (for so thou think it) take thee up and cast thee down
again upon some mountain, or into some valley: For indeed the Spirit of the
Lord being thus mistaken, or thus misapplied, does so take men up as to cast
them down again; first upon the mountain of presumption, then into the valley
of despair: Secondly, our Savior claimed heaven by the right of his desert,
even as his just recompense and reward: And that claim or title of his is
intimated in the words (...) and (...), he was carried or received up into
heaven, as having before merited to be carried or received up thither; so says
Saint Paul, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death
of the Cross* Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, Phil. 2. 8, 9. Our
blessed Savior was obedient in doing, before he was obedient in suffering: He
first had a most perfect active; and then a most perfect passive obedience: He
was first obedient: He was first obedient unto the life, and after that
obedient unto the death; He was zealous in doing the work of God, and that made
him patient in suffering the will of God; yet here is no mention made of his
active, but only of his passive obedience; and no mention made of his obedience
without respect to his humility: How then shall any Christian forego his
humility to stand upon the merit of his obedience, when our Savior Christ
himself, (whose obedience alone is or can be meritorious with God,) was exalted
no less from being humble, then for being obedient? Surely to teach us, how we
may soonest have comfort from this his title to heaven; nay after some sort be
sharers in it, claiming heaven as a reward, but of our Saviors, not of our own
righteousness; or rather as a reward of his righteousness, but made ours.

So Saint Bernard most Divinely comforted himself against all the accusations
of Satan at Gods Judgment seat; Fateor non sum dignus ego, nec propriis possum
meritis regnum obtinere coelorum; Caeterum duplici jure illud obtinens Dominus
meus, haeredita te Sc. Patris, and merito passionis, altero ipse contentus
alterum mihi donat, ex cujus dono, jure illud mihi vendicans non confundor: I
confess that (...) ^t worthy, nor can I hope to obtain heaven by mine own
merits; But my Lord having obtained the same by a double right, the one by the
inheritance of his Father, the other by the merit of his passion, being himself
contented only with one of them, has given the other unto me, by whose gift I
do now claim it as my right, and am not to be confounded in my claim: Which we
might very well take for a great miracle wrought upon us men, by our Saviors
ascending in our flesh, and so entitling that flesh to heaven, were it not for
those other miracles, which nearly concern our Savior Christ in his own
person: For we have a twofold miracle intimated in these same words, (...) he
went up, though in his body of flesh; there is one miracle, his conquest over
earth in his humane body: For earth was now taught to ascend upwards contrary
to its own nature, which of it self so descends downwards as to press to the
Center, nay actually to possess it.

Earth in it self moves furthest from heaven, but in the body of Christ, earth
moved toward heaven, nay earth went up into heaven: And the reason is given by
Saint Paul, Phil. 3. 21. Who shall change our vile body, that it may be like
his glorious body. The body of Christ after his resurrection, was more
peculiarly (...), a glorious body; Saint Paul gives us this distinction of
(...), A vile body, and a glorious body: Our body is a vile body, dejected and
debased by the sinfulness, the grossness, the weakness, the sluggishness of the
flesh; our Saviors body was never thus a vile body in the state of his
humiliation, because he knew no sin, yet was it subject to all infirmities, or
he could not have dyed for sinners; And therefore we may truly say that his
body in the state of his exaltation was made a glorious body, and invested with
four conditions or qualities, quite contrary to these of our bodies, called by
the School, impassibilitas, claritas, subtilitas, agilitas, and by Saint Paul
(...), 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43. to whom we are primarily beholding for this part of
School Divinity, which unfoldeth the conditions of a glorified body: And the
same Apostle comfort us, that after the Resurrection, our vile body shall be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, and consequently be made, first
impassible and incorrupt, without sinfulness; for where is no sin, there is no
corruption, there can be no suffering: Secondly, Clear and transparent, without
grossness, so that we should then see the thoughts of one another hearts,
looking through one another breasts, were there no other obstacle to hinder
us, but only the grosness of the flesh, according to that position of the
Angelical Doctor, Cogitatio unius hominis non cognoscitur ab ^alio propter
duplex impedimentum, sc. propter grossitiem corporis and propter voluntatem
claudentem sua secreta; primum obstaculum tolletur in resurrectione, nec est in
angelis; sed secundum impedimentum remanebit post resurrectionem, and est modo
in angelis: (1. p. qu. 57. art. 4. ad 1.) There are now two impediments of
knowing man's thoughts, one from his body, another from his will; The first
shall be quite taken away in the resurrection, and then men shall be like
Angels, have nothing to keep their thoughts secret, but only their own wills of
not revealing them: Thirdly, Our bodies after the Resurrection shall be nimble,
active, and powerful, without any weakness. For as the soul will move wholly
with God, so the body will move wholly with the soul; and as there will be no
impotency in the soul to hinder it from following God, so there will be no
impotency in the body to keep it from following the motions of the soul.
Fourthly and lastly, they shall also be spiritual and subtle without any
sluggishness. Now I have almost a carnal soul, but then I shall have a
spiritual body: Now I have a gross spirit, but then I shall have a subtle and
active flesh; why should I not long for that minute which will take away my
weakness and sluggishness and cloth me with power and activity in immortal
glory? So we see that this first miracle, the conquest over earth in our
Saviors natural body, shall in due time be accomplished also in his mystical
body; For we men shall be partakers of it, after the last Resurrection from the
death of the body; nay we are already in some sort partakers of it, after the
first Resurrection from the death of sin. For as many as are truly regenerated,
have already even in their flesh, (in some weak degree,) this incorruption,
this glory, this activity, this spirituality; They are not subject to so much
corruption as formerly in their conversation, for that is reformed; nor to so
much grosness of heart, for that is refined, and moves toward heaven; nor to
so much weakness, for they are able; nor to so much dullness and sluggishness,
for they are willing, through the grace of God to run the way of his
commandments.

A blessed miracle this to be considered, but much more to be enjoyed, the
first miracle in our Saviors Ascension, the conquest over earth in his body;
And yet we have Another miracle, The conquest over heaven in his soul, in the
words (...), he was carried up; (...) he was received up; Heaven it self as it
were stooping down to carry and to receive him up: Christ had conquered heaven
in his humiliation, by the fervency of his prayer making an Angel Minister unto
him, Luke 22. 43. So that it is no wonder if he conquered heaven in his
exaltation, making a bright cloud to minister unto him; For though his
glorified body needed no fiery charet as Eliahs did, because he ascended by his
own power into heaven, yet he was received by a cloud out of his Apostles
sight, to show that even heaven it self was ready to minister to his Ascension;
This ministerial assistance of the creature, not derogating from the power, but
proclaiming the goodness of the creator, according to that determination of the
school, Non propter defectum suae virtutis, sed propter abundantiam suae
bonitatis, ut dignitatem causalitatis etiam creaturis communicet, God makes use
of his creatures in many things, not for the defect of his power, but for the
abundance of his goodness, that he may communicate to them the honor of doing
good one unto another, whiles he himself is the only true Efficient cause of
doing good to all. But here the honor was so much the greater, by how much the
need was the less; for though the creatures may one need another, yet the
Creator himself has need of none; and our Savior in making use of this cloud
did only show unto us that he could have commanded heaven it self, if he had so
pleased, to receive him up, as well as to receive him in: Thus did the kingdom
of heaven first suffer violence, from Christ himself; and now, from every good
Christian, Mat. 11. 12. The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the
violent take it by force; (...), says Clemens Alexandrinus, not by contentious
wranglings and disputes, but by the constancy of an upright life, and by
uncessant prayers do we get the conquest over heaven: many men do now mistake
this violence, whiles they seek to invade the kingdom of Grace, using the sword
of the flesh not of the Spirit, to set up religion, forcing other men's faith
and consciences, but neglecting their own; whereas the violence should indeed
be offered to the kingdom of glory; every man should now invade that by the
strength of his Faith, since Christ has opened it to all believers: For
nothing is, or can be a good Christians treasure, but only Christ, not to be
kept from him by the most watchful Sentinel, not to be taken from him by the
most merciless plunderer, or the most deceitful sequestrator; and therefoe
where his only treasure is, there will his heart be also, even at the right
hand of God: This makes him always pressing into the wounds of Christ who
sits there; for in his wounds there is a place to hide his soul from
Vengeance, and there is blood to wash his soul from sin: This is indeed the
violence of faith; but this violence is more safe in affection then in
persuasion; for our affection may without doubt carry us up to heaven, (after
our blessed Savior,) but our persuasion cannot. Therefore a faith which is
strong in persuasion and not in affection, is but as a dream which soon
vanishes; and the image of Christ which is imprinted in us by such a faith,
cannot but vanish with it: So dangerous a thing is it to put asunder those two
which God has joined together in A true and lively faith, Persuasion and
affection: Israel himself could not so prevail with God, though he had his name
of Israel from prevailing with God. It Is true, he said I will not let thee go
except thou bless me, there is the strength of his faith in its persuasion: But
it is as true that he wept and made Supplications (Hosea 12. 4.) there is the
strength of his faith in its affection: It Was both together made him Israel, and
not the one without the other: Thus is the true strength of faith set down by
the Prophet David, Psalm. 73. 24. It is good for me to hold me fast by God, to
put my trust in the Lord God, there is the strength of persuasion; And to speak
of all thy works in the gates of the daughter of Sion, there is the strength of
affection; first in the exercise of devotion, to speak. Secondly in the extent
of it, of all thy works. Thirdly in the profession of it, in the gates.
Fourthly in the integrity or purity of it, in the gates of the daughter of
Sion: What pity is it that we who out-pass others in the purity of our
devotions, should come far short of them in the profession, extension and
exercise of the same? That we who are in the daughter of Sion, should come
short of those who we say, are under the Whore of Babylon? For this second
miracle in Christ's ascension, The conquest over heaven in his Soul, must needs
make us conclude concerning our selves, that we cannot possess heaven, till we
have first conquered it: Man in his composition is (...) a little world, but in
his affection he is (...) a great world.

A conqueror over heaven and earth: over neither by himself, but over both by
his Savior; In all these things we are more then conquerours through him that
loved us, Romans 8. 37. and we may see who it was that loved us, from ver. 35.
who shall separate us from the love of Christ? It was he that loved us, it is
by him that we are more then Conquerours: Let me fight the good fight of faith,
that I may have my Saviors love, and though all the Nimrods and mischiefs of
this wicked world prevail against me, yet none of them shall conquer me.

SECT. II. The time of Christ's ascension is particularly named in the Text: and
the observation of that day is founded upon the practice of the Apostles, which
in the exercise of Religion is to be embraced as Precept: And why the Apostles
left not many precepts concerning the circumstances of worship to the Christian
Church: The place of the Ascension was Bethany in Mount Olivet, and what
considerations arise from thence.
LOgicians do tell us, that it is the property of verbs to be adsignificant, as
says the great scholar of nature and greater master of Art, Aristotle in his
book (...). cap. 3. (...), Verbum est quod adsignificat tempus; It is the
property of a verb not only to express the thing it self, which is to be
significant, but also to declare the chief circumstances of time and place and
person, which is to be adsignificant: And for this reason it will not be
improper to consider in these three verbs, (...), He went, he was carried, he
was received up; not only the substance or act of our Saviors Ascension, but
also the chief circumstances of it, to wit, the time in which, the place from
which, and the persons before whom he was pleased to ascend into heaven; As for
the time in which, it was exactly the fourtieth day after his resurrection;
being seen of them forty days says the Text, Acts 1. 3. which doubtless is
not set down superfluously, and therefore ought to be observed carefully, I may
justly add, conscientiously. For though duties and not days, yet duties upon
their own days, call for a most religious observation: God himself having said
in express terms to the Jews, and consequently by the rule of general equity to
the Christians, since the reason of his saying is rather moral then typical,
The man that is clean, and is not in a journey and forbeareth to keep the
Passover, even the same soul shall be cut off from his people, because he
brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season; that man shall
bear his sins: Number. 9. 13. Whence we may safely conclude not as Jews but as
Christians, that it is not safe but sinful merely out of peevishness or
willfullness to neglect the appointed seasons of serving God; for such a
grievous punishment as being cut off from Gods people, would not be threatened
but for a grieveous sin, such as begins in the contempt of God, and ends in the
scandal of men: Therefore duties are to be most strictly observed upon their
own days: Thus the resurrection is most solemnly to be celebrated on its own
day, the first day of the week: and the Ascension on its own day, the fifth day
of the week; for the fourtieth day after a Sunday, can be no other then
thirsday: So that either the fourtieth day after the resurrection of Christ is
lawfully consecrated to celebrate his ascension (and by consequent is the day
appointed for that duty) or this particular circumstance was unnecessarily set
down in the text, and as unlawfully observed by the Apostles, who turning from
the mount Olivet came into Jerusalem, and went up into their upper room, (when
they durst not assemble together in the Temple) and prayed there immediately
upon their return, even on the very same day of Christ's Ascension, and did not
think fit to put off their solemn meeting till the next Sabbath, or till the
next Lords day after it.

Wherefore it is reasonably concluded by Judicious men, that Apostolical
practice is to us Christians, what Mosaical precept was to the Jews, concerning
the observation of days, places and persons for religious assemblies; and
therefore our Lords day is as indispensable as was their Sabbath; our Churches
as inviolable as their Temple and Synagogues, our orders of Ministers as
unchangeable as their orders of Priests: for Apostolical Practice, in these
circumstances, or adjuncts of Religion, does oblige us Christians to
conformity, as Mosaical precept, did the Jews to obedience: (I say Comformity,
because time, place and person were all essential parts of their ceremonial
(and typical) but cannot be so of our moral worship; and therefore obedience
was necessary for them, but comformity is enough for us) So that a wilful
neglect, and much more a scornful contempt of any rite observed by the
Apostles, cannot but be impious in it self, dangerous to us, and scandalous to
our brethren; And as this is judiciously concluded by some learned men, so it
must be courageously resolved by all good men, not to fear superstition in that
which the Apostles practiced, when their practice is declared in the text,
since all circumstances and adjuncts of Religion are derived to us Christians,
rather by practice then by precept, as not being of the Substance of our
Religion; And indeed they could not well be derived otherwise, because types
and ceremonies were utterly to be abolished to the Jews: and therefore
ceremonies, though without types, could not but with offense to the Jews, be
particularly prescribed to the Christians, and consequently were to be left
unto them only in example and practice, as matter of decency and order, which
are capable of dispensation: not set down in the text by way of command or
imposition, as matter of Substance, which has always a rigor of Justice, and
should always have a readiness of obedience, both alike indispensable: Nay yet
more, Apostolical practice recorded in the Text, was therefore embraced by the
Catholic Church, as if it had been Precept, for the time, and place, and
persons of Religious worship, because that Practice in all these respects was
founded upon the precepts of the old Testament, not as they were typical and
figurative, but as they were solemn and positive, and did no less concern the
Christian in the public exercise of his moral, then they did concern the Jew
in the public exercise of his ceremonial Worship.

For public worship requires the same public adjuncts of time, place, and
person no less in the Christians, then it did in the Jews Religion; And
therefore we cannot deny but all those precepts in the old Testament that were
given about those public adjuncts, do still remain in force as to that intent
of the public exercise of Religion, unless we will deny that Christians are
obliged to the exercise of Gods public worship; we must then still have our
set days, (as Sabbaths:) our set places, (as Churches:) our set Persons, (as
Ministers,) for the solemn public worship of God: And consequently they who go
about to abolish any of these adjuncts, or circumstances of public worship, do
in effect go about to expunge the fourth commandment out of the Decalogue,
which was written with Gods own finger as well as the rest, and commands the
solemn benediction, and consecration, and conservation of all those adjuncts of
time, place and person, as conducing to the Public service of God, and
exercise of Religion: And as for times and persons, they have been since in
many respects determined by Apostolical Practice, and particularly the Day of
our Saviors Ascension seems to have been Annually observed by them, as the day
of his Resurrection was observed weekly, since we find that Festival
universally received by the Catholic Church, and the Fathers made many
admirable Sermons or Homilies upon it long before superstition had infected, or
Popery had invaded the Church of Christ; in so much as Saint Augustine tells us
plainly, that the feast of the Ascension was observed in the Catholic Church,
even from the Apostles times.

Sure we are, those primitive Christians well understood that God did not
intend to confine, but to enlarge his own worship by the fourth Commandment; to
wit, to make that exercise of Religion solemn and public in the fourth, which
was private in the other three Commandments; not to make that to be only on one
day, which was before commanded to be all the week. For he that says Thou
shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, supposes, that as no day thou
can be without thy heart, so no day thy heart may be without his love; And
therefore when we have a public day set apart to make this our love publicly
known, if we do wilfully neglect the same, we are grievous transgressors and
downright plain Sabbathbreakers, though not on the Sabbath day; and
consequently twice sinners in one contempt or profanation, for omitting the
substance of the duty, and for contemning the circumstance of the day.

Another circumstance in our blessed Saviors Ascension, is, the place from
which he was received up, and that was not Jerusalem, but Bethany: For
although the Apostles had been with him in Galilee many days, (where he
conversed with them after the first day of his Resurrection,) yet now they were
again returned back to Jerusalem, waiting there for the promise of the Father,
as they had been commanded, Act. 1. 4. And he led them out from thence as far
as Bethany (Luk* 24. 50.) before he was pleased to ascend into heaven, partly
because he would not have the people see, but rather believe the Mystery of
his Ascension; and partly because he would not expose his Apostles to the
outrages of those, who though they had seen it, yet were resolved not to
believe, but to persecute the true believers: And yet in that he led his
Apostles out to Bethany, he showed them what was the right use they were to
make of this worlds afflictions or persecutions, even to have their
conversation with him in heaven: For Bethany is by interpretation the house of
sorrow or affliction; and our blessed Savior Ascending to heaven from thence,
has showed us that then do we make a right use of of our afflictions on earth,
when they do make our souls ascend up to heaven: This is to turn Bethany into
Bethel, the house of sorrow into the house of God.

But the place from which our blessed Savior ascended into heaven, is called
Mount Olivet, Act. 1. 12. And indeed these two were but one and the same place;
for Bethany stood upon Mount Olivet: Christ ascended from a Mount, and from
this Mount Olivet: He ascended from a Mount, to show it was not an easy step
from earth to heaven; there must be three ladders joined together to accomplish
this ascent, scala mentis, scala voluntatis, scala vitae; one ladder of the
mind by contemplation; another ladder of the will by affection; a third ladder
of the life by action: All three have several rongs or degrees, as Jacobs
ladder had, and God is only at the top: Again, he ascended from this Mount
Olivet, where he begun his passion by sweating blood, ( Luke 22.) to show us
the necessity of passive obedience if we desire to go to heaven; Moses his
Mount Sinai which teaches the rule of active obedience, will not serve the
turn; we must also go up to Christ's Mount Olivet, and there learn his passive
obedience, that by suffering with him, we may also reign with him; for he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross,
and therefore God highly exalted him, Phil. 2. Can you drink of his cup,
without fear it may overcome your weak Stomach, since the fear of it made him
offer up prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears, (Heb. 5. 7.)
If you can, then may you find some pretense, though little cause, to take that
for granted to you, which the sons of Zebedee only requested for themselves, to
sit with him in his Kingdom; But if your frailty and humility bid you fear you
may stick at the dregs in drinking of his cup; much more should your frailty,
and modesty bid you blush, that you are so exceeding unworthy of coming to his
Kingdom, and of sitting in it together with him; that so you may not turn your
own Churchwarden to appoint your own place in heaven, but may wholly rely upon
him for your place, upon whom you must rely for your worthiness.

SECT. III. The persons before whom our Savior Christ ascended, were, 1.
Angels, 2. Men; yet men only, not Angels, appointed by him as witnesses of his
ascension; though not all men: And that the disturbers of these witnesses,
(that is, of the orders of Christ's Ministers in his Church,) do sin against
this article of Christ's ascension, which however is it self, and puts all true
believers above all disturbances.
THE persons before whom, or in whose presence our blessed Savior was received
up into heaven, will afford us several considerations; for they were of two
different kinds; Angels, and men; The one were Citizens of heaven in their
Pilgrimage to earth; the other were inhabitants of earth in their Pilgrimage to
heaven: He was taken up before some Angels that were newly come down from
heaven; and before some men, that were in their journey thither; none is
accounted by him a fit witness of his ascension into heaven, but such a one as
is already there, either by the excellency of his condition, or by the purity
of his affection; either an Angel, or an Apostle: The Angels are mentioned,
Act. 1. 10. Behold two men stood by them in white apparel; that is, Two Angels
in the shape and appearance of men: They had been witnesses of his humiliation
to their astonishment, and were now of his exaltation to their joy; He is going
up, and they are coming down; He seems to carry away Heaven from his Apostles,
they seem to bring it back again: God never leaves his servants destitute of
all comfort; If not Christ, yet an Angel is still with them, till at last comes
the Comforter himself: Nor did our blessed Savior account a bare promise of
the Comforter to be enough, but here he also gives a pledge of that promise:
Those Ministering spirits being as it were so many harbingers sent before hand
to be speak and provide lodging for God the Holy Ghost against his coming, and
so many sureties or pledges, that he would now very shortly come. Yet our
blessed Savior appointed not Angels for witnesses of his ascension to the
world, lest the Devils (which can transform themselves into Angels of light)
might also have been witnesses of the same without his appointment, not to the
confirmation, but the utter depravation and subversion of the true Christian
Faith; Therefore has God flatly bound us up to be guided and governed only by
those things which his Apostles have preached unto us, that our faith should be
wholly grounded and fixed upon certainties, so that though an Angel from heaven
should preach any other Gospel, we should not hear him but curse him, Gal. 1.
8. But Aquinas (in 3. 64, 7.) upon this question, Vtrum Angeli possint
Sacramenta Ministrare, whether Angels may administer the Sacraments, concludes
they may not, upon such demonstrative reasons, which will also prove that they
may not preach the Gospel; one of his reasons is this, Tota virtus
Sacramentorum a passione Christi derivatur, cui in natura conformantur homines,
non autem Angeli; and ideo ad homines pertinet dispensare Sacramenta, non autem
ad Angelos; All the virtue of the Sacraments, is derived from the passion of
Christ, who took not on him the nature of Angels, but of man, and therefore it
belongs to men, not to Angels, to be the Ministers of the Sacraments: We may
say the same concerning the word, (for the Word and Sacraments were both
ordained by the same Author, and for the same end, and are both under the same
trust,) That Christ became man to the intent that he might himself preach the
Gospel, and therefore would nor make use of any but of men to preach it after
him: That like as the Son of God had privileged the nature of man, not of
Angels, by taking it into the Unity of his person; so he might privilege the
persons of men, not of Angels, by taking them into the society of his office.

The other of his reasons is indeed above all reason, because it is founded
upon Gods Authority, and therefore serves him for an Argument to be opposed
against all the contrary objections; Sed contra est, quod dicitur, Heb. 5.
Omnis pontifex ex hominibus assumptus, pro hominibus constituitur in his que
sunt ad Deum; sed Angeli (boni vel mali) non sunt ex hominibus; ergo ipsi non
constituuntur ministri in his quae sunt ad Deum, 1. in Sacramentis. The Apostle
says, That every high Priest is taken from men, and is ordained for men in
things pertaining to God; but Angels are not taken from men; Therefore they are
not ordained Ministers for men, in things pertaining to God, and doubtless the
word and Sacraments are things pertaining to God; the argument concerns the
whole discharge of a Priests office, That an Angel may discharge no part of it;
For the Apostles intent is to clear the Priesthood of Christ against all
objections of the Jews; and accordingly he proves out of their own Law that God
had absolutely circumscribed and limited the Priesthood, in three respects. 1.
In regard of the person of the Priest, for that none could be a Priest who was
not a man, because none else was fit to intercede for men; none else would have
compassion of men. 2. In regard of the office of the Priesthood, which was to
reconcile the sinners, and expiate the sin. 3. In regard of the outward calling
to that office, for no man might take that honor to himself, but he that was
called of God as was Aaron. Accordingly our Savior Christ was pleased to be
made man, that he might be capable of being our high Priest, to intercede for
us and to have compassion on us: And he did actually undertake this office of
the Priesthood, in reconciling sinners and in expiating sin; nor did he
undertake this office without being thereunto called of God, as was Aaron.

From this Argument we may deduce these two conclusions.

1. That Angels cannot be Priests, nor discharge those duties which belong only
to Priests, as Preaching the word, and ministering the Sacraments, because they
are not men: and every Priest is to be taken from among men.

2. That all men may not be Priests, to discharge these same duties, but only
those who are called of God as was Aaron, that is, who are set apart by an
outward calling for that discharge; And they that are not so called, and yet
will needs be either Preaching the Gospel, or Ministering the Sacraments, do
affront our Savior Christ in his Priesthood, opposing him in his office,
rejecting him in his example, and contemning him in his Authority: For as an
Angel may not do the office of a Priest, propter impedimentum personae, for the
impediment of his person, because he is not a man, not taken from among men; So
that man who is not called of God as was Aaron, may not do the office of a
Priest, propter impedimentum causae, for the impediment of the cause or office
it self, because he is not ordained for men in things pertaining to God; and
unless God ordain him, sure God will not accept him: Let him meddle only with
things pertaining to men, let him not meddle with things pertaining to God: For
he that struck Vzzah dead for rashly going to uphold his Ark when it was
shaken, (2 Samuel 6. 7.) because not having Commission to touch it, he had
profaned it with his touch; has plainly showed how much he hates all
will worship in his service, (though proceeding out of never so good
intentions) because it is without, and therefore against his Commission: And if
it were an act of profanation and provocation to uphold his Ark without his
leave when it was shaken, what is it to help shake it, or rather to throw it
down? I pray God speedily make such men to see how much they have out-gone
Vzzah in their sin, and therefore cannot come short of him in their punishment;
For he that struck Vzzah with a corporal, can strike them with a spiritual
death; and except they repent, will undoubtedly so strike them; unless it may
be feared, he has already so stricken them, because they have not repented. To
affront Christ in his Priesthood, whereby he reconciled man to God, is the
ready way to lose the benefit of that reconciliation: He will not have his
Priestly office invaded by Angels, much less will he have it invaded by men; He
will not let Angels preach his Gospel, least their preaching should beget
uncertainties, whiles the Devils might come and preach among them; And much
less will he have men that are not called of God to preach his Gospel, because
their preaching can beget nothing but Impieties, whiles the Devils may come and
preach in them: He will have no other witnesses of his truth, but such as are
of his own choice: For thus he declared his own will, (and has never since
reversed that declaration) Acts 10. 40, 41. Him God raised up the third day,
and showed him openly, not to all the people, but unto witnesses chosen before
of God: He would then have his choice and select witnesses, and would not
entrust his Sacred Mysteries with all in common, least they should be neglected
of all; But he chose such men for his witnesses as should rather lay down their
lives, then the profession of the Christian Faith: And we cannot reasonably
deny, but that he still has his choice witnesses, whom he has entrusted with
his truth, whom he has enabled to discharge that trust, and whom he will call
to a strict account for not discharging it: so that we must say, God is still
pleased to show his Son openly as he did then, not to all the people, but only
to some chosen witnesses. And he will have the people still to depend upon
those witnesses to be instructed and informed in the Sacred truths concerning
his Son, or in the mysteries of the Christian Religion: And the gadding humor
which now possesses the people, to run from Gods witnesses, is the ready way
for them to fall into all kinds of false Doctrine and heresy, and that will in
a short time bring them to hardness of heart, and contempt of Gods word and
commandments, especially since they are not now taught to pray against it, but
rather to expel and revile such heavenly prayers: And thus we plainly see,
that the more Christ's Ministers have of late been hindered from being the
witnesses of his saving Truth, the more they have been forced to be the
witnesses of this sad Truth, even of the increasing of Heresies and hardnesses
in his people: And though they may be denied to be Christ's witnesses to the
people for their conversion, yet they cannot be denied to be his witnesses
against the people for their condemnation: Jesu God, what an infinite misery is
it for thy Ministers to be such witnesses! and yet infinitely more miserable
are thy people, in that thy Ministers must bear thee such witness. Surely when
thou did first say, And ye shall be witnesses unto me unto the uttermost
parts of the earth, Acts 1. 8. thou did intend a succession of witnesses
whereby the uttermost parts of the earth should come to hear of thee, and that
no sort of men should stop their mouths from testifying or witnessing
concerning thee, nor stop their own ears against their testimony; And doubtless
Saint Peter advising the Elders to feed the flock of God under so many
introductive persuasions, That he was also an elder, and a witness of the
sufferings of Christ, and a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed (1
Pet. 5. 1.) did use that strain which is called by Rhetoritians Titulus
argumentosus, a title that has as many arguments as words: for an Elder is fit
for the office of looking to others, and may not neglect his office; a witness
of Christ's sufferings may not shrink from his testimony, unless he will betray
his trust; And a partaker of Christ's glory, may not renege that blessed
Communion, unless he will betray his own soul.

It Is true that his first witnesses forsook him and fled, Mar. 14. 50. and one
of them also denied him, yet after his resurrection he neither upbraids the one
nor the other, as if they had been scandalous Ministers, but pitties their
infirmities, and encourages and confirms them in their Ministry.

They had parted with him before his death, but would not part with him again
after his resurrection, till he was taken away from them* For they found it
sadness enough unto their souls that they had forsook him once, and durst not
so much as go out of his sight, for fear they should be tempted to forsake him
again; Good God, what a deep sadness would possess, if not over-whelm, our
guilty consciences, should we but seriously consider, how often we have, out of
mere peevishness, forsaken our blessed Savior, Running away from him in his
Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, (for we look upon Sunday more as the Sabbath,
then as the Lords day) and Ascension, as if either these Festivals did not
invite us to converse with Christ, or conversing with Christ were not the best
platform, and exactest practice of Christianity! Then all the Disciples forsook
him and fled, says Saint Matthew, Mat. 26. 56. Then, that is, when they were
possessed with carnal fear; but we forsake him merely out of spiritual pride
and presumption, and we forsake him in his Authority, in his Church, and in his
Ordinances, as if we needed no good examples to move us, no instructions to
inform us, no directions to guide us, no duties to sanctify us, no affections
to inflame us: God grant that we come not at last to think, that we need not no
Word to govern us, and no Christ to save us.

Then the Disciples forsook him and fled; In this we can be as good Disciples
as the best, in forsaking our blessed Savior and in flying from him, but not
so in returning and in cleaving unto him again; Alfonsus is so bold as to say,
that during the time of our blessed Saviors Passion till his Resurrection,
true faith remained only in the blessed Virgin; And this seems not to have been
his private opinion; for the Missale ad usum Sarum, gives this for the main
reason, why chiefly on Saturday or the seventh day of the week, (there called
the Sabbath day, as indeed in all other ancient Missals or Liturgies) the
office made in honor of the Virgin Mary, is appointed to be said, Quia Domino
crucifixo and mortuo, discipulis fugientibus and de resurrectione
desperantibus, in illa sola tota fides remansit; Because the Disciples being
fled and despairing of the Resurrection, (when they saw their master was dead,)
the whole Christian faith remained in the blessed Virgin alone, specially that
day, wherein Christ himself lay in the grave, (that was the Sabbath day, or
Saturday) as if he had been captivated under death. The foundation is unsound,
and so is the superstruction; But we are sure, whatever the Disciples frailty
was in our Saviors Passion, yet their zeal and constancy were both very
eminent after his resurrection: For then they attended diligently and
constantly upon their master, till they saw him taken up from them, and they
lost nothing by their diligent and their constant attendance: For his
Valediction was a Benediction, as he left them, he blessed them: A good example
for us how we ought to leave this world, though never so injurious to us, never
so oppressive of us: for a Benediction is the only true Christian Valediction:
and there is no ascending into heaven without that: They who part, and go away
hence in discontents and grudgings, (which are but secret curses of the heart,
against God or man) can scarce go to heaven by Christ's assistance, because they
desire not to go thither after his example. But let their names be enrolled in
the records of eternity, who notwithstanding all the provocations and
insolences of unjust and unrighteous men, have died with more patience and
contentedness, then we dare live: Sure even they also did see Christ in his
Ascension, (though so many hundred years after it)* or they could not so
exactly have followed his pattern: But whatever we may think or say of them,
sure we cannot deny but some others did see it full as many hundred years
before; as Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 26. Ascensor coeli auxiliator tuus, He that
ascends the heavens i^ thy helper; (for not only Saint Hierom, but also
Jarchi so expounds those words:) And David, Psalm. 47. 7. Ascendit Deus in
jubilatione, God is ascended with a shout. Nay many more (it seems) did see
this Ascension together with him, upon whom he calls earnestly to glorify God
for it, Psalm 68. 4. O sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name, magnify
him that rides upon the heavens, as it were upon an horse, (what could the
Apostles say more when they saw our Savior triumphantly sitting upon the
cloud, and so ascending up?) Praise him in his name, yea and rejoice before
him: Concerning which places the Angelical Doctor has thus determined; Quod
autoritates illae prophetice dicuntur de Deo secundum quod erat incarnandus,
(3. p. qu 57. art. 2. ad 1m.) Those authorities were spoken prophetically of
God the Son, in respect to his Incarnation: And a more truly Angelical Doctor
did in effect so determine long before him, and that was Saint Paul, when he
applied those words of Psalm 68. 18. Thou art gone up on high, thou have led
captivity captive, etc. directly and expressly to the ascension of our Savior
Christ. Thus were there many witnesses of our blessed Saviors Ascension long
before it come to pass, and therefore certainly that truth (and consquently the
rest tending to it) may not want its witnesses to the worlds end; This is
clearly evidenced from Saint Paul's words, who says, that when he ascended, he
gave gifts unto men; that there should be a succession of witnesses to testify
of him till his coming again: for this is the effect of those words, Ephesians. 4.
11, 12. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and
some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ; The meaning is, that the
testimony of his Truth should not expire with the first witnesses of it, but
should continue by a succession of other witnesses to the worlds end, even as
long as there should be a Church to be edified, or Saints to be perfected, or
the work of the Ministry to be performed. Let these men consider whether they
come not near denying Christ's Ascension, who do in effect deny the Apostles
proof it; He proves that Christ was ascended, because he had established a
Ministry; they say there is no no need of a Ministry; they were as good say,
That Christ is not ascended; Again, others there are that will have a Ministry,
but yet set up new officers in it or with it, for the edifying of the body of
Christ, which Christ himself never instituted at his ascension, and reject
those which were of his own undoubted institution; These men ought not to
obtrude upon the Church any office, as of Christ's erecting, that is not
comprehended among those in this Text, since they cannot show us another
Ascension; much less ought they to disturb some of those which Christ himself
then erected, (and his Church has ever since acknowledged and retained) unless
they will be thought disturbers of this Article of their Christian faith, He
ascended into heaven: For that institution cannot be only for a time, which
has a reason that continues for ever: And such is the reason here given by
Saint Paul, for instituting these Church Officers, to wit, The perfecting of
the Saints, the work of the Ministry, and the edifying of the body of Christ: A
reason which is to hold till the end of the world, and therefore doubtless so
also must the Institution.

But we may ^ot stray away from our Mount Gerizim, on which not the Sons of*
men, but the eternal Son of God has blessed us, to follow after those whose
delight is to be upon Mount Ebal, to revile and to curse their Brethren, nay
their Mother, (the Church:) Let us then fix our eyes and our hearts upon our
blessed Savior; for though one cloud received him out of his Disciples sight,
whiles he was ascending, yet not all the clouds nor the whole body of heaven
was able to keep Saint Stephen from seeing him after he was ascended; for so we
read, Acts 7. 55. But he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly
into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
God; what he did then see with the eye of flesh, we may still see with the eye
of faith, especially if with him we suffer courageously and contentedly, and
not only so, but also thankfully for Jesus sake, we shall with him likewise see
Jesus standing on the right hand of God; Behold I see the heavens opened, and
the Son of man standing on the right hand of God, v. 56. Adstantem ad dexteram
Dei, i. e. Paratum ad me confirmandum in veritatis confessione, and recipiendum
ad sese, says Beza. I see him standing, that is ready to confirm me in the
confession of his truth, and as ready to receive me for confessing it: And he
borrowed this his gloss from Saint Gregory in his Sermon upon the Ascension,
Sedere est judicantis, stare vero pugnantis and adjuvantis; Stephanus ergo in
labor certaminis positus stantem vidit quem adjutorem ^abuit; sed tunc post
ascensionem Marcus sedere describit, qua post Ascensionis gloriam inde in ^i^e
videbitur; To sit belongs to one that judges, to stand, to one that helps:
Therefore Saint Stephen saw Christ standing when he needed his help, though
Saint Mark described him as sitting, because after he was ascended, he looked
on him as ready to judge the quick and dead: God grant all the persecuted
Ministers and servants of Christ, so to see their master standing as ready to
help them; nay indeed so they do see him, or they could not contentedly undergo
their persecutions; Quo propius mortem accedunt martyrs, eo propius Christum
intuentes in coelum assurgunt, says the same Beza in his short notes upon the
place; The Martyrs the nearer they approach to death, the nearer they behold
Christ; and when they seem to fall lowest, they do indeed rise highest; when
their head is nearest earth, (even upon the block) their heart is nearest
heaven: when we most see their destruction, they most see their own salvation:
we look on their destroyers standing over them ready to dispatch them; but they
look on their Savior standing over their destroyers, even at the right hand of
God, ready to receive them. Most heavenly is that contemplation of Tertullian,
(lib. de resur. carn.) Quemadmodum nobis arrhabonem Spiritus reliquit, ita and
a nobis arrhabonem carnis accepit* and vexi^ in coelum, pignus totius summae
illuc quandoque redigendae: Securi igitur estote caro and sanguis; usurpastis
enim and coelum and regnum in Christo. Our blessed Savior as he gave unto us
the earnest of his Spirit, so he took of us the earnest of our flesh, and
carried that with him into heaven, as a pledge that all the rest should follow
after it: Be secure then O flesh and blood, for ye have already ascended into
heaven, and do even now, in Christ your head, possess and enjoy the Kingdom of
God.

CAP. III. Christ considered after he was ascended, as sitting on the hand of
God.
SECT. I. What is meant by the right hand of God, and by Christ's sitting there.
SAint Augustine in his hundred and fifteenth Sermon de tempore, ascribes this
part of the Apostles Creed concerning Christ's ascending into heaven, and
sitting on the right hand of God, to Saint Bartholomew; and the ancient Fathers
do generally make them both but one Article, or at least join them so together
as if they were bur one: Wherein they speak* much after the dialect of Saint
Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 22. Who is gone into heaven, and is on the right hand of God.
But I have rather chosen to treat of them severally, because though we should
allow them to be but one article of our Faith, yet they are two several
mysteries of our Religion, and indeed the one an effect and consequent of the
other, and therefore not the same with it; For our blessed Savior first
ascended in his humane body, and afterward in that same humane body sat at
the right hand of God. But here we must be sure to observe Origens caution, Ne
tibi describas sensibiles sessiones and duas cathedras, and sedentes super ^as
humano Schemate Patrem and Filium; take heed you fancy not to your self any
visible sitting, as if there were two chairs in heaven, the one for the Father
to sit in; the other for the Son to sit by him; Nor may we think that God has
such a right hand for Christ to sit on, as Solomon had for his mother
Bathsheba, 1 King. 2. 19, He caused a seat to be set for the Kings Mother, and
she sat on his right hand; We must have no such earthly and fleshly thoughts
of the place, and much less of the God of spirits; but by the right hand of
God, We must understand the power and majesty, and glory of the God* head: So
Saint Basil, (in lib. desp. S. (...): The right hand of God does not signify
any relation of place, but equality of power: So Saint Athanasius, (...), when
you hear of, Gods right h^nd, you must thereby undeastand the glory, honor and
worship of God; and nothing else is meant by Christ's sitting at the right hand
of God, but his being in the same glory with the Father. Excellently Damascence
lib. 4. de orth. fide. cap. 2. (...): I was the more willing to transcribe the
whole words, because this piece of Damascen is scarce to be met with but in
College Libraries, and is not like to be there very long, if some men may have
their wills, who gaping after College lands would force the poor Scholars to
sell their books to buy bread; but the meaning of them is this, We say that
Christ sits on the right hand of his father corporally or locally in his
humane body; But we do not say that the right hand of his Father is local or
corporal; confined to any place or situation; for how can he that is
uncircumscribed and unconfined have such a right hand? But we call the right
hand of the Father, the glory and honor of the Godhead, in the which Christ,
as the Son of God, was Copartner with his Father before* all ages, being
coessential with him. But now also as the Son of man in his humane flesh or
body is he possessed of the same glory, his humane nature being glorified
together with his Divine nature, and worshipped in the same person, by all the
Saints and Angels in heaven.

SECT. II. That Christ as man sits on the right hand of God.
IT is not to be denied but that our Savior Christ, does as he is a man, sit
at the right hand of God: For he does sit there in his humane nature, whether
we take his sitting at the right hand of God for his resting in eternal
blessedness, after all the travails and labors of his sufferings, as Saint
Augustine does, ( in Expos. Symb.) or for being assumed and associated into the
glory of the Divinity, as Damascen expounds it: For as in his Divine nature he
sat at the right hand of God from all eternity, being in the same power, and
glory, and blessedness with him; so also after his ascension he carried up his
humane nature to sit there, having taken the nature of man as into the unity,
so also into the glory and blessedness of his person, and in it administering
the Kingdom of his father, as head of the Church both Militant and Triumphant,
King of Saints, and governor of all things in heaven and in earth. For so
himself has told us, Mat. 28. 18. All power is given unto me in heaven and in
earth; Go therefore and teach all nations, baptizng them; (or rather, Go
therefore and Disciple all nations, baptizing them, that is, make them my
Disciples by baptizing them in the name of the Father, etc. thereby
distinguishing them from those who are not my Disciples, even by Baptism) Here
is such a commission for the Minister to execute his calling, (both for Word
and Sacraments;) as all the Magistrates in the world can neither give nor take
away: For they have a power only from Christ's power in earth: but this calling
of the Ministry is founded upon the power of Christ which he has also in
heaven.

And they who make it their business to discountenance and oppose the Ministers
of the Gospel, whilst they preach, and pray, and administer the Sacraments
according to the appointment and command of their Master, do but in effect
strive to justle Christ out of the heads and hearts of men, and to thrust him
away from the right hand of God: Surely he that hopes to be set one day at the
right hand of Christ, will now willingly acknowledge, and reverently adore
Christ's sitting at the right hand of God; And they who do not willingly now put
themselves under his power, shall at last be brought under it against their
will; for he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet; and
though he shall still reign after that, ( for his Kingdom shall have no end, as
being an everlasting Kingdom, 2 Pet. 1, 11.) yet he shall not, after that,
exercise his government so visibly by the cooperation of his humane nature as
now he does, but only by the essential power and presence of his Godhead, in
which respect it is said, And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then
shall the Son also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him,
that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. 15. 28. For the office of his Mediatorship
will then be at an end, no less as King. then as Priest and Prophet, when he
shall have brought all men either to his Father or under him, though the
Majesty of his person be immortal and everlasting: And therefore as the Man
Christ Jesus did not actually sit at the right hand of God, till he was exalted
into heaven, and yet was potentially there, (that is, in right and power) by
virtue of the hypostatical union, even from the first instant of his
incarnation; so when he shall have exalted and drawn all his mystical body
thither after him, though he shall still sit there in the same person, yet not
in the same respect or to the same end; for not Man, but God, shall then
administer the Kingdom of the Father; that as from all eternity, so also to all
eternity, God may be all in all: Excellently Saint Augustine, Ipsam Dexteram
intelligite potestatem, quam accepit ille homo susceptus a Deo, ut veniat
judicicaturus qui prius venerat judicandus; Non enim Pater judicat quenquam,
sed omne judicium dedit Filio, ut omnes honorent Filium, sicut honorant Patrem;
By the right hand of God understand the power, which that man has received,
who is taken into God, that he may come to judge, who at first did come to be
judged; For the Father judges no man, but has com^ all judgment to the Son,
that all men should honor (...) As they honor the Father: So that this (...)
at the right hand of God, is to be expounded of ou^ bles^ed Savior, not
according to his Divine, but according to his humane nature, as the Apostle
has fully declared, Ephesians. 1. 21. When he raised him from the dead, and set him
at his own right hand in heavenly places: (...): says Saint Chrysostom. These
words cannot be spoken and therefore may not be understood, of God the word for
he was never dead, and therefore it is not said of him that he is set on Gods
right hand: So likewise Saint Cyprian, Dominus ascendit in coelum; non ubi
verbum Dei prius non fuerat, quippe qui erat semper in coelis, and manebat in
Patre; sed ubi verbum caro factum, ante non sedebat. The Lord ascended into
heaven, not where the word was not before, for he was always in the bosom of
the Father, but where the Word made flesh, never sat before.

But let Saint Augustines determination decide this controversy, who purposely
handles it, lib. 3. de Symbolo, cap. 8. Quis est qui sedit ad dexteram patris?
Homo Christus: Nam in quantum Deus, semper cum Patre and ex Patre; and quando
ad nos processit, a Patre non recessit: Who is it that sits at the right
hand of the Father? The Man Christ: For as God, he was always with his Father,
and of his Father; and when he came to us, did not depart from him; Therefore
Christ was always at the right hand of his Father, as God; but since his
ascension, he is there also as Man.

SECT. III. That to sit at the right hand of God is proper only to Christ, and
therefore invocation of, or adoration to the blessed Virgin is not agreeable
with this Article of our Christian Faith; And that the Author of no Religion,
but only the Christian, is said to be at the right hand of God; and to
administer his Kingdom, and therefore no Religion to be compared with it, and
no power to prevail against it.
IF it be demanded, whether to sit at the right hand of God be proper only to
Christ, it must be answered, Yes: For none else is, none else can be there but
only he. For by this argument does the holy Apostle prove him to be the Son of
God, Heb. 1. 13. But to which of the Angels said he at any time, Sit thou on my
right hand? And if he has not said so to the Angels, much less has he said so
to any man: And ^ow then shall we say unto either, sit thou on the right hand
of God, by our invocation and adoration, placing the creature in the throne of
the Creator, God blessed for ever.

And what else do they who thus invest a Bishop, saying, Accipe pallium,
(plenitudinem, sc. pontificalis efficii) ad honorem omnipotentis Dei, and
gloriosissimae Virginis Mariae genitricis ejus, Beatorum Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli: Take this pall, (and with it the fullness of Episcopal power,) to the
honor of Almighty God, and the most glorious Virgin Mary his Mother, and his
blessed Apostles Peter and Paul; for to join the blessed Virgin and the
Apostles in the same honor and glory with Almighty God, is in effect to join
her and them in the same Kingdom and power with him; since they all go
together, For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and
ever.

Therefore Laus Deo Virginique Matri Mariae, used by Bellarmine at the end of
each general controversy, must needs beget a new controversy, (were all the
rest amicably concluded) among those Christians, who love not to think, but to
know they do God good service in their prayers and praises: For such a form of
worship must needs be controverted to the worlds end, unless it could be
proved, that not only Christ, but also the blessed Virgin does indeed sit at
the right hand of God, being joined with Christ in the government of his
Kingdom: which is altogether impossible, for that Christ himself sits there in
his humane nature, only by virtue of the personal union to, and with the
eternal Son of God, whose property alone it is to sit at the right hand of his
Father: For though the Holy Ghost be also equal with the Father in the same
power and glory, (and therefore together with the Father and the Son is
worshipped and glorified) yet he is not said to sit at his right hand; that's a
phrase spoken peculiarly of the Son, in whom the Divine nature was as it were
ecclipsed for a while in the state of his humiliation; and in whom the humane
nature now shines most gloriously in the state of exaltation.

And besides, for that the Son alone does administer the Kingdom of the Father
immediately from the Father, but the Holy Ghost administreth the same Kingdom,
not only from the Father, but also from the Son: For although God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost do equally govern the Church both militant and triumphant,
that is, do equally administer one and the same Kingdom in heaven and earth,
yet the Father administreth it of himself, not by himself; for he is of none,
as in being, so in working. The Son administreth the same Kingdom by himself,
not of himself; for as his being, so his working is of the Father: The holy
Ghost administreth the same Kingdom by himself, not of himself, for he is of
the ^ather and of the Son; so that God the Father administreth his Kingdom
immediately by God the Son, who is next him in order, and mediately by God the
Holy Ghost, who so administreth from the Father, as also from the Son; and
therefore is not said to sit at the right hand of the Father, because he has
the administration of the Kingdom of God; not of the Father alone, but of the
Father and of the Son, whereas the Son has it immediately and only of the
Father. So that our blessed Savior did administer the Kingdom of his Father
from all eternity as God: But now, since his Ascension, he does also administer
the same as God in man, or as God manifest in the flesh: And it is his property
alone to sit at the right hand of God, because it is his property alone to
govern all things in heaven and in earth, immediately from the Father.

Laus Deo will reflect directly on him, no less then on the Father and the Holy
Ghost, for the blessed administration of his Kingdom, but Virginique Matri
Mariae may securely be left out, and is blasphemously and idolatrously put in,
since the blessed Virgin her self must needs think it robbery to be equal with
her Son, when her Son thinks it no robbery, to be equal with God. And certainly
if the Fathers in the first Council of Constantinople, thought it enough to
prove the Holy Ghost coequal with the Father and the Son, by saying, Who with
the Father and the Son together is worshipped and glorified, Then we cannot but
think it too much that the blessed Virgin is worshipped and glorified with all
three persons of the Trinity, as if she were to be thought coequal with Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost; But perchance Bellarmine was resolved to gratify the
present practice of his Church, with a doxology answerable to that Antiphona,
Gaude Maria Virgo, cunctas haereses sola interemisti in universo mundo; Rejoice
O Virgin Mary, thou alone have taken away all heresies in the universal world;
And he having made it his work to confute all for heretics who were not of his
own began, gives thanks to the blessed Virgin, as if by her help he had perfected
this great confutation; whereas without doubt it is no more in the power of any
creature to take away a heresy, then it is to change the heart or will of the
heritick: nor is it in the power of all the Jesuits in the world to prove us
poor protestants guilty of heresy, because we dare not be guilty of blasphemy,
nor of Idolatry. For it is blasphemy to ascribe that perfection, and it is
Idolatry to give that honor to the creature which is proper only to the
Creator: And it is a wonder that Baronius who is pleased to say that our Church
of England is wholly drowned in heresy, would not impute the cause of that
mischief, to our rejecting this and the like Hymns or prayers to the blessed
Virgin, and say, she would not take away our heresies, because we had taken
away her worship: for this reason had certainly been more ingenuous, (in one of
that persuasion,) then to tell us that we were therefore given over to our
delusions, because we denied to pay the Peter pence: For that is his
observation in his Annals, (Anno Christi 740.) That Ina King of the West Saxons
appointed every house in his Dominions to pay a penny to Saint Peter every
year, that his subjects knowing Saint Peter to be their Lord, should more
zealously addict themselves to his service, and call upon him in their
necessities: (^t annui census pensitatione cognosceret se subditum S. Petro,
quem and scientes omnes Dominum esse suum, propensiori studio colerent, and in
opportunitatibus invocarent) But that when this yearly revenue did cease to be
paid, the Church of England was swallowed up by an inundation of heresies:
(Vbi cessavit pendi vectigal istud, utcunque mali redemptum, haeresum alluvione
Anglicana Ecclesia absorbetur:) whereas if the money were paid upon that reason
of Invocating Saint Peter, it could not be excused from heresy, to have
continued that payment: However this reason is more for the Penny then for the
Pater noster, and sure the Church of England had more heresies whilst it paid
the Peter pence, then it has had ever since, unless we look upon these few
late years wherein the poor woman clothed with the Sun, has been distressed
by a great red Dragon, and forced to flee into the wilderness, (Rev. 12.) But
Gods truth is never the worse for being persecuted, and Gods faithful servants
will not fall from his truth because of persecution: For they know they serve a
Master, who himself has said, My Kingdom is not of this world, John 18. 36.
and therefore they who profess themselves subjects of his Kingdom, will not
change with the world: For though our Saviors Kingdom be not of this world,
yet has he subjects on earth, as well as in h^en; And therefore in his
Ascension, whereby he took possession of his Kingdom, he provided for them
both; For those on earth, by the diffusion of his grace, called by the Apostle,
Receiving gifts for men; for those in heaven, by the diffusion of his glory,
expressed by this phrase, And sat on the right hand of God.

By the diffusion of his glory he has prepared a mansion for us with him; by
the diffusion of his grace, he has prepared a mansion in us for himself; O the
immortal comfort of a good Christian, and the more immortal glory of the
Christian Religion. show me a comfort like to the comfort of a good Christian,
who is already in his head, ascended into heaven; show me a glory like to the
glory of the Christian Religion, which has him alone for its author, for its
head, who sits on the right hand of God: Ask the Jew, he will tell you he
left his Prophet upon Mount Nebo; Ask the Turk, he will tell you his Pcophet
was left at Meca; Ask other Religions, they will tell you they know not what is
become of their Prophets: It is only the Christian Religion that can say, it
had such a Prophet as now sits at the right hand of God. A Prophet who
taught not a religion without righteousness, as is the Religion of Turks and
Heathens; nor a Religion with Righteousness, but which could not make men
righteous, as was the Religion of the Jews; But a Religion with Righteousness,
to show it self righteous, and a righteousness with Religion to make us so. For
the law (which was the rule of righteousness) came by Moses, but grace (which
makes righteous) came only by Jesus Christ, John 1. 17. By this, He still
dwells in us, even now that he is farthest from us: which is so invaluable a
blessing that it cannot be valued till it be enjoyed, and when it is enjoyed,
it is found invaluable: For the soul of man cannot but have a wretched dwelling
in the body, and a more wretched dwelling out of it, unless Christ have a
dwelling in the soul: It is the glory of men above Angels that Christ dweleth
in their flesh: It is the glory of good Christians above other men, that Christ
dwells in their spirits: By his grace he dweleth with us and in us, by our
faith and love we dwell with him and in him; nor shall this dwelling ever be
destroyed, it shall only be enlarged, when what is now of grace, shall
hereafter be of glory.

There is so inseparable an union betwixt Christ and the good Christian, that
as the Christian cannot be in the state of Grace without Christ, so Christ not
fully in the state of glory without him. The head thinks himself not in honor,
whiles the members are in dishonor, and therefore our head being ascended into
heaven, makes it his work to draw us (the members of his mystical body) thither
after him; For we are united unto Christ by a threefold cord, that is not
easily broken: First by the tie of Election, God having chosen us in him before
the foundation of the world, having predestined us to the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. Secondly by the tie of incarnation, wherein he took our
flesh unto himself. Thirdly by the tie of Inspiration, wherein he has given
his Spirit unto us: All which have begot so inseparable an union betwixt the
Son of God and the sons of men, by a golden chain reaching from heaven to
earth, that Saint Paul speaks of the good Christians, as of those who are
already in glory with Christ: And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. 6. He looks on them not
only as having jus ad rem, but also as having jus in re; not only as claiming,
but also as possessing their heavenly inheritance. O that we would be so
careful, or could be so happy, as not to abuse those mercies which we cannot
deserve! O that we would lift up our souls truly and entirely unto the Lord,
then would our hearts be where our treasure is, at the right hand of God: For
we may not be in heaven by our persuasions, whiles we are either in earth by
our affections, or in hell by our dispositions: How can we see our Savior at
Gods right hand, whiles Satan stands at ours? making us to butcher his
servants, to deface his Sanctuary, to discountenance his Religion, to defile or
despise his Ordinances, to deceive his people, to destroy his inheritance? How
can we believe him to be making intercession for us, whiles we care not to make
intercession for our selves? or at least wise, use such extravagant prayers
wherein we cannot justly expect, much less judiciously hope he should make
intercession with us? Be it the privilege of faith to have an eye to be able
to see Christ; but of devotion to keep that eye always open, actually to
behold and look upon him, for which cause some have thought that prayer was the
proper act of justifying faith, men then most especially believing in Christ,
when they are praying to him: So that to oppose or disturb the exercise of
wellgrounded and well-settled devotions, under pretense of reforming them, is
to put out the eye of faith whiles we pretend to take off the film, that it may
see the clearer. For the precious talent of faith, must neither be wrapped up
in a Napkin, nor indiscreetly managed, if we expect it should enrich our souls
with heavenly and immortal comforts; but must be diligently and discreetly
employed in judicious, as well as in fervent pravers and praises to Almighty
God, that so we may fight the good fight of faith, by defending and maintaining
not only the truth of the Gospel, but also our profession and practice of that
truth: Saint Paul requires both alike of his Scholar, and in him of us; 1. Tim.
6. 12. Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life whereunto thou
art also called, and have professed a good profession before many witnesses.
Saint Timothy had not only embraced the Christian faith (in general,) but had
also (in particular) professed a good profession thereof, before many
witnesses; and Saint Paul binds him, (as well as he had bound himself) to make
it good; Else as many as had been witnesses of his profession, must have been
Judges and Condemners of his revolt: And doubtless God having exalted our
Savior Christ at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, (Ephesians. 1. 20, 21.) has
sufficiently declared, That we should so exalt and advance the Christian
Religion (whereby we seek to glorify his Son in earth, as the Father has
glorified him in heaven) that neither principality, nor power, nor might, nor
dominion here on earth, (for those in heaven will not endeavor it) should be
able to remove us from the truth of Christ, either in its belief or in its
practice, no more then they can remove Christ himself from sitting at the right
hand of God.

And we most humbly beseech thee O blessed Savior, who have conquered all
things, to conquer also our inconstancies, that we may perfectly and without
all doubt believe in thee, and show the sincerity of our faith by the zeal of
our piety, and the constancy of our says by the unweariedness of our piety,
that neither faith nor piety may be reproved in thy sight when thou shall come
to Judge us, who rulest and governest all things, with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, ever one God world without end, Amen.

Christ communicated in the coming of the Holy Ghost.
CAP. I. Of the Communication of Christ to his Members.
SECT. I. That we being born in sin, our condition is very miserable till
Christ be communicated to us; but after that, very comfortable: for the time of
sin is a time of warfare, captivity, banishment; The time of Grace, a time of
Peace, of Restitution, of Liberty; The admirable liberty of Gods servants, the
woeful slavery of those who serve themselves.
IT is no small part of man's misery, (who is born in sin and sorrow, and
therefore born in sorrow because in sin,) that the afflictions of this world
may grieve his soul, but all the comforts of this world cannot rescue or
release it from grief. The Spirit may be perplexed from the flesh, but cannot
be relieved from it; it is only the lover of souls that can exhilerate the
soul, only the God of Spirits that can comfort the Spirit: And till this lover
of souls show his love to us, we are hateful to our selves; till this God of
Spirits do comfort our spirits, we cannot but remain altogether comfortless:
For we are of our selves strangers and aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel;
and consequently from the comforts and immunities of that Commonwealth; being
alienated from God as far as earth from heaven in our affection, as far as hell
from heaven in our condition: It Is a sad truth which may be lamented, but may
not be denied, (for in its denial though a man may show himself a good
Sophister, yet he must show himself a bad divine, and cannot show himself a
good Christian) That we are all by nature children of disobedience, and
children of wrath; The Jew though he came of the stock of Abraham, yet came not
into the world without disobedience, nor without wrath no more then the
Gentile; for so says Saint Paul, we were born the children of wrath even as
others, that is, we Jews who came of Abraham, no less then the Gentiles who
came of the most unworthy and most unrighteous stock in the world; Among whom
(sc. the children of disobedience) we all had our conversation in times past in
the lusts of our flesh, and were by nature the children of wrath even as
others, E^h. 2. 3. as if he had said, we were children of disobedience in our
affection; children of wrath in our condition; strangers from God in our
affection, for being under such lusts; strangers from God in our condition, for
being under such wrath; The Apostles intent is fully to declare unto us the
state of man's misery which he is in by nature till he be relieved by his
blessed redeemer; and we may reduce all his doctrine to these four Heads:
First, that our misery consists of two parts, that we are under the dominion
of sin, and that we are under the guilt and punishment of Sin: Secondly, that
all men in general, as well Jews as Gentiles, as long as they are without
Christ and his Grace, are subject to this misery, that is, are dead in
trespasses and in sins, and obnoxious to punishment for the same: Thirdly, that
this our misery is merely voluntary in regard of the sin, though not in regard
of the punishment, for it is the course of this world, and the fulfilling the
desires of the flesh and of the mind, i. e. perverse and inordinate desires,
both external of the body, and internal of the Soul: (for body and soul both
are alike infected, both are corrupted by sin, and the desires of the mind are
sinful, no less then the desires of the flesh:) This course of the world we
are all desirous to run, these desires of the flesh we are all inclined to
nourish and to fulfill: So that our misery is altogether voluntary in regard of
our sin, though it be altogether involuntrary and necessary in regard of the
punishment: we are willingly under the sin, as pleasing our corruption, but
unwillingly under the punishment as bringing our destruction: we are contented
with the disobedience, but we are afraid of the wrath; and yet as long as we
are under the sin, we cannot but be under the punishment: as long as we are
children of disobedience, we are also children of wrath. Fourthly and lastly,
that as it is not in our will, so it is not in our power to redeem our selves
from this misery: for that our corrupt nature does not so much as desire, and
therefore cannot recover the state of true liberty either from sin or
punishment; but it is only the infinite goodness and mercy of God that recovers
us by his Grace, which is as far beyond our desires, as above our deserts; such
a grace as we could not imagine, and therefore did not desire; such a grace as
we did not desire, and therefore could not deserve, as says the Apostle, But
God who is rich in mercy for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ.

The first Adam communicated nothing to us but sin and death; it is only the
second Adam that has communicated to us Grace and Life; and therefore it is only
in relation to him, to our Savior Christ, that the Prophet begins his Sermon
of Comfort, Isa. 40. 1, 2.

Comfort ye, comfort ye my people says your God, speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, that her iniquity
is pardoned: The beginning of the pardon is the end of the war; Her warfare is
accomplished, and her iniquity is pardoned, do both signify the same peace:
Completa est malitia ejus, says the Latin translation for militia, by a small
mistake of the letter, (and that in the printer, not in the translator) but
none of the sense; for our malitia is our militia, our iniquity is our warfare:
the Hebrew word is (...) that is both her work and her time of war: Kimchi in
his gloss says thus (...) vult dicere tempus quod in captivitate vel exilio
d^buit transigere; He means the time that she was to pass in banishment or
captivity: we may well admit the gloss; For sin is a time of war, banishment,
and captivity: of war with God, of banishment from God, and of captivity, not
under God, for he can be no tyrant, but under the devil; A sad time surely: And
therefore the time of Grace must needs be a joyful time, wherein this warfare,
this captivit^* this banishment is brought to an end; For Christ being
communicated, the sin is pardoned; and the Sin being pardoned, the sinner is in
peace, and in prosperity and in liberty: to say this, is to speak truly to the
heart (...) loqui ad Cor, which is the Hebrew phrase for speaking comfortably;
other comforts go no farther then the ear, then the outward man; that his stock
is increased, his request granted, his cause advanced: it is only this comfort
that enters into the heart, and revives the inner man, That the time of his
warfare, banishment and captivity is at an end, because his sin is pardoned;
For here are two distinct times to be observed: A time not accepted; that's of
warfare, banishment and captivity: And a time accepted, that's of peace or
reconciliation, of restitution, of liberty: For Epiphanius his argumentation is
not to be denied (...), from the nature of relatives: si fuit unus annus (...),
ergo fuit alter (...), If Christ preached one year wherein he was accepted, (as
Clemens Alexandrinus labors to prove out of Luke 4. 19. To preach the
acceptable year of our Lord;) then it must needs be that he could not preach
only but one year; for there must also be another year wherein he was
contradicted and no^ accepted; His Logic is not to be questioned, though his
tenent be refused by the Learned Scaliger, lib. 6. de emend. temp. who proves
that Christ did preach upon the earth, not only one year as Clemens, nor two
years as Epiphanius would have it, but four full years. So here the inference
is unquestionable; If there were a time of warfare, of banishment, of captivity
before the pardon, there must needs be a time of peace, of restitution of
liberty after it; If that were a time of expulsion or rejection whiles we were
enemies; this is a time of acceptance or admission now we are Sons, as says
Sant Paul, behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of Salvation,
2 Cor. 6. 8.

That was a day of damnation, this is a day of salvation: that a a time not
accepted, this a time accepted: The time of the flesh, and the time of the
Spirit: the time of sin, and the time of Grace, are two opposite times: the
time that sin reigns in us, is a time of warfare, banishment, and captivity;
the time that the Spirit of Grace reigns in us, is a time of restitution and of
liberty.

First a time of peace, and that a peace of heart, John 14. 27. My peace I give
unto you, let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid. The peace
that Christ gives us, is a peace of heart; a Peace that puts away all trouble,
and all fear; All trouble least it should disturb our peace outwardly; and all
fear least it should disturb our peace inwardly; which is the invincible reason
Saint Augustine alleges to prove that the holy Angels are assured of their
state of bliss, because otherwise their fear would disturb their peace, and
consequently interrupt their blessedness: And Aquinas affirms the Saints in
heaven to be no less sure of the continuance of their bliss then of the bliss
it self, and therefore to be in some sort partakers of the divine eternity, to
which all is actually present, nothing to come, or else they could not have the
full quietation of their wills, without which Blessedness it self could be no
blessedness, 22. q. 18. art. 2, 3.

Secondly, the time of Grace is a time of restitution, and that to our true
Country, even to heaven: The Philosopher could point thither with his finger,
but the Christian points thither with his heart. For that being once touched
with the spirit of God, always moves and beats toward heaven, as a needle
touched with a loadstone moves always toward the Pole. For true Christians
are so full of hope, and their hope is so full of immortality, that they are
very well contented to resign this mortal life when God shall require it, as
those who know themselves to be but strangers and so journers hereon earth, and
that their Country, (where they are to expect a lasting and a sure dwelling) is
only in heaven, as says Saint Paul in their behalf, For we know that if our
earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God
eternal in the heavens; wherefore in this we groan carnestly, desiring to be
clothed upon with our house which is from heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2. This house
of earth is but our tabernacle, that of heaven is our dwelling; In this we
groan, in that we shall rejoice; This is to be dissolved as built by man; that's
a building of God, and therefore not capable of dissolution.

Thirdly, the time of Grace is a time of liberty, for Grace is the wellspring
and fountain of liberty, as sin is of thraldom; For as sin is an aversion from
God to serve our selves, which is the greatest servitude, so Grace is a
conversion to God to serve him; whose service is perfect freedom; so that no
man is so truly a slave as he that serves himself, and none so truly free as he
that serves his God; Nemo liber nisi sapiens, None is a free man but he that is
a wise man, may not be taken for a Paradox, if we be not mistaken in the
wisdom, but think and say with the spirit of God, Behold the fear of the Lord,
that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding, Job. 28. 28. It Is a
heavenly contemplation of the Seraphical Doctors, Tunc homo rectus est quum
intellectus adaequatur summ^ veritati in cognoscendo; voluntas confirmatur
summa bonitati in diligendo; and virtus continuatur summae potestati in
operando: Et ex hoc homo non solum rectus, sed and rector ipse Deo subditus,
ipsi alia. (Bonav. Prol. in lib. 2. Sent.) Man i^ then only well governed in
himself, and governor of all other things, when he depends wholly upon God;
His dependence upon God in his understanding to know him the first truth; In
his will to desire him the chiefest good: and in his power of action to follow
and obey him the highest power, makes him subject to God, and all the world
subject to him* This is such a kind of liberty which the son of God only gives,
and the servants of God only enjoy; See it in the Sons gift, If the Son
therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed, John 8. 38. See it in
the servants receipt, And I will walk at liberty, for I seek thy precepts,
Psalm. 119. 45. They who are Gods servants, are the only freemen; for they are
so his servants as that also they are his Sons; For as the Sovereignty of his
dominion claims them for Servants, so the transcendency of his goodness accepts
them for Sons, and therefore gives unto them both the Liberty and the Patrimony
of children.

SECT. II. That Christ is generally communicated to all Christians by Baptism,
wherein the Holy Ghost is given to regenerate and sanctify them, by taking
away the imputation or guilt of original sin, and making them the members of
Christ; How the Apostles Baptized in the name of Christ: and their infidelity
and uncharitableness who deny Baptism to Infants.
IF we look on men as men, we must look on them as the Sons of wrath; But if we
look on men as Christians, we must then look on them as the Sons of God,
members of Christ, and inheritors of the kingdom of Heaven; For they are Sons
in his Son, in whom they are made Christians, because Christ is communicated to
them in their baptism, whereby they are not only distinguished from Turks and
Infidels, but also qualified and exalted above them; for having been baptized
into Christ, they have put on Christ.

This is Saint Paul's own assertion in his own words; For ye are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 26, 27. which two verses in
Saint Chrysostoms Judgment, do show, that Christians are the Sons of God* and
the means or manner how they are made his Sons; The 26. verse shows their being
made Sons ((...)) And the 27. verse shows the means and manner how they are
made Sons, (...), as he calls it. For ye are all the children of God in
Christ Jesus, there is (...). Christians are made the Sons of God by faith in his
Son, by faith in Christ Jesus; which makes Saint Chrysostom break forth in
admiration, (...); Oh wonderful, how great is the power of faith! for he
showed before that it makes us the Sons of Abraham, ver. 7. He shows now that
it makes us the Sons of God; Again verse 27. For as many of you as have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, there is the (...), the manner of our
adoption, how we are made the Sons of Gods, even by being baptized into his
son; ye have put on Christ by being baptized into Christ; or ye have been
baptized into Christ, therefore ye have put on Christ; for this will be the
Minor and the Conclusion to that Major: and we may join all these together, and
make up this Syllogism: As many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ; But you have been baptized into Christ; Therefore you have put on
Christ.

If you ask how the baptized into Christ, put on Christ, Saint Augustine will
answer you with a distinction, Vel Sacramenti perceptione vel rei induunt
homines aliquando Christum usque ad Sacramenti perceptionem; Aliquando autem
ulterius, usque ad vitae sanctificationem, and hoc accidit quum digne
suscipiunt. Men (when they are baptized) do put on Christ: Sometimes outwardly
in the visible sign of the Sacrament, Sometimes inwardly in the spiritual Grace
of the thing signified (as when they worthily receive their Baptism) And this
answer is necessary because there are so many Hypocrites in the world who
frustrate the Grace of God by their Hypocrisy; But concerning those that are
not Hypocrites when they come to be baptized, as true believers, or concerning
those who cannot be Hypocrites, as little children, the Judgment of charity
bids us say, they have put on Christ both outwardly and inwardly, because the
Judgment of verity teaches us to say, that the outward visible sign is not
without the inward spiritual grace on Gods part who offers the Baptism, (and
is not wanting to his own offers) what ever it be on man's part who receives
it; for those words of the Gospel, He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire (Mat. 3. 11.) will not allow us to separate the Holy Ghost and the
fire from the Baptism which has been instituted by our Savior Christ; But
Bonaventure lib. 4. Sent. disp. 4. supplies us with another answer; omnes
Baptismum aequaliter recipient quantum ad characterem and restitutionem
innocentiae, non quantum ad infusionem Grati^; As many as have been baptized
into Christ, have alike put on Christ, so far as to be accounted innocent, or
freed from the guilt and imputation of original sin, (with which they came into
the world,) though not so far as to be made righteous by the infusion of Grace,
or to be freed and delivered from the infection or the dominion of that Sin*
for grace has a twofold act, Delere culpam, and habilitare ad bonum, (says
the same Author) to blot out sin, and to dispose to righteousness: Sure we are
that Baptismal grace does immediately avail to the blotting out of sin alike in
all, though we are not sure that it does alike dispose all to righteousness,
though we hope well of that too. So that in his sense, All that have been
baptized into Christ, have put on Christ equally as to the restitution of
innocence, though not as to the infusion of grace. They are all restored to the
innocence that was lost in the first, though not all enriched with the grace
that is found and founded in the second Adam. They have not the sin of their
nature imputed, though they have it still inherent: They have it not imputed,
in that they are made the children of God; They have it inherent, in that they
are still the sons of men: Baptism is available unto all alike for Remission of
sins, though not for Regeneration from sin: And yet sure it makes way for that
too; else Saint Peter would not have annexed the receiving the gift of the Holy
Ghost to the remission of sins, saying, Repent and be baptized every one of you
in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive
the gift of the Holy Ghost, (Acts 2. 38.) Baptism does immediately conduce to
the remission of sins; be baptized every one of you for the remission of sins:
and mediately also to the receiving of the gift of the Holy Ghost; in as much
as it takes away that guilt of sin which keeps him from us; and ye shall
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost; That is, some more eminent gift of the Holy
Ghost, for your confirmation in righteousness, after you have received him in
Baptism for the remission of your sins. For surely Baptism of it self without
the Holy Ghost cannot avail to the remission of sins* therefore this promise of
receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost, is to be expounded comparatively, that
is, a greater gift of the Holy Ghost. And this exposition is necessary from
this very text, because there is no remission of sin without grace, and no
grace without the Spirit of grace; and may be proved to be convenient from that
other Text which comes near to this, of Acts 8. 15, 16, 17. where after the
Samaritans had been Baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, Saint Peter and
Saint John laid their hands upon them, and they received the Holy Ghost; that
is to say, in a greater proportion for their confirmation, then they had in
Baptism for their conversion.

But why is it said, They were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus? shall we
think that the Apostles did recede from that form of Baptism, which had been
given them by Christ himself? Saint Ambrose (lib. 2. de Sacram. c. 7.) seems to
affirm there is no need of that, when he says, In uno nomine baptizari nos
oportet, hoc est, in nomine Patris and Filii and Spiritus Sancti, etc. We must
be baptized in one name, that is, In the name of the Father, and of the Son,
and of the Holy Ghost, which is but one name, because but one substance, but
one Divinity, but one Majesty; and says moreover, that name is the name
whereby we must be saved, which we are sure is the name of the Lord Jesus, (
Acts 4. 12.) So that if we admit of this Gloss, Baptizing in the name of the
Lord Jesus, is all one with Baptizing in the name of the blessed Trinity, which
being undivided in nature, cannot well be divided in name. But Aquinas seems to
be of another opinion, ( 3a. par. qu. 66. art. 6. ad 1.) Dicendum quod ex
speciali Christi revelatione, Apostoli in primitiva Ecclesia in nomine Christi
baptizabant, ut nomen Christi (quod erat odiosum and Judaeis and Gentilibus)
honorabile redderetur per hoc, quod ad ejus invocationem Spiritus Sanctus
dabatur in baptismo; We must say that the Apostles by some special revelation
did for a while at first baptize only in the name of Christ, because the name
of Christ was odious both to Jews and Gentiles, and this was a way to make it
honorable in the esteem of both, when by the invocation of that name they saw
the Holy Ghost given in Baptism; But this opinion may the better be deserted,
1. Because the words upon which it is grounded, require it not. 2. Because no
such special revelation can be proved: and it is not safe to allow of special
hidden Revelations against the known general revelation of the Text. 3. Because
the Apostles by baptizing in the name of Christ, could glorify him only
amongst unbelievers; whereas, in so doing, they might dishonor him amongst
Believers, by receding from his Institution. 4. Because the Holy Ghost was not
given in Baptism after so public a manner, as to be taken notice of by
standers by. 5. Because Aquinas himself is so positive for baptizing explicitly
in the name of the Holy Trinity, that he avoweth there can be no true Baptism
without it. For these and the like reasons, it may happily not be amiss to give
another Interpretation of those words; then Aquinas has given, (though not so
exactly to the letter,) and to say, They were baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus, is all one in effect, as if it had been said, That they were baptized by
his Authority, and according to his institution: or that they were baptized
into his death and resurrection, giving up themselves wholly to him; or that
they were baptized with a special invocation of his name, not in the very act
of baptizing, (for then was invocated the name of the Trinity) but before and
after it, because in Baptism was made a special application of his merits unto
them, for the remission of sins: This was the reason that the name of Christ
was specially then invocated, because the righeousness of Christ was then
specially applied, as appears by that advice of Ananias to Saul, Acts 22. 16.
Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord;
that is, on the name of the Lord Christ, who instituted Baptism for the
remission of sins, and was to be called upon, to bless his own institution: So
that to baptize in the name of the Lord Jesus, may happily import no more then
to baptize with a peculiar invocation of his name; not altering the form, but
showing the end of Baptism, which was to ingraft the baptized into the mystical
body of Christ; However this phrase of being baptized in the name of the Lord
Jesus, does clearly evince that Christ is peculiarly communicated in Baptism;
for to suppose the name without the thing, is little less then to take the name
in vain. And this is ground enough, why good Christians should desire to have
their children baptized; and too much, why any should delay, and (which is far
worse) deny the baptism of infants; for such men do what they can to hinder
Christ from being communicated to those infants, to whom they deny baptism:
wherefore as that promise which was made particularly to Joshua, I will not
leave thee nor forsake thee, Jos. 1. 5. is applied generally by Saint Paul to
all good Christians, Heb. 13. 5. upon this ground that God is the same in all
ages, to all that alike fear and serve him. So does our Church, (after Saint
Paul's example, and in his faith,) rightly infer, that the same good will which
our blessed Savior declared by embracing and blessing those little children
which were brought to him, ( Mar. 10.) belongs alike to all children born
within the Covenant of grace: for God is always mindful of his Covenant and
promise, that he made to a thousand generations, even the Covenant that he made
with Abraham, Psalm. 105. 8, 9. and that Covenant was in these words, I will be
a God unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, Genesis 17. 7. so that it is a plain
case, the Church promises no more for God, then God has promised for himself,
who we are sure neither can nor will fail his promise: And therefore since the
Church can truly say in the assurance of faith, That our heavenly Father
allows this charitable work of ours, in bringing children to his holy
Baptism: who can deny the truth of this saying, but out of infidelity? who can
deny the doing of this charitable work but out of uncharitableness? Such an
infidelity, and such an uncharitableness, as to provoke the wrath and
indignation of the eternal Son of God against his own soul; for so says the
Text, (...), when Jesus saw it he was displeased even to wrath and indignation,
indignatus est, says Beza; indigne tuit, says the Vulgar: Doubtless he that
for this indeliberate and inconsiderate uncharitableness showed indignation
against his Disciples, will for a greater uncharitableness then this, such as
proceeds from deliberation and resolution, pour out indignation upon his
enemies.

SECT. III. That Christ is more peculiarly communicated to some Christians by
the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they cry Abba Father; calling upon God with
greater earnestness, confidence and comfort then did the Jews, and yet they
also had the Spirit of Adoption, (though not in the same degree) as well as
Christians.
IT is not to be doubted but that our Savior Christ is generally communicated
unto Christians in the Holy Eucharist, as well as in Baptism; and that he is
also communicated in his word, no less then in his Sacraments: But because the
men of this our age pretend wholly to be spiritual, I will (not to vilify, but
to confute their preaching) immediately show how Christ is more peculiarly
communicated by the Spirit of adoption, and the rather because his being
communicated in Word and Sacraments, would not be available to salvation,
unless he were also communicated to us by the coming of the Holy Ghost.
Concerning which Alensis has befriended us with a most comfortable and a most
Christian-like position in these words, L^quendo proprie de missione, non
dicitur mitti Filius vel Spiritus Sanctus nisi ratione alicujus effectus
pertinentis ad gratiam gratum facientem: Nam in missione illorum, non solum
dona ipsorum sunt nostra, sed and ipsi, quia Inhabitant animum, and sunt ibi
modo specialiori quam prius. Alen. par. 1. qu. 73. m. 4. art. 2. To speak
properly concerning the mission (or communication) of the Son and Spirit of
God, neither of them is communicated but only in some effect of saving grace,
(though in general terms either may be said to be communicated in the gift of
any grace) For when they are communicated unto us, not only their gifts are
ours, but also themselves, to inhabit and to dwell in us, and to be in us more
specially or peculiarly then they were before; And why then should not every
Christian take up Holy David's most holy Resolution, and say, I will not suffer
mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, until I find out a place,
(even mine own soul) for the Temple of the Lord, and an Habitation for the
mighty God of Jacob, Psalm. 132. 4, 5. For indeed the Lord and the mighty God,
Christ and his Spirit are communicated both together, according to that of John
6. 53. Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have
no life in you: As there is a communication and distribution of the nourishment
to the body, that it may live; so is there of Christ to the soul, or it cannot
live: And he is communicated by the Spirit: For no man can eat his flesh nor
drink his blood who is at the right hand of God, by corporal, but only by
spiritual manducation; and there can be no spiritual eating of Christ, but by
the assistance of his Spirit: So that Christ and the Spirit of Christ, are
communicated to us both together, and we have alike need of both: For as Christ
is our Advocate to bring us to the Father, so is the Holy Ghost our Advocate to
bring us unto Christ: And as Christ revealed to us the will of his Father; so
does the holy Spirit reveal to us the will of Christ, making us, in the right
use of his Word and Sacraments, to receive instruction from him, to enjoy
communion with him, and to find immortal joy and comfort in him: This is that
Spirit the Apostle speaks of, when he says, For ye have not received the
spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father, Romans 8. 15. The Apostle would have us Christians
see the happiness of our own condition above the Jews, that we might
accordingly show our thankfulness above them. For they being under the terrors
of the Law, could not but have the Spirit of bondage, because they saw nothing
in the Law but what was exceeding formidable, the flames of Mount Sinai before
it, and the flames of Hell fire after it: But we Christians being under the
promises of the Gospel, (which discharge all that truly repent and unfeignedly
believe, from the curse of the Law and from the guilt of their sins) have the
spirit of liberty, whereby we can with great confidence, and with greater
comfort, draw near to the throne of grace: The Jews had the Spirit of Adoption
as well as Christians (though not in the same degree,) but not from the Law but
from so much of the Gospel as was revealed to them: And the Christians have
also the spirit of bondage as well as the Jews, (though not in the same degree)
but not from the Gospel, but from so much of the Law as is still in force to
scourge them unto Christ. The same spirit of Adoption was to them a spirit of
bondage, yet with some hopes and show of liberty: To us it is a spirit of
liberty, and yet with some fear and show of bondage: They could say unto God,
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge, us not, (Isa. 63. 16.) but we can say moreover, Abba Father: that
is, we can call upon God as our Father, with greater fervency and earnestness,
with greater assurance and confidence, and with greater joy and comfort, then
they could; For this Abba Father is vox clamantis, vox exclamantis, vox
acclamantis; The voice of one crying out, the voice of one crying out for help,
the voice of one crying out for joy. First, The voice of one crying out,
there is the greater earnestness; they did say to God our Father, but we do cry
it; not coldly and remissely, least our prayers should be congealed in the
middle Region of the air, before they get up to heaven, but zealously and
earnestly: They said it with zeal, but we say it with greater zeal. Secondly,
The voice of one crying out for help, there is the greater confidence; The Jew
could say Father, but the Christian says Abba Father, that is Father, Father,
with greater confidence and assurance of Gods paternal affection. Lastly, The
voice of one crying out for joy, there is the greater comfort: The Jew could
rejoice in God as his Father by Creation; but the Christian rejoices in God as
his Father by Redemption: The joy of the creation had an allay because of the
sin and sorrow which we had brought upon our selves; but the joy of our
Redemption has no allay, because our blessed Savior has taken away our sins,
and with our sins our sorrows.

CAP. II. Of the coming of the Holy Ghost where Christ is communicated.
SECT. I. That the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Christ: that is, the Spirit of
the Son as well as of the Father; And that the Greeks were unjustly and
uncharitably rejected by some of the Latins as Heretics, concerning the
Procession of the Holy Ghost; Of the Addition of Filioque to the
Constantinopolitan Creed, and that the Pope has no Authority to change any
article of faith; The Greek Church agreed with the Latin about this
controversy in sense, though not in words: therefore not anathematized by the
Western Churches which use the Athanasian Creed. Bellarmines heavy doom
concerning the Greek Church, fitter for a Soldier then a Divine.
IT is not the part of any Christian to deny the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of
Christ, since that were not only to deny the Word of Christ, but also to deny
the greatest and chiefest comfort of Christianity: It were to deny the Word of
Christ; for Saint Paul takes the Spirit of God and the Spirit of Christ for
one and the same saying, If so be the Spirit of God dwell in you, and, if any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8. 9. The Spirit of God and the Spirit
of Christ are one and the same Spirit, for Christ is God: And it were also to
deny the greatest and chiefest comfort of Christianity, which is this, That the
Spirit of Christ dwells in us, to revive our souls now from the death of sin,
to revive our bodies hereafter from the death of the grave; the Apostle plainly
attributes thr Resurrection of the soul from sin, and of the body from death,
only to the dwelling of Christ's Spirit in us, Romans 8. 10. And if Christ be in
you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of
righeeousness, there is the resurrection of the soul from sin; and again ver.
11. If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he
that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by
his spirit that dwells in you; There Is the resurrection of the body from
death; And this is also from the Spirit that dwells in us, as well as the
other; the Spirit of Christ raises the soul from sin; the Spirit of Christ
raises the body from death; so that to deny the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of
Christ, is to deny both our Regeneration and our Resurrection: Wherefore this
being of so dangerous a consequence, The Master of the sentences would not
impute this Tenent to the Greek Church, as if they denied the procession of the
Holy Ghost from the Son, though they would not say in their Creed, I believe in
the Holy Ghost the Lord and giver of life, who proceeds from the Father and
the Son, but only, who proceeds from the Father, who with the Father and the
Son together is worshipped and glorified: But he says plainly that the Greek
Church did agree with the Latin Church concerning that Article of Faith, in
sense, though not in words: Sensu nobis convenient, dum aiunt Spiritum Sanctum
esse Patris and Filii, They agree with us in the sense, whilst they say, that
the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Father and of the Son; only we speak a
little more plainly, saying, who proceeds from the Father and the Son; nor
are we to be blamed, (says he) for adding to the Creed, much less to be
anathematized, because our addition is not of a contrary assertion, but of a
necessary interpretation; Nos enim non praedicamus contrarium, sed addimus quod
deerat, ideoque non subjecti anathemati. Lomb. 1. Sent. Did. 11. He is more
careful to justify his own Church for adding to the Creed, then to condemn the
Greek Church for not allowing that addition; But his Scholars are not so
moderate; for Aquinas taxes Damascene of Nestorianism in the case, and says he
was carried away with the Schism of the Greeks, Damascenus sequitur errorem
Nestorii, Quod Sp. S. non procedit a Filio, quia fuit tempore quo incepit illud
Schisma Graecorum, Aqu. 3. par. qu. 36. art. 2. ad. 3. And Bonaventure is yet
much mor fierce, when he says, that the Greek Church denied this article out
of ignorance, pride, and perverseness, Graecos negasse hunc articulum ex
ignorantia, superbia, pertinacia, (Bonav. in lib. 1. sent. did. 11.) Three
unmerciful words from a Church-mans mouth against a whole Church, and surely
altogether underserved; For the Greek Church always acknowledged the Holy Ghost
to be consubstantial with the Son, as well as with the Father, as appears by
the Confession of Faith exhibited by Charisius in the Council of Ephesus, in
the sixth Action, (...) The Spirit of truth the comforter being of the same
essence or substance with the Father and the Son: which plainly shows the Greek
Church did not deny the article, though they were loath to change their Creed,
wherein they found it was thus expressed, Who proceeds from the Father, (no
mention at all made of the Son.) For this is their own profession in the
Council of Florence in the 25. Session, (...): We have our Creed from seven
general Councils, and weneither add thereto nor take therefrom: And it is evident
that the Latin Church it self did a long time demurr about this addition of
Filioque to the Greek Creeds: Nay, Leo the third did strongly oppose it, and
that not only Papally in his Chair, but also Episcopally in his Chancel; for he
did absolutely refuse this addition when he was thereto entreated by Charles
the great, and did set up the Creed* over the Altar (at Rome) without it; nor
did Filioque get into the Article, till the time of Benedict the seventh,
(says Binius, in Syn. Constant.) which was above nine hundred and fifty years
after Christ, and about six hundred years after the divulging of that Creed.

But without doubt the Addition it self is to be justified; for it was not
Additio corrumpentium Symbolum sed perficientium, as says Bonaventure; not an
addition to corrupt the Creed but to perfect it; or rather an explication not
an addition, as Bellarmine seems to distinguish, Explicatio Doctrine, non
additio contrarii, but the manner of maintaining it seems altogether
unjustifiable; For those of the Latin Church showed little temper and as
little charity in rejecting the Greek Church for heretics, (which was trampled
on enough by Turks, and needed not Christians to help tread it more under foot)
for not admitting the same addition, merely because they thought themselves
under the curse (which the Latins are willing to put off by a distinction) if
they should recede but one tittle or syllable from the language of their own
Creeds. But this (it seems) was the fault of the Greek Church, (which has been
ever since accounted damnable Schism in all other Churches) they could not
swallow, much less digest, that crude position, Ad summum Pontificem pertinet
fidei Symbolum ordinare, It belongs to the Pope to order and dispose of the
Creeds. A position so unreasonable, that Aquinas himself, the greatest Master
of reason among all the Schoolmen, is fain to fly to Gratians decree to fetch a
proof for it; and that proof depends altogether upon the Authority of some few
Popes, who were very partial Judges in their own cause.

This is clear, that the objection about Athanasius his Creed does so puzzle
him, that he is fain in effect to say his Creed is no Creed, because he cannot
find the Popes hand was in the making of it; Athanasius non composuit
manifestationem fidei per modum Symboli, sed per modum cuiusdam Doctrine;
Athanasius did not set out this manifestation of the faith as a Creed, but as a
Doctrinal institution; notwithstanding the very title of it in Greek is the
same which is prefixed to the Apostles Creed, and the Latin Church calls it
Symbolum Athanasii, unto this day: It is not suitable with my purpose, (and
much less with my desire,) to examine the other exigencies which this excellent
Divine is put to, that he may gratify his Church by seeking to make good this
Tenent; but sure other Churches look upon it as an invasion of their Christian
liberty, and as a Doctrine which cannot pretend to Christian verity or
antiquity, though it may fondly pretend to some external unity; It Is certain the
Greek Church took it for a Novelty, and therefore would not admit this position
as a dispensation from the Anathemas denounced by the two Councils of Ephesus
and Chalcedon against such as should presume to alter the former Creeds: And
yet in truth, the alteration was more in word then in sense, and the Greek
Church had the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, in their Faith,
though not in their Creed. And this appears plainly by Simeon the Metaphrast,
who lived about the year eight hundred and fifty after Christ, (near the same
time with Walefridus Strabo) yet uses these words, in the Greek Menology, on
October 9. (...): My Lord Christ is Ascended into heaven, and returned to his
Fathers throne, and from thence has sent down the Holy Spirit which proceeds
from himself, upon his Disciples: He says in his Faith, the Spirit proceeded
from the Son, though neither he nor any of his Church would change their Creed,
to say so: And upon this ground the Western Churches may still retain the use
of Athanasius his Creed in their Liturgies, notwithstanding the addition of
Filioque, without cutting off the Greek Church from the hope of salvation,
though they allow not that addition, because the procession of the Holy Ghost
from the Son, is also in their Faith, according to the sense, though not
according to the words of the Article; And to speak the plain truth, in this
controversy concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son, as well
as from the Father; the animosity was greater betwixt the Greek and Latin
Church, then the disagreement, the quarrel larger then the difference; And thus
much Scotus ingenuously confesses in these words, Sed forte si duo sapientes,
unus Graecus, and after Latinus, uterque verus amator veritatis and non
propriae dictionis, de hac visa contrarietate disquirerent; pateret utique
tandem ipsam contrarietatem non esse veraciter realem, sicut est vocalis:
Alioquin vel ipsi Graeci vel nos Latini sumus vere haeretici: Sed quis audet
Johannem Damascenum, Basilium, Gregorium Theologum, and Nazianzenum, Cyrillum
and similes patres Graecos arguere haereseos? Quis iterum argueret haereseos B.
Hieronymum, Augustinum, A^ibrosium, Hilarium, and consimiles Latinos?
Verisimile igitur est, quod non subest dictis verbis contrariis, contrariorum
Sanctorum sententia discors; and (Scotus in 1. Sent. did. 11 qu. 1.) But
happily if two wise men, the one of the Greek, the other of the Latin Church,
did enquire concerning this seeming contrariety, and both of them would prefer
the truth above their own words or expressions, they might in time find that
this is but a verbal, not a real controversy; For if it be real; either the
Greeks or the Latins must needs be heretics: But who shall dare to accuse
Damascene, or Basil, or Gregory the Divine, or Gregory Nazianzene, or Cyril,
and the rest of the Greek Fathers of heresy? Again, who dares take Saint
Hierom, Saint Augustine, Saint Ambrose* Saint Hilary, and the rest of the
Latin Fathers for heretics? It is therefore most probable, that in these
contrary expressions was no contrary sense, but they both meant one and the
same truth, concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost. Thus far Scotus; and
indeed no less appears in the Council of Florence, where, from the twentyeth
Session to the twenty fifth exclusively, is a long disputation betwixt Johannes
Provincialis for the Latin Church, and Marcus Ephesius for the Greek Church;
And the Ephesian professing that the Spirit did proceed from the Father by the
Son, the Provincial confesses it was in effect the same as from the Son: (...)
That by is here as much as from, says Johannes Council. Flor. Sessione 24. For
the Father begetting, and the Son begotten, and the Holy Ghost proceeding,
being all confessedly coequal and coeternal, whether it be said, the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the Father and the Son, or, from the Father by the Son, the
Doctrine of the blessed Trinity is incorrupt and inviolable; for the three
distinct persons with their three distinct properties are believed in one God,
none before or after, none greater or lesser then other: In personis proprietas,
in essentia unitas, in Majestate aequalitas; property in the persons, unity in
the essence, equality in the Majesty of the Godhead, being no less acknowledged
and believed by the Greek then by the Latin Fathers, which is the short
confession of the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity. For it is manifest that the
Greeks who denied not the Son to be consubstantial with the Father, could not
exclude him in the procession of the Holy Ghost: Wherefore we must needs reject
that harsh and heavy doom which Bellarmine has left upon record against the
Grecians, Ac* ut intelligant causam exitii sui esse pertinaciam in errore de
processione Sp. S. in ipsis ^eriis Sp. S. capta fuit Constantinopolis a Turmay
understand the cause of their destruction to be their pertinacy in their error
concerning the procession of the Holy Ghost, in the very Festival of the Holy
Ghost, that is at Whitsontide, was Constantinople their chief City taken by the
Turks: This he thinks he has sufficiently proved; but the learned Scaliger
thinks no man can sufficiently prove, and laments this Queen Regent of the East
in these words, ut cujus calamitas ignorari non potest, dies calamitatis
ignoretur; And though he incline to their opinion who said that City was
besieged the morrow after Easter, and taken upon the day of Pentecost, yet he
concludes it dangerous to determine so much: Sed periculosum est haec definire;
De anno quidem non dubito fuisse 1452. sed de mense delibero, utrum sc. mense
Maii an mense Aprilis capta fuerit: Scal. lib. 5. de emend. temp.) He dares not
define the month whether it were in April or in May, (and sure Whitsontide
cannot fall in April) much less the week or the day; he says it is dangerous to
assert it was taken in Whitsontide; but sure it is dangerous to assert it with
so much uncharitableness against a whole Church, whose ruin should be thought
on with pity, not with insolency: However though the assertion it self be
true, yet the argument is fitter for a Soldier then for a Divine, to appeal to
the success of the sword for the justification of the cause, and will much
better advance Turcism, which has full six parts, then Christianity, which in
all the several professions of it, has but five parts of thirty in the known
habitable world, as Master Brerewood has demonstrated in his enquiries, ( cap.
14.)

SECT. II. That the coming of the Holy Ghost for the communicating of Christ
after an extraordinary manner, is not now to be expected: That preaching and
praying with the Spirit come not by infusi^ns: Enthusiasts are the worst
separatists; and the greatest blasphemers, guilty of the worst kind of
sacrilege and Idolatry, in robbing God of his public worship after such a
manner as he has commanded, and idolizing their own pretended gifts.
SInce it is an undoubted truth that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of Christ, we
may not doubt but his coming unto men always was and still is of purpose to
communicate Christ unto them; either after an extraordinary manner by immediate
infusions and revelations as to the Prophets and Apostles, or after an ordinary
manner by habitual improvements and assistances as at this day. For the
extraordinary manner of his coming, and the extraordinary manner of his
communicating Christ to men by immediate infusions or revelations, did both
cease together; And we may truly say concerning those miraculous and
extraordinary dispensations of the spirit, what Saint Paul has said concerning
tongues, one of the principal effects thereof, They were for a sign, not to
them that believe, but to them that believe not, 1 Cor. 14. 22. and therefore
were to continue and remain no longer then signs and wonders, that is, till
the preaching or publishing of the Gospel, or till the planting and settling the
Christian Religion.

For Saint Peter plainly shows in the second of the Acts, That this Prophecy
of Joel, In the last days, says God, I will your out of my spirit upon all
flesh, was fulfilled in the miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, that these were the last days meant by that Prophet, and therefore
after those days, men were not to expect any more such extraordinary
dispensations: Wherefore those that will now preach or pray by the Spirit, may
not rely upon infusions for which they have no warrant, but must betake
themselves diligently to read and consider the word of God, that so they may
have the assistance of the Spirit of God; For they that go about to separate
the Spirit from the Word, are the most abominable Separists that ever were, or
can be in the world, because they endeavor to separate God from himself; for
Gods word is Gods truth, and Gods truth is himself. Be it then taken for
granted, which may not be doubted, it cannot be denied that they are very
wicked Separatists who separate man from man, for they fill the world with
sedition and privy conspiracy; They yet worse Separatists, who separate man
from God, for they fill the world with false doctrine and heresy; But yet
still they are the worst Separatists of all who separate God from God, that is,
Gods Spirit from Gods Word, for they fill the world with hardness of heart,
contempt of Gods Word and Commandment; which is the ready way to make men first
impenitent, and then unpardonable; and what more can be said of the sin against
the Holy Ghost? Yet these three separations do so naturally and necessarily
spring from one another, that they may be accounted themselves inseparable. For
the sedition begets the heresy, and the heresy begets the hardness of heart;
separating man from man by sedition will separate man from God by heresy; and
that will also in a short time endeavor to separate God from himself, by
contempt of his Word and Commandments: What an unhappy age do we live in,
wherein men think they do God good service, to run away from his Word, by
pretending to his Spirit! But this is the wit of wickedness, the order of
disorder, the method of atheism, that the persons of the holy and undivided
Trinity should be sinned against by succession, and blasphemed in the same
order that they are to be confessed; first the Father, secondly the Son, and
thirdly the Holy Ghost: For under the Law men were generally given to Idolatry,
(took an Idol for God) and so more immediately sinned against God the Father;
he is (...) God of himself. Under the first times of the Gospel, men were
generally addicted to Arrianism, denying the Divinity of Christ, and so more
immediately sinned against God the Son; for he is God of God. But in these
latter times of the Gospel, (for so it is to be feared our sins have made them)
men are generally addicted to cry up their own phansies for the dictates of the
Spirit, and so more immediately sin against God the Holy Ghost: not considering
how unconscionable a thing it is to grieve the Holy Spirit of God whereby they
are sealed to the day of redemption; and how impossible a thing it is for those
not to grieve the Holy Spirit of God, who constantly blaspheme him; and what an
unsufferable blasphemy it is to entitle those rude and crude impertinencies to
the Holy Spirit, which few sober men can hear with patience, and no zealous man
can hear with profit; and no conscientious man can hear with piety: Well may
such a worship profit some men by exercising their patience, but yet it scarce
deserves the name of worship, because it does not rather exercise their piety:
so that we must confess, that such pretenders to the Spirit are the greatest
enemies of the Spirit; and whilst they would be thought the best reformers are
in truth the worst blasphemers, for as much as they impute those imprudencies
and indescretions, or rather impieties and irreligions (for imprudencies in the
service of God are impieties, and indiscretions are irreligions) to Gods Holy
Spirit, which are merely their own vai^ imaginations, and carnal inventions;
and in the mean time, reject and disesteem those prayers and praises, which are
the undoubted d^ctates of that same Holy Spirit, as if they rather hindered then
helped us to cry Abba Father; what is this, but in effect to blaspheme God,
instead of blessing him, for giving us so many admirable forms of prayer and
praise in the holy Scriptures? and for giving us a Church to teach us to pray
exactly according to that pattern in the Mount, according to those patterns of
prayers and praises which came immediately either from God the Son, or from God
the Holy Ghost? What is this but in effect to distract and to hinder men;
instead of settling and helping them in their Religion, whilst they are made
believe that nothing is truly from the spirit of prayer, but what is new and
unknown to them, whereby they are taught first to contemn the known prayers of
the Church, and then the known prayers of the Scriptures, (for that the spirit
is as much confined by the one as by the other) and to hunt after novelty
instead of certainty, which is a way to exercise the fancy before the
conscience, (because the conscience first tries the spirits, then follows them,
1 John 4. 1. but the fancy first follows the spirits, and never at all tries
them.) A way that the more it busieth the head, the less it setleth and
establishes the heart; wherefore if that benediction was Apostolical, The Lord
Jesus Christ himself stablish you in every good word, 2 These. 2. 17 Then this
practice must be Apostatical, which does unstablish and unsettle the People in
their Prayers the very best words: Then was Egypt in a sad case when the
locusts did eat up what the hail and thunder had left, Exodus 10. And is it not
so with Israel when locusts out of the bottomless pit devour that small
pittance of Religion which the hail, that is, their own chill and frozen
dispositions; or the thunder and lightning, that is, the tempestuous terrors
and troubles of war, had left in the Peoples hearts? When God suffers such
devourers of piety and Religion to come into a land, he either looks upon it as
Egypt, or it is to be feared he intends to make it so; The death of the first
born is then sure not far off, and the drowning of all the rest is not like to
belong after it For what can we expect, but that the read sea, even a sea of
blood should cover us all, when we persecute the Israel of God for desiring to
serve him, and say unto those who are zealous for such prayers as they know are
either in Gods word, or agreeable with it, ye are idle, ye are idle, therefore
ye say Let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord, Exodus 5. 17. as if Praying in
known and approved forms, were rather a pretense for idleness then a help to
devotion: This is not only to reproach the Church for teaching us to pray by
her Liturgies, but also to reproach God himself for teaching the Church to pray
by his Scriptures; and by this argument we may throw away not only the dictates
of the Church, but also the dictates of the Spirit of God: Sure this is not the
part of Christians, by one and the same wicked practice to oppose both the
authority and the doctrine of Christ; the authority of Christ in his Church,
the doctrine of Christ in his word: They pretend to have the spirit of God, but
yet contemn the word of God: They will needs have the spirit of his Son in
their hearts, and yet care not to have the language of his Son in their mouths:
giving their Pater noster a quietus est, a writ of ease, as if the Holy spirit
had supplied the servants above the son, and taught us better prayers then it
had taught our Savior: or as if it were not one and the same spirit that once
directed him, and still directs us to call upon the Father; Doubless such men
cannot take it unkindly, that we abstain from communicating with their prayers,
since they by rejecting the Lords own holy prayer, do at the same time reject
commnnion not only with all the servants, but also with the Spirit and with the
Son of God; for the Servants of God always used it, the Spirit of God indicted
it, the Son of God commanded it; It Is no wonder if such men be not only
Sacrilegious, but also persuade themselves there is no such sin as sacrilege,
and consequently that whatsoever has been consecrated to Gods Holy name, is
still unholy and profane, though it has been conscrated according to Gods own
express command in the fourth commandment, which is the commandment of
consecrations, and requires the sanctification of place, and of persons, and of
our substance to Gods public worship, as well as of time; Time cannot be
sanctified, or kept holy to Gods public worship without these; And besides, we
find these also expressly commanded in other parts of the Bible, and since they
are all commanded for one and the same end, we must reduce the Texts concerning
them to one and the same commandment, for the ten commandments are December summa
genera, as it were ten predicaments or ten general heads to which is to be
reduced whatsoever is commanded as a moral duty in the whole word of God:
wherefore since it is a moral duty that men should publicly and solemnly call
upon the name of God, and time alone, without place and persons, and the
maintenance of these cannot serve for the discharge of that duty, we must allow
the rest of these outward requisites to be commanded in this of time; And
consequently, what of all these alike was common and unholy before it was
sanctified to Gods public worship, being once sanctified thereunto is made
peculiar and proper to God; and therefore to rob, or pillage, or take away any
of these, is sacrilegiously to invade Gods property; which is a sin of so heavy
a burden to press down the soul, that the Apostle has put it in the scale
against Idolatry, and seems to make this at least to balance, if not to
outweigh the other; Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege?
Romans 2. 22. The argument would be of little consequence, if Sacrilege were not
a sin at least equal to Idolatry; And truly so it is, (whatever we please to
think or to make of it;) For whereas there are two kinds of Idolatry, the one
to take an Idol for God, the other to make God himself for an Idol; the
sacrilegious person is in effect guilty of them both: For it is impossible that
any man should rob God if he did not make money his God, there is taking the
Idol for God: or if he did not take God for one to be mocked rather then
worshipped; there is taking God for an Idol: And it is no wonder if they can do
all this, who can contemn the Lords most holy prayer: for the three first
petitions of that prayer contain all the Duty of the first table; and the least
part we can show of dutifullness is to pray that we may be dutiful: and
consequently he that will not say Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be
thy name, cannot be troubled at that Sin of Sacrilege, whose property it is to
invade and profane all that is dedicated to the hallowing of the name of God;
For they that can swallow the Camel, have little reason to strain at the gnat,
they that can be guilty of the greater, cannot stick at the lesser Sacrilege;
they that can rob God of his public worship, cannot easily make any scruple of
robbing his Church; and to take away such public prayers as do undoubtedly
glorify the name of God, what is it else but to rob God of his worship, or of
the honor due unto his name? For he that does forbid us to take his name in
vain, does withal command us to glorify his name, and consequently to make
use of such forms of prayer and of praise as we are sure do most glorify him;
These forms being accordingly made for the honor of God after the rule of the
two first, and in obedience to the third Commandment, are set apart for this
use, in obedience to the fourth; and to take away these forms, is in effect to
sin against all the first Table: And they who are guilty of this sin, even of
putting down the true service of God, are guilty of many sins together; for as
they sin against the third Commandment, they are guilty of blasphemy; as
against the fourth, they are guilty of sacrilege and profaneness; and as they
sin against the first and second Commandments, denying men (as much as in them
lies,) to have God for their God, and to worship him with internal and external
worship, according to his own holy will and command, so they are downright
guilty of Irreligion and of Idolatry.

Nay yet more, (which is a misery to think, and the greater because it is not a
mistake to say) such men are guilty of worse Idolatry then many of the heathen:
For no Idolatry is so bad as that wherein a man does make himself the Idol: and
have we not here that Idolatry, when men set up their own pretended gifts,
against a known true and substantial worship of God? for what is it for any man
to pretend the gift of the spirit (that all others may rely upon his lips, in
pouring out their souls to God,) but to make himself an Idol? And what is it
for others to rely upon pretenses, instead of Certainties in Gods worship, but
in effect to make themselves guilty of Idolatry? For to speak the plain truth
in this case, the people do worship God not in their own Faith, but in the
faith of their Minister if they pray with him as Communicants, before they know
what he will pray, which is to be guilty of will worship, whiles they resign up
their souls in a blind obedience: or the minister alone does worship God,
whiles the People are present only as Judges, not as Communicants, reserving
their souls unto themselves, all the time he is praying, till they see they can
safely say Amen at the end of his prayer, which is in effect to have no public
worship till the worship be quite done; for public worship is not rightly so
called from its company, but from its communion; And Saint Paul would never
have commanded all gifts whatsoever, (in that he commanded the first gift, the
gift of tongues, which came immediately from the Holy Ghost) to submit to
Edification, if he would have allowed any other gift afterward to oppose it
self against, much less to advance it self above true Christian communion,
since it is a plain case that Christian communion was at first commanded, and
ought to be still observed chiefly for Edification.

SECT. III. Hypocritical Christians, who make prayers for pretenses, worse
Atheists, then the heathen; Pretenders to the spirit are the greatest enemies
to the spirit, and show the least fruits of the spirit; Therefore must be
silenced by the Ministers of Christ, and shunned by his people, who have no
excuse if they are misled by themselves, because they are to be known by their
works, whereof the weakest and the meanest men are competent Judges.
THere is no Atheism so much dishonors God or deceives men, as that of
Hypocrites, who make religion it self a mere pretense whereby to act their
irreligious designs and practices: So that the Christians Atheism is worse then
the heathens; for the heathen that has not the true Religion is an Atheist not
knowing God; but the Christian who has the true Religion, and uses it for a
pretense, is an Atheist abusing and affronting him. Hence is that terrible
curse denounced by our Savior against such men, saying, Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make
long prayer, therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation, Mat. 23. 13.

It Is not imaginable that our Savior Christ should discourage either the gift
of prayer, or the use of that gift in making long prayers; for himself
continued all night in prayer to God, Luke 6. 12. And spoke a parable, that men
ought always to pray and not to faint, Luke 18. 1. Therefore we may be sure it
is a grievous sin to make long prayers for a pretense, when our Savior himself
may seem to dislike the prayers, rather then he would not condemn the pretense:
And questionless such Hypocrites are most abominable Idolaters; for whiles they
make prayers merely for pretenses, they make God an Idol: and whiles they make
them for pretenses of devouring, they make Mammon their God; And this is the
twofold Idolatry of Hypocrites, they pray not to glorify God, and to do so, is
to make God an Idol: they pray to enrich themselves, and to do so, is to make
Mammon their God; they pray that they may devour.

So that two grievous sins at once are laid to their charge: one is that they
are devourers; for ye devour widows houses; the other that they are pretenders,
and for a pretense make long rayers; he that makes no prayers is in a sad
condition, because he neglects his salvation; but he that makes prayers for a
pretense, is in a sadder condition, for he increases his damnation; therefore
ye shall receive the greater damnation: He that does this, may easily deceive
men, and is sure to deceive himself, but he cannot deceive his God: Thus to
pretend the Spirit of God, and to do the works of the flesh, is little less
then to blaspheme the spirit both speculatively and practically at the same
time; speculatively in pretending to act by him; practically in acting
downright against him; This is to make themselves Edomites, not in Edom but in
Israel, to speak with the smooth voice of Jacob, that they may act with the
rough hands of Esau; to pretend to snuff the candle, that they may throw down
the Candlestick, and put out the light of our hearts and of our eyes both
together; even the light of the Gospel, no less then the light of Israel. This
is to go far from the Doctrine of Christ, who made that exhortation a main part
of his first Sermon, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. For though
such men are pleased to say they walk in the light more then all the world
besides, yet it is evident they heap up together so many works of darkness,
rebellion, blood, rapine, sacrilege, profaneness, injustice, oppression, as
do even scandalize all good men, and encourage and harden all wicked men; and
teach them who once frequently glorified their Father in heaven, now not to
glorify him; and those who before did carelessly glorify him, now openly to
revile and to blaspheme him: So direct a path have they chosen, by following
their new lights, to make Protestants turn either Papists or Atheists, and to
keep not only Papists from turning Protestants, but also Turks and Jews from
turning Christians. For what sober man can find any rational motives to be of
that Church, where men use their Religion not to serve their God, but to serve
themselves, nay the worst, though truest part of themselves, their unbridled
distempers and concupiscences.

Surely such men cannot truly say, (and yet they say it most of all men) that
they have the Spirit of God, who are so far from the works of the Spirit; And
they are very far from the works of the Spirit, unless hatred, variance,
emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, ((...) dividing and standing in parties)
heresies, envyings, murders, and such like which the Apostle calls works of
the flesh, ( Gal. 5. 19.) may be discerned by some of the new lights to be the
works of the Spirit: It were a foul shame for any Minister of Christ to immix
such a reproof as this in his Doctrine, if it were not a fowler shame that some
Christians have immixed such sins as these in their practice; But those that
have Saint John Baptists trust to prepare the way of the Lord by preaching of
penance, must follow his example, constantly speak the truth, boldly rebuke
vice, and patiently suffer for the Truths sake; Thus did Saint Paul rebuke the
Galatians when they were in the like distemper, saying, (...) O Amentes, O ye
mad men that are out of your wits; or O Insentati, O ye sottish and stupid men
that are out of your senses, who has bewitched you that you should not obey
the truth? They would needs pretend to be reformers of the Gospel, when indeed
they were disturbers and destroyers of it; for this reason the Apostle reproves
them sharply as Apostates, saying, Who has bewitched you? and again, Ye are
fallen from grace: And he also reproves them fitly as hypocrites, calling them
fools, whilst they pretended to be wiser then all other Christian Churches,
because indeed they were too wise in their own fond conceits ever to attain
unto true wisdom: Excellently Saint Chrysostom, (...), To preach mild
Doctrines to those that more need reproofs, is rather to act the part of a
jugler then of a Divine; to be an enemy rather, then to be a friend: Our chief
Master did not do so to his Disciples, (...), but sometimes blesses and
sometimes reproves them; and he instanteth in Saint Peter, to whom Christ upon
the confession of his faith, said, Blessed art thou Simon Barjona; but upon his
carnal advice he said, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me;
(Greek, a scandal unto me) for thou savourest not the things that be of God,
but those that be of men, Mat. 16. 17. and 23. O blessed Savior, still say to
this kind of Satan that loves to get in among the Disciples, Get thee behind
me; take away such scandalous Ministers out of thy Church, who savor only the
things of men, whilst they pretend the things of God; for such will often
offend, but never confess thee; or if they do confess thee, it is only, that
they may the more covertly and the more securely offend thee: Real scandals
they are, not only to thy Ministry, but also to thy self; not only to thy
Church, but also to thy religion. Thou have showed thy hatred of their sin in
that thou have so sharply rebuked it: O now show the love of their Function, in
not suffering that foul sin any longer to possess thy Ministers, or to deceive
thy people.

It is a question very well propounded by Alensis, but better answered by him,
when he says, Vnde tam detestetur Dominus in Evangelio peccatum Hypocrisis?
Resp. 1. ut notetur quanta debet esse detestatio Antichristi, qui maxim per
Hypocrisin decipiet. 2. Quia hypocrita est contrarius operi Divino; Dominus
enim ordinat malum in bonum, ille bonum convertit in malum. 3. Quia contrarius
est toti Trinitati, etc. His question is this, Whence is it that our Lord does
in his Gospel show so great a detestation of the sin of hypocrisy? His answer
is this; 1. To show men how they ought to detest Antichrist, who will deceive
them chiefly by hypocrisy. 2. Because the hypocrite is directly opposite to
God in working; For God uses to turn evil into good, but the hypocrite uses
to turn good into evil. 3. Because the hypocrite opposes the whole Trinity:
The Father, in seeking after his glory; for the hypocrites aim is to glorify
himself. The Son, in not seeking after his truth; for his whole life is a lie:
The Holy Ghost, in not regarding his goodness; for the hypocrite comes only to
appear good, but not to be so; For this cause our Savior intermingled sharp
reproofs with his Doctrine, when he had to do with hypocrites, and so did his
Apostle after him, saying, O ye foolish, or mad, or senseless Galatians, who
has bewitched you? (...), He varied the manner of his teaching according to
the necessity of his Scholars; sometimes burning and cutting, where was a
gangrene, other times applying lenitives where was a green wound: (...), etc.
So great a paroxysm showed a very great distemper; For as to be pettish for a
trifle argues a poor degenerous spirit; so not to be moved to anger and
indignation when there is just occasion, is the argument of a sleepy and
sluggish, if not of a sottish man; And behold says Saint Chrysostom, Here was
a sin greater then the rebuke could be, a sin vast and mountanous, (...), such
as not only separated, but also estranged them from Christ. A dangerous relapse
or recidivation! First, because after a full knowledge of Christ, a mercy
denied to others when bestowed on them; For Saint Paul that went through the
region of Galatia, was forbidden to preach in Asia, Act. 16. 6. Secondly,
because after a full confirmation in that knowledge, for the same Saint Paul
who had instructed them, did also by way of an Episcopal visitation, see how
they followed his instructions: He went over all the country of Galatia and
Phrygia in order, strengthening all the Disciples, Act. 18. 23. In such a case
as this, the Apostle of Christ could not, the Ministers of Christ cannot be too
zealous, to show men their apostasy from the Christian Religion; and to
vindicate the honor of Christ, and of Christianity; always remembering that
distinction of Alensis, qui irascitur per vitium, irascitur personae; qui autem
per zelum, irascitur peccato; (Alensis, par. 2. qu. 139. m. 11.) He that bids
us be angry and sin not, would have us angry only with sin; And the rather,
because for so doing, the Ministers have not only the practice of the Apostles
as a president to justify them, but also the Doctrine of the Apostles as a
precept to command them: For this is the express command of the Text, There are
very unruly vain-talkers and deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped, Tit. 1.
10, 11. Must their mouths be stopped? then surely such as Titus, (Bishops and
Ministers) must stop them; for we cannot expect that God should again send his
Angel, and shut the Lions mouths, as he did to Daniel; And the way of stopping
their mouths, is by opening their sins; as it follows, Wherefore rebuke them
sharply, that they may be sound in the Faith, ver. 13. and without doubt
whosoever cordially desires to be sound in the Faith, either is not concerned
in the rebuke, or will not be displeased with it. It is Alensis his
observation, that the Spirit of God makes no mention of the sin of Angels in
the book of Genesis, but sets forth at large the sin of man, and he gives this
reason for it, Quia Angelicam vulnus Deus non praedestinavit curare, sed
hominis peccatum sanare voluit, (Par. 2. qu. 98. m. 8.) Because God intended
not to heal the wound or to repair the ruin of the Angels, but he intended to
heal the wound and repair the ruin of man: so is it still; where God will not
heal the sinners, he suffers their sin to be undiscovered and unreproved; but
if he be pleased to reprove them, it is because he is willing to heal them. And
if the mouths of unruly vain talkers and deceivers must be stopped by the
Ministers; then surely their communion and their Doctrine both, must be shunned
and abandoned by the people, who can have no pretense of excuse if they be
misled by false Prophets, since the Text bids them, (in this case) appeal, not
to their judgments, wherein they might possibly be misguided by
misperswasions, but to their senses, wherein themselves are infallible Judges;
for says our blessed Savior, ye shall know them by their fruits, Mat. 7. 16.
The most ignorant peasant that lives, knows the distinction of fruits by his
outward sense, and goes not to gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles;
And our blessed Savior bids him be guided also by his own sense, in the choice
of the tree from which he would gather spiritual fruit to nourish his soul to
everlasting life. He may not leave a good, and go to a bad tree to gather good
fruit: The false Prophets will say, Lo here is Christ, as well as the true
Prophets, Mat. 24. 23. Yet our Savior says, believe them not: What shall the
people do in such a case? shall they not believe the Prophets? No, they must
not believe the false Prophets; But how shall they distinguish betwixt the true
and the false Prophets, to believe the one, and to shun the other? I answer,
they must look on that other Text, which professedly bids them beware of false
Prophets, ( Mat. 7. 15.) and there they shall find their note of distinction:
for he that bids them beware, teaches them to distinguish, and to discern a
wolf though he be in sheeps clothing; and they must distinguish them merely by
their fruits, whereof they themselves cannot be but sufficient Judges:
Wherefore let them examine the works of the Prophets, and they will soon
perceive, which are the true and which are the false: Whether the scoffing
Ismael or the patient Isaac: Whether the covetous Balaam who loves the wages
of unrighteousness, or the obedient Elisha who slays his Oxen, and burns
his Plow, to show that no worldly interest can keep him from his calling;
Whether a false and a fierce Zedekiah that is ready to Prophecy according to
the mind of Ahab, and to smite a true Prophet on the cheek: or a true and a
mild Micaiah who vows to speak only what the Lord shall say unto him, (though
he be sent to the prison never so often) and who forbears to give ill words
when he is smitten; Lastly, whether a proud Diotrephes, who loves to have the
pre-eminence, and receives not the brethren, but prateth against them with
malicious words; or a meek and modest Demetrius, that has a good report of all
men, and of the truth it self: In a word, whether he that serves the times, or
he that serves the Lord; whether he that invadeth another right, to forsake
his Religion, or he that forsakes his own right to keep and practice his
Religion? Surely it can be no hard matter, for the people to discern in such a
case on which side Christ is, and on which side he is not: and if they will not
discern, we cannot say this people who knows not the Law are cursed, but this
people are cursed because they will not know the Law; they will not know that
Christ is to be found in the temple among the Doctors, not among the
mony-changers; and out of the temple among just, obedient, patient men that are
ready to suffer for righteousness sake; not among unjust, rebellious,
outrageous men, that are ready to devour those that are more righteous then
themselves: For Saint Paul speaking of the works of the flesh, uses this
introduction, Now the works of the flesh are manifest, therefore as easily to
be discerned by the ignorant as by the learned; by the people, as by the
Priests; they are manifest; for all men to see them, and for such men as do
them not, to avoid and abandon those that do them; and the same Saint Paul
after he has spoken of the works of the flesh with an etc. saying, and such
like (for fear we should think he had named them all in naming those few,)
uses this conclusion; of the which I tell you, that they who do such things,
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; doubtless with an intent to instruct the
people as well as the Priest, the unlearned as well as the learned, that those
who have not done such things, should take heed of doing them; and those who
have done such things (to procure some worldly advantages) should take heed of
doing them any more, unless they will so look after the inheritance of this
world, as not to inherit the Kingdom of God: All the works of the flesh which
the Apostle there numbreth, do directly proceed either from the sinful
distemper of the body, as adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
drunkenness, revellings; or from the more sinful, though less visible distemper
of the soul, as idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
strife, sedition, heresies, envyings, murders. The distemper of the body is the
more opprobious, the more scandalous; the distemper of the soul is the more
dangerous, the more pernicious; I find Noah repented of his drunkenness, I find
not that Cham repented, who mocked at his fathers nakedness: I find that David
repented of his adultery and of his uncleanness, I find not that Doeg repented
of his cruelty and of his maliciousness; I find Publicans repenting who thought
themselves sinners, I find no Pharisees repenting who thought themselves
Saints: I will pray as heartily as I can, that God will keep me from the
distempers of my body, lest I should defile the members of Christ, and the
Temple of the Holy Ghost: But above all will I pray that God will keep me from
the distempers of my soul, for they will downright expel Christ out of my
heart, and bid defiance to the Holy Ghost: For the temper of Christ was the
temper of charity and of humility, and so also is the temper of the good
Christian; Come unto me, says Christ, not go from me, there is the temper of
charity, to invite and embrace, not to repel and reject others; for I am meek
and lowly in heart, there is the temper of humility; lowly in heart, and cannot
be of that pride as to forget my self; meek in heart, and cannot be of that
presumption as to disdain and reproach my brother; where you find not this
temper, there you may not seek for Christ; where you do find the contrary
distemper, (in the forenamed works of the flesh,) there you are sure not to
find the Spirit of Christ, and therefore must come with your libera nos Domine
(though you care not to have the Letanie) and say, Good Lord deliver me from
such professors, and from such a profession of the Christian Religion, where I
can neither find the temper, nor the Spirit of Christ.

SECT. IV. Vnsetledness in Religion, shows we have not learned it from our
heavenly Master, or from Gods Exapostole; The Holy Ghost being given us from
the Father by the Son, shows there is no salvation to them who believe not
the Trinity: The mixture of Praises with Prayers in the Psalms, was the Abba
Father of the Old Testament, and proceeded from joy in the Holy Ghost; which is
a Joy both unsequestrable, and unspeakable: The Sacrifices and Hymns answerable
to that joy.
IT is very easy for a man to depart and fall away from God, but not so easy
to return and to cleave unto him; No man can come to me, except the Father,
which has sent me, draw him, says our blessed Savior, John 6. 44. The Father
draws us, before we go unto his Son, and he draws us with lovingkindness, Jer.
31. 3. with bands of love, Hos. 11. 4. that is, by the power of the Holy Ghost,
who is the Spirit of love: The Father draws by his Spirit to his Son. He that
believes not the Trinity, cannot hope to be thus drawn; and he that is not thus
drawn, cannot hope to come unto God; which is plainly showed by the Apostle
when he says, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts,
crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6. The Greek word is very observable, (...): for
here is another Exapostle, even God the Holy Ghost, as in the fourth verse we
had before one Exapostle, God the Son; There it was God sent forth his Son;
here it is, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son; that is, He sent such a
Messenger as was not only an Apostle, one sent from God, but also an Exapostle,
One sent out of God: There was one Exapostle to plant the Christian Religion in
the world, God sent forth his Son; and there is another Exapostle to plant it
in our hearts, God has sent forth the Spirit of his son into your hearts; the
same word is used in both places, (...), God made use of Exapostles as well as
of Apostles, for the planting of the true Religion: Messengers sent from God
would not have served the turn to make men believe the truth, (much less to
love and practice it) unless there had been also Messengers sent out of God;
Therefore God sent forth his Son, and the Spirit of his Son, that he might
settle and stablish our hearts in the Christian faith: So that if we be
unsettled in our Religion, and carried away with every blast of vain Doctrine,
as being not firmly established in the truth of the holy Gospel, it is a plain
case we have not inclined our ears (and much less our hearts) to those two
Messengers who came immediately out of God, even his own Son, and his own
Spirit, and therefore it is no wonder if we slightly esteem of all Gods other
Messengers: God the Father has sent out God the Son: And God the Father and
Son, has sent out God the Holy Ghost: The salvation of one is the work of
three; the salvation of one sinful soul, is the work of all three persons of
the blessed Trinity; The Father sending the Son, the Father and Son sending the
Holy Ghost; which of these three persons can we lose or let go, and not withal
lose or let go our own Salvation? which of these three needs not work as God, a
work of All-mighty power, of All seeing wisdom, of All-sufficient and
All-saving goodness; to turn us from our evil ways that we may be sanctified,
and to keep us in the ways of righteousness that we may be saved? God the Son
sent out of the Father into your flesh; and God the Holy Ghost sent out of the
Father and the Son, into your hearts: His Son and your flesh; his Spirit and
your hearts, both certainly most miraculous conjunctions, and the one the cause
of the other; For his Spirit and your hearts, could never have met in man, had
not his Son and your flesh met together in God: And this produces yet another
miraculous conjunction, a conjunction of Prayer and of praise both together in
the same mouth, and from the same heart, and at the same time, that a righteous
man cannot be so over-burdened with sorrow in himself, as not to be relieved
and refreshed with joy in his Savior: Thus Hannah was was in bitterness of
soul and prayed unto the Lord and wept sore, but she found that joy and comfort
in her prayer, that the Text says, She went her way and did eat, and her
countenance was no more sad: So that in effect, she was so of a sorrowful
Spirit, as also of a joyful Spirit, and as her sorrow afforded matter of
Prayer, so her joy afforded matter of Praise; Her own spirit made her
sorrowful, but Gods Spirit made her joyful: And this was indeed the Abba Father
of those in the Old Testament, who had but dark promises of a Savior, yet did
with joy draw water out of the wells of salvation, Isa. 12. 3. who had scarce
any knowledge or revelation of the person, yet were very well acquainted with
the joys of the Holy Ghost: Hence it is that most of the Psalms, as they are
exceeding devout prayers, wherein Gods own Spirit teaches us to pray, and
helps our infirmities in praying; so they are also most thankful praises
wherein the same spirit teaches us to rejoice in God, for hearing our prayers:
They are not only prayers, but they are also praises concerning the same
deliverance, whether it be corporal or spiritual, whether it be from bodily or
from Ghostly enemies; as for example, The 30. Psalm is a prayer to be delivered
from sickness, and death, and damnation, (as that noble Champion of Christ,
both for his Church, and for his Truth, and for his Authority, has piously and
judiciously stated it, in his Book of Collects upon the Psalms, which should
never be out of the hands of good Christians, till it be fully imprinted in
their hearts) I say the 30. Psalm is a Prayer to be delivered from sickness,
and death, and damnation, three such sad considerations as were enough to make
it a most disconsolate and doleful prayer: yet it begins with praise, I will
magnify thee O Lord, for thou have set me up; and it ends with praise, O my
God I will give thanks unto thee for ever: And it is the peculiar observation
concerning the 88. Psalm, nulla consolatione clauditur, says Musculus; that it
has in it no clause of comfort and consolation, and yet even this Psalm has
in it some shadow or dark representation of Abba Father, in that it is said, O
Lord God of my salvation, and, O let my prayer enter into thy presence; even as
our blessed Savior when he thought himself most forsaken of God, yet even then
laid hold on him by a true and lively Faith, saying, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? This we are sure, It is the same Spirit of adoption that
inditeth the most uncomfortable prayer, and the most comfortable praise: Only
the prayer proceeds from the great apprehension and constant necessity of our
own manifold wants and imperfections, even in our best condition; But the
praise proceeds from the comfortable enjoyment of Gods undeserved goodness in
mercies received, and more comfortable assurance of his everlasting mercies, in
blessings promised; So that the uncomfortableness of the prayer is from the
testimony of our own spirits concerning our miseries and sorrows in our selves;
but the comfortableness of the praise, is from the testimony of Gods Holy
Spirit concerning the blessings and joys treasured up for us in our Redeemer.
Accordingly there is no gift or comfort of the Spirit which we can now pray for
in our distresses, which was not prayed for by the Psalmist in his greatest
distress, Psalm. 51. Renew a right spirit within me; take not thy holy spirit
from me; stablish me with thy free spirit: He prays for a right spirit
against the perverseness; for an holy spirit against the profaness and
uncleanness; for a free spirit, against the dullness and deadness of his heart:
And what can we say more of that spirit which teaches us to cry Abba Father,
but that it is a right spirit to rectify us when we are out of order: but that
it is an holy spirit to sanctify us that we may be kept in order: and that it
is a free spirit, to testify unto us that being rectified and sanctified, we
shall doubtless be accepted as beloved in the beloved: Accordingly Saint Hierom
thus translateth the words, Et spiritu principali confirma me, and confirm or
stablish me with thy principal spirit, which in Saint Paul's phrase is the
spirit of thy Son, or the spirit of Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father: So
that we find these Psalms of David as necessary and as useful devotions for us
Christians, as they were for the Jews; for that one and the same spirit cried
Abba Father in them, which cries Abba Father in us: Wherefore he so prays,
as that he also praises: and so praises, as that he also prays: He praises
for the joy of his Savior, he prays for the joy of his salvation: Read mihi
laetitiam salutaris tui, restore unto me the joy of thy salvation: So restore
it when it is lost, as also preserve and increase it when it is restored. This
is a joy which all the delights of this world cannot give, and therefore sure
all the sorrows of this world cannot take away: Although the figg tree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cut off from the
fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, yet I will rejoice in the Lord,
I will joy in the God of my salvation, Hab. 3. 17, 18. The Prophets festival
does not depend upon the joy and mirth of the times; his good cheer does not
hang upon the fig tree, nor upon the vine: it arises not out of the fields,
nor out of the flocks; God may sequester all these from man, or man may
sequester them all from Gods Prophet, yet still he will keep his solemn feast,
he will rejoice in the Lord, he will joy in the God of his salvation; and the
reason is, because God will not, and man cannot, sequester the true Prophet
from his God: Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation,
or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, (as
it is written, For thy sake we are killed all the day long, we are accounted as
sheep for the slaughter) nay in all these things we are more then conquerors
through him that loved us, Romans 8. 35. And as this joy of the good Christian is
unsequestrable, not to be taken from him, so is it also unspeakable, not to be
expressed by him: thus says Saint Peter, speaking of our blessed Savior, Whom
having not seen ye love, in whom though now ye see him not, yet believing ye
rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. You that love him
from your soul, cannot but rejoice in him from your soul; If your love of him
be with all your soul, with all your might, with all your strength, your joy in
him will be so too; you love him with all your might because he is your
Savior; you rejoice in him with all your might because of his salvation. Who
can sufficiently admire the goodness of God in giving the gift of faith unto
men, thereby in some sort to antedate the beatifical vision, and to let us into
heaven whiles we live here on earth? For the Apostle describes to us such a
faith as is to be known, not by its pretenses, but by its power; and that power
is threefold, A power of believing in Christ, yet believing; A power of loving
Christ, whom having not seen ye love: A power of rejoicing in Christ, in whom
ye rejoice with joy unspeakable. Whosoever has not this threefold power of
believing, of loving and of rejoicing in Christ, has not true Faith in Christ,
but a fancy in stead of Faith: So inseparable are these three Sisters, the
three Theological virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, that whosoever has one
has All; whosoever does believe, does also love; whosoever does love, does
also rejoice, rejoice in hope of the glory of God, Romans 5. 2. A joy not to be
expressed to others by our speaking, but by our doing; not by our words, but by
our works; It is fit they should see us offer the sacrifice of righteousness,
and from thence know, that we put our trust in the Lord, Psalm 4. 4. For we
Christians also have an Altar, ( Heb. 13. 10.) and we have a two fold sacrifice
to offer upon that Altar. 1. A Sacrifice of thanksgiving: let us offer the
Sacrifice of praise to God continually, v. 15. 2. A Sacrifice of Almsgiving: to
do good, and to communicate forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is well
pleased, ver. 16. These our sacrifices as they do express our joy in Christ, so
they should also answer it: and therefore when we have the greatest joys, we
should also have the greatest sacrifices: For the analogy or proportion is not
only historical, but also causal, which we find set forth betwixt the joy of
Gods people and their Sacrifices, Nehem. 12. 43. Also that day they offered
great sacrifices, and rejoiced, for God has made them rejoice with great joy:
Because their joy was great, their sacrifice also was great: God had made them
rejoice with great joy on that day, and therefore also on that day they offered
great sacrifices: And this is the reason why the Church of Christ recommendeth
to us solemn Festivals as days wherein the Lord has made us rejoice with
great joy: and as solemn sacrifices for those festivals, particularly the
receiving the holy Eucharist, and the giving of alms (the two proper sacrifices
of Christians) that our sacrifices may be in some sort answerable to our joy.
For all the sacrifices we can offer unto God cannot be answerable to the joy we
have in him, and from him, (and much less answerable to the joy which we hope
to have with him.) And will you see the reason of this joy? it is by reason of
the comfort and consolation that good men have in and from God, when they
cannot have it in or from the world: They have comfort from the Comforter, and
may well have joy with their comfort: This made Saint Paul bless God for all
the troubles and tribulations he had from men, because the more they troubled
him, the more his God comforted him, and enabled him to comfort others, 2 Cor.
1. 3, 4. Blessed be God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father
of mercies and the God of all comfort; who comfort us in all our
tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by
the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God; that is, with
internal and spiritual comfort, which proceeds from the Spirit of God; q. d.
I will not repine for men's cruelties, but bless God the Father of mercies,
whiles the more man is my Persecutor, the more God is my Comforter: enabling me
to comfort both my self and others with such comforts, as this world is not
able to give, and therefore sure is not able to take away. And the same way
does God please to comfort the soul, as the Prophet describes him comforting of
Zion (for what is Zion (...) but an illuminated or enlightened soul?) For the
Lord shall comfort Zion; He will comfort all her wast places, and he will make
her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of the Lord; joy and
gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody, Isa. 51.
3. What an immense, an immortal comfort is this, that the wast places of the
soul are comforted, and that her wilderness is made like Eden, and her desert
like the garden of the Lord? for the waste place of the soul that needs be
comforted, is the conscience which is wasted by sin; the wilderness or desert
of the soul is the same conscience overgrown with cares (as a wilderness is
with thorns) and overawed with fears and terrors, (as with so many wild
beasts,) and overcome with drouth and barrenness, (like the deserts of those
hot Countries, that starve their inhabitants:) This wast place, this
wilderness, this desert must be quite changed before it can be comforted: The
Lord makes this wilderness like Eden, a place of pleasure, this desert like a
garden of the Lord, a place of fruitfulness, before joy and gladness can be
found therein, thanksgiving and the voice of melody: Till the conscience is
purged from dead works, it is like a wilderness, unlovely and unfruitful;
unlovely, it makes the man out of love with himself, and much more his God out
of love with him: unfruitful, it brings forth no fruits either of righteousness
or of repentance: But after it is purged from sin, then it is like an Eden or a
Paradise, a place of pleasure, and of plenty, of loveliness and of
fruitfulness; Saint Paul joins them both together, That ye might walk worthy of
the Lord unto, all pleasing, being fruitful in every good work, Col. 1. 10.
(...), to all pleasing, of God, of your neighbors, and of your selves, there is
the pleasure and the loveliness (for no man truly pleases himself, whiles he
displeases his God:) (...), bringing forth fruit in every good work, or
bringing forth the fruit of every good work, there is the plenty and the
fruitfulness; for no man walks worthy of God, but he that is fruitful in
every good work; that is to say, fruitful in the works of piety, of temperance,
and of charity: of piety toward God, of temperance toward himself, of charity
toward his neighbor: He that thus walks worthy of God, cannot but exceedingly
rejoice in God: For he cannot but say with the Psalmist, And now shall he list
up mine head above mine enemies round about me, Psalm 27. 6. Hoc erit lentum
est nimis; He shall lift up mine head, would make him stay too long for his
joy: He may therefore say, He has already lifted up mine head, even my blessed
Savior, above all mine, and above all his enemies, that I should not fear
them: and he is daily lifting me up to my head, that I should not fear my self:
Therefore will I offer in his dwelling an oblation with great gladness, I will
sing and speak praises unto the Lord, (ver. 7.) Hoc erit lentum est nimis, I
will sing, keeps him too long from his duty, he therefore does sing and say,
Praised be the Lord, for he has heard the voice of my humble petitions; The
Lord is my strength and my shield, (my strength to support me when I am not
assaulted, my shield to defend me, when I am) my heart has trusted in him and
I am helped; therefore my heart danceth for joy, and in my song will I praise
him, Psalm. 28. 7, 8. All this and much more then this is set down to express
the joy of the Holy Ghost, and it is nothing but Abba Father in the language of
those under the Law, who though they did not see God in his Son and in his
Spirit so clearly as we do under the Gospel, yet they praised him as loud both
for his Son and for his Spirit, as we can praise him; for though in some sort
they came short of us in the Object of Faith, because the Son and the Holy
Ghost were not so fully revealed unto them, yet they came not short of us in
the Act of faith, whether exercised in prayers or in praises; for they prayed
in the mediation of the Son, and they praised in the joy of the Holy Ghost.

SECT. V. F^lly and Filiation are together in Gods best adopted children,
whiles they are in this world: The three privileges of the Saints (of Gods,
not of their own making) because of the Spirit of Adoption; First, That of
enemies they are made servants, and of servants they are made sons. Secondly,
That being made sons, they have the Spirit of his Son. Thirdly, That having the
Spirit of his Son, they have also the mind and language of his Son, crying Abba
Father: Having their hearts true to God by inward affection, and their mouths
true to their hearts by outward profession.
IT is fit that a foolish son should know his folly as well as his filiation;
his folly that he may return to himself to do his duty, as well as his
filiation, that he may return unto his Father and beg for mercy: Accordingly
every good Christian being made the son of God, and yet still abiding too much
in the sins of other men, should look with one eye upon himself to increase his
humility, and to quicken his obedience and repentance; with the other eye upon
his Savior, to strengthen his faith, and to inflame his piety and devotion: He
must see his folly as well as his filiation, that he may ascribe unto God the
honor due unto his name, and much more the honor due unto his nature, in that
he disinherits not a foolish Son, besotted and bewitched with the vanities of
the world, and with his own sinful lusts and affections, but first looks on him
as wise in Christ, his own eternal wisdom, and then makes him so, that he may
not only accept him for a son, but may also bring him to his inheritance.

For there is no doubt to be made but that the filiation will carry the
inheritance, if so be we take care that the folly do not destroy the filiation;
And accordingly we must still remember, that we were by nature the children of
wrath, born enemies, but made sons by the grace of adoption, and take heed of
returning to our own natural corruptions, or of sinning against that grace
whereby we have been adopted; For in that we have been adopted into Gods
family, we have been put out of our own; so the Greeks do expressly set forth
the nature of adoption, (...), to be an adopted son, (...), (says Suidas) is
to be put out of our own kindred, out of our own stock: And the Psalmist
requires no less of us, when he says, Hearken O daughter and consider, incline
thine ear, forget also thine own people and thy fathers house, so shall the
King have pleasure in thy beauty, for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou him,
Psalm. 45. 11, 12. Thou can not be an adopted son of God, unless thou forget
thine own people, and thy fathers house, that is, unless thou go out of the
man, that thou may go in to God; leave off to be an enemy, that thou may
begin to be a son; forsake thy self, that thou may cleave to thy Savior: For
in thy self thou art a stranger, nay an enemy; in him only thou art a servant,
or rather a Son: This consideration made Saint Paul say, I am crucified with
Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.
20. As if he had said, I am crucified with Christ, in that I am dead unto sin;
for the thought that he has nailed my sins to his Cross, makes me willing to
be crucified with him; And yet I still truly live, but not that old carnal man
I was before, but made a new creature; so that indeed Christ lives in me by
his Spirit, making me lead a new life; And though I am still in this mortal
body, yet my life which I live is immortal; for though my person be on earth,
yet my conversation is in heaven: And the same truth which the Apostle here
preached by his Example, he did in another place preach also by his Doctrine,
saying, And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the
spirit is life because of righteousness, (Romans 8. 10.) that is, the outward man
is mortified to the weakening and abolishing of sin, but the inner man is
renewed to the increasing and establishing of righteousness. And this is the
proper work of the Spirit of adoption, to change a man from being an enemy to
be a servant, and from being a servant to be a son; which we may well look upon
as the first privilege of the Saints, who are truly so, that is, Saints in
Gods account, though sinners in their own; Saints not of their own calling, but
of Gods: or Saints not of their own, but of Gods making. Their duty is to be
his servants, but their honor is to be his friends, nay more, his sons: Ye are
my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you (John 15. 14.) They were before
his enemies, they are now his servants and friends; They are to do whatsoever
he commands them, there is their duty, they are obliged as servants; yet he
says unto them, ye are my friends, there is their honor, they are accepted as
friends: Great is their honor as his friends admitted to his counsels; yet
much greater is their honor as his sons, admitted to his inheritance; But this
honor is merely a privilege, not a prerogative; it is such as they must
thankfully receive, not such as they may peremptorily demand; for when ye have
done all those things which are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable
servants, we have done that which was our duty to do, says our blessed
Savior, Luke 17. 10.

Christ looked upon his own obedience as duty, and therefore will not have us
look upon ours as supererogation; We are unprofitable servants in our service,
and should be so in our account, and are we then in Gods account accepted as
friends, nay beloved as sons? Great was their privilege who could say, We are
the servants of the God of heaven and earth, and build his house, Ezra 5. 11.
(Sure they could not have said so much, if they had pulled his house down;) But
far greater is our privilege, who can say, We are the sons of the God of
heaven and earth, and though we be despoiled of our inheritance in earth, yet
we cannot be deprived of our inheritance in heaven, The prodigal son says to
his father, I am no more worthy to be called thy Son, make me as one of thy
hired servants, Luke 15. 19. but each of us may now invert those words, and say
unto our Father, I am no more worthy to be a hired servant and yet thou have
made me be called thy Son: A consideration which is able to kindle a holy fire
in the breast of every good Christian, and inflame his soul with the love of
Christ, by whom alone of an enemy he is made a servant, of a servant a friend,
of a friend a Son, of a son an heir, even an heir of God, and joint heir with
Christ, Romans 8. 17. For though men have son* that are not heirs, yet God has
no son which is not also an heir, and therefore this is not so truly a
privilege, as it is a property, for Gods Sons to be his heirs; Accordingly all
our care must be to keep our selves in the obedience, that we may be in the
acceptance of sons, for then we shall have no cause to doubt of our
inheritance: And the best way to keep our selves in the obedience of Sons, is
to keep our selves in the communion of his Spirit; for if any man have not the
Spirit of Christ he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And this is indeed another
privilege of the Saints, that being made the Sons of God, they have the Spirit
of his Son. And that Spirit is sent forth into their hearts to testify unto
them his fatherly care and kindness; For the tongue could not truly say Abba
Father, if the heart did not truly believe it: We must therefore observe the
Apostles Doctrine concerning the Spirit of adoption, that it so moves in the
tongue, as much rather in the heart, Ye have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba Father, there is Abba Father in the mouth; and, The spirit
it self bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of God,
there is Abba Father in the heart, Romans 8. 15, 16. (...); says Saint
Chrysostom. When the spirit of God is our witness, who can misdoubt the
testimony? All the fault in truth is, that we do not so devote our selves to
the love of God, and the practice of piety and godliness, as that the Spirit
either will or can be our witness: For we often g^eve the Holy Spirit of God by
our multiplied transgressions, and hence it is we do not see that he has
sealed us to the day of redemption, (Ephesians. 5. 30.) His seal is always sure
and good, though not always clear and visible: He does still imprint it,
though we do not still perceive it: the reason is, because our sins do cast a
mist before our eyes, nay more, a dismal darkness upon our hearts; and this
mist, this darkness interposeth it self betwixt us and the everlasting light.
Therefore says the Apostle, And every man that has this hope in him,
purifieth himself even as he is pure, 1 John 3 3. Every man that has this hope
in him, viz. truly and really, not presumptuously and phantastically, purifieth
himself even as he is pure, and it is no more then needs, because he cannot have
this hope in him unless he purify himself: For the same Holy Spirit that
makes the Son of God dwell in us by consolation, does also make us dwell in
him by affection; and no longer then we dwell in him, can we be assured that he
dwells in us: hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he in us (they go both
together) because he has given us of his spirit, 1 John 4. 13. And that holy
Spirit as it makes him dwell in us by consolation, so it makes us dwell in him
by affection; God has joined these two together, and we may not separate them,
even walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost,
Act. 9. 31.

Thus does our own Church teach us to pray, That we may evermore dwell in him,
and he in us; which when it shall be fully brought to pass, we shall fully
understand, and more fully enjoy that benediction of the Psalmist, Blessed is
the man whom thou choosest and receivest unto thee; he shall dwell in thy
Courts, and shall be satisfied with the pleasures of thy house, even of thy
holy Temple, Psalm. 65. 4. Nay his dwelling shall be much bettered; for he shall
dwell not in thy Court, but in thy self; and be satisfied with the pleasures,
not of thy house, but of thy Son; nor of thy holy Temple, but of thy holy
Spirit.

Thus does Jerusalem get up thither indeed, whieher Babel got up only in
design, even to heaven; Nay yet much higher: Is there any thing higher then
heaven? Yes there is, The God of heaven; A true Citizen of Jerusalem never
leaves ascending in heart and mind, till he get up to God: And this makes him
so given to his de^otions, that he cares to say nothing else but Abba Father;
which is yet another privilege of the Saints; of Gods, not of their own
making; (for they, though called Saints here, will be found sinners hereafter,)
that having the Spirit of his Son, they have also the language of his Son, and
cry Abba Father; For the privilege of Gods Sons who have the Spirit of his Son
in their hearts, is also to have the same Spirit in their mouths, crying Abba
Father; as their heart is true to God by inward affection, so their mouth is
true unto their heart by outward profession; and consequently, that man's
religion is not true which wants either part of this truth; for if his heart be
false to his God, he is an hypocrite: If his tongue be false to his heart, he
is little less then an Apostate: So has the irrefragable Doctor determined
concerning one that lives among the Turks or Saracens, who still retains the
Faith in his heart, but not the confession of it in his mouth: Potest tamen
dici Apostata communi nomine quia a confessione fidei retrocedit; (Alensis par.
2. qu. 153. memb. 2.) He may in a general sense be called an Apostate because
he is fallen away from the confession of his Faith: So then a true believer
has not only his heart true to God by affection, but also his tongue true to
his heart by profession; being bound to the one by the first, to the other by
the third Commandment of the decalogue: If his heart be false to his God, he
will one day be ashamed of himself: If his tongue be false to his heart, his
Savior will (one day) be ashamed of him; so himself has told us, Whosoever
therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the
glory of his Father, with the holy Angels, (Mar. 8, 38.) of him shall the Son
of man be ashamed, (...), He shall blush for the shame of him: O our blessed
Redeemer, let us never put thee to the blush, let us never force that precious
blood into thy lovely face, which thou came to bestow upon our sinful souls:
But as with our hearts we believe unto righteousness, so with our mouths let us
make confession to salvation: This is Saint Paul's definition of a true
Christian, A man that with the heart believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confesses to salvation, Romans 10. 10. The heart believing brings the
righteousness; the mouth confessing, brings the salvation: As it is vain to have
a Faith without righteousness, for that is the hypocrites faith; so it is vain to
have a righteousness without salvation, for that may be an Apostates
righteousness: But the true and constant Christian has both the heart to
believe, and the mouth to confess his belief: and therefore so has the Faith,
as that also he has both the righteousness and the salvation: For not being
guilty of hypocrisy in confessing his faith whereby to lose the righteousness,
he will not be guilty of Apostasy in falling away from his confession, whereby
to lose the salvation.

SECT. VI. The having the Spirit and language of the Son further explained, by
three questions. 1. How Abba father is called the language of the Son, and
whether Saint Mark borrowed not that expression from Saint Paul? 2. Who it is
that cries Abba Father, or prays by the Spirit; whether he that has most
cordial affections, or he that has most voluble effusions? 3. Whether the
spirit may be in the heart believing, whilst it is not in the mouth crying Abba
Father? or whether the Spirit of adoption once truly had, be not retained to
the end?
SAint Paul saying to the Galatians, and because ye are Sons, God has sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts crying Abba Father, (Gal. 4. 6.)
has joined three eminent privileges of the Saints altogether in few words;
And because ye are sons, there is their first privilege, that of enemies they
are made servants, of servants they are made sons: God has sent forth the
spirit of his Son into your hearts; there is their second privilege, that being
made Sons, they have the Spirit of his Son; whereby we cry Abba Father, there is
their third privilege; that having the Spirit of his Son, they have also the
language of his Son: But it may not unfitly be demanded how Abba Father is
called the language of the Son? I answer because Christ himself used it in his
prayer to the Father, and he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto
thee, Mar. 14. 36. And the Spirit of Christ teaches us to use it; as appears
Romans 8. 15. Ye have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abba Father;
and Gal. 4. 6. God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts
crying Abba Father: And it is to be observed that this kind of expression is
never at all used in the Old Testament, (as if it had been reserved of purpose
for our Savior Christ) and but thrice used in the new Testament, (in the
places forecited) as if it could not rightly be used but only by some few very
good Christians, who having entirely devoted themselves to all dutifulness and
obedience, can hope for a greater portion of love and kindness from God, then
other men; as if he were more a Father to them then to others: For so would
Syrus interpres have us understand the words, (...) Abba Pater mi; O Father, my
Father, Father of all in general, but my Father in particular; which is
doubtless the application of a true and lively faith, and cannot belong unto
those who have not applied themselves to this Father as most dutiful and
obedient children; But why (...), Abba Father, the one is Syriack, the other in
Greek? was our blessed Savior at so much leisure in his agony, as to look
after variety of languages in his prayer? That's not to be supposed; but it is
most probable, that our Savior used only the Syriake word Abba when he prayed
(because he commonly used that language,) and he doubled that word, to express
the zeal and earnestness of his affection in his prayer; So Grotius; duplex
autem vox posita est affectus testandi causa; simile illud (...), Apoc. 1.
There is a double word set down to show the strength of his affection, as
Revel. 1. 7. Even so, Amen: This may happily be a reason of the duplication,
but it is not a reason of the variety; that doubt still remains why Abba Father
in two several languages? I answer, happily to teach us that Christ and the
good Christian do call upon God with one and the same Spirit; and therefore
Saint Mark agrees with Saint Paul in the use of one and the same expression;
For though Saint Mark writ his Gospel from Saint Peter, yet it is probable he
borrowed this emphatical expression from Saint Paul, since it is undeniable,
that Saint Paul had written his Epistles to the Romans and to the Galatians (in
which two he uses this Abba Father) long before Saint Mark published his
Gospel; For Saint Chrysostom in the argument or Hypothesis before the Epistle
to the Romans, (wherein he takes great pains to show in what order Saint Paul's
Epistles were written, and that by observations collected out of the Epistles
themselves) plainly says, (...), It seems to me that the Epistle to the
Galatians was writ before the Epistle to the Romans, and it is past all doubt
that the Epistle to the Romans was writ long before Saint Paul was carried
prisoner to Rome; but the Gospel of Saint Mark was writ afafter that as may be
gathered out of Epiphanius his words (in Haer: Alog.) (...): next after S.
Matthew comes S. Mark who following S. Peter to Rome, was there permitted to
write his Gospel. But Saint Peter came not to Rome till after Saint Paul's first
answer, under Nero; unless you will comprize him amongst those of whom Saint
Paul complains (2 Timothy 4. 16.) At my first answer no man stood with me, but all
men forsook me; I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge; That Saint
Peter came soon enough to Rome to die there with Saint Paul for the Gospel of
Christ, we may not doubt, since all antiquity asserteth it. But that he sat
there as Bishop 25. years, sc. from the second year of Claudius, to the 13.
year of Nero, (in which he was put to death) seems an unreasonable assertion;
for if he were then Bishop of Rome, when Saint Paul was brought to his first
answer before Nero, he did plainly forsake Saint Paul; and it is more just to say
he had rather forsake his Bishopric, nay indeed his life; And this being laid
for a ground that Saint Peter did not forsake Saint Paul at his first answer,
it must needs follow that he came not to Rome till after it, and by consequent
Saint Mark writ not his Gospel till after Saint Paul's first answer, that is,
long after Saint Paul had writ his two Epistles to the Romans and to the
Galatians* So that Saint Marks Abba Father may not improbably seem to have been
derived from Saint Paul's Abba Father, and that for this reason, to assure us
that good Christians have the same Father that Christ had, and call upon God
with the very same spirit that he did, nay in the very same words, as having
their prayers both exemplified and sanctified through his intercession; For as
some Protestant Divines are willing to believe that the Baptism of John and of
Christ were both one, because else we now say they should not be baptized with
the same baptism wherewith Christ was baptized; and we cannot be too desirous
to receive our Baptism in our Saviors communion: for what is communicated from
him is also sanctified by him; So is it in our prayers: we may very comfortably
persuade our selves, that Saint Mark used the same Abba Father for Christ,
which Saint Paul had used for us Christians; least any man should think we
Christians ^ad not the same right to pray, or at least not the same spirit of
prayer that was in Christ; therefore to assure us that both do pray in the
communion of the same Spirit, both are set down praying in the communion of the
same words: But yet, whether S. Mark borrowed this from S. Paul, or not, the
doubt still remains, why this Abba Father is in two several languages, when as
the reduplication might happily have been as emphatical in one tongue as in
two; I answer with Saint Augustine, Abba propter illorum linguam, pater propter
nostram (Aug. in Psalm. 78.) To show that Christ did no less belong to the
Gentiles then he did to the Jews, he uses a Greek word that signifies father
for the Gentiles, as well as a Syriack word, that signifies father for the
Jews; (for at that time the Jews themselves commonly spoke Syriack, having in
the Babylonian captivity learned to mix Chaldee with Hebrew, which mixture
begat the Syriack) The effect of Saint Augustines answer is this; Syriack and
Greek are both joined together, to show the communion of Jew and Gentile in
Christ; we may add, and not only so, but also to show the cause of that
communion, even the communication of the same spirit to them both; which when
it descended visibly upon the Apostles, endued them with the gift of tongues;
and the scripture still retaining the variety of languages in this Abba Father,
does not only commemorate that miraculous descent of the Holy Ghost upon them,
but does also confirm his continual descending upon us, with as good success,
though not with as great a miracle; For he teaches us no less then he taught
them to cry Abba Father, which puts me upon a second question, who it is that
cries Abba Father? is it his spirit or our own? I answer, it is his Spirit, not
our own; it is indeed our voice, but it is his breath; for we cannot say Abba
Father by the breath and power of our own, but only by the breath and power of
his Spirit; and by that we can say it with an undaunted courage, and do say it
with an immortal comfort, because with a hope full of immortality: It Is then his
Spirit that cries Abba Father though in our mouths; And this crying Abba
Father is more fully expressed, Romans 8. 26. The spirit helps our infirmities;
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self
makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered; whence it
may be gathered that the gift of prayer is more in groans then in words: more
in groans which cannot, then in words which can be uttered: for Moses cried
unto the Lord when he spoke not one word; ( And the Lord said unto Moses,
Wherefore criest thou unto me? Exodus 14. 15.) So that he prayed by the Spirit
whiles his tongue stood still, and consequently the gift or spirit of prayer
(here meant by crying Abba Father) may not be placed in voluble effusions, but
in strong affections; not so much in the tongue as in the heart; for else many
adopted Sons must be denied to have the Spirit of Christ, who cannot pour out
their conceptions in multiplicity of words; And (which is as bad) many must be
affirmed to have the Spirit of Christ, who are enemies to the cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction, whose God is their belly, and whose glory is in their
shame, who mind earthly things; for many of these men may and do attain to a
great perfection in extemporary effusions, we dare not then say that all those
who take upon them to be eminent in the gift of prayer, do truly cry Abba
Father, or do pray by the Spirit of Christ, because we see that many of them by
their works do oppose the name, and blaspheme the truth of Christ; and bring
themselves under that terrible reproof and more terrible reproach, They profess
that they know God, but in works they deny him, being abominable and
disobedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Tit. 1. 16. But there are
doubtless many others, more concerned in the gift, though less in the pretense
of the Spirit, who make not so many words, but yet make more prayers, even
whiles they make use of those prayers which their Church has made for them,
for these bring their groans, though not their words; and those groans are the
groans of the Spirit; which without doubt may as well (if not better) accompany
a prayer that we are sure is according to the mind of Christ, as a prayer that
we cannot tell whether it will be so or no; However, we cannot deny but every
one who truly prays by the spirit of Christ, may say what holy David has put
into his mouth, and the Holy Spirit put into the mouth of David, Oh come hither
and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done for my
soul: I called upon him with my mouth, and gave him praises with my tongue; If
I incline unto wickedness with my heart, the Lord will not hear me; But God
has heard me and considered the voice of my prayer; praised be God which has
not cast out my prayer, nor turned his mercy from me, Psalm. 66. v. 14, etc. As
if he had said, This great miracle of mercy has God done for my soul, which I
cannot but speak; and all you that fear him, shall do well to hear, he gave me
his spirit to call upon him with my mouth, and to give him praises with my
tongue; and because praise is not commonly in the mouth of a sinner, and cannot
be acceptable from it; he gave me his spirit also to sanctify my heart, that
it should not incline to wickedness; and hence it is that I do heartily praise
him for enabling me to pray, because praying in the spirit of his Son, I can
pray in comfort, that he will not cast away my prayer, because he cannot cast
away his only Son; nor turn away his mercy from me, because he cannot turn away
from his own Spirit, which by his mercy, is now beco^e mine.

Thus it is said, The spirit of the Lord cloatheth Amasai, 1 Chro. 12. 18. it is
in the Hebrew (...), which the Septuagint translate (...), and Saint Hierom
induit, that is, The spirit of the Lord clothed Amasai, not barely came upon
him but also stuck close to him, and covered him all over; And indeed so does
the spirit come upon us to cloth our souls as our garments do our bodies; that
there be neither chilness nor nakedness, neither want of zeal nor of holiness
in our affections whiles we cry Abba Father.

But is the spirit therefore gone when the voice is gone? or is the Holy Ghost
no longer in our hearts, then Abba Father is in our mouths? For that must be
our third Quere, Whether the spirit may be in the heart believing, while it is
not in the mouth crying Abba Father? as when Saint Peter, who doubtless had the
Spirit of God, was so far from saying Abba Father, that he denied the Son, nay
forswore him, as if a simple denial had not been enough, unless it had been
seconded with oaths and curses (which is our unhappy progress of
Saviour-denial, instead of self-denial). I answer for Saint Peter, that either
the spirit was not quite gone from him, or else soon returned unto him, which
appears by the speediness and by the entireness of his repentance in that he
wept suddenly, and he wept bitterly; for he had a peculiar prayer and promise
of Christ that his faith should not fail; I answer for others of Gods adopted
children, as my late reverend and learned Diocesan taught me out of Saint
Ambrose, Deus nunquam rescindit donum Adoptionis, God never cuts off his
entaile; if once adopted; ever adopted, and out of Biel, Eos (...) qui a*
salute excidunt numquam fuisse filios dei per adoptionem: All those who at last
fall away from their salvation, were never the children of God by adoption:
(Bishop Davenant in his third determination) or rather as Saint John taught
them all three, If they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us, 1 John 2. 19. But withal I must distinguish betwixt adoption and the state
of adoption: betwixt salvation and the state of salvation; for there is salus
and status salutis, salvation and the state of salvation, as there is peccatum
and status peccati, sin and the state of sin, And the state of either is such
as it is in relation to us, and to our reception of it. In actionibus humanis
dicitur negotium aliquem statum habere, secundum ordinem propriae dispositionis
cum quadam immobilitate seu quiet, ( 22ae. 183. 1.) in humane actions the
state of a business shows the immoveableness of its disposition; so the state
of sin is a kind of immoveableness in sin, and the state of Adoption is a kind
of immoveableness in adoption: But yet we men are not alike immovable in both
states; because the state of sin is wholly of our own making, and therefore may
get some stability from us; But the state of grace is wholly of our receiving,
not of our making, and therefore loses of its stability (as also of its
perfection) from the mutable and sinful condition of our persons: Hence it is,
that though to be in sin, is much less then to be in the state of sin: yet to
be in Adoption and Salvation, is much more then to be in the state of either;
For though we can add to our own misery, yet we can only diminish from Gods
mercy: For Adoption and Salvation are much greater in Gods giving, then in our
receiving, and consequently the Adoption is greater then the state of Adoption,
and the salvation then the state of salvation, according to the old rule,
Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis; whatsoever is received,
follows more the nature and condition of the receiver then of the giver; And
hence it is that even the adopted Sons of God, have by fearful failings and
fallings made disputable for a time the state of their salvation, though their
salvation has by Gods infinite goodness been made indisputable: For there i^
no being at the same time in two contrary states, that is to say, in the state
of sin, and in the state of Grace; and sure we are that it is no other then
madness for any man to be in the hope, who is not in the state of Salvation: So
that though we may truly say the (...), the habit remains, when the (...), the
act is gone (or cessant) yet we may as truly say, That Gods Elect are not saved
only by habits: and therefore the acts of grace if they have been expelled,
must necessarily return again, either to keep or to put them in the state of
salvation, either to retain them in it, or to restore them to it, before they
can be actually saved. And in this sense may we expound Saint James his
question, What does it profit my Brethren, though a man say, He has faith, and
have not works, can faith save him? James 2. 14. As if he had said, It is not
the sleepy habit, but the vigorous act of faith (and of all other graces) that
brings a man to salvation. And by this means we shall reconcile Saint James his
works, and Saint Paul's faith in the Doctrine of Justification; For Saint James
affirming that we are justified by works, does include faith in those works;
and Saint Paul affirming we are justified by faith, does include works in that
faith: both of them understanding a faith working by love, Gal. 5. 6. though
Saint James comprehend the faith in the works, as the cause in the effect:
Saint Paul comprehend the works in the faith, as the effect in the cause.

And Saint James as justly urges the necessity of works against hypocrites;
who deceived themselves with a vain pretense of faith in Christ, and so did not
look after the righteousness of works; as Saint Paul urged the necessity of
faith against the Pharisees, who trusting to the righteousness of the Law, did
not at all look after the righteousness of Christ: Both Saint James and Saint
Paul will have us justified by Christ's righteousness, (for no other
righteousness can acquit and absolve us before God) only they differently
express the instrumental cause of our Justification, which is faith working by
love: for whereas that faith has a twofold act, actum confidendi and
obediendi, An act of believing, and an act of working; Saint Paul rather
insists upon the act of believing, because he had to deal with Pharisaical Jews
who rejected the Gospel, and thought they could live according to the rule of
the Law; But Saint James rather insists upon the act of working, because he had
to deal with Hypocritical Christians, who abused the Gospel of Christ, to
lawless licentiousness of living: And therefore in Saint James his Divinity, it
is as great an absurdity to suppose true faith without its proper act of
working, and consequently, by the rule of analogy, to suppose the habit of
righteousness without the exercise of righteousness, as to suppose true faith
and righteousness without salvation: For the act of working being as essential
to a justifying faith, as the act of believing; He that will go about to
separate true faith from working, may as well go about to separate it from
believing; and as well make faith no faith, as make it no working faith.

But how this faith shows its work in those who are carried away with any
grievous temptation, is not so easy to discover: though that it has its work,
is unreasonable to deny: Therefore Saint Ambrose in his apology for King
David, affords us a threefold excuse of his sin, 1. Quia din noluit in peccato
manner. 2. Quia cord doluit. 3. Quia potius fragilitate naturae quam libidine
peccandi. Gratianus de Poenit. lib. 3. c. 25. 1. That he would not long
continue in his sin: (I suppose he means after he had been reproved for it;
for else he was too long in it, at least a whole year.) 2. That he did repent
of it with all his heart. 3. That he had fallen into it rather out of weakness
then of willfulness: now if you will ask the reason of his resistance before
his sin, of his regret and reluctancie in it, of his repentance after it, you
will answer your self, it was from some good principle of the spirit within,
which made him war against the flesh, even at that very instant when he was
overcome by the strength of its temptation: And accordingly he uses these
words in his first penitential prayer, Cast me not away from thy presence, and
take not thy holy spirit from me: The holy Spirit was certainly in him when he
repented, and therefore not taken away from him when he sinned: And thus much
Aquinas is willing to admit, Quod Charitas ex part Spiritus Sancti moventis
animum ad diligendum Deum, impeccabilitatem habet: Vnde impossible est haec duo
simul esse vera, quod Spiritus Sanctus velit aliquem movere ad actum
charitatis, and quod ipse charitatem amittat peccando; (22^. q. 24. ar. 10.)
Charity (or Grace) as it proceeds from the Holy Ghost moving the soul to love
God, is not to be lost by sin; wherefore it is impossible that these two
propositions should be both true, That the Holy Ghost will move a man to love
God, and that he by his sin should lose that love. We conclude then, That they
who have once received the Spirit of adoption, do still retain him; for Gods
gifts are without repentance, and therefore he gives not his Holy Spirit, the
greatest of all his gifts, that he may take him away again: But this Spirit
still abides in the children of God, and will not let them be wholly
conquered, much less captivated by the flesh, but either holds them up that
they may not fall, or raises them up when they are down: For the foundation of
God stands sure, having this Seal, The Lord knows them that are his; And
let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.
19. The first part of this seal cannot be so much as changed, The Lord knows
them that are his; for as God himself is immutable, so is his knowledge; And
the second part of this seal can never be totally defaced, Let every one that
names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; for he that names the name of
Christ, so as to love what he names, does certainly either first or last
depart from iniquity; departing from it either by his righteousness or by his
repentance. For though man may be and often is wanting to God, yet God is never
wanting to himself; Shall his Spirit begin a good work and not accomplish it?
Shall he lay the foundation and not finish the building? We know what our
Savior has said in this kind, Which of you intending to build a Tower,
sits not down first and counts the cost, whether he have sufficient to
finish it? least happily after he has laid the foundation, and is not able to
finish it, all that behold it, begin to mock him, saying, This man began to
build, and was not able to finish, Luke 14. 28, 29, 30. Be it so that we may
pass this jeer and scoff upon man, but let us not think it may be passed upon
God: For it were not only unrighteous, but also unreasonable to ascribe less to
the Spirit of Grace, then Saint Paul ascribes to the Word of Grace, since the
Word is made powerful by the Spirit which accompanies it: but Saint Paul
ascribes the power of salvation to the Word of Gods grace, saying, And now
Brethren, I commend you to God and to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified, Acts 20. 32. If the word of grace be able to build you up, then
sure the Spirit of grace much more; which is not only able but also willing to
build you up, or else he would never have begun to lay the foundation; and when
power and will are both in the premises, the work or effect must be in the
conclusion; So then, though we be cast down, yet since the Spirit of God is
both able and willing to build us up, we have a firm hope to be raised at last
as high as heaven; for though heaven be as far above our deserts, as above our
reach, yet we cannot doubt but he that has given us an inheritance among all
them which are sanctified, will also give us an inheritance among all them
which are glorified; And thus the same Aquinas rightly grounds our hope of
salvation which we have in this life, not upon man's righteousness which may
fade and decay in a moment, but upon Gods almighty power and all-saving mercy,
which can never decay: Spes viatorum non innititur principaliter gratiae jam
habitae, sed divinae omnipotentiae and misericordie, per quam etiam qui gratiam
non habet, eam consequi potest: Our hope of salvation does not rely principally
upon the grace which we have, but upon Gods power and mercy, whereby they may
have grace who yet have it not, and consequently we may come to have grace
again if we should lose it: Therefore though we should suppose without heresy,
that grace it self may fail, yet we cannot suppose without infidelity, that
Gods power and mercy should ever fail; and that can as easily restore grace, as
it did at first give it: But Saint Gregory will not let us go so far in our
supposition, having thus dogmatically determined this controversy, (though
some of his own Church will scarce now stand to it as to his decretory
sentence, or Papal determination) Quod in illis donis, sine quibus ad vitam
pervenire non potest, spiritus sanctus in electis omnibus semper manet, sed in
aliis non semper manet, Greg. 2. Moral. The Holy Ghost does always abide in
Gods elect, as to those gifts without which they cannot be saved, though in
regard of other gifts and graces, he may be said sometimes to depart from them.
Wherefore we are sure the Spirit of his Son is always in their hearts who are
adopted, to work in them an habitual perseverance in godliness, for that is
absolutely necessary to salvation, though not always to work in them an actual
perseverance in godliness, without which they may be saved; For the Act of sin
does not prevail against the habit of righteousness, and much less above it: So
that the habit of righteousness cannot be captivated under an everlasting
lethargy, that it should always forget its own act; The Spirit of Christ
which at first infused the habit, so working in all those who belong to him,
that either they still retain the act of righteousness by their innocence, or
in due time recover it by their repentance.

God of his infinite mercy give unto us all this Spirit, and continue unto us
his own gift, that we being his adopted sons, may so honor and obey him as our
Father, that we may have the comfortable assurance of our adoption in this
life, and the glorious fruition of our inheritance in the life to come. The one
by the Spirit, the other by the merits of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, who lives and reigns with the Father in the unity of the same
Spirit, one God world without end, Amen.

Christ received in the state of true Christianity.
CAP. I. Of the state of true Christianity.
SECT. I. The happiness of Christians who have their conversation with Christ;
That lovers of themselves, or of the world, have not this happiness; For though
Christ speaks to all, yet he answers only to good Christians, that is, to
Sheep, not to Wolves; to Christians, not to Heathens; for such he accounts
all Persecutors; teaching the one to their instruction and contentation, the
other only to their conviction and condemnation, the reason why so many
Christians come not to the state of true Christianity.
IT is the special privilege of Christians, not only to have their appellation
or name from Christ, the eternal Son of God, but also to have their Religion
from him, and their conversation with him: The Jews could begin (...) with God;
and the Heathen learned it from them: But we Christians can begin (...), with
the salvation of God, even with Jesus, who had that name from salvation, for he
shall save his people from their sins, Mat. 1. 21. Happy soul that is so well
acquainted with the dialect of heaven, as to understand the language of Jesus,
and so wholly taken up with that acquaintance, as to maintain familiar
colloquies with him, to hear, and to know, and to love his voice. For if the
Psalmist could say with great admiration and greater comfort, O how amiable are
thy dwellings thou Lord of hosts! Psalm. 84. 1. Then much more, O how amiable
art thou O Lord who make thy dwellings so! The hope of men, and the joy of
Angels; the salvation of earth, and the beauty of heaven: No wonder if it
follow in the next verse, My soul has a desire and a longing to enter into the
Courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh rejoice in the living God. But where
is the soul that enjoys this happiness? for even one of his Apostles who
daily seemed to converse with him, enjoyed it not. Saint John plainly excludes
him in these words, Judas says unto him, not Iscariot, John 14. 22. As if the
Spirit of God had been afraid least we should think that a Traitor could
familiarly converse with Christ, (though he dipped with him in the same dish)
or have any comfort from that conversation. Tremelius glosseth the word
Iscariot two ways, mercede inducitur ad defectionem; and ultro declinavit ad
strangulationem, (Mat. 10. 4.) The hopes of gain made him a Traitor, the
thought of his treason made him hang himself; Such was this Iscariot, A man
whose heart was so settled and fixed on money, as to sell his Savior for the
love of it: Therefore he could not comfortably and much less familiarly
converse with Christ, by questions and answers: For he durst not ask Christ a
question to be informed of his Doctrine, for fear the answer should have proved
an Indictment, to convine him of his treason, whereof he knew himself already
guilty in his heart, which made him afraid least he should disclose the same,
who was the searcher of hearts. Therefore he desired not to make any particular
addresses to his Master, when as the other Judas who had none of this Treachery
or covetousness, did as it were continually hang upon his lips, and was wholly
ravished with his Doctrine, saying within himself, How sweet are thy words unto
my taste, yea sweeter then hon^y to my mouth? Psalm. 119. v. 103. And
accordingly our blessed Savior answers the Jude, but not the Iscariot: answers
the Confessor, but not the Traitor; For Jude was a name imposed from confession
and praise, Now will I praise the Lord, therefore she called his name Judah,
Genesis 29. 35. that is praise, or confession, whence the Vulgar Latin does often
say, Confitebor tibi Domine, I will confess unto thee O Lord, for, I will
praise thee O Lord, because the same word in the Hebrew signifies both
confession and praise; Be it so then; Christ will answer one that confesses
him, but he will not answer one that betrayeth him: This is the reason that
though he speak so loud, yet so few hear his voice; That though his love be
greatly extended, yet it is but little diffused in our hearts; For though he be
most lovely in himself, yet is he not so to them whose breast is filled with
another love: The Text tells us of a fourfold lover, (...), A lover of himself,
A lover of his pleasure, A lover of his profit, and A lover of his God. The
first lover will not hearken to Christ's voice; for self-love and Saviour-love
cannot be together, since self ends and Saviour-ends are so far asunder: The
second and third lovers, though they may a little hearken to Christ's voice, yet
they cannot much regard it; for if any man love the world, (that is, his
pleasure or his profit, the whole world consisting of nothing else) the love of
the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. It is only the last lover, the lover of
God, who hears Christ's voice, and rejoices to hear it; for every one that
loves him that begat, loves him also that is begotten of him, 1 John 5. 1. To
such lovers he will not only speak, but he will also answer, which shows a
familiarity of speaking; For though he speak to very many, yet he answers to
very few: that is, only to those who are willing to discourse and advise with
him; He speaks to all that are Christians by outward profession, calling aloud
to them now in his Word, as once he did to the Jews in his person, and saying,
Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand, Mat. 4. 1. But he answers only to
Christians by inward affection, because indeed they only do hear his voice; for
why should he answer to those that will not give him the hearing? Thus himself
has told us, my sheep hear my voice, John 10. 27. He must be a sheep that will
hear the voice of Christ, not a wolf, one more ready to devour his Pastor then
to follow him, one more ready to scatter and tear the flock, then to associate
and join with them. I must take heed of being a Wolf toward my Brother, If I
desire to be a Sheep toward my Savior; Homo homini lupus, and Christo ag^^^,
were a strange proverb, and more strange Divinit^, That he who is a Wolf to
man, should be a Lamb to Christ. It was an evil Spirit that made Saul a Wolf to
David, 1 Samuel 19. 9. And the same evil spirit showed him to be none of Gods
sheep.

He watches to catch David, but to lose himself; and whiles he seeks to destroy
Gods servant, he does indeed destroy his own soul; This makes the spirit of God
look upon him as a heathen not as an Israelite, as appears from Psalm. 59. 5.
Thou therefore O Lord God of hosts the God of Israel, awake to visit all the
heathen; This Psalm was made upon that occasion that Saul had sent and watched
David's house to kill him, and we must expound these words according to that
occasion; So Tremelius, Ad visitandum omnes gentes is it as, i. e. Copias Saulis,
quae eodem animo Davidem persequebantur, quo gentes aliene a populo Dei
facturae fuissent; Awake to visit the heathen, that is, the Armies of Saul
which did persecute David with as malicious a Spirit, as the very heathen, who
knew not God, would have persecuted him.

Thou which laughest the heathen to scorn, says Isacides, wilt also laugh
those men to scorn; And Ezra shows how he is able to do it, saying, that he is
the Lord of hosts, of the Armies of Angels that are above in heaven, (...) no
less then of the armies of Israel that are below on the earth: God is not said
to laugh any to scorn but only heathen, as in this Psalm. ver. 8. And in the
second Psalm. v. 4, or such as make themselves like heathen by raging as
furiously as they, against the Church of Christ, and the ministers of his
Gospel, as appears Acts 4. where the Apostles being persecuted for preaching
Christ, make use of this very Psalm in their prayer, Why did the heathen rage,
and the people imagine vain things? For such men whether they be Jews or
Christians, are no better then heathen in Gods account; and accordingly he that
dwells in heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in
derision; He laughs them to scorn because of their vain imaginations of
opposition against Christ, and much more because of their vain endeavors in
opposing him; and his laughing ends in their weeping, and their weeping ends,
(as their cruelty began,) in gnashing of teeth; They gnashed on him with their
teeth, Acts 5. 54. there is their sin, which showed them be men little better
then Wolves; and again, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.
12. there is their punishment, which will show them to be men worse then
nothing: The first gnashing of teeth was from the fierceness, the last shall be
from the anguish of their hearts: And the spirit of God seems to pray that it
may be so, saying, and be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious
wickedness: (Psalm. 59. v. 5.) So that we need not wonder why so many Christians
now a days come not to the state of true Christianity, (which alone puts them
in a capacity of mercy) for the reason is plain, it is because they sin out of
malicious wickedness: (...) Be not merciful to any wicked prevaricator, Selah;
Tremelius renders the words thus, Ne gratiam facias ullis perfide agentibus
iniquitatem sum: He finds a new signification for Selah, to show he had found
a new Selah for their sin, that is, a new hight or exaltation in the sin of
those men who are praevaricatores iniquitatis, who do not only continue, but
also prevaricate in their iniquity: Qui Deum cultu, and honor Davidem prosequi
simulantes, perfide ea perpetrabant quae sequuntur, (says he,) who pretending
to fear God, and to honor David did perfidiously act all that follows in the
Psalm against them both: How are such men like to come to Salvation, when the
Son of God will not preach for it, and the Spirit of God does pray against it?
Be not merciful unto them that offend of malicious wickedness. Surely OLord,
mercy is thy delight no less then it is our desire; It is above all thy works,
and shall it not much more be above all ours? shall there be any sin (which is
properly our work) of so vast an extent as to reach beyond thy mercy? or of so
loud a cry as to make thee stop thine ears against the prayer of a distressed
sinner? Oh no, it is not iniquity, but prevaricating in iniquity that makes man
not care to pray; It Is not sin, but impenitency in sin, that makes God not hear
his prayers: Your iniquit es have separated betwixt you and your God, Isa. 59.
2. that is your multiplied, your malicious sins, committed with a shameless
face, with a stiff neck, with a high hand, and with a hard heart, which first
fill your Souls with iniquity, and then with impeniteney; such iniquities as
these whiles unrepented (and it is like they will be unrepented, whiles they
would be unreproved) do separate betwixt you and your God: For froward thoughts
separate from God; there is the separation of a perverse sinner from God the
Father who is God of himself: and again, into a malicious soul wisdom will not
enter, there is his Separation from God the Son, who is the wisdom of the
Father: And lastly, wisdom is a loving spirit; there is his separation from God
the Holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of the Father and of the Son, the spirit of
love: (Wisdom 1. 3, 4, 6.) This is the reason why not Iscariot is annexed to
that Judas, who spoke to our blessed Savior, and whom our Savior Christ was
pleased to answer; God the Son did not answer such an Apostate, such a Traitor
as Iscariot was, and God the Holy Ghost would not have us think that he did
answer him; he that once thought it better to be a Traitor then to be a
Disciple, does now think it better not to be, then to have been a traitor: He
that once was willing from an Apostle, to become a Devil, is now much more
willing from a Devil to become nothing.

He then would not hear the voice of Christ, and now he cannot hear it, unless
it be that voice which has already filled his heart with the horror, though it
shall not till the last day fill his ears with the noise of it, Depart from me
ye cursed into everlasting fire, Mat, 25. 41. A voice that Christ has reserved
as a Judge, for those who would not hear him as a Savior; A voice which he
will utter to the goats on his left hand, not to the sheep on his right hand.
Lord, make me consider in due time which is best for my soul; either now to
hear thy voice as a sheep to my salvation, or hereafter to hear it as a goat to
my condemnation: Thou have said, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and
they follow me, John 10. 27. Which is thy voice Lord that we may hear it? And
where will thou be that we may follow thee? Is not thy voice in thy Word? art
not thou in thy Church? How then do those men hear thy voice that neglect thy
word? How do they follow thee, that run away from thy Church? Surely he is no
good sheep that does this, and therefore Christ is none of his shepherd.

He cares not to answer one that is either a Wolf or a Devil; either a Wolf
for his bloody cruelty, or a Devil for his continued Apostasy; or if he do
answer such a one, it shall be only as he did once answer Judas Iscariot, who
was both a Wolf and a Devil, with a Tu dixisti, Thou have said, Mat. 26. 25. An
answer tending to nothing but to his conviction, or to his condemnation; He
that has persecuted or betrayed his Savior, if he say unto him, Master, is it
I? shall soon find such an answer returned to him in his own guilty conscience,
Thou have said: an answer tending only to his conviction or to his
condemnation; But the answer which our blessed Savior was pleased to return to
Saint Jude the Confessor, was of another strain; for it was a gracious answer
for his instruction, a satisfactory answer for his contentation.

If Christ made so great a distinction betwixt two of the same communion and of
the same order, no wonder if he still make so great a distinction, betwixt
those that will not be of the same Church, who regard neither the Doctrine of
Christ, nor the communion of Christians! Judas the traitor, had not yet
forsaken Christ's Communion, yet was not benefited by his teaching, because he
regarded not his Doctrine. Judas the Confessor that he might be sure to be well
taught by him, readily embraced his Doctrine, and resolved never to forsake his
Communion: And hence it was, that our Savior Christ returned to him a gracious
answer for his instruction, teaching him that great Mystery of the
manifestation of the Son of God in the soul of man: Nay yet more, a
satisfactory answer for his contentation, assuring him, that he would thus
manifest himself unto him: The manifestation of Christ unto the soul, is a
great mystery and a greater mercy; the mystery instructs the soul, but the
mercy contents it: And well it may, for it is no less then eternal life; In qua
quidem manifestatione vita aeterna consistit; as says Aquinas, in which
manifestation of Christ unto the soul, consists eternal life; and he proves
his saying from John 17. 3. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, (Aquin. 22. qu. 24.
art. 12.) So then, if I will enjoy eternal life, I must first know it, if I
will know eternal life, I must know Christ: If I will know Christ, I must not
disesteem his Doctrine, or discountenance his communion; for if I do either,
though I live never so long among Christians, yet I am like never to come to
the state of true Christianity.

SECT. II. Many Christians not so careful of their spiritual, as of their
temporal estate or condition. The State of true Christianity is not external in
the profession; but internal in the love of Christ, which will make us hate all
sin, No malicious man can be in the state of true Christianity: The ground of
true Christian charity, generally abused to most unchristian uncharitableness;
charity is more safely mistaken, then not maintained.
IF men were as zealous to look after their spiritual, as they are to look
after their temporal state, the earth would be less filled with sin, and heaven
would be more filled with Saints: But we are generally careless to know the
state and condition of our souls, because we are generally careless to make it
such as might be worth our knowing: Hence that sad Epiphonema from our Saviors
own mouth, so is he that lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich
toward God, Luke 12. 21. That is, so very a fool is he, in the account of the
eternal wisdom, (though perhaps he be wise in his own account,) who is careful
of his Mammon, and careless of his God; who takes so much pains about his body,
so little about his soul; who is so busy in contriving of his temporal, but
thinks not at all of his eternal welfare: Hence it is, that men so easily
betake themselves to that profession of the Chris^ian Religion, which makes
most for their temporal advantages, though it much disadvantage them in their
spiritual condition, and thereby declare themselves not to be in the state of
true Christianity, for that would make them prefer the love of Christ above all
worldly interest whatsoever.

But we need not have to do with the several professions of the Christian
Religion in this case; for the state of true Christianity, is not to profess
but to love Christ; and we are then truly in the state of salvation, when we
truly love our Savior: And this plainly appears by Saint Paul's exhortation to
the Ephesians, (and in them to us,) where he says, Be ye therefore followers
of God as dear children, and walk in love, as Christ also has loved us, Ephesians.
5. 1, 2. To be followers of God, and to be his dear children, and to walk in
love, are put for one and the ame thing; And what love is here meant, but the
love of Christ, who so dearly loved us as to give himself for us, and therefore
may justly require our entirest love? And if we entirely love him, we will be
sure not to love what he hates, nor to hate what he loves, and consequently
not to abide in any sin either of commission or of omission; for to be wilfully
guilty of a sin of commission, is to love what Christ hates; and to be
wilfully guilty of a sin of omission, is to hate what Christ loves: and either
of these is enough to keep a man from being a good Christian. Therefore says
the Psalmist, O ye that love the Lord, see that ye hate the thing which is
evil, Psalm 97. 10. For ye cannot love him, unless ye hate what he hates; and
he hates every thing that is evil, whether it be evil by omission or by
commission.

The state of salvation consists so much of love, that it is not possible for an
uncharitable, and much less for a malicious man, to be in that state, but
either he must forgo his malice, or he must forgo his salvation; for God is
love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him, John 4.
16. No man can be in the state of salvation, who has not communion with God;
and there is no having communion with God but by love; we must dwell in love,
or he will not dwell in us: And therefore it was most Christian Doctrine which
was delivered by Saint Augustine, lib. 1. de Doctrina Christiana, when he said,
Quatuor sunt diligenda; unum quod est supra nos Sc. Deus; Alterum quod nos
sumus; Tertium quod juxta nos. i. e. proximus; Quartum quod infra nos. i. e.
corpus: There are four things which every man is bound to love, that he may be
a good Christian, or in the state of true Christianity; his God that is above
him: His neighbor that is about him: His soul that is within him; and His body
that is without him; for as the body is capable of eternal bliss by redundancy
from the soul, so is it also capable of true Christian charity; which is not a
momentary or temporal, but an eternal and everlasting love, grounded upon the
communication and the communion of a blessed eternity: So that in truth the
love of God does not only produce, but also comprize and contain all those
three other loves; man loving his body and his soul, and his neighbor with
Christian charity, only in relation to Christ, and as they belong to his
communion: For undeniable, if not indisputable is that position of the
Angelical Doctor, Amicitia charitatis super communicatione beatitudinis
fundatur, The friendship of Christian charity is founded upon the communication
of eternal blessedness; (Aquin. 22^. qu. 25. art. 5.) and by consequent is to
be extended according to the extent of that communication: Therefore it
begins with our Savior Christ, and goes on to every one of his members,
this spiritual unction of the Holy Ghost being like to that holy ointment
poured upon Aaron, which ran from his head down to the skirts of his clothing,
Psalm. 133. 2. And yet even from this excellent ground of charity, do many men
find a pretense for gross uncharitableness, whilst those that are of diverse
persuasions in matters of Religion, will needs deny to one another the hopes of
salvation; every one being resolved to maintain, that his own Religion is the
only true Christian, (though it be no more then a profession of it) and all
agreeing, that it is only the true Christian Religion wherein and whereby we can
attain eternal blessedness: Hence it is, that we commonly receive those very
faintly whom we suspect God has not received; and those not at all, whom we
are persuaded he will not receive: So that we do little less then invade
Christ's Judgment seat, that we may discard true Christian charity; and if we
now invade his seat, we shall hereafter tremble at his bar. Why should we so
grossly abuse the very ground of Christian charity, to a most unchristian
uncharitableness? Why should we be so hasty to exclude out of the communion of
eternal blessedness, those whom our Savior Christ has called to it? Surely,
if it be not in our power to give heaven by our charity; it is not in power to
deny heaven by our uncharitableness, unless it be only to our selves.

True Christian charity is of as large an extent as heaven it self, and
embraces all those who have any probability of getting thither; For it is
grounded upon the communion of eternal bliss; and therefore as it loves Christ
the head, so it cannot but love all Christians as members of that communion: It
first loves Christ for his own sake, by whom we have the communication; it
afterward loves our Christian brethren for Christ's sake, with whom we have
inchoately, and hope to have consum^ of eternal blessedness: O Christ let me
love as a Christian, that I may live as a Christian; for I cannot live as a
Christian unless I live in thee, and I cannot live in thee unless I live in
love: Let me rather mistake my charity in believing their salvation who have
gross errors mixed with their profession, then not maintain my charity, by
denying them salvation, who are not of mine own profession: For thou will
sooner pardon their errors which may proceed from ignorance or infirmity, then
my uncharitableness which can proceed from nothing else but pride and
presumption.

SECT. III. That the state of true Christianity is best taught by our Savior
Christ, and best learned of him; how far the Jews may be said to have known
Christ and Christianity: That Christ teaches us by his voice in the holy
Scriptures, more certainly then by his voice in holy Church; the Scripture is
to teach the Church, as the Church is to teach the people.
THere is not in all the world any thing taught by a Preacher from heaven, but
only the Christian Religion: And the Son of God came from heaven to teach that,
and his Fathers voice came from heaven to bid us observe and follow his
teaching. Behold a voice out of the cloud, which said, This is my beloved Son
in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, Mat. 17. 5. And we may very well be not
only contented, but also desirous to hear him; for the state of true
Christianity is without all doubt best taught by Christ himself, and is
therefore best learned of him; Moses was faithful in Gods house as a servant,
(and the best teachers amongst men can but sit in Moses chair, Mat. 23. 2.) but
Christ was faithful as a Son, Heb. 3. 5, 6. The servant was appointed and
ordained for the Son, and so was Moses for Christ; but the Son came only for
himself; The servant was faithful in his Masters house; but the Son in his own
house; Christ as a Son, over his own house, ver. 6. Moses his faithfulness was
by way of introduction, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken
after, ver. 5. (sc. by Christ;) But Christ's faithfulness was by way of
perfection, to speak those things plainly, of which Moses had testified
obscurely, and to accomplish or perform whatsoever Moses his testimony had
either prophesied or promised concerning him: For Moses in his writings spoke
of Christ, and directed these Jews unto him, in so much that our Savior
tells the Jews that they needed no other then Moses to accuse them of
unbelief for not turning Christians. Do not think that I will accuse you to the
Father; there is one that accuses you, even Moses in whom ye trust; For had ye
believed Moses, ye would have believed me; for he wrote of me; But if ye
believe not his writings, How shall ye believe my words? John 5. 45, 46, 47. We
may put the whole sense of those three verses into these two propositions. 1.
That Moses writ so much of Christ as to leave the Jews inexcusable if they did
not from his writings look after Christ, and believe in him; which more
particularly appears from Deuteronomy. 18. 15. where Moses says, The Lord thy God
will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like
unto me: unto him ye shall hearken; which words we find Saint Peter and Saint
Stephen both, have applied unto Christ, proving he was that Prophet to whom
Moses had bid them hearken, Act. 3. 22. and Act. 7, 37. so that the Jews
themselves were no longer to hearken to Moses, by Moses his own appointment,
then till the coming of Christ.

2. That the Jews who would not believe Moses his writings concerning Christ,
were not like to believe any other Prophets words concerning him; which is
still a good proof, that no man can possibly reject the authority of the
Scripture, and yet truly believe in Christ from the authority of the Church;
for if the writings of Moses, or of the Old Testament, then much more the
writings of the Apostles or of the New Testament must needs be above any other
Prophets words, since these writings as well as those are looked upon as the
undoubted word of God; And therefore if the Church has not found Christ in the
Scriptures, how shall we hope to find Christ in the Church? and by consequent,
if we will be good Christians, we must above all things take heed of cavilling
or rather blaspheming against the word of Christ; for that is in effect to say,
that we will have a state of Christianity, not of Gods, but of our own making:
we question not but the Christian Religion, as it has an excellency above all
other religions, so it has a certainty agreeable to its excellency.

And this Certainty is grounded merely on the written word, in the judgment of
Saint Peter, who tells us indeed that there came such a voice from the most
excellent glory, This is my beloved Son; in whom I am well pleased: and that he
and some others heard this voice, when they were with Christ in the holy mount:
but yet that the Scriptures were a more certain ground of the Christian Faith,
then was this Voice; for so he says after all, We have also a more sure word
of prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a l^ght that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts. 2 Pet. 1. 17, 18, 19. The voice from heaven was sure, but yet the word
of Prophecy was more sure; for notwithstanding that voice did say, Hear ye him,
Mat. 17. 5. yet they would have suspended their hearing, but for the word of
Prophecy which had said before, Unto him ye shall hearken, Deuteronomy. 18. 15. So
that the voice from heaven had in effect all its certainty from the word of
Prophecy; Therefore he said, we have also a more sure word of Prophecy; His
full intent was to make us seek after Christ in the Old Testament, much more in
the New: He says we shall do well to take heed unto that, much more unto this;
that will guide us unto Christ as a light that shines in a dark place, but
this will guide us to him as a morning Star that ushereth in the day: And this
is no more then our Savior himself had said before, Blessed are the eyes which
see the things that ye see; For I tell you that many Prophets and Kings have
desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them, and to hear
those things which ye hear, and have not heard them; Luke 10. 23, 24. The
comparison is betwixt those under the Law, and those under the Gospel: and they
under the Gospel are declared the more blessed; For they under the Law had but
a dim light, which made them see Christ so imperfectly as if they had not seen
him; But we that are under the Gospel have a clear shining light clearly, and
perfectly to see our Savior Christ, and therefore are much more blessed then
they, if we can but see our own blessedness, and will be heartily thankful for
it; therefore says Saint John, The Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth
came by Jesus Christ; John 1. 17. whereby he excludes the Law both from Grace
and Truth; from Grace absolutely, but from Truth only comparatively; The Law
did neither teach Grace, nor give Grace; it only gave a rule of righteousness,
but not grace to keep it; and therefore only showed our want of a Redeemer, but
showed not the way of our redemption; Thus the Law was opposed to grace
absolutely, and left that to come wholly and entirely by Christ; and it was
also opposed to Truth comparatively; for many truths were but obscurely and
figuratively propounded in the Law, which are plainly and substantially
revealed in the Gospel; as the doctrine of the blessed Trinity, of the
incarnation, passion, resurrection, and ascension of the Son of God, and indeed
all the other articles of our Christian faith; So that Truth substantially or
completely, that is, in its full revelation and accomplishment, came only by
Jesus Christ.

Wherefore if our Savior Christ himself, (who without doubt best understood
the state of true Christianity) sent the Jews to the Law of Moses to be assured
of the truth of the Christian Religion; much more does he send us Christians to
his own holy Gospel, to be assured of the same truth; And, as Moses his
writings were then, so the Apostles writings are now a greater ground of
assurance to us, then any Prophets words can be: (for as Moses wished That all
the Lords People were Prophets, so am I willing to believe, that his Church is
to be accounted as a Prophet:) so that it commonly fares with Christians in
their coming unto Christ, as it did with the Samaritans, John 4. who first
believed on our blessed Savior for the saying of the woman, but afterward
believed because of his own word; So do we generally first believe in Christ by
the testimony of the Church, which he has in mercy appointed to lead us to his
Word, (for else it were impossible we should ever come near it) But when once
we come to see and understand his Word, then we believe in Christ, not for his
Church, but for himself; and may justly say to the Church, as the Samaritans
said to the woman, Now we believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard
him our selves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the
world; John 4. 42. This may we justly say, not to the undervaluing of the
Church, to which we are so much obliged for bringing us to the knowledge of the
Word, (for had not she preserved and translated it, we could never have known
it) but rather to the overvaluing of the word above the Church, to show we are
infinitely more obliged to God for giving his word, then we can be to his
Church, either for preserving, or for expounding it: Therefore we cannot but
prefer the word above the Church, and we know this may be done without either
undutifulness or unthankfulness; since God has appointed that his Church
should wholly rely upon his word, and prove her self to be his Church from the
Testimony of his Word, as appears plainly in the case of the Bereans, who are
commended for searching the Scriptures, and believing the Word preached by Paul
and Silas, because they found it agreeable with the written Word; These were
more noble in that they searched the Scriptures, whether those things were so;
therefore many of them believed; Acts 17. 11, 12. And sure, we are to go in the
same way they did go, unless we can prove that either the Scripture is now less
Dogmatical then it was in those days, or the Church more Apostolical: And there
is great Reason for it, as well as great Religion. For we plainly see that the
Church is much ordered according to the will of man; but wear sure the word
was wholly ordered according to the will of God; For the Prophecy came not in
old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by
the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. We must say the same of the New, what he says of
the Old Testament; for as came the Prophecy of old time, so also came the
Gospel in the latter times, not by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke
as they were moved by the holy Ghost: And from hence we must conclude the
Authority of the Scripture, to be the highest authority that can be, in settling
and establishing the Christian Religion: For if the Prophets and Apostles did
not only speak, but also write as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, it must
needs follow that the doctrine of the Church must have its force and weight
from their doctrine, but their doctrine from it self, as that which came
directly and immediately from the Holy Ghost, the infallible Spirit of God,
which best knew his mind as being his own Spirit, and has most truly derived
his mind and meaning to us, as being his infallible Spirit: So it is evident,
The Scripture is no less to teach the Church, then the Church is to teach the
People, according to that irrefragable determination of their irrefragable
Doctor, Si enim aliquis asserit aliquid quod non sit determinatum in sacra
Scriptura, vel quod non sequatur direct ex fide, mortaliter peccat, quia se
constieuit supra Deum: Judex enim est supra id de quo debet judicare; Qui ergo
sua authoritate asserit aliquid de Deo, ponit se supra Deum, quia judicat de
Deo. Haec est superbia Intellectus, quam prohibet Apostolus, Romans 12. Non plus
sapere quam oportet sapere, sed sapere ad sobrietatem: Alensis par. 1. qu. 68.
mem. 1. ar. 2.) If any Doctor, and (consequently if any Church which is but a
company of Doctors) does positively affirm any thing (as matter of Faith or
Religion) which is is not directly determined in the holy Scriptures, or does
not inevitably follow from the Faith therein revealed, he sins mortally,
because he exalts himself above God; For the Judge is above that of which he
is to judge; Therefore he who without warrant from God positively asserteth any
thing of God, puts himself above God in that he judges of God: which is the
Spiritual pride forbidden by the Apostle, Romans 12. 3. Be not wise above what is
required, but be wise to Sobriety: Therefore surely the Church cannot teach
that as a Doctrine of Christianity, which she has not learned of Christ; and
where has she learned of Christ but in his Word?

SECT. IV. That the state of true Christianity is to be learned only in the
Church of Christ, for there only does Christ teach by his word (which the
Church is bound to translate, that the People may understand it:) and by his
spirit, which teaches both infallibly and irresistibly: That the state of true
Christianity is not confined to any one particular Church, for that Christ
teaches more or less in all Christian Churches; and yet this is no ground for
Sectaries to run from the Church.
THE state of Christianity, as it came by our Savior Christ in being, so also
in knowing; It has its being from his merit, its knowing from his word; whence
it follows by undeniable consequence, that the state of true Christianity is to
be learned only in the Church of Christ: for there only is the word of Christ,
by which he teaches to men's conviction: there only is the Spirit of Christ by
which he teaches to men's Conversion; For the voice must needs proceed from the
body, and the Church is his body, Col. 1. 24. therefore it is to be feared that
those who care not to be of the body, either do not hear his voice, or do not
much profit by hearing it; For it is not to be doubted but Christ has
entrusted his Church with his word, as appears, Rom 3. 2. Unto them were
committed the oracles of God, (...), they were entrusted with the oracles of
God: The Jewish Church with the Oracles of the Old Testament, and the Christian
Church with the oracles of the new; And this precious Talent was entrusted with
the Church, not to be wrapped up in a Napkin, but to be employed to Gods glory
and the peoples good: for so we find that the law and the Prophets were read in
the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 13. 15. and 27. And by the same reason
the Christian Church is still bound to take care that the Gospel or New
Testament be also read in our Churches, which because it cannot in the original
tongue, wherein it was written, to the Edification of the people, the Church is
bound to translate it into such languages as the people do understand, that she
may not be defective in her trust, which is to use the word of God most for
Gods glory and for his peoples good: And that Church does in this particular
best discharge her trust, which sets forth the word of God in the truest and
fittest translation; not rigidly according to the words, (in all places,) but
yet exactly according to the sense; for neither does Christ himself nor his
holy Apostles cite the Old Testament so much according to the words, as
according to the sense: And if men had no other obligation to their Church but
only this, That they could not know what God had said in his holy word, unless
their Church had taught them, yet this alone, (if rightly weighed,) would keep
them both from Heresy and from Schism: from Heresy, in receding from that
doctrine which came from God: and from Schism, in receding from that communion
wherein they were first made partakers of that doctrine. This is certain, the
Text says plainly, The Lord, added to the Church daily such as should be
saved, Acts 2. 47. which would never have been written, if to depart from the
doctrine, or to be out of the communion of the Church, were the ready way of
Salvation. Therefore as S. Peter once said to our blessed Savior, so ought all
good Christians still to say unto his Church, for rightly translating the word
of Christ, Lord to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life, John
6. 68. for without question God did not put it in the power and will of his
Church to give unto his people the words of eternal life, that they should run
away either from her doctrine or from her communion; The hour is coming and now
is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, John 5. 25. Sweet
Jesus, make the dead; to hear thy voice, for the living do little less then
scorn it. And this document or instruction, as it much concerns the word
preached, so it much more concerns the word written, which has always in all
ages and in all Churches been taught more incorruptly and more impartially by
Translations then by Expositions; For in Translations men generally follow Gods
truth, but in expositions they too too often follow their own inventions, if
not their own interests.

Thus have men little reason to depart from the Church, because therein Christ
teaches by his word; and yet much less, because he therein teaches by his
spirit: for it is clear that the spirit goes along with the word, in that
Saint Stephen says unto the Jews, Ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7.
51. When as they had only resisted the words of the Prophets. Therefore we may
confidently and comfortably affirm, that they who carefully observe and
conscionably obey Gods holy Ordinances in his Church^, will be able at the last
day to say unto him, not as Sectaries and wanderers will be able to say, Thou
have taught in our streets, Lake 13. 26. to whom he will answer, I tell you I
know you not whence you are; depart me from all ye workers of iniquity, ver 27.
but, Thou have taught in our hearts: for I will put my laws into their minds,
and write them in their hearts; Heb. 8. 10. And indeed this doctrine concerning
the state of true Christianity, and the knowledge of that state, and the
comfort of that knowledge, is a most heavenly doctrine, and therefore can have
its teacher only from heaven; The teaching Priest is not enough to instruct us
in it, but we need also The teaching God. Miserable was the condition of Israel
to have been without a teaching Priest, but irrecoverable would have been their
misery, had they been also without a teaching God; had not the Spirit of God
come upon Azariah to teach them, 2 Chronicles, 15. 1. 3. Man may teach us the way of
Gods statutes, and we may never keep that way at all; but if God once teach it
us, we shall no^ only keep it, but we shall also keep it unto the end; Teach me
O Lord the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end; Psalm. 119.
33. Thus has Saint John said, And ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie,
and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him, 1 John 2. 27. His intent
is not that they to whom he writ, should despise his teaching; he is only
willing to commend them to a far better teacher; for the Apostle might teach
them, and yet they might not abide either in the Church or in the truth; but if
the Anointing, if the Spirit did teach them, they were sure to abide both in
him and in his doctrine for ever: And therefore says holy Job, who teaches
like him? Job 36. 22. Though he be not the only teacher, for man teaches with
him, yet he is the only irresistible and infallible teacher; for man teaches
not like him: He is the only infallible teacher, because he convinces the
understanding: he is the only irresistible teacher, because he converteth the
will, teaching us by the representation of himself unto our Souls as the
chiefest good, from which we cannot turn away, and against which we will not
resist. For God teaches the soul by his own presence, revealing unto it
himself and his everlasting blessedness (says Alensis,) against which the will
of man cannot resist in the judgment of some Philosophy, and therefore the
scoff of irresistible Grace, must needs be far from the Judgment of sound
Divinity: The Church in the Collect for Whitsunday shows both the
infallibility and the irresistibility of Gods teaching: he teaches
irresistibly: in that he teaches the Heart which uses to make resistance
against all teaching of the ear, unless it self be taught in the first place,
wherefore none can be an irresistible Teacher but he that can teach the heart;
and he teaches also infallibly, in that he teaches by the light of his holy
Spirit: wherefore none can be an infallible teacher but he that teaches by the
Holy Ghost; God which have taught the hearts of thy faithful people, by
sending to them the light of thy holy Spirit: Here Is a teacher that subdues my
perverseness, and makes me willing to learn, in that he teaches my heart:
here is a teacher that enlightens my darkness, and makes me able to learn, in
that he teaches by the light of his holy spirit: And the doctrines which he
teaches are agreeable with the manner of his teaching, Recta sapere, and in
ejus consolatione gaudere: To have a right judgment in all things, that is, in
all things of Salvation: as if you would say, to have a right judgment in the
state of true Christianity, and of your being in that state, and evermore to
rejoice in his holy comforts, as if you would say, to comfort your self against
all temptations and taibulations, that you have such a right judgment. Let me
never u^dervalue, much less forsake that School wherein this heavenly master is
pleased to teach, for fear I should lose both the right judgment and the Holy
comfort which he is pleased to bestow upon his Scholars; And let me not doubt
but this Church wherein I have been trained up, is a part of that school, since
it has taught me nothing that is either Antichristian or unchristian, for
where I cannot deny the doctrine of Christ, I may not doubt of the spirit of
Christ; Wherefore it is a false and an envious principle of divinity which some
have so much improved of late to the advantage of their Church, but to the
disadvantage of Religion, (if at least any Christian Church can be advanced by
that doctrine, by which the Christian Religion is depressed and disparaged)
That our Savior Christ has set up one chair from which he would have all the
world to take the documents and determinations of Christianity: For the state
of true Christianity is not to be confined to any one Church, since the author
and teacher of it is over all, God blessed for ever; Romans 9. 5. The Apostle
proves that God vouchsafed his Grace to the Gentiles no less then to the Jews,
by this argument, is he the God of the Jews only, is he not also the God of the
Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also, Romans 3. 29. and again, There is no
difference between the Jew and the Greek; for the same Lord over all, is rich
unto all that call upon him, Romans 10. 12. as if it were as absurd to think God
not rich unto all that call upon him, as to think him not Lord over all;
wherefore as no Christian Church can doubt of his being Lord over them, so
neither of his being rich toward them; unless we will say that Saint Paul did
by this argument take away the difference betwixt the Jew and the Gentile, that
he might set it up betwixt Christians; That he took it away betwixt men of two
different Religions, to set it up betwixt men of one and the same Religion;
whereas the contrary is evident from his doctrine, for though he said
explicitly, yet he said not exclusively, To all that be in Rome Grace to you
and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 1. 7. for he
extended the same benediction to all that in every place call upon the name of
Jesus Christ our Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 2. not thinking it so little as to be confined
to one place: Let us observe his words, Unto the Church of God which is at
Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with
all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours: Grace be unto you and peace from God our Father, and from the
Lord Jesus Christ: 1 Cor. 1. 2, 3. He tells us of a Church of God in Corinth as
well as in Rome, and in other places as well as in Corinth, which are
sanctified and called to be Saints, the one as well as the other; and he proves
it, because the Lord Jesus, whose name they call on, is both theirs and ours,
therefore have they Grace and peace from him, as well as we. And the like is
Saint Peter's doctrine when he says, Of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears him and works
righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10. 34, 35. He says, of a truth I
perceive that God is no respecter of persons; not that he had first perceived
it, for Moses had perceived the same before, and had told the Jews so. For the
Lord your God is God of Gods, which regards not persons, Deuteronomy. 10. 17. But S.
Peter perceived it better then Moses; For Moses did only see that God would not
overvalue the Jew, because of his being circumcised in the flesh, if in his
heart he remained uncircumcised; But Saint Peter did moreover see (and it is a
wonder his Successors will not see it after him,) That God would not undervalue
the Gentiles, confining them all to the dictates and documents of one
particular Church, But that in every nation they who would fear him and work
righteousness, should be accepted with him: Nor is this indefinite manner of
speech, he that fears him, a warrant for every Schismatic and Sectary to set
up a new Church of his own making: for such men do neither truly fear God,
because not in his Authority; nor work righteousness, because not according to
his commands; For if they work for righteousness in the first Table, by
renouncing superstition, they work against righteousness in the Second Table,
by setting up sedition; And working against righteousness in the second Table
they cannot either truly or rightly work for righteousness in the first Table.
So says Saint James, whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in
one point he is guilty of all: James 2. 10. The reason is, because he that can
despise the authority of the Lawgiver, by a voluntary breach or violation of
any one of his commandments, cannot observe the rest out of duty or obedience:
for the same Authority commanding all, requires the same duty and obedience to
all; And therefore he that wilfully rejects but one, embraces the rest more
out of convenience then out of conscience, more for his own then for Gods sake,
more for his self-interest then or his Saviors glory.

SECT. V. That the certainty in true Christianity, or the state thereof, is
from the Word and Spirit of Christ; The uncertainty from our selves: and of
doubtings in good Christians concerning their state, that some are by way of
admiration, others by way of infirmity, but none by way of infidelity.
THE certainty that is in true Christianity, or the state thereof, is wholly
from the word and Spirit of Christ; the uncertainty is wholly from our selves;
For what shall we be sure of, if not of our Religion? What certainty can we
have but of truth? What truth can we have so certain, as the truth of Christian
Religion? grounded upon the word of truth, and testified by the spirit of
truth? Therefore doubtless the state of true Christianity cannot be capable of
any doubt in it self, but only in regard of us that profess to be Christians:
For Saint Paul tells the Colossians of a full assurance of understanding in the
knowledge of Christ, Colossians 2. 2: And Christian faith is in its own nature
more sure and certain then any humane science whatsoever, though in us, it
often has a less proportion of certainty: For Faith in it self, looks wholly
on Gods infallibility, though in us it partake of, and sympathize with man's
infirmity: Therefore the doubt, the uncertainty is not in the Religion, but in
the professor of it; It Is not in the thing but in the person; as for example,
it is without all doubt that true Christianity is to love Christ, the doubt is
only whether we that are Christians do truly love him.

But is it lawful for us to make this doubt of our selves, who by our
inordinate self-love, have caused all the world besides to make it of us? Does
not the Apostle bid us receive him that is weak in the faith, not to doubtful
disputations, (Romans 14. 1.) And shall we think he would have us oppress a weak
faith in our own selves by doubting? I answer out of Bonaventures words ( in 3.
sent. did. 25.) Quod triplex est modus du^itandi; Est enim quaedam dubitatio
proveniens ex infidelitate, sicut dubitaverunt Iudaei; and est dubitatio
proveniens ex tarditate, sicut dubitaverunt Discipuli, quibus dicitur Lucae
ultimo, O stulti and tardi cord ad credendum; and est dubitatio proveniens ex
pietate, sicut quam aliquis ex magna admiratione ad modum dubitantes se habet;
There is a threefold manner of doubting, one that proceeds from infidelity,
so the Jews doubted of Christ and of his Doctrine; Another that proceeds from
infirmity; so the two Disciples that went to Emmaus, doubted of Christ's.
Resurrection, to whom it was therefore said, O fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken, Luke 24. 25. A third doubting there
is that proceeds from piety, because of astonishment and admiration, which
makes a man to seem to doubt what he does most steadfastly believe, (And such a
doubting we read of in the blessed Virgin, Then said Mary unto the Angel, How
shall this thing be, seeing I know not a man? Luke 1. 34.) I answer then
according to this distinction; First, If the doubt concerning our being in the
state of true Christianity, proceed from piety or admiration, it is exceeding
commendable, we have an excellent president for it, the man after Gods own
heart, who twice spoke these words from Gods own mouth, for surely with his
spirit, What is man that thou have such respect unto him, or the son of man
that thou so regardest him? Psalm 8. 4. and 144. 3. Nor is it possible for any
one that has indeed the Spirit of God, when he considers the immensity of Gods
goodness and of his own unworthiness, not to make this doubt of admiration unto
his own soul, What is man! what am I, a sinful man in my person, that thou have
such respect unto me? or What is the son of man! what am I, a sinful man in my
nature, that thou so regardest me?

Secondly, If the doubt concerning our being in the state of true Christianity,
proceed from infirmity, it is at all times excusable, because though the spirit
be willing yet the flesh is weak; (Mat. 26. 41.) and at sometimes almost
commendable, when either by our omissions of piety we have quenched, or by our
commissions of impiety we have grieved the Holy Spirit of God, whereby we are
sealed to the day of redemption; In this case of spiritual leprosy, Gods
answer to Moses concerning Miriam, may be taken as a full determination
concerning us; If her Father had but spit in her face, should she not be
ashamed seven days? Let her be shut out of the camp seven days, and after that,
let her be received in again, Numb. 12. 14. Si pater terrenus aliquod gravis in
eam irae signum edidisset, puderet eam saltem septem Dies redire in conspectum
ejus, says Junius; If her father on earth had showed some great sign of anger
against her, she would for shame not presently rush into his sight, but would
forbear to come before him, for one seven days: The explanation is very
punctual, and we cannot but see that in God Almighties own Logic the argument
is good from our Father on earth, to our Father in heaven; Hence that prayer of
sorrowful David, Cast me not away from thy presence: He confesses he durst not
come into his sight, and prays that he might not be for ever banished from it,
Psalm. 51. 11. and again, read mihi laetitiam salutaris tui, Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation: Having grievously offended his God, he could not but
discover in his own soul the signs and tokens of that offense: therefore he
prays God to restore unto him the joy of his salvation: For had he not in his
blood-guiltiness lost the joy of his salvation, he might in his impenitency
have lost the enjoyment of it: Good Lord, that we should so outstrip this holy
man in our sin, and come so short of him in our repentance! This is certainly a
ready way not to strengthen our faith, but to weaken it; not to lessen our
doubtings, but to increase them: yea to turn our doubtings into distresses, and
our distresses into despair, and our despair into damnation.

Thirdly and lastly, if the doubt concerning our being in the state of true
Christianity, proceed from infidelity, it is neither commendable nor excusable
in any; nay it is so far from being commendable in any, that it is altogether
inexcusable in all: For such a doubt supposes not a weakness, but a want of
faith, and consequently shows the man that has it, to distrust his Savior,
not himself, and to remain still in the state of infidelity, notwithstanding
God calls him so earnestly to the state of faith: Wherefore since without
faith it is impossible to please God, (Heb. 11. 6.) such a doubting of
infidelity must needs leave him that has it, under Gods most heavy and more
just displeasure; under his most heavy displeasure, because he embraces not
reconciliation when it is offered; and under his most just displeasure, because
he believes not him that offers it. This is the reason of the Apostles
exceeding pathetical exhortation, Take heed brethren, lest there be in any of
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God, Heb. 3. 12.
The heart is made evil by unbelief, and shows it is so by departing from the
living God; so that we are advised and exhorted to take heed of unbelief, as we
would take heed of an evil heart, and of departing from the living God. It Is at
first, (...), an evil heart o^ ^nfidelity; it is at last (...) an evil heart of
apo^tacy, (...), in apostatizing from the living God: But we must here take
heed that we confound not together the doubtings of infirmity and of
infidelity; The one says, Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief: the other
cannot say, Lord, I believe: The one dare not trust himself, but the other will
not trust his Savior; a doubting of infidelity rejects faith, but a doubting
of infirmity desires it. For though doubting cannot be in faith, yet it may be
in him that has faith; Saint Peter's faith could not doubt, yet himself
doubted; so says the text; when he saw the wind boistrous, he was afraid, and
beginning to sink, he cried, saying, Lord save me, Mat. 14. 13. Though he was
full of fear, yet he was not empty of faith, For he cried, saying, Lord save me.

And therefore we may not say of any other in his case, more then our Savior
Christ did say of him, O thou of little faith, wherefore did thou doubt? Mat.
14. 31. O thou of little faith, not, O thou of no faith; for he did fully
believe in Christ, and did only misdoubt himself; And surely it would not be
much amiss if every confident man would do so too, and ask himself the question
which Christ asks Saint Peter, Love thou me? John 21. 17. and ask it again
and again, and not be grieved at the often asking it; do thou indeed love thy
Savior? love thou him who died for thee? love thou him who loved thee with
an everlasting love? For the more you are assured in your own heart that you
love your Savior, the more will he assure you of his everlasting love.

CAP. II. Of the knowledge of the state of true Christianity.
SECT. I. The knowledge of our being in the state of true Christianity, is from
our keeping the words of Christ; And that Antinomians cannot truly be (and much
less know they be,) in the state of true Christianity.
HE that is in the state of true Christianity cannot but desire to know it, and
he that knows himself to be so, cannot but exceedingly rejoice and triumph in
that knowledge: Accordingly after the discourse of the state of true
Christianity, in the next place we ought to enquire concerning our own
knowledge of that state; for that man can scarce be thought to believe the life
everlasting, who labors not to be very well assured that he himself is in the
way which leads unto that life; and he can never be assured that he is in the
way of righteousness, but by the practice and the love of righteousness;
Therefore if it be demanded, how any Christian may know that he is in the state
of true Christianity, I must answer, merely by loving and obeying his Savior
Christ: For indeed so Christ himself has answered, If any man love me, he will
keep my words, John 14. 23. All that are in the state of true Christianity, do
entirely love our Savior Christ: and all that love him, do keep his words,
that is to say, All his words; for Christ leaves out none, no more must we: so
says the Holy Prophet, For I have an eye unto all his Laws, and will not cast
out his commandments from me, (Psalm 18. 22.) He had said in the verse before,
I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not forsaken my God as the wicked
does; and he gives this for the reason of that saying, For I have an eye unto
all his Laws: It Is this alone that keeps us from apostasy or forsaking God,
even the having an eye unto all his Laws; For many that are very wicked, have
an eye to some of his Laws, that they may the more securely act their
wickedness against the rest; Wherefore we must keep all his Laws or words, not
only in our memories to remember them, but also in our hearts to embrace them,
and also in our works to do them; so Moses requires us to keep the statutes and
Judgments of God, saying, Keep therefore and do them, Deuteronomy, 4. 6.

It Is a question among School Divine, An sit de ratione charitatis quod homo
velit praeceptorum Dei regulam in omnibus sequi, Whether it be of the essence
of true charity, that a man have a will to sollow the rule of Gods commandments
in all things? and Aquinas determines it in the Affirmative; (22^. qu. 24. art.
12.

But it is moreover determined by one who we are sure was more then an
Angelical Doctor, even by our Savior Christ, saying, Whosoever shall break one
of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall be called the
least in the Kingdom of heaven; but whosoever shall do and teach them, the same
shall be called great in the Kingdom of heaven, Mat. 5. 19. If any of Gods
commandments might be discarded or laid aside, then surely the least would
claim the least observance: but the contempt even of the very least of them,
will no less then cast us from heaven to hell in the day of Judgment: For so
Saint Chrysostom expounds our blessed Saviors words, (...): when you hear the
words, He shall be least in the Kingdom of heaven, do not surmise any thing
less, then that he shall be in hell, and in everlasting torments; For Christ
here calls the general resurrection and his own coming to Judgment, the
Kingdom of heaven, because they will make way for the full power and glory of
that Kingdom; and tells us, that such an offender as shall not only
practically, but also doctrinally offend against one of the least of his
commandments, not only doing wickedly himself, but also teaching others so to
do, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of heaven, that is, shall be
accounted as one rejected or a castaway at his coming to Judgment; for such
a man never was truly in the love of God, nor was the fear of God truly in
hin; For had his heart been seasoned with the fear of God, he would have been
afraid to have lifted up his hand against the least of Gods commandments by a
wilful breach thereof, and much more to have lifted his heel against them all,
(for whosoever offends in one point thereof is guilty of all, Jam. 2, 10.) by
denying them to have the force of his commandments; as if Christ had come to
abolish the Law, when indeed he has established it, Romans 3. 31. This is such a
point of Divinity as is now most necessary for all, and can be offensive to
none but only such men as may pretend Vertuosi, but act Banditi, as may pretend
Saints, but act the most desperate and wilful sinners, resolving to maintain
such opinions as are most agreeable with their practices, because they resolve
to maintain such practices as are like to be most agreeable with their
interests: I will only ask their consciences, whether it can proceed from the
love of God, or rather from the love of Mammon, that they are desirous to
advance the wicked precedents of men, against the most righteous precepts of
Christ, whereby they run headlong into such tenants as they may well be ashamed
of in the worst times, as they must be afraid of in better times, as they will
be both ashamed and afraid of, when time shall be no more: Excellently Saint
Greg. in his Morals, Sola est quae fidei meritum possidet obedientia, sine qua
quisque infidelis esse convincitur, etiamsi fidelis esse videatur: It Is only
obedience that makes or shows faith to be a saving faith, without which
every man is but an infidel, though he may pretend very much to be one of the
faithful; This is a new way of infidelity (even in the midst of faith,) you
need not turn Mohammedan or Pagan, to become an infidel, it will suffice if you
only turn Antinomian; And this is too too palpable, that since we have lost our
obedience, we have found none of the blessings promised to it, Deuteronomy. 28. but
have been a burden to our selves, a reproach to our neighbors, a seorn to our
enemies, a laughing stock to all, a pity to none.

SECT. II. Three practical Principles necessary to be maintained by all those
who desire to be good Christians, and to know themselves to be in the state of
true Christianity: the first, That Christ has words to be kept as well as to
be believed; The second, that true love of Christ will make us labor to keep
his words; The third, That true faith in Christ, was never yet without this
love.
THere are three practical principles which all those must hold, who will be
good Christians, and know themselves to be in the state of true Christianity;
The first principle is this, That Christ has words to be kept as well as to be
believed; precepts as well as promises; and therefore ^o preach the Gospel of
Christ, is not only to preach faith in his promises, but also to preach
obedience to his precepts; and they who leave out this latter part, preach but
a half Gospel, which may show the glad tidings', but not effect the good work
of our salvation: For the precepts lead directly to the promises; and the way
to obtain that which God does promise, is to love that which he does command:
Hence Saint James exhorts us to be doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving our own souls, Jam. 1. 22. This is the most miserable cheat of all
cheats, to deceive our own souls, and cheat our selves of our salvation; And
this we shall do if we be only hearers of the word, as it is a promise to
strengthen our says; and not also doers of it, as it is a precept to exercise
our obedience; For Saint Paul tells us plainly, that even the Gospel, the
preaching of Jesus Christ was made known to all nations for the obedience of
faith, Romans 16. 25, 26. Not for the assent or persuasion only, but also, and
much rather for the obedience of faith.

The second Principle of good Christianity is this, That the true love of
Christ will make us labor with all our might to keep his words: For this is
substantia Christianismi, the very substance of the Christian Religion; so
Saint Paul says expressly, Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is
nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God, 1 Cor. 7. 19. as if he had
said, External rights and professions are nothing to the Substance of
Christianity (though to the order of it; they may be much) but the keeping of
the commandments of God is all in all; And this is the true touchstone of the
soul, to try whether it it be made of dross, or of purer metal, whether it love
God or Mammon, as its chiefest good: For he that cares not to thwart Gods will
to fulfill his own, is certainly in the state of sin, and not in the state of
Grace: For he loves his pleasure, or profit, or preferment better then God, who
for his pleasure, or his profit, or his preferment cares not to break Gods
commandments. The Casuists rule is undeniable, Constituitur in honor ultimus
finis, si ob honorem consequendum non curat quis offendere Deum mortaliter,
(Cajet. Sum.) and again, Si paratus sit non curare de praecepto: He that so
resolves upon riches, or honor, or any thing of this world, as to break
through a commandment to come by it, is not yet a true lover of God; but loves
only himself, nay the worst (though truest) part of himself, his sinful
affections; and is not yet a new Creature, because he has not yet in him faith
working by love, to make him so: For faith working by love, and a new creature,
are one and the same thing in Saint Paul's account, as appears, Gal. 5. 6. and
Gal. 6. 15. in the former place he tells us, that which avails in Christ Jesus
is a faith which works by love; in the latter place, that it is a new creature:
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision nor uncircumcision avails any thing,
but faith which works by love; Gal. 5. 6. For in Christ Jesus neither
circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.
15. Compare these two places of Scripture with that other formerly cited, out
of 1 Cor 7. 19. Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the
keeping of the commandments of God, and you will see the cord, which either
draws or knits us unto Christ, to be made up of these three links, keeping the
Commandments of God, A faith which works by love; and a new creature: This
three fold cord is not easily broken, and cannot possibly be untwisted: In that
it is not easily broken, it may comfort the good Christian against the fear of
being a Castaway: but in that it cannot possibly be untwisted, it must
distinguish him from one that is so; For he has not one of these truly, that
has them not all three, and he that has them not all three, (at least in his
purpose and and desire, where he is defective in his practice and actual
performance) is not yet in Christ Jesus: For the love of Christ constrains
us, because we thus judge, thaet if one dyed for all, then were all dead; and
that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
The love of Christ is a constraining love, impatient either of denial or of
delay, and the more impatient of delay, for fear it should end in a denial: The
love of Christ constrains, not courteth, those who are in Christ, to live not
to themselves but to their Savior, by whose death they have already obtained
the life of grace, and by whose resurrection from death, they hope to obtain
the life of glory.

The third principle of good Christianity, is this, That true faith in Christ
was never yet without true love of Christ; And this much we have learned from
our Saviors own mouth, who when he was asked a question that concerned faith,
returned his answer concerning love: For so we find St Judes question, Lord,
how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us? John. 14. 22. But our
Saviors answer is this, If any man love me, he will keep my words, v. 23. The
question was made concerning the manifestation of Christ unto the soul, which
is by faith: but the answer was only concerning love: and since our Saviors
answer may not be thought impertinent, or improper, we must conclude that true
faith in Christ cannot be without true love; wherefore the Solifidian must
either say, That he may have true faith without Christ's manifesting himself
unto his Soul; or show, that Christ has manifested himself unto his Soul, by
loving him and keeping his words: Saint Jude himself thus understood our
Saviors answer, and thus in effect explaineth it (in his Epistle) for our
better understanding: saying thus, But ye beloved, building up your selves on
your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Ghost: v. 20. There Is Christ
manifested unto the soul by faith; a most pious faith, for it is praying; a most
holy faith, for it is praying in the Holy Ghost: not despising, much less
destroying either the house, or the exercise of prayer: and again, Keep your
selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
eternal life, v. 21. There Is that holy faith showing it self by love, teaching
a man to forsake all things else, to gain Christ's love, and to forsake himself,
to keep it, not looking after that fading life which he has in himself, but
after that eternal life which he has in Christ: There is in man a two fold
manifestation, and a twofold love: for either we are manifested unto our
selves, and love our selves; or Christ is manifested unto us, and we love our
Savior; For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the works of the devil, 1 John 3. 8. He was manifested in his own own flesh to
destroy sin: and for the same purpose is he also manifested in our spirits; and
accordingly till he be there manifested, we are so far from destroying sin,
that we wholly delight in it: For as long as we are manifestd to our selves,
our love is wholly of our selves, either of our pleasures, to defile the flesh,
despise dominion, and speak evil of dignities, (ver. 8.) such a licentiousness
as hates to be controuled, and much more to be confined, and therefore hates
the dominion and dignities which God has ordained to control and to confine
it; Or we are lovers of our profits (as in ver. 11.) They have gone in the way
of Cain, and ran greedily after the error of Balaam, for reward; and perished
in the gain saying of Core; where Balaam, though put in the Second place, yet
is clearly the first mover in the way of unrighteousness: for Cain and Core
both do homage unto him: For Cain is ready to kill, and Core is ready to
rebel, if Balaam once run greedily after reward: Such are we whiles we are
manifested to our selves, even lovers of our selves, in our pleasures, to all
abominable licentiousness, in our profits to all abominable outrages; and such
are the cursed effects of our self-love, even murders and seditions: So that in
truth we are selfhaters whiles we are self-lovers: for we have our woe
denounced against us, Woe unto them (v. 11.) Praedicit eorum exitium, quoniam
Cainum impudenti malitia, Balaamum turpi avaritia, Core d^nique factioso and
ambitioso ingenio referunt, says Beza in his short notes: He foretells the
destruction of such men, because they follow Cain in his impudent malice,
Balaam in his filthy coveteousness: and Core in his factious and ambitious
unruliness, But if Christ be manifested unto us, our love is wholly of him, and
we will never think that we can sufficiently express that love. We will labor
to build up our selves in our most holy faith, delighting in those things that
are for Edification, not for destruction, and being afraid of that faith which
is more for pulling down then for seeting up of holiness; for we may not so
build up our selves, as to throw down others: Praying in the holy Ghost, that
is, praying in such a manner as that he may pray in us, and in such a form as
that he may pray with us, not pinning those prayers upon the spirit of God,
which a sober man would be ashamed to speak, and a conscientious man must be
afraid to hear: Keeping our selves in the love of God, and loving whatsoever
may be a means to keep us in his love, as his word because it instructs us, his
authority because it restrains us, his ordinances because they confirm and
strengthen us; having our eyes and our hearts always lifted up to heaven,
looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life; This is the
only way to be assured that Christ is manifested unto our souls, if indeed we
thus entirely love him; For our faith makes us accepted in Christ, not so much
from the strength of its persuasion, as from the sincerity of its affection;
and is therefore called by Saint Paul, (...), a faith which works by love,
Gal. 5. 16. There is no moral certainty to others of our being in Christ
without this love: In this the children of God are manifest and the children of
the devil: whosoever loves not righteousness is not of God, neither he that
loves not his brother: 1 John. 3. 10. There can be no theological certainty to
our selves of being in Christ without this same love, as it follows v. 14. We
know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren: He
that loves not his brother abides in death: And again, cap. 4. v. 13. Hereby
know we that we dwell in him and he in us, because he has given us of his
spirit, and sure we are that spirit is the Spirit of love.

Thus if we love, we shall be assured of love: and the more we find that we do
love, the more we shall find that we are beloved: What have we then to do, who
profess our selves Christians, but to walk in love, as Christ also has loved
us, (Ephesians. 5. 2.) and by this love, to give our selves unto him, who has given
himself for us? So shall we also, (in him,) be made an offering, and a
sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling Savor: being made partakers of the
greatest glory that is incident to the creature, even to be an offering and a
sacrifice to the Greator, and of the greatest blessing that is incident to that
glory, even to be an offering and a sacrifice for a sweet smelling Savor unto
him; That he smelling the smell of the Goodly raiment which we have borrowed
from our Elder brother, may bless us, and say, See the smell of my Son is as
the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed. (Genesis 27. 27.) God the Son
has blessed that soul, to which he has given this sweet smelling Savor and
God the Father will bless it: and God the Holy Ghost will continue the blessing
for ever more: Amen.

CAP. III. Of the Comforts that arise from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity.
SECT. I. The first comfort arising from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity, is, That we are thereby assured of the love of God.
MANY are the comforts of those who know they are in the state of true
Christianity; but they are all reducible to these three Heads, That they are
assured of love from God, of communion with God, and the continuance of that
communion: Three such comforts, the least whereof is able to outweigh all that
can be put against it, not only in the balance of the Sanctuary, but also in
the scales of right reason: For man naturally does love God above his life, and
does desire communion where he loves, and does exceedingly delight in the
continuance of that communion; So that the comfort which arises from the
knowledge of our being in the state of true Christianity, consists of these
three degrees: 1. That we are thereby assured of the love of God: 2. That we
are thereby assured of communion with God: 3. That we are thereby (on Gods
part) assured of the continuance of that communion: which must needs bring
heaven down to us, if not carry us up to heaven.

The first degree of this comfort is that we are assured of the Love of God, in
whose presence is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there is pleasure
for evermore, Psalm. 16. 12. For God is not as man that he should be changeable
in his love, but his love is like himself, without beginning or ending: He
loves not more or less in process of time, as men do; and if he did, we should
have but small comfort of his love. For love that is in time, is but for a
time, and not for all times, it will be sure to choose the best time; If Gods
love were such, woe would be to us upon whom are come the last and the worst
times of this wicked world, and therefore the last because the worst; The worst
as farthest from God, and for that reason the last, as nearest their own
destruction: Were Gods love to have a beginning in such times as these, both
they and it would quickly have an ending; his love would end; and the times
would end, which are supported only by his love, and we should all suddenly
pass from a most wicked time, to a most woeful eternity: We must therefore say
of Gods love to our souls what himself has said of it by the mouth of his holy
Prophet, Yea I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn thee, Jer. 31. 3. in that he has drawn us to
himself, it is an argument he has loved us with an everlasting love; wherefore
every one whom God has drawn unto himself by the bands of the Christian
Religion, is bound to believe that God has loved him in Christ, from all
eternity, and will love him to all eternity if he abide in Christ, the Son of
his love: Thus has Saint Paul joined these two titles both together, beloved
of God, called to be Saints, Romans 1. 7. taking it for a proof that they were
beloved of God, because they were called to be Saints; And yet we may still
admit the School distinction of Gods love Secundum affectum, and Secundum
effectum: not as setting forth a new love of God, but only new effects of his
former love; For though his love be eternal and always the same, yet the
effects, the benefits thereof are temporal and various, according to our
various temper or disposition to receive them: And particularly, the assurance
of his love to our Souls, is in time, and not till such time as we have
approved our selves to love him: And hence it is that our love to God is
reckoned up before Gods love to, us, even that love whereby he loved us in his
holy purpose of eternity; We know that all things work together for good to
them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose, Romans
8. 28. in which words our love is put before Gods love, not that it is so in it
self, but that it is so in our experience: We must love, before we can know
that we are beloved; for though we are called according to his purpose before
we can love him, yet we must love him before we can know that we are called
according to his purpose. Hence Saint John writes to an honorable Lady, as if
she had been elected but then when she walked in the truth; and yet Saint Paul
says plainly, we were elected in Christ before the foundations of the world,
Ephesians. 1. 4.

And these two will very well agree; for we are not Gods elect in the judgment
of our own consciences, till we have used all diligence to make sure our
calling and our election: we cannot know that we are elected in Christ, till we
can find that we are approved in him: Hence electus in Christo, and probatus in
Christo, are but several expressions of the same spiritual blessing in Christ;
Apelles approved in Christ, and Rufus elected, or chosen in the Lord, Romans 16.
10, 13. set forth to us two several good Christians, but only one true being in
Christ: for he that is elected in Christ, is also approved in him: And till he
can make good his approbation, he cannot make good his election: whereas on the
other side, he that can make it appear that he is approved in Christ, by being
in the state of true Christianity, needs not doubt of his being elected in him:
for knowing that he loves his Savior, he shall much more know that his Savior
first loved him: since no man can be so well assured that he loves God, as he
must be assured that God is love for the former assurance is from the testimony
of his own conscience, but the latter is from the testimony of Gods most holy
and infallible word.

SECT. II. The second comfort arising from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity, is, that we are thereby assured of communion with
God; the cause, the work, and the effects of that communion. The cause of it is
God; The work of it is contemplation of God, and consultation with God; The
effects of it, that it makes a man live for, to, with, and in God.
HE that will truly comfort himself in his communion with God, must first
consider the cause of that communion, and then after that the communion it
self, and its effects. The cause of that communion is only Gods own free grace,
and undeserved goodness, in coming unto us, when we were unworthy, if not
unwilling to come unto him.

For all the love that we can possibly bestow upon our Savior, and all the
obedience that we can possibly bestow upon our love, are not a sufficient
invitation for such a heavenly guest to come unto our souls, and much less a
sufficient entertainment for him, when he is come: Let us view that scala
salutis, that Jacob's ladder whereby we climb up to heaven, set down, Rom, 8.
29, 30. we shall find in it five several steps or degrees, and God freely
coming unto us in them all; The five steps whereby we ascend up to heaven are
these: 1 Precognition, 2 Predestination, 3 Vocation, 4 Justification, 5
Glorification: For whom he did 1 foreknow, he also did 2 predestinate to be
conformed to the image of his son; whom he did predestinate, them he also 3
called: and whom he called, them he also 4 justified, and whom he justified,
them he also 5 glorified: Here are five steps in our ascending up into heaven,
and God freely comes to us in every one of them: He did foreknow, there he
comes to us in the first step, that of precognition: He did predestinate, there
he comes to us in the second step, that of predestinacion: He also called,
there he comes to us in the third step, that of vocation: He also justified,
there he comes to us in the fourth step, that of Justification: He also
glorified, there he still comes to us in the fifth and last step, that of
glorification: What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, (and
he is certainly for us whilst we are for him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2.) who can be
against us? He that spared not his own son, but delivered him up for us all,
how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? (Romans 8. 31, 32.) Nay
rather, how has he not already given us all things in him as our head? how
will he not give them us with him, if we continue still his members? We have
already all things in him by virtue of his merit; it remains only that we have
them with him by virtue of his communion: God in giving his Son, gives himself;
in giving himself, gives all things; for he is all in all: Nothing but God can
give God to the soul of man; The Father gives the Son, the Father and Son give
the Holy Ghost: For as the Father did heretofore come to us by the Son: So
Father and Son do now come to us by the Holy Ghost: and do also by him make
their abode with us: Hence that Apostolical benediction, The grace of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with
you all, Amen, 2 Cor. 13. 14. The grace is of God the Son, the love is of God
the Father, but the communication both of grace and love is of God the Holy
Ghost; communicatio Spiritus Sancti, (says the Vulgar Latin) The
communication of the holy Spirit be with you all; For our communion with the
Father and with the Son, is by the holy Ghost. Thus we see, the cause of our
communion with God, is God. Let us now consider the communion it self, that we
may know our own happiness, in continuing and abiding with God.

This communion is heartily desired, and fully expressed by the Psalmist, when
he says, One thing have I desired of the Lord, which I will seek after; that I
may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple; Psalm 27. 4. Non dicit
simpliciter potii a Domino, sed unum petii a Domino, quibus verbis ostendit se
prae omnibus bonis, quibus, liceat in hac vita frisi, unum hoc extollere, si
detur pacifice in domo Dei habitare, says Musculus. He says not simply, I
have desired of the Lord, but one thing have I desired of the Lord, whereby he
shows, this one thing is to him above all other things, that he might live
peaceably in the house of God; And of this he says, which I will seek after,
that is, I will never give over seeking, till I have found it; and there is
cause enough for this longing desire, for this indesatigable diligence; for it
is to behold the beauty of the Lord and to enquire in his temple; Ad
contemplandum, ad consulendum Deum; That he might contemplate God, or behold
the beauties of the Lord, and that he might consult with God to enquire in his
Temple: Tell me what can a sanctified ou^ desire more in earth; tell we what
can a glorified soul enjoy more in heaven, then the contemplation of God, and
consultation with God; ut videam voluntatem Domini, says the Vulgar Latin,
that I may see the good will and pleasure of the Lord; ut videam pulchritudinem
ejus, says Saint Hierom: that I may see his beauty; and thence Hugo inferres,
that in the contemplation of God is a double vision; Visio pulchritudinis,
visio voluntatis; The vision of his beauty, the vision of his will; for the
first, he alleges the words of the Prophet Isaiah, Thine eyes shall see the
King in his beauty, Isa. 33. 17. For the second he alleges that saying of
Saint Gregory, supernae curiae cives dum supra se voluntatem sui Conditoris
semper aspiciunt, quod obtinere non valent, nunquam volunt: The Citizens of the
heavenly Hterusalem, whilst they always see the will of God, are ready to
conform their wills to his will, and never desire what they cannot attain; This
is the blessing they have who contemplate God, whether in earth or in heaven;
and they who are in his communion, do not only contemplate him, but also
consult with him; as they see his beauty, so also they enquire in his Temple;
They consult with God, as with their friend, hearing him and asking him
questions: maintaining familiar colloquies with him whilst they are in his
communion, that as they are delighted by their contemplation of God, so they
may be directed by their consultation with him: And this appears in that
heavenly dialogue which we find in the eighth verse, My heart has talked of
thee, seek ye my save, thy face Lord will I seek; that is, my heart communing
with it self, and with thee, makes me often hear thee saying, seek ye my face;
and I cannot but answer, thy face Lord will I seek; here is a spiritual
dialogue, God speaking to the soul, seek ye my face; and the soul answering
him, thy face Lord will I seek; So Hugo, Been dicit tibi dixit cor meum,
quiaquaedam familiaris colloquutio, and delectabilis confabulatio est, inter
Deum and cor justi: He well said, My heart has talked of thee, or to thee; for
there is a kind of familiar colloquie and a delightful discourse betwixt God
and the heart of a righteous man: No tyranny can forbid this communion, for it is
of the heart; no outrage can disturb it, for it is in the heart; no pleasure can
divert or distract it, for it is the delight of the heart; My heart has talked
of thee, or with thee, desiring no other company to converse withal: He
desires to hear no other voice talking with him, but that which says, Seek ye
my face; and as he desires it earnestly, so he answers it readily, Thy face
Lord will I seek.

Facies Dei est praesentia ejus, says Alensis, (par. 1. qu. 2. memb. 1.) The
face of God is his presence, that is, the presence of his Grace, for by that
alone do we in this life enjoy his communion; His natural presence in our souls
may be by knowledge and understanding, whereby he makes man know him, and so he
is present with many wicked men, with whom he will not communicate; but his
gracious presence is in the will and affections, whereby he makes men love him,
and so he is present only with good men, to whom by this his presence he does
also afford his communion; agreeable to this is Saint Augustines Doctrine,
concerning the inhabitation of God in the souls of men, Inhabitator quorundam
est Deus nondum cognoscentium Deum, ut parvulorum; quorundam vero inhabitator
est, cognoscentium and diligentium; quorundam autem inhabitator non est, qui
sc. sunt cognoscentes and non diligentes, de quibus, Romans 1. Qui quum Deum
cognovissent, non sicut Deum glorificaverunt: (Aug. ad Dardanum.) God dwells in
some who know him not, as in regenerated Infants: He dwells in others who know
him and love him, as in religious men; but he dwells in none who know him and do
not love him: of whom the Apostle speaks, ( Romans 1. 21.) When they knew God,
they glorified him not as God: He is naturally present with those that know
him, or else they could not know him; but he is graciously present only with
those that love him: Many have found his gracious presence, that knew him not;
but none ever found it who loved him not: For love, as it is the cause of
union, so also is it the cause of communion, which is indeed but a reciprocal
or interchangeable union: God may be present where he does not dwell, for
whither shall I flee from thy presence? Psalm 139. 7. and such a presence of
God is without his communion: But where he is so present as to make his abode
or dwelling, there he has communion with the soul: For this presence of God is
in truth nothing else but his communicating of himself: Praesens autem est: in
quantum praesentat seu praesentem facit beatitudinem quae est in ipso, in
habitu tantum, ut in parvulis; in affectu tantum, ut in adultis: in habitu,
effectu, et intellectu, ut in beatis, says that excellent Schoolman Alensis
par. 3. qu. 61. God is then present with the soul, when he represents unto it
his own blessedness, either in habit or disposition, as in children that know
him not, and yet love him: or in desire or affection, as to men that know him
and love him; or in a habit, desire, and comprehension, as to the blessed souls
that not only know and love, but also enjoy him.

So that according to the degrees of Gods presence, are also the degrees of his
communion: where his presence is incomplete and imperfect, (as in grace,) there
his communion is so too: where his presence is complete and perfect, (as in
glory) there so also is his communion; But it is best for us to examine the
effects of our communion with God, in the presence of his grace, that so we the
more may undoubtedly attain to a communion with him in the presence of his
glory.

And these effects are excellently set down in few words by the Casuists,
saying, Spirituale bonum Divinum consistit in amicitia inter Deum and hominem,
ac per hoc in consentire, conversari, convivere and colloqui cum Deo; The
blessing of the soul consists in this, that a man has friendship or communion
with God, and consequently that he lives for him by consent, lives to him by
conversation, lives with him by cohabitation, lives in him by contentation: I
will briefly explain them all, that the good Christian may know his own
happiness, in that he is called to live in this communion, by virtue whereof,
First he lives for God by consent. Fiat volunt as tua^, Thy will be done, is a
petition twice sanctified unto us by our Saviors own lips, in two several
prayers; One of them taught us by his Doctrine in the Mount, Mat. 6. So that we
cannot contemn his prayer, but we must also contemn his Sermon: The other
taught us by his practice or example, Mat. 26. 42. where he made but one
speech, yet three prayers, he prayed the third time saying the same words, ver.
44, It was one and the same expression of his voice, it was not one and the
same elevation of his soul; therefore he prayed the third time, though he spoke
but his first words: We place the gift of prayer in the volubility of our
tongues; our Savior placed it in the groans of his heart; He prayed thrice in
the same words; we use many words, scarce pray at all: It is the heart that
pants it, not the tongue that chants it out, when we truly say, Thy will be
done: Conformitas in volito formali must be in all our desires, where in volito
materiali cannot be: Here was a conformity of our Saviors will with Gods will
in what he desired formally in his intention, though a seeming nonformity in
what he desired materially in his expression: And so it must ever be with us;
For we are most sure that in this case, the Non Conformist cannot be a good
Christian; but the want of conformity is the want of Christianity.

The second effect of this communion, is that the good Christian lives to God
by conversation. It Is a pleasant contemplation of Aquinas, that local distance
is no impediment in the Angels conversing one with another, or speaking one to
the other, because that is a mere intellectual operation: In loquutione
Angelorum nullum impedimentum praestat localis distantia, quia est mere
intellectualis operatio; (Aqu. 1. par. qu. 107. art. 4.) But it is a much more
comfortable assertion of the Apostle, that the distance of heaven from earth
cannot hinder the conversation of man with God; for so much he plainly
asserteth when he says, For our conversation is in heaven, for whence also we
look for the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil. 3. 20. In which words the
Apostle affords us three observations concerning the heavenly conversation of
good Christians; 1. that it is nothing else but a serious study and exercise of
Christian piety, in imitation of Christ, to whom they are always lifting up
their eyes, and their hearts: 2. that they only are true Christians who firmly
and constantly exercise this piety; for they only have true faith in Christ,
they only have a firm hope of immortality: 3. that we have all two great
Motives for this exercise; the one is that Christ our Savior, on whom all our
hopes rely, and in whom all our joys are fixed, is in heaven; and thefore what
have we to do on earth? The other is, that the same Christ will at the last day
come from heaven, to judge us according to the works that we have done;
therefore if we will have a favorable judgment, we must have an innocent
conversation: Conversation is but a frequent conversion, and requires our often
turning to God by our repentance, as we often turn away from him by our sins.

The third effect of this communion, is, that he lives with God by
cohabitation; I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2. 20. Saint Paul by this losing his life, did
indeed save it; had he kept his life in himself he might have lost it, by a
temporal, a spiritual, an eternal death; for he would have been subject to the
separation of his body from his soul, of his soul from grace, and of his soul
and body from God: But having lost his life in himself, that he might keep it
in his Savior, he keeps it for ever: He keeps his natural life, which else he
could not but lose; for his dissolution is not to him a death, but only a
change, making good his We shall all be changed even before the last day: for
he had a change only, when others had a death; Our departure hence if looked
upon as a change, is our greatest consolation, (for it must needs be much for
the better, because our corruptible shall thereby put on incorruption, our
mortal shall put on immortality) But if looked upon as a death, must needs be
our greatest horror and confusion; for that can only tell us of the destroying,
not of the amending or bettering our present state and condition; He keeps also
his spiritual life, so continuing as moreover improving it; His soul being more
knit and united with grace then before; which is the spiritual life, the union
of the soul with grace; for though we suppose it the same grace, yet the soul
must needs be united to it the more nearly and the more firmly, the longer it
abides in the communion of Christ, the fountain of grace; But we may well
suppose the good Christian to grow in grace, since the Apostle so advises him,
2 Pet. 3. 18. and say that by communion with his Savior, his soul is united to
more and more grace, and that both most nearly and most firmly; so nearly as
without a distance, so firmly as without a disunion: Lastly, He keeps also his
eternal life, by living to and in his Savior; that is, he presently enters his
claim, that he may keep his right, though he happily stay a long time, before
he enters possession: Hence the Apostle said, cupio dissolvi and esse cum
Christo, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. It Is all
one for him to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; for he did live with Christ
before his dissolution, and therefore cannot but live with him after it.

The fourth and last effect of this communion with God, is, that the good
Christian lives in God by contentation; Hence it is that the outrages of this
world may disturb or discompose, but not discontent him; For when he is weary
of men, he can retire to himself; and when he is weary of himself, he can
retire to his God; And though he be not weary of himself, yet he cannot be
satisfied in himself, as long as he is absent from his God: Therefore he will
be always turning to him, and never satisfied with turning till he get within
him: Turn again then unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded thee;
And why? Thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling; I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the living, Psalm
116. 7, 8, 9. We have been a long time turning, and we have turned again and
again, but surely not unto our God, because not unto our rest; we have turned
unadvisedly and irreligiously, for we have turned away from our peace and from
our God; and therefore the more shall be our turnings in this sort, the more
will be our troubles; But this holy man turns very advisedly; for he is sure to
get rest by his turning: He turns unto God with a deliberate election, because
he is sure in him to find joy and rest: Turn unto thy rest O my soul; he turns
unto him with a zealous and a thankful affection, acknowledging his manifold
spiritual and temporal deliverances; Thou have delivered my soul from death,
mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling: Lastly, he turns to him with a
firm and a constant resolution, of persisting and presevering in his thankful
acknowledgements, I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

These be the effects and fruits of our communion with God, we have a league of
friendship with him; and that friendship makes us more devoted to him then to
our selves: And hence it comes to pass that we live for him by consent; live to
him by conversation; live with him by cohabitation; live in him by contentation.

SECT. III. The third comfort arising from the knowledge of our being in the
state of true Christianity is, that we are thereby assured of the continuance
of our communion with God: For his Desertion will be only for trial, not for
punishment, unless we become unfaithful and unfruitful.
TRue friendship consists in a proportionable communication of offices and of
benefices; Amicitia consistit in analogica officiorum and beneficiorum
communicatione: One friendly office, one friendly courtesy for another: So is
it in our communion with God; The friendship on Gods part is wholly in giving
benefits or blessings; the friendship in our part is wholly in returning
offices or services; we receive benefits from him, he receives offices from us:
Beneficium requirit officium, His benefice requires our office; and we cannot
better befriend our selves, then by readily and faithfully serving so good a
Master, who is more willing to pay us our wages, then we are to earn them, and
is not willing to cast us off for every neglect or default in our services. It
was a sad complaint of the Orator in behalf of that widow whom he lamented,
Nescio an foeliciorem dicam quod talem virum habue^it, an miseriorem quod
amiserit, I cannot tell whether I may call her more happy in that she once had
so good a husband, or more unhappy that now she has lost him; But God forbid
this complaint should be verified of a soul espoused to Christ by a spiritual
marriage, and associated with him by a spiritual communion. Therefore there is
yet a third comfort arising from the knowledge of our being in the state of
true Christianity; which is this, that we are thereby assured of the
continuance of our communion with God, according to that triumphant exaltation
of the Psalmist, But thy loving kindness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm 23.
6. Did my communion with God depend upon mine own deserts, I that could not
invite him to me, might justly fear I should soon drive him from me; but now
that it depends upon his mercy and loving kindness, I will hope I shall never
lose it, though I know I can never deserve it: For what can love do else but
love? what can goodness do but good? What can the fountain of mercy delight in,
but in showing mercy? Therefore though I sometimes step aside from him, yet I
hope he will not forsake me; for he has not only a preventing mercy to receive
me, but also a following mercy to recall me; He came to me when I was out of
the way, and will he go from me because I cannot constantly keep in it? No, His
mercy and loving kindness shall follow me all the days of my life: For though
men do follow, that they may receive; yet God does follow that he may give, and
that he may give pardon among the rest of his gifts.

This is the ground of my confidence, that I shall dwell in the house of the
Lord for ever, and that he will continue his dwelling in my heart: For God does
not come to men with an intent presently to leave them; He comes to the devout
foul, not as a guest to lodge for a night, but as a friend, or a lover, to
abide for ever: The Psalmist reckons up four ways of Gods discontinuing his
communion with his servants; Ne abscondas faciem, ne declines in ira, ne
dimittas, ne derelinquas, Hide not thy face, turn not away, leave not, forsake
not, Psalm 27. 8, 9. Each of these is an interruption of Gods communion with us
and our communion with him, but none of them is a total abruption of it; each
of them is a breach, but none of them is a final breach.

The first breach is expressed by the hiding of his face: the second by turning
away his face; the third by leaving us; the fourth by forsaking us: But this
which is the greatest of all, is capable of a mitigation; for though he forsake
us for a while, yet he will not forsake us for ever. The Psalmist that asks the
question, Will the Lord absent himself for ever, and will he be no more
entreated? Is his mercy clean gone for ever, and is his promise come utterly to
an end for evermore? Has God forgotten to be gracious, and will he shut up his
loving kindness in displeasure? Answers it negatively, in that he checks
himself for asking it, saying, It is mine own infirmity, Psalm 77. 8, 9, 10.
And agreeable to this Doctrine is that distinction of the Schools, desertio
explorationis, and Poenae; There is a twofold spiritual desertion, a Desertion
of trial, and of punishment; by the first, God may, and often does withdraw his
presence from his best servants to prove them, but not by the second to punish
them, (taking punishment properly not as the chastisement of a loving Father,
but as the vengeance of an angry Judge.) Thus says the Evangelist, Jesus
having loved his own, which were in the world, he loved them unto the end, John
13. 1. If he had not loved them, he would never have come to them; and loving
them to the end, how shall he depart from them? And lest we should think this
peculiarly spoken of the Apostles (contrary to that rule of Romans 4. 23, 24. Now
it was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him, but for us
also to whom it shall be imputed; where we may plainly see that the Scripture,
though it often is but particular in the occasion, yet is always universal in
the instruction,) I say, lest we should think this occasionally spoken of the
Apostles, Saint Paul says it also Doctrinally of all others, whom God has
been pleased to call to his communion, Who shall also confirm you unto the end,
that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 1. 8. And
he gives the reason of his Doctrine in the next verse, God is faithful by whom
ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord: as if he
had said, he has converted you, and he will confirm you, not for a while, but
unto the end, and the reason is, because he is faithful: He has called you to
the fellowship or the communion of his Son Jesus Christ, and he will keep and
confirm you in it unto the end: He forsakes not the fellowship which himself
has ordained, for he is faithful: He has ordained that you should have
fellowship with him in his Son, and he is so faithful to his own ordination
that he gives his Holy Spirit to call you to, and keep you in that fellowship,
to the intent you may be joined with him in the communion of grace, till he
bring you to the communion of glory: So that the fault is wholly our own if God
make not his perpetual abode with us, after once he is come unto us; It Is
because either we do not stick to our Savior the Son of his love, or because
we do stick to our sins which he cannot love. For he will not constantly abide
either with an unfaithful or with an unfruitful soul: The unfaithful soul
forsakes his communion, the unfrui tfll soul forgets it: (...), says
Aristotle, Children are the bond of Wedlock: Nay God says so too; Now this
time will my husband be joined unto me, because I have born him three sons,
Genesis 29. 34. Therefore was his name called Levi. The Levite had his name from
conjunction; for shame let him not be the author of separation: And again yet
more fully, God has endued me with a good dowry; now will my husband dwell
with me, because I have born him six sons, and she called his name Zebulon,
Genesis 30. 20. Zebulon, id est, donum cohabitationis, says Tremelius, Donatum
filium ad conciliandam cohabitationem viri, a pledge or pawn of the husbands
dwelling with his wife, and delighting in her society.

So is it also in the Spiritual Matrimony, in the Marriage of the soul with
Christ; That he may betroth us unto himself for ever, he does betroth us in
righteousness and judgment, in loving kindness, and in mercies, and in
faithfulness, Hos. 2. There is righteousness and faithfulness, as well as there
is loving kindness and mercy in this blessed wedlock: Righteousness and
faithfulness required on our parts, as well as loving kindness and mercies on
his part; and we must take heed of losing the righteousness and the
faithfulness, for fear we should lose the loving kindness and the mercies:
Gratia est habitus mentis totius vit^ ordinativus, Grace is a habit of the mind
ordering the whole life, says Alensis par. 3. qu. 61. m. 2. In what but in
righteousness? Grace orders the whole life in righteousness, will not suffer
any part of it to be spent in unrighteousness; so likewise says Saint Paul,
Grace reigns through righteousness to eternal life, Romans 5. 21. Take away the
righteousness, take away the reign of grace: take away the reign of grace, and
farewell to the reign of glory, unless you will look for glory without eternal
life. O blessed Jesus who art the only guest and joy of religious souls! I
confess that I am not worthy thou should once come under my roof; yet I
beseech thee to make me fit for thine everlasting abode; That I being faithful
and fruitful in all righteousness unto the death; may receive of thee a Crown
of life, who did dye for my sins, and rise again for my Justification, and
now sit on the right hand of God, making intercession for me: Thou have
been the Mediator of this blessed communion betwixt God and my soul; O be thou
also the preserver of it, that in it, and for it, I may bless and praise thee
with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God world without end, Amen.

Christ retained in the true Christian Communion.
Now I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them; for they that
are such, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, and by good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 17, 18. Nec
Haereticus pertinet ad Ecclesiam Catholicam quae diligit Deum: Nec
Schismaticus, quoniam diligit Proximum: Aug. de fide and Symbolo cap. 10.
Neither does a Heretic belong to the Catholic Church, because she loves God;
nor a Schismatic, because she loves her neighbor.

The Prooem. Christian Communion is to be considered in its Authority, in its
Excellency, and in its Sincerity.
GReat are the divisions of wicked and ungodly men, whilst at first they run
away from God; and as great are their distractions, when at last they run away
from one another: It is their sin that they will needs be at enmity with God;
it is their punishment that they cannot but be at enmity among themselves: This
small Treatise endeavors either to keep us from this great misery, or to
recover us out of it; either to prevent it from coming upon us, or to redress
it when it is come: For it calls us to unity against division, to constancy
against distraction, (since there can be no constancy where there is no unity)
It calls us to a communion with Christ and with his Church; which communion
must have unity from the nature, and constancy from the author of it; For our
Savior Christ is the same yesterday to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. and as
he is unchangeable in himself, so he desires to be found unchangeable in his
members; He will have them the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever; And
indeed so they are, for they do partake of the constancy, who were real
partakers of the unity in the Christian communion, which is betwixt Christ and
his Church: Those Christians do show forth a kind of immutability or
unchangeableness, by their constancy in religion, who truly have communion with
Christ, in the unity of his Church: For they cannot run a gadding after other
men's phansies who are really established in their own consciences: They know
they have met with the true Christ already, and therefore look not after false
Christ's; and regard not them who say, lo he is here, or lo he is there; They
have found him in his Church, and will not look for him in the desert or in the
secret chambers; For Christ having said to his Church, Lo I am with you
always, even to the end of the world, would not have us think that we can be
with him, if we will not be with his Church. Therefore we must look for
Christian communion in Christ's Church, though we must not look for it only in
his Church, but also, and much rather in himself: For in truth, Christ and his
Church do make but one true Christian communion; Accordingly it will be
necessary to consider this communion, first in its authority, for that Christ
calls us thereto by his own authority as the head, and the Church calls us
thereto by the authority of Christ as his body.

After that we shall consider the same communion in its excellency; for
authority and excellency are reciprocal in Gods commands; He commonly commaning
that with the greatest authority, on which he has bestowed the greatest
excellency.

And lastly, we shall consider the same Christian communion in its sincerity;
for in spiritual exercises or duties of the soul, such as is the desire and
practice of this communion, the greatest part of the excellency consists in
the sincerity; for God the seer and searcher, and judge of hearts, accounts
nothing excellent in his service, but what proceeds from the heart.

Lord make me earnestly desire this Christian communion, for its authority, as
proceeding from Christ the eternal Son of God, make me highly admire this
communion for its excellency, as continuing with Christ; make me cordially
embrace this communion for its sincerity, as wholly ending in Christ.

A true Christian communion indeed, which has its beginning from Christ, its
continuance with Christ, its end in Christ; which is (...), ex ipso, per ipsum,
and in ipsum, which is of him, and through him, and to him, (as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 11. 36.) Because it is of him, it has great authority; because it
is with him, it has great excellency; because it is to him, it has great
sincerity.

CAP. I. Of Christian Communion in its Authority.
SECT. I. Christ requires our Communion by his own authority, as our Head:
which has the most noble and most powerful influence upon the members. The
nature, the reasons, the cause, the proofs of our communion with Christ.
COmmunion with Christ is the only way to Salvation by Christ; for if we
embrace not his Communion here, we shall not enjoy his Salvation hereafter: For
Christ as man, is the head of our Christian Communion, though as God, he be not
only the commander of it by his word, but also the defender and maintainer of
it by his power, so that the gates of hell are not able to prevail against it;
And this is Saint Augustines Judgment upon those words of our blessed Savior,
John 1. 5. I am the true Vine: That our Savior spoke those words, Secundum
quod caput Ecclesiae, as he was the Head of the Church, that is, according to
his humanity, whereby he is of the same nature with us men, as a Vine is of the
same nature with its branches. Nor can there be a fitter similitude to express
the communion of Christ with his Church, then is this of a Vine with its
branches: For as a Vine in the winter is without its branches, so was Christ in
his passion without his disciples: for they all forsook him and fled, Mark 14.
50. And as a Vine when it is without its branches is without it is beauty; so
it is said of Christ, whiles he was yet without its disciples, hanging upon his
cross, He has no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see him there is no
beauty that we should desire him, Isa. 53. 2. And as a Vine is first planted in
the earth before it brings forth branches; So was our Savior first laid in the
earth before his Church was increased and multiplied And as the Vine is the
basis and foundation which sustaineth the branches, so is Christ the foundation
of his Church: Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. The fellow laborers with God (spoken of in the
ninth verse) may help under prop the branches: but it is only the Vine that can
sustain them: And as the branches have all their greeness, and growth, and
fruit, from the Vine: So has the Church all its beauty and nourishment and
increase from Christ; and as the Vine does transfuse its nature, and therewith
its virtue into the branches, so does Christ communicate to his members his
name, whereby they are called Christians, his virtue whereby they are made
Christians, nay the very nature and being of his filiation or Sonship, as far
as it is communicable, in that he makes them the Sons of God with himself,
though not by nature, yet by adoption and Grace: Lastly (which is Saint
Augustines observation) As the branches are the most contemptible of all sorts
of wood when they are off from the Vine, but the most glorious whiles they are
on it: so is it with men, whiles they are without Christ, they are most base
and contemptible. Saint Peter can liken them to nothing but to dogs or swine,
But it is happened to them according to the true proverb, the Dog is turned to
his own vomit again, and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire,
2 Pet. 2. 22. But whiles they are in Christ, they are glorious and excellent
above all others; the same Saint Pteer labors for variety of titles to express
their excellency, But ye are a chosen generation. a royal Priesthood, an holy
Nation, a peculiar People, 1. Pet. 2. 9 Nay yet more, Partakers of the divine
nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust, 2 Pet.
1. 4. In his first list of titles he makes them much more then other men: but
in his Second, he supposes them little less then God: Christ as man,
communicating to his members the excellencies of his humanity, making them a
chosen, a holy, a peculiar people; and as God, communicating to them the
excellencies of his Divinity, making them partakers of the divine nature: In
capite tria possumus considerare, says Aqu. (tertia par. qu. 8. ar. 1.)
Ordinem, perfectionem, and virtutem: we must consider in the Head these three
things; That it is the highest part in order; The noblest part in perfection,
and the chiefest part in operation; And so is Christ to be considered as Head
of the Church. 1. That he is the highest part in order; for he is nearest the
most high, in whom alone men and angels are brought near unto God; For the
distance betwixt finite and infinite, must needs be infinite; The Angels then
being finite, no less then men, are in the same parallel or equi-distance from
infinity, and cannot be Mediators to bring us unto God: Only he that has
joined finite and infinite in one person, can join them together by his
mediation. 2. That he is the noblest part in perfection, because he alone had
the fullness of Grace and truth: all others have received from him; and of his
fullness have all we received, John 1, 16. Quo propinquius est receptivum causae
influenti, eo abundantius recipit; The nearer that which receives the
influence, is to that which gives it, the more plentifully it is supplied; thus
Astronomy teaches us, that the Moon in its conjunction with the Sun has in
truth more light in it self: though in the opposition, when it is farthest from
the Sun, it seem more enlightened in regard of us; So the Soul of Christ
received most Grace, because it was nearest God the fountain and giver of
grace, as being joined to him in person, whereas the spirits of the best men
and Angels are joined to him only in affection; and those are the best of
either sort, who are the nearest God in this conjunction.

3. That he is the chiefest part in operation; For as the virtue and motion ^f
all other members depends on the Head; So the virtue and motion of religious
Souls depends on Christ. Hence the Apostle is more, willing to glory in his
infirmities, then we can be to glory in our supposed strength; for it is but a
supposed strength, and that by an unlogicall, much more by an untheological
supposition which we do challenge to our selves, without our Savior; it is a
supposed strength by a supponis quod non est supponendum; A man that supposes
himself to have strength from himself, supposes what is not to be be supposed
logically, because it is against reason; much more theologically, because it is
against religion; for he has said without me you can do nothing, Sine me nihil
potestis facere, John 15. 5. Nec mirum, quia nec Deus sine ipso aliquid fecit,
says Aquinas; and it is no wonder if we can do nothing without him: For God
himself did nothing without him: as appears, John 1. 3. Sine ipso factum est
nihil quod factum est, without him was not any thing made that was made.
Accordingly Saint Augustine tells us, that by this saying our blessed Savior
has instructed the hearts of the humble, and stopped the mouths of the proud:
In quo and corda instruit humilium, and ora obstruit superborum. I had rather
be one of the humble to have my heart instructed, then one of the proud to have
my mouth stopped, and will therefore say unto my Savior, O Lord my strength
and my redeemer, Psalm. 19. 14. Or I will say of him, I take pleasure in
infirmities for Christ's sake, for when I am weak then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12.
10. that is, though I am weak in my self, yet I have a sufficient strength to
glory in, and to trust to, being strong in my Savior; therefore let me follow
Saint Paul's humility and say, Most gladly will I rather glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me, 2 Cor. 12. 9. Power is
accounted matter of glory in the man who desires to rely upon himself; But
Weakness is matter of glory in the Christian, who desires to rely wholly upon
his Savior: Hence Saint Bernard, Quis dabit mihi non solum infirmari, sed and
destitui ac dificere penitus a memet ipso, ut Domini virtutum virtute
stabiliar, (Sermon. 25. super Cant.) O that I could be more and more in- firm
and defective, even to a swowning fit in my self, that I might be strengthened
and revived by his power who is the Lord of power and strength; He comes very
near Saint Paul's expression (...), ut tanquam in tabernaculo inhabitet in me
virtus Christi, That the power of Christ may rest in me as in a tabernacle, not
for the shortness of continuance, or the uncertainty of abode that is in
tabernacles, for he could never have too much of Christ's company; but for the
slenderness of entertainment that was used to be in them: for he could never
enough bewail his own unworthiness to entertain such a heavenly guest.

But this Communion with Christ, as with our Head, will be better understood
from our Saviors own mouth, who makes a whole Sermon concerning it in the
fore-quoted 15. Chapter of Saint John, in the eleven first verses; and we shall
best learn this doctrine by considering the chief heads of that Sermon; For
therein our blessed Savior shows us the nature, the reasons, the cause, and
the proofs or evidences of our Communion with him.

First, The nature of this communion, Abide in me, and I in you, v. 4. It is
that whereby we abide in him, and he in us; as our own Church has taught us to
pray, That we may evermore dwell in him, and he in us; we dwell in him by faith
believing his promises, by love obeying his commands, and by desire, hungring
and thirsting after his presence; He dwells in us by his spirit enlightening our
understandings that we may believe, inflaming our affections that we may love,
and satisfying our desires that we may delight and rejoice in the presence of
his Grace, till we may be admitted to the presence of his Glory.

Secondly, The reasons of this communion: for although his command be enough to
compel us, yet he is pleased to use reasons to persuade us to have communion
with himself; And those reasons are five, whereof four are positive arguments,
the fifth is privative; The first positive argument why we should communicate
with our Savior, is, our own Sanctification, set forth by two words of
Purging, ver. 2. and of cleansing v. 3. by abiding in him we are purged from
the guilt, and cleansed from the pollution of our sins.

The Second positive argument why we should communicate with our Savior, is,
our fruitfulness in all good works, ver. 5. He that abides in me and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit; that is, fruits of piety and religion
toward God; fruits of temperance and sobriety toward himself; fruits of
justice and charity toward his neighbor; for he is like a tree planted by the
water side bringing forth at all times and seasons the fruits of a holy, a
chaste, and an upright conversation.

The third reason why we should communicate with our Savior Christ, is, our
own contentation, ver. 7. Ye shall ask what you will, and it shall be done unto
you; For he that abides in Christ, conformeth his will to the will of Christ,
and is sure to obtain what he asks, because he asks such things as please
him; according to that excellent prayer of our own Church, That they may obtain
their petitions, make them to ask such things as shall please thee: (Collect
for 10. Sunday after Trin.) So Saint Augustine glosseth the words, Manendo
quippe in Christo, quid velle possunt nisi quod convenit Christo? quid velle
possunt manendo in salvatore, nisi quod alienum non est a salute? He that
abides in Christ, what can he ask against Christ? He that abides in his
Savior, what can he ask that is destructive of salvation? Therefore if he beg
any thing of God that is not granted him, he begs it as he is in himself, not
as he is in his Savior; so the same Father, Quia si hoc petimus quod non fit,
non hoe petimus quod habet mans^o in Christo, sed quod habet cupiditas aut
infirmitas carnis; If we ask that which God will not do for us, we ask not
according to our being and abiding in Christ, but according to our being and
abiding in our own fleshly lusts and infirmities: Wherefore this being a
certain truth, that the good Christian desires to live rather according to the
will of Christ, then his own will; he can never be discontented for whatsoever
befalls him, because he knows, that though God hear him not according to his
prayer, yet he hears him according to his profit; si non audit ad voluntatem,
audit ad utilitatem, as says Saint Augustine, and being persuaded that all
things work together for good to them that love God, (Romans 8. 28.) he resolves
to be thankful for what God gives him, and for what he denies him and, he that
resolves to be thankful, is sure not to be miserable.

The fourth reason why we should communicate with our Savior Christ, is Gods
glory; ver. 8. Herein is my father glorified, that ye bear much fruit; which is
agreeable with that Doctrine in his first Sermon upon the Mount; Let your light
so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 5. 16. An argument so powerful, that we may
call it (...) or violentum, because it offers force or violence to our
consciences, which cannot but tell us that unless we do glorify our God here,
we may not hope to be glorified by him hereafter.

The fifth reason why we should communicate with our blessed Savior, is rather
privative, then positive, because it is taken from the punishment of those who
are not in his communion; and that reason is urged in the sixth ver. If a man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather
them, and cast them into the fire, and they are burned: Where the punishment of
those who abide not in Christ, is the same which those endure that are in hell;
For it is a punishment of loss, and a punishment of sense; The punishment of
loss is twofold, 1. The loss of glory, he is cast forth; 2. The loss of
nourishment, he is withered; The punishment of sense is also twofold; 1. He is
confined to ill company, men gather them, he is gathered together with other
branches as rotten as himself; he can have no other company but of wicked men
and of evil spirits; which we cannot but see, in our late outrages, was a most
unsufferable mischief; and if it be so tedious for an hour, what is it for
ever? 2 He is cast into a place of torment to be there tormented; and cast them
into the fire, and they are burned; Hence Saint Augustine most excellently,
Vnum e duobus Palmiti congruit; aut vitis aut ignis; si in vite non est, in
igne erit; ut ergo in igne non sit, maneat in vite; One of those two things
must needs befall every branch, either he is in the Vine, or he is in the fire;
therefore that he may not be in the fire, he were best abide in the Vine.

Thirdly the cause of this communion, ver. 9. As the Father has loved me, so I
have loved you; continue ye in my love: Gods love to us in Christ is the first
efficient cause of our communion with Christ, even as his grace is the
secundary or instrumental cause of it; and Saint Augustine has found that also
in these words, manete in dilectione mea, id est, in gratia mea, says he;
continue ye in my love, that is in my grace: He that is an enemy to the grace
of God, is not yet fitted for communion with Christ.

Fourthly and lastly, our blessed Savior shows the proofs or evidences of
our communion with him, that we may rejoice when we have it, and repent when we
have it not; and those proofs are three.

The first proof of our communion with Christ is this, that Christ's words abide
in us, ver. 7. If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you, the one always
accompanies the other; so that those men give an ill proof of their communion
with Christ, who make it their business to revile and reproach his word: Tunc
dicenda sunt verba ejus in nobis manner, quando facimus qua praecepit, and
diligimus que promisit, says Saint Augustine. Then is it to be said that his
words do abide in us, when we do what he has commanded, and desire what he
has promised; But Aquinas tells us that Christ's words do abide in us when we
believe them, when we love them, when we consider them, and when we obey them,
Amando, credendo, meditando, and implendo; And he proves this his Exposition
from Prove. 4. 20 21. My son attend to my words, that you may believe them;
Incline thine ear unto my sayings, that you may obey and fulfill them: Let them
not depart from thine eyes, that you may consider and meditate upon them; Keep
them in the midst of thine heart, that you may entirely affect and love them:
If the words of Christ do thus abide in us by faith, by love, by meditation and
by obedience, then we have a sure token that we our selves do abide in him; so
says Saint Bern. (Sermon. 69. super. Cantic.) Si sensero aperiri mihi sensum, ut
intellig^m Scripturas aut uberiores desursum influere animo meditationum
imbres, non ambigo sponsum adesse; Verbi siquidem hae copiae sunt, and de
plenitudine ejus ista accipimus: If I perceive my understanding opened to
understand the Scripture, or the influence and distillation of heavenly
meditations upon my soul, I cannot doubt but the Bridegroom is at hand; for
these are the armies that the word does march withal; and it is from his
fullness, that my soul is thus filled.

The second proof of our communion with Christ, is this, that we continue and
abide in his love; and this is a consequent of the former, as it is said, ver.
10. If ye keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love: No keeping of his
commandments, no abiding in his love: Wherefore the Solifidian is in a
dangerous condition, who seeks not to join obedience to his faith; For he
abides not in the love of Christ; and how then can he expect that Christ should
interpose his death and passion betwixt the judgment of God and his sinful
soul, since that interposition is clearly the greatest effect that can be of
Christ's love? Greater love has no man, then this, that a man lay down his life
for his friends, John 15. 13. Our blessed Savior dyed for his enemies; but
none shall have the benefit of his death, in the day of Judgment, but only his
friends; and none are his friends but they that abide in his love; and none
abide in his love, but they that keep his commandments; if not by their
righteousness, yet at least by their repentance.

The third proof of our communion with Christ, is this, that his joy remains
in us, ver. 11. These things have I spoken unto you, (sc. the things that
belong to your abiding in me) that my joy might remain in you; and that your
joy might be full; Lord, what a mercy is it that thy joy does come unto us,
much more that it does remain in us? And from whence co^^^h thy joy, but from
the testimony of thy Holy Spirit that thou have reconciled us unto the Father,
and from the testimony of our own consciences that we do not abide in any sin,
to hinder the comfort, and hazard the fruit of that reconciliation? This is the
very joy of the Holy Ghost, a joy not heard of but amongst Christian, a joy not
found but amongst good Christians, who have the Spirit of Christ witnessing
with their spirits that they are the children of God; and if children, then
heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ; if so be that they suffer
with him, that they may be also glorified together: Romans 8. 16, 17. It Is not all
the losses of the earth can discourage those who are the heirs of heaven; it is
not all the sufferings of this world can dismay those who have the joy of the
next world, because they know they can be losers and sufferers only for a time,
but they are sure they shall have gain and glory for ever.

SECT. II. That our communion with Christ is as our participation of Christ;
exteral or internal; The one may be the communion of hypocrites, the other only
of good Christians: The way to be a good Christian in a bad Church.
NO man can hope to be wise without wisdom, righteous without righteousness,
holy without holiness, true without truth, or to see without light, or to live
without life; And therefore no man can hope to be wise, righteous, holy, true,
or to see, or to live without Christ; for he of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, 1 Cor. 1. 30. and he alone is the light
which lights every man that comes into the world, John 1. 9. and he alone is
the truth and the life, John 14. 6. Therefore we must have Communion with him,
or we cannot have wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, truth, light or life
from him: But how can we have communion with Christ, since He is in heaven, and
we are on earth? I answer, as we can partake of him, so we can communicate with
him; For participation and communion, (...) are in Saint Paul's language
equipollent, one and the same thing: (...) Quae participatio, quae communio,
are set down as terms convertible, 2 Cor. 6. 14. So far therefore as we
participate of Christ, so far forth we communicate with Christ; If we
participate of him only externally: whether in his Word, or in his Sacraments,
we communicate with him only externally; If we participate of him internally,
we communicate also with him internally: according to that excellent
determination of that irrefragable Doctor, upon this question, An mali
pertineant ad unionem capitis cum corpore Ecclesiae? whether wicked men belong
to that Union of the Church, wherein Christ as head, is united with the body:
which question he determines in the negative, saying thus: Mali quidem sunt in
unitate Ecclesiae dummodo habent fidem rectam, ut zizania cum tritico, Mat. 13.
sed non sunt in unitate corporis Ecclesiae; sunt ergo de Ecclesia, sed non de
corpore Ecclesiae; nam ut in corpore humano est unio membrorum duplex, sc.
materialis per nervos, and formalis per vitam, sic in corpore Ecclesiae est
duplex unio membrorum, una quasi materialis quae est per fidem, alia formalis
quae est per charitatem: (Al^n. par. 3. qu. 12. m. 2. ar. 3.) Wicked men are in
the Unity of the Church as long as they profess the true faith, as the tares
are with the wheat, Mat. 13. But they are not in the unity of the body of the
Church; therefore they are of the Church, but not of the body of the Church;
For as in the body of a man there is a twofold Union of the members, to wit a
material union by nerves and ligaments, and a formal union by spirit and life;
so in the body of the Church there is a twofold union of the members, the one
as it were a material union in the outward profession of the same Christian
Faith, the other a formal union in the inward affection and love of that Faith
which they profess; And hence is that distinction of Aquinas (for Stapleton and
the later writers have it from him) Quidam sunt de Ecclesiae numero tantum;
quidam and merito and numero; Some men are members of the Christian Church only
in their number or in their persons; some also in their merit or in their
Dispositions: some men partake of the Word and Sacraments only with their ears,
and with their mouths; but others partake of them also with their hearts, as it
is said of the blessed Virgin Mother, She kept all these sayings in her heart,
Luke 2. 51. the one we may say are Christ's external, the other his internal
communicants; And the Apostle in the same place uses three other words, (...),
concord, part, agreement, which are in effect so many pledges to us, and
testimonials to others, of our internal communion with our blessed Savior; for
that causes us to have concord, part and agreement with him; Concord, as being
united with Christ, in the same affections; Part, as being united with him, in
the same promises; Agreement, as being united with him, in the same professions.

Wherefore this rule as it may increase our knowledge, so it must increase our
comfort; as it may be for our instruction, so it must be for our consolation,
that as far as we partake of Christ, so far we communicate with him; and as far
as we communicate with Christ, so far we partake of him. If our participation
of Christ be only external, as is that of hypocrites, who draw near him with
their lips, but their heart is far from him; who hear his Word, and receive his
Sacraments merely for custom, or for curiosity, or for some other external
consideration, then is our communion with Christ only external, and we only do
help to make up that visible body, whereof man is the Head: But if our
participation of Christ be internal, as is that of good Christians, who hear
his Word and receive his Sacraments out of conscience, that they may hear him
speaking to them in his Word, and find him nourishing them in his Sacraments,
then is our communion with Christ not only external, but also and much rather
internal, and we do help make up that mystical body, whereof Christ alone is
the Head: For it is our heart makes our Head, as we are Christians: if our heart
be with man more then with God in our religion, then man is our head in it; but
if our heart be with Christ, more then with man in our religion, then Christ is
our Head in it: And hence it comes to pass, that some men are better Christians
under a more corrupt, then others are under a more incorrupt form of doctrine
and discipline; because it is not communion with the Church, but with Christ in
the Church, that makes the good Christian: He that looks more after Christ,
then after his Church in the profession of Christianity, may happily be a good;
Christian in a bad Church; for Christ is able to make him a good Christian
without his Church; nay indeed against it: He that looks more after his Church
then after Christ, must needs be a bad Christian in a good Church; for his
Church cannot make him a good Christian without Christ. Accordingly a man may
be a better Christian in an unreformed Church, if his religion be above his
faction, then in a reformed Church, if his faction be above his religion; and I
had much rather have a Christian mind in an unchristian or antichristian
Church, then an unchristian mind in the purest Christian Church that is: For
though Christ be never so much in my Church, yet that will do me no good,
unless he be also in my heart; And if Christ be in my heart, it is not my
Churches being Antichristian or unchristian in some particulars (which I do
lament, but cannot help) that can drive him out of it, or deprive me of the
state and comfort of true Christianity: It Is sin if Christ be not in mine heart,
whiles I profess my self to be a Christian: It Is my misery, if. Christ be not in
all the professions and practices of my Church, by which I have been brought to
Christianity: Let me keep my self from being sinful, by making sure of Christ
in my heart; and my God will keep me from being miserable, because of some
mistakes or defects of Christianity in my Church.

Saint Paul says to the Corinthians, but of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
notwithstanding at that time there was both heresy and schism in the Church of
Corinth; Heresy, for some denied the resurrection; 1 Cor. 15. 12. Schism, for
some said they were of Paul, others of Apollos, others of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1. 12.
Their communion with a bad Church, (when they could not help it) did not hinder
their communion with Christ; and their communion with Christ, did make them
partakers of Christ: for he was made unto them wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. wisdom to direct them,
righteousness to acquit them, sanctification to purge them, and redemption to
save them: Thus was Christ made unto them either externally in his Word and
Sacraments, or internally in his Spirit and graces, accordingly as they did
communicate with him, and participate of him: If they brought only an outside
to him, they received only an outside from him; such a wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption as did only show them to be
Christians, not make them good Christians: But if they brought their inner man
to Christ, he perfected their inner man by an internal communion with, and
participation of his wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. Wherefore if our communion with Christ, or participation of Christ,
be only external, and not also internal, we ought to quarrel with our selves,
not with our Church, and much less with our God: for without doubt, God is
faithful who offers us Christ by his Church in his word and Sacraments, (For is
the Spirit of the Lord straightened? do not his words do good to him that walks
uprightly? Mich. 2. 7. is a question as unanswerable now, as it was then) and
it is merely from our own unfaithfulness, if we receive not Christ when he is
offered, or retein him not when he is received.

SECT. III. That our internal communion with Christ is through his Spirit and
our faith; which may not be a fancy or fiction, much less a faction, but a
faith knowing by evidence, approving by adherence, applying by affection, and
working by practice: That such a faith will make our communion with Christ real
and substantial in the thing it self, though in the manner it be only spiritual
and mystical.
THE union of two extremes, is necessarily by some other third thing betwixt
them both, which brings the said extremes together; and that, in regard of
Christ, is his spirit, which brings him down to us; in regard of us, is our
faith, which carries us up to Christ; Both are alike required in our internal
communion with Christ: For though his Spirit be never so powerfully with his
own ordinances, that to resist the one is to resist the other, as says Saint
Stephen, ye stiffnecked and uncircumcised in hearts and ears, ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost, Acts 7. 51. Yet if our faith be not with his Spirit, we
cannot have communion with him in his word; For so is the same truth spoken by
another mouth, But the word preached did not profit them not being mixed with
faith in them that heard it, Heb. 4. 2. Their not being profited was not for
want of Gods Spirit with his word, but for want of their faith with Gods
Spirit: The spirit was not, is not wanting to the word; for the word of God is
quick and powerful, sharper then any two* edgedsword, peircing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a
discoverer of the thoughts and intents of the heart, ver. 12. All which force
and activity cannot be from the dead letter which constitutes the word, but
from the quick spirit which accompanies and enlivens it; But their faith was,
and our faith is wanting to the Spirit of God, which brings us all under that
sharp reproof of our blessed Savior, O fools and slow of heart to believe all
that the Prophets have spoken! Luke 24. 25. For if we be not slow to believe,
yet generally we believe by an historical faith proceeding from the conviction
of the understanding merely through the evidence of truth, (as the Devils
believe and tremble) not by a justifying faith, proceeding from the conversion
of the will through the love of truth: And hence it is, that though the chief
corner stone be rightly laid in all Christian Churches, all alike confessing
Christ to be the eternal Son of God, and the Mediator betwixt God and man; (for
if any deny this, they are neither to be thought, nor to be called Christians)
yet the building is not rightly raised in many Churches; the reason is, because
there be many mockers in these last times, who walk after their own ungodly
lusts, separating themselves, sensual, not having the Spirit, as Saint Jude
admonishes; But in no wise building up themselves in their most holy faith, or
praying in the Holy Ghost, or keeping themselves in the love of God, as Saint
Jude advises. No wonder if such a faith as this came far short of its proper
object, Christ with all the blessings and mercies of God, since indeed it comes
far short of it self; For a faith that makes men not build up but pull down
the practice of religion; and pray, not in Gods Holy Spirit, but in their own
perverse spirits, and keep themselves not in the love of God, and consequently
of his Church, but in the love of their own self-interests and advantages; such
a faith, or rather such a fancy or fiction, and faction as this is and must
be called, comes far short of faith, and therefore cannot but come far short of
Christ the proper object of faith.

Saint Paul tells us of another kind of faith, which to them under the Law was
the evidence of things not seen, and must be so to us under the Gospel, saying,
these all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them
afar off, and were persuaded of them, and embraced them, and confessed that
they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth, Heb. 11. 13. They died in that
faith in the which we ought to live and dye, though the object of it be more
clearly revealed to us, then it was to them; a faith which is the substance of
things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen; A faith knowing by evidence,
(...), they did see the promises a faith approving by adherence, (...), they
were persuaded of them; A faith applying by affection, (...) they embraced
them; and lastly a faith working and persevering by profession and practice,
(...), they confessed the same promises not only in their words but also in
their deeds, in their life and conversation, accounting themselves strangers
and Pilgrims on earth, when they considered those heavenly promises: And that
made them like Pilgrims earnestly to long after their own country, and not do
or desire any thing for love of earth, which might hinder or delay their
passage to heaven: So that a faith thus seeing, thus applying, thus approving,
thus confessing the promises of salvation by Christ, is the faith which our
Apostle defines to be the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things not seen; that is to say, a faith that now makes Christ present with
the soul by the communion of his grace, and will hereafter make the soul
present with Christ in the communion of his glory: Oh for such a faith to bring
my Savior into my soul, and to keep him there, till faith it self be no longer
faith, but be turned into vision! A faith that engages the whole man, in all
his powers and faculties both of soul and body; For only such a faith as takes
up the whole man, in his understanding, will, affections, actions, can take a
right and lay a fast hold on Christ; such a faith, though it cannot
miraculously now open the heavens, as it did once to Saint Stephen, yet it can
and will pierce the heavens, and there see the son of man standing on the right
hand of God, ready to defend us on earth, and as ready to receive us into
heaven.

Whence we may very well conclude, that this communion of good Christians with
Christ, or of the body with the head, though at so great a distance, is in the
thing it self most real and substantial, though in the manner it be only
spiritual and mystical. Christ and his Church, (nay every true member of his
Church) are as substantially united together, as man and wife; Husbands love
your wives, as Christ loved the Church, Ephesians. 5. 25. that is to say, his wife:
And therefore as no distance can keep the man and his wife from being one
flesh; so neither Christ and his Church from being one spirit: He that is
joined to the Lord, is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. And to put us out of doubt
that we whilst we live here on earth, if we live unto him, are thus joined unto
him, Saint John says plainly, Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the
spirit which he has given us. 1 John 3. 24. There cannot be a more substantial
union then is of the soul with the body, because the soul abides in the body;
and the same union is of Christ with the soul, because he abides in the soul;
and as we know the soul abides in the body by the spirit or breath which it
gives to the body; so we know that Christ abides in the soul, by the spirit
which he gives to the soul; Yet is this union of Christ with his body, not
carnal but spiritual, not to be discerned by the strength of the outer, but of
the inner man; such an union as Saint Paul describes to all, but wishes only
to good Christians, (for though he might wish the Son of righteousness to shine
upon a dunghill, yet he might not wish him to be joined to it) that God would
grant you to be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inner man, that
Christ may dwell in your heart by faith, Ephesians. 3. 16, 17* Here is a most real
and substantial union and communion betwixt Christ and good Christians; for the
spirit strengthens them, and Christ dwells in them; but it is only spiritual,
for the spirit strengthens their inner man; and mystical, for Christ dwells
in their hearts: And he dwells in their hearts by faith, not a faith that
comes from their own Spirits, but a faith that comes from Gods Spirit; A
faith that comes from our own spirits strengthens only the outer man; but a
faith that comes from Gods spirit strengthens the inner man: That faith is
strong only in persuasion, but this faith is strong in affection; That faith is
strong in fancy, but this faith is strong in love, even in that love which is
the fulfilling of the Law; loving the body for the heads sake, loving the head
for his own sake: loving the Church for Christ, and loving Christ for himself;
such a faith as this proceeding from the Spirit of God, cannot but afford us a
real communion with the Son of God; and having a real communion with Christ as
with our head, we shall never delight in separations and divisions from the
Church, which is his body.

SECT. IV. Christian communion begins with the Church, but ends with
Christ both in the word, and Sacraments, and Prayers; and that the Church is
bound in all these to advance, not to hinder our Communion with Christ, either
by denying the people the use of the Scriptures, or by teaching them
superstitious prayers, as to Saints and Angels, wherein Christ neither can nor
will communicate with men: The ready way to have communion with Christ, is by
peace and holiness, and wherein that communion chiefly consists.
TRue Christian communion begins with the Church, as with the body of
Christ, but ends with Christ himself, as with the head: God has joined those
two together, let not man put them asunder; Nor is it the intent of this
discourse to divide this Christian communion into two several communions, by
reason determining or defining, ratione ratiocinata, because the body cannot
subsist without the head, but only by reason discussing or debating, ratione
ratiocinante, because the head is different from the body: And every good
Christian is to take notice, that though he may consider this communion
severally, yet he may not pursue and embrace it so. For he cannot have actual
communion with Christ, unless he have actual communion with his Church, no more
then he can have communion with the head, unless he have also communion with
the body: yet may he not rest satisfied in his communion with the body, the
Church of Christ, till they come thereby to have communion with the head, even
with Christ himself.

For our Christian communion is much like Jacobs ladder, the lower part whereof
was set upon the earth, but the top of it reached up to heaven; And behold the
Lord stood above at the top of it, Genesis 28. 12, 13. So is our Christian
communion; The lower part of it is with the Church the body of Christ here on
earth: but the upper part or top of it, is with Christ in heaven: And we cannot
say that our Christian communion is a true communion, unless Christ be at the
end of it; as for example, in hearing the word (read and preached) we at first
communicate with the Church, which speaks to the outward man, but we hear it
not profitably to our salvation, unless we at last communicate also with
Christ, speaking by his Spirit unto our souls, or to the inward man; Paedogogus
est Jesus, Our teacher is Jesus, was thought by Clemens of Alexandria, a fit
subject both to fill and to name his books of Christian Institutions ( v. lib.
1. Paedag. cap. 9.) For as the Church teaches the people, so also Christ
teaches them much more: and the Churches paedagogy i^ or should be to bring
them unto Christ, not to make them rest only upon their own teaching for
soul-saving truths: nor is this Doctrine any disparagement to the Church, no
more then Saint Paul's was to the Law, when he said, The Law was our
Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Nay indeed it is the
greatest honor of the Church, (as it was of the Law,) that God is pleased to
use her teaching as a means or instrument to bring us unto Christ; That as the
Church teaches us by explaining saving truths to our understandings, so Christ
may teach us by imprinting the same truths in our wills and affections, and
therefore the Church should above all things, take heed of offering those
truths in her explanations, which she cannot believe, nor wish that Christ
should ratify by his impressions, such as are all those Doctrines which are
the inventions of men, and not the institutions of Christ.

And forasmuch as it cannot be denied that Christ teaches more powerfully by
his own word then by ours, it is evident that the Holy Scriptures may not be
denied to the people in their own tongue by that Church which will labor to
advance their communion with Christ; and as evident, that the people are not
bound to communicate with that Church which will not labor to advance this,
the highest and greatest part of their Christian communion: Again, in receiving
the holy Eucharist, we must not only communicate with the Priest exhibiting
unto us the bread and wine, but also, and much rather, with Christ himself
exhibiting unto us his most precious body and blood, or we shall receive but
half a Sacrament, and enjoy but a half communion: This is Saint Paul's Divinity;
The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of
Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of
Christ? 1 Co. 10. 16. We bless the Cup, and we break the bread; therefore you
must communicate with us, (which we could not say, if we did refuse to do
either; for we could not desire you to relinquish your communion with Christ's
institution, to follow ours;) But the Cup which we bless, and the bread which
we break, is the communion of the blood and body of Christ; therefore you must
not communicate chiefly, and much less only with us, but also and much rather
with Christ himself.

Lastly, Thus is it also in our prayers* we are bound in our praying to
communicate not only with the Church as the body, but also with Christ as the
head; and consequently the Church is bound to use no other prayers then such as
may be agreeable with Christ's communion, and available by Christ's intercession:
For if we pray out of his communion, we cannot hope to obtain what we pray for,
by virtue of his intercession: And this (I conceive) was one main reason why
public Liturgies were at first established in the Church, that Christians
might know before hand the terms of their communion, and be assured in their
own hearts, that no other prayers should be offered unto them, then such
wherein Christ himself would join with them in intercession, which assurance
during the extraordinary effusions of the Spirit, was grounded upon the
infallibility of their persons who prayed; but when it could no longer be
grounded upon the infallibility of the persons that prayed, then it was thought
fit it should be grounded upon the infallibility of the thing or of the prayer;
for that faith cannot rest but upon infallibility; and the people, as well as
the Priest, ought to pray in Faith, wherefore this assurance is not only very
just and reasonable, but also very necessary and religious, since we all know
we must pray in the merit of Christ's intercession, if we hope our prayers
should find admittance to God, and acceptance with him, and we are sure he will
not intercede with us in such prayers as we have not learned from him. For
which cause the Church also teaches us to conclude all our prayers after this
manner, Per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum, through Jesus Christ our Lord, as
if we were bound to believe that Christ then prays for us, when we are
praying for our selves, (according to the rules of his word) and that we have
hopes to be heard not by virtue of our own, but of his intercession: And it is
observable that Saint Paul says of those who worshipped Angels, that they held
not the head, (Col. 2. 19.) because in such worship, Christ who is the head,
could not join with them, nor they with him: accorcordingly Saint Chrysostom
thus expostulates with such a worshipper, (...), Why do you let go the head to
lay hold on the members, whilst you think to come to God by the Angels, (he
might have put in Saints too, by the same reason, if that worship had been then
in fashion) and not immediately by Christ? For if you fall from him you are
certainly lost; and the way to fall from him, is not to lay immediate hold on
him; for he that lays not immediate hold of him, cannot lay fast hold of him;
It Is holding of the head, not of the body, that gives the nourishment whereby we
increase with the increase of God: and Angels are of the body, no less then
men; Accordingly the Fathers of the Council of Laodicea, give this reason why
they accurse them who called upon Angels in their worship, (...), ( Can. 35.)
because such men have forsaken the Lord Jesus, and are guilty of idolatry: And
it is a pitiful evasion of Baronius to say that the Council spoke of false
Angels, which the Heathen called Genii; for besides that no Christians ever
worshipped them, and the Canon only concerns Christians, it is too great an
absurdity to be pinned upon a Council, to say they spoke of Angels, when they
meant Devils: For our parts, we must conclude that praying to Saints and Angels
is a very unwarrantable, a very unsafe, a very uncomfortable way of praying,
because we are sure we cannot have communion with Christ in such prayers: For
though he can, does, and will join with us in saying, Our Father, yet he
cannot, will not, saying, Our Brother; Though he does join with us in our
intercessions to the Creator God blessed for ever, yet he does not, cannot join
with us in our intercessions to any creature; And therefore since the Church
requires our communion only by authority from Christ, it is evident that no
Church can justly require our communion in this or any other practice, wherein
it self does not communicate with Christ: For in such prayers as these, we can
only hold of the body, (or rather some corrupted member of the body) but we
cannot hold of the head; and consequently in such prayers as these, there can
be no true Christian communion; for that so begins with the Church, as that
it ends with Christ; so begins in earth, as that it ends in heaven;
Saint John's determination may best decide this controversy (for some men's
perverseness, has made it so) who in very few words thus sets forth to us our
Christian communion, That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you,
that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the
Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, 1 John 1. 3. Where we may see that God
imparted not the knowledge of Christian truths to his Church that she might
reserve them to her self, but that she might publish and declare them to his
people: That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you: God has
declared them to us, that we should declare them to you: And the reason why the
Church is bound to declare these Christian truths to the people, is, to
establish them in the true Christian communion, that ye also may have
fellowship with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with his
Son Jesus Christ; where we plainly see, that Christian communion begins with
the Church, and ends with Christ; nor would the Apostle seek to draw them to
have fellowship with him, but that with him they might also have fellowship
with Christ; he desires not to magnify this communion from himself, but from
his Savior: He therefore exhorts them to have communion with the Church, that
they might have communion with Christ: For indeed there are at least two
degrees, if not parts, of our Christian communion; the first is our communion
with Christ's Church as with the body, that ye also may have fellowship with us;
The second is our communion with Christ himself as with the head, and truly our
fellowship is with the Father and with his Son Jesus Christ; and this communion
is or ought to be the end of all preaching; that which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship, etc. This is or should
be the intent of all preaching; even the communion of the people with the
Priests, and the communion both of Priests and people with Christ; so likewise
says Saint Peter, speaking of our blessed Savior, His Divine power has given
unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness, through the knowledge
of him that has called us to glory and virtue; whereby are given to us
exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be partakers of
the Divine nature, 2 Pet, 1. 3, 4. (...), not only partakers of, but also
communicants in or with the Divine nature, as if he had said, the end of your
communion with us, is, that you may thereby have communion with God; His Divine
power has given unto us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through
the knowledge of himself; And we are desirous to impart to you this knowledge,
that you may have part in the same life and godliness: He has given to us
exceeding great and gracious promises, and we desire to publish them to you,
that by these, you also with us, might be partakers of the Divine nature: But
because this communion is or should be the only task of our whole life, and is
the only, comfort of our death, I will yet allege one more testimony for it,
and that shall be his who was wrapped up into the third heavens, that he might
the better show us the right and the straight way thither, and he bids us
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord, Heb. 2. 14. thereby dec^aring unto us as it were the two integral parts
of our Christian communion, Peace and Holiness, and the reason why we should
embrace them both, even that we may come to the beatifical vision: follow peace
with all men, that you may have communion with Gods Church; and follow
holiness, that you may have communion with God himself; for if you leave out
either of these, or leave following either of these, you cannot see the Lord:
We that follow peace with no men, not so much as with our selves, how shall we
see God? we that follow holiness in no kind, at least conscientiously, but only
contentiously, pretending to set it up in some one commandment, that we may the
more plausibly beat it down in all the rest, how shall we see God? Let all
unpeacefull and unholy men, (for surely they go both together, though holiness
has of late been made a pretense for breaking the peace) here see the danger
of their perverseness, that hereafter they feel not the mischief of it: those
who neither follow peace nor holiness, and yet pretend their eyes are open, so
as to see God, more then all the world besides, For it is a sad thing so to see
God, as not to come near him; Dives could do so in hell; He could see Abraham's
bosom; though he could not get near it, for it was afar off says the Text,
Luke 16. 23. It Is a sad thing to have a Vision of God without a fruition; but
it is an impossible thing to have a fruition without a communion; Excellently
Alensis asks this question, Per quid est unio membrorum in corpore Ecclesiae?
By what is it that good Christians are joined together, or the faithful are
united as members in the body of the Church? and he thus answers it: Per unam
perfectionem; una enim est perfectio in capite Christo and in omnibus Sanctis,
sc. Spiritus sanctus ex quo est nobis communio Trinitatis: et per unam
dispositionem, sc. Fide, spe, charitate, opere; nam Idem credunt, Idem appetunt
seu volunt, Idem expectant, Idem imitantur: Par. 3. q. 12. m. 2. art. 3. Christ
and good Christians are all united together by one Perfection, and by one
Disposition: By one perfection, for there is the same perfection in Christ the
head, and in all the Saints which are his body, to wit the Holy Ghost, which
joins them both in communion with the blessed Trinity: and by one Disposition,
to wit, in Faith, Hope, Charity and Works: for they all believe the same thing,
viz. The first truth: All desire the same thing, viz. The chiefest good: All
expect the same thing, viz. Eternal bliss: All imitate the same thing, viz. The
pattern or example of holiness, and hence it is that they all are of the same
communion.

SECT. V. That the Catholic Church requires our communion by the authority of
Christ, as his body: That the whole Christian Church is this Catholic Church,
and that it is known to be so by the word of Christ: and how a particular
Church may be sure to keep communion with the Catholic Church*
HE that truly desires communion with God, cannot but highly esteem, and
zealously pursue the actual communion with his Church, because the Church is
appointed to bring, and lead him unto God; And this was the reason of that
ancient saying, Extra Ecclesiam non est Salus, Out of the Church there is no
hope of Salvation, that is, out of the Catholic Church which is the body of
Christ; So that for any man not to be a member of that body, is in effect to be
a limb of the devil, and fuel for hell; which consideration made Saint Cyprian
break out into that pathetical expostulation, Vbi, and ex qua, and ^ui n^tus
est, qui filius Ecclesiae non est, ut habere quis possit Deum Patrem, ante
Ecclesiam matrem? (Saint Cypr. Epist. and Pompeium) Where, of whom, or to whom
is he born, who is not ^ Son of the Church, that he should have God for his
father, who has not the Church for his mother? And this doctrine not only many
very good Christian Divines, but also the Jewish Doctors have enforced as a
duty of the Text, from these words of Solomon; My Son, hear the instruction of
thy father, and forsake not the Law of thy mother, Prove. 1. 8. for say they, by
Father is here meant God the Father almighty, and by Mother is here meant the
Church, which teaches us the word of God; Thus Solomon Jarchi glosseth that
Text, my Son hear the instruction of thy father, that is (says he) Hear the
Instruction which God blessed for ever gave to Moses, partly in writing, partly
by word of mouth: (...).

And forsake not the Law of thy mother, that is, says he, forsake not the Law
of the Church or the Congregation of Israel, (...) nor the interpretations of
the Scribes, which are as it were a hedge of the Law: And doubtless he that
will not hearken to the Churches instruction, will not hearken to Gods
instruction; and he that will not hearken to Gods instruction, cannot hope for
Gods communion; which made the Prophet Jeremiah to say, Be thou instructed O
Jerusalem, lest my soul depart from thee, Jer. 6. 8. It Is in the Hebrew (...) ut
non laxetur anima mea a te, lest my Soul be loosed or disjointed from thee: the
same word (says Rabbi David,) that is used about the hollow of Jacobs thigh
being out of joint; and the signification of it is, the removing of a thing out
of its place, (...) from whence we may gather, that the communion of faithful
Souls with God, is like the knitting of the joints in the bodies of men; and as
a member when it is out of joint, affords great pain, but no use to the man as
long as it is dislocated: So is it with the Soul whiles it is out of Gods
communion, it is subject to very much horror and great anguish, but is not
capable of any good motion, or inclination: Consider what it is to put thy soul
out of joint, before thou play the Ephraimite, starting aside like a broken bow
from the communion of God in his Church; for if the dislocation of a joint be
so painful, because of the distention of the parts, what pangs and horrors*
must needs accompany a disjointed Soul that is distended upon the wrack of an
evil and a troubled conscience? Accordingly Rabbi David thus glosseth the
Prophets words, Be thou instructed O Jerusalem; for if thou will not be
instructed, my good will shall be separated from thee, that I will take no
delight in thee: A dismal judgment for a Separatist, that God will be
separated from him* and take no delight in him; but the reason is, because he
would needs be separated from God, and take no delight in God: For if he had
delighted himself in the Law of God, he would have delighted himself in the
Church, to which God committed, and with which God entrusted his Law: But he
would not take delight in God, and therefore God by way of retaliation, will
not take delight in him: And this he may be sure of, if God take no delight in
him, what ever he may do for a while in this world, yet certainly in the next
world, he will take no delight in himself: For he will then be so out of joint,
as never to be set again: Behold all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your
selves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
that ye have kindled: This shall ye have of mine hand* ye shall lie down in
sorrow, Isa. 50. 11. A text that is to be expounded of Schismatics in Iarchies
opinion, who thus begins to gloss it, Behold all ye, because (says he) they
did not hear the voice of his Prophets: So we see that in his judgment the
words concern those who would not hear the Church: and we may read in them, The
sin and the punishment of Schismatics: Their sin is twofold; they kindle a
fire, and compass themselves with sparks: that is, they are Incendiaries in
Church and State, and they love to be so. And their punishment is also twofold.
1. That in this life they are suffered to walk in the ^ight of their own false
fire, walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled;
q. d. Quum non acquiesca^^^ ig^^ sacro, perg^tote in prophano vestro, sed
perituri tamen ut filii Aaronis, Levit. 10. says Trem. since you will not
acquiesce and rest satisfied with the holy fire that came from God, and with
the true light thereof, that is in his Church, go walk in your own strange
fire, and after your own false lights, but know, you shall certainly perish as
did the Sons of Aaron, Lev. 10. where Nabad and Abihu, for offering of strange
fire, were devoured by fire. 2. That at the end of this life, they are punished
with everlasting death, This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in
sorrow; as if he had said, because ye will needs stand up in sin, ye shall be
sure to lie down in sorrow; and ye shall so lie down in sorrow, as that ye shall
never rise up in glory.

And we have little reason to wonder at this grievous punishment, but less to
doubt of it: for every Schismatical spirit by putting it self out of the
communion of Gods Church, does also put it self out of the communion of God
himself: For Christ's Church requires our communion by the authority of Christ
the eternal Son of God; And if you ask what Church? it must be answered, That
Church which is his body; for that only can act by power and virtue of the
Head: If you farther ask what Church is his body: It must be answered the
Catholic Church, that is to say, the whole congregation of Christian people,
dispersed over the face of the whole earth: For so does Saint Paul plainly
answer for us, saying, And he is the head of the body the Church, Col. 1. 18.
Not naming this or that particular Church, but taking the whole body of
Christian people for the body of Christ, or for his Catholic Church: For they
are all united together in one communion, and fellowship by the spirit of
Christ, even as all the members of the body are united in one communion by the
soul; So Aquinas, Sicut in uno homine est una anima; and unum corpus, and tamen
sunt diversa membra ipsius; Ita Ecclesia Catholica est unum corpus, and habet
diversa membra; Anima autem quae hoc corpus vivificat, est spiritus sanctus:
(in opusc. de symbol.) As in one man there is but one soul and one body,
although there be very may several members, because they are all made one body
by virtue of the soul which gives life to all; so is the Catholic Church but
one body, although it consist of diverse particular Churches, as of so many
members, because they are all made one body by the spirit of God, which
quickens and enlivens them all: So that no man can say any one particular
Church is the Catholic Church, excluding other Christian Churches without
confining the spirit of God, and dismembring the body of Christ; which is
little less then damnable blasphemy against the Spirit; for he is infinite and
therefore unconfinable; and as damnable Schism against the Son of God, for he
has made himself one with his Church; and therefore to cut off any part of his
Church from him, is to cut him off from himself: Let me rather rejoice that the
spirit of God is not to be confined, and the body of Christ is not to be
dismembered; for why should my eye be evil because he is good? Why should I deny
that mercy to others, which God has undeservedly bestowed on me? Will he not
say to me, as Moses to Joshua, Enviest thou for my sake? Numb. 11. 29. for what
is it to deny the Holy Spirit to other Christians that are not of our own
profession, but enviously to wish that God would deny his spirit unto them? Or
what is it to say they are not of Christ's body, but maliciously to wish they
were not so?

We may not then labor to bring back so much of Judaism into the world, as to
say now, He has not dealt so with any Nation, neither have the heathen
knowledge of his Laws, Psalm. 147. 20. for we cannot say he has restrained his
Church to any one Nation or People, since himself has said that in every
Nation he that fears him and works righteousness, is accepted with him:
(Acts 10. 35.) Be it therefore taken for granted that all the Christian
Churches in the world do make up the Catholic Church of Christ; and that it is
so called, not only for its accidental Catholicism, which is universality of
time, place and person, because it comprizeth all times, all places, all
persons, that is all conditions of men; But also and much rather for its
Essential or Substantial Catholicism, which is universality of doctrine, which
all they do hold and maintain that are reputed or called Christians; and that
doctrine is called by Saint John This confession That Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh. Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
is of God, 1 John 4. 2. The Apostles scope and intention in that place is
briefly to teach us how to try or examine the spirits, that is, the several
doctrin^^ of religion; that we may know who are true, and who are false
teachers: and he tells us, that whosoever teaches that Jesus is the Christ,
that is, the only founder and governor of the Church, and Savior of the
world, that man's doctrine is of God; for it is not to be doubted but he that
acknowledges Christ for the teacher and governor of the Church, is rightly
instructed and established in the doctrine of Christianity: Contrariwise, he
that acknowledges not this, as he has not Christ, so he has not God; and as
he professes not the Christian Religion, so he is to be looked upon as one
that professes a false religion: And to this is agreeable the Imperial
constitution in the first title of the Code, Fides Catholica, hoc est, ut
Patris and Filii and Spiritus sancti unam Deitatem sub pari Majestate and sub
pia Trinitate credamus; Qui ita credunt Christiani Catholici appellantur; The
constitution determines those only to be called Christian Catholics who have
and profess a right faith of the blessed Trinity: for indeed none other are
Christians, and therefore no other can be Catholics: For he is not a Christian
that has not this faith of Christ; that he is the eternal Son of God, made man
for our Redemption; and he cannot have this says who believes not the Trinity;
For he cannot believe Christ to be the Son of God, who believes not God the
Father; and he cannot believe this Son of God made man, who believes not God
the Holy Ghost, for he* was conceived of the Holy Ghost, that he might be born
of a Virgin: So that a right belief of Christ cannot be without a right belief
of the blessed Trinity; and therefore a right belief of the Trinity is very
fitly called by Saint Athanasius, The Catholic Faith, and to be a Christian is
to be a Catholic; For Christ alone is the founder both of our religion and of
our communion: If he be truly taught amongst us, then is God truly amongst us,
and we need neither misdoubt our Religion nor our communion, (for he that
abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and the Son, 2 John
9. but if he be not taught amongst us, let us not deceive our selves; for we
cannot be without Christ, but we must also be without God; for whosoever
denies the son, the same has not the father, 1 John 2. 23.

So that as far as the Christian Church is extended, so far the Catholic
Church is extended; and if you will yet farther ask what particular Church is
now to be reputed most Christian or Catholic; I must answer, that Church
wherein Christ is best taught and practiced; for we may not separate the
practice from the doctrine of Christianity, since the doctrine cannot be proved
but from the practice, according to that of Saint John, Hereby we do know that
we know him, if we keep his commandments, 1 John 2. 3. Wherefore that is to be
accounted the truest Christian Church, wherein the doctrine of Christ is most
truly published, accepted, maintained: and since the doctrine of Christ is not
to be known but from the word of Christ, no Christian Church can justly deny to
submit its doctrine to the test and trial of the word: for so says Saint Paul
to the Ephesians, ye are fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the household
of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, (that
is the Old and the New Testament) Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner
stone, Ephesians. 2. 19. 20. They could not have been taken for the household or
Church of God, if they had not been built upon the foundation of the Apostle^
and Prophets* Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone of such
buildings, and of no other: For that which proves the Christian Church in
general to be now the only true Catholic Church or body of Christ, may not be
denied to prove this or that Christian Church to be so in special: which cannot
be Tradition, for that has still varied in all Churches, and at all times, so
that never yet any Church would be bound by its own Traditions for any long
time, and much less by the Traditions of another Church: It remains then that
only the word of Christ is able to make good that proof, which word has been
generally acknowledged and received by all Churches: That proves the Christian
Church in general to be the only Catholic Church, and may not be denied to
prove this or that Church to be so in special. By that alone we prove the
Christian Church to be the only Catholic, against the misguided Jew; by that
alone we prove this or that particular Church to be more truly Catholic
against the mistaken Christian: And this proof Saint Paul teaches us in all
his Epistles, proving out of the Old Testament that Christ alone was that
Prophet who was to come into the world to bring both righteousness and
salvation; and consequently that no Religion but only the Christian was now any
longer to be embraced or expected, unless we would have a Religion that should
continue without righteousness, and end without salvation; And if we will
compare the second of the Galatians with the eleventh of the Acts, we shall
have more then a probable conjecture, that it was by Saint Paul's advice that
the Disciples were in Antioch first called Christians, and the name of
Nazarites, by which they had been formerly known, was quite laid aside, because
in that very City some of the Nazarites had endeavored to mingle Judaism and
Christianity into one Religion: But this we are sure of, that in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, the same Saint Paul, (for this argument being there so thoroughly
canvased, is proof enough alone to conclude him the author of that Epistle)
makes it his whole business to show, that only in Christ, and in his Gospel,
is fully revealed the will of God, and the way of salvation; But more
particularly, Heb. 9. 10. He shows, that though the Church of the Jews was
once the Catholic, viz. till the time of reformation, yet the Church of the
Christians alone is so now; which was indeed to continue and keep the
spiritual, but to reform and lay aside the carnal Ordinances: Therefore this
Christian Church still maintains communion with the Jewish Church in all
Moral duties: (for no reformation of Gods making can put down a Moral duty or
obligation, either toward God or toward our neighbor:) as says Saint Paul,
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe,
to the saving of the soul, Heb. 10. 39. Here is (...), but not (...) in our
turning Christians, (...) sumus substractionis, (...), sed fidei, q. d. we are
not of those who forsake or deny any one Moral Law enjoined to the Jews, for
that were (...), to draw backward to perdition; but we are of those who profess
a true and a lively faith in Christ, the Messiah promised to the fathers, but
exhibited to us, for that's (...), what we have been taught by the Apostles, and
it is to go forward to salvation: For it is indeed to outstrip the Jews in
their own Moral Law, whilst we establish not our own righteousness, but submit
our selves to the right^^usness of God, acknowledging that Christ is the end of
the Law for righteousness to every one that believes, (Romans 10. 4.) but by no
means for unrighteousness; that is, for the acceptance of our obedience, but
not for the abolition of it: Thus we Christians still keep communion with the
Jews in all Moral duties; and as for Ceremonials, the Jews themselves cannot
deny but they are bound to alter their own communion; For the abolition of all
ceremonial or typical worship was foretold to them even at the first
institution of it, by Moses himself, saying, And the Lord said, I will raise
them up a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee, and will put my
words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him:
And it shall come to pass that whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which
he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him, Deuteronomy. 18. 18, 19. And as
this abolition of the Ceremonial worship was foretold to the Jews at the first
institution, so was it also believed by them, at the first reception thereof:
For hence alone was it, that they found no fault with their Prophets, after
Moses, though they found them dispensing with the Law of Moses, nay plainly
acting against it in the exercise of their typical or ceremonial worship; as
for example, neither they (of Jerusalem, nor of Samaria) quarrelled with Eliah
for gathering Israel together to offer sacrifice upon Mount Carmel, 1 King. 18.
19. Though Moses had flatly commanded, That all should bring their offerings to
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, Levit. 17. 2, 3, 4. Here it is
plain the Ceremonial worship was changed without any quarrel at all in that
backsliding, and therefore quarrelsome and contentious age of the Church of the
Jews, which could scarce have been, had they not received that same worship
with some belief of its future change, and had not their Prophets confirmed
them in that belief, foreshewing as it were by particular changes introduced by
them, the universal change that should one day be introduced by the Messiah,
their last and greatest Prophet.

And this general change wrought by our Savior Christ is so proved to us
Christians, that we cannot so much as doubt it, and much less deny it; For
those very words of Moses that foreshewed the change, A prophet shall the Lord
your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me, him shall you hear in
all things, are quoted by Saint Peter as fulfilled in Christ, Acts 3. 22. And
again he says v. 24. That all the Prophets, from Samuel, and those that follow
after, (which words justify the Jews division of the Prophets into the former,
and latter Prophets, (...) and put the latter Prophets in as good credit as the
former, against the Samaritanes) and as many have spoken, have likewise
foretold of these days: All the Prophets like so many lines from the
circumference in the center, meet together in Christ; so that the written word
of God, not only is the undoubted, and therefore should be the undeniable
ground of all Religion, but also of the very Christian Religion; nor may we
endeavor to prove the establishment of the Christian Religion by unwritten
Traditions, no more then the Apostles did prove the change of the Jewish
Religion by them; They alleged the written word for the introduction. we for
the establishment of our Christian Religion; The old Testament so exactly
agreeing with the new; and both old and new so exactly agreeing and
corresponding in Christ, that there can be no doubt left of the truth of
Christianity: Hence Saint Paul will have us make so sure of our Religion, that
though an Angel from heaven should preach another Gospel, we should not be
ready to believe but to accurse him; Gal. 1, 8. And Saint John says the same
in effect, If there come any to you and bring not this doctrine (sc. that
whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, has not
God) receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed, 2 John 9* 10.
Si quis venit ad vos, If any come unto you, it is all one whether the substantive
be an Angel or a man; for that divinity was not yet in fashion, Si Papa erraret
praecipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo virtutes, teneretur Ecclesia credere vitia
esse bona, and virtutes malas, nisi velit contra conscientiam peccare, Bellar.
lib. 4. de Pontif. cap. 5. That if the Pope should err by commanding sins, and
forbidding virtues, The Church were bound to believe that sins were good, and
virtues were evil, unless she would sin against her conscience; Op. Ac ne forte
contra conscientiam agat, tenetur credere bonum esse quod ille praecipit, malum
quod ille prohibet; And least the Church should do any thing against her
conscience, she is bound to believe that to be good which the Pope commands,
and that to be evil which he forbids; A strange assertion, as if God had put
all his Divine Truths whether speculative or practical (for if the one, the
other also) under the possibility of man's lawful contradiction, and all our
consciences under the power of his control: nor is there any remedy for this
mischeivous consequence, by translating this pretended Infallibility from his
person to his chair, nor from his chair to his Church; for we may justly
suppose, or rather must necessarily believe, that Saint John's words are as well
to be understood and interpreted of a whole Church, as of single man, since
there is the same reason of both; for a Church is but a congregation of men;
and false doctrine has no less of falsity, though it has less of excuse, in a
Church, then in any particular man; But we must more then believe this Truth,
(if it be possible) That the Gospel is to sway our faith above and against all
authorities to the contrary whatsoever, by the force of Saint Paul's reason; For
if not the authority of the Church triumphant, then surely not of the Church
militant may be allowed to weaken our faith in the doctrine or in the Gospel of
Christ; If not an Angel from heaven, then sure not a man upon the earth.

And great pity it is, but greater shame, that the faction and humor of some
men should endeavor to shake not only the dictates of nature, in putting
virtue and vice under man's determination, but also the very foundation of
supernatural Truth, the written Word of God, thereby thinking the more to
establish the pillar of supernatural truth, the Church of God; whereas indeed
they do the more shake that too; For we are all most sure that the Scriptures
came incorrupt from the mouth of God; and therefore if there be now any
corruptions in them, they are of man's, not of Gods creating: And consequently
if the Scriptures have in any wise lost their authority, they have lost it by
the Church; and it were a wonder if the Church should cause the Scriptures to
lose their authority, and yet keep her own.

We will then take it for granted that the Catholic Church cannot be fully and
infallibly proved to be Christian, but only by the Holy Scriptures, and that
she her self seeks for no other, and cannot find a better proof; And from hence
it must need follow that every particular Church as far as it is truly
Christian, is willing to submit it self to be tried by the written Word of God;
and that if nothing but true Cbristianity had gotten into the Church, men would
never have withdrawn their necks, and much less their hearts from that known
and certain trial; for that all the world is not able to prove any thing that
is unwritten, (whether it be Tradition or Revelation) to be the undoubted Word
of God, but only as far as it is agreeable with what is written; according to
that admirable Rule delivered by Saint Athanasius, (who having been vexed by
the Arrian heretics above forty years together, has taught us how best to
confute that, and all other heresy saying) (...); Athanasius in Epist de
decretis Nic. Synodi ad finem, There are much more exact and perfect proofs of
the divine truth to be taken from the Scripture alone, then all the whole world
beside is able to afford us: wherefore it must needs follow again that the best
way for a particular Church to keep communion with the Catholic Church, is, to
keep close to the Scriptures, wherein alone are revealed those Truths, the bare
profession whereof makes a Church, and the entire profession whereof makes it
truly Catholic: That Curch which has the written Word of God for the
foundation of her faith and practice, is sure to have communion with all good
Christians in what she truly believes and practices according to that word;
And in case she deviate through humane error, or infirmity, in some particular
deductions, yet that deviation or mistake, shall not overthrow her faith,
because it is sure and certain in the foundation; and consequently shall not
break off her communion with Christ the head, nor with the Catholic Church his
body, because that same holy Spirit, on whose dictates she relies, is the sole
author and maintainer of that communion: whereas if a Church should believe all
the Articles of the Christian faith upon any other ground, then that of Divine
revelation, (which we cannot now be assured of, but only from the written Word
of God) as she could not have a true Divine says, not being grounded upon a
Divine foundation, so she could not in that faith, have communion with those
Christian Churches who allowed no other ground of their belief.

And such were all the Christian Churches of the Primitive times; for though
Saint Athanasius (in the place fore-alledged) does on the Arrians behalf bring
in an objection against the word (...) as not being used in the Text, and
therefore not to be used concerning Christ, for that we may not speak otherwise
of him, then he in his word has spoken of himself; yet he allows this very
objection to be according to his own heart, (and sure he was a very good
Chatholike) and enforces it with the reason before cited, That the most exact
proofs of Divine truths were to be taken from the Scriptures, and withal
avoweth, that those about Eusebius (who was a chief upholder of the Arrians)
were such egregious turn-cotes and cavillers, that the Bishops assembled in the
Council of Nice were in a manner compelled more clearly to expound those words
of the text, which did immediately strike at the root of their heresy: (...):
Whereby it appears, that the Nicene Fathers did assume to themselves only the
power of Exposition, in matters of faith, not of Addition, or of Invention:
They did expound that more clearly which they found in the Scriptures, and in
the Apostles Creed; they did not ad or invent that which they found not: As
they were expounders, they might and did hold communion with the Catholic
Church (whereof they were then the Representative) which did wholly rely upthe
word of God for all the Doctrines of faith; whereas if they had taken upon them
to be Inventers, they must have forsaken the main ground of Christian
communion, the undoubted word of Christ, and have been the authors of a
faction, and of a division: And for this cause we see that in that famous
Council of Chalcedon, (wherein were assembled six hundred Christian Bishops,)
The Holy Gospel was placed in the midst of them, as that on which they relied,
and to which they appealed, in all their determinations: (...), are the words
found in the first action of that Council, The most holy and most pure Gospel
being set before them; And Baronius tells us that the same had been done before
in the Council of Nice, and gives the reason why it was done, out of Saint
Cyril, who says thus, concerning the Council of Ephesus, Christum assessorem
capitis loco adjunxit; venerandum enim Evangelium in throno collocavit, tantum
non in aures sacerdotum clamans, Justum judicium judicate: Liber igitur ille in
sede regia collocatus divinam prae se ferebat personam, secundum illud Psalmi,
Deus stetit in synagoga Deorum, in medio autem Deos dijudicat: They looked upon
Christ as head or president of their assembly, for they placed his holy Gospel
on a throne amongst them, that it might represent the person of God the Judge
of all men; and they placed it in the midst, that all might cast their eyes
upon it, and be afraid in the presence of their Judge, to pass an unrighteous
judgment; Thus says the Psalmist, God stood in the midst of the congregation
of Gods, and he that was in the midst judged the other Gods: ( Baron. An. 325.
number. 66.) And the same says Binius in his notes upon the Council of Ephesus,
In medio Patrum consessu sedem enm Evangelio collocarunt, cujus intuitu omnes
admonerentur, Christum omnium inspectorem ac judicem adesse, Synodique
praesidem agere: In the midst of the fathers of the Ephesine Council, was the
Holy Gospel placed on a throne, that all the Fathers seeing it, might be
admonished of Christ's own presence to overlook them as their Judge, and to
overawe them as president of their Council: and he says no more then is truth,
for that form of adjuration mentioned by Fidus the Bishop of Joppe, (...), Whom
we beseech and adjure by the Holy Gospel here set before us, Council. Ephesians. par.
2. act. 1. does plainly witness as much; although at the first session of the
Bishops there is no mention of the Holy Gospels being placed among them, as was
afterward at the first session of the Council of Chalcedon: But it is plain that
the New Testament was not only before their eyes, but also within their hearts;
for they proved all their several Doctrines out of it; particularly this
position, that Christ is God by the union of the manhood with the Godhead,
they proved, 1. (...), out of the Apostle Saint Paul's writings, (among which is
also reckoned up the Epistle to the Hebrews,) 2. (...), out of the Epistles
general of Saint Peter, Saint John, Saint Jude, 3. (...), out of the Gospels
peculiarly so called; Council. Ephesians. par. 1. And it is most evident that the
Doctrines delivered by the four first general Councils in their Creeds, are all
plainly to be proved by the Scriptures, so that we may easily grant that they
placed the Holy Gospel in the midst of their Synods* as it were to make
protestation that they intended to obtrude no other faith to the world, then
what they had met with there, and could prove from thence; and consequently not
to desire other men's communion with them in their Doctrines further then
themselves had in the same Doctrines communion with the Holy Ghost; Wherefore
this is the ready way for every particular Church to be sure to keep communion
with the Catholic Church in her Doctrine, to adhere steadfastly to the written
Word of God, which is the only indisputable ground of that Doctrine; For this
Word alone shows that the Jews in Moral worship had communion with
Christians, and that both the Jews (then had) and Christians now have in the
same worship communion with Christ: They have Moses and the Prophets, says our
blessed Savior, let them hear them, Luke 6. 29. And again, If they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from
the dead, ver. 31. We Christians have not only Moses and the Prophets, but also
the Apostles, for the foundation of our Churches; and as we are sure that Moses
and the Prophets were delivered incorrupt to our first Fathers; (for else our
Savior Christ would not have appealed unto them, but rather have reproved the
Jews for corrupting them;) so ought we to be sure that the Apostles are now
delivered as incorrupt unto us, unless we will say that the Christian Church
has been less faithful then the Jewish Synagogue, in keeping the Text, and by
so saying, quite disannul her authority in expounding it; and so cut our selves
off from one of the best means of our salvation. Why thou should not these
writings of Moses and the Prophets, and the Apostles, which are the only proof
of our Churches, be also the grand establishment of our communion? For as it is
the faith that makes the Church, so it is the agreement in the Faith, that makes
the communion of the Church truly Christian; Accordingly our own Church has
taught us to pray most exquisitely for this Christian communion, in these
words, Beseeching thee to inspire continually the universal Church with the
Spirit of truth unity and concord; and to grant that all they that do confess
thy holy Name, may agree in the truth of thy holy word, and live in unity and
godly love; A prayer so full of true Christian affection* that its Christianity
will acquit it from Novelty, though it be scarce to be found in any ancient
Greek or Latin Liturgy; for it sets forth true Christian communion in all
its four causes; in its efficient cause, the Spirit of truth unity and concord;
in its material cause, the universal Church; in its formal cause, the agreement
in the truth of Gods holy Word; and in its final cause, to live in unity and
godly love: How can any man that heartily says this prayer, be either an
Heretic by willingly sinning against the truth of Gods Word, or a schismatic
by wilfully sinning against the unity of Gods Church?

We may conclude then, That all the several Christian Churches in the world,
which have been, are, and shall be, do concur together as members to make up
the body of Christ, or the Catholic Church; and that all of them as Christian,
are joined together, (though thousand of miles and years asunder,) in one
outward communion by agreeing in the same word of Christ; and in one inward
communion, by enjoying the same Spirit of Christ; The outward communion joins
the members to the body; and I would to God that they were not so much
disjoined and disjoynted: The inward communion joins the body to the head, and
I bless God that in that respect there can be no disjunction; It Is dangerous to
be a separatist from the first, but it is damnable to be a separatist from the
second communion; to communicate with Gods most holy Spirit in Gods most holy
Word, is the most sure and ready way to communicate with the Catholic Church,
and that will keep us from being heretics; for no heretic, as such, does
communicate either with Gods Word, or with Gods Spirit. To communicate with the
Catholic Church, is the most sure and ready way to communicate with Christ
himself, and that will keep us from being Schismatics; for no Schismatic, as
such, does communicate with Christ either in his body or in himself. But still
we must remember, that communion with the Word, and with the Church is nothing
worth, without communion with Christ, and with the Spirit, and that will keep
us from being hypocrites; For no hypocrite does communicate with Christ and
with his Spirit, either in his word or in his Church: And we have need, in
these dangerous times, of all three cautions; for never was there any Heresy
without a Schism; and seldom is there any desperate Schism without most
damnable hypocrisy.

SECT. VI. The Catholic Church properly so called, has in it neither
Herereticks, Schismatics nor Hypocrites; but commonly so called comprizeth all
those Christians, who outwardly embrace the truth and worship of Christ: That
our own particular Church (keeping communion with the Catholic) requires our
communion by the authority of the Catholic Church; The authority and Trust of
particular National Churches from Scripture and Councils: A sober and a pious
resolution not to sin against the authority of the Church by wilful Schism,
and the reasons of that resolution.
THE special number of right believing, (and therefore righteously doing)
Christians in all the several Churches of the Christian world, which
communicate in all things wherein Christians should, is alone truly and
properly named the Catholic Church, because it consists of them only that
without addition, diminution, alteration, or innovation in matter of doctrine
hold the common faith once delivered to the Saints, so that it is impossible for
them to be Heretics; And without all particular or private division or ^act^on
retain the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; so that it is impossible for
them to be either Hypocrites or Schismatics; they cannot be hypocrites because
they have the spirit of God; and they cannot be Schismatics, because they hold
the unity of that spirit in the bond of peace.

Whence we may gather this Negative definition of a true Catholic, that he is
such a one who is neither Heretic, nor Schismatic, nor Hypocrite; and this
positive definition of a the Catholic Church, that it is such a number
Christians, as profess the faith of Christ in Verity, Unity and Sincerity; in
verity, and so are distinguished from Heretics; in unity, and so are
distinguished from Schismatics; in sincerity, and so are distinguished from
Hypocrites: And this is the Catholic Church perfectly and properly so called;
And of this Catholic Church are those words of Epiphanius to be understood at
the end of Colorbasii, or his thirty-fifth heresy, (...). My dove, my
undefiledis but one, says Christ, (Cant. 6. 9.) that is, his holy spouse, the
Catholic Church; called a dove, for her mildness, innocence, and purity; and
called undefiled for the perfect grace and knowledge she has received from God
through our Savior Christ, by the holy Ghost.

But yet we must acknowledge, that the Catholic Church commonly so called, is
of a larger signification then to express, and of a larger extension then to
comprize only these choice and selected Christians; For all that outwardly
embrace the truth and worship of Christ, do make but one Catholic Church, for
as much as they all concur in the outward profession of faith in the same
common Savior, and in the outward use of those means of Salvation which he
has appointed, though they neither profess the faith so incorruptly as it was
taught, nor use the means so inoffensively as they were appointed. And this
Divinity, That all Christians are incorporated into one body of Christ, or one
Catholic Church, has been taught us by Saint Paul, who says, That he might
reconcile both (Jew and Gentiles) unto God in one body, Ephesians. 2, 16. and again,
That the Gentiles should be of the same body, Ephesians. 3. 6. that is to say, of the
same body externally by the same word and Sacraments, and of the same body
internally by the same spirit of Christ: Wherefore the unity of this body of
Christians, as it is a visible body, is from one thing; and as it is a mystical
body, is from another: For the unity of the Mystical body of Christ, is only
from the Holy Ghost, joining all the members together, and each particular
member to the Head; But the unity of the visible body of Christ, is from one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, all the members of the Church as it is visible,
being to be discerned and known by this character, even by the outward
profession of that truth, and by the outward use of those means, which Christ
their common Lord and Savior has instituted and ordained for their Salvation.

Wherefore all men that have the profession of Christ's saving truth, and do
practice the means of salvation, must be acknowledged to belong to one
Christian, or to one Catholic Church, as being sanctified by the profession of
that truth, and the use of those means, though their ptofession be not so
entire, nor their practice so exact as it ought to be: Whence the Apostle
writing to the Corinthians, though much over run with Heresy and Schism, yet
writes on this manner, Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1. 2. For in that they were of the
Christian Church by the outward profession of Christ's truth, and the practice
of his commands, they were sanctified in Christ Jesus, though some of them were
Heretics and denied the resurrection, others were Schismatics and denied the
Apostles authority; For even Heretics and Schismatics though they do not hold
in verity and in unity the entire profession of Christ's Truth, yet are they of
the Christian Church generally so called, for that truth which they do hold;
and as far as they remain parts of the true Christian Church, so far they may
be a means of saving others either by preaching the word or administering the
Sacraments, though by reason of their Heresy and Schism, they themselves
(without repentance,) are not in the state of Salvation; And surely we cannot
reasonably think that there were neither Heretics nor Schismatics in the
Churches of Ephesus, Philippi, and Colosse; and yet the same Apostle says, To
the Saints which are at Ephesus, Ephesians. 1. 1* To all the Saints which are at
Philippi, Phil. 1. 1. and to the Saints and faithful brethren in Christ, which
are at Colosse, Col. 1. 2. In all which Epistles doubtless Saint Paul writ to
the visible body of the several Churches, and sent his letters to the visible
head of that body (as Saint John did his epistles to the Angels of the several
Churches, Rev. 2. 13:) and yet he called them Saints and faithful brethren;
not that they were all really such, but that they were indeed called of God to
be such; and if they were not so in their own inward affection, it was their own
fault; He was sure they were so in their outward profession, and therefore
might justly be so called; It was their parts to make good that glorious title,
not his part to forbear it: for they were indeed sanctified through the outward
profession of Christ's saving Name and Truth, and therefore he could not in
charity but think and say, they were also sanctified by the inward affection of
the same: Nor may any man suppose, that the Apostle did send his directions and
instructions to the mystical, but to the Visible body of Christ, unless he will
say that the Apostle intended to bring confusion into the Church, which for its
singular order, is called acies ordinata, a well ordered army, wherein not one
man is suffered to be out of rank; or that he intended to gratify some proud
contentious spirits, by laying such grounds of schism and faction as might
breed strifes and quarrels about the right of Church Government unto the worlds
end: For who can tell by looking in a man's forehead, that he is one of the
mystical body of Christ, having communion with him through the Holy Ghost?
whence it will follow that those who are best conceited of themselves will
violently invade, at least readily usurp, the government of others, and
consequently pride and presumption will challenge universal jurisdiction: for
they who have so much pride as to say they are more nearly linked in communion
with Christ then their brethren, have seldom so much piety as to make good
that saying.

Wherefore it is safest for men to believe, that though the promises of grace
chiefly concern the mystical; yet the precepts chiefly concern the visible
Church; for as much as Christ has entrusted that, both with the doctrine and
with the means of salvation; with the ministry both of his Word and Sacraments:
For these are without question deposited with the visible Church, though none
are benefited by them, (so far as to attain Salvation) but only those that are
of the invisible Church, or the mystical body of Christ: But God the searcher
of hearts, has reserved the knowledge of the invisible Church only to himself,
and requires all Christians to join in communion with that visible Church
wherein they live, if so be that* therein is preserved the outward sincere
profession of Gods truth and worship, and the right administration of his
Sacraments* which is a condition not to be excepted against, unles we will deny
men the use of reason (there only where they most want it) in the choice of
their religion; and yet allow it in the choice of their Church: and think it
enough for them to serve God according to the dictates of others consciences,
when we are sure they shall be acquitted or condemned in the last judgment*
according to the dictates of their own: Wherefore we must allow an outward
sincere profession of Gods truth, and word, and a right administration of his
Sacraments to the constitution of that visible Church, which obliges us to her
communion as a member of the true Catholic Church; And if we cannot make it
appear out of the written Word of God that our own Church is faulty in either
of these, we may not forsake her communion, since by virtue of these she is to
us instead of the Catholic Church, and by authority of the Catholic Church,
binds us to her communion: For if we acknowledge our Church to be Catholic
in her profession, (which we are bound to do unless we can prove the contrary)
we must also acknowledge her to be Catholic in her obligation; because where
is unquestionable purity, there must be unquestionable Authority, unless we
will say that Religion is a matter of indifferency, and leaves men at their
liberty either to practice or to despise it, as they please.

This was not the opinion of the Primitive Christians, of whom it is said, And
they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of bread, and in prayers, Acts 2. 42. They thought themselves bound to
continue sted^astly in that communion wherein was a sincere profession of Gods
truth and worship, (here expressed by doctrine and Prayers,) and a right
administration of the Sacraments (here expressed by breaking of bread:) And so
must we likewise think our selves bound to continue steadfastly in their
Communion, who succeed the Apostles in the public exercise of the same
religious duties, or deny that this Scripture was written for our learning; So
that unless it be evident to us that the Church wherein we live is faulty
either in doctrine, or in Prayers, or in administration of the Sacraments, we
may not recede from her communion without being guilty of schism and faction,
and then Saint Augustine (unless you will say Fulgentius was the author of that
book) will tell us our doom, in these words, Firmissime tene, and nullatenus
dubites, non solum omnes Paganos, sed etiam omnes Judaeos, Haereticos, atque
Schismaticos, qui extra Ecclesiam Catholicam praesentem finiunt vitam, in ignem
aeternum ituros, qui paratus est diabolo and angelis ejus; Aug. de fide ad
Patr. Daph. c. 38. You must firmly believe, and in no wise doubt, that not only
all Pagans, but also all Jews, and Heretics and Schismatics, who end this
present life out of the communion of the Catholic Church, shall go into that
eternal fire which was prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

For he that wilfully lives and dies out of the communion of his own Church,
being a true member of the Catholic, lives and dies (at least in the perverse
disposition of his soul) out of the communion of the Catholic Church, and
consequently lives and dies in the state of damnation: so nearly does it
concern every Christian not to break communion with his own Church unadvisedly
and undeservedly, (for that is in effect to break communion with the Catholic
Church) but to try the Spirits whether they are of God, and to know there is no
warrantable disobedience of that command, Keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace, unless it be evident, That the Spirit is not of God; And yet
even in that case, men ought to be very cautelous and wary, that they so
forsake the communion of the Church, as not to disturb the peace of it; for
that was all that those seven thousand did, who bowed not their knee to Baal,
in the general defection of the Church of Israel, 1 King. 19. 18. And that is
all we are bound to do in the like case, if we will have Gods mark set upon us
to preserve us from wrath in the day of wrath; for so says the Prophet
Ezekiel, Set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for
all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof, sc. of Jerusalem;
Ezech. 9. 4. Sighing and crying for those abominations we cannot help, is
enough to discharge us from the guilt of them, and this may be done, if not
without making of a noise, yet sure without making of any tumult.

And this is according to Saint Augustines advice, Misericorditer corripiat
homo quod potest; quod autem non potest, patienter ferat, and dilectione gemat
atque lugeat, donec aut ille desuper emen det and corrigat, aut usque ad m^ssem
differat eradicare zizania, and pal^am ventilare: ut tamen securi de salute sua
bonae spei Christiani, inter desperatos quos corripere non valent, in unitate
versentur, auferant malum a seipsis, id est, ut in ipsis non inveniatur, quod
in moribus aliorum eis- displicet. Aug. lib. 3. contra Parmen. cap. 2. Let
every man correct what he can with mildness; and what he cannot, let him bear
with patience: And let him sigh and mourn in love till God from above amend
what is amiss, or at the harvest pluck up the tares, and blow away the chaff;
yet that Christians who have a good hope, may without danger of their own
salvation, live in unity among those desperate wretches whom they cannot amend*
let every man reform one, that he may not find that in himself which he
dislikes in another; This is the safest way for every particular man, to be
sure not to be out of the communion of the Catholic Church, and yet not to be
in the corruptions of his own Church; For he that sighs for the abominations,
shows he loves Gods truth; and he that only sighs, shows he loves his
neighbors peace: His love to Gods truth will keep him in the actual communion
of the Catholic Church; his love to his neighbors peace, will not let him
violate the communion of his own Church, although he refuse to communicate in
its corruptions: It is not to be doubted, but holy David, all the while he
lived in Saul's house, or was afterward driven from Jerusalem, was under the
affliction and temptation of evil company* yet he says of himself, I have
walked in my integrity, I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in
with dissemblers; I have hated the congregation of evil doers, and will not sit
with the wicked; and he thus makes good that saying, For thy loving kindness is
ever before mine eyes, and I have walked in thy truth; (Psalm 26.) His
communion with God, kept him from the corruptions of those unrighteous men he
could not avoid, and kept him in the communion of those righteous men he could
not enjoy; Though his conversation might be in Gath, or Ascalon, yet his
communion was in Jerusalem, (when the Ark was there) as it is said, ver. 8.
Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine
honor dwells.

Therefore make sure of thy communion with God, by faith and repentance and
holiness of life, and doubt not of thy communion with his Catholic Church,
though thou live amongst Infidels or amongst such Christians as are fallen into
Infidelity, and so having denied the faith, are worse then those who never
embraced it.

For no private man is entrusted with the external communion of his own Church,
nor shall he be called to an account for the sins of it, if he partake not in
those sins; but he is entrusted with the internal communion of his own soul,
and for that he must look to give a strict account; to the maker and lover and
Judge of souls.

But this admonition which only concerns private men, may not be extended to
whole national Churches, which have power given them of God to rectify what is
amiss among themselves either in Doctrine or worship, or Sacraments, and are
accountable to God for not rectifying it; so that if there be any notorious
defect in either, much more in all of these, they that are not bound to obey
other men, have no pretense of excuse if they obey not God, in ordering
themselves exactly according to his known and undoubted word.

And this is evident by Saint Paul's Epistles to particular Churches, and Saint
John's orders to the seven several Churches of Asia, to all which were sent
distinct instructions and reproofs, which shows that every one of them was
bound to follow those instructions they had received from God, (without
expecting new orders from some general Superintendent over them all) and was
justly reproved for not following them.

And this is the Judgment of the Catholic Church in the first Council of
Nice, in the sixth Canon, which will have the privileges and dignities, and
authorities, of all Churches inviolably preserved; for so much is comprised in
these few words, (...): The same Judgment is again repeated and reinforced in
the first Council of Constantinople, Can. 2. which forbids the confounding of
Churches, ((...)) and leaves every several provi^ce by a Synod in it self, to
administer and order its own ^s. The same is again more fully repeated and
reinforced in the first Council of Ephesus, Can. 8. which will have particular
Churches keep their own rights and privileges, lest they should unawares lose
the liberty purchased for them by the blood of Christ: (...). And the Council
of Chalcedon, Can. 19* enjoins provincial Synods twice a year to rectify and
dispose all emergencies whatsoever in the Church, (...), So we find this is the
judgment of the Catholic Church in the four first general Councils; and
therefore all the world is not able to prove this practice of our Church to be
Anticatholick; For I willingly pass by other Churches in the case, with whom I
am not bound to keep external communion, and plead only for this Church where
of God in mercy has made me a happy member, though an unworthy Minister; For
if Saint Paul would not judge those men that were without, much less may any of
us judge those Churches that are within: And truly it is enough for our
satisfaction, and too much for our desert, that though other Churches pretend
more, some to the purity, others to the practice of Religion, yet generally
they have performed less; Though some rigid Zelots press nothing so much as a
circumcision of all rites and ceremonies; other Pharisaical professors can
boast of the yoke which they have put upon the neck of their Disciples, which
neither we nor our fathers were able to bear; yet we cannot find any sufficient
reason why we should not answer them both in Saint Peter's words, we believe
that through the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved even as
they, Act. 15. 11. For we have this reason of our belief, because the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ is truly and clearly set forth in the Doctrine of this
our Church, (it is our shame and sin, not our Churches, if it be not also in our
practice) and Saint Paul has taught us, that this is the doctrine which most
constituteth (and therefore most edifieth) a Christian Church: For thus much do
those words import to the Colossians, And you that were sometimes alienated and
enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled in the body of
his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable
in his sight, if ye continue in the faith, grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from the hope of the Gospel which ye have heard, Col. 1. 21, 22, 2^.
It Is the Churches part to preach unto us the hope of the Gospel, or the Doctrine
of our being reconciled to God in Christ; where this Doctrine is rightly
published, accepted and maintained, there is without doubt a true Christian
Church; there is communion with Christ; and if he will present us holy,
unblameable and unreproveable in his sight for continuing in this faith
grounded and settled, we can have little cause, but no excuse, for leaving that
Church whereinis the profession of this faith: for as every particular
Christian Church may lawfully preserve its own liberty against the incroachment
of other Chuuches, so it must necessarily preserve its authority against the
insolences of its own people: The case is notorious concerning Vzziah, when he
went into the Temple of the Lord to burn incense upon the Altar of incense,
that Azariah with the Priests withstood him, saying, it pertains not to thee
Uzziah to burn incense unto the Lord, but* to the Priests the sons of Aaron
that are consecrated to burn incense: Go out of the sanctuary, for thou have
trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from the Lord God, 2 Chronicles.
27. 17, 18. And great is the approbation which the Spirit of God gives to this
Azariah for so doing, saying, He it is that has executed the Priests office in
the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 6. 10. As if none had been high Priest but he, who so
courageously maintained the authority of the Priesthood; and this is R. David's
gloss upon the words: He was not the first Priest of Solomon's Temple, for that
was Zadok; nor was he the only high Priest, for there were many others, both
before and after him; but our Rabbis say, because he gave his mind to the
holiness of the Temple, [(...)] and would not let Uzziah offer incense,
therefore it is said, he it is that executed the Priests office, because he was
most zealous for the glory of the Priesthood; (...): So Kimchi: it seems by
the Text, that officiating in the Priests office without being a Priest, was a
profanation under the Law; and why should we think otherwise under the Gospel,
since those who now succeed them in the administration of public worship, have
obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much they are the Mediators of a
better Covenant? Heb. 8. 6. For those words though spoken directly of Christ,
yet are proportionably true of the Ministry instituted by him, who are surely
the Mediators of a better Covenant, and therefore have obtained a more
excellent Ministry; and consequently to invade their office, must needs be a
more dangerous profanation; and we see those who are guilty of it, are commonly
even to this day, struck as Vzziah was, though not with a corporal, yet with a
spiritual leprosy, that infects more dangerously, though less discernably: And
if their office may not be invaded without profanation, then much less may it
be despised and opposed without irreligion. For God gave all the authority
belonging to the Ministry of the New Testament, to our Savior Christ, and he
gave the same to his Apostles, with power and command of giving it to others
after them to the worlds end; so says the Text, John 20. 24. As my father has
sent me, Therrs the authority of the Ministry given unto Christ, even so I send
you, there is the same authority given by him to his Apostles, not only for
themselves, but also for others; for as Christ was sent that he might send
them, so were they sent that they might send others after them. Thus Saint Paul
says for himself, According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God which
was committed to my trust, 1 Timothy 1. 11. And he says no less for Saint
Timothy, I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, that thou might charge
some that they teach no other Doctrine. And again, This charge I commit unto
thee, 1 Timothy 1. 3. and 18. Thereby acknowledging that he had received this trust
not only to discharge it himself, but also to commit it to others that should
discharge it after him: For this calling of Ministers having been instituted
for the perfection of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the
edifying of the body of Christ, (Ephesians. 4. 12.) it is evident it must be
continued as long as there shall be any Saints to be perfected, or the work of
the Ministry to be performed, or the body of Christ to be edified; and as
evident, that it may not be despised or opposed by any who will not put himself
out of the communion of Saints, or cut himself off from the body of Christ: For
the Text is as plain as if it had been written with a Sun beam, which says, He
that hears you, hears me; and he that despises you, dispiseth me; and he
that despises me, dispiseth him that sent me, Luke 10. 16. He that despises
you that are sent by me, despises me that sent you; and he that despises me
that am sent of my Father, despises him that sent me; nor may we say that our
Ministers are not sent of God; for how shall they preach except they be sent,
does now infer as well as then, that if there be no sending, there can be no
preaching: either we must say that preaching (and consequently praying and
administering the Sacraments, for there is the same reason of all) is not Gods
work, or that those who lawfully do it, have Gods authority for what they do:
And if they have Gods authority, how shall they not have my obedience? Saint
Paul's says not only for himself and his assistants, but also for all that were
to succeed him in his Ministry, We were allowed of God to be put in trust with
the Gospel, 1 These. 2. 4. They have Gods allowance or approbation, and may
lawfully undertake the Ministry of the Gospel; nay more, they have Gods command
or trust, and must necessarily discharge what they have undertaken: so the same
Saint Paul, Necessity is laid upon me, yea woe is unto me if I preach not the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 9 16. Not speaking the words occasionally concerning his person,
(we must betray the authority of the Scripture to say so, making it an
imperfect rule to give us only momentary or occasional directions) but
doctrinally, concerning his calling; and therefore this woe lies* upon all
those that succeed him in the Ministry, binding them to use their utmost
endeavors, both by their preaching, and by their living, and by their dying to
advance the Gospel of Christ; or if they do not their duty, this woe lies upon
them; and consequently if they do, it l^eeth* upon those that oppose or hinder
them; For it is a clear case that our Savior Christ has in every Nation of
Christendom entrusted his worship, and Word, and Sacraments, and what ever else
directly concerns the salvation of souls, with some peculiar men, who must
rather forgo their lives then forsake their trust; to whom he still says, as
he did to his Apostles when he first gave them his commission, Fear not them
which kill the body but are not able to kill the soul, but rather fear him
which is able to destroy both soul and body in hell, Mat. 10. 28. They were not
to fear men's killing if they did their duty, but Gods killing if they did it
not; And least the world should think them hated of God, because they were by
him exposed to all dangers, in another place, (where he still deterreth them
from fearfulness in discharging this trust,) he calls them his friends, And I
say unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that kill the body, and after
that have no more that they can do. But I will fore-warn you whom you shall
fear, fear him that after he has killed, has power to cast into hell; yea, I
say unto you fear him, Luke 12. 4, 5. They are to prefer the discharge of their
Trust above their lives, and shall not I prefer it above my humor? Shall I
think that my Savior who has bid me take him for an heathen or a publican
that neglects to hear the Church, will take me for a good Christian if I my
self be guilty of that neglect? ( Mat. 18. 17.) I will then willingly
acknowledge that those only to whom Christ has given the power of loosing and
binding in heaven, are, in this respect, called the Church (for so the sequel
of the context there requires) and that if I hear not these, I shall be in his
account but as a heathen or a publican.

For this is the Church which God has in this Nation, entrusted with the blood
of his Son, with the dictates of his Spirit, and with the souls of his People;
and I must hear this Church as I would have the benefit of his Sons blood, as I
would have the instructions of his holy Spirit, and as I would not forfeit the
salvation of mine own Soul.

Wherefore though the whole world turn round to a mere spiritual diziness, or
reel to and fro and stagger like a drunken man, yet this shall be the sober
resolution of my soul; I will not sin against that authority which God has set
over me. He has called his Ministers his friends, I will not call them mine
enemies least I put my self out of his friendship: I find that God the Father,
Son and Holy Ghost has set them over me, and how shall I answer it to this
blessed Trinity, if I oppose my self against them, or rather set my self over
them! It Is St. Athanasius his observation, ( Ath. lib. de communi essentia
Patris, Filii and Sp. S.) That the election of Ministers in Gods Church, is, in
the book of God, equally attributed to all three persons of the holy and
blessed Trinity: Saint Paul attributes it to God the Father, 1 Cor. 12. 28.
God has set some in the Church, first Apostles, Secundarily Prophets, Thirdly
Teachers, etc. Again, The same S. Paul attributes this work to God the Son,
Ephesians. 4. 11. And he gave some Apostles, (sc. He that had descended into the
lower parts of the earth, and was now ascended into heaven) and some Prophets
and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: And lastly the same Saint
Paul attributes the choice of Ministers to God the Holy Ghost, Acts 20. 28.
Take heed unto your selves and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost
has made you Overseers; God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost has made them my
Overseers, and shall I strive to make them my Underlings? And what shall I
answer at the last day to this God whose authority I have contemned, and whose
power I shall not be able to resist, when he will call me to an account, and
pronounce against my soul, and execute upon it the sentence of eternal
dammnaton for my contempt?

He has said expressly, Obedite praepositis vestris and subjacete eis, Heb. 13.
17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves; for they
watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you: There are some
certain men that have charge of the peoples souls, and are accordingly to give
an account of that charge: Those are here called their Rulers or Leaders,
(...), Their Captains to train and lead them under Christ's banner; A word of
great humility in regard of their communion with them, in the same Christian
duties and combats, but a word of great authority in regard of their command
over them; in so much that Gregor. Nazian. in the first of his steliteuticks
calls the Ministers, (...), The order of those that govern; and the people,
(...), those that are under that order of government, or those who are to be
governed: The one are set over, the other are set under by the power of God the
Father, by the wisdom of God the Son, and by the goodness of God the
Holy Ghost: so that to disturb and to destroy this order, is little less then
to proclaim enmity against the eternal power, and wisdom and goodness of God;
This is reason enough why we should obey, because God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost has made them our Rulers; but yet the words enforce another reason
of our obedience, because they watch for our souls: And are accordingly called
watchmen in the Text, Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of
Israel, therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me,
Ezekiel. 3. 17. Speculatorem dedi te; speculator qui est aliis vice oculorum, i.
e. (...) says Calvin upon the place. A watchman is one who is to others
instead of eyes, that is an Overseer or a Bishop: we find here God has
divolved to him a double trust; here is verbum commissum, Animae commissae;
Gods word is committed to his care, and men's souls are committed to his cure;
He is entrusted with Gods word, hear the word at my mouth; and he is entrusted
with his neighbors Souls, Give them warning from me: His office was instituted
merely for the glory of God, and the salvation of men; and I cannot oppose it,
but I must be an enemy both to God and Man; And if I be an enemy to Gods glory
here, how shall I hope to enjoy it hereafter? If I oppose the Salvation of
others, how shall he that came to be their Savior, take a care to save me? For
I do what is in me to trample his blood under my feet; and how can I hope that
he should sprinkle it upon my soul? nor may I say that these Texts were only
occasional, or this trust was only temporal, such as concerned the Prophets and
Apostles, but not others after them, unless I will moreover say (which in truth
I am afraid to think,) That God has now a less care then he had then both of
his own glory and of our salvation; both of his own word, and of our souls.
These spiritual watchmen were as necessary in Saint Paul's time as in Ezekiels,
and in our times as then; And consequently they are to us, what the Prophets
were to the Jews, or the Apostles to the Primitive Christians, saving only
their extraordinary commission and endowments: Ezekiel was to give warning to
the Jews, and Saint Paul was to give warning to the Gentiles for so himself
says, whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom,
that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 28. And our
watchmen are now to give warning unto us, by virtue of the same commissions,
and therefore Saint Paul speaks in the plural number, saying, whom we preach,
comprizing the whole body of the Ministry; wherefore also he says warning
every man, and that we may present every man; which was impossible for himself
alone, and indeed for all the Preachers of his time, because there were to be
infinite sucessions of men, which could not be their auditors; whereby it is
evident, that as long as there shall be men to be warned, and taught, and
presented perfect in Christ Jesus, so long there must be Preachers to warn and
teach and to present them: whose duty and office is accordingly here described;
1. In the nature of it, To warn and to teach; not only to deliver sound
doctrine which is teaching, but also to apply it by particular exhortations
according to the capacities or wants of theit auditors, which is warning or
admonishing: (...), putting your mind to theirs, that they may understand what
you say, not soaring aloft in sublime speculations above their apprehensions:
or putting the Truth into their minds, as they are able to receive it. 2. In
the object of it, every man, excluding none from the benefit of their Ministry,
who desire to be taught or to be warned, though more particularly including
those of their own Pastoral charge; in which respect Clemens Alexandrinus his
gloss may be admitted, who says, (...), warning and teaching the whole man,
that he may be purified both in his body and in his soul. 3. In the manner of
it, with all assiduity and industry, for so the Participles (...), do set forth
not only continued, but also multiplied acts. 4. And lastly, in the end of
scope of it, which is to bring men to the communion of Christ, that so they may
be presented to God as perfect, having that perfection in their Savior, which
they have not in themselves.

Wherefore we cannot deny, but as we still need the warning, so we still need
the watchmen; and we must confess that watchmen of Gods own setting up, may not
be disturbed or displaced, till himself be pleased to put them away, or to pull
them down; and sure we are, that will not be till we shall no longer need them.
And if the watchmen are bound to give the warning, then questionless the people
are bound to take it when it is given: For it is plain the Text said, Obey them
that watch for your souls, (Heb. 13. 17.) before the civil Magistrate was yet
Christian, to force men to that obedience: Nay indeed, while he was yet
Heathen, to deter them from it, and to persecute them for it; So that the
fifth Commandment obliges me to obey those whom God has set over me in
spirituals, no less then those whom he has set over me in temporals: And I may
no more forsake the Church to set up a new Religion, then I may forsake the
State to set up a new Government: For my obedience is due to both as a moral
debt by the necessity of Justice, since I am as much obliged to my spiritual
Father for the care of my soul, as I am to my civil Father for the care of my
body; and therefore I can no more withdraw my duty from the Church, then I can
from the Commonwealth: Nor may I go out of my Nation to look for a Head of the
Church, any more then to look for a Head of the State, since the fifth
Commandment obliges me equally to the Church and to the State; And I ought to
be as much afraid of Schism, which is a sedition against the Church; as of
Sedition, which is a schism against the State: Sure I am, if I will be a true
Gospeller, I must see that my conversation be such as becomes the Gospel of
Christ, and that is a conversation which requires Unity no less then Verity;
Unity of Spirit, no less then Verity of Faith: So the Apostle advising the
Philippians that their conversation should be as becomes the Gospel of Christ,
shows them in the next words wherein consists that conversation, saying,
That ye stand fast in one Spirit, with one mind, there is the Unity; striving
together for the faith of the Gospel; there is the Verity, Phil. 1. 27. He
permits not the pretense of Verity to break the bonds of Unity; for he says
striving together, (not striving one with, or against another,) for the faith
of the Gospel: Their concord and communion was to be the credit of their
Religion, not the pretense of Religion to be the bane of their communion: He
accounts it as necessary to their salvation that they should stand fast in the
same Unity, as that they should strive for the same Verity: that they should
stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, as that they should strive for the
faith of the Gospel: This is the true way to set up Christ's Discipline; for
himself has said, By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
have love one to another, John 13. 35. As we are made Christ's Disciples by the
Verity of our Faith, so we are known to be his Disciples by the Unity of our
Love: and if we desire to set up his Discipline, we must take a course that men
may know we are his Disciples: which they cannot do unless we have love one to
another; and surely factions, divisions, strifes, contentions, are very ill
arguments, and worse evidences of love: So that I cannot be a Schismatic in
withdrawing my love from Christ's Church, but I must be a piece of an Atheist
in withdrawing my love from Christ himself, as refusing to be accounted his
Disciple: This makes Saint Paul come like clypei Dominus septemplicis Ajax,
holding out a Buckler with no less then seven folds in it to keep off all the
assaults of schism; saying, 1. There is one Body, that is, one Catholic Church
of Christ, whereof we are all members that profess our selves to be Christians.
2. One Spirit, to quicken and enliven that body. 3. One hope of immortality to
comfort and confirm it. 4. One Lord, (to wit our Savior Christ) that has
purchased, and does claim it. 5. One faith, to feed and nourish it. 6. One
Baptism, to wash and cleanse it. 7. One God and Father of all, to rule and
govern it, ( Ephesians. 4. 4, 5, 6.) So that I dare no more be a Schismatic, then I
dare think to divide this one body, to multiply this one Spirit, to falsify
this one hope, to renounce this one Lord, to forsake this one faith, to despise
this one Baptism, to deny this one God; for I must be zealous to maintain this
Christian Communion in its authority, that I may be so happy as to enjoy it in
its excellency.

CAP. II. Christian Communion in its excellency.
SECT. I. The excellency of Christian Communion, because of its large extent,
as reaching to all Christians, though of different persuasions, and professions.
THE Christian Church is truly Catholic, in that it comprizeth all true
Believers, of what nation* sex, age, or condition soever; for God acknowledges
them all for his children, by faith in Christ Jesus; So says Saint Paul. Gal.
3. 26, 27. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus; for as
many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ: So that
whosoever believes in Christ, and is baptized in his name, must be
acknowledged a member of the Christian Church; whether he be Jew or Greek, bond
or free; which was not so before Christ's coming in the flesh; for then it was
said only of the Jews, ye shall be my people, and I will be your God, Jer. 30.
22. But since our blessed Savior has broken down the partition wall, God has
called to himself a people, not of the Jews only, but also of the Gentiles; and
it has come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto them, ye are not
my people, there they are now called the children of the living God, Romans 9.
24, 26. Those whom God calls his sons, how shall we not call our brethren,
unless we will deny him to be our Father? Whence it must follow, that Christian
communion is of as great a latitude or extent, as is the Christian Church,
according to that of Saint Paul, ye are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3. 28.
Having said before, ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, to
show they were of the same Christian Church; he now says, ye are all one in
Christ Jesus, to show they were also of the same Christian communion. And this
principle we may not gainsay, if we will acknowledge the excellency of* true
Christian communion: for it cannot be so excellent if it* depend on man, as if
it depend on God; if it depend on Christ's. Vicar, as if it depend on Christ
himself; if it be confined to one party of Christians, as if it be extended to
all; for undeniable is that rule in reason, Bonum quo communius, eo melius,
Every good the more common it is, the better it is; and much more undeniable is
it in charity, when it is applied to our Christian Communion: For it is against
the nature of God to be under a restraint or a Monoply. God the fountain of
goodness is an universal good; He is good unto all; and every other good, the
more it partakes of his goodness, the more it partakes of his universality, and
is the more diffusive of it self, being good only to it self whiles it is not
diffused, and therefore diffusing it self, that it may also be good to others.
Much more is this to be seen and confessed in the good of Christian Communion,
which is therefore good because it is a common good, and may not be abridged of
its Community, without being also abridged of its goodness. Saint Paul will
have us if it be possible, to live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18.
therefore much more with the best of men, with Christians, who have the name,
the word, the image, the Spirit of Christ; with all men we must keep an
external and civil, but with Christians we must moreover maintain an internal
and spiritual peace. Our hand is bound to the good behavior in regard of
Christ's enemies, but our heart is so bound in regard of his servants. We may
not break the outward peace with those that persecute him; much less may we
break the inward peace with those that love him: There is a great difference
betwixt our Civil and our Christian conversation or communion: The Civil
depends upon the body, and is accordingly confined to time and place; but the
Christian depends chiefly upon the soul, and therefore may be extended as far
as the souls apprehension and affection, to know and to love the Truth; Whence
Saint John says to that elect Lady, Whom I love in the truth, and not I only,
but also all they that have known the truth (though they had not known her) for
the truths sake which dwells in us, and shall be with us for ever, 2 John 1.
2. As far as truth and love do extend, so far extends our Christian Communion,
the foundation whereof is truth, the building whereof is love. Communio
spiritualis, est in consensu vero vel interpretativo; Spiritual communion
consists either in an explicit or an implicit consent with other Christians, (
Alensis par. 2. qu. 161. m. 10.) which as I may not afford to any Christians as
they abide in error, so I may not deny to any Christians as they embrace the
Truth: For wherever the Truth is, it calls for my interpretative or virtual
consent, not to deny or gainsay it; and where I know it to be, there it calls
for my actual and explicit consent to love and follow it; I may not turn
Donatist, to confine the spirit of truth; nor may I turn Familist to confine
the spirit of love; For as it cannot be denied but that the spirit breaths
where it lists; so it may not be disputed, but I must love wheresoever the
spirit is pleased to breath; Either I must deny the spirit of Truth to breath
upon all those Christians that are not of my profession; or the spirit of love
to breath upon me, if I will not allow them to be of my Christian Communion; So
that I must first limit and confine the Catholic Church, before I can limit
and confine the Communion of Saints; for as is the Church, so is the communion,
if the one be Catholic, the other is so too: If I will make a particular
Christian communion, I must make a particular Christian Church, and
consequently make that two Articles of my Faith, which Christ and his Apostles
have made but one, even, The holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints;
Saint John the beloved Disciple loved for the Truths sake, and so must I; where
God has not denied his truth, there may not I deny my love: If there be such a
Christian Church in the world which I cannot well love for its own sake, yet
even that Church must I love for the truth sake; as far as it has my Saviors
Truth, so far it must have my souls love; And though that Church may most
justly claim my love, which has most entirely Christ's truth; yet no Christian
Church, but may in some sort claim it, since no Christian Church but has
Christ's Truth, by which it is made Christian.

Some have this truth mingled with many and gross errors: but God forbid that
the tares which the enemy has sowed, should make me out of love with that good
seed, which I know came from Christ himself: For why should I be always
looking on the mote in my brothers eye, and not rather see the beam in mine
own? To his own master he stands or falls, and God is willing to make him
stand; why should I be willing to make him fall, or to keep him down? If I
would look on the Christian, not on the man, I should account him a brother,
whom now I think an enemy; for what he is in Christ is most amiable, though not
what is he in himself: God looks on me in Christ to love me, and why should not
I so look on my Brother to love him? Gods love in Christ toward me covers a
multitude of my sins, and why should not my love in the same Christ toward my
Brother cover a few of his mistakes? Sure I am my Savior has made Charity a
necessary condition to the forgiveness of my sins, and therefore I must
willingly cover my brothers faults, or I cannot hope that God will cover mine.
If I will needs lay open his miscarriages to my sight, I shall but lay open
mine own miscarriages to the sight of God; for he that cursed Cham merely for
not covering, will certainly never bless me only for discovering, either my
fathers or my brothers nakedness; I cannot judge him, but I shall bring my self
into Judgment; and therefore I must pass by his faults, as I would have God to
pass by mine; This is such a truth as no Christian can deny, and therefore none
should contemn; yet is this truth most of all contemned by Christians, whiles
each particular Church more stomachs at a man for not being one of her members,
then she rejoices for his being a member of Christ; Hence those outrageous
invectives and impious calumnies of one Christian Church against another,
whiles they all had rather contribute to their own unnecessary differences as
men, then to their necessary concord and agreement as Christians; Each
particular Church so laboring to advance and enlarge her own Communion, as in
effect neglecting and confining the communion of Christ's Catholic Church.
Whereas it is most evident by Saint Paul, that there is neither Greek nor Jew,
circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free; but Christ
is all and all, Col. 3. 11. That is, All true Believers promiscuously without
any distinction or exception of place or person, do belong to the communion of
Christ's Catholic Church; And accordingly the same Apostle sets all Christians
a rule, how infallibly to compass, and inviolably to hold this communion,
saying, Put on therefore as the elect of God holy and beloved, bowels of
mercies, kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing one
another and forgiving one another, if any man have a quarrel against any, even
as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, ver. 12, 13. How many virtues are here
joined together, the least whereof, if put on in bowels, (that is sincerely and
without hypocrisy,) will not let us break communion with any Christian? For
here is mercy to pity him, kindness to recall him, humbleness to yield to him,
meekness not to provoke him, long suffering to forbear and to forgive him, when
we have a just quarrel, and therefore much more not to make a quarrel against
him, when we have none: And all this is enjoined, as we would be the Elect and
beloved of God, or thought zealous to follow the example of Christ, who has
forborne and forgiven us much more, then we can (for his sake) forbear or
forgive our brethren: These virtues will make us zealous in compassing our
Christian communion, and one more follows these which will make us as zealous
in keeping it; And that is charity, of which it is said, And above all these
things put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness, ver. 14. Charity is
the bond of perfection in regard of our souls, in regard of our operations, and
in regard of our communion; making our souls perfect, by uniting and binding
them together in Christ, that every one may enjoy the perfections of all;
making our operations perfect, by uniting and binding them together for Christ,
that all may tend to his glory as if they were but one; and making our
communion perfect by uniting and binding both our operations and our souls,
together with Christ; for our communion in neither is perfect, till both be
joined with him who is the author of all perfection: For as in the natural body
of man, the perfection thereof consists very much in the communion which the
several members have with themselves, but much more in the communion which they
all have with the soul; so in the mystical body of Christ, the perfection
thereof consists very much in the communion which good Christians have with
one another, but much more in the communion which they all have with Christ: It
is their great glory and bliss that they all have in effect one common soul,
but their far greater glory and bliss that they all have in truth one common
Savior: And indeed they first meet in him before they meet in one another;
Quae in aliquo tertio convenient, ea inter se convenient, is not only
consequently but also causally true; not only if two or more agree in a third,
they agree in themselves; but also, because they agree in a third, therefore
they agree in themselves: Thus the two extremes in a syllogism are joined both
together in the conclusion, because they were both joined before with the same
middle term in the premises; so is it with men of different and disagreeing
persuasions, because they rightly agree in medio termino, in one and the same
Mediator, they cannot but agree among themselves: And as it is a rule in Logic
or in reason, Si medium in premissis rite collocatur, duo alii termini non
possunt aliter quam recte disponi; If the medium be rightly placed, the two
extremes cannot be placed amiss; so is it in religion, if our Mediator may but
have his due place and order amongst us, there will be no fear of our own being
out of order amongst our selves: Hence that Eulogie of the first Christians,
And all that believed were together and had all things common, Act. 2. 44. They
were not so together in their persons, as to be asunder in their affections;
and therefore we must interpret this verse from the first, and say, (...), They
were all with one accord in one place, or with one mind and soul; They were
unanimously met together as well as personally, they were in one mind as well
as in one place; And so will all true believers to the worlds end; Nay, they
will meet in one mind, when they cannot meet in one place; for they are all
joined together as it were in one common soul, though not as men, according to
Averrois his fancy, who said there was but one numerical intelligent soul
which assisted all mankind; Yet as Christians, according to Saint Paul's
Divinity, with one mind and one mouth glorify God, Romans 15 6. or perfectly
joined together in the same mind and the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10. or,
being of one accord, of one mind, Phil. 2. 2. And in this respect they have
also all things common; for though we may not allow an external community of
goods and bodies to the confusion of humane property and society, yet we must
allow an internal community of affections and souls to the exercise of
Christian love and charity: For if that rule be true of the outward or carnal
man, Homo sum, humani a me nihil alienum puto; I am a man, and think nothing
belongs to a man but belongs to me; then much more is it true of the inward and
spiritual man, I am a Christian, and think no prosperity or adversity can
happen to any Christian, but the same happens to my self: For this is according
to the example of Christ, who said unto Saul, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest,
Act. 9. 5. Thinking the injuries done unto his members as done unto himself;
Nay, it is according to the precept of Christ commanding us to think so to;
wherefore he says, Rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep with them that
weep; Be of the same mind one toward another, Romans 12. 15, 16. Bidding us be
of the same mind, that we might be of the same affections, and have the same
joys and the same sorrows: This contemplation should indear it self withal
Christians to remember, and much more to practice it; for then all outrages in
words and deeds, which are now so scandalously heightened, would be peaceably
composed, because every one would look upon another injury as his own, and
consequently would be afraid of wronging his brother, that he might not wrong
himself: Thus would the peace of God rule in all our hands and tongues, if it
did first rule in all our hearts, which is also required as the chiefest means
whereby to preserve Christian communion, and let the peace of God rule in your
hearts, to the which also ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful, ver.
15. Where the Apostle exhorts us to Christian unity and concord for three
reasons: First, because God is the author, and lover of it, whence it is called
the peace of God; and we may be amazed to see that men should say in their
daily prayers, Deus author pacis and amator, O God which art the author of
peace, and lover of concord, and yet not love it themselves: Secondly, because
it is a badge, or rather an ingredient and part of our Christian calling,
whence it is said, To the which also ye are called in one body; that as there
is no schism in the body, but the members have the same care one for another;
and whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it; so it might also be with us now we
are the body of Christ, and members in particular, 1 Cor. 12. 27. For Christ
has called us to be of one body; and how then shall we not be of one mind?
Thirdly, because it is an expression of that thankfulness which we owe to God,
for giving us that peace, which this world, were it never so quiet, could not
give, and be it never so quarrelsome, cannot take away; whence it is said, and
be ye thankful; to wit for that peace of a good conscience here, and a blessed
eternity hereafter, which Christ has purchased for you, of which the same
Apostle speaks, Romans 5. 1. Therefore being justified by faith we have peace
with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ; We can never be truly thankful for
that peace of God which our blessed Savior has purchased for us, unless we
labor earnestly to have peace one with another: Nor may we pretend that the
love of truth makes us to have but little regard of peace; for the Apostle
supposes that peace and truth may very well be joined together in our
conversation, in that after the command for peace, he gives the command for
truth; and first says, Let the peace of God rule in your hearts, and after
that, Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly in all wisdom; He first
requires the peace, and then the truth, inverting the order by confirming the
authority of the Prophet Zachariah, who first requires the truth, and then the
peace; therefore love the truth and peace, Zach. 8. 19. For as it is an
undeniable argument, that the tenth Commandment of the decalogue cannot fitly
be divided into two several precepts, because the order of the words being
changed in Exodus and in Deuteronomy, it could not be known which of the two
precepts were to be set down first; for Exodus 20. 17. first is forbidden the
desire of our neighbors house; but Deuteronomy. 5. 21. First is forbidden the desire
of our neighbors wife; so that in both places is forbidden but one inordinate
desire in regard of the act, though two in regard of the object; and
consequently both inordinate desires come under one and the same precept, or we
must be posed to show which of the two prohibitions makes the ninth, which
makes the tenth commandment; So is it in this command of loving peace and
truth, the Prophet first names the Truth, the Apostle first names the Peace,
that we not knowing which of the two we are bound to follow first, might be the
more industrious to follow both, being as much afraid of forsaking the peace to
follow the truth, as of forsaking the truth to follow the peace; for that we
can do neither, but we must invert the order, and pervert the intent of Gods
command; which yet more plainly appears from the words of the same Apostle
Saint Paul, (...), Ephesians. 4. 15. Speaking the truth in love, or doing the truth
in love, for so the Vulgar Latin veritatem facientes in charitate; we may
render the words, Be ye true in love, show your selves true men, in that you
are charitable men; for here is plainly but one precept for the exercise of
both virtues, to show we cannot be defective in the love, but we must also be
defective in the truth; I will then be as zealous for Christian love, as for
Christian truth, and not think I can do my Savior good service, whilst I am so
intent upon the truth of his Religion, as not to regard the peace of his
communion; Communicant and Christian, must be to me terms convertible; as far
as reaches the Christianity, so far also reaches the communion; For he that
is a good Christian does communicate with Christ; and how can I exclude the one
without excluding the other out of my communion? What is truly Christian in the
worst of Christians is lovely for Christ's sake; and though I exceedingly
rejoice in old Simeons happiness to take my Savior from the arms of a pure
Virgin Church, as he did from the arms of his pure Virgin Mother, Luke 2. yet I
will not run from him, if I find him talking with a woman of Samaria, revealing
himself to her that lives in the state of incontinency, John 4. It shall be my
desire to meet with him daily in mine own Church that is not defiled either
with superstition or with faction; but it shall be my joy to meet with him in
any other Church, though she be actually defiled with both, and run a whoring
after her own inventions: For I may not refuse to communicate with any Church
in that wherein she is truly Christian, unless I will venture to divide and
separate from Christ himself: Wherefore I will communicate with all Christian
Churches, as far as they are so, in the disposition of my soul, though I cannot
in the presence of my body; so shall I be sure neither to be a schismatic in a
Church that is truly Catholic, and moreover I shall be a Catholic in a Church
that may be guilty of schism; Animus Catholicus in Ecclesia Schismatica, is in
my account a better temper then Animus schismaticus in Ecclesia Catholica; I
had rather have a Catholic spirit in a schismatical* Church, then a
schismatical spirit in a Catholic Church; for the one is an antidote to allay
the poison I meet withal, the other is able to turn an antidote into poison.
To have a Catholic Spirit in an Anticatholick Church may keep me a true
Catholic in the communion of Schismatics; but to have an Anticatholick Spirit
in a Catholic Church, will make me a Schismatic even in the communion of
Saints.

Therefore Christianus Catholicus, Christian Catholic is the Title I desire to
assume, and will labor to justify; the one may be as my proper, the other as
my common name; the one showing what I am in my person, the other showing what
I am in my communion. For I cannot but think Lactantius his pen borrowed ink
from heaven, when it dropped down this admirable observation, Christiani esse
desierunt, qui Christi nomine amisso, humana and externa vocabula induerunt;
Lact. de vera sap. cap. 30. They have left off to be Christians, who have left
off the name of Christ, that they may call themselves by other men's external
names: For indeed all other names are Notes and causes of division, it is only
the name of Christ is the note and cause of communion amongst Christians: This
is truly the voice of a dove that has no gall, and me thinks I see the Holy
Ghost still appearing in this Dove: Sure I am there is none other name under
heaven given among men whereby we must be saved, but only the name of Christ,
Acts 4. 12. and why should I then either desire a name that cannot show my
Religion, or desire a Religion that cannot bring me salvation?

SECT. II. The excellency of Christian communion as holding of Christ, and fom
him having Immortality, piety, verity, and charity; and of the proper place,
company, and author of this communion.
THE Communion of men is frequently broken off by faction in their life; or
necessarily broken off by dissolution in their death; But the communion of
Christians is altogether indissolvable; for it endures no faction to separate
the members from the body, it incurs no dissolution to separate the body from
the Head: Other communions are cut off and destroyed by by death, but this is
confirmed and enlarged by it; and the reason is, because he is the Head of this
communion who is the first born from the dead: So says Saint Paul, He is the
head of the body the Church, who is the beginning, the first born from the
dead, Col. 1. 18.

And indeed this is the greatest excellency of our Christian communion, that it
not only begins, but also continues with Christ, and that in his twofold
exa^tation, in his exaltation (...), which he had by nature, as the beginning,
coaeternal and coaequal with his Father; and in his exaltation (...), which he
had by dispensation, as the first born from the dead, Col. 1. 18. An excellent
communion indeed that is grounded upon eternity, both a part ante, for he is
the beginning; and a part post, for he is the first born from the dead, Col.
1. 18. And such is the communion of all good Christians with Christ, (and
surely no other can have communion with him) for they were joined with Christ
in one election before the beginning of the world, ( as he has chosen us in
him before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1. 4.) and shall be joined with
him in one Salvation after the end of it: ( Father, I will that they also whom
thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory which
thou have given me; John 17. 24.) The first communion we have with our Savior
as he is the beginning; the second as he is the first born from the dead; Hence
it is that the Apostle Saint Paul so exceedingly labors in all his Epistles,
first to make us sensible of, then to make us thankful for this great mercy.
For this Method he observes in all his Epistles, making it his business first
to show us the blessings we have in Christ then to exhort us to the practice of
true Christianity: But more particularly in those Epistles which he writ in his
captivity at Rome, immediately before his death, which he purposely divides as
it were into these two parts, one of doctrine, another of application; As for
example, In his Epistle to the Ephesians he spends the three first chapters
wholly in doctrine, declaring the benefits we have by Christ and the three last
chapters wholly in application, exhorting us to show our selves dutiful and
thankful Christians: So again in his Epistle to the Colossians, all his labor
in the two first chapters is to show us what blessings we have in Christ, what
prepared in our election, what exhibited in our redemption, what consummated in
our salvation; and in the two last chapters, what thankfulness we are obliged
to for so great blessings, exhorting us accordingly by all holiness of life,
that we may approve our selves to be truly thankful: In both which arguments
he is so zealous that he takes many whole sentences out of his Epistle to the
Ephesians, and repeats them again (though a little shorter,) in his Epistle to
the Colossians, as neither afraid to pen his Sermons, though he preached by the
spirit, nor yet to preach the same Sermon twice; for in truth his Epistle to
the Colossians is little other then an Epitome or compendium of that to the
Ephesians: He had heard by Epaphras that the Colossians were settled and
established in the communion of Christ, ( cap. 1. verse. 8.) and that made him
write this Epistle to keep them still in that communion: (...), says Sain
Chrysostom. Saint Paul writ three Epistles to those Churches which he had not
then seen, that to the Romans, that to the Hebrews, and this to the Colossians,
which Church it is probable he never saw at all, and accordingly professes he
had a great conflict for them, because they had not seen his face in the flesh;
Col. 2. 1. His intent was to show he would be with them in his affection,
though he could not be with them in his person; accordingly he gives this
reason for his writing to the Colossians (which may likewise serve for his
writing to those other Churches) that though he was not one of their company,
yet he was one of their Communion, saying, For though I be absent in the flesh,
yet am I with you in the spirit, joying and beholding your order and the
stedfastness of your faith in Christ, Col. 2. 5. He openly professes himself
one of their communion, yet I am with you in the spirit, and shows the cause
why he was so willing to communicate with them, because of their order and the
stedfastness of their faith in Christ.

Good God what a strange course have we taken of late to make all good
Christians (which are and must be of Saint Paul's mind,) to abhor our communion,
who neither care for order nor for stedfastness; but instead of order, do
embrace confusion; instead of stedfastness do eagerly pursue inconstancy: who
neither have order in the practice, nor stedfastness in the profession of our
religion: who pretend to faith in Christ, but show no stedfastness in our
faith; So that it is much to be feared we have no true faith in him, and
consequently no true communion with him! Did we indeed look upon our Savior as
the beginning, we would begin in his fear, and in his faith, (not in our own
phansies, and much less in our own factions) that we might live to him; did we
look upon him as the first born from the dead, we would go on in his favor
that so we might at last die to him, and through him be made partakers of a
joyful resurrection from death to everlasting life. This would we all do if
indeed we had communion with our Savior Christ, and we would before and above
all things seek to have communion with him, if we did rightly understand, or
could sufficiently value not only the future but also the present excellencies
of his communion; For what excellency is there not to be found here, and not to
be expected hence? He is the beginning, that is ground for Christian piety,
(...), to begin with God, or else we must begin without our beginning: He is
from the dead; that's ground for Christian verity, no religion in the world
teaching this truth of the resurrection, but only the Christian, and that
teaching it as the consummation of all other truths: And lastly, he is the
first born from the dead, that's ground for our Christian unity or charity; in
that we are all under the same Captain of our Salvation, and therefore should
upon no pretenses fall into mutinies, and much less into outrages one against
another: For that Disciple who leaned in his Masters bosom, and therefore
probably knew most of his heart, plainly tells us we cannot have a share in the
resurrection of this first born from the dead, or at least not know we have it,
unless it be from our love to those that are to follow after him: We know that
we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren: He that
loves not his brother abides in death, 1 John 3. 14. Were it possible for any
man to pass from death to life who loves not his brother, yet it were not
possible for him to know so much; We know that we have passed, because we love;
therefore they who will not have this love, cannot have this knowledge, and
indeed they cannot have this passage: for he that abides in death, has not
yet passed from death unto life; And he that has not passed from death, has
not yet communion with the first born from the dead; and consequently is no
less destitute of piety and of verity then he is of charity; I was willing to
find out all these three heavenly virtues together in the Apostles expression;
but sure I am I shall find them altogether in my Saviors communion; for
without doubt therein is piety to keep us from being hypocrites; verity to keep
us from being heretics; and unity to keep us from being schismatics or
sectaries: agreeably to those three honorable compellations given to the
Colossians by Saint Paul, and in them to all good Christians, the Saints and
faithful brethren in Christ, Col. 1. 2. Saints, faithful, and brethren; Saints,
from the piety, faithful from the verity, and brethren from the unity that is
in the true Christian Religion; wherein he is adored who is the beginning,
author of the piety; who is from the dead, author of the verity; and the first
born from the dead, (to raise us all after him,) author of the unity: I must
now confess with Saint Chrysostom, That those of Saint Paul's Epistles have
something more of Divinity in them, which were written in his bonds, (as this
was to the Colossians,) (...), since I find both the grounds and the
excellencies of all Christian Religion twice fully expressed in three words,
once speculatively in those (...), Beginning, first born, from the dead;
another time practically in those (...), Saints, Faithful, brethren; I cannot
hear those compellations of Christ, the Beginning, the first born, from the
dead, but I think my self called to the blessed speculation of piety, verity
and charity; I cannot hear those compellations of Christians, Saints, faithful,
brethren, but I must confess my self called to the more blessed practice of
them; since he is not a Saint who is without piety, he is not faithful who is
without verity, and he is not a brother who is without charity; Wherefore the
best and readiest way to be a good Christian, is, to have communion immediately
with Christ; for by this means we shall be sure never to be destitute either of
piety, or of verity, or of charity, to make us perfect Christians, or of
immortality to make us happy Christians, but in the midst of hypocrites we
shall have piety, in the midst of heretics we shall have verity, in the midst
of schismatics we shall have Charity, there is our purchase; in the midst of
death and destruction we shall have immortality, there is our happiness.

In the midst of life we be in death as men, but in the midst of death we be in
life as Christians; And for this cause I conceive the Church did more
peculiarly enjoin Communions at Easter, because then she did more especially
commemorate the resurrection of Christ; thereby putting us in mind, that if we
did indeed communicate with him, we should not only be partakers of his piety,
verity, and charity, but also of his immortality; and be not only strengthened
against the errors of our life, but also against the terrors of our death.
For through his blessed resurrection, even the grave it self has teemed to
eternity, and is become a second Eve, to be called the mother of all living, at
least in respect of the true life, that is to say, the life everlasting.

For by virtue of this firstborn from the dead, corruption it self is become a
father, and the worm is become a mother, to bring forth children to
incorruption, and to immortality: So that what was holy Jobs complaint, I have
said to corruption thou art my father, and to the worm thou art my mother and
my sister, (Job 17. 14.) must be our joy and triumph ever since that text has
been verified, Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer
thy holy one to see corruption. For ever since that day, has our corruptible
put on incorruption (in our blessed Savior) and our mortal has put on
immortality: so that although we still carry about us mortality in our
condition, yet we have already put on immortality in our Communion: Hence was
the time between the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, anciently called
(...), (as Cedrenus calls that week (...), which Zonaras calls (...), says
Meursius) partly for the history, that our Savior abode in Galilee altogether
after his resurrection till his ascension, but much rather for the mystery,
the reason why he chose Galilee for the place of his abode, and that is the
signification of its name derived from the Hebrew (...) which signifies joy and
exaltation, or our English word Glee; That as the resurrection of Christ was
the greatest joy that ever came to earth, whose very dust by this new breathing
of God the Son, is the second time become a living body, never to die again; so
the place wherein it was demonstrated, and the time wherein it was celebrated,
should be to mankind both of them remembrancers of everlasting joy.

This was enough then to make all the world go to Jerusalem, and Jerusalem it
self to go to Galilee, that they might be joyful spectators of this great
blessing, and more blessed partakers of this great joy, accordingly providing
their (...), their songs and hymns of triumph in honor of our blessed Savior,
who had thus overcame death, to open unto us the gate of everlasting life, and
let us in to an immortal Communion with himself the firstborn of the dead, and
with his holy Angels, the firstborn of the living. This is that communion the
holy Apostle recommendeth to our desires, and much more to our delights, when
he says, Ye are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels; To the general
assembly and Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect: and to Jesus the
Mediator of the New Covenant, Heb. 12. 22, 23, 24. As many words, so many
excellencies of our Christian communion, which is inchoate here in earth, and
shall be consummate hereafter in heaven; but I will reduce them all to three
heads, the proper place, the company, and the author of this Communion.

1. The proper Place, is the Church of God, here specified by three most
honorable titles or compellations, Mount Sion, The City of the living God, The
heavenly Jerusalem; three such titles as will make every sober, much more
every Religious man in love with the Churches communion, as he would be in love
with the stedfastness of Mount Sion, which cannot be removed; with the holiness
of the City of God, which cannot be defiled; and with the happiness of the
heavenly Jerusalem, which above all things is to be desired; for without doubt
this Christian communion with the Church of Christ is the safest and the
plainest way to stedfastness, to holiness, and to happiness.

2. The company, and that is so good, that we cannot hope for better in heaven:
for it consists of Angels, and of the firstborn in Christ, whose names are
written in heaven, and of God the Maker, Preserver and Rewarder of these, and
the Judge of all that hate and oppose them; with all these do we actually
communicate in Christ's Church whiles we are here on earth, with Angels as the
assistants, with good men as the members; and with God as the president of this
communion; nay indeed, we actually communicate with more then these, for also
with the spirits of just men made perfect; so that if any just man go from
hence out of our company, yet he goes not out of our communion: for we follow
after him to heaven in our affections, though we still continue and remain here
on earth, in our persons.

3. The author of this Communion, and he is no other then the eternal Son of
God, the hope of men, and the joy of Angels; the support of earth, and the
beauty of heaven, even Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, who by his
eternal Priesthood offering up himself, has fully expiated and taken away the
sins of the whole world, and by his own death has ratified and confirmed that
Testament in which he has given us the Inheritance of heaven; It Is of his
fullness we have all received grace for grace; It is of his fullness we shall all
receive glory for glory: It is the sprinkling of his blood which washes away
our sins contracted from our earthly parents: and which will present our souls
without sin, before our heavenly Father: so that we have great necessity
earnestly to desire and constantly to embrace his Communion, by whom alone we
can hope to attain the sanctification of our souls here, and the salvation of
our souls hereafter.

CAP. III. Of Christian Communion in its sincerity.
SECT. I. The sincerity of Christian Communion consists in this, that it gives
all to Christ: Those Christians justified that do so in their Festivals; the
Sabbatarians questioned for not so doing. The Apostles new method of teaching
Christian Divinity by interlining of prayers and praises, that Christ might be
the more glorified, and the Christian Religion the less adulterated.
IN other communions every one is like Diotrephes, (...), ready to challenge,
if not to engross the pre-eminence to himself: But in the true Christian
communion, all are willing to give the pre-eminence wholly unto Christ: And
they have great reason so to do, and greater Religion in so doing; for they do
but give unto him, what they have received from him; that like as they have the
pre-eminence among other men in being members of his body, so he may have the
pre-eminence among them, in being acknowledged for their Head: For his
humiliation was very great in stooping down so low as to be joined to them, and
by the Apostles express rule, Phil. 2. His exaltation is to be correspondent to
his humiliation: Saint Chrysostom thus expresses his humiliation in that He
descended to this communion, (...), That he who was above and above all things,
was pleased to join himself with those below, that so he might be their Head;
It was the Psalmists admiration, Who is like unto the Lord our God, that has
his dwelling so high, and yet humbles himself to behold the things that are in
heaven and earth? Psalm 113. 5. It must be our astonishment that he humbles
himself, not to behold, but to guide and manage them; that he humbles himself,
not to look, but to come down to heaven to be the head of Angels; not to look,
but to come down to earth, to be the head of men: Three great steps of humility
in stepping down to this* It was one great step for him to look down to heaven;
Another great step to look down to earth; but the third was far greater then
both, to come down to earth, that he might there incorporate himself with men
in one body, and so become their Head; and inspirit men with himself, as it
were in one soul, that they might become his members: Wherefore our enquiry
concerning this, must needs begin in admiration, that our admiration may the
better end in thanksgiving, according to Saint Paul's example, who after his
(...), O the depth of the riches, concludes with (...), to whom be glory for
ever, Amen.

Nay indeed according to Saint Paul's Doctrine, for so he expressly says, (...),
That in all things he might be first, or that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence, Col. 1. 18. (...), (...), says his most faithful interpreter,
Saint Chrysostom. The first in heaven, as the beginning, the first in earth as
Head of the Church, the first under the earth, as the first born from the dead.
Thus has God ordained that our Savior Christ should have the pre-eminence in
all things, and in all places; from whence we must conclude that the same is
the duty, and ought to be the work of all that profess godliness, even to give
all honor and glory to this Son of man, whom the King of Kings is pleased to
honor: And in this respect those Christians, like Mary, have chosen the better
part, (though the other, like Martha trouble themselves and all the world
besides, about many unnecessary things) who carefully observe all those
anniversary Festivals which have been instituted entirely for the honor of
Christ, and consequently, observe our weekly festival rather as a Lords day
then as a Sabbath: For these sit quietly and orderly at Jesus his feet, hearing
his Word, and place him at their head, promoting his honor: according to the
Apostles example and advice, To God only wise be glory through Jesus Christ for
ever, Romans 16. 27. They look upon this festival as instituted for Gods glory,
and think it neither safe nor fit for Christians to glorify God through Moses,
but through Christ. And therefore desire to honor him not by a Sabbath, but by
a Lords day; for that the Sabbath was a type of Christ's rest in the grave, (who
rested there only that whole day, as it were to bury it with himself) but the
Lords day is an undoubted memorial of his resurrection; So that the one carries
in its name, if not in its nature a false protestation concerning the Christian
faith, and may possibly in time make us turn Jews: The other carries in its
name and nature a true profession of our faith, and can only help to make and
to keep us good Christians, as immediately directing our thoughts and our
thankfulness to our Savior Christ, which alone is the way to make us true
Evangelical professors; this being the sum of the whole Gospel, That he was
delivered for our offenses, and rose again for our Justification, Romans 4 26.
And it is plain that the whole Gospel does so directly tend to the Article of
Christ's resurrection, that Saint Paul says expressly, it can neither be rightly
preached nor professed without it: If Christ be not risen, then is our
preaching vain, and your faith also is vain, 1 Cor. 15. 14. It nearly concerns
all Christian Ministers to abandon those tenants which may either directly or
indirectly make vain their own preaching, or the peoples faith: And it is to be
feared the Sabbatarian Doctrine may tend to this; for it is to be avowed that
the turning those solemn festivals out of the Church, which peculiarly
commemorate the Incarnation, Nativity, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ,
and teach us to bless God for the same, that the Sabbath may be set up as Lady
paramount and Queen Regent to control and confine all our public worship,
can in no case make for the honor of Christ, and therefore not for the truth
of Christianity: For Saint Paul says expressly, that in all things he must have
the pre-eminence, and if in all things, then surely both in duties and in
days; and if in duties, then much more in days; for if the worship be not
acceptable to God but in him, then sure the day cannot be acceptable but for
him; It Is proper for the Jew to keep a Sabbath, who thinks himself still bound
to worship God through Moses; but it is proper for the Christian to keep a Lords
day, who knows himself bound to worship and glorify God only through Christ
Jesus the Lord of glory: And Saint Paul reads this Lecture to the Jews
themselves, (and much more to us Christians,) in those words to the Hebrews,
Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make you perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever
and ever, Amen, Heb. 13. 20, 21. Where he briefly declares the sum not only
of that whole Epistle, but also of the whole Christian Faith, and that by way
of benediction, to show we cannot have the blessing of Christians, unless we
have the faith of Christians; And that faith teaches us to believe and
confess, 1. That God is reconciled to us, Now the God of peace. 2. That our
Savior Christ alone has wrought for us, and offers to us this
reconciliation, as our King, our Lord Jesus, as our Prophet, the great
Shepherd, and as our Priest, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant. 3.
That he has given us sufficient proof of his great work, that he is brought
again from the dead. 4. That he is ready to give us the superabundant fruits of
all, by making us perfect in every good work, to do his will, working in us
that which is well-pleasing in his sight. In all these inestimable and
undeserved mercies, it is Christ alone that is all in all; wherefore it follows
in the next words, through Christ Jesus, and consequently he in himself, and
the Father in him is to be glorified for all, as it is said, To whom be glory
for ever and ever, Amen. God is the God of peace to us men, in that he brought
again from the dead the Lord Jesus; so that we cannot rightly glorify him for
the reconciliation, unless we glorify him for the resurrection. And for this
cause happily it was that the Church did anciently interpose Halleluiah in the
midst of those sentences of the Text, which she chose for her public service
in celebrating the memory of Christ's resurrection, not to interrupt the words
or sense of the Scriptures, but rather to explain them; teaching us that good
Christians should not read or hear any part of the Text without thinking of
Christ, and that they should not think of Christ, without praising God in him
and for him, and that praising God in and for their Savior Christ, they can
never be zealous enough in their praises, nor rejoice too much in his
salvation. Therefore they intermingled Hallelujah not only in the Hymns of the
Text, where it might be thought a natural appendix, but also in the Doctrines
of it, where (at first sight) it might seem altogether an unnecessary addition;
As for example, thus they recite that Hymn of the Psalmist, He brought forth
his people with joy, Halleluiah, and his chosen with gladness, Psalm 105. ver.
42. And thus also that doctrine of Saint Peter, As new born babes, Halleluiah,
desire the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2. 2. Where Halleluiah does not
close a part of a Hymn, but breaks off a doctrinal exhortation, surely not to
distract our attentions, but to inflame our affections; and to possess our
souls wholly with the joy and love of Christ, without which neither our praying
nor our preaching is acceptable unto God, or available unto us. And the Church
seems to have borrowed this practice from the Apostles; for it is much to be
observed that Saint Paul delivers not any one Doctrine of the Christian verity
without his Halleluiah, that is, without a peculiar doxology to God in Christ:
So in his Epistle to the Romans, (1. 8.) First I thank my God through Jesus
Christ: So to the Corinthians (1. 1. 4.) I thank my God always on your behalf;
So to the Galatians, (1. 5.) To God and our Father be glory for ever and ever,
Amen: So to the Ephesians (1. 3.) Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: And so in the rest of his Epistles: Nay he does not only prefix
his Halleluiah and lay it as the foundation and bottom of his work, but he does
also familiarly interweave it whilst he is working, as it were some choice and
eminent thread to checquer and adorn the whole piece: Thus in the Doctrine of
Christian regeneration, Romans 7. 25. I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord,
speaks little or nothing to the argument, but more to the soul of him that
earnestly desires truly to understand it, then the tongue of men and Angels is
able to express: Thus also in the Doctrine of the resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 57.
Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ, are
such words as do more then persuade the belief, they do also enforce the love
of that Christian truth, which of it self is able to make not only one Foelix,
but also all mankind to quake and tremble: For Christ raising us from the
death, by virtue of his resurrection; will also uphold us in the judgment, by
virtue of his satisfaction: Lastly, thus also in the Doctrine of Christian
patience and preseverance, concerning our being strengthened with might by the
Spirit of God in the inward man, and Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith,
and our own being rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3. He begins with prayer
to God before it, ver. 14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and he ends with praises after it, ver. 21. Unto him be
glory in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages world without end:
Which manner of teaching by prayer and praise, must needs make a deeper
impression upon the soul then all the arguments of Logic, or persuasions of
Rhetoric, that have been or can be invented by the art of man.

And indeed the same is also the Method of Saint Peter, and of the rest of the
Apostles, to intermingle prayers and praises to God in all their writings, and
may not unfitly be called the Method of grace: And Alensis gives this reason
for it, Alius est modus scientiae ad informationem affectus secundum pietatem;
Alius ad informationem intellectus secundum veritatem; (Alex. Ale. qu. 1. mem.
4.) There is one method of teaching the will how to embrace piety, another
method of teaching the understanding how to embrace truth: For the
understanding is best informed by the evidence of demonstration, but the will
is best enflamed by the power of devotion: And again, sunt principia veritatis
ut veritatis, and sunt principia veritatis ut bonitatis. There are principles
of truth which are to be learned as they are true; and there are principles of
truth which are to be learned as they are good; other sciences proceed from
principles of truth which are to be learned as they are true, because their
truth is most notoriously evident; But Divinity proceeds from principles of
truth which are to be learned as they are good, because their goodness is more
notoriously evident then their truth; Vnde hec scientia magis est virtutis quam
Artis, and sapientia magis quam scientia: magis enim consistit virtute and
efficacia quam in contemplatione and notitia; (Alen. ibid. in respon. 2.)
Therefore is Divinity rather a science of power then of Art, and consequently
rather a Sapience then a Science; for both in its being, and in its knowing it
consists more of virtue and power, then of contemplation or knowledge:
Accordingly the Apostle himself, (says Alensis) professes that his preaching
was not with enticing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit
and of power, 1 Cor. 2. 4. which is such a demonstration as is more fitted to
the will then to the understanding, because it has more of piety then of
evidence; man's wisdom teaching the understanding, but Gods wisdom rather
teaching the will and affections; The one working more upon the head, but the
other working more upon the heart; And therefore the Method which Gods wisdom
uses in teaching man, is not unfitly called the Method of grace. For it is a
Method that neither nature nor Art can teach us, but only the Spirit of Grace,
and is accordingly used in no other science but only in Divinity: In teaching
other sciences he that should break out into a prayer or ejulation, would
either forget his principle, or mistake his conclusion; But in teaching
Divinity, this is the only way to strengthen both our memories against
forgetfulness, and our judgments against mistakes; Here it is not (...), quod
demonstrandum erat, nor (...), quod faciendum erat, but (...), quod orandum
erat; Not what we can show, nor what we can do, but what we can pray, makes us
the best proficients in the School of Christ.

For doubtless we may best learn soul-saving Divinity in the way the Apostles
taught it, that is, by intermingling prayers and praises with our endeavors,
since this is the only way to learn Christ; for Christ cannot be learned till
he be received, and cannot be received in a soul not prepared by piety and
devotion to entertain him: This occasioned that expression of Saint Paul, As ye
have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, Col. 2. 6. In
other sciences we need learn but the Doctrine that is taught, no matter for the
author that teaches it; But in Christian Divinity we must learn and receive
Christ the author, or we cannot rightly learn and receive the Doctrine: Haec
cloquentia quaedam est Doctrinae salutaris, movendo affectus discentium
accommodata, says Saint Augustine, Epist. 119. ad Januarium; Whence we may
gather the true definition of Christian eloquence, It is that which most moves
our affections, and raises them up to Christ; this is the reason why the
Apostles used this new kind of method in their writings, not for the want of
knowledge, but for the abundance of love and charity, which was wholly enamored
on Christ, and the beauties and excellencies of the Christian Religion, making
them to proclaim to all the world these three things concerning that Religion
which they taught after this new manner.

1. That Christian Religion is not opus naturae, proceeding from the principles
of nature; for then they would have used the Method of nature, who first
planted it; but opus gratiae, The work of Grace, and therefore they used the
Method of grace.

2. That Christian Religion must not be made opus artis, matter of man's
invention or institution; for if it would not borrow so much as outward form or
Method from the art of man, (there being no science in the world taught by such
a Method as Divinity is, in the Scriptures) much less any inward matter or
substance from it.

3. That Christian Religion must be taken in the whole, in credendis and
agendis, in belief and practice both together: for therefore did the Apostles
teach it by praying, to show that we must learn it by practicing, prayer it
self being the best practice of Christianity.

Thus it is necessary that Christ should be the Alpha and Omega, the first and
the last in all our thoughts, words and works; for this is the end of all the
Scripture, (and they who undervalue the Scripture, seem not to know this end,
or not to regard it) as says Saint John, But these are written that ye might
believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might
have life through his name, John 20. 31. as if he had said, God gave us the
Scriptures, (especially the New Testament,) for this end, that we might
glorify Christ as the eternal Son of God and only Savior of the world, and
that by so doing, we might through him come to inherit eternal glory.

SECT. 11. The sincerity of Christian communion is the bullwark of its
authority, and first to be regarded by every Christian Church, as being the
glory of her prosperity, and comfort of her adversity; such a sincere communion
never to be deserted, when once happily attained.
NO particular Christian Church advances our communion with Christ, as such,
but only as Christian, and therefore no particular Church can justly require
another Church to communicate with it, any farther then as it is truly Christian
or Catholic; for no further does she her self keep communion with Christ; And
consequently where any Christian Church leaves Christ, there other Churches
may, and must leave Her, that is, leave Her as to the communion in Her sin,
whereby she leaves Christ, but not in Her righteousness whereby she still
reteineth him; for that were little less then in her to leave the communion of
Christ; For this profession of Saint Paul, We are not as many which corrupt the
word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, speak we
in Christ, 2 Cor. 2. 17. should be the profession of every Christian Church,
which desires to have other Churches join with her in her communion; we do not
corrupt the word of God, and would not willingly pin corruptions upon it;
(...), non sumus mangones aut caupones Theologiae, we play not the prolers or
hucksters with our Divinity or with Gods word, putting new dresses or false
colors upon the Text, or truth, to make our own erroneous Doctrines the more
passable, and the less discernable: or rather, we do not mingle Gods truth with
our own errors, as false drawers mingle their wines; for so says Hesychius,
(...), so that the word (...) here translated which corrupt, is a Metaphor
taken from those Vintners who corrupt and mingle their wines before they sell
them: A word that speaks much in little, and may serve instead of a whole
Sermon to the Preachers themselves: For if they preach fancy, they mingle
water with this wine; if they preach faction, they mingle blood with it: Lord
forgive us these horrid mixtures, and renew again amongst us thy miracle
wrought in Cana of Galilee, and once more turn our water into wine, and suffer
not us any more to turn that wine into blood: (...), says Saint Chrysostom,
To corrupt wine, is in effect to bastardize it; which consideration should
terrify any Church that has wittingly corrupted the word of truth, seeing she
has thereby labored as it were to bastardize the eternal Son of God: Non
cauponantur, quia meram veritatem praedicant de Filio Dei, nec ipsam quasi aqua
falsitatis adulterant, says Saint Cyril (of Alexandria) These. l. 12. cap. 3.
They ^sc. that are true and good Churchmen) do not corrupt the word, because
they speak nothing but the truth, and do abhor to adulterate Gods pure wine,
with their impure, their puddle water: No Church can be two careful about the
sincerity of its Doctrine, since the Apostle did not think he could be zealous
enough about it; And therefore he again immediately enforces this same duty to
the same effect, though in other words; seeing we have received this Ministry,
as we have received mercy, we faint not; but have renounced the hidden things
of dishonesty, not walking in crastiness, nor handling the word of God
deceitfully, but by manifestation of the truth, commending our selves to every
man's conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. 1, 2. His whole intent and
purpose is to make them see his sincerity in preaching the Gospel of Christ,
thereby obliging every Christian Church, (which is the grand Apostle of its own
nation) openly to profess, and much more conscionably to discharge the same
sincerity, for which accordingly he alleges two reasons. First, the
incomparable worth and value of the Doctrine, and therefore he says this
Ministry, by way of excellency; for that the Gospel was as far above the Law,
(and much more above all other things) as liberty and salvation are above
thraldom and condemnation; Secondly, the indispensible obligation of his trust,
which God had laid upon him, and therefore he says, as we have received
mercy; he calls it a mercy, not a trust, the more to endeer it to his own soul
and to ours, yet in that he says he had received it, he acknowledges the
trust, and himself as one accountable according to his receipts: for as he had
received it from God, so he was bound to deliver it to them without either
alteration or addition, or diminution, according to his own former profession,
I delivered unto you that which I also received, 1 Cor. 15. 3. q. d. If I could
not prove the receipt, I could not justify the delivery: Having alleged these
two reasons for his sincere preaching of the Gospel, he afterward shows what
it was preserved him in this sincerity; and that was his magnanimity, his
innocence, and his integrity: First, the undaunted courage of his heart, we
faint not: (...), non deficimus, we are not defective to our selves for want of
perseverance, nor to our duty for want of constancy; For thus Aquinas finds out
two virtues to strengthen a man in any good enterprise, or great undertaking:
the first is perseverance to encourage him against the difficulties that arise
from the long continuance of the work; the second is constancy to encourage him
against any outward impediments in working: Saint Paul professes both in his
(...), we faint not either for the remisness of our own spirits, or for the
intenseness of other men's oppositions: The word is used of both, that men ought
always to pray and not to faint, Luke 18. 1. (...), not to faint because of
inward weakness or imbecility; agan, I desire that ye faint not at my
tribulations, Ephesians. 3. 13. (...), not to faint because of outward difficulties
or oppositions. Secondly the unspotted innocence of his life, we have renounced
the hidden things of dishenesty; He did so heartily detest any thing that was
against religion and righteousness, that though he might do it never so
secretly, yet he would not: as abhorring not only what was notorious and
obvious to other men's consciences, but also what was injurious to his own.
Thirdly the unfeigned integrity of his mind, not walking in craftiness, neither
handling the word of God deceitfully; (...), non ambulantes in astutia, not
using sophistry where he should use simplicity; (...) omne faciens, qui
quidlibet ex quolibet facere potest, one that can make any thing of any thing,
This (...), and (...) will never agree together; It Is ill iugling in temporal,
but worse in spiritual matters. I may not use art in mis-rendring or
mis-interpreting the word of man, and much less the word of God; and therefore
he says, (...), nor handling the word of God deceitfully: (...) says Saint
Basil (in Psalm. 14.) every better thing when it is mingled with a worse, is
handled deceitfully; so is Gods word, when it is mingled with man's inventions
or false glosses. But this is not that is all intimated in the Greek word (...)
therefore says the Vulgar Latin, adulterantes verbum Dei, adulterating the
word of God. They who handle the word of God deceitfully are guilty of
spiritual adultery: Beza goes yet farther, falsantes Sermonem Dei, falsifying
the word of God; They who handle the word of God deceitfully, are guilty of
diabolical fasifications: And is it proper for the spouse of Christ to play the
whore? for the Church of God to imitate the Devil? He was a liar from the
beginning, let him only be the liar unto the end: for is it just that any
Church should allege the word of God for her authority, which cares not to
allege it, for her sincerity? it is without doubt the Churches part first to
make good her sincerity, by renouncing the hidden things of dishonesty, and not
walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully, but by
manifestation of the truth commending her self to every man's conscience in the
sight of God; And then after that, to stand upon her authority, unless she will
profess to be more selfish then Christian, to be more zealous for her own then
for Christ's interest; and to be more desirous of making proselytes unto her
self, then unto her Savior: For it is only the manifestation of Gods* truth can
commend a Church to men's consciences, though the manifestation of pomp and
prosperity may too much commend it to their opinions. And what is the Churches
glory, but to commend her self to men's consciences, that men may commend their
own Consciences to God?

For do I now persuade men or God? or do I seek to please men? for if I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ, Gal. 1. 10. If a Christian
Church shall not be servant of Christ, who else will care to do him service?
and she cannot be Christ's servant by seeking to please men, in condescending to
their humors, but God, in cleaving steadfastly to his truth. If she do this, she
will keep her sincerity, which is her chiefest glory: and if she keep her
sincerity, she cannot lose her authority; For a Church that with Saint Paul, by
the manifestation of the truth, commends her self to every man's conscience in
the sight of God, may say with the same Saint Paul, If our Gospel be hid, it is
hid to them that are lost; In whom the God of this world has blinded the minds
of them which believe not, least the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
who is the image of God, should shine unto them, 2 Cor 4. 3, 4.

In such a case there is no want of Authority in the Church; but want of
conscience in the men she has to deal withal; For she commends her self to
their consciences which is an act of the highest authority; But they have no
conscience left to regard her doctrine in the manifestation of Gods truth, and
that makes them not regard her authority, though speaking in Gods name: And the
reason is, because they will not be governed by the God of the world above, but
by the God of this world below, whereby they come to lose themselves, and the
internal light of reason, and the external light of Religion; For he calls
them lost, blind, and unbelievers, and concludes them lost because they
wilfully continue in their blindness, and in their unbelief: He complains not
that he had lost his authority; for the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
was able to dispell all mists of error, and to reprove and repro^ch all works
of darkness; But he complains that they had lost their consciences, and were
so blinded with their own interests that they would not see this light, though
it shined most gloriously unto them: So is it with each true Christian Church,
she can never lose her Authority, whiles she preserves her sincerity; well she
may lsoe her actual jurisdiction, because men may lose their consciences which
should make them obey; but she cannot lose her habitual jurisdiction, because
she has not lost Gods truth which claims their obedience: Thus we find the
Church complaining in the Prophet Micah, 1. Of her small number, that she was
as the grape-gleanings of the vintage. 2. Of the general corruption, that the
good man was perished out of the earth, and those who were left in it did evil
with both hands earnestly. 3. Of unsufferable inhumanity* the best of them is
as a briar, the most upright is sharper then a thorn-hedge; and 4. Of a most
abominable Schism and faction, that the Son dishonored his Father, the
daughter did rise up against her mother, and that a man's enemies were those of
his own house; yet even in that complaint she comfort her self in God, and
triumphs over her enemies: Therefore I will look unto the Lord; I will wait
for the God of my salvation; my God will hear me; there is her comfort; and
again, Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise: when I
set in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me: There Is her triumph, Micah
7. 8. Neither could her tribulation deprive her of comfort; for that was no
more then she had deserved, therefore she says, I will bear the indignation of
the Lord because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
execute Judgment for me; Nor could her captivity diminish her triumph; for
that was no less then he had promised; therefore she says, He will bring me
forth to light, and I shall behold his righteousness: Then she that is mine
enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the
Lord, thy God?

It Is evident the Prophet here complains in the person of his Church, as says
Theophylact, (...), He takes upon him the person of Sion, And he speaks to sin
as his enemy, says Kimchi; to Babel, says Jarchi, to Idumea, says
Theophylact; Sin, Babel, Edom, are all three the enemies of Sion; Sin throws
her down, Babel and Edom keep her under: But God will raise her again in
despite of them all; He will first subdue her iniquities, (v. 19.) and then he
will subdue her enemies: Divinely the same Theophylact, (...) I have indeed
fallen down by reason of my sins and my impieties, but by returning unto
Christ, who is the Resurrection, I shall be raised again: And if he will raise
his Israel, it is neither Babel nor Edom, neither a stranger nor a brother,
neither a foreign nor a domestic enemy shall be able to keep him down: And he
will not only raise him, but also plead his cause and execute judgment for
him, against those that do depress him as says the same Father, (...): for
although I have offended against my God, yet I have many just complaints of
their offenses against me. So is it still with the Church of God; though she be
most sincere in the profession of his truth, yet she may easily incur the
just indig^ of the Lord* because either her profession comes short of Gods
truth, or sure her practice comes short of her profession; so that the purest
Church upon earth may deservedly come under persecution, and being persecuted
must contentedly say with the Prophet, I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him: But yet she must not be dismayed at the
indignation of men; for God will certainly plead her cause when he has purged
her corruptions, proved her patience, and procured her repentance; He will
bring her forth to the light, whiles her enemies shall sit in darkness; and she
shall behold his righteousness, though she be punished a while for her own
unrighteousness; Nor is it a wonder to see that time come now, which Saint
Peter said was come one thousand six hundred years ago, That Judgment must
begin at the house of God, 1 Pet. 4. 17. It is Gods pleasure thus to train up
his children under the rod; and it is my shame if the severity of his discipline
make me repent that I am one of his family: though there is sorrow from the
judgment, yet there is joy from the house of God; and I had rather be one of
his domestics, though full of sores, and empty of food, then be a stranger
from his house, and be clothed with purple and fine linen, and fare
sumptuously every day; For I cannot but admire that holy protestation, One day
in thy courts is better then a thousand, Psalm. 84. 10. It is better to live one
day in thy courts and die to morrow, (says Jarchi) then to live a thousand
years in another place, Let this Jew teach me both to be a good Christian, and
to be a good Protestant, that I may learn to prize Gods Courts above men's
Palaces, and to prefer his service above mine own patrimony: for it is in truth
better then my life, and disdains to be brought in competition with my
livelihood: And a more hhly resolution follows this holy Protestation, when
he says, I had rather be a dore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell
in the tents of wickedness; excellently the same Jarchi thus glosseth those
words, I had rather be at Gods threshold (...) to be kept watching and waking,
then dwell at my ease in the tents of Esau, (...) to cleave to, or have
communion with them: And indeed the Hebrew words intimate as much, (...) I had
rather sit at at the threshold: a great descent for a king to come from his
throne to sit on a threshold; and yet that's not all; for the Septuagint (from
the unquiet estate of those that sit on thresholds because of their often being
displaced by the goers out and comers in) have thus interpred the words,
(...), I had rather be tumbled and tossed up and down: Let us join both
together, and this will be the full meaning of his resolution, I had rather
dishonourably sit at the threshold, or unquietly be tumbled and tossed up and
down from this to that place in the house of God, then to dwell at my ease, to
have a quiet and peaceable, and if it were possible, an honorable habitation
in the tents of ungodliness. Therefore though many Disciples go back and walk
no more with Christ when they meet with thorns and briers in the way, yet all
good Christians will be sure to say with Saint Peter, Lord to whom shall we go?
thou have the words of eternal life, John 6. 68. Others may teach us words more
conducing to this life, but thou have the words of eternal life; We came to
thee not to learn how to live in this world, but how to live in the world to
come; and therefore all the terrors and mischiefs of this world shall not drive
us from thee: We have found thy words in thy house wherein we have lived, and
dare not leave thy house, (though at this time the rain descend, and the floods
come, and the winds blow and beat upon it,) for fear least we should also leave
thy words: If it be not in the wit of man to prove that our Church has
forsaken Christ's words, it should not be in the power of man to make us forsake
our Church; For if there be no just exception against the premises, it is
impossible justly to except against the conclusion; And if there be no lawful
objection against the object and act of worship, there can be no lawful
objection against the exercise of it.

Wherefore it would be happy for Christendom if all Churches would stand more
upon their sincerity then upon the authority of their communion; For authority
without sincerity is but like will without understanding, power without
judgment, to engage men to sin; but sincerity without authority is not to be*
imagined; for whatsoever appears to me in matters of Religion to be true, does
require my assent by the authority of the first truth; and whatsoever appears
to me to be good, does require my love and obedience by the authority of the
chiefest good; So that if I cannot but confess my Churches sincerity, woe will
be unto me if I deny, much more if I withstand her authority; For if I cannot
justly find fault with her Religion, I must be irreligious if I forsake her
communion: God have mercy upon those Christians, who on the one side are so
zealous for their Church, as not to be scrupulous about their Religion; or who
on the other side, are so scrupulous about their religion, as not to be zealous
for their Church; the one sinning against the verity, the other against the
unity of faith, and therefore neither but has a spice of infidelity in their
sin; and since God has made me a Christian, why should I make my selfan
Infidel, either by superstition sinning against my God, or by faction sinning
against his Church? I will therefore take the best care I can both about my
Religion, and about my communion: though I will first take care of my Religion,
and then of my communion.

SECT. III. The sincerity of Christian communion comprehends both the purity
and the solemnity of Religion; And is the whole duty of the first table: The
purity and substance of Religion being enjoynd in the three first commandments:
The solemnity and public exercise of it with the adjuncts thereto belonging,
being enjoined in the Fourth, the one from the end, the other from the letter
of the Law: The Sabbatarian the greatest opposer of the fourth Commandment who
cries up the day, but beats down the other adjuncts, and also the very duty of
the Sabbath; That duty being to glorify God in Christ, (by public worship)
for the Redemption of the world, whereas they discountenance Liturgy and
Festivals, though both instituted in honor of our Redeemer.
EVery man is born an enemy to the true Christian communion, because his
corrupt nature fills him with vain fears to make him superstitious, and with
outrageous malice to make him factious: And the true Christian communion is
equally opposed by superstition which corrupts the sincerity, and by faction
which destroys the solemnity of Gods public worship: Wherefore God has given
us a Law which takes care not only for the Religion of his Church against
superstition, but also for the Communion of his Church against faction; though
it first take care for the Religion, and after that for the communion; For
Religion knits and unites us immediately to God; But communion knits and unites
us one to the other; Religion is the very knowledge and worship of God;
communion is only the agreement in that knowledge and worship: Religion makes
the Saints, communion only shows and declares them; Religion makes true
worship, communion makes public worship: Accordingly God first provided for
the duty, then for the solemnity; first for the Religion, then for the
communion: Thus in the three first precepts of the decalogue, he requires the
true knowledge and worship of God, which constitute our Religion; and in the
fourth, he requires the public profession of that knowledge, and exercise of
that worship, which constitute our communion: For the first commandment
requires us to have right apprehensions and affections concerning God, by the
internal acts of our souls in trusting, believing, loving him above all things:
The second and third require us to testify those our inward apprehensions and
affections concerning him, by our outward adoration or reverence, and by our
outward confessing or glorifying his holy name: Then follows the fourth,
requiring us to muster up our apprehensions and affections, adorations and
glorifications altogether, in one public entire and holy communion: So that
the fourth Commandment is little other then a new ratification or establishment
of the three first; all in one to be observed or performed solemnly and
publicly: enjoining us to do those holy duties on some set days openly and
jointly in one communion, which were before enjoined every day severally and
privately in one Religion: And consequent the 4th Commandment is in effect an
establishment of the Church, as the three first are an establishment of
Religion; For the consecration of times, places, persons, maintenance and forms
of worship, is here commanded, though time only be named, and all for this end,
that God may be publicly glorified, (and our souls edified) in the communion
of Saint.

Wherefore those that profane the places, oppose the persons, rob the
maintenance, and reproach the forms consecrated to the public worship of God,
are as great Sabbath Breakers as those that profane the time; nor is there in
truth a greater enemy to the Sabbath then the Sabbatarian: as not a greater
enemy to faith then the Solifidean; the one crying up the Sabbath in the day,
but beating it down in the duty; advancing the circumstance of time, but
depressing and debasing not only other circumstances, but also the very
substance of worship; The other making a noise of faith which fills the fancy
with strong persuasions, but neglecting the work of faith which fills the soul
with holy affections: What? do we think our Savior Christ said in vain,
Father, glorify thy name? or that God himself answered in vain by a voice from
heaven, saying, I have both glorified it and will glorify it again? John 12.
28. If not, let us acknowledge this to be the main end of our Christian
Religion to glorify the name of God, and then we shall be afraid to oppose any
thing directly conducing to his praise and glory: For certainly, those words
are never to grow out of date, This voice came not because of me, but for your
sakes, John 12. 30. We know it was the whole work of Christ to glorify God,
and what else can we think is the work of the Christian Religion?

Let this then, (I mean the glory of God) be taken for the balance of the
Sanctuary, wherein to weigh all our Tenants and all our practices, and we shall
never put a parsimonious, much less an envious gloss upon the fourth
Commandment, as if it had taken care only for one circumstance of public
worship, but neglected all the rest; that's a parsimonious gloss; or as if it
had provided for the circumstances alone, and not much more for the substance
of Gods public worship and service; that's an envious irreligious gloss; For in
truth, as in the Creed every subsequent Article of faith presupposes the
belief of all before it, that it self may be rightly believed, the same truth
being first in the order of nature, which is there put first in the order of
Revelation; So also in the decalogue, especially in the first table, every
subsequent commandment presupposes the obedience of all before it, that it
self may be rightly obeyed, the same duty being first in the order of nature
which is there put first in the order of injunction: God in his very Method of
revealing truths and enjoining duties, showing us that we cannot take any of
either, but we must take all: And this is most evident in the present case; for
the fourth Commandment pl^inly presupposes all that is enjoined in the three
former commandments concerning holy duties, or the whole substance of Religion
both internal and external; and then also farther adds an obligation of
consecrating time and other adjuncts for the public exercise thereof, that God
may be the more solemnly glorified, and men the more truly edified whilst the
duties of Religion are all practiced together in a full communion of Saints,
the Church Militant being obliged in this to imitate the Church Triumphant,
that it invite men on earth to glorify God with one accord, as the Angels do
glorify him in heaven.

And in this respect we may easily believe, and readily confess the first
Sabbath to have been both instituted and kept in Paradise; for the Church was
there founded, and the Communion of Saints there first established: That is,
the communion of holy men with the holy Angels and with themselves, joining
together to sing Halleluiahs to God their blessed Creator, which was indeed the
principal end of their creation: And accordingly men were at first enabled to
the discharge of this great duty, as well as the Angels, having the right and
acceptable forms of praising God imprinted in their hearts; and when through
transgression they had disabled themselves, it pleased God of his infinite
goodness to grant them as it were a new impression, and to give them a second
edition of those praises in his holy Scriptures, which before had been written
in their own hearts, but were now very much slurred and defaced, if not quite
obliterated and blotted out. This great and undeserved mercy of God, those men
either shamefully forget, or ineffectually remember, who cry up the Sabbath
day, but beat down the Sabbath Duty, making little or no use of the written
Word of God in their public worship, and making little or no account of those
forms of pra^er and praise which are either contained therein, or agreeable
thereto; but setting up their own private gifts against that public communion,
which should be in Gods house and service by virtue of this fourth Commandment;
discountenancing the exercise of Religion, in known forms of heavenly prayers
able to establish the heart; and encouraging newfangled devices which are only
fit to busy and tickle the fancy.

By which ungodly practice, (for so it must be called, though it pretend to the
greatest measure of godliness,) they in effect throw the fourth Commandment out
of the Church, whilst they pretend to set it up over the Altar, since not
sitting still or keeping an outward rest, but coming together that we may all
labor inwardly in Hallowing the name of our Father which is in heaven, is the
chief moral duty of the Sabbath; For as in the promise of the fifth, so in the
precept of the fourth Commandment, the Lawgivers expression contains the
least part of his intention, and we may no more confine this precept in the
duty, then we may that promise in the reward; Therefore as we would be loath to
look no farther then the Land of Canaan for our inheritance, so we should be
wary how we assert that God looks no farther then the Sabbath day for our
obedience: Truth is, it pleased God to train up the Jews in his fear by types
and figures, and as it were to wrap up heaven in earth, spirituals in
temporals, morals in ceremonials, substances in circumstances, to them as well
in his precepts as in his promises; particularly in that precept which
concerned his public worship because that amongst the Jews was for the most
part Ceremonial and figurative. Wherefore if we desire rightly and fully to
understand the fourth Commandment, we must conceive it in so great a latitude
as to comprize all those Commissions, injunctions, invitations, and
exhortations which we find in the Old and New Testament, given either to Kings,
or Ministers, or People, concerning the ordering, establishing, reforming,
practicing, professing or promoting the solemn public worship of Almighty God,
which is in truth the principal end thereof, unless we will say that all those
moral duties are reducible to none of the ten commandments in the decalogue,
and consequently that all they were will-worshippers who either professed, or
promoted or practiced them; For as such duties of Religion are to be done
publicly and solemnly by many together in one communion, they are not
reducible to any of the three first commandments which speak to single persons,
but only to the fourth which alone speaks to whole families, (or to many
persons joined together in one community.) And therefore it is not amiss to say
that Hallowed be thy name is that Petition which most directly prays for Grace
to perform the duty of the fourth Commandment, since all other things are
hallowed for his names sake; God sanctifying times, places, persons and forms
of prayers and praise, unto us, that he may sanctify us unto himself: nor is
it amiss to say, that the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints, is
that Article of faith which most directly professes to believe the truth of
the fourth Commandment; for it is only the Catholic Church, the Communion of
Saints, which does rightly hallow and praise Gods holy name: The Hallowing of
Gods most holy name belonging equally to the decalogue, and to the Creed, and
to the Lords most holy prayer; belonging to the decalogue, as it is a duty to
be performed; belonging to the Creed, as it is a truth to be believed; and
belonging to the Lords Prayer, as it is a good to be desired, as we are all
bound to pray that we may perform this duty, and believe this truth.

For Faith, Hope and Charity are not to be separated from one another; but do
alike belong to supernatural Truths, and to religious or moral duties, because
both truths and duties do equally call for our faith to know and believe them,
and for our hope to crave and desire them, and for our Charity to love and
embrace them: But if we take the outward sanctification of a day for the
principal morality of the Sabbath, we shall scarce find a Petition in the Lords
most holy and most perfect prayer, relating to such a Duty, nor an Article in
the Apostles Creed, relating to such a Truth: and so we shall fancy to our
selves such a morality as is without a good to be desired, and without a truth
to be believed; for without doubt, The Lords Prayer briefly contains all the
good we are bound to desire, and the Apostles Creed briefly contains all the
Truths we are bound to believe, as well as the Decalogue briefly contains all
the Duties we are bound to practice and perform. Whereas on the other side, if
we look upon hallowing the name of God in our public worship, as upon the
principal moral duty that is enjoined in the fourth Commandment, we shall find
the Decalogue, and the Creed, and the Lords prayer, all jointly agreeing
together in this, the one commanding it to be done, the other believing it is
done perfectly in heaven, the third praying it may be done perfectly on earth.

And in this sense it is evident, that keeping of the Sabbath is a moral duty,
not to end with time, but to last to all eternity, as becomes Righteousness,
which is immortal, not temporary; and that so intrinsecally and essentially,
that if it be not Immortal, it cannot be righteousness: Thus did Adam and Seth
with his righteous posterity keep the Sabbath (long before the Law was given by
Moses to appoint the day) as we read Genesis 4. 26. Then began men to call upon
the name of the Lord; which words clearly set forth the first exercise of
public worship in the first communion of Saints upon the earth; so Junius upon
the place, Sensus est, Adam and Seth in cujus posteris mansura erat Ecclesia,
etc. The meaning is, that Adam and Seth, in whose posterities the Church was to
be continued, observing that their families were in danger of being corrupted
by the ungodly conversation of the wicked Cainites, and consequently that the
worship of God, whereof they were the Ministers (and therefore the Trustees)
was like speedily to decay, did from that time assemble their children together
into one congregation, or into one body of a Church, and by their preaching,
and their praying, and their exercises of piety and Religion, did labor to
convert the wicked, and to confirm the righteous, from which their religious
observations they did purchase to themselves the title or appellation of the
Sons of God; Nam prius quidem invocavit Adam, sed in familia; tunc vero
invocarunt multi, sed in ecclesiam, velut in caulam, recepti, a mundi peccantis
and seducentis consortio; For Adam had indeed before that, called upon the name
of the Lord, in his own family; But at that time many families called upon God
together, being gathered into the Church as into a fold, and separating
themselves from the sinners and seducers of the world; Thus in effect, says
Junius: And we cannot but say, that this was a moral duty suggested to them by
the Law written in their hearts, which teaches men to enter into a society or
communion to serve themselves, and much more to serve their God; Drusius goes
yet further, saying thus, Eo tempore ritus certos colendi Deum institutos
fuisse, quos observarent filii Dei; At that time were instituted some certain
rites and ceremonies of worshipping God, which the Sons of God were bound to
observe. But Aquinas had said the same long before him; for after this
objection, how could Enos first begin to call upon the Name of the Lord? for
that were to say that the Church began not till his time; he gives this answer,
Non incepit divinum cultum, sed invenit aliquem modum singularem colendi
velorandi Deum, He did not first begin to worship God, but found out a new way
of solemnly worshipping him, which new way Junius tells us, was of assembling
many families together, whereas before, for want of Communicants, Adam had
served God only in his own family: But now that the Church was further enlarged
and spread in several families, it was necessary that all those families should
assemble together to do their homage to their liege Lord and maker.

And the Chaldee Paraphrase did before him give the same exposition of that
Text; for though the words* of that Paraphrase be different in Buxtorfs and
Montanus his Hebrew Bibles, which is very usual, whilst the Hebrew Text in both
is always the same, the Church not thinking her self bound to the same care in
keeping of Translations as of the Originals; yet the sense is not different,
but one and the same of either Paraphrase, and that is this, then began men to
pray in the name of the Lord, that is, then they began to pray altogether in
one congregation, whereas before they had prayed only in several families.

So then, this is the true keeping of the Sabbath, to Hallow Gods most holy
name for its own sake, and to hallow the things conducting or belonging
thereto, for his names sake, according to that command, Be ye holy, for I am
holy, which though found four several times in Leviticus, (Lev. 11. 44. 11. 45.
and Lev. 19. 2. and Lev. 20. 7.) yet is not a precept of the Levitical, but of
the Moral Law, as Saint Peter plainly shows us, alleging these very words as
an invincible demonstration, that it is our bounden duty to be holy in all
manner of conversation, because it is written, Be ye holy, for I am holy; 1
Pet. 1. 15, 16. Where this is the force of the argumentation; such as I am,
such must all they be who will have relation to me, or communion with me; but I
am holy; therefore must they be holy: And this argumentation, though it most
properly belong to persons, yet may it not be confined only to them, but is
also to be extended to things and Actions; Person^, Res, Actiones, Persons,
Things, and Actions must be all holy, or they must not come into the beauty of
holiness; And if they be all holy, they must come in thither, and may not be
kept or cast out thence; ungodly profaning of days and Churches, unworthy
reviling or robbing of Ministers, consecrated to the service of Almighty God,
unjust excommunicating of Orthodox Christians, undeserved ejecting of Catholic
rites, of unblameable Liturgies, are all sins against this fourth Commandment,
and so many breaches or violations of the Sabbath; all of these directly
opposing that communion of Saints which ought to be in the public worship of
God, or the exercise of Religion; and all of them grievously sinning against
that command which came to Saint Peter in a voice from heaven, before it came
to us in the written word, What God has cleansed or purified, that call not
thou common or unclean, Act. 10. 15. We generally do look upon the profanation
of consecrated time as the breach of the Sabbath; and we do well, for so it is;
But we look not far enough; for profanation is of as large an extent as
consecration; and we are to know that persons and Things, and Actions, are all
alike consecrated to Gods public worship, by virtue of the fourth Commandment.
Thus says the Psalmist, Give thanks O Israel to God the Lord in the
congregation, Psalm 68. 26. Which are the words, (says Sol. Jarchi) that
Miriam and the Damsels with her, playing on the timbrels, (mentioned in the
verse before) had said in their song of praises to God at the drowning of the
Egyptians, so that in the judgment of this great Doctor, blessing God in the
congregations, was a duty that belonged to Israel by the Law of nature, (for
the Law of Moses was not then given, when Miriam was supposed to say so) Though
it was also included in the positive Law concerning the Sabbath, which we find
set down in Genesis, as if it had been given immediately after the Creation;
but are sure it was written with the finger of God, among the rest of the Moral
Law; which is a strong proof that the substance of it was written in man's
heart, before it was writ in Moses his Tables; And what can be the substance of
it, but this, that God ought to be publicly worshipped in the congregations,
and therefore all those things are made, and are to be reputed holy, which
necessarily belong to his public worship: For sure that was no will worship in
the Jews which we find recorded for our example, Nehem. 8. And all the people
gathered themselves together as one man; I ask by what Commandment, if not by
the fourth? so it is apparent that communion in Gods worship is a duty of the
fourth Commandment; And Saint Peter will have this communion, extend it self to
the whole body of Christians wheresoever dispersed, (for he writes to the
strangers scattered abroad in several Countries) when he says, But ye are a
chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, that
ye should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness
into his marvelous light, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Be good Christians never so far asunder
in time and place, yet they are all joined together in one chosen generation,
in one royal Priesthood, in one holy Nation, in one peculiar people, and the
reason why they are so joined together, is, to show forth the praises of him
who has called them out of darkness into his marvelous light; And this (as far
as may be) they must all do together as one man, no less then did the Jews,
according to that of Saint Paul, Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, (as you desire to be thought and called Christians) that ye
all speak the same thing and that there be no schisms or divisions among you,
but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment, 1 Cor. 1 10. as if he had said, I beseech you altogether to make but
one man amongst you all, in the business of Religion, but one outward man,
whilst you all speak the same thing, and there be no schisms or divisions among
you, (which is best done by having a set and known form of prayer) and but one
inward man, whilst you are perfectly joined together in the same mind and in
the same judgment; he^e is not only a most powerful exhortation, but also, as
it were, a most powerful exorcism, By the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to
cast out from us all, the evil spirit of schism; Now I beseech you brethren by
the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; nor can the Church of Christ now use a more
powerful exorcism against Schismatics then that which was once used by the
vagabond Jews, (such as Schismatics now strive to make their Ministers, and
the more to make them vagabonds, because they cannot make them Jews) saying, We
adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches, Acts 19. 13. For there cannot be a
stronger adjuration to unity and concord, then the name of Jesus, who joined
God and man together, and therefore will not suffer man and man to be asunder;
nor can we more powerfully adjure by that Jesus then as Paul preached him, or
in the words of Saint Paul, that they would all speak the same thing; all have
one confession of faith, all have one form of prayer and praise, who are of one
and the same communion, and not be like that confused assembly of the
Ephesians, wherein some cried one thing, and some another, and the more part
knew not wherefore they were come together, Acts 19. 32. That's for their
external union and communion. And again, that they would all be perfectly
joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment; In the same mind
by unity of love, in the same judgment by unity of faith; in the same mind in
regard of their affections; in the same judgment in regard of their opinions;
that's for their internal union and communion; To speak the same thing is the
ready way to be of the same mind, and the same judgment; and consequently to
break off external communion in worship, is to break off internal communion in
faith and charity; for worship is the profession of faith, and the exercise of
charity: Here Saint Paul preaches communion in Christ, so as to have it begin
in the mouth, and to end in the mind, they should first speak the same thing,
and after that be of the same mind and of the same judgment; But in his
Epistle to the Romans; he will have this communion in Christ begin in the mind,
and end in the mouth, Romans 15. 5, 6. Now the God of patience and consolation
grant you to be like-minded one toward another according to Christ Jesus, That
ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: He first prays that they may have one mind in Doctrine, and then
that they may have one mouth in prayer; They both so much conduce to each
other, that it is indifferent to him which he names first, whether the mind or
the mouth; for Jerusalem is a City that is at unity in it self, as well in
Mouth as in mind; and if Babel, if Confusion once get into the Tongue, it will
from thence easily get into the Heart.

And now tell me ye that are possessed with the evil spirit of Schism, is not
this word of adjuration, being by the holy Apostle made the word of God, quick
and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the
dividing asunder of soul and spirit in you, whiles you proceed to the dividing
asunder of soul and spirit in Christ's Church? we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preaches thus plainly, thus powerfully, that you will endeavor to keep the
unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, not violating that internal Communion
which ought to be among Christians in the unity of the Spirit, nor that
external communion which ought to be among them in the bond of peace; Nay more,
we adjure by Jesus by whom Paul adjureth you, when he says, I beseech you
brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...), says Oecumenius; I
commanding or exhorting in mine own name perchance am not sufficent to persuade
you, therefore I command and exhort you in the name of Christ, that is to say,
Christ himself who is injured by you, does by me command and exhort you to
unity and concord in his worship: The words in themselves are no more then a
pathetical exhortation, but in regard of the evil spirits of some men, they may
be taken for an Adjuration: Saint Paul, as it were leaving the Apostle and
taking the Exorcist to allay the furious outrages and distempers of those who
make it their work not only to rend Christ's coat, (which yet the Roman
Soldiers would not do) but also his body; raising factions and schisms in the
Church, not only against the decency and order which are as it were the coat or
clothing, but also against the very substance of worship, which is in some
sort the body of Christ. So then the Church may still in this regard claim and
continue the power of Exorcism, saying with Saint Paul, I exhort or command you
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, or we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preaches.

And if the evil spirit of Schism being thus adjured, shall answer, Jesus I
know, and Paul I know, but who are y^? making no more account of the Ministers
of Christ then if they were indeed so many vagabond Jews, it will show it self
not only a factious, but also a lying spirit, saying It knows Christ, when it
does not know him: They profess that they know God; but in works they deny him,
being abominable and disobedient, and unto every good work, reprobate; Tit. 1.
16. Such a lying spirit deserves not to be confuted by the spirit of Truth,
which says Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of Christ, and
stewards of the mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 5. (showing that the societies or
corporations of Christians may no more take their spiritual food together,
without their ministers, then other Corporations do usually take their corporal
food without their Stewards:) I say, such a lying spirit as this, (which
pretends to know both Jesus and Paul, but indeed knows neither,) deserves not
to be confuted by the spirit of Truth, but by the spirit error; and indeed
has found such a confutation; For Satan in this foul affront of Christ, is
divided against himself; and one of his own most false and wicked spirits could
not but say of Gods Stewards or Ministers, These men are the Servants of the
most high God, which show unto us the way of salvation, Acts 16. 17. This truth
when some men did gainsay, after the father of lies himself durst not deny,
could not dissemble it, they gave occasion to Luther of falling into these
bitter expressions, As hitherto men have seemed possessed with Devils; even so
now the Devils themselves do seem to be possessed of far worse Devils, and so
rage above the fury of Devils; and again, For who ever heard (to pass over the
abominations of the Pope) so many monsters to burst out at once in the world as
we see at this day in the Anabaptists alone, in whom Satan breaths out as it
were the last blast of his kingdom through horrible uproars, as if he would by
them suddenly not only destroy the whole world with Seditions, but also by
innumerable Sects swallow up and devour Christ wholly with his Church; (Prefat.
in Gal.) So Luther in his zeal to Christ and his Church; for he saw the one
could not be devoured without the other; he saw the Church could be thrown
down, but Christ would also be involved in the downfall.

Without doubt it is a most horrid sin for men to cry up the shadow, that they
may beat down the substance of the Law; and yet this is the sin of many men who
cry up the Sabbath in the Day, that they may throw it down in the Duty, making
it their business to discountenance the solemn exercise of Religion in common
Prayer, to disadvantage Gods public worship and service, to disgrace his
Ministers, to defile his ordinances, to revile, and contemn, and pollute his
Sanctuaries; whereas in truth, these are all alike sanctified to the hallowing
of Gods name by virtue of the fourth Commandment; and if we will needs make a
separation betwixt the letter and the end or reason of that commandment, where
God has made a most strict conjunction, we must give the pre-eminence and
superiority, not to the circumstances, or adjuncts, but to the substance of
Religion; The Jew in his typical worship, was first to look after the Time, the
Place, the Person, as the Sabbath, the Temple, the Priest, which were the
adjuncts of his worship, and then, to offer his sacrifice, which was the
substance of it.

But the Christian in his moral worship, is first to look after substance, then
after circumstances, though he has commission to neglect neither, but rather
has express command to look after both; Nay indeed the Jew himself was to do
this in his moral worship, even to prefer the Substance before the
circumstance; for we find that Ezra did read in the book of the Law, and
blessed the Lord the great God, and all the people answered Amen, Amen, with
lifting up their hands, and they bowed their heads and worshipped the Lord with
their faces to the ground; Ezra 8. 5, 6. All these were acts of moral worship,
and accordingly we find them not confined to the Temple, for its evident They
were all performed before the Street that was before the watergate, verse 3.
And it is as evident that the duties of Preaching and Praying were exercised by
the Jews in their Synagogues, whereas their sacrifices were offered only in the
Temple; The reason we may conceive was this, Because their Typical worship was
to continue but for a time, and to show it deserved not to continue for ever;
there was in it this kind of absurdity, that the accessory did draw the
Principal, the Temple the Sacrifice, the Circumstance the Substance: But their
moral worship was to continue for ever, and therefore in that the Principal
was to draw the accessories, the substance the circumstances, blessing the Lord
the great God, bowing the head and worshipping the Lord, reading the Law and
giving the sense of it that the People might understand the reading, these
being all duties of moral worship, were unconfinable either to place or time,
either to the Temple or Sabbath, to show they were above them both, and were to
remain after them, as they had been before them.

This was the main subject of Saint Stephens Sermon, Acts 7. That Abraham and
the Fathers worshipped God rightly, long before Moses was born to give them any
Laws either about the Tabernacle or the Temple, (and consequently about the
Sabbath) and that all those outward ceremonies which were afterward ordained
by Moses, were to last but for a time, but till the coming of Christ. And the
Jews themselves who call the Sabbath the foundation of the Decalogue, because
the precept of the sabbath was given before the rest, (for that was certainly
given in the wilderness of Zin, Exodus 16. where as the rest were not given till
they came to Mount Sinai, Exodus 20.) yet do ingenuously confess that Abraham
did not keep the Sabbath; so says Hospinian, (who yet was very zealous for the
Sabbath) Judaei ipsi in minori expositione in Genesin, arbitrantur Abrahamum
non observasse Sabbatum, The Jews themselves in the lesser exposition upon
Genesis, do think that Abraham did not keep the Sabbath. Nay the Fathers do
plainly say they know he did not. For Tertullian proves, against the Jews, that
the Sabbath was temporary, and to be abrogated, because their Antientest and
first fathers, Adam, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham did not keep the Sabbath; And
lest we should mince the matter by a distinction, and say that he denied not
Abraham to have kept the Sabbath, but only to have kept it so rigidly and
severely as the Jews did, (which is Hospinians opinion) Justine Martyr makes it
his business in a great part of his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew (wherein he
excellently asserts the Truth of the Christian Religion) To prove that neither
circumcision was before Abraham, nor the Sabbath before Moses; and so refutes
Trypho's objection, That the Christians did slight the commandments of God in
the Old Testament concerning the Sabbath and Circumcision, and other outward
observations.

(...) (...): If before Abraham there was no need of circumcision, nor before
Moses of the Sabbath and Festivals and Oblations, neither now is there any need
of them: Nor is it easy for any man to answer the force of this argument which
he uses (amongst many others,) (...). To say that any of these outward
ordinances is righteous in and for it self, were in effect to calumniate God,
as if he had not at all times taught one and the same Righteousness; which must
follow, if there be granted any intrinsecal or inherent holiness either in the
Jewish or in the Christian Sabbath, since we cannot prove that the one was
established before Moses, and we are sure the other was not established till
after Christ; So that by confequent, there was one moral Righteousness before
the Law; another under the Law; a third under the Gospel; and we whose
salvation it is to sit in Abraham's bosom, shall be saved by a righteousness
unknown to Abraham; which cannot be allowed without setting up two several
distinct communions of Saints, and two several distinct Religions that made
them so; and how can we acknowledge two Religions, and acknowledge but one God?
We must therefore put a distinction between circumstances and substances in
Religion; for though both are to go hand in hand to do their homage to Almighty
God, yet substances are to have the upper hand; And this appears plainly by our
Saviors own determination in the like case, even concerning Tithes; for Tithes
and the Sabbath are alike moral; if what is numeral be moral in the one, how
can it be less then moral in the other? Nay Abraham paying Tithes before Moses,
is undisputable, not so his keeping the Sabbath; whence it appears God took
care for the Priest before the Sabbath; for the person, before the day of his
worship. I say this appears plainly by our Saviors own determination
concerning Tithes, Mat. 23. 23. which he will not have put in the balance
against Mercy and Judgment, calling in effect these and the like ceremonial
institutions, the lighter, whiles he plainly calls those moral duties, the
weightier matters of the Law; And denouncing a woe against those as Hypocrites,
who magnified the one, that they might vilify the other, Woe unto you Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites, For ye pay tithe of mint, and annise, and cummin,
and have omitted the weightier, matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith;
This woe was denounced against them, not for what they paid, but for what they
omitted; not for paying Tithe of mint, and annise, and cummin, but for omitting
Judgment, mercy and faith, whiles they were over zealous and over scrupulous
about those payments: for so it follows, These ought ye to have done, (that is
the moral duties) and not to leave the other undone, (that is, the ceremonial
institutions.) To prefer circumstances above substances, and consequently, to
be more zealous and scrupulous about the day or other adjuncts then about the
duty of public worship, is to incur this woe; and it is too too plain, that
since tything of mint, and annise, and cummin have been much in fashion in
regard of God (for in regard of his poor Ministers Tithes were never less in
fashion) Mercy, and Judgment, and Faith have been quite out of request; Since
we have been so scrupulous about the Rue and all manner of herbs, we have quite
passed over judgment and the love of God, ( Luke 11. 42.) since the Sabbath
day has been so much cried up, the Sabbath Duty has been quite beaten down:
In the name of God let us set up both together, and know that (...) Tempori
Servientes, Applying our selves to the Time, is not good Divinity, if it
exclude (...) Domino Servientes, Applying our selves to the Lord; Though
Erasmus has given us that interpretation on Romans 12. 11. and our Church in the
Epistle for the second Sunday after Epiphany has followed him; and Vorstius
would fain justify (...) to be the truer lection, against the authority of the
Text commonly received both in Greek and Latin Churches. This may seem a
dangerous assertion in him, to make the letter of the Text come under our
Disputes, which God has set over our Obedience; But yet the other assertion
would be more dangerous in us, to make the end and reason of the Text come
under the letter of it; We all know this is the end of the Text, That God may
be glorified in Christ, and we saved by him; Let us gloss the fourth
commandment according to this end, and we shall neither be Heretics nor
Schismatics by our gloss, neither sin against Religion by having a corrupt
Liturgy, nor sin against communion by having no Liturgy; which are both
peccancies against the end of this commandment; And (consequently) we shall
neither Idolize, nor profane, much less rob either Times, or Places, or
Persons consecrated to Gods public worship, which are both peccancies against
the letter of this Commandment.

Christ is the end of the Law, says Saint Paul, Romans 10. 4. showing that the
letter of the Law was to look to the end, and the end of the Law was to look to
Christ; let us say so too, and we shall not easily sin against the principal
end of this Commandment, which is the glory of God in Christ; we shall not sin
against the Christian Religion by having a corrupt Liturgy. Again, the same
Saint Paul says, the end of the commandment is charity, 1 Timothy 1. 5. not
excluding what he had said before of Christ, but including it: Let us say so
too, and we shall not easily sin against the subordinate end of this
Commandment, which is the salvation of man by Christ; we shall not sin against
Christian communion, by having no Liturgy. For what Saint Paul has said of
the Law or Commandment in general, that must we say of this Law, of this
Commandment in particular, The end of it is Christ, and the end of it is
charity: For the end of it is twofold; First, the exercise of the true
Christian Religion, that God may be glorified in Christ for our redemption:
Secondly, the establishment of true Christian communion, that man may be
edified, and brought to the knowledge and enjoyment of his Redeemer. And all
those Texts in the Old and New Testament, which concern the public worship of
God, are so many interpretations of the twofold end of this commandment; as for
example, in the Old Testament, Psalm 95 (which was made to be used in public
assemblies, according to Aben Ezra's gloss) commands singing to the Lord, and
worshipping of him, there is the exercise of Religion, q. d. Remember thou keep
holy the Sabbath day: and commands us to sing and worship, there is the
establishment of communion, q. d. Thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, etc. and
gives this reason of those commands, The Lord our maker; q. d. For in six days
the Lord made heaven and earth: So again, Psalm 100. O be joyful in the Lord,
serve the Lord with gladness, and come before his presence with a song, there is
the Religion: All ye lands, or, as it is in the Hebrew, all the earth, there is
the communion: It is he that has made us, and not we our selves, there is the
reason of both, from our Creation; For the Lord is gracious, his mercy is
everlasting, etc. there is that reason further enlarged to us Christians from
our redemption; who are taught that God by his son both made the worlds, and
also purged our sins, Heb. 1. 2, 3. So again in the New Testament, Mat. 18. 20.
Where two or three are gathered together, there is the communion; In my name,
there is the Religion; I am in the midst of them, there is the reason of both; so
Heb. 10. 22, 23. Let us draw near with a true heart, let us hold fast the
profession of our faith, there is the exercise of Religion; for he is faithful
that promised, there is the reason of that exercise: And ver. 24, 25. Let us
consider one another, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together,
there is the establishment of communion; To provoke unto love and to good works,
there is the reason of that establishment: If we be sure of Christ's name, we
cannot be too zealous of our gathering together; if we be sure of the Religion,
we cannot be too zealous of the Communion, but if we be not sure of the name,
(which cannot well be, without a set and known Liturgy) every good Christian
must be contented to say with Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord, and
mou^n that he cannot say with David, I was glad when they said unto me, we will
go into the house of the Lord: for it is more agreeable with the end of the
fourth Commandment, that men have the right Religion in their own houses
without a public visible communion, then that they have a public visible
communion (in Gods house,) without the right Religion. They must first say, Let
us hold fast the profession of our faith, and after that, Let us consider one
another, not forsaking the assembling of our selves together; For if the
Assemblies have forsaken the faith, it can be no sin to forsake the Assemblies,
since the end of the Commandment is without doubt above the letter of it, the
substance of worship above the adjunct of it, or to speak in one word, since
Christian Religion does challenge precedence before, and preeminency above
Christian communion.

So then without question the end of the Commandment is the first thing to be
considered; for if the end be rightly understood, the letter will not easily be
mistaken; for the letter of the Law is subservient, to the end of it, and
therefore may not have so scanty an interpretation as will not reach the end;
And such is that interpretation of the fourth Commandment, which would have the
letter mean no more then it mentions, (that is the bare circumstance of time,)
and leaves men at liberty to do what they please with the other adjuncts of
public worship, (to wit, the persons by whom, and the places in which it is to
be performed) and regards not the end or reason of the command at all.

This was the fault which our blessed Savior did find with the Scribes and
Pharisees interpretations of the Law, that they interpreted it not in its full
extent or latitude; and this made him so often in one Chapter use these words,
Ye have heard it has been said of old, But I say unto you, etc. not opposing
his authority against the authority of God, who gave the Law, but against the
authority of the Scribes and Pharisees, who misinterpreted it: As for example,
God had said thou shall not kill, they intepreted this Law only of the act of
murder; our Savior interprets it also of the intent or occasion of it; of
hatred in the heart, and of calumny in the tongue: Again, God had said thou
shall not commit adultery, this the Scribes and Pharisees restrained to the act
of fornication or adultery, but our Savior tells us plainly that God meant
otherwise, and forbad not only the act, but also the inclination thereto,
lusting, nay the occasion thereof, looking on a woman to lust after her, Mat.
5. 28.

The like interpretation have some of late given of the fourth Commandment, as
if the day were all that God required, whereas questionless he requires also
the other adjuncts of public worship, as much as the day, and he requires the
worship it self much more: For public worship must first be public in its
substance, then in its adjuncts; first, in its substance, by having such
prayers as are of public concernment to all good Christians, according to the
pattern given us in the Mount, that is to say, in Gods most holy word, wherein
we find the Spirit of God himself the first author of Liturgy or of common
prayer; having taught us such prayers whose matter and form is common alike to
all good men; and taught them, not only for our direction, but also for our
use; as plainly appears by the Hebrew inscription on the ninty second Psalm, A
Psalm for the Sabbath, because, says Jarchi and Ezra both, they were to say
that Psalm on the Sabbath; And Musculus says the same after them, concinendus
in Ecclesia die Sabbathi, this Psalm was to be sung in the assemblies on the
Sabbath; Nay the Psalmist says as much, being nothing else but an invitation
to praise the name of God for all his works, most especially for the wonderful
dispensations of his power in pulling down his enemies, and of his mercy in
relieving and upholding his servants: So again, Psalm 102. has this
inscription, A prayer for the afflicted when he is overwhelmed, and pours
out his complaint before the Lord, which plainly shows that the Psalms were
made to be used not only as public, but also as private devotions, and
consequently that set forms do not confine the Spirit of prayer, because the
Holy Ghost commands the use of this Psalm to the afflicted, not for the
hinderance, but for the furtherance of his devotion; not only as a prayer, but
also as a prayer fit to pour out his complaint before the Lord: And it is clear
our blessed Savior has said concerning his own most holy prayer, not only,
after this manner therefore pray (Mat. 6. 9.) commending it for our direction,
but also, when ye pray, say Our Father, (Luke 11. 2.) commanding it for our
use; not only giving this prayer to his Church as a pattern for Liturgy, or
public worship, but also as a part of it; which is also true of the whole Book
of God, since those words being a part of the Scripture, cannot be of any
private interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. 20. So that God has provided for himself a
Lamb for a burnt offering, in giving his Scriptures to his Church; for in them
are not only rules of worshipping, but also forms of worship; such rules as
equally oblige all; such forms as equally concern all the Christians in the
world.

Secondly, public worship must also be public in its adjuncts, not only in
one adjunct of Time, (though that happily be more particularly named, because
it is the most universal or common adjunct, wherein all the habitable world can
at once communicate together) but also in the other adjuncts of place and
person; God will have his public places to be worshipped in, his public
persons to be worshipded by, as well as his public day; and all those Texts in
the Old and New Testament, which speak of places or persons deputed to Gods
public worship, do belong to the letter of this fourth Commandment, as well as
those which speak of the day.

Thus has God himself said, Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my
sanctuary, I am the Lord, Lev. 19. 30. Here is the same reason given for
reverencing the Sanctuary, as for keeping the Sabbath, and not to do the one,
as well as the other, is a contempt of God; And lest we should think this
injunction did only concern the Tabernacle or the Temple of the Jews, the
reverence is evidently communicated to more then one Sanctuary, Lev. 21. 23.
That he profane not my Sanctuaries, for I the Lord do sanctify them; God owns
the sanctification of Place as well as of time for his worship, and forbids us
to profane the one as well as the other: Thus as we find many complaints in
the Prophets against those that profaned the Day, so we find many in the
Psalms, against those that profaned the place of Gods public worship, as
Psalm 74. 8. They have set fire upon thy holy places, and have defiled the
dwelling place of thy name, and ver. 9. They have burnt up all the houses of
God in the land; and they that did this, are called Gods enemies, foolish
people, and blasphemers, verse 19. Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has
rebuked, and how the foolish people have blasphemed thy name. God owneth to
have houses as well as days; and if our Saviors example may prevail with us,
we shall be as zealous for his Houses as for his Days: He would not suffer that
any man should carry any vessel through the Temple, Mark 11. 16. (and yet he
here excused his Disciples for plucking the ears of corn on the Sabbath day,
Mark 2.) and he gives a reason for it that concerns Christians who are of all
Nations, and not only Jews who were but of one Nation, for he says, Is it not
written, my house shall be called of all Nations the house of prayer? Which
words plainly show that all Nations are to set apart Houses of prayer, and that
God has an interest or propriety in those Houses, (so set apart) they are his
houses; which caused Saint Paul to say to the Corinthians, What, have ye not
houses to eat and to drink, or despise ye the Church of God? 1 Cor. 11. 22.
Where is a plain contradistinction betwixt men's houses and Gods House, they may
not do the same offices in both; Their corporal food they must take in their
own houses, their spiritual food only in Gods house; and they who do otherwise,
are said to despise the Church of God, which is here put as a term convertible
with the House of God, or is imporperly opposed to their own houses: And indeed
the context requires this exposition, when ye come together in the Church, ver.
18. Is thus afterward explained, when ye come together in one place, ver. 20.
For it is evident that if the place of their meeting had not been first
determined, and known, they could never have met together; and what is the
determining of a place to holy meetings, but the exempting or separating it
from profane or common uses?

Therefore the Canon Law says expressly, that all men know there was a
consecration of places from the beginning, who know the precepts of the Old and
New Testament; ( de consecr. did. 1. cap. 1.) and accordingly proves it was so
among the Jews, and ought to be so among the Christians: Iudaei ergo loca, in
quibus sacrificabant Domino, Divinis habebant supplicationibus consecrata, nec
in aliis quam Deo dicatis locis munera Domino offerebant: si enim Iudaei, qui
nmbrae legis deserviebant, haec faciebant, multo magis nos, etc. The Jews did
consecrate those places by prayers and supplications, in which they offered
their sacrifices: And if they who had only the shadow of the Law were so
zealous and careful about the places of their worship, how much more ought we
so to be who enjoy the substance of the Gospel, and the very Sunshine of
Grace? For sure our worship being more holy then theirs, cannot have less claim
to the beauty of holiness: And the same was also the Judgment of the Greek
Church, in the purest ages of it, as appears by Athanasius his Apology to the
Emperor Constantius, making many excuses for himself, that he had held a
religious Assembly in the great Church newly builded by him, (...), before it
had been consecrated: And the Council of Gangre says expressly, (...), we
honor and highly esteem the Houses of God, not speaking of his spiritual, but
of his material Temples (which this profane age blasphemously nick-nameth
steeple houses) for so it follows, (...), ( Can. 21.) Honoring every place
that is built to the name, or for the worship of God: But why should we insist
upon the practice of the servants, when the master himself did no less, who
honored the Feast of the Dedication of the Temple with his own presence, John
10. 22. Thereby showing it was not superstition but true Religion which first
taught men to perform holy duties, not only on Holy Days, but also in holy
Places.

And yet we have not quite explained the letter of this Commandment, for it
also requires holy persons, as well as times and places, for a holy worship:
Nay we find Gods public worship performed in a common or unholy place, Nehem.
8. 1. In the street before the watergate, but not by a common or unholy
person, for it was performed by Ezra the Scribe. And we find our blessed
Savior and his Disciples sometimes upon extraordinary occasions, preaching and
praying publicly, neither in the Synagogues nor on the Sabbaths, that is,
neither in consecrated places, nor on consecrated Days, to show the work it
self had a holiness incommensurable with, and therefore unconfinable to either;
but still we find only them who were without doubt consecrated persons,
publicly preaching and praying; we find no unholy or unconsecrated persons in
all the Book of God either authorized or allowed to do this Work of God, which
immediately concerns his public worship: But on the contrary it is said
expressly, The Lord separated the tribe of Levi to bear the Ark of the Covenant
of the Lord, to stand before the Lord, to Minister unto him, and to bless in
his name unto this day, Deuteronomy. 10. 8, Those whom the Lord had not separated,
durst not meddle with the Ark of his Covenant, nor stand before the Lord to
Minister unto him, and to bless in his name: One Vzzah that was not of this
separated tribe, was struck dead for taking hold of Gods Ark, though it were
with a good intent, to sustain it when the Oxen shook it, 2 Samuel 6, 7. And we
cannot say that this was not written for our learning, unless we will twice
contradict Saint Paul, not only in the general Thesis, when he says, Now all
these things happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our
admonition, 1 Cor. 10. 11. but also in this very particular hypothesis, when he
says, No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God, as
was Aaron; so also Christ glorified not himself to be made an High Priest, but
he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, Heb. 5. 4, 5. In which words though he
confine not the Priesthood to the tribe of Levi, of which Aaron was, for he
says that Christ was an high Priest, who was of the tribe of Judah, yet he
confines it to the calling of God, for he says, Christ glorified not himself
to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto him, thou art my Son. If
Christ would not glorify himself by taking the Priesthood, till he was called
of God, then surely no Christian can do the office of a Priest without being
called, but he must disobey God, and dishonor Christ; and to countenance any
man that does so, must needs be both ungodly and unchristian; much more to
discountenance those whom God has called, and who do not their own, but his
work; Ministering indeed unto him, (exactly according as himself has prescribed
both in Worship, and Word, and Sacraments) and blessing in his name and by his
authority: If we will needs expel these Ministers, what do we else but expel
our own Blessing? Sure we cannot deny but our Savior Christ has given unto
his Ministers the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, (for the Keys which he
promised only to Saint Peter, Mat. 16. 19. He gave to all his Apostles, John
20. 23.) Nay also the Keys of the Kingdom of Hell, for so those whom he had
sent out, return with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subject unto us
through thy name, Luke 10. 17. And how then can we disturb those Ministers whom
he has sent, without grievously sinning against his authority, and dangerously
sinning against our own souls? For what is this in effect, but to shut up
Heaven, and to open Hell, but to keep out God, and to let in Devils? Tell me if
you can, why men are not now so frequently possessed with Devils, as they were
before the coming of Christ, but only because Christ has given his Church
power over them; And if we will needs beat down his Church, why should not the
Devils again recover their former power of possessing men?

This we have found true by sad experience, that since we have forsaken our
Church which prayed God to beat down Satan under our feet, God has let Satan
get up even over our heads; Angelis malis duplex poenalis convenit locus;
Infernus pro ipsorum culpa in quem omnes post diem judicii detrudentur Aer
autem ista caliginosus, usque ad diem Judicii, ad bonorum exercitium, ne
totaliter; sc. ab utilitate naturalis ordinis exciderent, says Aqu. par. 1. qu
64. art. 4. God has allotted the Devils two places of torment; Hell, in regard
of their own sin, and they shall be all thrown down thither at the day of
Judgment; And also the region of the Air. (till that day comes) for the
exercise of good men, lest otherwise those evil Spirits should quite have
fallen from the order of nature, and been out of all capacity of doing good.

God has set the Devils over our Heads in respect of Place; But it is only our
contempt of God can set the Devils over our heads in respect of power: And the
contempt of Gods Ministers comes very near the contempt of God, for so himself
has taught us, He that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me Luk 10. 16.

What is it then? I will take heed of sinning against the letter, but much more
against the end of the fourth Commandment; I will take heed of sinning against
the circumstances, but much more against the substance that is required in the
exercise of Religion; I will glorify God in the Sabbath Day, that is, in all
the adjuncts or solemnity, but I will much more glorify him in the Sabbath
Duty, that is, in the substance (or form) of his public worship.

I will first make sure of my Religion, then of my Communion; first of my
Liturgy, then of my Company; first of Essentials, then of Ceremonials: I know
they are blessed that dwell in thy house, Psalm 84. 4. But withal that this is
the reason of their blessing, They will be always praising thee; Great is the
blessing of Christian Communion whereby men dwell in Gods house, but greater is
the blessing of Christian Religion, whereby men are always praising God; I
will not willingly sin against thy house, but above all I will not sin against
thy praise; I will not cast them out of thine house, whom thou have commanded
to dwell in it, that they may be always praising thee, ( Psalm 134. 2.) much
less will I cast thee out of thine own house by disturbing thy praises

If others will not forsake their false Churches to come to the true worship of
God, what shall I answer at the last day, if I forsake a true Church, to set up
a false worship? If they so highly prize a Religion that is in part against
thee, a Communion that is in part without thee, for which they can produce only
some few specious pretense; what will become of me if I regard neither thy
Religion, nor thy Communion, for which I have so many unquestionable arguments,
or rather so many irresistible Demonstrations?

I will then be very zealous for that Christian Communion, wherein I am sure I
have the true Christian Religion, for I cannot oppose such a Communion because
of its authority, but I shall be guilty of faction; nor because of its
excellency, but I shall be guilty of Blasphemy; nor because of its sincerity,
but I shall be guilty of Irreligion; And I cannot be either Factious, or
Blasphemous, or Irreligious (much less all three together) but I shall sin
grievously against the glory of my God, scandalously against the good of my
neighbor, dangerously against the salvation of mine own soul.

In a word, since God (of his infinite goodness, which I could not deserve, may
not abuse) has made me an Israelite, I will not strive to make my self an
Idumaean, a Babylonian, or an Egyptian; Saint Bernard finds all these three in
one persecutor or opposer of that Church which professes and practiceth the
true Christian Religion, saying thus, Herodiana malitia, and Babylonica
crudelitas est nascentem extinguere velle Religionem, and allidere parvulos
Israel; Si quid enim ad salutem pertinens, si quid Religionis oritur, quicunque
resistit, quicunque repugnat, plane cum Aegyptiis parvulos Israelitici germinis
necare conatur, imo cum Herod nascentem persequitur salvatorem; It is the
malice of a Herod, (who was an Idumaean,) and no less then Babylonian cruelty
to labor to suppress Religion, and to dash the children of Israel against the
stones: For if indeed what is brought forth does conduce to salvation, or
belong to true piety, who ever resists or opposes it, does plainly endeavor
with the Egyptians to slay the young children of Israel, nay with Herod he
does seek out his new born Savior to destroy him; And he that does this,
forgets all the curses denounced against Edom in the Prophets for persecuting
his brother Jacob, particularly that of Obadiah, v. 10. For thy violence
against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off
for ever: A Text, the fittest that can be alleged in this case, because the
Jews tell us that this Obadiah from being Ahabs Steward, was made a Prophet of
the Lord, for the kindness which he had showed to the Lords Prophets when they
were persecuted by Jezebel; Hic igitur quia centum Prophetas paverat, accepit
gratiam Prophetalem, and de duce exercitus fit dux Ecclesiae; Tunc in Samaria
parvum gregem paverat, nunc in toto orb, Christi pascit Ecclesias, says Saint
Hierom (prol. in Abdian. Proph.) This man because he fed an hundred Prophets,
received the Grace of Prophecy, and from being a Captain under Ahab, was made a
Captain under Christ; Then he fed but a small number in Samaria, now he feeds
many millions in all the world; and I doubt not but God has still reserved the
same blessing for all those who have hitherto sustained his persecuted
Prophets, not to give them the Spirit of Prophecy (for he will not violate his
own orders and institutions) but to give them the Spirit of Grace in this
ungracious, the Spirit of perseverance in this backsliding age of ours; So that
we may be truly say, The reason why they have not lost their faith (as well as
others) is because they would not lose their Charity; whereas many that were of
an other temper, as at first they lost their charity, so now at last they have
lost their faith, and know not whither to go to seek it; but may truly say with
Mary Magdalen, (and so much the more truly, by how much the less sorrowfully,
for they would with her have more tears in their eyes, if they had grace in
their hearts,) They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him, John 20. 13.

They who were among the head-men of Tekoa, Amos 1. 1. and taught to keep
cattle from their youth, Zach. 13. 5. and so made themselves Prophets without
the Lord; Nay they who were among Saul's messengers sent to take David, 1 Samuel
1. 20. and so made themselves Prophets against the Lord; They have taken away
my Lord, my Savior from me, and I know not where they have laid him. A very
sad complaint, which they now least make who have most reason, who from their
Sedition and privy conspiracy have fallen into false doctrine and heresy, and
from their hardness of heart toward men, have fallen into contempt of Gods
word and commandments, from which we pray God to deliver them, and to keep us:
For since his mercy has made us Christians, we may not let our own
Unthankfulness make us Antichristian; and such are all they who will needs be
of a Religion fitter to serve themselves then to serve their God; It is
Musculus his observation upon Ps. 52. Saul hic typum gerit ^ntichristi, qui
habet in regno suo Sacerdotes and tabernaculum, and cultum Dei, verum haec
omnia vult sui Juris esse, and sib ministrare; Vult Sacerdotes Domini, esse
iniquitatis suae Ministres; Non indicastis mihi (inquit) quod David venerit ad
vos; Saul was the very type of Antc^hrist, who had indeed Priests and
Tabernacle, and the worship of God in his kingdom, but would have them all
under his command, and would make them all serve his designs: He would have the
Priests of the Lord become Ministers of his wickedness, and destroyed them,
because they had not been so, Turn and slay the Priests of the Lord (says he)
because their hand also is with David, and because they knew when he fled, and
did not show it to me, 1 Samuel 22. 17.

This Sin of Antichrist, in striving to make Religion stoop to Interest, (that
is in effect, to make God serve Mammon, to make Christ serve Belial,) being
most directly against the end of the fourth Commandment, plainly shows that the
end of that Commandment is chiefly to set up the honor of Christ, the eternal
Son of God; All the Jews service did, all the Christians service should tend
only to this end; Do this in remembrance of me, concerned their Sacrifices, no
less then our Sacraments; Their Sabbaths no less then our Lords days; their
weekly, on less then our weekly; their anniversary, no less then our
anniversary festivals; and all by virtue of the fourth commandment; Do this in
remembrance of me, concerned the Jews in the general reason of it, no less then
it concerns us Christians; only it concerned them in types and shadows, it
concerns us in body and substance: So says Saint Paul of their Sabbaths,
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ, Col. 2. 17.
They were to look after the shadow, but we are to look after the Body, they
were to look after the types, but we are to look after Christ; They were to be
zealous for the Sabbath Day, but we are to be most zealous for the Sabbath
Duty, which is to do all in remembrance of Christ; to magnify our Redeemer in
the first place, and for his sake to magnify the memorials of our Redemption;
Thus has holy Zachary taught us to sing, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel;
and has given this reason of that song, For he has visited and redeemed his
people, Luke 1. 68. That we may assure our selves it is not superstition but
good Religion, (agreeable with the end of the fourth Commandment) which
teaches us to celebrate the memorials both of his Visitation, that he came to
visit us in great humility, and of his redemption, that he has redeemed us in
great mercy, and will consummate that Redemption in greater glory; nor may we
think that the letter of this Commandment was to restrain the end of it, or the
Sabbath was to confine the public worship of Christ, no more then we may think
that God gave the Law to restrain the Gospel, or set up the practice of Judaism
for a time, to confine the practice of Christianity for ever: we may not so put
our necks under the yoke of Jewish bondage, in the Circumstances, and much less
in the substance of our Religion: The proportion of time allotted the Jew for
his public worship, may admonish the Christian to give no less, must not
regulate him to give no more to God: For Religion first brings men to God, then
binds them to God; and that Religion which brings them nearest, binds them
fastest; The Jews Religion brought and bound him to God as to the author of
nature, and called for much praise; The Christians Religion brings and binds
him to God as to the Author of Grace, and calls for more praise; The Angels
Religion brings and binds them to God as the author of glory, and calls for
all Praises.

The Christians Religion, though betwixt that of the Jews and that of the
Angels, yet comes nearer to that of the Angels, and therefore may not look
backwards to Nature, but must look forwards to glory: The Author of nature did
bid the Jews first number days, saying, For in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh
day and hallowed it; There the day called for the duty: But the Author of Grace
has bid the Christian first number Duties, teaching him to say, I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 7. 25. Here the Duty calls for the Day;
and bidding us think God will not let us be sti^ted to one day in seven for our
thanksgivings: For though nature be under the measure and government of Time,
yet Grace is only under the measure and government of Eternity; Wherefore any
day that tells me of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God in
him, shall tell me also of the Communion of the Holy Ghost, to give thanks to
God the Son for his Grace, and to God the Father for his love; nor dare I so
undervalue the duty of thankfullness which I owe to my blessed Savior, for my
redemption from sin and death, as to tarry till the next Sabbath before I say,
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord; And this I am sure, though men may
deny me thus to keep the Sabbath on earth, yet God will not deny me thus to
keep the Sabbath in Heaven; and the more they may hinder me thus to keep it in
earth, the more should my soul be filled with desires and longings to keep it
so in Heaven.

SECT. IV. The sincerity of Christian communion may be broken either causally
by a false Religion; or formally by an unjust separation; Both breaches are
abominable: The care which the Primitive Christians used to avoid both by
cleaving to the ancient Creeds, and the Gloria Patri, and also by their
communicatory letters; The reason of that care was, that both Priest and People
labored only to serve Christ, not to serve themselves of him: The Touchstone
to try all Churches, is from advancing the glory of Christ, both in their
Religion and in their communion.
AS the Communion of Saints is commanded in the fourth Commandment which
requires all men to communicate in those doctrines of faith and duties of life
which God has called them to profess, and practice in and by his Church; So
the Religion of Saints is commanded in the three first Commandments which do
teach the Doctrines and Duties of that communion; For as God has not left his
people to make their own communion, so neither has he left his Church to make
her own Religion; He first says, Let all things be done, then let all things
be done decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14. 40. He first provides the doctrines,
then regulates the Prophets or the Preachers; first takes care for the order of
Religion, then takes care for the order of Communion: He first taught his
Church how to invocate and implore his mercy, how to reverence, and adore his
Majesty, how to acknowledge his Authority, and glorify his holy name in
worship, in word, in Sacraments, and after that how to order assemblies and
public meetings for these Invocations, for these adorations, for these
acknowledgements or glorifications.

And hence it is that Christian Religion bids all men first look after Gods
authority in his word, then after Gods authority in his Church; So that no
Church can be obliged (by the obedience which she owes to the Christian Faith)
to communicate with that Church which absolutely refuses to have the doctrines
and duties of its communion regulated and ordered by the known and undoubted
written word of God, because every man ought first to choose his Religion,
whereby to have communion with Christ, then the Profession or exercise of it,
whereby to have communion with Christ's Church: And by consequent, for any
company of men to advance themselves against the word, is to incur Saint
Paul's censure, If any man teach otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words,
even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according
to Godliness, he is proud, knowing nothing, but d^ating about questions and
strifes of words; And those men which have incurred Saint Paul's censure, cannot
be acquitted from Saint Paul's sentence, From such withdraw thy self, 1 Timothy 6.
3, 4, 5. In such a case the breach of Christian communion is to be imputed to
those who consent not to the words of Christ; for if they break off from
Christ, it is no sin, can be no shame in others to break off from them; For the
Apostle says expressly, from such withdraw thy self: So that it is evident the
breach of Christian Communion may be causal in a false Religion, as well as
formal in an unjust separation; And all the world is not able to excuse the
formal, unless it be from the causal breach, since no man can have a pretense
to leave the Church, unless it be to cleave to Christ; to forsake the Christian
communion, unless it be to follow the Christian Religion: Therefore where
Religion is most sincerely kept, there communion is most sinfully and most
shamefully broken. For if the Church has indeed taught us the right Invocation
and Adoration of God, and a right profession to glorify his most holy name,
according to the three first Commandments, How does it not bind us to its
communion in all these according to the fourth? If we cannot deny the purity,
how dare we deny the public exercise of our Religion? For surely he that will
one day say Depart from me ye cursed, to those who have carelessly neglected
their duty toward their neighbors, will never say, Come ye blessed, to us if
we wilfully neglect our duty toward our God; but our peevishness now saying,
unto him in effect Depart from us Thou blessed, will then most certainly be
recompensed with his Justice saying unto us, Depart from me ye cursed; Our
departure from him is now voluntary, it will then be necessary; it is now our
sin, it will then be our punishment: For if we shall be condemned for our
omissions toward our brethren, much more shall we be condemned for our
omissions, or rather for our contempts toward our Savior; And those Jehu's
which drive furiously, not to throw down the worship of Baal, but of the true
everliving God, shall without doubt answer at the last day not only for their
furiousness, as guilty of Schism, but also for their contempt, as guilty of
profaness; not only for their breaking the Christian communion, but also for
their opposing the Christian Religion; they cannot set up the abomination of
desolation* in the Holy place, and pull down holiness from thence, but
themselves will be in Gods account abominable and desolate. So says Junius in
his Parallel upon Saint Mat. 24, 15. Appellatur exercitus omnis infidelium ad
subversionem desolationemque populi Dei comparatus, (...), i. e. Abominatio
desolationis; Abominatio quidem propter naturam and constitutionem ipsius, quia
totus ex hominibus abominandis and infidelibus conflatus est; Desolationis vero
ab effectu; quia horridam desolalationem fuerat importaturus loco in quem
irruerit. Christ calls those Roman Armies which were to lay waste Jerusalem,
The Abomination of desolations; Abomination from their persons, because they
were abominable men; desolation from their work, because they were to make
Jerusalem waste and desolate: If those men were the abomination of desolation
who laid waste the City of God, what are they who lay waste the worship of God?
Therefore says the Spirit of God in Psalm 68. that such men are Gods enemies,
and must expect to be scattered, and either speedily to vanish like smoke,
after they have a little troubled our eyes, or at least to melt like wax, that
they may not stay so long as to harden our hearts: For he is the God that
makes men to be of one mind in an house, verse 6. and most loves they should
be of one mind in his own House; (...) say the 70. Inhabitare facit unius moris
in domo, He makes those of the same fashion to be of the same family; He makes
men to be of one disposition, and of one conversation, that they may be of one
communion; And he accounts them but runnagates that are not so, But lets the
runnagates continue in scarceness: Nay the Hebrew calls them Rebels, (...) but
the rebellious: The Greek translations do render this one word four several
ways, (...) say the 70. Qui exasperant, they that are contentious, ready to
exasperate and to provoke; (...), says Symmachus, Incruduli, They that are
incredulous and hard to believe; (...), says Aquila, Abscedentes, They that
are exceptious or ready to depart from the known way; (...) says Theodotius,
Declinantes, They are erroneous and actually declining into false ways: (for
so is that word used, Psalm 124. v. 5. (...), Declinantes autem ad tortuosas
vias, such as turn aside unto their crooked ways:) All which sins are combined
together in this one of wilful schism, which makes men Runnagates for their
inconstancy, Rebels for their disobedience, contentious for their bitterness,
incredulous for their blindness, exceptious for their apostasy, and erroneous
for their pertinacy. Such men are commonly Hotheaded, and Hardhearted in their
sin; and they are accordingly tormented with Heat and Hardness in their
punishment; (...), habitabunt aestus siccitatem, says Symmachus, They shall
dwell among burning drought, that shows their punishment from heat; (...),
habitaverent rupem, says Aquila, they do dwell among rocks, that shows their
punishment from Hardness: And what is the reason of all, but because they are
enemies to God, in being enemies to the communion which he has established?
for so it is said, ver. 26 Give thanks O Israel unto God the Lord in the
congregations; but they neither regard Israel, nor the God of Israel, nor the
giving of thanks, nor the congregations. And therefore these words, Rise up
Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee
before thee, which were used by Moses when the Ark set forward, Number. 10. 35.
are here by David formed into a perfect Psalm, which was sung afterward (says
Musculus) before that same Ark, when David and all the house of Israel brought
it up to Zion with shouting and with dancing, and with the sound of the
trumpet, 2 Samuel 6. 15. The Ark was a Type of the Church, and therefore this
Psalm which once concerned the Ark and its enemies, does now concern the Church
and her enemies; and Saint Paul in effect assured us as much, in that he has
applied the 18 verse of this Psalm to our Savior Christ's Ascension, wherein he
gave such gifts to men by which the Christian Church was first founded and does
still subsist: So that it is evident that this Psalm is a prayer for defense
and propagation of the Catholic Church, and consequently these and the like
expressions that are found in it, are so many imprecations and curses from the
Spirit of God against his Churches enemies. The like is often to be observed in
the whole book of Psalms, which is very full of expostulations with, and
imprecations against the enemies of the Church; and that being a book of
devotions of Gods own making, may neither be neglected by his servants, nor yet
securely used by his enemies; for they will but curse themselves by using it,
and more mischief themselves by not using it; A sad condition which the
Churches enemies most unavoidably bring upon themselves, either not to use
those devotions which were of Gods own composing, or to use them against their
own prosperity in this world, and salvation in the next. I will make but one
instance more, and that shall be out of Psalm 129. one of the Psalms of degrees
or Ascensions, which were so called says Kimchi, from Rabbi Sudia, because the
Levites in singing those Psalms were bound to exalt their voices, and as it
were to ascend higher and higher in every Psalm: so that before they came to
this Psalm, their voices were at a very high pitch, God not permitting them to
dissemble their danger who would needs oppose his Church, though by denouncing
and divulging it, they incurred their own; They were therefore to sing those
words in a high and loud tone, The righteous Lord has hewn the snares of the
ungodly in pieces, ver. 4. or rather as it is in the orher translation, has
cut asunder the cords of the wickd, even those cords whereby they drew the Plow
to make long furrows upon the Churches back, says Junius; densos funes quibus
aratrum trahebant in dorso Ecclesiae; And he borrowed this gloss from Aben
Ezra, who thus expounds the place, The Lord will cut asunder their cords,
that they shall not be able to plow upon my back; and the meaning is, that the
Lord will take away their burdens, (sc. who had led Israel captive) from off
the shoulders of Israel, by destroying their Dominion. Again ver. 5. and 6. Let
them be confounded and turned backward as many as have evil will at Sion; Let
them be even as the grass growing upon the housetops, which withers before it
be plucked up: If they be not confounded and turned backward in this world,
they will in the next; (for this curse cannot fall to the ground;) and to be
turned backward in the next world, is nothing less then to be turned into Hell,
as the grass that is withered is good for nothing but to be thrown into the
fire: And this is the very doom that Saint Paul has denounced against them,
Romans 2. 8, 9. But unto them that are contentious and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, Tribulation and anguish, etc. What
is there more in Hell, then indignation and wrath tormenting the soul? then
tribulation and anguish afflicting the body? And this will be the punishment of
those who are contentious, and merely out of contention; at first do not obey
the truth, and at last do obey unrighteousness: Therefore the Apostle uses an
Emphatical expression to set forth their contentiousness, saying, (...), lis
autem qui sunt ex contentione, (as the Vulgar Latin has rendered it,) But to
them that are of contention; that is, so contentious, as if they were born or
made of contention; this preposition Ex does here note the material cause, as
if contention were the very matter of which such men were made. Aquinas
ingeniously maintains that Position, Creare est aliquid ex nihilo facere, To
create is to make something out of nothing, mainly by this distinction, Quum
Praepositio Ex due importet, habitudinem causae materialis, and ordinem, hic
non designat causam materialem, sed ordinem tantum; sicut quum dicitur, Ex mane
fit meridies, id est, post mane fit meridies. Where the preposition Ex does
import two things, either the material cause out of which the thing is made, or
the Order of its making; here it does not import the material cause, but only
the Order, as when we say that the noon is made out of the morning, we mean
after the morning, so when we say to create is to make something out of
nothing, we only mean it is to make that something which before was merely
nothing, (1. Par. qu. 45. art. 1.) But we cannot fasten such an exposition upon
these words of Saint Paul, (...), Iis autem qui sunt ex contentione, But those
that are of contention; for this Of cannot import their beginning as if they
had been such, but now were not, and therefore it must import their
constitution; that they are such, and made of such principles: that they are so
of contention as of that which is the chief ingredient in their composition;
And according to this interpretation, (...) They which are of contention, will
signify those who make contention their study and delight, as, (...), Gal. 3.
7, 9. They whch are of Faith, does signify those which wholly depend and rely
upon faith in Christ; contrary to whom are (...), verse 10. As many as are of
the works of the Law, that is, As many as place their hope and confidence in
the works of the Law; And again, (...), They which were of the circumcision,
Gal. 2. 12. does signify those which did glory or boast of their circumcision,
and made it their business to be zealous for those kind of outward and carnal
Ordinances: And this is agreeable with Saint Hieroms criticism upon the word
(...), which he thus explaineth, Est (...) quum qui semper ad contrad^cendum
paratus, stomacho delectatur alieno, and muliebri jurgio contendit, and
provocat contendentem, alio nomine (...), (Hier. in 5. ad Galat.) The spirit of
contradiction and of contention both, are (according to this gloss) in those
men of whom Saint Paul says, (...), But unto them that are contentious; None
can be a formal Separatist from the communion of his Church rightly
established, but he must have the Spirit of contention to make him a
Schismatic, and the Spirit of contradiction to make him labor to justify, or
at least to continue and prolong his Schism: So that indeed such a man has
indignation and wrath, though unjustly, in his sin, and therefore may expect to
have them both, but very justly, in his Punishment; But unto them that are
contentious, indignation and wrath, says the Text: They unjustly had
indignation and wrath against their Church, that they might be contentious; And
God will justly have indignation and wrath against them, that they may be
punished for their contention.

All which considered, we have reason to believe that external Christian
communion, as far as it is truly Christian, is to be carefully followed,
maintained and preserved in all Churches; to be forsaken, persecuted and
destroyed in no Church; For God has not left it to the disposal of the Kings
and Potentates of this world, whether he shall be publicly served or not; only
has given them a strict command to promote and advance his public worship and
service. He gave not power to his Apostles for destruction, but only for
edisication; and therefore that power that tends only to destruction, cannot be
of his giving: What shall we say of those who commanded the Apostles not to
speak at all in the name of Jesus? Acts 4. 18. Shall we say they had power from
God so to do? God forbid; for then the Christian Religion could not have been
planted without Rebellion, and so should not have been planted at all; For the
Text is plain, which forbids to do evil that good may come: Gods power does
no thwart it self, nor put men upon contradictions; Therefore in that the
Apostles were commanded to pray and preach in the name of Jesus, the Rulers of
the Jews were commanded not to oppose them in their praying and preaching in
his name; And accordingly we find when they would needs oppose them, such an
answer returned as could not but make them condemn themselves for that
opposition, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you, more
then unto God, judge ye, Act. 4. 19. And this Answer was given by the Apostles,
that it might serve as a Ruled case (for their Successors) to the worlds end,
whom God has constituted his Trustees for his public worship, That his* name
may be rightly invocated and adored, his word rightly preached, his Sacraments
rightly and duly administered, and who are bound to lose not only their
livelyhoods, but also their lives rather then to forsake or betray their Trust;
And if they are bound thus to stick to the Truth, then surely the people are
bound to stick to them, that they may all be one sheepfold under one shepherd;
and as it were one Diocese under one and the same Bishop of their souls.

Saint Paul did not think his authority confined with his Person, when being a
prisoner at Rome he did write to Philemon at Coloss, calling upon him for the
effectual communication of his faith, ver. 6. and telling him, that he was to
be Ministered unto in the bonds of the Gospel, ver. 13. and requiring him to put
some wrongs and losses upon his account, ver. 18. and all upon this ground,
Thou owe unto me even thine own self besides, ver. 19. Is not the Church to
us what Saint Paul was to Philemon? Since by her Ministry God has called us to
the knowledge of his Truth and to Faith in his Son? or can we indeed owe even
our own selves to her, and not be bound to pay our best acknowledgements? by
effectually communicating in her devotions, diligently ministering to her
necessities, patiently suffering in her losses, readily obeying her commands,
constantly persisting in her Doctrine, and continually praying for her
deliverance; If we deny these acknowledgements to that Church, to the which we
owe them all, because we do own even our own selves besides, shall we not show
our selves untrue in denying our debt, as well as unjust in denying our duty?
For a true Christian Church cannot lose her right of obliging us to her
communion, because she is in Bonds (with Saint Paul) or in persecution, (with
the other Apostles) since it is evident that the precept of Heb. 13. 17.
Obedite praepositis vestris, Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit
your selves, for they watch for your souls, etc. was given to the people when
the Apostles were all grievously persecuted, and was carefully observed during
the unhappy time of the ten first Persecutions; And the reason (as we may
guess) was this, that the Church required the peoples communion upon no other
terms then Christ himself had required it; So that to break communion with the
Church, had been then to break communion with Christ; and this appears from
that profession of faith which was made by the Fifth General Council, (the
second of Constantinople) in the third collation; as it is set forth by Binius
in these words, Confitemur fidem tenere and praedicare ab initio donatam a
magno Deo, and Salvatore nostro Jesu Christo Sanctis Apostolis, and ab illis in
universo mundo praedicatam, quam and Sancti Patres confessi sunt and
explanaverunt, and Sanctis Ecclesiis tradiderunt, and maxim qui in Sanctis
quatuor Synodis convenerunt, quos per omnia and in omnibus sequimur, etc. We
profess our selves to hold and preach that faith which was at first given from
God and our Savior Jesus Christ to the holy Apostles, and by them preached in
all the world; which faith the holy fathers did confess and explain, and
deliver to the Churches, most especially those who met in the four first
general Councils, whom we exactly follow in all things: And again, Et omnia
quae a praedictis Sanctis quatuor Conciliis, sicut praedictum est, pro una
eademque fide definita sunt suscipimus; and omnes condemnatos praedictis
Sanctis quatuor conciliis, tanquam condemnatos and anathematizatos habemus, una
cum aliis haere^icis; And we receive all those Definitions or Determinations
concerning the Christian Faith which have been delivered by the four first
general Councils, and all that were condemned and accursed by them we condemn
and accurse as we do all other Heretics.

If this confession was Catholic in that general Council, how is it since that
time Schismatical in us? And if they were Catholics who cleaved to the
Apostles Creed, and to the Creeds of the four first Councils, (which had none
of those additional Articles, that have since made the breach in Christ's
Church, and are like to continue it to the worlds end, if they themselves
continue so long; for there will be still many conscientious men who cannot
take that for Christian Doctrine which they find not in the Word of Christ, nor
that for Christian practice, which they find rejected by his Word) I say, if
they were Catholics who cleaved to the Apostles Creed, and to the explanations
thereof, the Creeds of the four first Councils which are accordingly called
(...), Expositions of the Faith, sc. of that faith in the Apostles Creed, why
are not we Catholics too, who profess and maintain the same Faith? And if we
be Catholics, how are they not Heretics who wilfully oppose our Doctrine?
how are they not Schismatics who maliciously recede from our communion?

And surely it will be hard to prove that the Primitive Christians did, for the
first six hundred years after Christ, reject any men, much less Churches from
their communion as Heretics, who did make profession of the Catholic Faith
according to the Creeds delivered by the four first Councils; That moderation
professed by Saint Cyprian in the third Council of Carthage, was followed by
the Catholic Church long after his time, Superest ut de hac ipsare quid
singuli sentiamus, proferamus, neminem judicantes, aut a jure communionis
aliquem, si diversum senserit, amoventes; It remains that we declare our
opinions concerning this business; but so, as to condemn none for being of a
contrary opinion, nor for that reason, thrusting him out of our Christian
communion; The cause they met about was the rebaptizing of those who had been
baptized by Heretics, wherein though the Catholic Church has rejected their
Determination, yet it has always followed their moderation, suffering
particular Churches in those Doctrines which did not immediately corrupt the
faith, to continue in their different opinions, or different expressions, and
yet to be of one and the same Christian communion.

And this appears from the first Nicene Council, which denounces Anathema only
against the Arrians, (who denied the Divinity of Christ,) being contented to
establish the Canons about Ecclesiastical order and government with lesser
punishments, in so much that Athanasius plainly says, Patres Nicenos non eodem
Anathemate inclusisse Arianos and Quartodecimanos, That the Nicene fathers did
not include the Quartodecimans under the same Anathema with the Arrians. And we
may gather the reason of this, from the Synodical Epistle of the Council of
Sardice, wherein it is accouted all one to be Anathema, and to be separated
from the Catholic Church, or not to be reckoned among Christians: For so those
Fathers declare their sentence against the Arrian Bishops, (...): We have
judged them not only to be unworthy of their Bishoprics, but also of the
communion of the faithful; For they which do separate the son from the father,
are to be separated from the Catholic Church as unworthy of the name of
Christians; Therefore let them be to you as Anathema; (...).

But why are they to be Anathema? Because they have corrupted the word of
truth, say the same Fathers; This being the Apostles command, If any man preach
any other Gospel unto you, then that ye have received, let him be Anathema, or
accursed, Gal. 1. 9. Therefore be sure not to communicate with any of them; for
there is no communion of light with darkness, but put them all far from you;
for there is no concord of Christ with Belial; Thus far in effect, those holy
Fathers, accursing only those whom God himself had accursed: So does the
Council of Ephesus Anathematize Nestorius in this form; (...), ( Council. Ephesians.
par. 2. Act. 1. The true Orthodox Faith does accurse this man, the holy Synod
does accurse him, showing plainly that if the true Faith had not excommunicated
him, they would not easily have denied him their communion; I will pass by the
Acclamations of the Bishops in the Council of Chalcedon in the first action,
saying, (...), Christ himself has deposed Dioscorus, this is a just sentence,
this is a righteous Synod; and their great exultations in the Nicene and
Constantinopolitane Faith after the recital of those two Creeds, in the second
action of the same Council; and I will hasten to some instances of after-ages,
to show how tender the Primitive Christians were in rejecting others from their
communion; the first shall be of the fifth general Council, which was not till
the year of Christ five hundred and fifty. And that Council at the end of its
fourth collation has these words, Sancta Synodus dixit, multitudo
blasphemiarum, quas contra magnum Deum and Salvatorem nostrum Jesum Christum,
imo magis contra suam animam Theodorus Mopsuestenus evomuit, justam ejus facit
condemnationem: The holy Synod avowed that the multitude of the blasphemies
which Theodorus of Mopsuestia had belched or vomited out against the great God
and our Savior Jesus Christ or rather against his own soul, had made his
condemnation just, or necessary; as if they had professed, they did not come by
their own authority to make him a Heretic, but by the authority of Christ to
declare him so.

My second instance shall be out of the sixth general Council, which was
against the Monothelites, For there the Fathers at the end of the fifteenth
action, pronounce their sentence of excommunication against Polychronius the
Monothelite, in these words, For as much as Polychronius the Monk has
persisted in his erroneous and wicked opinion even to his old age, we have
therefore put his soul under the curse denounced by Saint Paul, (...):
Praedicto a Sancto Apostolo Paulo Anathemati jam hunc secundum animam
subjecimus: what curse that was, the Council names not, but we may suppose
they meant that denounced in 2 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus
Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha: They looked upon this man as one that
loved not the Lord Jesus Christ; for in that he was a Monothelite, and said
there was but one will in Christ, he did in effect deny his humane nature,
whilst he denied his humane will, as themselves profess in their seventeenth
action, That the Monothelites Tenent did by a new subdolous invention, ((...))
labor to overthrow the perfection of Christ's humanity; I say, they looked upon
this man as one that loved not the Lord Jesus Christ, in that he opposed the
perfection of his humane nature, and consequently as one that had involved
himself in that Anathema denounced by Saint Paul, If any man love not the Lord
Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha; This is the Anathema that truly
strikes the soul, which the Spirit of God denounces against our Spirits for
not cleaving steadfastly to the Son of God, or, for not loving our Lord Jesus
Christ; he that is thus bound in heaven, can never think himself a freeman,
though he be not bound in earth; He that is thus excommunicated by the sentence
of the Law, cannot but think himself in a very ill condition, though happily he
may be absolved by the sentence of his Judge: So says Saint Chrysostom upon
the place, (...), By this one word has the Apostle frighted all the impenitent
sinners of Corinth, whether guilty of fornication, or of scandal* or of
faction, or of infidelity, (for some of them also denied the resurrection,) he
first shows them the greatness of their sin, that they loved not the Lord Jesus
Christ, then the greatness of their punishment, that they were Anathema
Maranatha, could not but tremble at the coming of that Lord, whom they did not
love. Such men as are in truth excommunicated by God himself, are most justly
excommunicated by his Church, and it is apparent that this Council looked upon
the Monothelites as such; for it follows afterward at the end of the Sentence,
Anathema to Macarius, Stephanus and Polychronius, (...), The holy Trinity has
deposed these three miscreants; I need not look after any more Instances since
this Council was held full six hundred and eighty years after Christ.

This is enough to show the Moderation of the Primitive Christians, that they
did not care to break communion with them in the Christian Faith who had not
broken Communion with Christ, and they did not think those had broken communion
with Christ, who professed the Christian Faith, as it had been delivered in the
Creeds of the four first general Councils; indeed they thought the
Constantinopolitans Creed alone a full and sufficient explication of the
Christian faith; so say the Fathers of this Council, Action 8. (...),
Sufficiebat quidem ad perfectam Orthodoxae Fidei cognitionem atque
confirmationem, pium atque orthodoxum hoc divinae Gratiae Symbolum; This pious
and orthodox Creed of the Divine Grace, was sufficient for the perfect
knowledge and confirmation of the orthodox faith; The Council of Chalcedon had
given the same Judgment before concerning that Creed, but in different words,
(Action 5) (...). Sufficiebat quidem ad plenam cognitionem and confirmationem
pietatis hoc sapiens and salutare divinae gratiae Symbolum, This wise and
wholesome Creed of the divine Grace, was sufficient for the knowledge and
confirmation of Godliness: They both highly extol this Creed* as a peculiar
Testimony of Gods grace to his Church, and as an exact Breviary of the
Christian Religion, containing the whole sum of saving faith, says the one;
of Godliness; says the other Council; and what can be wanting to that
Christian Communion which has in it true faith and Godliness? or how can we be
wanting to such a communion, and not be wanting to the Christian Religion? But
the council at Chalcedon gives this reason why they account the
Constantinopolitan Creed a perfect Breviary of the Christian Religion, (for so
they mean, when they say it is sufficient both for the knowledge and Proof of
Godliness,) saying, (...) De Patre enim and Filio and spiritu sancto
perfectionem docet, ac domini nostri inhumanationem fideliter accipientibus
repraesentat: For it teaches perfectly the knowledge of God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and plainly represents to all that will receive it with
faith, the mystery of our Lords incarnation or Inhumanation.

And indeed under these heads are all the mysteries of our Christian Religion
briefly contained, though not fully explained and therefore when this Council
of Chalcedon had used all exactness of care and diligence in the further
explication of such Truths concerning our Savior Christ which the perverseness
of Heretics had made disputable, though it could not make doubtful, Showing
that two complete Natures in him made but one Person, it was high time in their
opinion, to put an end to the making of any more new Creeds, and accordingly
they forbid all men either to speak or write, or make, or think, or teach a new
faith; for these are their own words, at the end of their fifth Action, (...).
His igitur cum omni undique exacta cura and diligentia a nobis dispositis,
definivit sancta and universalis Synodus, alteram Fidem nulli licere proferre
aut conscribere, vel componere, aut sentire, aut alios docere.

I will not here argue how they can answer this Prohibition, who have since
added twelve new Articles to the Creed as it was delivered by the Council of
Constantinople, and have obliged all that will be Ministers of their Church, to
swear all that will be members of their Church to profess to live and dye in
the belief of those additional (no less then of the other) Articles as the only
true Catholic Faith by which men may be saved; it is enough for my present
purpose; and it may be enough for others future certainty and constancy in
their Religion, that all the Christians that were saved for one thousand and
five hundred years after Christ, were saved without the necessary belief of
those additional articles; And it is clear that the Church of Rome her self
denied not anciently her communion to other Churches, if so be they professed
and maintained only that faith which was declared in the known and received
Creeds of the universal Church; for so Optatus Milevitanus testifies, that all
the Churches of the world did hold communion among themselves, and with the
Church of Rome by virtue of their communicatory letters: His words are these,
lib. 2. contra Parm. c. 7. Cum quo nobis totus orbis commercio Formatarum in
una communionis societate concordat, with whom (having named Siricius then
Bishop of Rome) we and all the Christian world besides, do by virtue of our
communicatory letters, accord in one fellowship or communion; But in those
communicatory letters was contained nothing save only the confession of the
Catholic Faith, as it had been declared in the known and received Creeds of
the universal Church, says Bishop Davenant in that small but excellent piece
of his old age, called Sententia de pace inter Evangelicos procuranda: And we
may gather as much not only from the Epistles of several Bishops in several
Synods, but also from the unhappy fate of those two Councils of Ariminum and
Seleucia, which both consisted of Orthodox Bishops, and yet for want of
communicatory letters were at last brought to subscribe the Arrian heresy: For
all the Bishops of the East gathered at Seleucia, did presently agree to the
true faith, and sent the Emperor notice of their agreement; And among the
numerous company of the Western Bishops, at Ariminum, above four hundred held
the Truth, scarce 80. opposed it; yet the Arrians abusing each Synod with
persuasions that the other had yielded (says incomparable Hooker) surprised
both which we may say, they could never have done, had each Synod acquainted
the other with their assents to the Nicene Faith, by communicatory letters:
This Faith then was, and still is ground enough to all Christian Churches for
their communion one with another in doctrine; And Prayers (and Sacraments)
according to this faith, are also ground enough for their communion in worship
or devotion, so that if all Christian Churches Believed, and prayed, and
administered exactly according to the rule of this Faith, it would not be
possible for any man to be a Schismatic in denying his communion, without
first being a Heretic in denying his Religion: For if I am required to call
only upon him in whom I have believed, and to do this only in remembrance of
him on whom I am bound to call, how can I deny my communion either in Prayers
or in Sacraments to any Christian Church, and not deny the faith that has been
taught me by the Catholic Church? This seems to have been the ground of
Christian communion in Saint Basils days, who in his seventy eighth Epistle
(which is a confes^ion of his faith) says thus: (...): We must be baptized, as
we have received from the Lord; We must believe as we are baptized; and we must
give glory as we have believed, Glorifying the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
(...), etc. But we must abstain from their communion who are not of this Faith,
as being open Blasphemers. In that he says we must abstain from the communion
of those that are blasphemers, it is evident he will not have us abstain from
the communion of those who are true believers and right worshippers; For where
the Baptism, (and consequently the other Sacrament) is according to Christ's
institution, and the faith is according to the Baptism, and the glory is
according to the Faith, there not to join in Communion (at least in vote and
desire) is so a piece of desperate schism, as it is also a point of damnable
heresy; for it comes near their Sect of whom the Apostle has said, Denying
the Lord that bought them, by reason of whom the way of Truth is evil spoken 2
Pet. 2. 1, 2.

And upon this account the Gloria Patri was so much looked after by the
primitive Christians in their public worship, as being a right Profession of
Faith in the Trinity, and consequently the ground of true faith in Christ; Nor
can we think of the common People so generally withdrawing themselves from the
Arrian Bishops in those days for not giving glory to God rightly according to
the form of this Hymn, but we must needs censure the dullness and deadness of
this our Age, wherein men care not with what Ministers they assemble in public
worship though they see them not only forsake but also revile all the Symbols
of true Christian Faith and worship, and all the badges of true Christian
communion; such as are the Lords most holy Prayer, the Apostles Creed, and this
Hymn of glorification; for though men may have so much Charity, as to pass by
that Sacrilegious Tenent which professes Bishops and Presbyters both one, that
they may be equally contemned; I call it a Sacrilegious Tenent, because I find
it so called by the Catholic Church twice in the Council of Chalcedon, once in
the fifth Action, in these words, (...), Episcopum in gradum Presbyteri redigere
Sacrilegium est, to bring back a Bishop to the degree of a Presbyter is
Sacrilege; and again in the fifteenth Action (wherein are the Canons of that
Council,) in the 29th. Canon, in the very same words, only that instead of
(...) to bring back, they say, (...) to bring down; (...): Episcopum in
Presbyteri gradum reducere, est Sacrilegium; to bring down a Bishop to the
degeee of a Presbyter, is Sacrilege; I say, though men may have so much
charity as to pass by that Sacrilegious Tenent, which professes Bishops and
Presbyters both one, that they may be equally contemned, yet they should not
have so little faith as to communicate in that Sacrilegious worship which cares
not to profess God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost to be but one, that they may
be equally glorified. And surely Saint Basil taking so much pains to clear
himself concerning the right use of the Gloria Patri, does sufficiently condemn
all our late Divines, who in such Antitrinitarian (and therefore Antichristian)
times as these are, wilfully contemn or carelessly neglect the constant and
public use of that most Christian Hymn; For it is most certain, he that has
not a right belief of the Trinity, cannot have a right belief of Christ, and
therefore he that will not openly profess his belief of the Trinity, cannot
justly claim, and consequently not reasonably expect the communion of those who
desire and deserve* ^e accounted Orthodox Christians: And it is observable that
those forms of the communicatory letters which are mentioned by Gratian in his
seventy third Distinct (and before him by Jno and Berchardus) do still retain
the footsteps of this Truth that all Christian Communion was anciently grounded
on the Profession of Faith in the Holy Trinity; and in this respect we may say
that membranas occupare non debet, was an unreasonable censure in him that
glossed the case of that distinction for the insertion of those Greek elements,
(...), being the initials of (...), does in effect assure us that the ancient
Bishops did neither give nor send their communicatory letters to any that did
not openly profess their belief in Father, Son and Holy Ghost; for as
concerning that fancy in the Canonist, Petri quoque Apostoli prima litera, i.
e. (...) assumatur, that P must also be added to signify Peter, it
sufficiently confuteth it self, in that it supposes (...) to stand alone for
the Holy Ghost. contrary to the nature and use of the Greek tongue, and leaves
out (...) to bring in (...), not robbing Peter to pay Paul, but robbing the
Holy Ghost to pay Peter; And yet we may add further to its confutation, that it
is as easy for those who resolve to make Saint Peter their author for every
thing they say or do, to bring (...) out of (...), as to turn Patres into
Petrus; and we find that has been done, in the very Pontifical it self, where
the Bishops Oath was at first to observe Regulas Sanctorum Patrum, the rules of
the Holy Fathers; But these words come afterward to be changed into Regalia
Sancti Petri, The Royalties of Saint Peter: but without doubt the Greeks meant
nothing else by those initial Elements, save only Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
if at least they had any set Form of communicatory letters among them, which
sure is not now easy to be met withal, although Baronius* has assured that
the form of those letters was instituted, and Binius has further assured that
it was extant in the 18th. canon of the first Council of Nice. In concilio
Nicaeno forma quaedum eiusmodi literarum, (c. 18.) ne fraus irreperet, est
instituta; non autem recens res ipsa est introducta, says Baronius, An. 142.
n. 6. Harum literarum formula a Niceno Concilio praescripta extat, can. 18.
istius Concilii, says Binius in notis in Epist. 1. Sixti Papae 1. yet he may
chance lose his labor that shall look for that form, not onl^ in that Canon,
but also in any other of the Greek Councils, or in the Commentaries of Zonaras
Balsamon upon them.

But what ever was the form of their communicatory letters (which by the
Latins might be called Formatae, for they acknowledge a form of them, such a
one as it is) sure we are this was the ground of their communion, that their
Baptism, their Belief, and their worship was all in the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Ghost; They kept themselves entire in their
Religion, and that made them keep themselves entire in their communion; They
did earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints,
(Jude 3.) they did not labor to deliver a new Faith; So that their contending
for the faith, kept them from other contentions; as now our contentions do
indeed keep us from the faith; They labored to serve their Savior, not to
serve themselves of him; we labor to serve our selves whiles we pretend to
serve our Savior: they followed the advice of Christ's Apostle, Endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. We follow the
insolency and outrage of Christ's enemies, saying, Let us break their bonds
asunder, and casts away their cords from us, Psalm. 2. 3. Kimchi says these
were the words of the Philistines against Israel, the Church of God; But the
Apostles say in effect they were the words of Herod and Pontius Pilate, against
Christ, the Son of God, Acts 4. 27. Let us take heed of saying such words as
these against the Church of God, for fear we come in time to say them against
the Son of God: For what are the bonds of Christ, but Religion which has its
name from binding, and Communion which has its work to bind? If we break one
of those bonds asunder, how shall we be held by the other? If we cast away
Religion, what do we talk of communion? it is more just to call it a
conspiracy; If we cast away communion, what do we pretend Religion? it is more
just to call it an apostasy: Let both Religion and Communion be truly for the
honor of Christ, or let neither be called Christian: For indeed this is the
only true touchstone whereby we may try which Churches are the dross of
Christendom, and which are the gold of it; they who most labor to glorify
Christ, are the best Christians, according that short but pithy prayer of the
Latin Church, Et quia tuum est quod credimus, tuum sit omne quod vivimus;
(Orat. in Sabbato quatuor temporum quadragesimae) And because that all our
Faith is from thee, grant that all our Life may be for thee and to thee: All
our faith is from Christ, all our life must be to Christ, or we shall live
infidels, though in belief Christians; Therefore they who most labor to
glorify Christ both by their Faith and by their life, are undoubtedly the best
Christians; They who most labor to glorify him as King, to be ruled by his
government; as Prophet, to be guided by his Word; as Priest, to be reconciled
by his satisfaction: they are clearly the best Christians; and they who are
defective in any of these, as they less glorify Christ, so have they less the
purity and truth of Christianity.

Great is the preeminence of Christians above other men, that they know Christ;
but greater is their preeminence above other Christians, that they glorify him
agreeably to their knowledge; such are truly (...), The faithful in Saint
Chrysostomes sense, (...). Christians are called the Faithful, not only for
trusting in God, but also for being trusted by him, in that they have been
entrusted with those mysteries of Christ, which not the Angels themselves did
know before them: They were accordingly best take heed they do not betray that
trust, which they did not, could not deserve; and they will certainly betray
it, if once they seek to take the preeminence to themselves; and not give it to
their Savior: We may not judge some of the ancient Churches for so doing,
because they were swallowed up by an Earthquake, soon after they had received
Christianity, as Coloss, Laodicea, and H^erapolis, in the reign of Nero, says
Orasius: But we most look carefully to our selves that we may not do so, who
daily hear many amongst us saying, We are of Paul; others, we are of Cephas;
others we are of Apollos, merely to divide the Church; and others saying, We
are of Christ, merely to contemn it: For they intend not to advance our
Savior, but to debase his Ministers; not to come nearer Christ, but only to
run further from his Church; I say, we must look carefully to our selves, le^t
some such dreadful Earthquake swallow us up also, who have provoked heaven,
wearied earth, and therefore may justly go down quick into hell; or lest we be
swallowed up by the Earth without an Earth quake, as were Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, who were the first notorious authors of divisions in the people of God,
and themselves perished by a strange division; for says the Text, The ground
clave asunder that was under them, Numb 16. 31. And the ground is still
cleaving asunder under us, in so much that it is to be feared, That the Earth,
the sons of the earth, (...) Filii terrae, as the Text calls them, Psalm 49. 2.
the lowest and meanest of the people will at last quite swallow up both Moses
and Aaron, that is, all authority and preeminence both Civil and
Ecclesiastical: This we are sure of, the only way for the Kings and Potentates
of this world, to keep their own authority, is by it to defend and maintain the
authority of Christ, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy 6. 15. nor is it just they should look to have any
preeminence without, and much less against him, whose proper right it is, in
all things to have the preeminence, Col. 1. 18. Therefore give glory to the
Lord your God, before he cause darkness, (in despite of all your new lights)
and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains, and while ye look for
light, he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness: But if
ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride, and
mine eye shall weep sore, and run down with tears, because the Lords flock is
carried away captive; Jer. 13. 16, 17. Carried away captive from the communion
of the Lord, to the divisions and distractions of his enemies: A captivity
beyond that of Babylon, because of a confusion beyond that of Babel; for there
only tongues, but here minds and spirits also are confounded.

O sweet Jesus, restore again to thy communion those that have departed from
it: retain and confirm those that still abide and continue in it; Thou blessed
Mediator betwixt God and Angels and men, and by that thy mediation, the blessed
author to the Angels of union, to men of reunion, to both Angels and men of
communion with the everliving God; be pleased so to join all Christians in one
communion here on earth, that thou may join them all in one communion
hereafter in heaven: even that eternal and most blessed communion wherein thou
our Head now live and reignest with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one God
world without end,

Amen.
Deo Trin-uni gloria.
THE JUSTIFICATION OF THE Church of England, According to the true principles
of Christian Religion and Communion, consisting of three Chapters.

The first Chapter shows that the Church of England is Gods Trustee for the
Christian Religion, as to the people of this Nation.

The second Chapter shows that the same Church of England has carefully
discharged that Trust, as a most Christian or most Catholic Church.

The third Chapter shows that the Communion of the said Church of England is
conscionably embraced and retained by all the people of that Nation, but
unconscionably declined or deserted by any of them.

I marvel, that you are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace
of Christ, unto another Gospel; which is not another, but there be some that
trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ,

Gal. 1. 6, 7. I would they were even cut off which trouble you,

Gal. 5. 12. LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini, 1658.

The Preface to the Judicious and unprejudicate Reader.
I Hope it will not be said I seek to justify a Church which is not; for the
truth and righteousness whereby it was a Church, are the same they ever were;
or that I seek to justify a Church which ought not to be; for no man can show
a better truth and righteousness whereby to make a better Church: Till men can
establish a better Religion then Gods word has established, they cannot find,
they should not seek a better Church, then such as most entirely professes
that Religion: For a Church which has the Religion God commands, must needs
have the Communion God approves.

This small piece seeks to justify such a Church, and hopes to be the
confirmation of your faith, and not only the Account of mine; Wherein I profess
my self an Accountant, not as a Politician, but as a Divine; For without doubt
so many pious Ministers, scandalous chiefly for this, that they durst be true
to their Oaths and to their Trust in such a perfidious and false age, have not
lost themselves for nothing in this present world; But they have a good
conscience to comfort them against their losses, and a good cause to
countenance them against the world; However, this can be no immodest assertion
to say, that he which values the Communion of his Church above his living, is
most likely to value the Religion of his Church above his life* and God make me
such a scandalous Minister: For I may not forsake the true Christian Religion
without being a Rebel against ^y God* nor the true Christian Communion, without
being a Separation from Him; And if such a Religion, and such a Communion be in
the Church I seek to justify, I shall fall under the curse of Meroz if I do
not my best to justify it; For this is not to come to the help of the Lord, to
the help of the Lord against the mighty, Judges 5. 23. unless we ought rather
to say, they have lost their might by opposing the Lord, who have lost their
Innocence by opposing his Church: If you be Unchristian, you may perchance
think I seek to justify a Church that is not to be regarded; If Antichristian,
A Church that is to be oppressed; But if truly Christian, you know I seek to
justify a Church, which conscience does bid you to regard, and God does forbid
others to oppress. A Church which does most entirely set forth Gods glory
without the falsities of a superstitious, or the novelties of a factious
worship; and in that it does most entirely set forth Gods glory, it cannot but
most entirely promote Man's salvation; And this being the proper End of
Religion, is also the proper work of a Church, which though it may be a company
from the multitude of worshippers; yet is it not a Communion but from the
verity and unity of worship. O thou who art the way, the truth, and the life;
the way for us to walk in, the truth to direct our goings, the life to reward
us at our journeys end, forgive us our many strayings out of thy way, our
fierce oppositions against thy truth, that thou may give us the happy
enjoyments of thy life: O thou eternal Sun of righteousness, who have
enlightened the Christian Church by thy Holy word, and holy example, and
multiplied illuminations of thy holy Spirit, be pleased also to enlighten our
wandering souls, that thy holy word may instruct us, thy holy example may guide
us, thy holy Spirit may rule and govern us, that we may not love darkness more
then light because our deeds are evil; But may love thee who have given us thy
heavenly light, may love thy Church to whom thou have given it, may love thy
Ministers by whom thou have given it, may love our own souls for which thou
have given it, and do still continue it; So shall we be preserved from that
inner darkness which will not see thee here, and from that outer darkness which
shall not see thee hereafter; and also be preserved in the unity of thy Church
to be ever with thee by a Holy Communion in Earth, and by a blessed fruition in
Heaven, Amen,

Amen.
The Justification of the Church of England according to the true principles of
Christian Religion and Communion, consisting of three Chapters.
CAP. I. That the Church of England is Gods Trustee for the Christian Religion,
as to the people of this Nation.
SECT. I. Christ delivered the trust of his Word and Sacraments to his
Apostles; they delivered the same to Bishops and Presbyters their Successors;
but the Apostles had an illimited, their Successors have a limited trust. The
necessity of the succession of these Trustees to the worlds end; yet is the
succession of Doctrine more necessary then the succession of Persons.
DID Christian Churches more consider the obligation and the charge, then the
privileges and the honor of being God's Trustees, none of them would
arrogantly claim, much less tyrannically invade another trust; But each would
timorously undertake, carefully manage, and conscionably discharge her own: It Is
evident that our blessed Savior trusted all his Apostles equally with the
teaching of his Word, Administering his Sacraments, and governing of his People,
because he gave to each Apostle an infallible Judgment, and an illimited
commission, the one enabling, the other authorizing each of them to guide and
govern the whole world, though for the better expediting of their work, every
one of them betook himself as it were to his own peculiar Diocese, according to
that of Paul, For we stretch not our selves beyond our measure, (1 Cor. 10.
14.) But it is easy to distinguish betwixt their Power, and their use of it; For
surely if we consider the Power only of each Apostle, none of them by taking
care of all Christian People, could usurp another authority, or intrude
himself into another Trust; Thus that commission and command given to Saint
Peter immediately by and from our blessed Saviors own mouth, Feed my sheep,
Feed my lambs, (John 21.) though we suppose those sheep and lambs did comprize
all Christ's Flock that then was, or ever should be, (which is as much as the
words can bear, and more then they do claim, or will justify) yet even that
large Commission taken in a larger sense then it was given, was no supersedeas
to Saint Paul, for taking care of all the Churches, 2 Cor. 11. 28. Instantia
mea quotidiana, solicitudo omnium Ecclesiarum, He calls the care of all
Churches his daily instance, that is, his daily work and labor, even in the
Judgment of the Latin Church at the time of the Vulgar Translation: For Saint
Paul as well as Saint Peter, and the rest of the Apostles as well as Saint
Paul, had an universal commission to teach and baptize all Nations, Mat. 28.
and by consequent an universal Trust concerning all those Nations who should be
taught and baptized; for else they might both teach and baptize in vain.

And this universal trust he that commanded them to undertake, enabled them to
discharge; for the holy Spirit of God leading every one of them into all truth,
fitted every one of them to lead all the world besides: But we dare not say it
was so with the successors of the Apostles; For they neither had an infallible
Judgment that they might have an illimited authority, nor had they an
illimited authority, that they might have an universal Trust; Nay the Text bids
us say the quite contrary; for Saint Paul thus writes to Titus, For this cause
left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are
wanting, (or that are yet left undone) and ordain Elders in every City, as I
had appointed thee, Tit. 1. 5. He limits Titus his commission, (and much more
the rest of the Ministers that were under him,) to that people only which was
in Crete, and leaves him not to take the particular care of any other People or
Nation; they were to have other Trustees appointed for them. Again, The same
Saint Paul writes thus to Timothy, I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus,
that thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine; 1 Timothy 1. 3.
Where it is as plain, that Saint Timothies Trust was confined only to the
people of the Church of Ephesus, and that he was Gods chiefest Trustee, though
he was not Gods only Trustee for that people; because the same Saint Paul says
to all the Presbyters of the same Church, Take heed therefore unto your selves,
and to all the Flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers,
((...), Bishops) to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his
own blood, Acts 20. 28. where it is evident whose Trustees they were; for he
says, The Holy Ghost has made you Overseers, or Bishops; and what was their
trust? for he says, Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock, to feed
the Church of God; (...) is so to feed, as it is also to govern or to guide, for
so does a shepherd his sheep, Pascere says Beza, to feed. Regere, says the
Vulgar Latin, to govern; the word requires both, and accordingly their trust
is not only to feed their Flocks, but also to govern them: Here is a commission
not only for Doctrine, but also for Discipline, and this commission is given
only to the Presbyters or Doctors of the Church of Ephesus; He sent to Ephesus,
and called the Elders of the Church, ver. 17. If you ask what Elders? It Is plain
by their office what they were; even such as were to answer for the blood of
those who perished in their sins, if they did not teach repentance toward God,
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ: For so the Apostle argues for himself,
I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, ver. 20. I testified
Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 21. I
have gone preaching the Kingdom of God, ver. 25. Wherefore I take you to record
this day, That I am pure from the blood of all men, ver. 26. He alludes without
doubt to those words of Ezekiel, Because thou have not given him warning, he
shall die in his sin, but his blood will I require at thine hand, Ezekiel. 3. 20.
So that Saint Paul gave this commission only to such Elders as were to* succeed
him in his office of preaching and governing, or in the Ministry, which he had
received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God, ver.
24. Th^se Elders he appointed his Successors in the Church of Ephesus, (when he
was now quite to be taken from thence,) and by the same appointment has
established the succession of the Ministry in all other Churches; For as the
Apostles observing the first day of the week for the public worship of Christ,
has made it necessary for all Christian Churches to observe the same day for
their public worship to the worlds End; so their appointing the Ministers as
their Successors for the discharge of that public worship, has much more laid
upon all Churches the necessity of a successive Ministry; yet Saint Paul looks
upon the succession of Persons without a succession of Doctrine, as a poor
evidence, and a poorer privilege of a Christian Church, because he says, Also
of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things to draw away
Disciples after them, v. 30. In that he says, Of your own selves shall men
arise, he plainly shows they should have a succession of Persons; but in that
he says, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after them, he as
plainly shows they should in that succession of persons, not have a
succession of Doctrine; It Is a miserable condition when men shall put asunder
those two which God has joined together; but if we will needs fancy, for God
forbid we make or fear, much more that we should suffer for the division,
better it were for the succession to be divided from the Ministry, then for the
Ministry to be divided from the Doctrine; For the Ministry is necessary for the
Doctrine, but the Doctrine is necessary for it self; And those Churches which
most pretend an uninterrupted and an undoubted succession in their Ministry,
yet would be loath to be no surer of their Doctrine, then they are of their
Ministry; For all the world cannot make them have more then a Moral certainty
of the succession of their Ministers, whereas they cannot be good Christians,
if they have not a Theological certainty of the succession of their Doctrine;
for he that believes the truth, not knowing it to be true, and to have
proceeded from the God of truth, is not formally, but only materially a true
Believer, and leaves himself in a capacity, if he does not put himself into a
disposition, to believe a lie: For by the same reason that he can bestow his
Faith upon an uncertainty, He may also bestow it upon a Falsity.

SECT. II. The trust and nature of the Catholic Church, best gathered from
particular Churches; the first part of their Trust is concerning the Word of
God.
HE that would not miss or lose his way to the Sea, had best follow the conduct
of some particular River; and he that would not be mistaken in his judgment
concerning the Catholic Church, were best guide himself by the consideration
and the observation of particular Churches; Vniversalia priora sunt
particularibus ordine naturae, Particularia Vniversalibus ^rdine Doctrinae;
Universals are before particulars in the order of nature, but particulars are
before universals in the order of Doctrine; wherefore we must first enquire
into the nature of particular Churches, if we would fully understand the nature
of the Catholic or universal Church; For as Universals have no subsistence in
themselves, but only in their Individuals, so neither has the universal Church
any actual subsistence but only in particular Churches: And as we rightly
understand an universal, by abstracting it from the conditions and
imperfections of the individiuals, and taking only the perfections of the same;
So shall we rightly understand the Catholic Church, by abstracting it from the
imperfections of particular Churches, and imputing to it only their
excellencies and perfections: Thus though I see lameness in one man, blindness
in another, perverseness in a third, ignorance in a fourth, and falseness in
all; yet I consider man in general, neither as lame, nor as blind, nor as
perverse, nor as ignorant, nor as false, but an excellent creature, made to
know and enjoy his maker; So though I see many defects and imperfections in
particular Churches, ( for in many things we offend all, men and Churches too)
yet I consider the Catholic Church, or the Church in general, neither as
defective, nor as imperfect, but as the body and Spouse of Christ, holy and
undefiled, without spot, called to the knowledge of God here in this world, and
to the enjoyment of him hereafter in the world to come; And if all men would
look more upon the perfections then upon the defects of the Churches wherein
they live, if they would rather look upon what Christ has made them, then what
they have made themselves, the world would be more given to devotion then now
it is to disputes, and would be more filled with Religion, then it is now with
faction: For Christ is so well preached in every true Christian Church,
notwithstanding the great corruptions and divisions of Christendom, that if he
were but half so well practiced, we should most of us soon become very good
Christians: And truly we can scarce give a better reason why State policy and
self-interest has not generally corrupted the principles, as it has the
Practice of Christians, but only that those who sit in Moses his chair, think
themselves concerned in Moses his Trust, which was this, Thou shall speak all
that I command thee, Exodus 7. 2. Hence it is, they commonly speak as they
ought, though they seldom do as they speak; their tongues are sanctified,
though not their lives; they remain holy and innocent in their Functions,
though not in their Actions, circumcised in their lips, though uncircumcised in
their hearts: Their Persons unregenerated, but their calling such as works
regeneration; Therefore said Truth himself, concerning them, Mat. 23. 3. All
whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; (for they speak with
Moses) but do not ye after their works; for they say and do not; (they act with
Jannes and Jambres) They speak, they teach according to their Trust; but they
act, they do, according to their lusts: it being much easier to talk by Rule
then to walk by it; God often giving to his Ministers the grace of ^^i^ication
for his names sake, that they may preserve his Truth, when yet he denies them
the grace of Regeneration for their own sakes, because they will not obey his
truth; Gratia gratis data may be given to the calling, when Gratia gratum
faciens is denied to the Person; we find that God threatens the wicked
Priests, saying, I will curse* your Blessings, Mal. 2. 2. What is their
Blessing but their calling? and how is that cursed, but when it is blessed to
all men, save only to themselves?

When the Ministers shall be like so many statues in a doubtful Road, directing
the travelers in the right way, but themselves not moving therein at all; The
comparison is not much amiss: For as it is not from the substance of the
statue, but from its office or employment that men are directed by it; so is it
also in the Ministers; it is not from their persons, but from their calling, that
they are so highly qualified, as to be our guides to heaven; And as men can
make a stock, so much more God can make a man discharge the office of a
faithful guide; And as the rottenness of the statue hinders not the soundness
of its directions, so a Minister that has a false and a rotten heart, may have
a true (and a sound) mouth; And as the traveller thanks not the statue for his
good directions, but those that set it there: so we are not to thank such a
Minister for his good directions, but God that set him over us; For if the
efficacity and operation of a good Instrument be ascribed to the efficient
cause, then much more of a bad instrument; And if such holy Apostles as Saint
Peter and Saint John rebuked the amazed Jews after this manner, Why look ye so
earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to
walk, Act. 3. 12. then we may be sure that when words of power or of truth
proceed from the mouth of a wicked Caiaphas; That he spoke not this of himself,
but being High Priest that year, he prophesied, John 11. 51. And as Caiaphas
though he was not a true man, yet he was a true Prophet, because in that
respect he was Gods Trustee for the propagation of that truth which he then
prophesied; So is it still with many Christian Ministers and Churches, as they
are Gods Trustees for preserving and propagating the saving truths of the
Gospel, so they are enabled by his Spirit to discharge that Trust; in so much
that we may take it for granted, that God has entrusted them, because we
cannot deny but God has enabled them: For if he had not given them a Trust,
why should he either give them Authority to undertake it, or ability to perform
it? Therefore since we cannot deny the Authority, nor the Ability, we may not
deny the Trust.

And indeed the Trust is too palpable to be denied by any that will not shut
his eyes against the truth, lest he should see it, or that will not open his
mouth against the truth, that he may oppose it; for so says Saint Paul, 1 Cor.
9. 17. (...), Dispensatio mihi credita est, I am entrusted with a dispensation,
sc. of the Holy Gospel; And it is evident he spoke not this in regard of his
person, that the Trust should die with himself, but in regard of his Calling,
to show the same trust was to remain with his Successors for ever: And if we
will look upon all his Epistles, we may there see accordingly, that he has
derived this Trust to particular Churches after him, that is, to those Bishops
and Presbyters that were set over the people. For as the Epistles that were
sent to the seven Churches of Asia, were directed and sent to the Angels, that
is, to the Bishops and Ministers of those Churches, and not to the common
people, Apoc. 2. and 3. So was it in all Saint Paul's Epistles, they were sent
not to the people, but to the Ministers that were set over them; God entrusting
them with his saving Truth, whom he had entrusted to bring others to salvation;
nor are we beholding to the Citizens of Rome, or to the Burgers of Corinth, but
to the Ministry of both those Churches, and of other Churches since them, that
we now enjoy the true Copies of Saint Paul's Epistles; the like is to be said
concerning all the other parts of the New Testament; For as the Books of the
Old Testament were known to have come from God, because they were deposited in
the Ark, and committed to the custody of the Priests, (whence Damascene says
concerning the Wisdom of Solomon, and of the son of Sirach, (...), lib. 4. de
orth: fide cap. 18. They are holy and religious books, but yet are not reckoned
among the Canonical Scriptures, because they were not deposited in the Ark:) So
the Books of the New Testament were known to come from God, in that they were
deposited in the Ark, that is to say, in his Church; And hence it was, that the
Epistle of Saint James and some others, though they were not at first generally
received in all Churches, yet were they no longer questioned, after once it was
made appear by the Testimony of those Churches, where the Authentic Copies of
them had been deposited, that they had been indicted by some Apostle, or
approved by some Apostolical man; till then, they were questioned, in regard of
their Authors, if not in regard of their Authority, but after that, they were
questioned in regard of neither; so great a confidence did God repose in
particular Churches, that it is evident he entrusted them with his own Word to
keep it, to witness it, and to explain it; as the Church of the Jews with the
Old Testament, (which Church though it were Catholic or universal in its
Doctrine, yet was it merely particular or national in its extent; for he showed
his word to Jacob, his statutes and ordinances unto Israel; he had not dealt so
with any Nation, neither had the Heathen knowledge of his Laws, Psalm 147. ver.
19, 20.) And several Churches of the Christians with several parts of the New
Testament; as the Church of Rome with that Epistle sent to the Romans, and the
Church of Corinth with those two Epistles sent to the Corinthians, and so of
the rest; And as for the seven Catholic or general Epistles, commonly so
called, they had the title of Catholic, or general Epistles, not because they
were sent to no particular Churches, but because they were sent to many, as
Saint Peter's to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappodocia,
Asia, and Bythinia, which being not directed particularly to one of these, was
therefore called a general Epistle; as belonging to them all; not because it
was sent at large to all of them, for so perchance it might have been received
by none, but because it was to be communicated to all; unless that we had
rather say that these Epistles were called Catholic, (...), because they were
sent of purpose to confute some new risen Heretics or Schismatics;
particularly the Solifidean Heresy, and the itch of separation, either from
ambition, or covetousness, or perverseness, as may appear by the arguments of
the said Epistles, (however those also were at first deposited with some
particular Churches:) and hence it was that some of them were sooner generally
received then others, even those which had been at first deposited with the
more eminent Churches: Thus we see the trust of particular Churches, and in
them the trust of the Catholic Church concerning the, Scriptures, (...), Eis
credita sunt eloquia Dei, They were entrusted with the Oracles of God, Romans 3.
2. that is, they were entrusted to keep them, and to witness them; but Saint
Paul's (...), I am entrusted with a dispensation ( sc. of the same Oracles)
speaks more; that they were also entrusted to explain them; and we cannot deny
the continuance of this trust unto the Worlds end, unless we will affirm that
God has laid aside the care both of us and of his Church, neither regarding
the salvation of our souls, nor the authority and continuance of his own
Church, and so by consequent exterminate out of our Creed as well as out of the
world, the Catholic Church, and the communion of Saints, and by consequent
deprive our selves of the forgiveness of sins, the Resurrection of the Body,
and the life everlasting.

SECT. III. The second part of the Trust of Particular Churches, is concerning
the people of God; What that Trust is, and how it comes to be derived to them,
is showed from Saint Paul's speech, Acts 20. to the particular Church of
Ephesus; and from Saint Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and from other
several Epistles (of his) to particular Churches.
GOD is very angry with a man, when he Trusts his soul in his own hands, for
then he leaves him exposed to the Temptations of his own concupiscence, to the
errors of his own ignorance, to the slips and stumblings of his own infirmity,
to the precipices and downfalls of his own presumption, and to the bondage and
thraldom of his own corruption: Therefore we justly extol the power and
goodness of God in our preservation no less then in our Creation, and himself
thinks it no less honorable to keep a soul then to make it; and therefore
Saint Paul calls him God our Savior, thrice in one Epistle, By the
Commandment of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 1. 1. This is good and acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. 3. We trust in the living God who is the
Savior of all men, specially of those that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. Which if it
had been observed by the transcribers of some private Manuscripts, one would
not have read (...), God the Father and our Savior Jesus Christ, Another would
not have read (...), of God our Father and Jesus Christ, for this variety of
reading proceeded questionless from that opinion which some held, That the name
of Savior, belonged only to the person of Christ; because it is palpable that
in the Authentic Copy of the Greek Church, as it is in Saint Chrysostom, and
of the Latin Church, as it is in the Edition of Sixtus Quintus, the words are
read as Beza records them, (...), God our Savior, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
where God the Father is plainly called our Savior; because he is the chief and
principal cause of our salvation: For it is the Fathers mercy that saves us,
though the Sons merit; and we could not have received, should not have embraced
the merit of the Son, had it not been for the mercy of the Father: Therefore
the same Apostle (as delighted with this expression,) says again, according to
the commandmnnt of God our Savior, Tit. 1. 3. being willing to ascribe to the
Father no less then to the Son, the Honor and glory of our salvation; Behold
all souls are mine, says God himself, Ezekiel. 18. 4. and Rabbi David gives us
this gloss upon the words, All souls belong to me, and I have given them bodies
of flesh to guide and lead after me, and I do delight in their life, not in
their death, for they are mine (...) umiccebodi nigzaru, and they were taken
from mine own Glory, q. d. They are mine, and I care not to lose them; They
were parts of mine own glory, and I am willing to glorify them; they were at
first springs and branches of mine own Tree, even the Tree of life, and I am
desirous to engraft them in that Tree again; And this gloss of the Jewish
Doctor, is agreeable with the best Christian Doctrine. For it is Saint Paul's
argugument for the Justification of the Christian as well as of the Jew, (from
whence he proves that Justification cannot be by the Law, because the Law was
given only to the Jew) That God is the God of the Gentiles as well as of the
Jews, Romans 3. 29. And it is the same Saint Paul's argument for the salvation of
the Christian as well as of the Jew, For the same Lord over all is rich unto
all that call upon him, Romans 10. 12. according to that of the wise man, But
thou sparest all, for they are thine, O Lord, thou lover of souls, Wisd. 11.
26. The Text says, Gods supreme Dominion over all, is the reason why he is
willing to show mercy unto all, and how shall we say his Dominion over all is
the reason that he has excluded much the greatest part from mercy? Let us
seriously consider this, and we will never quarrel with our Church for teaching
us this prayer, That is may please thee to have mercy upon all men: For in
truth God himself is Originally the general Pastor of souls, according to that
of the Psalmist, The Lord is my Shephard, therefore can I lack nothing; A Psalm
made concerning all Israel, says Kimchi, that they should say so when they go
out of captivity; we need not change, but only rectify his gloss, by extending
it to all the Israel of God, and to their going out of spiritual captivity, the
bondage of sin and Satan; for all the souls that go out of this captivity, have
God for their Shephard, to guide them, to feed them, to protect them; thus is
God himself originally the general Pastor of souls, and all others that take
care of souls are but his Substitutes and Curates; For he has imparted this
cure immediately to his Son, whence he is called the Shephard and Bishop of our
souls, 1. Pet. 2. 3. But mediately, by his Son, unto his Ministers, for so it
is averred from Christ's own mouth, as thou have sent me into the world, even so
have I also sent them into the world, John 17. 18. viz. To take the charge and
care of souls; And every true Church of Christ may borrow these words from her
Masters mouth, should speak them with his zeal, and justify them with his
constancy, To this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world;
that I should bear witness unto the truth; John 18. 37. (...), that I should be
a witness to the truth, and if need required, also a Martyr for it; the first
in the affection of my soul, the latter also, in the preparation of it; A
witness I am in the best times; may be a Martyr in the worst; a witness when
men love the truth, a Martyr when they oppose it: They are first enemies to the
truth, before they can be enemies to me, as it follows, Every one that is of
truth, hears my voice, and by the Rule of conversion, every one that hears
not my voice, is not of the truth; But the less they will hear my voice, the
more they shall feel thy hand; the less they will let me speak for the truth,
the more the truth will cry out against them; they may bring the Martyrdom upon
me, but they will bring the destruction only upon themselves; So says Saint
Peter, There shall be false teachers, by reason of whom the way of truth shall
be evil spoken of: What then? shall they therefore be able to destroy Gods
Church, the witness of his truth, and the Martyr for it? no, they shall destroy
only themselves, as it is said in the same place, and bring upon themselves
swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. But as for the Church, that shall be
preserved, though so as by fire, as just Lot was delivered when Sodom was
destroyed, verse 7. Whence is inferred this Doctrinal conclusion, for the
strengthening of our Faith, for the establishing of our Hope, for the inflaming
of our Piety, and for the increasing of our Patience; The Lord knows how to
deliver the godly out of temptations, ver. 9. All the persecutions that can
befall the godly, though they are others sins, yet they are only their
temptations; and they that have the zeal to pray not to be led into temptation,
shall atleast have this benefit of their prayers, not to be left in, but to be
led out of them: They may be thought to be in captivity, but they are not; for
the truth shall make them free, John 8. 32. They may be thought to be in death,
but they are not; For he that is their Truth, is also their Life, John 14. 6.
They will not be false to the Truth, and the Truth cannot be false to them;
they bear witness to the Truth, not only for Gods sake to obey his command, and
for their own sakes to discharge their consciences, but also for the peoples
sake, to save their souls; For the same must be the Trustees for Gods Truth,
and for the peoples souls, because there is no way to save their souls but by
his Truth; And therefore Saint Paul tells the Church of Ephesus, (Acts 20.)
that he had discharged his Trust concerning their souls, by teaching them the
whole Truth, and nothing but the Truth; for says he, I kept back nothing that
was profitable unto you, ver, 20. Whence it is evident he preached the whole
Truth: And again, But have showed you and have taught you publicly and from
house to house, Testifying both to the Jews and also to the Greeks, repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 20. 21. Whence it is
evident he preached nothing but the Truth; nothing but the right practical
Truth, such as concerned the good ordering of this present life by repentance
toward God; nothing but the right speculative Truth, such as concerned the
knowledge and enjoyment of the life to come, by Faith toward our Lord Jesus
Christ: We see by Saint Paul's example what is to be the chief Doctrine of every
particular Christian Church (which succeeds him in the same Trust and care of
souls, even Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, and
consequently the Church is most truly Apostolical, which most incorruptly
preaches this doctrine of faith and repentance, and most zealously practices
what it preaches; Nor may such a Church be dismayed that by this means she is
like to have many enemies, even as many enemies as there are Pharisees and
Sadduces in the whole world, ready either to deride the Repentance, or to
corrupt and deny the Faith, for so was Saint Paul assured that bonds and
afflictions did abide him, v. 23. yet he plainly answers, (and thereby
teaches every one who succeeds him in the same Trust, what to answer) But
none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so
that I might finish my course with joy, and the Ministry which I have received
of the Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God, v. 24. as if he
had said, I did not at first either invade or falsify this Trust, that I
should now betray it or forsake it; for I received it of the Lord Jesus; he put
me in this course, I must follow his Directions; He made me his Minister, I
must obey his commands; It is my course, I must run it on directly, not turning
aside either to the right hand or to the left, that I may consult with flesh
and blood, but looking only to my journies end; It is my Ministry, I must
perform it as I am enjoined, not seeking to please my self, and much less any
other, but only my Master.

Nor need we ask the Eunuchs question, I pray thee of whom speaks the Prophet
this? of himself, or of some other man? Acts 8. 34. For Saint Paul in the same
place gives the answer to this question, in that he alleges his own example,
not as Personal but as Doctrinal, making this inference upon it, Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost
has made you oversers to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with
his own blood, v. 28. He gives them 4. reasons why they should be as careful
in their Trust, as he had been in his: 1. That they had the charge of the
flock, and were to answer for those that should go astray; Take heed therefore
unto your selves, and to all the Flock. 2. That they have this charge imposed
on them by the Spirit of God, Over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Overseers. 3. That this charge nearly concerned the Church of God which he
owned for his own peculiar, To feed the Church of God. 4. That this charge
nearly concerned the Son of God, and might not be neglected without the
inexpiable guilt of profaning and contemning his blood, which was the only
price of our souls, and the only expiation of our sins, which he has purchased
with his own blood, (...), says S. Chrysostom. see how many necessities are here
joined together; you have your Ordination or Commission from the spirit of God,
there is one necessity; you are entrusted with the Church of God, there is
another necessity; you are entrusted with the blood of God, there is a third
necessity: This is the necessity that St. Paul thought was laid upon him of
preaching the Gospel, when he said, (...), Necessitas enim mihi incumbit, for
necessity is laid upon me, 1 Cor. 9. 16. and the same necessity has he laid
upon all his Successors in the Ministry, to the worlds end; as plainly appears
in his charge to Timothy his chiefest Successor in this Trust at Ephesus, to
whom he says, I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickneth all things,
and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession,
that thou keep this Commandment without spot, unrebukable, until the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ; which charge it was impossible for Timothy to perform
by himself, because he was to die long before the coming of Christ; it must
therefore be performed by his successors, who are to continue till Christ's
coming, that they may perform it; as Saint Ambrose glosseth upon the place, non
solicitus a cura Timothei tam circumspectus est, sed propter successores eius.
This charge was given thus circumspectly in this strict manner to Timothy, not
that S. Paul doubted of him, but that all the world might see it was not given
to him alone, but also to all his successors: And so much concerning the Trust
that was given by God to the particular Church of Ephesus, whereof Timothy was
the Bishop, or the chiefest Trustee; whence Oecumenius tells us, upon those
words of S. Paul to him, I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, 1 Timothy 1.
3. (...), here he made him Bishop of the Church of Ephesus: He, that is Saint
Paul, but as the instrument of the Holy Ghost; for so Saint Paul himself had
told us before, That the Holy Ghost had made him Bishop of that Church, and all
his fellow Presbyters in some sort Bishops with him, Over which the Holy Ghost
has made you overseers; some were overseers of the flock, but he also of the
shepherds themselves; and the commission is accordingly, Take heed therefore
unto your selves and to all the Flock; every Presbyter was a Bishop or an
overseer in regard of the flock; but he was also Bishop or Overseer in regard
of the Presbyters, in the regard of the Ministry, and not only of the People;
this is Oecumenius his gloss upon the fourth of the Ephesians, (...). Those who
were entrusted with (whole) Churches, he peculiarly calls Bishops, such as
was Timothy and Titus: And doubtless such Trustees as these were more
especially interested in that admonition concerning the Wolves or the false
Pastors, v. 30. 31. for therefore said he, they shall arise, that those to whom
he said it, should suppress them when they did arise: But however they were all
in common Gods Trustees for that place and people though not all equally
entrusted; God the Father entrusted them with his flock, God the Son entrusted
them with his blood; God the Holy Ghost entrusted them with his Truth. Go now
you that despise the Ministers whom God has set over you, but take this advice
along with you; Take heed you despise not at once God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; Go now you that invade the office of the Ministers, whom God has
not made overseers of his flock, nor entrusted with his word, or with his
people; yet you will needs be feeding his Church, but take this advice before
you go, take heed he say not to you at the last day, Who has required this at
your hands? Isai. 1. 12. for sure he will charge you with a profanation because
he has not charged you with a Trust; look not upon that office as profitable
and glorious, which God will have looked upon as terrible and dangerous; no
less dangerous if undertaken without his commission, then if forsaken against
it.

The like is to be averred concerning the Trust of the particular Church of
Creet; The people of which Island Saint Paul plainly commended to Titus and his
fellow Presbyters, as himself has professed, For this cause left I thee in
Creet, that thou should set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5. Why was he to ordain more Bishops, but because
the Trust was too great for one Bishop? So says Oecumenius (...). For he would
not that such a great Island should be committed one Bishop, but that every
City should have her own Pastor, or Bishop. For by Elders or Presbyters he
means Bishops. (...), says Saint Chrysostom, He would that every particular
Bishop should have his particular charge, that so the burden might be the less,
but the care might be the greater; the Ministers might have the lesser trouble,
but the people might have the greater benefit; from whence it may be collected
that the Bishops were Gods principal Trustees, and that the inferior Ministers
were only taken into part of their Trust; And this is suitable with that saying
of Theodorete recited by Oecumenius in the argument of the Epistle to Timothy,
That though Saint Paul had other Scholars or Disciples, as Silas, and Luke, yet
he writ Epistles only to Timothy and Titus, because he had then entrusted them
two with several Churches, ((...)) But the others he yet detained with himself;
And it is Conradus Vorstius his observation that Saint Paul makes it his
business in his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, to draw the exact picture of a
true Christian Bishop; and that he uses singular skill and industry in
elaborating that draught; Et sane in his Epistolis, ac nominatim in illa priore
ad Timotheum, singularis quaedam Apostoli industria and solicitudo elucet;
quippe collegam ac filium suum subinde studiose obsecrantis, imo obtestantis
and per omnia sacra adiurantis: nunc blandis promissionibus allicientis, nunc
minaciter territantis, nunc suo, nunc Christi exemplo provocantis, ut modis
omnibus tostatum faciat, quam sit ardua res inculpatum agere Episcopum,
quantaque pernicies humanae vitae sit parum sincerus Dominici gregis Custos.
(Vorst. Arg. Ep. ad Tim.) Sometimes he earnestly entreats Timothy for his own
sake, sometimes he humbly beseeches him for Gods sake, sometimes he adjureth,
sometimes he promises, sometimes he threatens, sometimes he persuades, and
even provokes him by his own and by Christ's example, that so he might testify
to all the world, how great was the charge which a Bishop had from God to be
faithful in his vocation, and that if he proved unfaithful, how great was the
mischief he might do unto Gods Church: And Oecumenius gathers as much merely
from those three words used by Saint Paul in his benediction to Titus, Grace,
Mercy, and Peace from God the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior,
Tit. 1. 3. for says he, Saint Paul very fitly wishes Grace, Mercy and Peace
to Titus being the Teacher and Governor of that Church; for unless he was
resolved to steer by these, he was sure to endanger the sinking of the ship:
(...).

God have mercy upon those covetous, ambitious, and contentious Ministers,
whose covetousness, ambition and contentiousness has made them expel Grace,
Mercy and Peace, that they might pull down Gods, and set up their own
Government; How can it be hoped that such men should approve themselves
Gracious, Merciful or peaceable Governors? For how can covetousness consist
with Grace, Ambition with Mercy, Contention, with Peace? and how miserable are
those people like to be, who are like to be governed without Grace, Mercy and
Peace?

Thus I have showed the Trust of the two particular Churches of Ephesus and of
Crete, whose first governors immediately after the Apostles are nominated,
licensed, and instructed by the Text, and these two are precedents sufficient
for all particular Churches to the worlds end; (happily more sufficient
precedents then are left in all the new Testament concerning any other external
adjunct of Religion.) For if all Scripture be profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, That the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good Works, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. then
surely much more that the Church of God may be perfect; For if Saint Paul's
proof be undeniable, that because God took care of an Ox, he much more took
care of a Minister, 1 Cor. 9. 10. then can we not deny but the proof is as
undeniable, that because he took care of one particular minister, he much more
took care of all Ministers; if he were so careful to instruct one man of God,
(as Timothy or Titus) then much more was he careful to instruct all the men of
God, that is to say, his whole Church, which is doubtless accordingly to be
guided by these Instructions; unless we can prove that since that time she has
received any other, or that God has repented of these, and is willing to let
his word (as we are to let our Oaths,) grow out of date: And indeed what can we
desire to know concerning Gods Trustees in behalf of our souls, which we may
not easily know from either of these two Epistles? For we know that God the
Father has said, All souls are mine, Ezekiel. 18. 4. and therefore we are sure
that none can claim, and consequently none should take the care of any soul but
by commission from him: This commission he immediately gave to his only Son,
with a promise that it should conduce to the Salvation of those souls which
should hear his voice; I am the good shephard, my sheep hear my voice, and I
give unto them eternal life, says Christ, John 10. 14, 27, 29. but this was by
power given him from his Father, as it is said, All power is given unto me, Mat.
28. and therefore when he was not yet pleased to own, or at least not to
exercise this power, he said to the mother of Zebedees children, It is not mine
to give, Mat. 20. 23. But however the promise concerning this power is no where
so clearly signified, as in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, so we find, 2 Timothy 1. 1. Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ, by the will of God, according to
the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus; He derives his own commission for
taking the care of souls, from Christ; Christ's commission from God; Paul an
Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God: And he shows the end of that
commission was the salvation of those souls, According to the promise of life
which is in Christ Jesus: Again, Tit. 1. 1, 2. Paul a Servant of God, and an
Apostle of Jesus Christ, there is the proof of his commission; in hope of
eternal life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world began; there'
s the end of his commission: God promised eternal life before the world began:
to whom could he promise it, but to his Son coaeternal with himself? and for
whom did he promise it, but for those who should be his, hearkening to him,
believing in him, relying on him, and supported by him? This was the
comfortable end of Saint Paul's commission, and therefore we have great reason
to look after the sure proof of it; And that we find particularly in these
Epistles First as it was given from Christ to him, and Secondly as it was to be
derived from him to others, even to the worlds end; For although there is great
Truth in that rule, Delegatus non potest Delegare, He that has a Trust or
power himself only by Delegation, cannot orderly delegate the same to another;
and greater reason for it in humane affairs; because the power of Delegation in
Delegates must fill the world with irremediable uncertainties, may fill it with
intolerable abuses and miscarriages; yet in Gods affairs, there is no truth in
that Rule; for his Delegates may and must appoint other Delegates till the end
of the world; and there is is reason for it, because himself still acts by
these latter Delegates as well by the former, limiting their Trust that they
may not abuse it, as well as declaring their Trust that we may not deny it.

First we are taught particularly in these Epistles, how Saint Paul's commission
was given from Christ to him; for so he says, The glorious Gospel committed to
my Trust, 1 Timothy 1. 11. Again, I thank the Lord Jesus Christ, who has enabled
me, for that he counted me faithful, putting me into the Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.
12. We doubt not but he speaks this in the behalf of the other Apostles, as
well as of himself, and by the same reason cannot see why the words spoken in
other places to and of S. Peter alone, should not belong to S. Paul and to the
other Apostles, as well as to him.

Secondly we are taught peculiarly in the same Epistles, how Saint Paul's
commission was to be derived from him to others after him till the worlds end;
For so it is said, This charge I commit unto thee Son Timothy, 1 Timothy 1. 18.
And lest we should think the Trust was to end there, he says farther; And the
things that thou have heard of me among many witnesses (whether concerning the
Doctrine or Discipline of the Church) the same commit thou to faithful men,
who shall be able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2. 2. So there is to be no end
of Teachers, till there shall be an end of Learners.

But it is more then time I should now pass to the Trust which God has given
to other particular Churches besides those, even to as many as his Apostles
sent their several Epistles: Thus we may see the seven Churches of Asia had
been entrusted by him, because he so sharply reproves them for not discharging
their Trust, and if we may believe some late interpreters, the reproof of those
Churches still concern our present Churches; but we are sure that if our
present Churches be concerned in their reproof, then also in their Trust, and
how then can we now oppose those Angels, whom we see God himself then entrusted
in those Churches? But to proceed; let us look upon S. Paul's Epistles to
several Churches, The power of excommunication is given particularly to the
Church of Corinth (and with it doubtless all other spiritual power, whether of
Order, or of Jurisdiction) 1 Cor. 5. and the reasons for it are such as evince
it to be still given to all other particular Churches, 1. That God and his
Church should not be exposed to reproach, v. 1. It is reported commonly, etc.
2. That Gods people should not be exposed to infection, v. 6. Know ye not that
a little leaven leaveneth the whole lump? 3. That the sinner should be brought
to repentance, v. 5. That the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus:
So again to the Churth of the Thessalonians is the same power given; and for
the same reasons, though only one of them be named, 2 These. 3. 14. If any man
obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no company with him,
that he may be ashamed; I will give but one more instance, and that concerns
the Christian Church of the converted Jews, wherein the Ministers are made
governors, the People commanded to be subject to their government by the
Apostles own express Order, Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the rule over you,
and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy and not with grief, for that is
unprofitable for you; where we have not only the necessity of this obedience to
our Ministers, they are appointed to rule us, therefore we must submit to them,
but also the reason of it, and that is twofold, 1. They watch for our souls; 2.
They must give account for our souls: Let our eyes be opened never so much, yet
we cannot sufficiently watch for our selves, therefore God has in mercy
appointed others to watch for us: And in that God has appointed them to be
over us, it is evident he has appointed us to be under them, and consequently
as evident, that they will not be able to give a good account for our souls,
till we our selves shall be able to give a good account of our obedience.

SECT. IV. The third part of the Trust of particular Churches is concerning the
worship of God; the written word of God is the Rule whereby they are to manage
that trust; the readiest way to beget a Christian communion among all Churches,
and a Christian peace in each particular Church.
IT IS a sad consideration, that the public worship of God, Wherein Christians
are most of all required and concerned to be of one communion, should be so ill
managed by some Churches, so ill received by some people, as to be the chiefest
cause of our greatest and our most outrageous divisions: but the reason is
palpable, it is either because the Churches go beyond their trust in setting up a
false Religion, or because the people come short of their obedience, in setting
up a false communion: For without all dispute, where the Church has followed
God in his Religion, there the People are bound to follow the Church in her
communion, And as it is not lawful for the Church to set up a Religion against
the Authority of God, so it is not lawful for the people to set up a communion
against the Authority of the Church: as the Church may not ordain a Religion
contrary to the Word of God, so the people may not ordain a communion contrary
to the ordinance of the Church; For as God has given his word to guide his
Church, so he has given his Church to guide his People in the outward exercise
of Religion; For it is evident that the outward exercise of Religion is
entrusted with some body, unless we will say it is not worth a trust, and
therefore as evident that it is entrusted with Gods Church, because we cannot
find out any other Trustee. And it is also evident that in this case every
particular Church has her particular Trust; For so says Saint Paul to the
Church of the Corinthians, (and by consequent to all other Churches,) Be ye
followers of me, even as I also am of Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1. which words are the
more carefully to be observed, and the more conscionably to be obeyed, because
they are as it were the general Proeem to the Apostles ensuing discourse
concerning the right disposition and order of public assemblies; In which
discourse, he gives the Rule both for persons, and for things, and for actions;
for as the Law of man has taken care of all these, so much more has the Law
of God taken care of them, and most of all in Gods own worship: Here the Holy
Spirit will have 1. Persons rightly ordered, prescribing the decent behavior
both of men and women, from the first verse of the eleventh Chapter to the
sixteenth. 2. Things rightly ordered, prescribing the right administration of
the holy Eucharist, from the sixteenth verse to the end of the Chapter; Lastly,
actions rightly ordered, prescribing the right use of Spiritual gifts and
Functions, in the twelfth, thirteeenth, and fourteenth Chapters: In respect of
all these it is the Apostles injunction to the Corinthians, and the Churches
injunction to us, Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ; as my
Church must submit to Christ's authority in the exercise of Religion to avoid
superstition, so I must submit to my Churches authority to avoid faction and
confusion. For what my Church requires by virtue of his command, I cannot
disobey without contempt of his authority: Excellently Aquinas, Majores sive
perfecti soli Deo inhaerent, cujus est immutabilis bonitas; qui et si
inhaereant suis praelatis, non inhaerent illis nisi in quantum illi inhaerent
Christo, secundum illud, Imitatores mei estote sicut and Ego Christi, (22. qu.
43. art. 5. c.) Those that are firmly grounded, and to be called perfect
Christians, do in all things cleave to Christ himself, and stick fast to him,
whose goodness is unchangeable, (and therefore so is also their will and
resolution,) for though they rely upon the Church which Christ has set over
them, yet they rely upon their Church, as that relyeth upon Christ, according
to that of Saint Paul, Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ; Every good
Christian man relies immediately upon Christ for his Religion, and much more
every good Christian Church; can you not deny me to be a Major in this case,
and will you needs make my Church a Minor? Am I of ripe years, and must my
Church be under age? must I rely upon Christ, and must not my Church much
rather rely upon him? There cannot be a greater impudence, then for one man to
persuade another to leave Christ and stick to him, unless it be for one Church
to persuade another to do the same; And are not they persuaded to leave Christ,
who are persuaded to leave the Holy Scriptures, that they may stick to
uncertain Traditions? For where is Christ to be certainly followed but in his
undoubted word? How then can any Church forsake Christ's written word, and
pretend to follow him? Saint Paul cares not to be so authentical, and yet
doubtless had more authority then those that are so; He praises the
Corinthians for keeping the Ordinances or Traditions as he had delivered them,
1 Cor. 11. 2. but he professes he had delivered no other then what he had
received, For I delivered unto you that which I also received, 1 Cor. 15. 3.
Nay in the same Chapter wherein he praises them for keeping what he had
delivered, he averreth that he had delivered what he had received, ver. 23. For
I have received of the Lord, that which I also delivered unto you; nor is it
reasonable we should imagine the Apostle of Christ would stand more upon his
own then his Masters honor, or would have praised the Corinthians for
remembering him in all things, if so be he had so grossly forgotten himself, as
not to have remembered his Master; and who has made a Church above an Apostle?
Therefore we may be sure that the Traditions Saint Paul gave the Corinthians,
were such as had been given him, and we could scarce be sure of this, were not
the same Traditions still given us, and consequently we cannot part with the
least degree of this certainty, but we must part with the best and greatest
reason of our praise; for what is, or can be the praise of any Church, but that
she remembers the Apostles in all things, and keeps the Traditions as they
delivered them unto her; so that upon the certainty of the Traditions, depends
the Fidelity of the Church, and those Churches must needs approve themselves to
be most faithful, which can make the surest proof of their Traditions, that
they are indeed truly Apostolical; now it is evident that the written word, is
so acknowledged by all Churches, but the unwritten word is not so; and it is
observable that those who stand most upon the credit of unwritten Traditions,
yet are of late very willing to endeavor to prove most of the Doctrines and
practices depending thereupon, by some Texts of the undoubted written word,
surely not to gratify their adversaries who refused the other, but themselves,
who look upon these as the much better and surer proofs.

Wherefore the holy Scriptures which are the only proof that the Church has a
Trust from God concerning his Worship, are the only Rule by which she can
either conscionably, or acceptably discharge that Trust; Conscionably, in
offering nothing to men's consciences, but what God has offered; Acceptably in
offering nothing unto God, but what himself has required; and if every
particular Church did exactly follow this Rule, none could detest the Communion
of another, without detesting the communion of God himself; For this is the
Apostles own determination, I give you to understand that no man speaking by
the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed, 1 Cor. 12. 3. that is, does accurse
or detest any thing that is truly of the Christian Religion, for that is little
other then to detest and accurse Christ Jesus himself; Men may bestow their
hearts as they please about Ceremonies and formalities, and happily be charged
only with indiscretion, but not so about real forms of worship, not so about
sound and solid prayers, unless they will also be charged with irreligion; For
if the prayer which is used by any Christian Church, does truly honor Jesus,
no other Church can detest her communion in that prayer, without detesting
Jesus himself; Therefore it is not from the Spirit of God, but from our own
spirits that we dislike any thing which truly belongs to Jesus, whether in his
Doctrine or in his worship, and consequently what is exactly agreeable with the
known Word of Jesus, is also exactly agreeable with his will, and accordingly
all Churches are bound to agree in that, though they may disagree about other
matters: Therefore let every Church faithfully discharge her Trust about the
worship of God, and there may be a hope of a Christian agreement among all
Churches, for then those that shall disagree from the rest, will prove
themselves either Antichristian or unchristian; either Antichristian, as being
against Christ, or unchristian as being without him; either faulty for having a
false, or faulty for not having a true worship of Christ: For a true and
laudable worship cannot but challenge our communion, either actually in our
corporal presence, if we live among such good Christians as have it, or
potentially in our spiritual vote and desire, though we live never so far from
them; And it is to be noted in Gods Method, that he first makes provision for
the Truth of his worship, in the three first, then afterward for the public
exercise of it in the fourth Commandment; he first takes care that we be not
faulty in the object of our worship, saying, Thou shall have no other Gods but
me, then not in the outward manner of it, either in deed, or in word; not in
deed, saying, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, thou shall not
how down to them nor worship them; not in word, saying, Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain; After this order taken for the truth of his
worship both in the object and in the manner, then he proceeds to command the
public exercise thereof, saying, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day:
Certainly this Method was not in vain, but to show that as the Truth was to go
before the exercise, so the exercise was to follow the Truths of Religion; And
therefore wheresoever the Church did worship God according to the dictates of
the three first commandments, there every man was bound to be a communicant
with the Church by virtue of the fourth, and not only by virtue of the fifth
Commandment; For Christian communion as an act of Religion, belongs to the
first, though as an act of obedience it belong to the second Table; Therefore
if another man says, Our Father which art in heaven; how shall I not say with
him, Hallowed be thy name? Does it beseem me to be angry with the Lords most
holy prayer for his sake that says it, as if what Christ's lips had sanctified,
his lips could profane, for my devotion? Or can I be angry with any of Christ's
words, wheresoever I find them, and not be guilty of anger against Christ, and
against Christianity? Is the love of my God to be overruled by the hatred of
my neighbor, or may I indeed hate my God for my neighbors sake, who am bound
to love mine enemy, for Gods sake? The argument then will proceed a minori ad
majus, that if I may not in a true worship deny my communion to a stranger,
much less to a brother; if not to a brother, then much less to a mother; If not
to one single Minister, much less to a whole Church, which God has entrusted
with his own worship, and with my soul: For if I must look on that particular
Minister whom God has set over me, as one that directs me in his worship by
his authority, then much more must I so look upon my Church, which God first
set over that Minister, before he set that Minister over me: And if every
particular Minister amongst us would as conscionably acknowledge, and as
courageously vindicate his Churches Trust, as he confidently assumes and
diligently performs his own, we should soon have much less faction in the
Church, and much more Religion in the people.

SECT. V. The Prince, as the supreme governor of the particular Church in his
own Dominions, is Gods Trustee concerning the outward exercise of Religion, not
to manage or perform, but to propagate and to protect it; The ancient Divines
acknowledged this Trust, and the ancient Princes discharged it; and Princes
were bound so to do, because it is their right by the Law of nature, and
because without the discharge of this Trust there can neither be the face nor
the order of Religion among any People.
IT was the singular providence of God to commit the care and trust of man in
matters of Religion, only to men, for since the devil can transform himself
into an Angel of light, if (in this case) we had been entrusted with the
Angels, we might have been deluded by the Devils: But now having a more sure
word of prophecy then can be any voice from heaven, whosoever be the speaker
or the messenger, 2 Pet. 1. 19. there is no true Christian Church but may with
confidence, and must with courage say unto the people committed to her Trust,
as Saint Paul said to the Galatians, Though we, or an Angel from heaven preach
any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached unto you, let him
be accursed, Gal. 1. 8. God has not trusted Angels but men with preaching his
Gospel, nor has he trusted men to preach a new Gospel, but that only which the
Apostles at first preached; and what he has given some men spiritual power to
preach, that he has given other men temporal power to maintain; The Priest is
to preach it, the Prince is to maintain it, and the same God who in the affairs
of the body has given his Angels charge over men, has in the affairs of the
soul given men charge over Angels, for though an Angel from heaven should
preach any other Gospel, yet neither might the Priest publish it, nor the
Prince protect it: It being a privilege of men above Angels, since the eternal
truth took on him not the nature of Angels but the seed of Abraham; that as
Angels are the guardians of men, so men should be the guardians of Gods truth;
And happily in this regard we find two sorts of men especially in the holy
Scriptures called Angels, to wit, Kings and Priests, because God has most
especially trusted them with his truth: It Is sure this reason is given why the
King is so called, 2 Samuel 14. 17. For as an Angel of God, so is my Lord the
King, to discern good and bad; And it is very probable the same reason is meant,
though it be not given, why the Priests are so called, Revel. 2. For we find
the Angels of those several Churches strictly examined, if not severely blamed
for the neglect of this Trust; God has made Kings and Priests guardians of his
truth, as he has made the Angels guardians of our persons, that we should
admire his infinite power whereby he is able, and adore his infinite goodness
whereby he is willing, not only to send down from heaven his Ministering
Spirits, but also to raise up from earth, his Ministering flesh to be our
guardian Angels: Nor can we now without unthankfulness to God, injury to the
Truth, and injustice (if not uncharitableness) to our selves, deny either King
or Priest his part in this guardianship: And God he knows, we have great need
of both.

It has been the Devils chiefest policy to sow seeds of jealousy and
dissension between these two Trustees, that so he might make himself the
greater harvest, either by depraving the purity, or by disturbing the peace of
Religion: In some Churches the Priest has almost expelled the King; in other
Churches the King has almost expelled the Priest; The one extending his
spirituals even to temporals, the other extending his temporals even to
spirituals, neither but comes short of his duty, whiles both go beyond their
Trust; God make both truly to see the danger and the burden of their own Trust,
and neither will care to invade what belongs to the other, but both will soon
see so much belonging to himself, as to desire no more.

But in matters of Religion the Princes Trust has of late been most disputed,
though the Priests Trust has been least obeyed; For indeed the Priests rising
against the Prince, has taught the People to rise against the Priest; and
Prince, and Priest, and People, have all in a manner risen against God. Hence
it is we find so many broken lineaments in the face of Religion, and so great
ruptutes in the body of it, all rebellion in States, all Schism in Churches
proceeding from this mischeivous resolution, that inferiors to compass their
own ends, do make it no shame, and would fain make it no sin, either impudently
to oppose, or if that will not serve the turn, Impiously to usurp their
Superiors Trust: The first great breach was, the Priest would have no King;
the Second great breach is, The People will have no Priest: God keep us from
the third, that King, and Priest, and People will have no God. But I am now to
Vindicate the Trust of Kings, if indeed that would admit of so mean a
Vindication; Yea rather let Saint Peter vindicate their Trust, seeing his
successors have most opposed it; His words are (...), Subjecti estote propter
Dominum (Regi quasi praecellenti) 1. Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves for the
Lords sake to the King as supreme, thereby showing, that those who deny the
supremacy, deny the submission; and those who deny the submission, deny the
Lord; nor is it safe to limit the supremacy, where it is not as safe to deny
it, since a Limitation is little other then a partial Negation; for he that
limits an affirmative to some particulars, denies it in the rest: Now this is
Gods Affirmative, The King is supreme; Do you limit this to Civil causes, and
you must deny it in Ecclesiastical; so Gods Affirmative shall be made your
Negative; therefore it is your safest way to say, he is supreme in all causes,
(as well Ecclesiastical as Civil,) So shall you speak with God; and to submit
your self to him as thus supreme, so shall you act with God; Nor is this any
new Divinity, but the same which was as first taught by Moses, the first
Professor or Teacher of Divinity; For in the fourth commandment, which concerns
the exercise of Religion or the public worship of God, (a cause without doubt
truly Ecclesiastical,) we find these words, Thou, and thy Son, and thy
daughter, thy manservant, thy maidservant, thy cattle, and the stranger that
is, within thy gates, which plainly infer that the Trust of Gods public
worship is (in some respect) deposited with those, who have temporal or civil
authority to see it executed, having power to command not only their own
domestics or natives to frequent public assemblies, but also strangers and
foreiners, at least not to vilify or disturb them; So that the supreme
Magistrate of each particular Church is Gods Trustee concerning the outward
exercise of Religion, to actuate and to protect, though not to act and to
perform the same. For they have the power of governing the Priests, though they
may not take the office, nor exercise the function of the Priesthood. And
therefore it was no less shamefully then scornfully said of Bellarmine, no less
falsely then spitefully, and jam re ipsa Calvinistis in Anglia, mulier quaedam
est summus Pontifex: Tom. 2. controv. general. pri. (quae est de Eccles. milit.
lib. 4. cap. 9.) And now the Calvinists of England have a woman for their High
Priest; meaning the Queen Elizabeth of famous memory; The scoffing Ismael might
have the confidence to reproach his brethren, as being a Jesuit; but he should
have been ashamed to reproach the providence of God, as being a Christian: when
he set the crown upon the head of a woman, she had that right which belonged to
the crown; not to have the power of the Keys (as my Lady Abbess forsooth may
have by the leave of his Canonists) but yet to have the power of the Church;
For it is concerning the Church the Prophet has said, Kings shall be thy
nursing Fathers, and their Queens thy nursing Mothers, Isa. 49. 23. So that
either let Church men not be of the Church, or let them bless God who gives
them Kings for Fathers, when he might have given them (as he did their betters)
Tyrants for Butchers; And to whom was it that Hezekiah King of Judah did say,
My Sons, be not now negligent, for the Lord has chosen you to stand before
him, to serve him, and that you should minister unto him and burn incense, 2 Chronicles. 29. 11. Was it not to Priests? Did he call them Sons, and was he not
their Father? or was he indeed their Father, and did they not owe him
obedience? Nay rather, did they not actually and readily obey him, and that as
Priests too, executing his commands even in matters of their own function
concerning the Temple, as it is said, v. 15. They gathered their brethren and
sanctified themselves, and came according to the commandment of the King by the
words of the Lord, to cleanse the house of the Lord, or, According to the
command of the King in the Business of the Lord: So the Hebrew words will bear
it, and then the case is plain, the Kings command is to be obeyed even in the
Lords business; But if we take (...) only for verbum, not for res, yet so the
Text will not only approve, but also require the Priests obedience to the Kings
orders in matters of Religion, (...) juxta praeceptum Regis in verbis Domini,
so the Hebrew according to the Kings command in the words of the Lord, He has
warrant from God: The Septuagint goes further, (...), Juxta mandatum Regis per
praeceptum Domini, According to the Kings injunction by the commandment of the
Lord; He has a command from God: Saint Hierom goes yet further, Juxta mandatum
Regis and Imperium Domini, According to the Kings injunction and the Dominion
of the Lord He has Dominion from God: The Syriack and the Arabic Translations
are here both defective, so that we cannot see the opinion of those Churches
concerning this Text; But we have seen enough already; for the King has a
warrant, nay a command, nay yet more, he has Dominion from God to cause the
Priest to do his duty, though he has neither warrant, nor command, nor
permission, much less dominion or power to do it himself: For it is one thing
to do the office of a Priest, another thing to regulate or defend the order of
the Priesthood; Many Pious Kings of Judah did the latter, but none of them all
did the former, save only Vzziah, and he was a Leper to the day of his death
for doing it, 2 Chronicles. 26. so that the ancient and common Axiom of the Civil
Law, Custos est utriusque Tabulae, that the Prince is entrusted with the
keeping of both the Tables of the Decalogue, is easily to be proved concerning
each Table by it self: For the words forecited out of the fourth commandment
prove it sufficiently concerning the first table, as that takes care for the
external worship; And as for the Duties of Religion that belong to the Second
Table, all the world agrees that the Prince is immediately and directly
entrusted with them, by virtue of the Fifth Commandment: And since the old
Testament (as far as it concerns Moral duties,) is no other then a various
Paraphrase or Exposition upon the Decalogue, we may not unfitly apply all those
Texts that enjoin or approve the supreme Magistrates care of Gods public
worship as so many glosses upon this Text of the fourth commandment;
Particularly that signal Injunction of God to Joshuah, This book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and
night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein;
For then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good
success; Josh 1. 8. In that he says, This book of the Law, we may not any more
leave out the first Table of the Decalogue out of Joshuahs commission, then out
of Gods book; in that he says, Thou shall meditate therein day and night that
thou may observe to do according to all that is written therein: we must
infer (unless we will say that God spoke to Joshua as to a private man, at that
very time when he made him a public person, and governor of his people in
Moses his stead) That this is a full precept both for his knowledge and for his
practice concerning Religion, as it was established for Prince, and Priest, and
People; Lastly, in that he says, For then thou shall make thy way prosperous,
and there thou shall have good success, We have a Promise answerable to that
precept; And what can be brought more for the proof of any duty, then Gods
precept and Gods promise? His Precept commanding it, his promise rewarding it;
the one to direct, the other to encourage our obedience: We need not doubt of
our work, if we have a Precept; we cannot doubt of his acceptance if we have a
promise: Quae faciunt divisa beatos, in te mista fluunt; Those two things
either of which severally and by it self were enough to authorize the Civil
Magistrate to have a special care of and regard to Religion, are here jointly
and both together in Joshuahs Commission, to wit Precept and Promise: So that
to deny him the Precept concerning the Piety, is in effect to deny him the
Promise concerning the Prosperity; And by the same reason, If we will not have
Christian Princes Religious, we must have them improsperous: If they will not
take care of Religion, God will not take care of them, unless we dare say that
our Savior Christ came to defalcate from the power and trust which God had
given to Princes by Legacy in the Old Testament, because that being made
Christian, either they would deserve it less, or abuse it more: But in all the
New Testament we find not the least hint of any such defalcation, either by
Christ, or by his Apostles. 1. Not by Christ, he never diminished, but
altogether established the right of Princes; for he withdrew himself when the
Jews would have made him King, John 6. 15. and professed openly before Pilate,
saying, My Kingdom is not of this world, John 18. 36. And acknowledged Pilates
power over him, John 19. 11. So far was he either from leaving a Viceroy
behind him as an universal Monarch of the whole world, to give some Princes a
faculty to act, and take away from others their power of acting; or from
leaving his Kingly office among a company of inferior Presbyters, with power
to control, and subvert the government of Churches and States under pretense
of setting up his Kingdom.

2. Not by Christ's Apostles, they never diminished or debased the rights of
Princes, but rather advanced and extolled them; So Saint Paul calls them Gods
Ministers, and writeeth to the Clergy of Rome in the first place, and to the
people of Rome by and after them, saying, Ye must needs be subject, not only
for wrath, but also for conscience sake, Romans 13. 4, 5. What ye? even Omnis
Anima, every soul, ver. 1. Nec animam Papae excipit, He excepteth not the soul
of the Pope, said Aeneas Silvius, whilst he was the Popes Scribe in the Council
of Basil, though when himself was afterward Pope, (under the name of Pius the
second) he was of another mind; whence that scoff was put upon him, Quod Aeneas
probavit, Pius damnavit, what Aeneas did piously approve, that Pius did
impiously condemn; And it is possible that in the first place he condemned
himself; it is probable he thought some others might justly condemn him, imputing
the change of this opinion rather to his preferment then to his Judgment; for
so himself does say in his Bulla Retractationum (as it is recorded by Binius)
Dicent fortasse aliqui cum Pontificatu hanc nobis opinionem advenisse, and cum
dignitate mutatam esse sententiam; But it is certain there was reason enough for
this condemnation, because he showed the greater Truth while he had the lesser
Trust; was a truer interpreter of the Text as a private man then as a Pope; was
more faithful whilst he was yet less powerful; for surely Saint Paul that says
Every soul, excepteth none; Even Christ's Vicar, is by this precept, Let every
soul be subject, himself made a subject to Gods Minister: So likewise Saint
Peter wills those whom he calls a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, to
submit themselves to Kings and Governors for the Lords sake; saying, For so is
the will of God, that with well doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of
foolish men, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 15. If they are a chosen generation that do submit,
then are they a reprobate generation that do rebel; and if they submit for the
Lords sake, they who will not submit, regard not the Lord; If the one be well
doing, the other surely is ill doing; and if the one silence the ignorance of
foolish men, then the other may be ashamed not to silence it self, and all its
presumptuous advocates.

In this strain of allegiance and obedience writ all the ancient Divines,
whilst yet their interest had not corrupted their Divinity. So Saint Augustine,
Reges quum in errore sunt, pro ipso errore leges contra veritatem ferunt; quum
in veritate sunt, similiter contra errorem pro ipsa veritate decernunt; Ita and
legibus malis probantur boni, and legibus bonis emendantur mali: Rex
Nebuchodonosor perversus legem saevam dedit ut simulachrum adoraretur; idem
correctus, severam, ne Deus verus blasphemaretur; In hoc enim Reges, sicut
divinitus eis praecipitur, Deo serviunt in quantum Reges sunt, si in suo regno
bona jubeant, mala prohibeant, non solum quae pertinent ad humanam societatem,
verum etiam quae ad divinam religionem, Aug. lib. 3. contra Cres. cap. 51.
Kings when they are in any error, make laws for that error against the Truth;
When they are in the Truth, they make laws for the truth against error; So good
men are tried by wicked laws, and wicked men are mended by good laws: King
Nebuchodonosor being yet in his perverseness, made a law for his image to be
worshipped; But being himself amended, made as severe a law that the true God
should not be blasphemed; For in this thing, Kings do God service as Kings,
according to his own command, if in their dominions they require what is good,
and forbid what is evil; and that not only in regard of humane society, but
also in regard of Divine Religion; Thus he plainly affirmed Kings to be Gods
Trustees, not only in regard of the second, but also of the first Table of the
Decalogue, though as long as they remained wicked Kings, they did only abuse
their Trust; So likewise Saint Ambrose in his Commentaries upon Luke 5. calls
it magnum and spirituale documentum, a great and spiritual point of Divinity,
whereby Christians are taught subjection to the higher powers, not to break the
constitutions of their earthly Princes; and he proves it to be so, for that
Christ himself paid tribute: The argument is irrefragable, from Christ to the
Christian, from the Son of God to the servant of God; If he showed his
obedience, who can give us leave to be disobedient, or pardon us for being so?

So likewise Saint Chrysostom in his Commentaries upon the Romans, (cap. 13.)
tells us, that Saint Paul requires Priests and Monks to be subject as well as
other men, in that he says, Let every soul be subject to the higher power; yea
though thou were an Apostle, (says he) or an Evangelist, (...): For subjection
does not overthrow (but rather establish) Religion.

And so likewise Saint Gregory does often in his Epistles call Mauritius the
Emperor his Lord; yea in his very chair, he does in effect determine for the
lawfulness of that appellation, sending this for a decretal to the Bishops of
Sicily, Legem quam piissimus Imperator dedit, vestrae studui fraternitati
transmittere, The Law which the most Religious Emperor has given, I was
careful to send to you; And why was he so careful to send it, but that they
should be as careful to obey it? ( Great. Did. 53. c. 1.)

I could easily heap up more quotations of the ancient Divines, but that the
testimonies of these four Doctors of the Church, are more then sufficient to
prove this was in their days the Churches Doctrine; And if it were so then,
it is not for the credit of our Churches to say, Now it is not so; nor for the
credit of our Religion to say, it should not be so: For we see plainly that
Jehosaphat who was in great esteem with Gods Prophet Elisha, (2. Reg. 3. 14.)
and with God himself, (2 Chronicles. 19. 3.) though he left the Priests to discharge
their own office, yet he thought the external Polity both Civil and
Ecclesiastical within the reach and compass of his Regal power; And accordingly
he constituted not only Zebadiah the Ruler of the house of Judah, his chief
commissioner for all the Kings matters; but also Amariah the chief Priest, his
chief commissioner for all the matters of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 11. And
Constantine the great, and after him Theodosius, Martian, Justinian, and other
Christian Emperors followed his example, in so much that the whole Civil Law,
(especially in the Code and in the Novels,) contains many several Laws and
constitutions both concerning Ecclesiastical persons and causes, that is to
say, concerning the whole discipline of the Church: And this is a Truth, which
no true Civilian can or will deny; Nay yet more, no true Canonist (though of
late their mouths have been most open against Princes,) can or will deny this
Truth, unless he resolve to leave the Church, that he may flatter the Court of
Rome, and not only to go against the ancient Canons, but also against his own
Master Gratian, the father of Canonists; For he brings in Pope Pelagius
professing to Childebertus the King, that he was bound by the Word of God to be
obedient to his Laws: Quibus (sc. legibus) nos etiam subditos esse, sacrae
Scripturae praecipiunt; Great. causa 25. qu. 1. cap. 10. And the gloss cannot
but take notice of it, saying, Argum. quod Papa subest Imperatori, This is an
argument that the Pope is subject to the Emperor; But because the gloss is
willing to elude this Argument by saying, that this subjection goes no further
then paying of tribute; it is not amiss to show that Gratian himself in another
place extends it generally to all the Imperial Laws: For in that very
distinction, wherein he pleads for the civil constitutions to be under the
Ecclesiastical, ( sc. Did. 10.) he produces some signal testimonies and
proofs, that even after the decay of the Empire, and the translating it to the
Germans, the Emperors notwithstanding had made Laws concerning the Church, and
the Popes themselves had professed their obedience to those Laws: I will
instance but in one, which is in the ninth Chapter of that distinction, wherein
Leo the fourth Bishop of Rome thus writeeth to Lotharius, the third Emperor of
the Germans, (for he was the son of Lodowick, the son of Charles the great) De
capitulis vel praeceptis imperialibus vestris vestrorumque Pontificum
praedecessorum irrefragabiliter custodiendis, quantum valuim^s and valemus
Christo propitio and nunc and in aevum nos conservaturos, modis omnibus
profitemur; As concerning your Imperial constitutions, and those of the High
Priests, your predecessors, we know they are undeniably to be observed, and
profess that we now do, and with Christ's help ever will by all means observe
them: The new Commentator upon the Decree, (as it is published by the authority
of Gregory the thirteenth) from the word Pontificum in this Epistle of Leo,
being applied to the Emperors, makes this collection, that the Emperors
established no constitutions in cases of Religion without the advice of their
Bishops, (which is a very true, just, and reasonable assertion; for doubtless
they were bound to look after the advice of their Divines in matters of the
Church, no less then after the advice of their Lawyers in matters of the
Commonwealth, even as the Kings of Judah had done before them; for even David
himself in ordering the Levites, followed the advice of Gad the Kings Seer, and
of Nathan the Prophet, 2 Chronicles. 29. 25.) But he takes it for granted that the
Emperors did make and establish such constitutions, and that when they were
made, not only the people of Italy, but also the Popes of Rome themselves did
obey them: For (says he) these words of Leo relate to the Capitula or
constitutions of Charles the great, and Lodowick his son, which Lotharius had
commanded to be observed throughout all Italy: And when it had been buzzed by
some to the Emperor that the Pope disliked those constitutions, he was very
zealous to clear and to purge himself from that suspicion by this Epistle; De
qua re Leo hac se Epistola videtur purgare voluisse: And indeed the words of
the Epistle show a very fierce zeal; for though he charge not himself with an
Oath, yet he plainly charge. them with a lie, that either had or should
report so to the Emperor; and si fortasse quilibet aliter vobis dixerit, vel
dicturus fuerit, scia^is eum pro certo mendacem: And yet this is not all; For
as Pope Leo in this Epistle made a solemn protestation of his own obedience to
the Emperors Laws, so in another after this (cited by Gratian in the
thirteenth Chapter of this same tenth Distinction) he made an humble
supplication that others might also be compelled to obey them; Vestram
flagitaneus clementiam, etc. For which though some late Canonists may perchance
say, he had too little spirit to be a good Pope, yet we cannot deny but (in
this Tenent) he had too much Truth to be a bad Divine; For Christ took not from
Kings their trust, that he might give it unto Churchmen, no more then God took
from Moses, that he might give to Aaron: And consequently Christian Kings are
still obliged to discharge this Trust, in their own dominions, as belonging to
them by the Law of nature, and therefore not impaired but confirmed by the Law
of grace; since it is the work of grace to consummate and perfect nature, not
to overthrow it; For the Moral Law given to the Jews by Moses, was the same
that had before been given by God himself to Adam; only it was written again in
Tables of stone, because by our sin we had much defaced that writing which had
been engraven in the tables of our hearts: So then, what is commanded by Moses
in the fifth Commandment, was before commanded by God in the Law of nature,
that is to say, that all Fathers, whether natural, or spiritual, or civil,
should be entrusted with, and have power over their own children, in
subordination to, though not in opposition against the commands of the Eternal
Father; And this right of Princes does Pope Leo himself acknowledge in giving
them the title of Pontifices, High Priests, which had been assumed by
themselves before in their edicts; and accordingly says the gloss, imperatores
olim Pontifices appellabantur: Which he proves by the Authority of Isid^re in
these express words, (cited afterward did. 21. c. 1.) A^tea autem qui
Regeserant and Pontifices erant; nam majorum haec erat consuetudo, ut Rex esset
etiam Sacerdos and Pontifex, unde and Romani Imperatores, Pontifices
dicebantur; Hence it is that among the titles of Aurelius the Roman Emperor,
this is one, (...), Summus sacerdos Maximus, Eusebius. l. 4. Eccles. histor. cap.
13. Which is a good proof that by the Law of Nations the authority of Religion
was judged to be in the Prince, though the administration of it was in the
Priest; nor was this an erroneous conceit of the Heathens; for God himself
would have the ceremonies of Religion to be instituted and established by
Moses, who was a civil Magistrate, not by Aaron who was a Priest; though they
were executed only by Aaron: After Moses, Joshua removed the Ark, gave the
charge of Religion, and renewed the Covenant betwixt God and the people: And
after him, David and Solomon, Josiah and Ezechiah did by their authority, as
Kings, order and reform Religion, overthrow Idolatry and superstition; so that
we may justly and truly infer, that Princes had that Trust of Christian
Religion, before they themselves were Christians to understand it; and still
have it, though they are never so bad Christians to abuse it; It Is one thing
what they are by their deeds, another thing what they are by their duties; for
by their duties they are preservers of Gods truth and peace, though by their
deeds they often prove the persecutors of his truth, and the disturbers of his
peace; God made them preservers, though they too too often make themselves
Persecutors of his Church: Thus Basilius the Emperor publicly assumeth to
himself this Trust, in the eighth general Council, cited in these words, (...),
The Divine and merciful providence, having put into my hands the helm of the
universal ship; That is, of the Church, wherein as in Noah's Ark all those are
gathered, who are saved from perishing: A large claim! and yet not one of all
the Council opens his mouth against it; Nay they all plainly give their
suffrages for it in the ninth Action when they solemnly make this profession,
(...): We well know, O Emperor, that there are under your power Archbishops,
and Bishops, and Abbates, and Clergymen, and Monks, and that you are the
Governor of them all. This was accounted no bad Divinity almost nine hundred
years after Christ, (for this Council was held in the year eight hundred and
seventy) both by Greek and Latin Churches, the Popes Legates then present not
dissenting from the rest, nay the Pope himself giving his actual and public
assent to this Tenent at this day, in that at his consecration, he solemnly
professes to Saint Peter and his Church, (I could rather wish it were to God,
but it is to Saint Peter,) Profiteor tibi Beat Petre, sanctaeque tuae
Ecclesiae, That he does receive and will keep this eight, as well as the other
seven general Councils; and promising to himself, that Saint Peter will be
gracious to him at the last day, (when I desire God only to be gracious to me)
as he did carefully observe this his profession; Eris autem mihi in illa
terribili die haec conanti and diligenter servare curanti propitius: This
profession of the Pope at his inauguration, is set down at large by Binius in
his notes upon this Council, so that it is scarce out of use in the Church of
Rome at this day to make it, whatever it is to keep it; And yet it is much that a
profession so solemnly made, should be slightly kept; for surely those words,
Deo and tibi sciens me redditurum de omnibus quae profiteor districtam in
divino judicio rationem, Knowing I shall give a strict account to God and to
you at the day of Judgment of all that I now profess, (though we leave out the
Tibi in the case) are such words as may well make a Pagan Foelix tremble to
hear them, much more a Christian Bishop tremble to speak them, and both Pagans
and Christians tremble to break them.

Nor may any Divine think or teach this Doctrine of Supremacy to be a matter of
indifferency; for to deny it to be the Kings due, is to deny the Text, and to
be a Heretic against the fifth Commandment; and it is as hard going to heaven
for Heretics against the Decalogue, as against the Creed; surely Mordecay and
Hester would not have appointed the feast of Purim for two days by their own
authority, if the secular Magistrate had been confined by God only to secular
affairs, and prohibited to intermeddle in Ecclesiastical; Wherefore we dare not
but say, this trust, this power is indeed the Princes birthright, and is as
inseparable from his Crown by the dictates of God and nature, as his Crown is
from his head, or his head is from his body: And it is happy for us it is so; for
else such is the wickedness, and such would be the outrage of headstrong
Schismatics, Heretics, and Atheists, that we should soon come to have no
appearance or show of a Church, and no form or face of Religion; For the
spiritual power of Preaching, exhorting, correcting, administering, praying,
excommunicating, (which is all that Churchmen can do by virtue of their
Orders,) can only enable them to preserve the purity and the truth, but not the
outward public solemnity and practice of Religion; that depends very much, if
not altogether, upon the external or temporal power, both for its being, and
for its continuance; For if men once turn mad and outrageous, (as it is very
easy for those who are out of their honesty, to be also out of their wits) the
fear of Gods Judgments will no more terrify them, then the love of Gods truth
will persuade them to consult with their consciences; so that neither fear nor
love of God is like to bring them to a right order in his worship and service,
nor to keep them in it; wherefore in such a case as this (and a mischief that
has already been so often felt, ought to be always feared) unless the secular
arm defend the Church, well there may be some private love and desire, but
there can scarce be any public practice and exercise of the true Religion;
This Augustine proves at large, Epist. 50. Bonifacio comiti, de moderate
coercendis* Hereticis, which himself would have us look upon as a full
Tractate, because in the second of his Retract. cap. 28. he calls it a Book,
Scripsi librum de correctione Donatistarum, In which Book he uses many
arguments why Kings, by their secular power, should both defend and vindicate
Religion. 1. Because those were blamed in the Old Testament who did it not;
those extolled above all others, who did it. 2. Because it was the duty of
Kings so to do; for that else though they might serve God as private men, yet
not as Kings (unless they made Laws to compel others also to serve him:) Aliter
enim servit quia homo est, aliter quia etiam Rex est; Quia homo est, ei servit
vivendo fideliter; quia vero etiam rex est, servit leges justa praecipientes
and contraria prohibentes, convenienti rigore sanciendo: Kings serve God as men
by being religious, but they serve him as Kings by making severe Laws in the
defense of Religion.

3. Because the Church might lawfully call upon them to do it; for though the
Apostles desired not the assistance of the Heathen Princes in their days,
because that prophecy was not yet fulfilled, why do the Heathen so furiously
rage, The Kings of the Earth stand up together against the Lord and against his
Christ? Yet now the Church may desire the assistance of Christian Princes,
since that is come to pass which follows in the same Psalm, Be wise now
therefore O ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges of the earth; For now that
Kings are called to the knowledge of Religion, it is not rational to say they are
not called to the defense of it; Quis mente sobrius Regibus dicat, Nolite
curare in regno vestro a quo teneatur vel oppugnetur Ecclesia Domini vestri;
non ad vos pertineat in regno vestro quis velit esse sive religiosus sive
sacrilegus, quibus dici non potest, non ad vos pertineat in regno vestro, quis
velit pudicus esse, quis impudicus: What sober man will say to Kings, It is no
part of your care to look after the Church of your Lord, who do possess it, or
who do oppose it, as if they were not to look after men's piety, who are to look
after women's chastity; as if it concerned them that there should be no
bastards, and not much more, that there should be no sacrilege or idolatry in
their kingdoms.

4. Because Kings by their temporal power might redress many mischiefs which
else were not like to be redressed; For though the best Christians were moved
by love, yet the most Christians were awed by fear: Sicut meliores sunt quos
dirigit amor, ita plures sunt quos corrigit timor; And to this purpose he
applies several Texts of the Proverbs; particularly this of Prove. 29. 19.
Verbis non emendabitur servus durus, A stubborn servant will not be corrected
by words, Quum dixit Verbis non emendari, non eum jussit deseri, sed tacit
adm^nuit unde debeat emendari; when be said a stubborn servant will not be
corrected by words, he would not have him left incorrigible, but privately
intimated the way he should be corrected, sc. by stripes or blows: For God
often uses the scourge to his best servants to bring them to himself;
therefore it is not cruelty but mercy in Christian Kings to scourge his enemies
unto him; and whereas the Donatists object, Cui vim Christus intulit, quem
coegit? Whom did Christ force or compel to be a Christian? I answer (says
he,) Let them look on S. Paul, Agnoscant in eo prius cogentem Christum, and
postea docentem; prius ferientem and postea consolantem: mirum est autem
quomodo ille qui poena corporis ad Evangelium coactus intravit, plus illis
omnibus qui solo verbo vocati sunt in Evangelio laboravit; Let them confess,
that Christ did first compel, then instruct Saint Paul; first strike him down,
then raise him up; and it is very observable that he who was forced to the
Apostleship by the pain and punishment of his own body, was more laborious
therein, then they who were only called by the word of Christ.

5. And lastly, Because the Donatists used un just violence to oppose and
opppress the Church, much more should Christian Princes use their just power to
uphold and to maintain it; Cur ergo non cogeret Ecclesia perditos filios ut
redirent, si perditi filii coegerunt alios ut perirent? Why should not the
Church force her lost children to come to the way of life, since they force
their brethren to go to the gates of death? Et ipse Dominus ad magnam coenam
suam prius adduci jubet convivas, postea cogi; for even our Lord himself first
appointed guests to be invited, but at last to be compelled unto his great
supper; Qu^propter si potestate quam per Religionem ac fidem Regum, tempore quo
debuit, divino munere accepit Ecclesia, Hi qui inveniuntur in viis and in
sepibus, i. e. in haeresibus and Schismatibus, coguntur intrare, non quod
coguntur reprehendant, sed quo coguntur, attendant: Wherefore if those who are
found in the Highways and in the Hedges, that is, either amongst Heretics or
Schismatics, be constrained to enter into the Lords Vineyard, by that power
which the Church has received by the goodness of God ever since Kings have
received the Christian Faith, Let them not find fault that they are as it were
driven by force, but let them consider whither it is they are driven, even into
those pastures where they may find true food and rest for their souls: These
are the chiefest of Saint Augustines arguments, why Kings and Princes should
interpose their power and authority in behalf of Religion; to which may be
added the inhumane barbarism of the Donatists, who invaded Maximian an Orthodox
Bishop of Africa, and set upon him at the Altar, and brake down the Altar, that
with the pieces of its wood (for Altars were not then made of stone) they might
knock down the Bishop; and after that they stabbed him with a punyard, then
dragged him on the ground, and left him for dead; But the dust having stopped
the bleeding of his wounds, there was still life in him, and therefore they
again took him away from those good Christians who were carrying him to a
religious house for help, and threw him down from a Turret, so not doubting but
they had at lest beat his breath quite out of his body, if not his brains out
of his head; This was their cruelty against a pious and an Orthodox Bishop,
because he would not be of their party; yet even this man, thus in effect by
them thrice killed, was by the singular providence of God preserved, and by the
singular power of God again revived, being stolen away in the night, and
carried to a religious house, and so well recovered afterward, that he was
able in his own person, to make his complaint unto the Emperor (and from him
obtained the suppression of the Donatists, which in time begat their
conformity.) Hinc ergo factum est ut Imperator Religiosus ac pius, perlatis in
notitiam suam talibus causis, mallet piissimis legibus istius impietatis
errorem omnino corrigere, and eos qui contra Christum Christi signa portarent,
ad unitatem Catholicam torrendo and coercendo redigere, quam saeviendi
tantummodo auferre licentiam, and errandi ac pereundi relinquere; Hence it came
to pass, that the Religious Emperor being informed of the whole matter, did
not only make Laws to suppress their violence that they should not mischief the
Churches peace, but also to command their obedience, that they should submit to
her commands, and embrace her Communion, as thinking it unworthy of his
authority to deny his subjects power of destroying others, but to leave them
power of destroying themselves: Thus did Saint Augustine plead for the power of
Princes in maintaining the outward order of Religion; and whereas he had once
thought that only the spiritual power of the Word, and not also the temporal
power of the sword was to be used against Schismatics, He plainly recanted
that opinion, and left under his own hand a testimony of his recantation; For
so he has written 2 Retract. c. 5. Dixi in libro primo contra partem Donati,
Non mihi placere ullius saecularis potestatis impetu Schismaticos ad
communionem violenter arctare; and vere mihi tunc non placebat, quia nondum
expertus eram vel quantum mali eorum auderet impunitas, vel quantum eis in
melius mutandis confer posset diligentia disciplinae; I said in my first book
against the Donatists, that I approved not their practice, who did violently
force Schismatics to the Communion of the Church; and truly when I writ that
book I did not approve it, for I had not then learned by experience, neither
how much the hope of impunity would make them the worse, nor how much the fear
of punishment would make them the better; He had done what he could as a Divine
to reclaim them, for he had made an Alphabetical Psalm, wherein he laid open
their follies and impieties to all the people; the Hypo-Psalm or burden of
which Psalm, to be repeated at the end of every new Period, was this, Omnes qui
gaudetis de pace, modo verum judicate, All ye that love the peace, now judge
the truth, ( u. Tom. 7.) In this Psalm he complains much of their turbulency
and violence, whereby they dishonored Christ, grieved his Spirit, wounded his
Church, but they continued still like the deaf adder, stopping their ears
against the voice of the charmer, though he charmed never so wisely; wherefore
when he saw they would not be reclaimed, he desired they might be suppressed,
and began to be of a persuasion that it was the duty of the Civil Magistrate to
suppress them; And truly it is not imaginable that God has given the power of
the sword to Princes, that they should use it against their own, and not much
rather against his enemies; that they should punish those who dishonor their
persons, or disobey their commands, and not much more those who dishonor and
disobey the great God their Maker, and Preserver, from whom alone it is that
either honor is due unto their persons, or obedience is due unto their
commands: For God himself has said, Them that honor me I will honor, and
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30. The words werr
spoken to Eli for not restraining the wickedness of his sons; He had made a
grave Sermon to them as a Priest, but he had not inflicted severe punishments
upon them as a Judge; And because he had not punished them, God resolves to
punish him: Nay to punish Religion for his sake, thinking it more agreeable
with his honor that his Ark should be captivated by Philistines, then
profaned and defiled by Israelites: We who have seen the same sins, may justly
fear we shall see the same confusion; However, we must pray that we may no more
see the same sins, or that we may see them severely punished; That neither we
may depart from our glory, nor our glory may depart from us: For surely there
is a very great blessing in the mere outward face and practice of Religion, and
much more in the inward zeal and love of it; This made King David so zealous to
fetch the Ark of God from Kiriathjearim, as himself professes, 1 Chronicles. 13. 3.
Let us bring again the Ark of our God to us, for we enquired not at it in the
days of Saul; He had been so long without the public exercise of Religion
(because of the troubles which had befallen him and the whole Nation, in the
days of Saul,) that now he could not endure to be without it any longer: The
outrageous persecutions of Saul had disturbed him; The furious and frequent
invasions of the Philistines had disturbed the people: Hence it was that Gods
worship had been without the Ark, and Israel had been without Gods worship;
Religion had been without its life, and they had been without Religion: Either
of which alone was enough to make the troubles of their souls much more irksome
and intolerable, then were the troubles of their bodies; how much more both of
them joined together? And thus were they prepared by the want of so great
blessings, the more perfectly to discry, and the more eanestly to desire the
incomparable happiness they should have in the enjoyment of them; and happily
hence it was, that when God offered to David either a seven years famine, or a
three months war, or a three days pestilence, yet he rather made choice of
this then of the other; though in all probability he might expect that himself
should be the first to perish in the pestilence (which was sent for his sake,)
but the last that should perish either in the famine or in the war. I am
willing to impute the reason of this choice merely to his love of Religion; He
was afraid that a seven years famine might make the people for want of meat,
grudge and repine at their sacrifices, and so there would be a cessation of
Religion; which is a probable conjecture, because above three years of the
famine had been already past, when God asked him the question, says Rabbi
David, thereby reconciling the seven years in 1 Samuel 24. with the three years
of famine, 1 Chronicles. 21. 12. So that David seeing so great a decay in the
sacrifices for a famine but of three years, had reason to fear that if it
should last out all the seven years, there would be at all no sacrifice; I say,
he was afraid that a seven years famine might make the people for want of meat
to put into their own bellies, grudge and repine at their sacrifices, and so
there would be a cessation of Religion; But he was sure that in a three months
war the soldiers would make havoc both of sacrifices and of Priests, and so
there would be a disturbance, if not a total desolation and destruction of
Religion; Therefore he had rather venture to die first in the pestilence; then
last either in the famine or in the war, because he feared that in either of
those exigencies Religion might also die with him; particularly he seemed most
averse from the war, as foreseeing that he could not flee three months before
the enemies, but the Ark of God would also be forced to flee with him.

SECT. VI. The Limitation both of the Princes and of the Priests Trust in
matters of Religion; that neither may deviate from the Law of God; and that the
authority of the Churches laws is most enfeebled by them who make least esteem
of the Law of God, casting the aspersions of Obscurity and Uncertainty upon the
Holy Scriptures.
IN matters of humane interest it may be reasonably disputed which is the more
blameworthy, Whether he that abuses a Trust which he has, or he that
usurpeth a Trust which he has not? for though the one may sin with the greater
injustice, yet the other does sin with the greater insolency; But in matters of
Divine Interest, it is without dispute he is a greater sinner that usurpeth a
Trust, then he that only abuses it; for this man's sin may be out of ignorance
or infirmity, but the other certainly sins out of pride and presumption; It Is
grievous for a man to fail with God, by abusing a Trust that is given him; but
it is abominable for a man to justle with God, by invading a Trust that he has
not given and will not give* The ordering of Religion is a trust that God has
given unto men, and they sin desperately who abuse it; But the making of
Religion is a Trust that God has not given, and they sin damnably who usurp
it; I am the Lord, that is my name, and my glory will I not give unto another,
Isa. 42. 8. But if he has given to men the power of making Religion, by which
alone his name is glorified, he has given his glory unto another, and has not
reserved it unto himself; wherefore let it be the glory of God alone to
establish any thing that is of Religion, whether it be so Speculatively or
Practically, whether as an article of Faith or as a Duty of Life; And let it be
man's glory only to execute what God has established: Kings by their Temporal,
Priests by their Spiritual power, not making Religion, but only ordering it,
not establishing their own commands in Gods worship, but only executing his;
That God who is governor of his enemies may not be denied to be governor of
his Servants; and he that is Master in all the world, may not be thought to be
no Master in his own Family: Therefore we may see and must confess that the
Trust both of Princes and of Priests in matters of Religion, is but a limited
Trust: not to do what themselves please, but what God has commanded them; It Is
not for Pharaoh to say, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice? Exodus 5.
2. when Moses himself had a limited commission, For see (says he) that thou
make all things according to the pattern showed to thee in the mount, Hebr. 8.
5. God having not given power to any man to act against him, but only for him:
Whence there is not only great prudence, but also great Piety in that excellent
saying, which is attributed to that noble Civilian Baldus, In rebus Juris
Divini vel naturalis, Summus Princeps nihil potest contra Veritatis praeceptum:
Alioquin quicquid fecerit nullum est; quemadmodam quod a Commissario vel
procuratore contra mandatum committitur; In matters that concern the Law of God
or the Law of nature the greatest Prince in the world may enjoin and act
nothing against the command of Truth; If he do, his injunction and action are
both null or void in themselves, even as what is done by a Commissioner or a
Proctor, is null, if it be against the command delivered to him, or the Trust
reposed in him; And this we are sure is not only good Law, but also good
Divinity; For in that we are commanded to obey the Magistrate for the Lords
sake, it is evident we cannot owe, and may not pay him obedience against the
Lord: For that were to obey man rather then God. And the same Divinity will
also hold in Summus Pontifex as well as in Summus Princeps, in the chiefest
Ecclesiastical, as well as in the chiefest Civil Magistrates: For they act only
as Gods Trustees by their spiritual, no less then the other by their Temporal
power, and have little reason to expect the same obedience when they forsake
their Trust, as when they follow it. Saint Paul says expressly God has given
us authority for Edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8. If he has not
given the Prince authority to destroy his Church, much less has he given the
Priest authority to destroy his Religion; That authority which is destrvctive
either of Church or of Religion, is not of Gods giving, and should not be of
man's taking* excellently Aquinas, Quum potestas Praelati spiritualis, qui non
est Dominus sed Dispensator, in Edification^m sit data and non in
destructionem, ut patet, 2 Cor. 10. Sicut Praelatus non potest imperare ea quae
secundum se Deo displicent, sc. peccata; ita non potest prohibere ea quae
secundum se Deo placent, sc. Virtutis opera; (22ae. qu. 88. art. 12. ad 2. um.
When as the power of a spiritual Praelate, who is not a Lord but a Steward, is
given for Edification, not for Destruction, (as it appears 2 Cor. 10.) it
follows, that as a Prelate cannot command those things which in themselves are
displeasing unto God, such as are all sins; So he cannot forbid those things
which in themselves are pleasing unto God, such as are all the works of Virtue:
Which is a Truth as clear as if it had been written by a Sunbeam, and should
be as durable as if it were written in our Hearts; Nay indeed it is written
there); So that we should as soon lose our own hearts as lose this persuasion,
That our Gonernours both Temporal and Spiritual, have no Authority to command
against God, but only for him: and therefore if they lay upon us any commands
that are evidently against the Law of God, their own spiritual Governors have
taught us what to answer them, Whether it be right in the sight of God, to
hearken unto you more then unto God, judge ye: Acts 4. 19. Nor does this
doctrine loosen the joints, or dissolve the ligaments of Government; It takes
not away the rights of Kingdoms or Churches, by giving to God his Right; Let
humane Laws bind in the court of conscience, but either let them not be laws if
they be palpably against the Law of God; or let humane laws so bind the
conscience, as that the divine law may bind it much more: We confess it is
neither safe nor sound Divinity to extenuate the obligation of humane laws; but
we also profess that the extenuation of the power of Divine laws must needs
have less both of safety and of soundness; And it is to be feared that this
has been the greatest cause of the other, and that God has suffered the
People to make so light of the authority of the Church, because a great faction
in the Church has of late made so light of Gods own Authority: For what else
have they done who have not only magisterially transgressed, but also
maliciously calumniated the Holy Scriptures, that by discountenancing, nay
indeed by disauthenticating the known Text, they might countenance and
authorize their own inventions, which is in effect no other but to turn out
God, and to put in man in the Legislative authority concerning Religion: It Is
very good to be zealous for this doctrine, that the disobedient are reckoned up
by Saint Paul among those who are worthy of death; (...), Parentibus non
obedientes, Romans 1. 30. They who are not obedient to their parents, (whether
Natural, or Civil, or Ecclesiastical) are worthy of death; for not only the
position of disobedience, but also the mere negation of obedience makes them
liable to damnation: But withal, we must be more zealous for God himself, then
for any of his Substitutes; For if not obeying our fathers on earth makes us
worthy of eternal death, then much more not obeying our Father in heaven; and
if the contempt of man's law can wound the conscience, then much more of Gods
law, by which alone man's law can either reach the conscience by its command, or
wound the conscience for its contempt. So that to speak the plain truth, no men
have so much opposed that Tenent of humane laws binding the conscience, as
those who have made the slightest account of the divine law; as if that could
not, or at least had not bound their consciences; For it is without dispute,
and therefore should be without denial, that Gods law has a far greater power
and dominion over the conscience of the greatest governor, then man's law can
have or challenge over the conscience of the meanest subject: Therefore the
readiest way for the Church to obtain a conscionable obedience from the people,
is to observe a conscionable obedience toward God: and not by raising
objections or rather cavils against the law of God, to teach the people to
object against and cavil with her laws, when they should obey them: Wherein
some late Churchmen have been very much too blame, who have endeavored to
cast that aspersion of obscurity and uncertainty upon Gods handwriting, which
they would take very disdainfully should be cast upon their own writings;
thereby in effect giving Gods law a quietus est as to the binding of the
conscience (without which yet their own laws cannot bind it) since it is
impossible that the conscience should be bound either by obscurities or by
uncertainties; For if the law be obscure, who can act with the knowledge of his
understanding? If it be uncertain, who can act with the consent of his will?
And if conscience be the Practical judgment, how can it act without either of
these? for how can it be a Judgment without the knowledge of the
understanding? how can it a practical obedience without the consent of the will?

Or to enforce this argument of natural reason with a medium of Religion, since
whatsoever is not of faith is sin, and whatsoever is not of the evidence, or of
the assurance of faith, is not of faith; and what is obscure cannot beget the
evidence; what is uncertain cannot beget the assurance of faith; who can think
that obscure and uncertain laws can bind the conscience, and not think that the
conscience may be bound to sin? So little is the Church of Christ beholding to
those Divines who yet would be thought most of all to magnify and to extol
her; For whiles they lesson the authority of Gods law in binding the
conscience, they cannot but lesson the authority of the Churches law, which can
have no such authority but from the law of God: Even as he that should cast any
scornful reproach upon the light of the Sun, would in vain make a Panegyric in
praise of the luster of the Moon, since she has all her light and luster from
the Sun; Therefore let them no longer tell us that Gods Law is obscure till
they have explained it, unless they would have us not think it a Law, till they
have made it so; for if it be obscure, it cannot have the virtue, nor challenge
the obligation of a law; For if this great trumpet which summons us all to the
Church militant, that we may be soldiers under Christ's banner, I say, if this
trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? So
likewise you, except ye utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how
shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air, 1 Cor. 14.
8, 9. The Argument has as much force against the Spirit of God as against the
Ministers of God, if he has no uttered significant words, has he not spoken
into the air? For shame let us leave off such objections, least we indeed force
him to speak into the air, whiles he intends and desires to speak unto our
stony hearts: So little does it become any Divine to set the Law of the Church
in a competition with the law of God, much less in a perfection above it; as if
that were plain and sure, this were uncertain and obscure; For men's consciences
must first be directed before they can be obliged; and therefore to suppose
Gods law to be defective in its direction, is to make it defective in its
obligation; And if Gods law be imperfect, how can the Churches law be perfect,
either to direct or to oblige our consciences? The law of the Lord is perfect,
converting the soul, Psalm 19. 7. If it were not for its own perfection, it
could not produce our conversion; nor can we oppose the perfection of Gods law,
without opposing the conversion of our own souls; Therefore we must above all
things, be careful to vindicate the Rule of our Religion, if we would engage
men's consciences to receive it, and much more to practice it; for it is
impossible they should be religious without their consciences, and much more
against them; He that searches the heart, may not be served without the heart;
and he that most requiquireth the Heart in his service, will not be served
against the the Heart; Therefore every man must worship God with the knowledge
of his understanding, and with the consent of his will; and consequently we may
not deny, That there is evidence of Truth in the rule of Gods worship to
iustruct the understanding and certainty of goodness in it to fix and settle
the will, ( i. e. to establish the heart) unless we will have men Religious
either without their consciences for want of knowledge, or against their
consciences for want of consent; For if a man does the best act of Religion
without his conscience, that act is to him little less then brutish; if against
his conscience, it is to him less then damnable: and therefore we have great
reason to abominate such a Tenent, as may either suppose a man to be a Brute in
his Religion, by acting without his conscience, or suppose a man to be a Devil
in his Religion, by acting against his conscience.

SECT. VII. The trust of each particular Church is sufficient for the peoples
salvation, if she take heed to her self, and to the Doctrine God has given her
in his written word, and in the ancient Creeds of the Catholic Church.
OUR blessed Savior bidding us seek the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness,
( Mat. 6. 33.) plainly shows that we have no hopes of finding Gods
righteousness, (and much less of enjoying it) till we have found out Gods
Kingdom, and are become faithful subjects of the same; And what is Gods Kingdom
but his Church, wherein he exercises dominion in the hearts of his faithful
people, having established his Throne upon these two pillars of Truth and
Holiness? by Truth enlightening their understandings, by Holiness inflaming
their wills and affections, and sanctifying their lives and conversations; so
that it is no hard matter to find out the Kingdom of God, and to distinguish it
from all the Kingdoms of the world, since it is to be discerned by its Truth,
and by its Holiness; For it is Truth and Holiness that makes a Church, though
it is power and pomp that makes a state; There is no coming to Gods Kingdom but
by these, no tarrying in it but with these, no going from it but by forsaking
these; so that any Christian people or nation in the world may thus plead for
it self, Tell me not of departing from the Church of Christ, unless you can
show me wherein I have departed from Truth and Holiness, which two make and
constitute his Church; If I believe all the Articles of Faith as he has
revealed them, and practice all the duties of life as he has commanded them,
sure I am, though you may deny me yours, yet my Savior will not deny me his
Communion; though you may not esteem me a member of yours, yet he will esteem
me a member of his Body.

This is all that Saint Paul requires to the constitution of a Christian
Church, when he says, Romans 10. 10. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness; there is the truth most chiefly fixed in the heart; and with the
mouth confession is mad unto salvation; there is the holiness, most chiefly
expressed by the mouth: Again, Whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed;
there is the truth, received by Faith; And, Whosoever shall call upon the name
of the Lord shall be saved, there is the holiness exercised by prayer; shall he
believe, and shall he call upon the name of the Lord, and not belong unto the
Lord here? Shall he not be ashamed, shall he be saved, and not belong to the
Lord hereafter? And what else is the Church but (...), That which belongs to
the Lord, here whilst Militant, hereafter when Triumphant? And how shall any
people that believes and calls upon the Lord, be excluded from belonging to
the Lord, or from being his Church, when it is said so generally, Whosoever
believes on him, and whosoever shall call upon his name; Therefore in every
Nation that believes on Christ, and calls on his name, (for they are
inseparable, the faith is not without the confession, the belief is not without
the prayer, the truth is not without the holiness) Christ has his Church, and
that Church has the means of salvation, Faith and prayer (or truth and
holiness:) and the promise of salvation, 1. Privatively, He shall not be
ashamed: 2. Positively, He shall be saved: and we cannot deny it the salvation
it self without detracting from Gods mercy, which has made good the means, and
from Gods truth, which will make good the promise; And therefore Saint Paul
having planted a particular Church in Ephesus says concerning the Presbyters
there: The Holy Ghost had made them Overseers of that people, Act. 20. 28. He
could have said no more of himself and of his fellow-Apostles who had an
extraordinary calling, but that the Holy Ghost had made them overseers; and he
says no less of those Ministers who had only an ordinary calling; And what
does he intimate by saying so, But that the Ephesians had still the same hopes
and means of salvation, as before, whilst himself instructed and governed them?
For that the Holy Ghost the Lord and giver of life, could and would give them
life by his ordinary as well as by his extraordinary Ministers: For we cannot
but say that those are words of eternal truth, as well as of eternal comfort,
Psalm. 73. 1. Truly God is loving unto Israel, even unto such as are of a clean
heart; for there is no doubt of Gods being loving unto Israel, no more then of
Isreal's being of a clean heart; If they be of a clean heart, they must be of
Gods Israel, though they may be of several Tribes; And if they be of Gods
Israel, they are sure of Gods love; He will here guide them with his counsel,
and hereafter receive them with glory; For he sanctifies them by his Truth,
that he may save them by his mercy: And accordingly S. Paul says to Timothy,
Take heed unto thy self and unto the Doctrine, continue in them; for in doing
this thou shall both save thy self and them that hear thee, 1 Timothy 4. 16.
Thereby showing he had left the people of Ephesus sufficient means of being
saved, in that he had left them an infallible doctrine, though he had not left
them an infallible Doctor: For if Timothy by taking heed unto himself, and to
the Doctrine he had received, was able to save both himself and those who were
committed to his charge, it is evident the people of Ephesus had no more need (in
Gods account) of an infallible Bishop to teach them, then they had of an
impeccable Bishop to govern them: and indeed infallibility cannot be in the
understanding, without impeccability in the will, since the will does
necessarily follow the last dictate of the understanding, and it self being
depraved, may corrupt and deprave both the first and the last dictate of it.
Nay yet more, lest we should make light account of the authority of particular
Churches, because we can neither prove nor believe their infallibility any more
then we can their impeccability, we find plainly that S. Paul calls the
particular Church of Ephesus, (even that Church with which Timothy was
entrusted, and in which he was taught by this Epistle how to behave himself)
The house of God, the pillar and ground of the truth, 1 Timothy* 3. 35. Though we
may justly, and should willingly infer, that if a particular Church by cleaving
to the word of Truth, deserved to be called the pillar and ground of Truth,
then sure the Universal Church much more; For so the argument will proceed a
minore ad majus. If one Minister shall be able to teach the saving Truth,
whilst he swerves neither to the right hand nor to the left from the word of
Truth, then much more a whole National Church, and most of all the Catholic
and Universal Church, that is diffused over all Nations; if she carefully
attend, and steadfastly cleave to that same word of Truth; And if any man think
this condition unnecessary, let him consider that those four general Councils,
which Saint Gregory received as four Gospels, did set the Bible upon a Throne
in the midst of their assembly, appealing to it for all their Doctrines, and
proving by it all their determinations; which if all other general Councils, at
least so reputed, had done since that time, well we might have had fewer
Articles, but certainly we must have had a surer Creed, and a founder faith;
nor can we deny but some provincial Councils by cleaving to the Text, have more
truly showed themselves the pillars of Truth, then some reputed general
Councils that have forsaken it; as the Council of Gangra which had in it but
thirteen Bishops, yet suppressed no less then twenty Schismatical opinions
together; whereas the Council of Constance that consisted almost of all
Nations, making light regard of Christ's institution and order concerning the
Eucharist, though it ended the Schism of the Popes, yet it began such a Schism
in the Church as is like to continue to the worlds end; for surely there will
always be some conscionable men, who will prefer the Institution of Christ in
his own Sacrament, above the constitution of a Council; and who will think
there can be no Schism either less curable or more damnable, then that which
dares set up the pretended authority of the Church, against the undoubted
Authority of Christ. This is most certain, Saint Paul took it for granted that
the Church of Ephesus was instructed in the whole Doctrine of the Scriptures,
(for in the first Chapter he mentions both the Law and the Gospel,) and that
she also followed those instructions, before he called her the house of God,
the pillar and ground of Truth: For indeed the first part of every Churches
Trust is the Word of God, which she is entrusted withal in a threefold respect;
1. That she should keep it. 2. That she should expound it. 3. That she should
obey it. Wherefore those men who of late have cavilled at the written Word,
thereby thinking to resolve all Religion into the Authority of the Church, have
in truth taken a direct course to resolve the Authority of the Church into
nothing; For if the Church has not been Gods faithful Trustee, in keeping the
substance or letter of his word; who can think her faithful in expounding the
sense, or in observing the commands of the same? And so then farewell to the
Churches faithfulness, and consequently to her authority, which is grounded
chiefly upon her faithfulness; For it is as just an exception now, as it was in
the Apostles times, Whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto
you, more then unto God, judge ye, Act. 4. 19. The intent of your arguments
against the Scriptures, is to advise us not to hearken unto God, that we might
only hearken unto you; But the reason and force of your arguments will
certainly ^eep us from harkening unto you, because they make it evident that
you have not hearkened unto God; Nay you have set light by his Word, that you
might not hearken unto him.

But this argument is good only against the men, not against the cause, and it
is therefore best when it is against the worst men. Those who have least
hearkened to Gods voice, have given the greatest cause to others, not to hearken
unto their voices; And if they will needs be angry with us, let them consider
that God is first angry with them, and therefore they ought to be angry with
themselves; For they took not only a very impious, but also a very indiscreet
way by vilifying the authority of Gods word, to magnify the authority of their
own. And yet to speak the plain truth, this is rather to be called a cavil then
an argument; For let all the Original Bibles be examined both of the Papists
and of the Protestant Churches, we shall find them all exactly agreeing in one
Hebrew and Greek Text, and their disagreement to be only in their several
glosses and Translations, in so much that all these parts of Christendom would
soon be of one and the same profession, as well as they are of one and the same
Religion, if all Churches would agree in the sense, as they do agree in the
Letter of Gods holy Word; To let pass the Old Testament, wherein all Protestant
Churches are as willing to be tried by the King of Spains, as by Buxtorses
Hebrew Bibles, I know Bezaes Greek Testament is censured by some, as a most
bold piece of Scripture; but upon comparing his Text with that of Pope Sixtus
Quintus, I find very little ground for that censure; and less Truth in it;
Because both Texts generally agree in the very same words, and* that even in
those very places, wherein both disagree from the Vulgar Latin: And I believe
the same may be said concerning the Greek Text that is received in all other
Churches. That they all agree in the same Original Texts, evinceth they have
been faithful in their Trust of keeping the Holy Scriptures; That many of them
disagree in their glosses upon, and translations of that Text, only shows
that each particular Church is willing to discharge its own particular Trust in
expounding the Holy Scriptures; That they all labor not to continue, and
increase their disagreement, but to end or to diminish it, (for so the Churches
do, though the men do not) is also a good sign that no one of them is willing
to be faulty in their Trust of observing and obeying the holy Scriptures: And
therefore though it must be confessed that the Church like Queen Vasthi, has
not performed the commandment of her King so readily and so entirely as she
ought, yet may not any rigid Memucan suppose that there shall ever go forth a
royal commandment that she come no more before the King Ahasuerus; for though
she may unhappily have been peccant in her obedience, she has not been peccant
in her faith; though she may have failed in her behavior, she has not failed
in her Trust; though she has been undutiful, yet she has not been false; she
has not been unfaithful to her King, that he should seek a divorce, and give
her royal estate unto another that is better then she; Let no man think that
our blessed Savior, the Prince of peace, the King of Saints, will so easily
part with his Spouse, concerning whom he has said, I will betroth thee unto me
for ever; yea I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment,
and in loving kindness, and in mercies; I will betroth thee unto me in
faithfulness, and thou shall know the Lord, Hos. 2. 19, 20. And since Christ
will not so easily be parted from his Church, how is it that we do so easily
part and depart from her? If we did rightly distinguish betwixt the Church and
the Men, we would soon all bless God for the Truth and Faith of his Church,
though we should blame one another for our own falseness and unfaithfulness; we
would find that the Church has been true to her trust, in keeping, in
expounding, in obeying Gods word, and that only the Men have been faulty: Thus
Saint Paul blamed the Men, not the Church at Corinth, for their factions and
schisms: It has been declared to me of you my brethren, that there are
contentions among you, 1 Cor. 1. 11. He said they were contentious; he said not
the Church was so: For as they were a Church, so they were sanctified in Christ
Jesus, called to be Saints, and calling upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord,
ver. 2. The men were sinners, the Church were Saints; the men were contentious,
the Church was Religious: Truth and peace were in the Church, whilst errors
and schisms were in the men; The treasure was heavenly, though the vessels
which held it were earthly: We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the
excellency of the power may be of God, not of us, 2 Cor. 4. 7. Will you reject
the Treasure because of the Vessel? you were as good to say, you would have the
excellency of the power in converting and saving souls to be of men, not of
God: The Vessel is certainly brittle, and may possibly be foul; but the
treasure is neither brittle nor foul; that's a lasting treasure, for Truth is
so; that's a pure Treasure, for holiness is so; As a Treasure it will enrich
your soul, as a pure Treasure it will purge your soul, as a pure and lasting
Treasure it will purge and enrich your soul, not for a moment, but for ever:
It Is confessed that this Treasure was at first in much better Vessels then now
it is, when neither perverseness sought to sophisticate the truth, nor
profaneness to corrupt the holiness of the Christian Religion; but the
Treasure it self is still the same it first was, For Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. The wickedness of man has not
destroyed, cannot destroy the goodness of God; He has still his communion of
Saints, amongst these great divisions of sinners; he has still one Catholic
and Apostolical Church, amongst our many divided and distracted Churches: And
blessed be his name, he first provided against our divisions and distractions,
before he suffered us to make them: For it was from his singular providence,
that the Romans Emperors should keep entire their dominion over all the
Christian world, till they had called those general Councils, wherein was the
confutation of the grand heresies, and the establishment of the true Christian
Faith, in the first ages of the Church, whilst the greatest part of the
Ministry in all Churches rightly understood, and zealously maintained the Faith
of the Catholic Church; For else it is much to be feared that these afterages
of Christians (which have been so much wedded to State Policy, and so resolved
on self-interest) would have been much to seek for the truly ancient Catholic
and Apostolic Faith, now briefly summed up in those Creeds, which as they are
undeniable proofs of the Apostles assertion, that the Church is the ground and
pillar of truth, so they are also the infallible guides of particular Churches
to retain and follow that Truth to the worlds end: Wherefore God having left us
his own undoubted word, and such incomparable sums of the saving Truths
therein contained, as is the Apostles Creed, and those other ancient Creeds of
the Church, there is now no particular Church in the world, which has these
helps, and will carefully and conscionably make use of them, but may be sure of
believing the Catholic Faith; and consequently of professing the true
Christian Religion whereby to know Christ, and of persisting in the true
Christian Communion, whereby to enjoy him; though perchance the factions of men
may be so great, and the Judgment of God, because of those factions, may be so
just, as never again to let the Church enjoy the happiness of a true general
Council: And without doubt every particular Church which professes the
Christian Faith according to the Scriptures and those Creeds, and has a
practice agreeable to her profession, may justly be called the ground and
pillar of truth, and may not justly be condemned by another Church, much less
opposed or deserted by her own state; For that such a Church is without doubt
Gods Trustee, and has not been faulty in the discharge of her Trust, and may
not be hindered or molested, in dischaging it*

SECT. VIII. The Trust of particular Churches is immediately from God himself
both in regard of the Magistrate, and of the Minister: That Trust much stood
upon in the Primitive times, and ought to be so still, because it is founded on
the holy Scriptures; And that this Doctrine concerning the Trust of particular
Churches, does not canton or disjoynt the Catholic Church.
IT IS no hard matter to prove That particular Churches are Gods immediate
Trustees, though they have but a limited Trust; For else will follow the
greatest absurdity that can be imagined, and much greater that may be granted,
viz. That God has left the blood of his Son, the dictates of his Spirit, the
honor of his name exposed to all the contempts, and prophanations, and
corruptions of perverse, and ignorant, and wicked men, if he has not entrusted
them all with some such persons who are bound to see them neither profaned,
nor contemned nor corrupted; And who were those his Trustees at first but only
his Apostles? and who have they been ever since but their Successors, Bishops
and Ministers? Take heed unto the flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made
you overseers, Acts 20. 28. O Timothy, keep that which is committed to thy
Trust, 1 Timothy 6. 20. The Minister, whether Bishop or Priest, is immediately
entrusted with the care of souls, and with those truths and administrations
which directly concern the soul; For the civil Magistrate, though he be
Christian, yet is not capable of discharging the spiritual part of this Trust,
being not called of God as was Aaron, to do the office of a Priest, though he
be called of God as was Moses, to have power and dominion over Priests: For in
that he is governor of the State, he is also governor of the Church, which is
in and within the State; and in that he is governor of the Church, he must
needs have his share in the Trust of the Church, concerning Religion, as far as
Religion is liable to the government of the State, sc. to be ordered, protected
and defended by it; For as God at first used the extraordinary power of
miracles to maintain his word and Sacraments, and to strike the opposers and
profaners of them either with death or with other corporal punishments, (as S.
Paul says of the Corinthians, For this cause many are weakly and sick among
you, and many sleep, 1 Cor. 11. 30. sc. because of your profaning the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ;) So in process of time he was
pleased to use the ordinary power of the Civil Magistrate for the same
purposes, never leaving himself without witness, having given a directive and
spiritual power to the Ministry, a coactive and external power to the
Magistracy for the suppressing of wickedness and vice, and for the promoting of
true Religion and Virtue: Therefore both Magistracy and Ministry have the
immediate Trust of Religion, and God has commanded both, to assist, has
allowed neither to oppose the other in the execution of his Trust; Both are
obliged to see there be a right exercise of Religion; the one to perform it,
the other to countenance and protect it; And both have their Trust immediately
from God, and this is that which I call the Trust of particular Churches; nor
is it to be imagined, That if God had given the Trust of all Churches to some
general Vicar of his, who derived his power immediately from him, and was to
derive the same to others, but that he would have given some notice of this
universal Trustee, that others might not invade this Trust without his leave,
much less manage it without his Authority: yet this he was willing to plead
for, who said, Petrus* Paulo dedit licentiam praedicandi. Gl. in Great. Did.
11. cap. 11. that Saint Peter gave Saint Paul a license to preach, and that
Authoritate Domini, by Gods own command, who said, Acts 13. Sepatate me
Barnabas and Saul for the work whereto I have called them; He will needs bring
Saint Peter from Jerusalem to Antioch of purpose to lay his hands on Saint
Paul, though the Holy Ghost reckons up these particular men who were bid do
that work, and reckons not Saint Peter among them, nay though Saint Paul
himself plainly tells us, that he had Preached full three years before he once
saw Saint Peter, Gal. 1. 17, 18. and then was fain to go up to Jerusalem, not
to Antioch, to see him; and only to see him; not to receive commission or
Instruction from him; So Saint Chrysostom upon the words, Gal. 1. (...). He
wanted Peter for nothing, but being equal in honor with him, (that I may say
no more now) yet he went up to him as to his Superior and his Ancient; And he
tell us this of purpose (says he) that we should not think the ensuing
reprehension proceeded either out of hatred or envy ((...)) for it is plain he
loved the man, and respected him more then any other of the Apostles; for he
says, Other of the Apostles saw I none; Yet he did but go to see him, not to
learn of him, (much less to receive spiritual power from him,) (...), I did but
see him, I did not learn of him, says the same Saint Chrysostom. And indeed
it is scarce imaginable that Saint Paul was rapt up into the third Heaven, (the
proper dwelling place of God;) to hear unspeakable words, to be Tongue-tied on
earth by any man, so as not to be able to preach without his License; Nay on
the contrary, it is clearly evident from the Holy Scriptures and from all
Antiquity that not only Saint Paul, but also all the other Apostles did Preach
the Gospel, found Churches, ordain Bishops, excommunicate offenders, without
any delegation from Saint Peter, only by their own immediate Authority; And it
is also evident that they all derived their Authority to their several Churches
after them, and that those several Churches did very much insist upon that
authority which they could not lawfully have done, had it not been derived to
them by the Apostles. Thus Saint Cyprian pleads for his Church of Carthage, Ne
quisquam se Episcopum Episcoporum constituat, aut tyrannico terrore ad
obsequendi necessitatem collegas suos adigat, quando habeat omnis Episcopus pro
licentia libertatis and potestatis suae arbitrium proprium, tanquam judicari ab
alio non possit, quam nec ipse possit alterum judicare: Neither let any man
make himself a Bishop of Bishops, nor by his tyrannical threats seek to compel
his colleagues to be his Vassals, since every Bishop has his own native liberty
and power to determine for himself, as one that may neither Judge his
fellow-Bishop, nor be Judged by him: Where we may safely enough admit of
Baronius his own gloss ( An. 258. nu. 42.) out of Saint Augustine, and yet not
enervate the Validity of the Text, Opinor (inquit) utique in his questionibus
quae nondum eliquantissima perspectione discussa sunt; (id sc. concessum esse;)
I suppose they had such power and liberty only in those questions as were not
yet fully discussed or determined: And again, Liberum faciebat quaerendi
arbitrium, ut examinata veritas penderetur; Saint Cyprian therefore allowed
them this liberty and power in common, That the Truth might be the better
discovered amongst them: Take either or both Glosses, it is evident that neither
Saint Cyprian nor Saint Augustine did think, That God had shut up all Truth in
one Bishops breast, or put all power into one Bishops hand; But that the
several Bishops of several Churches had by the blessing of God, both ability to
discern the Truth, and Authority to publish and to establish it. And this was
the deliberate determination of the whole Council of Carthage in the year four
hundred eighty five, to which not only two hundred and thirty Affrican Bishops
subscribed, but also three Legates from the Bishop of Rome, Faustinus,
Philippus and Asellus, in these numerical words, Prudentissime justissimeque
(Niceni Patres) providerunt, quaecunque negotia, in suis locis, ubi ^rta
essent, finienda, nec unicuique Provinciae gratiam spiritus sancti defuturam,
qua aequitas a Christi Sacerdotibus, and prudenter videatur, and constantissime
teneatur: The Nicene fathers did most judiciously and most justly provide that
all controversies should be ended where they were begun: For that the Grace of
the Holy Ghost would be wanting to no Christian province, whereby the Ministers
of Christ (belonging to that same Province) should be enabled beth wisely to
see what was just and equal, and constantly to hold and to maintain it; This
Canon (says Goldastus) was subscribed by three of the Popes own Legates; but
sure we are it was subscribed by all the Africane Bishops then present, and
sent in a letter to Pope Celestine, which letter is inserted by Binius as the
105. Chapter of the Africane Council under Boniface and Celestine (Tom. 1.
Council. par. 1. p. 757. edit. Colon.) Accordingly the same Council in 92.
Canon, constituteth and ordains, That a Presbyter or Deacon being aggrieved
by his own Bshop, should appeal to the neighboring Bishops, or to the Primate,
or to an Africane Council, but by no means to any Bishop out of their own
Territories; Ad transmarina autem qui putaverit appellandum, a nullo intra
Africam in communionem suscipiatur; But if any shall appeal to countries abroad
or beyond the Seas for his redress, let no Bishop in Africa admit him to his
communion: The most reasonable Canon that could be made, if particular Churches
had their authority immediately from God to appoint those who were aggrieved
their remedy at home; But if not, the most unreasonable to deny them to seek
for remedy abroad: Surely if we examine the Text, we shall find very much
spoken in the behalf of particular Churches. For even our Savior Christ
himself appointed each particular Church to be judge of every person that lived
within its Jurisdiction; If thy brother shall trespass against thee, tell it
unto the Church, Mat. 18. 15, 17. What Church? but that wherein thy brother
lives with thee, not another Church wherein he lives not; for then our
Savior would certainly have named that other Church; which since he has not
done, we must understand this injured man's own Church, or else leave the peace
of Christians under very great difficulties, and greater uncertainties: to this
proof taken out of the first, let us add another out of the last book of the
new Testament. Our blessed Savior sends to the seven Churches which are in
Asia, Rev. 1. 11 and blames the Angels of them all severally for the several
misdemeanors which he had seen in them, which plainly shows that those several
Angels had their several Trusts; and as plainly proves that the doctrine
concerning the Trust of particular Churches, does in no wise canton or
dismember or disunite the Catholic Church; for it is of Christ's own teaching
who is the head, and may not be thought to canton or dismember or disunite his
own body. Saint Paul likewise sent seven several Epistles to seven several
particular Christian Churches, as to the Church of Rome, Corinth, Galatia,
Ephesus, Philippi, Colosse, and Thessalonica, allowing and confirming the
particular authority and Trust of those several particular Churches, and yet by
no means dividing or disjointing the Catholic Church; Whence we may justly
infer, that what Trust God at first gave to the particular Church of Rome,
Corinth, Galatia and the rest, the same he still gives to other particular
Churches; and yet without the least division or disunion of this Catholic
Church; They were all several particular Churches, in regard of their trust and
jurisdiction; they were all but one Catholic Church in regard of their Faith
and communion; neither of them was opposed against the other, in that they were
accounted as so many several Churches; neither of them was advanced above the
other, that they should all be united into one Church; As it was said of the
Church of Rome, That your faith is spoken of throughout the whole world, Romans
1. 8. so it was likewise said of the Church of Thessalonica, In every place
your faith to Godward is spread abroad, 1 These. 1. 8. So that this argument can
give no more Supremacy to the one Church then to the other: and since there
cannot possibly be two supreams, this Text is very ill urged to prove the
Church of Romes supremacy. For ought then that can be gathered from these
Epistles, all the seven Churches were equally Gods Trustees (and by consequent
all others as well as they) not one of them entru^ed above the rest, and much
less with the rest; Each to give an account both to God and men for it self,
not one for All; Nay Saint Paul has taught us a reproof which may justly be
used against any particular Church that will needs make it self too authentical
above other Churches, in that he says to the Corinthians, What? came the word
of God out from you? or came it unto you only? 1 Cor. 14. 36. Were you the
first founders of the Christian Religion, or are you the only Partakers of it?
was all Religion from you, or is there no Religion but with you? unless you can
make good either one or both of these, you may not take upon you to be the only
Masters in Gods Israel, but must allow others also to be taught of God, to have
their Religion from him, and to have their Communion with him; and what is that
else but to be a true Christian Church? to be called out of the world to Christ
the Son of God by Religion, to abide and dwell with him by communion; Thus does
Saint Paul briefly but pithily define a Christian Church, 1 These. 1. 1. To the
Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father, and in the Lord Jesus
Christ; We cannot imagine the Thessalonians were in God, before they were with
God; so that the one presupposes the other, and we may hence collect this
definition of a true Christian Church, that it is a company of men, Ministers
and People (though here Saint Paul chiefly write to the Ministers, calling them
the Church, as appears in that he charge them to read this Epistle to all the
Holy brethren, cap. 5. v. 27. which shows that he sent it only to the
Ministers) I say, that a true Christian Church is a company of Men, Ministers
and People, who are with the God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ by their
Religion, nay more, who are in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ by
their communion; And all the men in the world who are thus with and in God the
Father, and God the Son by the power of God the Holy Ghost, do make up the
whole present Christian or Catholic Church: They may be several Churches in
their Denominations and Jurisdictions, They are but one Church in their
Religion, and in their spiritual communion: Thus faith the same Saint Paul, Now
ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular, 1 Cor. 12. 27. that is,
ye Christians of all Nations are the mystical body of Christ, and ye Christians
of Corinth, of this or that Nation, are members in particular of that body, and
members in particular one of another, as all together make up that body, or as
all particular Churches make up the Catholic Church.

SECT. IX. What Trust is given to other particular Churches in the Holy
Scriptures, is also given to our particular Church of England, from God the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; That our Church is accordingly bound to magnify
her Trust, and therefore we bound not to vilify it; And that it is both
Rational and Religious to maintain the Trust and Authority of our own
particular Church.
IF he be justly reproached for dishonesty, who does not carefully discharge
his Trust which he has received from man; how much more they who do not
carefully discharge their Trust, which they have received from God? And this is
the case of Ministers above all other men, who have received such a Trust from
God as all the power of the world could not give them, and all the malice of
the world cannot deny them. Indeed it is the case of every particular Minister,
much more of the whole Ministry, or of a whole Church, which is more eminently
Gods Trustee, and has a much greater Trust, then either the arrogance of any
one can challenge, or the ability of any one can discharge; And therefore if
the spirit of God give that charge to one particular Archippus, Take heed to
the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col.
4. 17. much more does it give the same charge to the whole Church of Colosse
which had in a more ample manner and for a more general end received the same
Ministry: And though the Church of Colosse it self was soon after swallowed up
with an Earthquake, (in the days of Nero as says Orosius) yet not so the
Instructions nor the authority given to it, they must remain till the worlds
end; Take heed to the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, is not to
be swallowed up by the cleaving and dividing of the earth, no more then it is
to be revoked or recalled by any voice from heaven; And so was it also with the
Church of Ephesus, as appears from Saint Paul's charge to the first Bishop of
that Church, I give thee charge in the sight of God, and before Christ Jesus,
that thou keep this commandment without spot, unrebukeable until the appearing
of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6 13, 14. In that he charge him to keep the
commandments he had received concerning Religion, without spot, unrebukeable,
he shows the Churches trust; in that he adds to his charge until the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, he shows that Trust is to continue till
the worlds end: For in this case we must always remember those words of our
Savior, Mar. 13. 37. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, (Watch:) For
what Saint Paul said to the first Bishop of Ephesus, he said to all Bishops
that ever should be after him, as well as to all that were then with him; For
the Apostolical Epistles though in their inscriptions or Title they concerned
some special Churches, yet in their Instructions and use they concerned all
Churches, as plainly appears from Saint Paul's own words, Col. 4. 16. And when
this Epistle is read amongst you, cause that it be read also in the Church of
the Laodiceans; and that ye likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea; So that
what Instruction or Authority or charge was given to one Church, was given to
all Churches in that one; And consequently we may thus argue by way of
Induction; The Trust of Religion was given by God to the Church of Rome and of
Corinth, and of Galatia, and of Ephesus, and of Philippi, and of Colosse, and
of Thessalonica; therefore the same trust is given by God to our own Church of
England, and indeed to all the several particular Churches in the Christian
world; For if each particular Bishop and Presbyter have his Trust originally
from the Holy Ghost, though derived by the hands of men; Then much more have
all the Bishops and Presbyters their Trust from the Holy Ghost; Hence that
expression in the first Council of Bishops, Act. 15. 28. It seems good to the
Holy Ghost and to us; Which has in some sort been followed by other Councils
since; Particularly the sixth, which confirming the five ecumenical before,
does it in these words, (...); This our holy and Ecumenical Synod, has by
inspiration from God confirmed those former Councils; Which is in effect as
much as if they had said, It seems good to the Holy Ghost and us to confirm
them; Council. Constant. 3. Act. 17. Graece, sed 18. Latin; A sufficient proof
that the Apostles spoke not those words for themselves alone, but also for the
Church after them; which was thereby authorized as to act by the power, so to
act in the name of the Holy Ghost: And if any shall be so refractory as to say
otherwise, he may look upon another place, not only as a confirmation of this
truth, but also as a confutation of his own refractoriness, Acts 7. 51. Ye
stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy
Ghost; For whosoever is stiff-necked and will not hear nor obey the word of
truth, though in the mouth of a weak and sinful man sent from God to speak it,
does make himself guilty of this detestable and damnable resistance, even of
resisting the Holy Ghost: For those Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus were as
much ordained and appointed by men, as any can be of any Church till the worlds
ends (supposing they be rightly ordained) to whom yet the Apostle says, Take
heed unto all the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, Act.
20. 28.

For the ordination of Ministers, though it is by man, yet is it not of men,
but of God, even as also is the Gospel which they are ordained to preach; so
that to resist them and their Doctrine, is not to resist men, but God; so said
he who first ordained Ministers of the Gospel, and still assisteth them in
their ministrations, He that hears you, hears me; and he that despises
you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke
10. 16. How shall any man go on this errand without Gods sending, when the
eternal word himself would not preach till he was sent? How shall any man
despise those whom the Word has sent, and not despise the Word that sent them,
and the Father that sent the Word? And how shall any man despise the Father and
the Son, and not grieve the Holy Spirit who proceeds from them? So impossible
is it for any to despise the Church which God has set over him, and not sin
against God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: For the argument is a minori ad
majus, if it be dangerous to despise one, much more to despise all: if to
undervalue a Disciple, much more an Apostle: For as the Apostles had a greater
trust then the 70. Disciples; so has every National Church, (which is as it
were the grand Apostle of its Nation,) a greater trust then any particular
Bishop or Presbyter of the same; and the Church now has that trust, as the
Apostles first had it from God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; Saint Paul says
of himself, (but doubtless he says it for more then himself,) that he was an
Apostle of Jesus Christ by the commandment of God, that is of God the Father, 1 Timothy 1. 1. Saint Luke says of him, that it was God the Son, even Jesus our
blessed Savior, who called him to be an Apostle, who said unto him, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? and who said of him, He is a chosen vessel unto
me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel,
Acts 9. 4, 15. The same Saint Luke says in another place, that he was called
to the Function of the Apostleship by the commandment of God the Holy Ghost,
Act. 13. 2. The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereto I have called them; Which variety of expression does not only verify
that common axiom of Divinity, Opera Trinitatis ad extra sunt indivisa, The
works of the blessed Trinity in regard of any external product are indivisible,
so that what is externally done by one person is done by all; But it does also
testify the great trust which was laid upon every one of the Apostles, in that
he received his commission from God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: And as
this trust has since been, and still is derived to the Church, so it has been
and is derived by the same glorious and blessed Trinity; Whereby we see the
large Exposition that is to be given to those words, he that hears you,
hears me, (Luke 10. 16.) for it is all one as if it had been said, he hears
God, he hears the Son of God, he hears the Spirit of God; Wherefore
supposing that this national Church wherein we live, is as Gods Apostle to this
Nation, no sectary can justly pretend to God or Christ, no Enthusiast can
justly pretend to the Spirit of God and Christ, why he should not hearken to
the dictates, and follow the directions of this Church, which God, and Christ,
and the Spirit of God and Christ has set over him.

I find in the ancient Calenders on the twenty sixth of May, this Title,
Augustini Anglorum Apostoli; The feast of Saint Augustine the Apostle of the
English; He was looked upon as one that had planted the Christian Faith amongst
us; and was therefore in the judgment of the Latin Church, esteemed and
called our Apostle.

I will not dispute the ground, but only admit the Title, for if one single
Priest or Bishop was not unfitly called the Apostle of our Nation; Then much
more may a whole company of Bishops and Presbyters be so called, and ought to
be so esteemed, who have more generally propagated, more firmly established,
and more carefully preserved amongst us the true Christian Faith; It is Saint
Paul's own argument to the Corinthians, If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet
doubtless I am to you, for the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord, 1
Cor. 9. 2. As if he had said, no Ambassador can more justify his trust and
his authority by his Princes seal annexed to his Credential letters, then I can
justify my Apostleship toward you, in that by my preaching you have been
converted to the Lord, and are confirmed in him; what Saint Paul was to the
Corinthians in bringing them to the knowledge and to the communion of Christ,
(to the knowledge of Christ by preaching the word, to the communion of Christ
by administering the Sacraments) that our Church has been and still is to us:
And therefore what Saint Paul said to the Crinthians, that our Church may
justly say to us, ( Since these things were written for our admonition, upon
whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10. 11.) If I be not an Apostle
unto others, yet doubtless I am to you; For the seal of mine Apostleship are ye
in the Lord; Though others may pretend they have some cause to doubt the trust
and the authority of our Church, as if she had not a true succession of
Ministers (which in truth is but a mere pretense, or rather a cavil, as the
learned Mason has sufficiently demonstrated, and should be least objected by
them who will have the whole Church depend upon the Pope, and cannot deny that
they have had many, and long lived Anti-popes to disturb their succession) yet
sure we our selves can neither have cause nor pretense to doubt it, since we
cannot reasonably deny but our Church has a true succession of Doctrine: so
that for us, who have not only the speculative, but also the practical, the
experimental knowledge of the Gospel, unless we have been grossly wanting to our
selves, and impiously wanting to our Savior; for us I say to doubt of our
Church, is little other then to doubt of our Religion, as if that either had
not come from Christ, or could not bring us to Christ, and keep us with him:
For there can be no doubt of the Ambassadors authority, if there be no doubt
of his Princes seal; and if we our selves be not the seal of our Churches
Apostleship in the Lord, the fault is merely our own, it is because we would not
admit the stamp and impression of Christ upon our stony hearts; it is because we
have been as Iron, when we should have been as wax, and not having received,
nor desirous to receive the seal of our Lord, do question the authority of his
Ambassador, of his Apostle; not having in us the image of Christ, do contemn
the authority, and forsake the communion of his Church; For as the want of
natural affection discovered the harlot not to have been the true mother of the
child, 1 King 3. 26. So the want of filial obedience discovers us not to have
been true children, but by no means our Church, to have been a false mother.
There is great reason and greater necessity why all true sons of this
distressed and despised Church should (now especially) insist upon this
Doctrine, since at this time the contumacy of the children, has made
disputable (nay almost desperate) the authority of the Mother: Wherein as we
have S. Paul's example to invite us, so we have his authority to justify us;
for questionless he did therefore so much magnify his own Apostleship, that we
should learn to magnify it much more.

Thus we find in the beginning of every Epistle, so many large Encomiums and
high commendations of his office, as if he had taken that for his Text, Romans
11. 13. Quamdiu quidem ego sum gentium Apostolus, ministerium meum
honorificabo, As long as I am the Apostle of the Gentiles, I will magnify mine
office: There needs but one instance for all, Gal. 1. 1. Paul an Apostle, not
of man, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him
from the dead; where Saint Chrysostom gives us this remarkable gloss; (...)
Because they (sc. who went about to pervert the Galatians): did undervalue his
Doctrine, saying it was from men, but that S. Peter's Doctrine was from Christ,
therefore in the first place he withstands that objection, viz. by affirming
that he was an Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ and God
the Father, as well as S. Peter: (...): In that he says he was not an Apostle
of men, he says what was common to all the Ministers of the Gospel, for both
their authority of preaching, and the doctrine which they preached was from
heaven; But in that he says, neither by man, he says what was proper only to
the Apostles; for our blessed Savior did not call them by other men, but only
by himself. We do not seek now for such an Apostleship in any Christian Church
as is not by man; we only say it is not of man; and that is enough to procure
sober men's attention, and conscientious men's obedience; for in that it is not
of men, it is clearly of God: And as it was not arrogance but necessity in
Saint Paul which made him stand so much upon his authority; so is it not the
pride of the Clergy (a string which they most harp upon, who are most guilty of
it) but their duty, which makes them stand so stiffly for the authority of the
Church; Let him speak for both, whose modesty and humility was greater then his
learning, and yet whose learning was greater in reality, then our new Divines
is now in show or pretense, and that was the late Bishop of Salisbury, Bishop
Davenant, in his most excellent Commentary upon the Colossians, where, almost
at the beginning, sc. in the fifth page you shall find these words, Paulus non
arrogantiae causa, sed ne in detrimentum Ecclesiae vilesceret illius autoritas,
Apostolicam dignitatem sibi vendicat; Ita etiam oportet in Ecclesiastica
dignitate constitutos, officii sui autoritatem atque existimationem tueri
contra contemptores and schismaticos: Saint Paul does not out of arrogance
challenge to himself the dignity and honor of an Apostle, but for fear lest
otherwise the Church of God should suffer detriment or loss by the contempt of
his authority: And so likewise it still behooves those who are placed in
Ecclesiastical dignity, to maintain the repute and authority of their office,
against despisers and schismatics.

And truly this is but a reasonable position both in regard of those in
authority, who do only maintain their own, (unless we will deny that to be
their own, which God has so manifestly given them) and in regard of those
under authority, who cannot be willing to obey, what they are not desirous to
maintain; and yet must either obey or be guilty of heinous impiety, such as now
joins them in communion with the Devil by their sin; for rebellion is as the
sin of witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15. 23. (and without doubt all witches are the Devils
communicants;) and such as will hereafter keep them in communion with the Devil
by their punishment: They that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation,
Romans 13. 2. And questionless it is a most reasonable problem, What communion
has light with darkness, and what concord has Christ with Belial, 2 Cor. 6.
15, 16. And yet a more reasonable demand, I would not that ye (who are
Christians) should have fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor. 10. 20. Not in their
sin, for Christ's sake; not in their punishment, for your own sakes.

Again, there may be yet further alleged these reasons why we should zealously
maintain, and carefully obey the power and authority of our own particular
Church.

1. Because reverence and suspicion cannot consist together, and therefore I
may not lightly suspect those whom I am bound to reverence, such as are my
spiritual Pastors and Teachers; whom for this reason I may not lightly suspect
in respect of their integrity, much less of their authority.

2. Because else there must be perplexitas facti, a perplexity in point of
fact, that private men will not easily know with whom they are bound to keep
their Christian Communion in the public worship and service of God, which yet
is an undeniable, and should be an undoubted duty of the Text.

3. Because else there must be perplexitas juris, a perplexity in point of Law,
which is such a perplexity as God will not endure, and man may not endure; for
then the conscience can never be at quiet, when it must so keep one Law, as to
break another; And that perplexity cannot be avoided, if we allow two several
Churches to have power from God to order and command the duties of our
Religion; for then they may lay upon us at the same time quite contrary
commands; and consequently whilst we are obeying the one, we must be disobeying
the other; But it is past all dispute that our own Church has power from God
over us in matters of Religion, because the Apostle says expressly, Obey them
that have the rule over you, Heb. 13. 17. Which cannot be understood of those
who are at a distance from us in another Country, because it follows, For they
watch for your souls as they that must give an account. But it is against reason
to say or think that Bishops and Presbyters in Italy shall give an account for
souls in England; and as much against reason to say or think that souls in
England shall not give an account for their disobedience.

And as this Position, (concerning the Authority of our own particular Church)
is reasonable, so is it also religious: For this is Saint Paul's own argument to
the Corinthians, Though you have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have
ye not many Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the
Gospel; Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me, 1 Cor. 4. 15, 16. Whence
we cannot but collect this dogmatical conclusion, That this Church which has
begotten us in Christ, claims our obedience in Christ, and to renounce that
obedience, is in effect to renounce our being made Christians; And as no other
Church can truly say to us, I have begotten you through the Gospel, so no other
Church can justly say unto us, Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me.

To sum up all in one word; This Doctrine concerning the acknowledging and
obeying the authority of mine own Church, being both rational and religious, I
dare not wilfully oppose it, for fear of sinning against the God within me,
that is to say, mine own conscience, which will certainly by a most terrible
and just remorse vindicate the violated dictates of Reason: And much more for
fear of sinning against the God without me, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which
will certainly by a more terrible and just vengeance (at the last day,)
vindicate the violated dictates of Religion.

CAP. II. That the Church of England has most carefully discharged her Trust
concerning Religion, as a most Christian or most Catholic Church.
SECT. I. Gods intent in trusting his Church with Religion, was her honor and
happiness, which should cause our thankfulness to God, and our reverend esteem
of his Church.
IT is a great honor to be trusted, and as great a happiness to discharge a
Trust; Accordingly God entrusting his Church with Religion, did intend her both
honor and happiness; Honor with men, happiness with himself; Honor in earth,
and happiness in heaven; wherein we cannot but admire the goodness, and
Justice, and liberality, and mercy of God. His Goodness, in that he
communicates to his Church his own most excellent property, even a will and
desire that all men should be saved, and come unto the knowledge of the Truth;
(1. Tim. 2. 4.) His Justice in that he gives abilities proportionable to that
desire, enabling his Church to promote the salvation of men, and to bring them
unto that heavenly knowledge; his Liberality, in that he gives this desire,
and those abilities merely of his free grace, to enrich our souls, not himself;
And lastly his Mercy, in that by giving this desire, these abilities, and these
riches, he expels our natural defects arising from error and ignorance,
whereby we do walk in the false, and cannot find out the true way, and
prepares us for that bliss and glory which is above nature; who can think of
this goodness, of this Justice, of this liberality, of this mercy, and not say
with the Psalmist, Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is with^n me, praise
his holy Name; Praise the Lord O my soul, and forget not all his benefits;
which forgiveth all thy sin, and heals all thine infirmities; which saves
thy life from destruction, and crowns thee with mercy and loving kindness;
Psalm 103. 1, 2, 3, 4. For it is his goodness that he forgiveth sin, and
heals infirmities; his Justice that he forgiveth only the penitent sinners,
and heals only those who are broken in heart; His mercy that he saves our
life from destruction, and his liberality that he crowns us with mercy and
loving kindness: Accordingly he has commanded his Church to teach especially
the Doctrine of Faith, to set forth his goodness by which he is reconciled; The
Doctrine of Repentance, to set forth his Justice, which has been satisfied;
The Doctrine of Free Grace, to set forth his mercy in saving us from
destruction: The Doctrine of eternal glory, to set forth his liberality in
crowning us with loving kindness.

O my soul, consider the immortal comfort of these heavenly Truths, and look
upon thy Church which teaches them, as the daughter of immortality, as the
mother of comfort, and as the Bride of the King of Heaven: Then will thou no
more be contentedly without thy Church, then thou can be comfortably without
these Doctrines.

Then will thou say with the Psalmist, I am fearfully and wonderfully made; but
with thy self, I am more fearfully and wonderfully saved; Mavelous are thy
works, and that my soul knows right well, Psalm 139. 13. I am much amazed at
thy great care and providence over my body, but much more at thy great care and
providence over my soul; Thou made use of my carnal Parents to make me,
communicating to them as far as they were capable, the honor of my Creation;
Thou make use of my spiritual Parents to save me, communicating to them, as
far as they are capable, the honor of my salvation; should I be a monster of
nature if I dishonored the one, and shall I not be a monster of grace, if I
dishonor the other? Did thou confer on them the Dignity of Causality by thy
goodness, that I should cast upon them the indignity of contumacy by my
undutifulness? Can I indeed truly honor thee the Principal, and dishonor thy
Church the instrumental cause of my salvation? Thou laid'st thine hand upon me
to make me, but thou laid'st thine heart upon me to save me: O make me wholly
to fix my heart upon thee my Savior, and upon thy salvation: Thine eyes did
see my substance yet being unperfect; and in thy book were all my members
written, wstilst thou made my Body; But thine eyes would not see my
sinfulness, nor my imperfections, and thou did blot all my transgressions out
of thy Book, that thou might save my soul: Therefore I cannot but say, How
dear are thy counsels unto me O God, (Psalm 139. 17.) Dear are thy counsels
about my Creation, much dearer are thy counsels about my Redemption; Counsels
they were, till thou were pleased to reveal them by thy Church. Since therefore
I cannot but say, How dear are thy counsels, I beseech thee suffer me not to
say, How cheap is thy Counselor?

SECT. II. The Churches Trust concerning Religion, is to see there be right
Preaching, Praying, and Administering the holy Sacraments: That preaching
belongs rather to the knowledge then to the worship of God, and ought not to
thrust out Praying, which is the chiefest act of Gods worship, and most
regarded by him, especially when many pray in one communion.
CHristian Religion teaches us to know and worship God as is agreeable to his
Glory, and profitable for our salvation; So that the Churches trust concerning
the Christian Religion is reducible to these two heads, the knowledge, and the
worship of God; And because the Church is trusted with the knowledge of God,
she is trusted with preaching which teaches that knowledge; And because she is
trusted with the worship of God, she is trusted with praying, and with
administering the holy Sacraments, which constitute that worship: So that we may
see how incongruously some men do seek to turn all the worship of God into
preaching, when as in truth, that more properly belongs to the knowledge then
to the worship of God; and though knowledge may direct our worship, yet it
cannot constitute it. Wherefore God himself speaking of his public worship as
it was exercised among the Jews on their Sabbath, calls the Temple, wherein
it was exercised, the house of Prayer, I will make them joyful in my house of
Prayer, Isa. 56. 7. And our blessed Savior speaking of the same worship, as it
should be exercised among Christians, calls the place of its exercise the
House of prayer, My house shall be called of all Nations the house of prayer,
Mark 11. 17. In that he says, of all Nations, he includes the Christians who
were so to be, whereas the Jewish worshippers were but only of one Nation; and
in that he allows the Christians to have amongst them Gods house, as well as
the Jews, it is evident, he calls not only the Temple at Jerusalem Gods house,
but also all other Temples or Churches which should ever after be set apart for
Gods worship; and plainly shows that his zeal was not so much for that house,
whereof in few years after not one stone was to be left upon another, as for
those houses which were to continue to the worlds end: And lastly in that he
calls the Temple, though set apart for all the acts of Gods worship, The
house of prayer (and that whilst sacrifices were not yet abolished) it is evident
he would have prayer looked upon, as the chiefest act of Gods worship, and as
chiefly belonging to Gods house; and that therefore no act of Religion should
cast prayer out of Gods house, which is the house of prayer; as no act of
irreligion should cast Gods house out of any Nation which is the house of
prayer for All Nations: Preaching was ordained for Praying, not against it; to
teach us how to make our supplications to God, not to exclude our making them:
Which truth is either so palpable as to obtain all men's consent, or so powerful
as to extort it: for even they who are most zealous for preaching, do not think
fit to preach without praying, nay they commonly turn their Sermons into
prayers, as if the one without the other, were either an ineffectual or an
incomplete act of Religion, (whereas prayer alone is neither thought
ineffectual nor incomplete,) thereby giving that pre-eminence to prayer in the
truth of their Judgments, which they arrogate to preaching, in the perverseness
of their practice, that is, To be the chiefest act of Religious worship.

No Christian Divine ought so to betray his own Vocation, much less his
Religion, as to undervalue preaching; nor yet so to betray his Trust, as to
overvalue it above Prayer; either of them is the public manifestation of Gods
excellency, which to do according to Gods command, is both the greatest duty of
a Christian, and the greatest glory of Christianity; But whereas Gods
excellency may be manifested three ways, First by way of Enuntiation, as in
that of the Psalmist, Great is the Lord, and mavelous, worthy to be praised,
Psalm. 145. 3. Secondly, by way of admiration, as, O Lord our Governor, how
excellent is thy name in all the world, or, What is man that thou art mindful
of him! Psalm 8. 1, 4. Thirdly, by way of invocation; as, In thee O Lord have I
put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, Psalm 71. 1. It Is evident, that
preaching can magnify God only by way of enuntiation, declaring his greatness,
and goodness, or by way of admiration, extolling it, (and I wish from my heart
that our preaching did truly hit either of these marks, which ought to aim at
both) But it is only praying which can magnify him by way of invocation, not
only declaring and admiring his greatness and goodness, but also Trusting it:
Therefore is this the highest degree of glory which man can give to God, (and
it is as great a shame to give it to any else, as not to give it him) because
this comprizeth as well as the other, the act of enuntiation, which is the work
of the tongue, and the act of admiration, which is the work of the head, but
moreover adds a most holy Affection, which is the work of the heart; and then
is God most truly glorified (as to the manifestation of his excellency) when he
is glorified both with tongue, and head, and heart: How much more when all
these meet together not only in one man, but also in many millions which join
together in one heavenly form of prayer, whom though their number may make many
Congregations, yet their uniformity in prayer will not let make any more then
one Communion: These Congregations, as they give most glory to God, so they
have most power with him, and most blessings from him; amongst the rest the
blessings of Charity and concord, which others who more delight in variety of
Prayers, as they do not so truly desire, so they cannot so firmly enjoy;
according to the excellent gloss upon Romans 15. Been rogat Apostolus minores pro
se orar^; multi enim minimi dum congregantur unanimes, fiunt magni; and
multorum preces impossible est non impetrare illud, quod est impetrabile; If
the effectual fervent prayer of one righteous man avails much, then of many
righteous men much more; especially when they all pray as one man, with one
heart, and with one mouth, and though many in speaking, yet but one in Praying;
though many as men, yet but one as Christians unanimously beseeching for the
Grace and mercy of Christ, who having joined two natures in one person, loves
to see us join many persons in one communion.

SECT. III. Preaching is twofold, either by Translating and Reading, or by
Expounding the Holy Scriptures: The great excellency and necessity of both; and
that our Church is entrusted with both, and cannot justly be charged as
defective in either.
GOD first instructed men in his own person till their wickedness made them
unworthy of so good company, then withdrawing himself to heaven, he instructed
them by his Prophets, because though their sin had made them destitute of his
good company, yet his mercy would no let them be destitute of his good
instruction: Thus was God pleased to preach unto those under the Law by himself
and by his Prophets; And after the same manner was he also pleased to preach to
us under the Gospel, by his Son and by his Apostles; So that all Preaching has
in Truth its beginning from God, should have its continuance with him, its end
in him.

For those Doctrines which are now Preached by his ordinary Ministers, may not
differ the least tittle from those formerly preached by his extraordinary
Ministers, his Prophets and Apostles, that they also may begin, continue and
end in God* Saint Paul's seems to have pointed at this distinction of Preaching,
if not to have made this distinction of Preachers, when he says, For to one is
given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge by
the same spirit, (1 Cor. 12. 8.) The word of wisdom, of infallible
incontroulable wisdom being put in their mouths, who preached by Inspiration,
That is, the Prophets and Apostles; The word of knowledge being put in their
mouths who preached by study and industry, that is, the ordinary Ministers; And
no more then this seems to be meant by the same Saint Paul, though much more is
spoken, 1 Cor. 14. 6. Except I shall speak to you either by revelation, or by
knowledge, or by Prophesying, or by Doctrine, All these four kinds of speaking,
are reducible to the former two words; For speaking by revelation and by
prophesying belong to the word of Wisdom: speaking by knowledge and by doctrine
belong to the word of knowledge; However, this is certainly an unquestionable
truth, that the Church is still bound to preach both by the word of wisdom, and
by the word of knowledge, and is accordingly bound to Translate and Read the
Scriptures, that she may preach by the word of wisdom; and to expound the
Scriptures, that she may preach by the word of knowledge; this was the twofold
manner of Preaching used in the Primitive Church. First by reading the written
word of God, then by expounding it: So Justine Martyr assures us in his second
Apology, (...): First were read the commentaries of the Apostles, or the
writings of the Prophets for some convenient Time; After that the Praesident,
when the Reader had done, did make a Sermon, admonishing and exhorting them to
Practice what they had heard, or to be Doers of the word, and not hearers only,
deceiving their own souls. (James 1. 22.) And indeed, Preaching by Reading, and
consequently by Translating the Scriptures, is sufficiently commended in that
saying, They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them, but we cannot now
hear them in the tongues wherein they spoke; we must therefore hear them in our
own tongues; And it is sufficiently commended in that saying, If they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from
the dead, (Luke 16. 29, 31.) Whereby it is evident that the Holy Scriptures
Preach much more powerfully and efficaciously for the conversion of sinners,
then any Preacher that could come from the dead, and therefore surely no
Preacher among the living can come near them in the power and efficacity of
Preaching: This is the reason that the Apostle so solemnly charge, or rather
adjureth the Church of the Thessalonians to read his Epistle to all the holy
brethren, (1 These. 5. 27.) not doubting but that his one Epistle alone would
work more good upon the peoples souls, then all their Sermons; And since the
same adjuration concerns all other Churches, it is clear they are thereby
obliged to translate that Epistle into their vulgar Tongue; for else it would
be in vain for them to read it to the People; which Truth is not only evidenced
and evinced, but also established and enforced at large by the same Apostle
concerning the whole body of the Scriptures in the 14. of the first to the
Corinths, in that he forbids an unknown tongue to be used in the Church for
these 5. several reasons, 1. Because it is an enemy to edification and speaks
into the air, v. 9. 2. Because it induces Barbarism in the very public
exercise of Christianity, making the Priest little other then a Barbarian to
the People, v. 11. 3. Because it hinders Christian communion; For none of the
unlearned can so much as say Amen to any of the Priests Prayers or
Thanksgivings, v. 16. 4. Because it reproacheth them (among themselves) as if
they were not yet in the true faith; for tongues are for a sign, not to them
that believe, but to them that believe not, v. 22. 5. Because it reproacheth
them among strangers, as if they were not in their right wits will they not say
that ye are mad? v. 23. All these reasons either now forbid the reading of the
Scriptures in our Churches (which yet the Holy Ghost himself gave us for a
Liturgy,) because they are in tongues unknown to us, or they require and
enjoin the Translating of them into such tongues as may be understood by the
People; Therefore it is undeniable that the Church is bound to preach by
translating the holy Scriptures, and may not refuse so to do, unless she will
be like that unprofitable servant, who after he had received his Talent* went
and dug in the earth, and hid his Lords money, Mat. 25. 18. And it were to
be wished, That those Churches who do so, would seriously consider the
unprofitable servants Doom, which was twofold: First that his Talent was taken
from him, Secondly that he was cast into outer darkness; For this his doom may
not unfitly be thought their danger, since they do highly provoke God to take
that precious Talent from them, which they maliciously keep from others, and to
bring that inner darkness upon their own souls, which they now seek to bring
upon the souls of the common People.

Secondly preaching by expounding the Scriptures is sufficiently commanded, in
that it is the affirmative Precept of the third Commandment, which will have us
glorify the name of God in our words; even as the Second will have us glorify
him in our Bodies, and the Fourth will have us glorify him in our works; So
that of all men in the world, those Preachers who do least aim at glorifying
God in their Sermons, do most take the name of God in vain, unless it be such
as not only Preach, but also Pray amiss: for they indeed are guilty of a double
blasphemy, since Praying (as to the outward words) is little other then a most
Holy, a most sanctified Preaching.

The same Preaching by expounding the Scriptures is likewise sufficiently
commended; First in that Christ himself the eternal word, was pleased to turn
Preacher, and yet to stay till he was full 30. years old before he would take
upon him the burden of Preaching, which is the reason the Fathers give in the
Council of Noecaesarea, Can. 11. why none should be admitted to the orders of
Priesthood before that age, though he were otherwise of never so great desert,
((...)) because Christ himself tarried till that Age before he began to preach;
Secondly, because the Apostles, though they committed other works of their
function to other disciples, yet reserved to themselves this great work of
preaching, Acts 6. 4. But we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to
the Ministry of the word.

What can be said more for the necessity of Preaching either by translating or
by expounding the Scriptures, then that it is most strictly commanded by the
word of God: what can be said more for the excellency of it, Then that it is
most highly commended by the Son of God? I shall only crave leave to add that
our own Church rightly judged of this necessity and excellency, and as rightly
conformed her practice to her Judgment in taking so great care that we should
have an exact Translation of the Holy Scriptures, and many eminent Expositions
of the same; so that no People in the world have greater means of knowing God
then we have, which is the first work of the Christian Religion, to teach us to
know God; All our fault is, we have not Affections and Actions answerable to
our knowledge, which is the second work of Christian Religion, to teach us to
love and honor God; and if our Church has as faithfully discharged her Trust
in this as in the other, we shall have great reason to bless God, and not the
least reason to dislike our Church; For what can she teach us more, then Christ
and the Christian Religion has taught her, which is, to know and to worship
God?

If our Church has thus been our Mistress to bring us unto Piety, then much
more ought she to be our Mother, to keep us in our Duty* So shall we not be
ungodly without being Monsters of Christians, nor undutifull without being
Monsters of Men, and much less shall we easily suffer our Undutifulness to be
the cause of our Ungodliness; for we cannot be Undutifull in kicking and
spurning against the true Christian communion wherein we are taught to know and
worship God, but we must also be ungodly in kicking and spurning against the
true Christian Religion, which consists in that knowledge and worship, though
much more in the worship then in the knowledge; and accordingly we hope it will
appear that our own Church which has been so careful to teach us to know God,
has been much more careful to teach us to worship him; for as in the
knowledge of him stands our eternal life, so in the worship of him is indeed
the very inchoation and anticipation of eternity.

SECT. IV. Praying a greater part of the Churches Trust, then preaching. The
Church has God the Fathers Precedent, and Precept for making set forms of
prayer; and shall answer for all the blemishes that may be in public prayers
for want of a set form.
THE Church teaches us to know God by Preaching, but she teaches us to
worship God, by praying; And accordingly we cannot but think praying a much
greater part of her Trust, then preaching, because though it be a very great
happiness truly to know God, yet is it a much greater happiness truly to
worship him: And if the Church be bound to take care that there be no false
doctrine in the Pulpit, much more there be no absurd prayers at the Desque; For
the Sermons men naturally hear as Judges, letting their discretion go before
their Affection; But prayers men naturally hear as Communicants, letting their
affection go before their discretion; so that false worship in praying is much
more dangerous, and may be much more mischievous, then false Doctrine in
preaching; for it is like an unsuspected infection, most probable to spread
further, to sink deeper, and to tarry longer: Again, false worship in praying
does infinitely more dishonor God, then false Doctrine in preaching, because
it more immediately dishonoreth him; that is to say, not only in his truth by
heresy, but also in his very nature and essence by blasphemy: For though a man
may preach blasphemy as well as pray it, yet he that preaches blasphemy,
blasphemeth God only to men, but he that prays blasphemy, blasphemeth God to
his own face: Wherefore the Church must needs take a most special care of
prayer, if she desire to discharge her trust either in regard of God or Man; in
regard of God as she is obliged to show forth his glory; in regard of men as
she is obliged to promote their salvation.

And indeed for so doing the Church has very good Precedent, and Precept, and
Promise; Her Precedent is God; her Precept and Promise are from God. Her
Precedent is God, who having taught so many heavenly forms of prayer in his
holy word, did in the very act of teaching them, as it were cry out to his
Church, Vade and fac similiter, Go then and do likewise; For if the Jews
examples of sin were registered for our instruction, (as the Apostle plainly
affirms, 1 Cor. 10* 11.) then much more Gods example of Righteousness; And he
that commanded Moses to do all things exactly according to the pattern showed
in the Mount, when as yet he showed him but only the out side and the outworks
of the Tabernacle, does much more command his Church exactly to follow his
example, since he has been pleased to show her the very inside and marrow of
Religion; aad therefore if the Tabernable, then surely much more the service of
the Tabernacle is to be framed and ordered according to his pattern; Thus much
for Precedent, but for Precept we have much more; First in the Old Testament,
God commanded the children of Israel to bring pure Oil Olive, beaten for the
light, to cause the lamps to burn continually, Lev. 24. 2. This command
reaches us; for he that would have well beaten Oil for his lamp, will not be
contented with extempore effusions, but will have well studied and elaborated
expressions for his homage; unless we will say he did more regard their
Typical, then he does our real worship.

Again, God threatened the children of Israel, That if they walked at all
adventures with him, he would bring plagues upon them according to their sins,
Lev. 26. 21. For so it is in the Hebrew, (...) Keri (for Bekari) in Accidente;
If you walk with me by chance or by accident, and so Tremelius renders it, Si
ambulaveritis mecum temere, If ye walk with me rashly or unadvisedly; This
threat likewise reaches us, and then especially when we most walk with God,
that is, in the exercise of our Religion; we must there be sure to do nothing
at adventures; nothing rashly, nothing unadvisedly; for unadvisedness in this
case is ungodliness; and if our prayers be turned into Provocations, what shall
we have left to make our Atonement? But you will say, these are rather
consequents then arguments; I answer, if they were so, yet they ought to be
regarded; for God forbids those actions which are sinful in their
consequences, and not only in their concomitances; but indeed we have choice
enough of direct Arguments; for so Moses is commanded to speak to Aaron and his
sons, saying, On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto
them, The Lord bless thee and keep thee: the Lord make his face shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee; the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee,
and give thee peace* Numb. 6. 23. (...) Coh tebaracu, sic benedicatis, so ye
shall bless, id est, ye shall use this very prescript form of blessing: And to
show that this precept was to be looked on as doctrinal, and not as occasional,
as general not as particular, we find Moses himself putting it in practice in
another case; for when the Ark set forward, he said, Rise up Lord, and let
thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee; and
when it rested he said, Return O Lord unto the many thousands of Israel, Numb.
10. 35, 36. He that considers how often the Ark moved and rested, must needs
confess that Moses used this set form of prayer very often; If to the stinting
of the Spirit, or excluding of the gift of prayer, let us blame Saint Paul for
saying, Moses verily was faithful in all his house, Heb. 3. 9. but if rather
for the solemnity, and reverence, and certainty of Religion, that all Israel
might pray with him, and knowing his prayer before hand, might pray in the
greater assurance and comfort of Faith, then let us not blame Gods Church for
following the example of his faithfulness: For indeed this is a general rule
concerning Gods public worship, and the Church cannot be faithful, unless she
carefully observe this rule. If it have any ill blemish, thou shall not
sacrifice it unto the Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 15. 21. Though it be a lamb, yet if
it has any ill blemish, it is all one, as to thy sacrifice, as if it were a
Hog; This is in effect Jarchies gloss upon the place, to show that a lamb might
no less be excluded for his il-favoredness, then a hog for his uncleanness; Nay
indeed this is in effect Gods own gloss, Mat. 1. 8. And if ye offer the blind
for sacrifice, is it not evil? or if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not
evil? as if he had said, though the offering you bring be not unclean in it
self, yet if it be blind, or lame, or sick, it is unclean in its use, for it may
not be offered as a sacrifice: And the more either to conform their obedience
to this command, or to convince their disobedience against it, he appealeth to
common sense, and in that to conscience, saying, offer it now unto thy
Governor, will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? q. d. If it be
against thy sense to offer it to thy Governor, let it be much more against thy
conscience to offer it to thy Maker: For if man who creeps on the earth, then
much more God who sits on the heavens, will disdain thy blind, and lame, and
sick offerings: Now let us consider seriously, to whose care and charge did God
commit the sacrifices and offerings; did he trust every man to bring what he
pleased, or did he trust only the Priests as to offer, so also to see what was
fit to be offered? Surely we shall find that he who said, Cursed be the
deceiver, ver. 14. did not so much curse the people for deceiving their
Priests, as he did curse the Priests for deceiving their God; These were the
grand impostors, these were the most unpardonable deceivers, because to all
other deceits they added this also, that they deceived their trust; God had
laid a trust upon them, and they so negligently performed it, as if they had
undertaken rather to deceive then to discharge that trust: Accordingly all his
contestations are with them, all his expostulations against them, as ver. 6. If
I be a Father, where is mine honor? and if I be a Master where is my fear,
says the Lord of hosts unto you O Priests that despise my name? And ye say,
wherein have we despised thy name? ye offer polluted bread upon mine Altar, and
ye say wherein have we polluted thee? in that ye say, the Table of the Lord is
contemptible, ver. 7. If Gods public worship be either contemned for want of
due honor, or profaned for want of due fear; if either his name be despised,
or his Altar be polluted, he expostulates not with the people, but only with
the Priests, either about the contempt or about the profanation, which plainly
shows that the Priests alone were his Trustees both for ^^s Name, lest that
should be despised, and also for his Altar, lest that should be profaned. And
is there a less care to be taken about our spiritual, then was about their
material sacrifices? about the Calves of our lips, then about the Calves of
their stalls? about the offerings of our souls, then about the offerings of
their Herds? about our Prayers, then about their Bullocks? Are not our prayers
real sacrifices, when as their bullocks were but Typical? as says Athenagoras
most divinely, (...) (...); Let us lift up pure hands to him, and what need
will he have of any other Hecatomb, of any other magnificent sacrifices? For
sure one pure head is more to God then an hundred Oxen; (...)* What should I
look after whole burnt offerings which God needs not? yet let me offer unto
him an unbloody sacrifice, even that of prayer and praise, which proceeds
from my soul: Nor did God himself say otherwise, under the Law, but that he set
a much higher value upon the offerings of the soul then of the flock, Think
thou that I will eat Bulls flesh, and drink the blood of goats? There he makes
light esteem of the offerings of the Flock; Offer unto God thanksgiving, and
pay thy vows unto the most Highest; there he makes great esteem of the
offerings of the soul, (Psalm. 50.) Then let us know assuredly that God is no
less angry with us for blemishes in our Prayers, then he was with them for
blemishes in their sacrifices: And that as then his anger was chiefly against
the Priests of the Temple, so it is now chiefly against the Ministers of the
Church; for it is their part to oversee the prayers, as it was the Priests part
to oversee the sacrifices; upon which ground the second Milevitane Council
would not allow any other Prayers to be used in the Churches of Africa, but
such as had been perused and approved in some Synod, Placuit ut nullae aliae
preces omnino dicantur in Ecclesia, nisi quae a prudentioribus tractat^, vel
comprobatae in Synodo fuerint; ne forte aliquid contra fidem, vel per
ignorantiam, vel per minus studium sit compositum, (Council. Milev. 2 Can. 12.)
We have determined that no other Prayers should be used in our Churches but
such as have been perused by some wise men, or have been approved in some
Synod, lest any thing contrary to sound and saving Faith should either out of
ignorance or out of carelessness have escaped the composers of any public
prayers. They rightly Judged; they were to answer for other men's sins in Gods
service, and if they did not accordingly prevent them, they would no longer be
other men's sins, but theirs. And this without all doubt was one main ground of
Liturgies, that men should not dishonor Gods Name when they met to honor it;
For that were doubly to take his Name in vain, not only as men, but also as
Christians; not only as sinners, but also as Saints: Not only as offenders, but
also as worshippers.

Therefore the Church thought her self bound in duty and conscience, to provide
such a form of prayer as she was sure had no blemish in it, but had holy
expressions exactly agreeable with holy affections, and holy apprehensions,
that Gods holy name might be certainly glorified, and her own Trust carefully
discharged; For it nearly concerned the Church to take great care there should
be no blaspheming instead of public praying, when she was like to answer for
all those blasphemies which (through her default) should be vented in public
prayers.

SECT. V. The Church has God the Sons precedent and precept for making set
forms of prayer; and is accordingly obliged both to make and to use them.
IT was an unsufferable malice in the Jews, to cry out upon the Christians as
Heretics when they proved their Religion by the holy Scriptures; But it was an
unpardonable madness in them, to cry out upon the Christians as Atheists when
they practiced their Religion, by continual and incessant prayer; (...), The
Heresy of the Christians was a calumny, but (...), the Heresy of the
Atheistical Christians was a mere Frenzy; for there could be no greater
confutation of Atheism then that which was constantly used by the Christians,
even daily and lowly addresses to God by prayer and supplication: And it were
to be wished that we who can easily clear our selves from Heresy by proving
our Religion, did as zealously seek to clear our selves from Atheism, by
practicing it; For without doubt it well becomes Christians to follow the
example of Christ; and if we will so do, we must above all things seek to
follow his example in praying. Justine Martyr (in Quest. and Resp. ad
Orthodoxos, qu. 105.) has this excellent contemplation; Since prayer is a
necessary help or remedy against the infirmities of our humane nature, and our
blessed Savior, as Lord of all, had from himself power against those
infirmities; what is the reason that he is recorded to have been so often at
his prayers, even oftener then any of his Apostles? Surely for this reason
(says he) because in after-ages some would doubt of the truth of his being a
Man, (whereas none would make that doubt about his Apostles,) therefore is he
so often described at his prayers, to remove or answer all doubts concerning
the truth of his humane nature: For if some Heretics have questioned the truth
of Christ's being made man, notwithstanding he took upon him all our
infirmities; how would they not have thought, they might have turned that
question into a demonstration, if they had never read of his making prayers to
God? [(...);] often praying was an irrefragable proof that Christ was the Son
of Man; often praying is an irrefragable proof that Christians are the Sons of
God; This was the reason the Apostles were so desirous to imitate him in his
praying, and desired him to teach them how to pray, that they might not be
mistaken in their imitation, Luke 11. 1. And it came to pass, that as he was
praying in a certain place, when he ceased, one of his Disciples said unto him,
Lord, teach us to pray as John also taught his Disciples; And he said unto
them, when ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. Where we have both the precedent and
the precept of God the Son, for making set forms of Prayer; His precedent in
that he made this form, Our Father which art in Heaven; His precept in that he
commanded his Disciples to use it, When ye pray, say, Our Father: from whence
naturally flow these three dogmatical conclusions.

1. That the people are bound to desire the Church to teach them to pray
(unless they will profess themselves not Disciples, but Masters) so far ought
they to be from scoffing or rejecting their Churches prayers.

2. That the Church is bound to teach the people to pray after a set form; for
so our Savior Christ taught his Disciples.

3. That the Church is bound to command the people to use that set form; for so
our Savior Christ commanded his Disciples to use his Prayer, When ye pray,
say, Our Father, etc.

If any man shall make light of these deductions, concerning praying in a set
form, he may with as great a pretense of reason, but must with as great a scorn
of piety make light of praying on a set day, and so by consequence either
undervalue or overthrow the whole public exercise of Religion: For from this
place* alone may as much be pleaded for the Duty of public worship, as from
all other places of the New Testament for the day of it, Ex. gr. Upon the first
day of the week* when the Disciples came together to break bread, Acts 20. 7.
is alleged as a pregnant place for our solemn meetings on the Lords day; (and
the like to this is that of 1 Cor. 16. 2.) yet that proof concerning the day is
not so full, and clear, as this concerning the duty; for that may seem to be
short in the precedent, because there is mention made in the second of the Acts
of meeting ^y and breaking bread from house to house. (Act. 2. 40.) Whereby it
is evident, that if breaking bread were confined to the holy Eucharist, yet the
holy Eucharist was not confined to a set day; But sure it is short in the
Precept, for it has no command annexed, which bids us assemble more on the
first day of the week, then another; But this proof concerning the duty, is not
short in the precedent, for the Disciples desired to be taught to pray as John's
were, that is, by a set form, and Christ accordingly so teaches them; Nor is
it short in the precept, for our blessed Savior commands them to use the set
form which he had taught them: If you will further allege that other Text, I
was in the spirit on the Lords day, Rev. 1. 10. you will thence righly plead
for the day of public worship, because those words plainly infer that
particular day to have been consecrated to the Lord, since no better reason can
be given why it should be called the Lords Day; But yet still this our Text of
Saint Luke will be a stronger proof for the duty of public worship, [ All to
use a set form of Prayer] then that Text of Saint John for the day of it, [ all
to meet on a set day] because this has precedent as well as that, and moreover
has precept, which that has not; And it is not to be imagined that any can
easily come to that depth of sottishness, or height of impudence and impiety,
as to say, the Lords day is a means to put him in the Spirit, but the Lords
prayer is a means to put him out of it: Or, that a set day may not as much
hinder and obstruct his gift of prayer, in respect of time, as a set form can
hinder and obstruct his gift of prayer in respect of words: For it is as strict
and as strong a confinement both to the spirit and gift of prayer, to say, Pray
on this day, as to say, Pray in these words; and we may as justly blame the
Church for prescribing a set day, as for prescribing a set form of prayer; in
both which notwithstanding she has exactly followed our blessed Saviors own
example, and in prescribing the set form has moreover followed his command.

SECT. VI. The Church has God the Holy-Ghosts Precedent and Pre^ept for making
and using set forms of Prayer.
IT is a heavenly prayer, and much befitting a Christian Divine, which is
hinted by Saint Dionysius in the beginning of his sublime book concerning
mystical Theology, (...), etc. O thou holy and blessed Trinity, super abundant
in essence, in deity, and in Goodness, the Overseer of our Christian Divinity
(which is a wisdom of, from, and for God,) be pleased to direct us in the
search of those more then hidden mysteries, which we can neither find without
thy guidance, nor see without thy light, nor utter without thy power. He
begins his book, as many ancient Divines began their Sermons, In the name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: And though we of late have
used longer prayers before our Sermons (I will not say out of pretense, but I
must say, Not out of Obedience, for our Church did not command it, and it is
probable did scarce approve it) yet we have not filled the world with much
better Piety, and sure we have filled it with much worse divinity: For we have
given occasion to many ignorant people to deny that Trinity, which we our
selves do disown, in that we neither will begin in his name, nor will end with
his glory. Tell me if there be any Jew in the world, that will not pray to the
great and dreadful God, or in the acknowledgement of his incomprehensible
Majesty, as well as we; If therefore we our selves would not be thought, nor
have others to be made Jews, or, which is as bad, Anti-trinitarians, let us not
think we pray as Christians, unless in our prayers we do indeed glorify God
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. For we are alike indebted to all three Persons
of the blessed Trinity in regard of our prayers; The Father accepts, the Son
recommendeth the Holy Ghost suggesteth them; nay indeed, if they be truly
acceptable, they are suggested to us from the Father, for the Son, and by the
Holy Ghost. And this was the grand reason, that the primitive Christians did
gather out of the holy Scriptures the greatest part of their publlike, if not
of their private devotions, because they were sure that all such prayers as
they found in the holy Bible, came to them from the Holy Ghost and they could
not desire better expressions then his in their mouths, as not better motions
then his in their hearts, not doubting but God would readily hear the words, as
he would readily own the motions of his own spirit; For this is the confidence
that we all have in the Son of God, that if we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us, (1 John 5. 14.) and we cannot but think that one ready way
to ask any thing according to his will, is to ask it according to his words;
And his are all the words that are written either by the Prophers or by the
Apostles for our instruction, for they all came from, they all lead to the
eternal word: So that in truth, all those heavenly forms of prayer and praise
which we meet with in the Old and New Testament, are no other then so many set
forms of infallible and impeccable Liturgy given to the Church from God the
Father, through God the Son, and by God the Holy Ghost; and the Church would
show but little dutifulness and less thankfulness, if she did not accordingly
make a frequent and a good use of them in her own Liturgies, or if she did not
make Liturgies of her own, both in imitation of those, and in obedience to
those Liturgies, which she has received from God.

And as for the using set forms, it is no less recommended to the Church by the
Spirit of God, then is the making them; Thus in the ninth of Nehemiah we find
eight several Levites Praying and Preaching at one time, each in his several
congregation; for the multitude was so great, that it was divided into eight
congregations, says Tremelius: But it is evident there was but one Form of
prayer and praise for them all; whether at one time in several congregations,
or at several times in one congregation (for one of these must be granted to
avoid confusion,) still they all had but one form: for the text says expressly,
then the Levites, Jeshua and Kadmiel, etc. said, Stand up and bless the Lord
your God for ever and ever, and blessed be thy glorious name which is exalted
above all blessing and praise, v. 5. Thou, even thou art Lord alone, etc. v. 6.
and so along to the end of the chapter, where all the eight Levites, named
together in the fifth verse do make a most religious confession of Gods
goodness; ( a confession of Praise) and of their Fathers, and their own
wickedness ( a confession of sin) and all of them make but one and the same
confession, using exactly the same words: For when the Text says expressly,
Then the Levites, (naming all eight of them,) said, Stand up and bless the
Lord, etc. it is not for us to imagine that one of all the eight did not say
these, or did say other then these very words.

Again it is said, Neh. 12. 46. For in the days of David and Asaph of old,
there were chief of the Singers, and Songs of praise and thanksgivings unto
God; No man can doubt who reads the inscriptions of the Psalms, and ob^^r^e^
what he reads, but that the Songs were as publicly known, and as particularly
appointed as the singers And ^a^^ David tells us plainly in his comment upon
the third Psalm* that the Psalms were not called (...) that is Songs at the
time they were made, but at the time they were sung; and that they were
accordingly, in process of time, sung in the Temple, some before, some after
the Captivity: However it is undeniable that the Psalms were the greatest part
of the Jews Liturgy, or public worship; and the matter is not great whether
we look on them as Songs or as Supplications: For if there were particular
forms of praise without stinting of the Spirit, (as without doubt the spirit
which appointed and commanded the use of these forms, stinted not himself) I
say if there were particular forms of praise without stinting of the spirit,
why not also forms of Prayer? Since it is evident the same spirit is the first
mover both in prayer and in praise, and if we look upon all the Psalms of
David, we shall scarce find one of them, which is not a most exact form of
prayer and of praise both together; and indeed these were the Songs of praise
and thanksgiving, which were meant by Nehemiah, or rather Ezra (for he made
that book, whence in ancient Canons it is usually reckoned under his name;)
Even the songs recorded in the book of Psalms; These Songs in some of their
Titles show the Singers for whom; in others, show the use for which they were
made by the Penmen of the Holy Ghost; the ninty second of them has this Title,
A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath day, and it was made by Moses, say the Jewish
Doctors, to be said or sung on the Sabbath; Targum goes farther, and says it
was made by the first man, that is by Adam, for the Sabbath; yet Docent Adamum
Sabbatizasse needs not trouble us in this case, for it is plain from the Hebrew
inscription, which is to be looked on as a part of the Text, that the
Holy Ghost intended this Psalm, as a set form of prayer and praise to be used
on the Sabbath day, to show that enemies to set forms are enemies to the
Sabbath: The like may be said of the hundred and second Psalm, which has this
Title, A prayer for the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and pours out his
complaint before the Lord; This Title in the Hebrew copies is accounted as the
first verse of the Psalm, and openly proclaims this Truth, That the Holy
Ghost not only commands the afflicted to pray, but also prescribes him this
particular set form of prayer; and though by commanding this, he forbids not
others, yet he plainly forbids the contemptuous neglect, and encourages the
Religious use of this; he forbids its contemptuous neglect; for by his
affirmative precept he binds at all times to an habitual, though not to an
actual obedience, whereas a wilful neglect, (much more a wilful contempt)
excludes the possibility of an habitual obedience. And he also encourages its
religious use; for as by his power he commands our obedience, so also in his
goodness he rewards it; which was the ground of that excellent Proverb among
the Jews, (...) Secar hamitsuah mitsuah, Merces mandati est mandatum, The
reward of the commandment is the Commandment, The reward of Piety is Piety;
with which agrees that excellent gloss given by R. David Kimchi on the second
verse of the first Psalm, where he tells us that God says of the Law (...)
it is my Law, till a man begins to read it with diligence and devotion, but
then he faith, (...) it is his Law, even his that so reads it; whereas Saint
Paul has said no more to make us in love with the Gospel it self, but that it
is able to transform us into the likeness of its own purity, 2 Cor. 3. 18. But
we all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the
Lord: They who most look on the Lord in the lookingglass of his own word, do
most behold his glory; And they who most behold his glory are most changed into
his image, from glory to glory, even as by his Spirit, because from his word;
for his Spirit is inseparably with his Word; And therefore we may safely say,
that no man yet ever devoutly used any form of prayer, or of praise which the
Holy Ghost has prescibed, but by using it devoutly, he both exercised and also
increased his own devotion, being the more inflamed with the love of making
such spiritual addresses to his God, and the more enabled to make them: which
is a truth dogmatically asserted by the very Jews, and experimentally verified
by many Christians, who have then chiefly found the comforts of the Holy Ghost
from their prayers, when they have prayed in his own words; the first proof
whereof was in the Apostles themselves, who after they had been threatened by
the Rulers of the Jews, made choice of the second Psalm for a great part of
their prayer, and the Text says plainly, that when they had prayed, the place
was shaken where they were assembled together, and they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, Act. 4. 31. This is the first proof we meet with among
Christians of Gods public accepting the words of the Holy Ghost in the mouths
of men; but there was one long before this among the Jews, even in King
Solomon's time, when upon the Priests singing the 136. Psalm, God gave a visible
sign of his acceptance. For so it is said, When they lift up their voice with
the trumpets, and cymbals, and instruments of music, and praised the Lord,
saying, For he is good, for his mercy endures for ever, (which words are
repeated in every verse of the 136. Psalm, and accordingly show it was that
Psalm they sung) that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of
the Lord; so that the Priests could not stand to Minister, by reason of the
cloud; for the glory of the Lord had filled the house of God, 2 Chronicles. 5. 13,
14. What can be said more for the use of set forms of public prayer, but that
God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost has made them, has appointed them, has
approved them, has accepted them? For in that he has accepted these in the
Text, he has assured us that he would reject none which should be made in
imitation of these; Let any man show but half so much for extemporary and
unpremeditated effusions, and we shall be so far from denying him the use of
his pretended liberty, that we shall be glad to exempt him from the accusation
of a pretense in his affected piety. In the mean time, as God himself did not
think it sufficient to teach his Church to pray, only by giving general rules,
but also by giving particular forms of Prayer, so Gods Church could not think
it sufficient to teach his people to pray without making for them such
particular forms, as should be sure to keep them to the general Rules, because
if she had not done so, she had been guilty of a great omission, for not
following the example of Gods unerring perfection in teaching; and of a great
Commission, for suffering the people (committed to her charge) to follow the
misguidance of their own manifold and great imperfections, for want of being
taught: Again, Hezekiah the King, and the Princes, commanded the Levites to
sing praise unto the Lord, with the words of David and of Asaph the Seer, and
they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. Had the King and the Princes forbad the Levites to sing praise
unto the Lord with the words of David and of Asaph, under pretense that those
set forms did make them lazy and idle, and did not suffer them to exercise
their gifts; do we think the Levites would have so readily, and so gladly
obeyed them? or that they would have forsaken the words of David and of Asaph
the Seer, to cleave to their own words? or that God would have been well
pleased with the Kingand Princes for giving such questions grounded upon a Text
of holy Scripture, as may well stumble, if not frighten our consciences;
therefore Tutior pars must be our solution, it is best chosing the safer part,
that which puts no questions, admits no scruples, that which we are sure
pleases God, and therefore cannot disturb, much less distress our consciences:
Solomon Jarchi upon this place tells us the very Psalm which the Levites were
commanded to sing, which he quoteth by the first words of it (as the Jews do
all parts of the Hebrew Text) and they are these, (...) Hodu leadonai, kirau
bishemo: Confitemini Domino, invocate in nomen ejus, O give thanks unto the
Lord, and call upon his name; and he alleges for his assertion, that he finds
it so written, (...) sicut scriptum est supra: (which is the best allegation
that Divines can bring, and it is a shame that herein the Jewish have out-gone
the Christian Divines;) citing that place of 1 Chronicles. 16. 7. Then on that day
David delivered first this Psalm to thank the Lord, into the hand of Asaph and
his brethren; And that Psalm is nothing else but a great part of the 105.
Psalm, the whole 96. Psalm, the first verse of the 107. and the two last verses
of the 106. Psalm, which is a very good precedent for the making of Liturgies
out of several parts of the Text, but must be a precept to make no other
Liturgies, save such as may be justified by the Text; and indeed such Liturgies
need no other justification, which can allege for themselves the precedent and
the precept of God the Holy Ghost.

SECT. VII. The Church has Gods promise for his blessing upon set forms of
prayer.
IT IS not to be imagined that God who has exalted his written word above the
Revelations of Angels, (Gal. 1. 8.) will endure it to be brought under the
imaginations of men; If not their Revelations, then surely not our imaginations
can be a sufficient ground of Christian certainty in any point of Doctrine, and
much less in any practice of Devotion; All must be reduced to the written word,
or all will be reduced to uncertainties: Therefore when I go to Church, I must
be so sure of my going on Gods Errand, that not a Prophets saying, An Angel
spoke unto me by the word of the Lord, saying, bring him back with thee into
thine house, that he may eat bread, and drink water, (1 King. 13. 18.) ought to
divert me out of my way, unless I will venture to be slain by that roaring lion
which goes up and down seeking whom he may devour; Sure I am that a form of
prayer prescribed by Gods Church, exactly according to Gods word, is from God;
and as sure, that whilst I am using that, I am going on Gods Errand; therefore
I may not hearken to any Prophet that will offer to bring me into his own house
that I may eat of his bread, (which may fill my mouth with gravel,) or drink of
his water (which is but in some broken cistern.) I may not depart from Gods
house to go into his house, nor leave that bread which I am sure is substantial
wholesome food, to eat of his dowbaked unleavened cake; nor leave the waters of
life, to drink of his puddle water: And though I will hope better things, yet I
may not leave a certainty for an uncertainty, and not fear lest a promise being
left of entering into his rest, I should seem to come short of it for want of
faith in my journey, or for want of truth at my Journies end: which doubtless
is the case of all those who go upon uncertainties in matters of Religion, who
rather think they do God good service, then are sure of it; and gad about to
change their way, because they do not know assuredly they are in the right way:
For my part, I must desire to be sure of the practical, as well as of the
speculative part of my Religion; of what I do, as well as of what I believe; of
my Churches devotions, as well as of my Churches doctrine: For if I lose my
certainty, I cannot keep my faith; and if I do not keep my faith, I cannot well
lay hold of Gods promises; and much less shall I attain them: For his promises
are made only to believers, and believers are only such as go upon certainties:
Some uncertainty may be in opinion, but none in Faith; and may I not be ashamed
to say I serve God in opinion? and how can I serve him in Faith, when I go to
join in such a prayer as I cannot be sure will be directed to God, and much
less, will be accepted of him? But what do I speak of my shame in going without
Faith to Gods public worship? is it not rather my Churches shame to which God
has committed the charge of his worship, and the care of my faith? Is not this
promise made to the Church, Where two or three are gathered together in my
name, there am I in the midst of them? Mat. 18. 20. And does not this promise
directly concern common, or public prayer? Surely Saint Chrysostom so
understood it, in that excellent prayer of his, which our Church has borrowed
from him (as indeed it has borrowed the true devotions both of Greek and
Latin Church, but the superstitions of neither) Almighty God, which have given
us grace at this time with one accord to make our common supplications unto
thee, and do promise that when two or three be gathered together in thy name,
thou will grant their requests, etc. It is of thy grace that we meet together
with one accord to make our common supplications or prayers; but it is upon thy
promise that we pray for the comfort of our meeting, that thou will grant us
our requests; for thou do promise that when two or three be gathered together
in thy name, thou will grant their requests: We must be sure that we have
obeyed thy precept in being gathered together in thy name, or we cannot be sure
we shall obtain thy promise, that thou will be in the midst of us, and grant us
our requests: Upon the certainty of the precept depends the certainty of the
promise; upon our being met in thy name, depends thy being present at our
meeting: So we must be sure of thy Name, or we cannot be sure of thy presence;
and we cannot well be sure of thy name, unless we be first sure of our prayers;
and consequently it is necessary for us to make sure of our prayers if we
desire to make sure of Gods Promises, according to that heavenly prayer of our
own Church, (10. Sund. after Trin.) Let thy merciful ears O Lord be open to the
prayers of thy humble servants; and that they may obtain their petitions, make
them to ask such things as shall please thee: No Congregation of Christians can
pray in faith of obtaining their petitions, unless they pray in faith of asking
such things as please God; and they cannot well do this, unless they know
beforehand what they shall ask of him in their prayers; and in what words they
shall ask it, because else for ought they know, they shall ask such things as
may not please him, or ask in such a sort as may displease him.

SECT. VIII. The Church is obliged to make set forms of prayer, according to
the pattern of the Lords most holy prayer, that there be no peccancy neither
concerning the object, nor the matter, nor the manner of public prayer; that
our Church has exactly followed that pattern in Hers, and that other Churches
ought to follow the same in their Liturgies: A short historical narration
concerning our Common prayer Book, and the Anti-prayer Book set up against it.
REligion is the motion of the reasonable soul to God, as to its first
beginning and to its last end; but Christ alone is the way by and in which the
soul does make this motion; so that to have a Religion without Christ, is to
have a Religion without God, and that is to have no Religion: For the soul of
man being finite, cannot be joined to God who is infinite, but by the help of a
Mediator; nor can any be a Mediator betwixt finite and infinite, but he that
partakes of both, which is only our Savior Christ, who partaketh of finite as
man, of infinite as God; He alone is able to join finite and infinite in one
Communion, who has joined them in one person; and therefore to him alone we
must repair, as often as we desire to be joined with God.

Our Religion without him were nothing, for it could not bring us unto God; and
since our prayers are the chiefest part of our Religion, they also would be
nothing without him: Therefore it nearly concerns the Church to make sure of
such prayers, wherein Christ may join with her; for else she will pray in vain,
because without his intercession, nay indeed she will pray in sin, because
against his command: Accordingly has Christ's own most holy Prayer been looked
upon in all Ages of the Church, as the ground and platform of Liturgy, to make
other set forms of prayer from it as a warrant, by it as a pattern: This was
the judgment of the Church in Saint Augustines time, delivered by himself, in
his Epistle to Proba, Si recte and congruenter oramus, nihil aliud dicere
possuneus, quam quod in ista oratione Dominica positum est; If we pray rightly
and fitly, (rightly in the object, fitly in the matter and manner of our
prayers) We can say nothing else, but what is already briefly said in the Lords
Prayer; And this was likewise the judgment of the Church in Aquinas his time
(as it is also delivered by himself,) In oratione Dominica non solum petuntur
omnia quae recte desiderare possumus, sed etiam eo ordine quo desideranda sunt;
ut sic haec oration non solum instruat postulare, sed etiam sit informativa
totius nostri affectus; (22ae. qu. 83. art. 9. c.) In the Lords most holy
prayer are not only desired all things which are truly desirable, but also in
that Method and order in which we must desire them; So that this prayer does
not only regulate our expression, teaching us of whom, and what to ask, but
also our affection, teaching in what Method to ask it: For this prayer teaches
us to pray unto God only, Our Father which art in heaven, and in our prayers,
first to desire God for himself, and after that all other things for God; God
for himself, as he is in himself, [ Hallowed be thy name] God for himself as he
may be enjoyed by us [ Thy Kingdom come] God for himself as he ought to rule
and reign over us, [ Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven] And it
teaches us to desire all other things for God, whether they concern our
present subsistence, [ Give us this day our daily bread] or our present
deliverance from the guilt of sin, [ and forgive us our trespasses as we
forgive them that trespass against us] or our future deliverance from the guilt
of sin, [ and lead us not into temptation] or our present and future
deliverance from the punishment of sin; [ But deliver us from evil:] Even all
these deliverances are prayed for in relation to God, for as much as the guilt
of sin does immediately separate from his holiness, and the punishment of sin
does immediately separate from his blesedness, and much more is our present
subsistence prayed for in relation to him, that we may not subsist in and for
our selves, who are worse then nothing, but in and for our God, who is all in
all.

And all these things are prayed for in a right order; first God for himself,
as he is in himself: Then God for himself as he is in his Church Triumphant, by
his Glory: after that, as he is in his Church Militant, by his Grace; Then we
pray for all other things in relation to God; and amongst them first we desire
desire him to give those things which may be as instruments to bring us to him,
as our corporal, and much more our spiritual food; after that we desire him to
remove those things which are as impediments to keep us from him; our sins, our
temptations and our punishments: We cannot answer it to God or men if we refuse
to pray with those who thus pray with Christ; for such men cannot be peccant
either in the object, or in the matter, or in the manner of their prayers,
wherein the Liturgy of the Church of England has a singular pre-eminence,
which makes her prayers only to God, and such prayers as are only for God;
Prayers exciting holy affections agreeable with a holy God; Prayers affording
holy expressions, agreeable with holy affections; Prayers least defective
either in religious affections, or in religious expressions; and therefore
prayers most befitting the public exercise of Religion, which will not endure
either of these defects. Prayers which no man does say cordially, but he is
assured of his hearts being with his God; Prayers which every man should say
cordially, because when he is assured of his hearts being with his God, he may
be ashamed of his tongues not being with his heart. As for that objection which
some make against our Liturgy, that it comes too near the Popish Mass book,
it is in truth its virtue; 1. Because thereby our Reformers intended the
promotion of true Christian Communion, by not making a needless, much less a
scandalous separation from other Christians, in those devotions wherein they
had not separated from Christ. 2. Because they intended to promote true
Christian Communion in the same way that Christ himself had promoted it, which
was by not changing any good prayers he found in public use at his coming; for
even in his own most holy prayer wherein he taught his Apostles, and in them
all Christians how to pray till the worlds end, he made choice of such laudable
forms as he then found used by the Jews: In so much that there is not one
petition in this most Christian prayer, which was not before some piece of a
prayer in the Jewish Synagogue; which has been largely and fully proved, by
Mr. John Gregory of Christ-Church, and needs no other proof after so complete
an Artist; Yet I will add the Testimony of one more, beyond all exception (both
for his learning and for his Religion) and that was the most learned and most
judicious Hugo Grotius, who in his Annotations on Mat. 6. 9. has these words,
Docent autem nos ea quae ex Hebraeorum libris ab aliis sunt citata non tam
formulam hanc a Christo suis verbis conceptam, quam in eam congestum quicquid
in Hebraeorum precibus erat laudabile; sicut and in admonitionibus passim
utitur notis eo saeculo proverbiis: Tam long abfuit ipse Dominus Ecclesiae ab
omni affectatione non necessariae novitatis: Those things which have been cited
by others out of the Jews writings do plainly show that our Savior Christ did
not so truly make this form of prayer new of himself, as he did take it out of
the Jews laudable prayers which he found ready made to his hands; even as in
his Sermons he did commonly use such Proverbs, as that age was best acquainted
with; So far was he that was Lord of the Church, from all affectation of
unnecessary novelty; An excellent Epiphonema, which has in it a manifest
document for all Christian Churches, that they ought to follow the example of
their Lord, in being far from affectation of unnecessary novelty in those
prayers which they teach and practice; And a tacit approbation of the Church of
England, because in that particular she had so exactly followed her Lords
example; she had made her Liturgy punctually according to the Lords most holy
prayer, as in all other respects, so also in this, that she would not have it
guilty of unnecessary novelty, which if she had not done, she must have tempted
others to schism and separation, and have tempted her self to pride and
presumption: Therefore she was willing to leave the Church of Rome as to her
corruption, but not as to her Communion, nor did Calvin himself desire she
should do more, (in his Epistle to the English at Frankford) wherein he was
only troubled that some of our Nation were still too much immersed in the dregs
of Popery; Quid sibi velint nescio, quos faecis Papisticae reliquiae tantopere
delectant; So that it is an injury to that learned man to say he would have the
Church of England make no distinction between the good wine of Christianity,
and the dregs or lees of Popery, which they in effect do say, who are so ready
to quote him for abolishing any thing that was truly Christian, in the
reformation of our Liturgy: But let us particularly examine the excellencies of
the Lords most holy prayer, that we may from thence the more easily discern the
excellencies of our own prayers; which can have no excellency but as they
follow the pattern of this, and if they follow this, need look after no other
excellency: For this prayer has Christ in all its four causes, and is
therefore most peculiarly entitled unto him; 1. Ratione efficientis, in regard
of its efficient cause, because he was the composer of it, there is Christ, in
his authority. 2. Ratione Formae, in regard of its formal cause, because it is
the most pious and most pithy form that ever was composed, there is Christ in
his piety. 3. Ratione materiae, in regard of its material cause, because it
contains all that we do want or can desire (as Christians) either belonging
to this or a better life, there is Christ in his Fruition: 4. Ratione finis, in
regard of its final cause, because it intends one connection of all Christians
with Christ and in Christ; for teaching all to say to God Our Father, it
joyneth all Christians with Christ who said so, and in Christ, who bids them
say so, there is Christ in his Communion: Willing all to agree as Brethren,
especially in their prayers, wherein they invocate one common Father, that so
none may go without his blessing, but that even he who cannot ask it in the
righteousness of his person, may both ask and have it in the righteousness of
his Communion; according to that of Saint Ambrose, whilst each one says Our
Father, every one prays for all, and all pray for every one; And these four
excellencies were as much communicated to the Liturgy of our Church, as they
are communicable to any Liturgy, and Christ with them: For the efficient cause
of it was Christ in his office as King, or Christ commanding in his authority,
Civil and Ecclesiastical, both concurring to make the Liturgy, though not the
prayers: The formal cause of it was Christ in his office as Priest, or Christ
praying in his piety. The material cause of it was Christ in his office as
Prophet, or Christ preaching in his Doctrine; The final cause of it was Christ
in the result of all his three offices, as King, and Priest, and Prophet, or
Christ reconciling and gathering, in his Communion.

I cannot be too plain or too punctual in a thing which once so nearly
concerned my calling, and still so nearly concerns my conscience; and
therefore that I may speak the more plainly, and the more punctually, I must
crave leave to speak a little historically.

In the first year of King Edward the sixth was this heavenly book framed and
compiled, by a most learned and Religious Synod; And after that so again mended
and corrected, that Mr. Fox witnesses it was then called by most men, The work
of God: Yet some restless Spirits were then* (as now we have legions of them)
who took occasion of quarrel at some particulars: Hereupon that learned
Archbishop Cranmer turned the book into Latin, and sent it to Bucer to crave
his Judgment concerning it: Bucer approved all generally to be either
contained in, or at least not to be repugnant to, or dissonant from the word of
God, but yet with a si commode acciperetur, if it were fairly taken; otherwise,
says he, Quarrelsome men will thence pick out matter of contention: Hereupon
this book was the third time corrected and amended, and all those particulars
either expunged or changed, which had before been misinterpreted, or were
thought liable to misinterpretation: Afterward in the reign of Queen Mary,
when the Mass was again reassumed, and this prayer book expulsed the Churches,
as schismatical and heretical, the same learned Cranmer undertook with the
Queens leave, that himself and Peter Martyr, with four other Divines, would
defend this Book and each particle thereof against all the Papists in England;
and he did indeed at last undergo his Martyrdom very comfortably in its defense.

Besides all this, the Confessors of that age, Those who were banished, or had
left all and fled for their Religion into Geneva, or the Low Countries, did
even there use this very form of prayer, which they had brought with them out
of England, as thinking it the best Test of their Religion, for which they
fled, and the surest badge of their communion, in which they persisted: I say,
they did use our Common prayer book beyond sea in Holland and Geneva, till
Master Knox began to pick quarrels, both with the book it self, and with them
that used it: Which when Doctor Grindal told Bishop Ridley as he was in prison,
to be sacrificed in the flames the very next day, the holy Martyr broke out
into this bitter complaint, I cannot but wonder that Mr. Knox should at this
time set himself against the poor Protestants of England, and find fault with
their Service book, wherein though his wit may chance find something to cavil
at, yet shall he never be able to find matter of just exception, as if any
thing therein contained were contrary to the word of God: This was that dying
Martyrs Testimony concerning our Common prayer book, to which I could allege
many more, but that yet after all this, (to give content and satisfaction to
all parties if it were possible, and to take away those passages which Calvin
was pleased to call Tolerabiles ineptias, Tolerable follies, who doubtless did
see intolerable follies in other conceived prayers) This same Book was again
the fourth time corrected and amended in the days of that renowned Queen
Elizabeth; and yet for all these corrections and amendments, met still with
innumerable companies of Malcontents, who disliked the use of it, though they
could not agree in their own dislikes; For what some rejected, others approved,
in so much that the whole was approved by them severally, whiles it was jointly
opposed; which when the Queen discovered to them, she shamed their oppositions,
though she could not silence them. For though they pretended only to make some
objections against this form, yet their intent was indeed to have no set form,
whereby to put Religion wholly into their own mouths, if not out of the
Peoples hearts. This made them despise that Book which Cranmer, Ridly, Bucer,
Peter Martyr, and Reverend Master Old, and others did justify against the
Papists, all of them with their Pens, and some of them with their Blood.

For my part, I must profess, that as a Christian Divine, I have bestowed much
pains in viewing the Christian forms of public worship, and I cannot yet find
any one Liturgy in all Christendom, to which I can willingly and with a good
conscience say Amen in all particulars, save only This of our own Church, with
which I cannot but most heartily and willingly join in every prayer, and the
rather, because I find This Liturgy has in it all the chiefest pious and pithy
devotions of Greek and Latin Liturgies, but the superstitions of neither: And
I am willing to persuade my self that other men (especially of my calling)
would not so easily forsake, much less so openly revile this public form of
worship, if they did seriously consider how directly it tends to Gods glory and
his peoples good, and how much it belongs to the Churches Trust that her
public worship should directly tend to both; For surely it is a most
inestimable privilege of Piety that we can join in Prayer with Saint
Augustine, Saint Chrysostom, and all the other Greek and Latin Fathers, nay
with Saint Peter and Saint Paul, who if they were present at our service, would
not refuse to communicate in our prayers (whatever our own seduced Brethren may
refuse) because they are all easily and plainly reducible to the Lords most
holy Prayer: In so much that we do not only in our Belief glorify God as they
did, (and truly the repeating of the Creed does more truly glorify God, then
any other Profession of his Truth, which we can make) but also in our prayers
we invocate him as they did, whereby we do not only speculatively profess or
acknowledge, but also practically maintain and uphold the Communion of Saints,
and are sure we shall both profess and practice that communion, if we
communicate with our own Church, which has such a form of worship as does
profess and practice it: For we are sure that we Pray as they once prayed,
whiles we are sure that we pray according to the Lords own most holy Prayer,
which certainly they must needs want, who do not beforehand know their Form of
Prayer; but come first to Hear, and then to Pray; so that if the Preacher
chance to abuse their Patience by some newfound upstart Divinity in his
Sermon, They may be sure he will much more abuse their Piety by some newfound
upstart Devotion in his Prayer, since his business is to turn his Sermon into
his Prayer, and that may be either of so bad contents, or of so bad
consequents, as to turn their Prayer into Nothing.

It is not to be denied but this may be done easily: it is to be feared this is
done frequently among those who have no other Prayers but such as the Preacher
is pleased to make for them; whose Faith may be Faction in his Sermon, and
whose Religion may be Rebellion in his Prayer, so that the Congregation which
depends merely upon his lips, must have no Prayers, if they will not be
factious and rebellious, or must have Profanations instead of Prayers, if they
will; For it is not to be imagined that such Ministers who pull down their
Church to set up themselves, will not stand on Tip-toe, as well in Praying as
in Preaching, that they may obtain a full Dictatorship in Religion, whiles
every one of them takes upon him to Lord it in Gods house, as if God had given
him Commission to say with Elijah, As the Lord God of Israel lives; before
whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, (neither dew of
heavenly Doctrine, nor rain of heavenly devotion to refresh your gasping souls)
but according to my word, 1 King. 17. 1. For they all in the end drive at this,
that we should in effect have no prayers, though at first they would be thought
to advise us to better prayers. The first Edition of their Anti-prayer Book,
though it had this proud posie in its forehead, No man can lay any other
foundation then that which is laid, even Jesus Christ; yet within two years
after, being reviewed by themselves, was in a manner quite changed, and had not
so few as 600. grand and material alterations: And yet for all this, within
another year, a third Book was begotten and brought forth, differing in many
points from both the other, as if they had resolved to make good that reproach
which once Frederick Duke of Saxony cast upon the Lutherans, Quid nunc credant
been novi, quid autem anno sequenti credituri sunt, prorsus ignoro, (Magal.
Praef. in Titum, sec. 3. annot. 4.) What they now believe I well know, but what
they will believe the next year, I know not. He might have said concerning our
Changelings, Nor they themselves: For they changed grossly thrice in less then
four years; But this third Book was thought so complete, that some earnestly
pressed to have the same allowed by public Authority, not with intent that
there should be prescribed a set form of public prayer, (mistake them not, for
they can endure none, no not of their own making; They that cannot agree as
Christians to pray as Christ taught them, will never agree as Brethren to pray
as they shall teach one another:) But only to throw aside that set Form, which
was prescribed in the Common Prayer Book: For although they durst not be so
outragiously impious as to make it their profession, that they would have no
set form of Prayer, yet they were so impiously subdolous, as to make it their
design to have none: And therefore though for a show they had made some set
Prayers, yet they meant never to use them: For in their Rubric they still give
themselves this liberty, That the Minister shall pray thus, or else to this
same purpose, as the Spirit of God shall move his heart: So that the Minister
is in truth left to himself, (which ought not to be, because the Church or
Ministry in general, and not each Minister in particular is Gods Trustee for
public worship) and the people are wholly left to the piety and discretion of
their Minister; (which ought less to be, because it is a ready way to bring
Gods public worship under the danger, if not under the guilt of Impiety and
Indiscretion:) For if the Minister conceiving a Prayer upon the sudden, shall
say, the Spirit moved his heart to pray so; and withal shall avouch his prayer
to have been to the same purpose with that which was prescribed him, though God
may be justly offended with him for entitling his enormities to the Holy Ghost,
yet the people may not justly be offended with him for making use of his
liberty, though they have the greatest cause of just offense which can be given
to any Christians, even the loss of their Piety, and the danger of their
patience, or to speak yet plainer, even the reproach of their Communion, and
the scandal of their Religion.

SECT. IX. Reformation not to be pretended against Religion: The abolishing of
Liturgy no part of a true Reformation: And that God has not given any Church
power to abolish Liturgy, and that no Church ought to assume that Power,
because Liturgy directly tends to the keeping of the third and of the fourth
Commandments.
TO do that open wickedness which immediately tends to the dishonor of Christ,
is no other then to smite Christ on the face; but to do it under a disguise or
fair pretense, is indeed first to blindfold him, and then to strike him,
saying, Prophecy who is it that smote thee. And thus do all Hypocrites deal
with Christ; they do not only smite him, but also deride him; and for this
reason it is that counterfeit holiness is a double wickedness, because it not
only forsakes God, but also mocks him; which consideration made Saint Paul so
sharply reprove those of Corinth, who made more account of some false Teachers,
who fed their phancies with vain pretenses, then of himself who had fed their
souls with the true bread of life; not that he greatly cared for their respect,
(for he had learned in what estate soever to be content) but that he greatly
abominated their impiety who were then learning to take Phancie for Faith, and
by that means were indeed unlearning Christ: Accordingly in his reproof, he
first insinuates their unthankfulness, that they had fallen from him who had
been the means of their conversion, For I have espoused you to one husband,
that I may present you as a chaste Virgin unto Christ, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Secondly,
their unadvisedness, who took no greater care of their footing, nor of their
safety, then to walk among Serpents, to converse securely with most notorious
impostors, who lived as Serpents, whiles they spoke as Saints; But I fear lest
by any means as the Serpent beguiled Eve, through his subtilty, so your minds
should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ, Verse. 3. Do you look
upon Eve as strangely sottish in taking a Serpent for her Company, and much
more for her Directorie? then be ashamed of your own sottishness, who have lent
your ears and your hearts to such men who are as earthly minded as if with
Serpents they were condemned to creep upon the ground, and are as venomous as
Serpents, having such poison as can reach your souls, and corrupt your minds
from the simplicity that is in Christ. Thirdly of their ungodliness, that they
had so received the Gospel of Christ as not to know it, or so known it as not
to regard it, or so regarded it, as not to retain it; They had itching ears, to
be ever learning, but dead hearts, never to come to the knowledge of the Truth;
They went a gadding after new Preachers, as if they could Preach another Jesus
whom Saint Paul had not Preached, or were led by a better Spirit in Preaching,
then had led him: And this reproof is in the 4. Verse. For if he that comes,
(sc. from abroad, to show this mischief was from those without, not from those
within the Church, as says Saint Chrysostom.) preaches another Jesus whom we
have not preached, or if ye receive another Spirit (by his Sermons) which ye
have not received (by ours) or another Gospel (from him) which ye have not
accepted (from us) ye might very well bear. What? his heart is too great for
his mouth, his mind is more then he can utter, his anger is greater then he can
express, or their sin had been so great as to stop his mouth, and to hinder his
expression; or at least their confutation was so plain, their condemnation so
evident, as to need no more words; that makes him say, ye might very well bear,
but say no more, leaving it to them to fill up the sense, who had filled up the
sin; speaking the more, by saying the less, and showing the power of his
eloquence in the practice of his silence; For now having only said, ye might
very well bear, He has left it to their own consciences to say the rest
concerning their new Teachers; so that if they looked back upon the foregoing
words, they must gather this for the Apostles meaning, Ye might very well bear
with their insolency, their impudence, their impetuousness, their impertinency;
For it was their insolency, their impudence to pretend they had another Gospel;
their impetuousness, to preach it as if it had been another; and their
impertinency to preach it, when it was not another.

Saint Chrysostom* is very copious in his descant upon this reproof, (...): He
says not lest as Adam was deceived, but he shows them to be women who were
thus affected, for it is the part of women to be deceived: But how does he say
here to the Corinthians, If ye received another Gospel, ye might very well
bear, who says to the Galathians, If any man preach any other Gospel unto you,
then that ye have received, let him be accursed, (Gal. 1. 9.) the same Father
who makes this objection, returns this answer, (...): Those false Ministers
did make their boasts as if the Apostles had taught imperfectly, but they
forsooth brought somewhat* more perfect; For so it was requisite that by their
vain boasting and babbling they should mix a mad hotch-potch with the sober and
sound Tenants of divinity: And to show they did this, mention is made of the
Serpent and of Eve, who had been deceived before by the vain promise and the
more vain expectancy of additional perfections.

Thus far Saint Paul proceeds by way of reprehension; declaring the great sin
of the Corinthians, in being so ready to forsake the substantial truth of
Religion established for the fond expectancy of a reformation pretended: And
yet he proceeds further by way of admonition, as being more desirous to keep
them from the change of Religion, then to rebuke them for changing it.

Accordingly he admonishes them to beware of pretenders in Religion, who
desire occasion wherein they may glory, as they would beware of false Apostles,
who did labor to plant a false, and of deceitful workers, who did labor to
supplant the true Religion; For such are false Apostles, deceitful workers,
ver. 13. (...), says Saint Chrysostom: They are deceitful workers, for though
they work hard, yet their work is only to pluck up what others have well
planted; Transforming themselves into the Apostles of Christ; (...), They are
all for outward show, (...), They have only the show or appearance of Apostles;
The sheeps skin is without, whilst the ravening wolf is within; And no marvel;
For Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light; Therefore it is no
great thing if his Ministers also be transformed as the Ministers of
righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works, ver. 14, 15. (...):
For when their Master dares do any thing, it is no wonder that the Scholars
follow their Master: What was it that he dared? That when he was a feind of
darkness, banished from the presence of God, he transformed himself into an
Angel of light, as if he still had access to him, and did appear before him: So
these men would needs be accounted the Apostles of Christ, when they did not
his work, had not his authority, sought not his glory; For all they all looked
after was to be accounted his Ministers, not to be so; which makes the same S.
Chrysostom give us this for a dogmatical conclusion, (...): Nothing is so much
like the Devil, as to do any thing (especially in Gods service) merely for show
or ostentation.

I will not say that this sin comes near some men's works in this our age, but I
must pray that this reproof may come near some men's hearts, that they may not
be the Ministers of Satan, when they should be the Ministers of Christ, which
will be if they use fair pretenses for foul designs, and cry up Reformation,
that they may throwdown Religion: This I will say, That abolishing of Liturgy is
no part of a true Reformation, and I think that all true Protestants will say
the same with me; sure I am, the first would; For in the confession of Faith
offered by the A^bingenses* to Francis the first King of France, (An. Dom.
1561.) we meet with these words, Nec ullas preces effundimus coram Deo praeter
has quae in scriptura sancta continentur, aut cum ejusdem sensu plane
convenient; (Molinaeus de Monarchia Francorum apud Goldastum:) Nor do we pour
out any prayers before God, besides those which are contained in the holy
Scripture, or plainly agree with the sense of it: Which words plainly evince
that they had a set form of prayer, either taken out of the Text, or made
exactly to it; For had they left it in the power of their Ministers to pray as
they pleased, they could not have assured their King that their prayers did
plainly agree either in words or in sense with the word of God.

Nor did the Protestants of France only stick fast to Liturgy, but the
Protestants of Germany did the like; For when the Marquess of Brandenburge
(being himself a Calvinist, whilst his Subjects continued Lutherans,) would
have removed the Lutheran, and set up the Calvinical forms of worship, his
Subjects would not endure so much as the mere change, so far were they from the
utter abolition of Liturgy; And all the chief contentions betwixt Protestants
and Papists, have been whether this or that form, but never any Protestant
contended for no form; That's against the very nature of reason, that men should
contend for a mere nonentity; Non entis nullae sunt passiones, that which is
not, cannot have any affections of its own, much less should it have any
affections of ours: And if it be against the nature of reason, it cannot be
according to the dictates of Religion; for Religion teaches nothing at all
against Reason, though it teach very many things above it; Nay yet more, That's
against the very nature and being of Protestantism, which by the same reason
that it sticks only to the written Word of God as the ground of its doctrine,
cannot allow unwritten Traditions, much less unwritten, unknown, unlimited
imaginations of men for the ground of its Devotion; For it is unreasonable to
protest, that God only shall be our guide in our Tenants, and man only our
guide in our prayers: If we will have the Doctrine of our Religion from God, we
must also have the exercise, the practice of it from him, since it is vain to
have a Religion Doctrinally true, but practically false; for not if ye know
these things, happy are ye, (says our blessed Savior) but if ye do them, John
13. 17. And if the written Word alone be embraced as the Rule of our Doctrine,
how can it be rejected as the pattern of our practice?

And this being granted, we must needs have set forms of prayer; for all the
written Word consists of set forms, in so much that if there were no set forms,
there could be no written Word: To protest against a false and superstitious
form of Gods worship, may become a good Protestant, and a good Christian; but
to protest against a true Religious form of Gods worship, if it may become a
good Protestant, cannot become a good Christian, and it is ill joining with such
Protestants as do not join with good Christians in their protestations: There
is a great distance betwixt superstition and Atheism; False-Liturgy is
Superstitious, but no Liturgy is Atheistical; For it must bring Religion to
uncertainties, may bring it to impieties; Uncertainties are as nothing,
Impieties are worse then nothing* Uncertainties cannot honor God as God,
Impieties must dishonor him, may defy him* tell me what can Atheism do more?
No Liturgy, in effect, bids Christians do like the Mariners in Jonah, Cry every
man unto his God; nay it leaves every man to make his God, for it leaves every
man to make his Religion; and he that has a Religion of his own making, must
also have a God of his own making: For the true God cannot be worshipped as men
please to fancy him, but as he has revealed himself; And therefore it is the
high way to Atheism, for men to be left to their own phansies in the exercise
of Religion; which must needs be, where the exercise of Religion is not under a
set form, that so it may be compared with the word of God* and accordingly not
embraced, till it be found agreeable with his word.

Will you think to convert a Papist by inviting him to no Liturgy? you may as
well think to convert him by inviting him to no Religion; for with him it is, No
Liturgy, no Religion: Will you think to confirm a Protestant by inviting him to
no Liturgy? you may as well think to confirm him by inviting him to no
Communion* for with him it must be, No Liturgy, no Communion, since he did not
depart from a corrupt Liturgy to have none, but to have a better; and justifies
his departure from the Church of Rome, that leaving her he might come to the
Catholic Church; so his business was not only to protest against a false, but
also to protest for a true public worship, unless you will say, he was only
careful not to be a Schismatic, in having good grounds of his separation, but
not careful not to be a Heretic, in not having as good grounds of his
Communion: Some things were in the Church of Rome, as a local or national
Church; some things were in it, as a member of the Catholic Church; There is
no wilful receding from these, without being Anti-Catholick* and that is all
one with being Anti Christian; Liturgy was one of these, so truly and
undoubtedly Christian, that H^ppolytus (an ancient Bishop and Martyr) says of
Antichrist, In those days shall be no Liturgy, In diebus illis Liturgia
extinguetur, (Orat de consummatione mundi, ac de Antichristo, in Bibliotheca
Patrum Tom. 2.) And sure we are, that there was never yet any Christian Church
in the world, (either national or provincial,) which had not its Liturgy, which
Cassanders Liturgicks does sufficiently manifest, (without any other tedious
way of proof) the whole business whereof is to show the several forms and rites
of administering in several Churches: So that to deny Liturgy to be Christian,
is in effect to deny the Catholic Church to be Christian, and to blot a whole
article of faith out of the Apostles Creed; as also to affirm that there is
will worship in having Liturgy, is in effect to affirm, that the whole
Catholic Church has for 1500. years together been guilty of will worship, and
consequently has not had the true Religion; such a negative must needs be
dangerous, which thrusts the Catholic Church out of the Creed; But such an
affirmative must needs be damnable, which thrusts the Christian Religion out of
the Catholic Church.

For the whole Church having placed the public practice of Religion in
Liturgy, if that be indeed will worship, it is palpable, Religion as to its
public practice or exercise has been hitherto out of the Church, unless we
will allow will worship to be Religion. However, sure we are that God has not
given any Church power to abolish Liturgy, because the power God has given his
Church, is for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor. 10. 8. But the
abolishing of Liturgy is nothing at all for edification, but wholly for
destruction: It Is nothing at all for edification, neither in regard of the weak*
for it helps not their infirmities, but takes away those helps God in mercy
has afforded them; neither in regard of the strong, for it must put them upon
uncertainties, may put them upon impieties: And it is altogether for destruction,
because it destroys Religion, because it destroys Communion; It destroys
Religion in the learned, making a way for them to run into any heresies; in the
unlearned, not making a way for them to come out of Ignorance: It destroys
Communion in the most settled times of the Church by disturbing it; but in
unsettled times, by distracting it; teaching men when they are at best, not to
be of one Communion; but when they are at worst, to be of many divisions* of as
many divisions as of interests; of as many interests as of minds; and of as
many minds, as men; This is proof enough; that God has not given any Church
power to abolish Liturgy. It remains in the next place to be proved that no
Church ought to assume that power: For it is not for any Christian Church to
assume such a power as directly tends to the destruction either of Christian
Religion, or of Christian Communion; and abolishing of Liturgy directly tends
to both these, as has been said: Again, It is not for any Christian Church to
assume such a power, as to abolish any thing which directly tends to the
fulfilling of any of Gods Commandments, (for our Savior Christ has said) If
ye love me, keep my Commandments, John 14. 15. But a true laudable form of
prayer directly tends to the fulfilling of two of Gods Commandments, to wit the
third and the fourth; It directly tends to the fulfilling of the third
Commandment, in that it keeps some from taking Gods name in vain, and teaches
others truly to glorify his name; And it directly tends to the fulfilling of
the fourth Commandment, in that it provides for the duty of the Sabbath, to wit
the service of the Sanctuary, the public worship of God, which is the end of
the fourth Commandment, and therefore the fittest rule by which to expound and
observe the letter of it: For the letter of the Law being subservient to the
end of the Law, we cannot rightly observe the day according to the letter,
unless we rightly observe the duty according to the end of this Commandment:
For by the reason of our blessed Saviors own Logic, ( Mat. 23.) If the Altar
sanctify the gift, then much more the service sanctifies the Altar: If the
Temple sanctify the Gold, then much more the Glory of God sanctifies the
Temple: If the Day was appointed for the sanctification of man, much more was
the Duty appointed for the sanctification of the Day: The Jews were commanded
to keep the Sabbath, that they might remember God ((...) says Justine Martyr
to Trypho) so that the end wherefore the Sabbath was ordained, is the
Remembrance of God; And consequently they best keep the Sabbath, who best
remember God; and without doubt they remember him best, who serve him best, who
have an established public worship most befitting his glorious Majesty:
Others, though they make never so much noise of God, yet if they remember his
name, they forget his nature; The Seraphims durst not do so, when they came to
praise him, They agreed before hand what should be the set form of their
Praise; for one cried unto another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of
Hosts, the whole earth is full of his glory, (Isaiah 6. 3.)* They cried one
unto another, to show they all were agreed upon the same anthymn; that they had
prepared their song of praise, before they came to sing it: And Saint Ambrose
tells us they still continue the same song, To thee Cherubims and Seraphims
continually do cry, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath: There is no true
singing Holy, Holy, Holy, unto God, without preparing the song before hand; and
a song that is well prepared, is as well continued: Let us imitate the
Seraphims in our care of preparation, that we may imitate them in our ardency
of affection: for we shall little less then lie to God, if we say, The whole
earth is full of his glory, whiles our own hearts are empty.

SECT. X. Certainty is more to be regarded in the public exercise of Religion,
then Variety: Hence the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue righteously
taken into our Liturgy, but unrighteously omitted by Innovators, who vainly
obtrude Variety to men's consciences instead of Certainty.
THE ready way to make men irreligious, is, to bring them to an uncertainty in
Religion: For Constancy is founded upon Certainty; and therefore those men who
are most uncertain what to do, must needs be most unconstant in their doings.
For this cause the Church (which is Gods Trustee for Religion) thinks it a
great part of her trust, to deal therein altogether upon Certainties, (not upon
Varieties) and to have such a public worship of God, as should first make the
people certain of their Religion, then zealous and constant in it. Hence was
the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments taken in as parts of our
Liturgy, because they are not only the complete sums, but also the certain
rules of all those duties of Faith, Hope and Charity, in which consists the
very body and substance of Religion: For as they are the complete sums of
those Religious duties, so they must fully declare the glory of God; These
short abridgements of Gods own making, showing more of the Truth then all the
copious enlargements which we can make: And as they are the certain rules of
those duties, so they most readily advance the edification of men, whose souls
are more truly edified by adhering to these fundamental certainties, then by
cleaving to all our additional varieties; which are but additions of hay and
^tubble, unless they be grounded upon these: Wherefore those men who are so
furiously bent against the public use of these in our Liturgies, were best
seriously to consider whether or no they do not grossly oppose the glory of God,
in rejecting such unparalleld sums of Piety; but surely they do grievously
oppose the edification of men, in rejecting such undoubted rules of certainty.
For their work is, (though I hope their aim be not) to bring all the world to
an uncertainty in Religion; To an uncertainty in Believing, for all Doctrine to
novelty; to an uncertainty in Praying, for all Devotion to Phancie; to an
uncertainty in Doing, for all practice to Inconstancy: Hence that heavenly
Creed which was the Rule of the Apostles Preaching, is willingly, if not
purposely omitted in their Assemblies, lest it should discover the nakedness
and novelty of their Doctrine; Hence the Lords most holy Prayer, which was not
only the Rule, but also the chiefest part of ancient Liturgies, as willingly
omitted by them, lest it should discover the emptiness, the levity, the
uncharitableness, the irregularity, and in one word, the phantasticalness of
their Prayers: Lastly, Hence the Decalogue, which is the short rule of life and
morality, as willingly omitted as the rest, lest it should discover the
impiety, and check the inconstancy of their doings; for this is the readiest,
if not the best reason we can give, why they should quarrel with Gods own
handwriting in our Liturgy, denying us to repeat each Commandment with a
solemn invocation for mercy, testifying our repentance the best part of our
innocence, and as solemn an invocation for Grace, imploring the amendment of
our sinful lives, the best part of our repentance: This is too too palpable,
That they generally preach such Doctrines, vent (I cannot say, make) such
prayers, and use such practices as are not agreeable with these rules, and
therefore they may judiciously, if not justly be thought to leave out the
rules, lest they should be checked from their own mouths, and thereby awaken
the yet sleeping checks of their hearts for such Preachings, such Prayings, and
such Doings: And if any of them take this for an uncharitable gloss, let him
know it is more charitable for us to question their superstructions, then for
them to condemn our foundations; For if one man sin against another, the Judge
shall judge him; but if a man sin against God, who shall entreat for him? 1 Samuel 2. 25. As if the good old Priest had said, No man ought to speak the least
word for him that sins against God with an high hand, and no man can speak too
much against him.

But I hear a great noise of Variety, making more then ample amends for that
Certainty in the public exercise of Religion, which we think is diminished, if
not destroyed, but they say is only changed, and by its change augmented; I
could easily answer, Quid verba audio dum facta videam? To what purpose do men
offer good words in excuse for bad deeds? As if they could prove that others
eyes are shut, because they say their own are opened: Or, as if men came to
Church, rather for curiosity then for conscience; rather like Athenians, only
to hear, and to hear some new things to please their curiosities, then like
Christians, to pray; (for so it was in Christ's time, Two men went up into the
Temple to pray, Luke 18. 10.) Or, if to hear, yet not to hear such solid Truths
as might nourish their souls, and such fundamental Truths as might establish
their consciences; But because they will needs say with Saul, I have performed
the commandment of the Lord, I have done nothing but according to his Holy
Word; I will also answer with Samuel, What means then this bleating of sheep
in mine cars, and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear? 1 Samuel 15. What means
this Bleating and Lowing instead of Praying and Preaching? not bleating of
sheep and lowing of Oxen, for thence might come an acceptable sacrifice at
last, though nothing but an hideous noise at first; but bleating of unprepared
boys, and lowing of unhallowed men, which must needs be all for noise, and
nothing for sacrifice, unless they will say, That God will accept of vain
babbling instead of Praying, and of prating instead of Preaching; for some such
answer they must provide or give none, who are resolved to turn all Praying
into Preaching, and to allow every one that lists to turn Preacher.

SECT. XI. That Prayer as a Duty, is above Prayer as a Gift. The Gift of Prayer
examined. That it is not a Gift of Sanctifying Grace. That the Spirit of Prayer
is often without the Gift of Prayer; and yet the Gift of Prayer is not perfect
without the Spirit of it. Those Christians who have obtained the Gift of Prayer
most completely, (that is, jointly with the Spirit of it) are not thereby
qualified to be the mouths of the Congregation. Those Ministers who have not
attained that Gift, are not for that reason to be despised, as not sufficiently
qualified for the Ministry. And those Ministers who have attained it, may not
for the exercising thereof be allowed to reject set forms of Prayer in their
Congregations; because set forms in public are more for the Ministers and the
peoples good, more for Gods glory, and more agreeable with Gods command.
HE that bids us examine our own Hearts lest we should deceive our selves, does
much more bid us examine other men's mouths, that they should not deceive us;
and he that commands us to try the Spirits, does much more command us to try
the Gifts: Upon this ground we come now to try and examine the Gift of Prayer,
which has of late so filled the heads of men with Phancies, the mouths of men
with Pretenses, the ears of men with Clamours, the hearts of men with
Anxieties, and (which is worst of all) the Devotions of men with
impertinencies, if not with Impieties, whiles they forsake the Prayers which
Gods Spirit and Gods Church has made for them, that they may exercise their
own, either acquired or pretended Gifts: And we have reason to be very
impartial in this examination, because some men have been so bold to teach, and
others have been so credulous to believe, That all Christians are bound to
attain this Gift, and that none are true members of Christ, or ought to be his
Ministers, who have not attained it, with many other such unwarrantable
assertions, which tend directly to (...) ^eaking of the Peace, and not at all
to the establishing of the Truth: to the destruction of Charity, and not at all
to the edification of Piety: For all the world is not able to prove that the
Gift of prayer is either a means of engrafting a man in Christ, or a testimony
that he is ingrafted in him; so that either they should much rejoice (though
they commonly do glory) in their pre-eminence who have it, or they should be
dismayed for their defects who have it not: For that holy communion which is
exercised with God by Prayer, is altogether heavenly and spiritual, in an holy
attention and affection which belongs to the Spirit of Prayer, not at all
earthly or carnal, in a ready apprehension or a voluble expression, which two
alone properly belong to the Gift of Prayer; For as concerning supernatural
assistance, (as was heretofore in Miracles and in Tongues) there is little
reason to suppose or mention it in the Gift of Prayer. 1. Because those men
amongst us who most have it, have it not in any other language, but only in
that which is to them most natural, even in their own mother tongue. 2. Because
those men who have it, do so much blame and revile those who have it not, which
sure they would not do, if they themselves thought it supernatural; For in the
Gift of Continency they are contented to consult with humane infirmity, for an
allay of any harsh censures in those that want it: And why not so also in the
Gift of Prayer, if both were alike (in their conceits) supernatural? And yet if
we should suppose a supernatural assistance in the Gift of Prayer, it would
little advantage either it or them; For we see the Spirit of God did overruled
the tongue of Balaam, when he uttered that most heavenly Prayer, Let me die the
death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his, (Numb. 23. 10.) though
the same Spirit did not sanctify his heart, for he loved the ways of
unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 15. Wherefore it is plain, A man may be a member of
Christ without the Gift of Prayer, because it is not a Gift that immediately
flows from the grace of Sanctification: And as plain, that a man may lawfully
and laudably be a Minister of Christ without it, (as well as without the Gift
of Continency) because it is not a Gift that either principally or necessarily
tends to edification. Not principally; for set forms of Prayer taken out of the
holy Scriptures, or made agreeable to them, do edify much more, as having more
suitable expressions both to engage and to enlarge holy ^ns. Not necessarily,
because the Jews under the Law were, and Christians under the Gospel may be and
are daily edified without it.

I know I am fallen upon a subject that has a great noise, and a greater form
of godliness, but not the power of it answerable either to the noise or form,
and therefore I will not make any apology for the plainness, and almost
rudeness of speech, I shall be forced to use in unmasking their hypocrisy (who
abuse this Gift) since our blessed Savior by denouncing a terrible woe against
those Hypocrites, who for a pretense made long Prayers, that they might devour
widows houses, (Mat. 23. 14.) has declared it not only fit, but also necessary
for his Ministers, to show to all the world the great danger and greater crime
of those hypocrites, which for a pretense make long prayers, that they may
devour Gods own house, that is to say, not only his Church, but also his
Religion: For when Prayer as a Gift shall dare to oppose it self against, nay
to exalt it self above Prayer as a Duty, it is high time to undeceive the
world, and to show that God has placed Duties above Gifts, giving Gifts only
to enable men to perform Duties; so that Gifts must give place to Duties, and
not Duties give place to Gifts: And consequently Prayer as a Gift must give
place to Prayer as a Duty, even in our private, and much more in our public
Devotions. He that has not the Gift of Prayer, may not for that reason neglect
the duty of prayer in private: And he that has the gift of prayer, may not for
that reason disturb the Duty of Prayer in public: Wherefore since public
Prayer is a Duty that no more belongs to One then to All, no more belongs to
the Minister then to the People; (for the fourth Commandment obliges them to
Gods public worship as well as him, in acknowledgement of, and homage for the
redemption of mankind) it is manifest, it ought to be so ordered, that Minister
and People may as one man, with one voice and with one heart Pray together, not
only in one company, but also in one Communion. And consequently the Gift of
Prayer, which is to be exercised in public, is that which God has given to
his Church in general, and not that which he has given to any of his Ministers
in particular^ ^^use the people cannot communicate in faith, unless they (...)
beforehand the terms of their communion; For faith is grounded upon
infallibility, which now cannot be in the Persons, and therefore must be in the
Prayers, and hence arises the necessity of a set form of public Prayer, that
the People as well as the Priests may pray in faith in the same Congregation,
and not only one, but also (many) several Congregations may constitute no more
then one and the same Christian Communion: For that Precept, Let all things be
done decently and in order, was given to the whole Church of Corinth, and with
it a power of making public Prayer, as a Duty, overruled public Prayer as a
Gift: For by the same reason that the Church has power to regulate the gift of
tongues, it has also power to regulate the gift of Prayer, which is chiefly
seated in the tongue; and since unknown matter and form in Prayers is no less
against the edification of the People as to praying in faith, then an unknown
dialect, the Church may as justly prohibit the one, as the other; and the
pretense of a Gift may in neither enervate the Churches prohibition. Again, The
Church is bound to use her Gift of Tongues for the peoples good, and why not
also her Gift of Prayer? and how can she use that Gift without making of a set
form? The same Church is entrusted with the ordering of Religion, and how shall
any Minister either presumptuously invade her Trust, or contumaciously opppse
her order? Nay on the contrary, every Minister is bound to submit his gifts to
the order of the Church; for so is Saint Paul's absolute determination, The
Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14. 32. that is,
The Spirits of the Prophets ought not to be refractory, insolent and imperious,
but modest, obedient and submiss, not given to contention but compliance, not
to contradiction but condescension, not despising others, but submitting
themselves: For he that placed a Prophet above a private man, has placed that
Prophet under the other Prophets. Saint Chrysostom here observes the Apostle
has used four arguments together, whereby to persuade Ministers to a Christian
modesty and moderation in the public use of their spiritual gifts.

1. That the work of the Ministry will be as fully (but more orderly)
discharged, For ye may all prophecy one by one, Verse. 31.

2. That the Spirit will not be discontented, or disparaged; For the Spirits of
the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, Verse. 32.

3. That this is exactly according to the will of God, For God* is not the
author of confusion, but of peace, Verse. 33.

4. That this is exactly according to the general practice* of the Church of
God, As in all Churches of the Saints. Verse. 33.

He that will not be induced by these arguments to submit his gift to the
Churches gift in the public exercise of Devotion, plainly shows that though
he may have the Gift, yet he has not the Grace of the Spirit: And indeed it is
no wonder that these two should be divided; for common gifts of the Spirit,
such as tend only to the edification of others, and not to a man's own
sanctification, are often given without saving grace; And such a gift we must
acknowledge the Gift of Prayer, (considered precisely in it self) because we
doubt not but Judas had it as well as the rest of the Apostles, and yet we dare
not say that he had sanctifying* Grace: We must therefore distinguish between
the Spirit and the Gift of Prayer; The Spirit of prayer consists in an holy
and firm attention, in sanctified and enlarged affections, and proceeds
wholly from the infusion of Grace: But the gift of Prayer (as this age is
pleased to call it, though without Gods warrant in the Text) consists in the
readiness of apprehension, and the fitness of expression, and proceeds partly
from the endowments of nature, partly from the confidence of custom, and partly
from the acquisitions of industry; For these three, Nature, Custom, and
Industry, are all necessarily required to the attaining of that faculty,
whereby a man is enabled upon all occasional emergencies or necessities,
fittingly to express the desires of his heart* and by fitting expressions to
inflame and to enlarge those desires, as well in himself as in those that hear
him; which I think will afford us the full definition of the Gift of prayer
(considered precisely in it self without the Spirit of prayer) not only
essentially, but also causally: For so the efficient cause thereof is nature,
custom and industry, (though nature and custom more then industry, in so much
that men of natural endowments, and of personal confidences, do often in this
gift outstrip those of most industrious improvements, whereby nature and
custom are frequently animated to laugh and scorn at learning and industry:)
The material cause thereof is occasional emergencies or necessities: The formal
cause thereof is readiness of apprehension, and fitness of expression: The
final cause thereof is to inflame and enlarge the desires of the heart: Tell
me, what can any true Israelite see in this Dagon of the Philistians, that the
Ark of God should fall down before it, and not rather it should fall down
before the Ark; For all this while if the desires be truly good, such as indeed
ought to be enflamed or enlarged, that is not to be ascribed to the Gift, but
only to the Spirit of Prayer. So that in truth the Spirit of Prayer is as much
above the Gift of Prayer, as an holy affection is above a quick imagination or
a voluble expression, and a sanctified heart is above a ready wit or an
elaborated tongue; For these two, (I mean the Spirit and the Gift of Prayer)
must necessarily be separated, because they are very dangerously confounded;
the common sort of people admiring these men as almost Angels, who have the
Gift without the Spirit, and contemning those Ministers, as scarce men; who
have the Spirit without the Gift; For many good Christians have the Spirit of
Prayer, who have not the Gift of Prayer; so says Saint Paul, The Spirit it
self makes intercession for us with groanings, there is the Spirit of Prayer,
but with groanings which cannot be uttered, there is not the Gift of Prayer; (
Romans 8. 26.) And on the other side, many pernicious hypocrites may have the
Gift of Prayer, who have not the Spirit of Prayer; so says our blessed
Savior, Woe unto you hypocrites, who for a pretense make long Prayers, Mat.
23. 14. And again, Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out devils, and in thy name
have done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew
you, depart from me ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7. See here how Gifted men may
be Hypocrites, not only gifted for Praying, Many will say unto me Lord, Lord,
(which repetition shows a familiarity they thought they had contracted with him
by their frequent addresses in Prayer) but also gifted for Preaching, Have we
not prophesied in thy name? Nay gifted for casting out Devils, (out of others,
though not out of themselves) And in thy name have cast out Devils? And yet to
these gifted men will our blessed Savior return this answer, I never knew you;
whence we may justly infer they never truly knew him, Depart from me ye that
work iniquity; whence we may as justly infer, that they did never really come
near him by piety, but only seemingly by hypocrisy. God forbid but we should
firmly believe, and willingly confess that the Spirit and the Gift of Prayer
though separated in Hypocrites, are often joined together in good Christians;
for in truth the gift of Prayer is not perfect and complete, (so as to be worth
the looking after) without the Spirit of it: For then only is the gift of
Prayer complete, when not only natural abilities are improved by study or
industry, and personal abilities are acquired by art or exercise, (which two
alone do properly constitute the very essence of the Gift of Prayer) But also
the heart is sanctified by Grace; (which properly belongs only to the Spirit of
Prayer:) so that in truth the Gift of prayer, which makes all the noise, is
perfected only by the Spirit of Prayer which says nothing, or speaks so
softly that none can hear its voice, but he that searches the hearts, and
knows what is the mind of the Spirit, Romans 8. 27. The word of the mind
(Verbum mentis) may be without the word of the mouth, (Verbum oris) So Hannah
continued praying before the Lord, and yet she spoke in her heart, only her
lips moved, but her voice was not heard, 1 Samuel 1. 13, 14. So Moses cried unto
the Lord, when yet he did not speak, nor so much as move his lips, Exodus 14.
15* Again, the word of the mouth may be without the word of the mind; for they
must needs make many words who make many prayers; and yet they could not be
said to utter one prayer from their hearts, to whom God did say, When ye spread
forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from you, yea when ye make many prayers
I will not hear, your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1. 15. For when the Text
has set this down as a proper compellation of God, O thou that hear prayer,
(Psalm. 65. 2.) it is most evident that from his saying he would not hear, we
may safely conclude, they did not Pray, though they did make never so many
prayers. But we will suppose such a gifted man as has the complete gift of
prayer, that is the Spirit and the Gift of Prayer both together, yet even such
a man is not thereby qualified to be the mouth of others in public Assemblies,
because public prayer is to have a public Person to perform it; And none can
be a public Person in Gods service, but whom God himself has made so by some
notorious and undoubted Commission, such as others are bound to acknowledge,
and therefore bound not to usurp; For the Lord will not hold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain; but they most take his name in vain, who speak in his
name without his allowance: They are most properly said to take his name,
because he has not given it; and to take it in vain, because they take it
rather to serve themselves then to serve him: It Is all one for strange Persons
to offer themselves before the Lord instead of the sons of Aaron, and for the
sons of Aaron to offer strange fire before the Lord instead of that from his
own Altar; for of both alike it may be said, which he commanded them not, Numb.
10. 1. and for both alike it has been said, And they dyed before the Lord,
Ver. 2. and again, This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified
in them that come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified, Ver.
3. If he be not sanctified in them that come nigh him, he is not like to be
glorified before all the people; If the Priests be unsanctified, the Lord will
be unglorified; for his Majesty will be contemned, as if it were lawful for any
that are not sanctified, to come nigh him: Therefore his Priests were first
sanctified to the Priesthood, then sanctified by it: They were first sanctified
by being called, then sanctified by their calling: And so ought their
successors to be till the worlds end; for it is an universal negative, which
denies as well for all times as for all persons, No man takes this honor unto
himself, but he that is called of God as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. Now Aaron was
called not only internally to satisfy himself, but also externally to satisfy
all the Congregation that he was called of God; For God is the God of order,
not of confusion, and consequently forbids those men to officiate as his
Ministers (though of never so great abilities) whom he has not outwardly
called to the Ministry: For he will have order, not confusion in his Church,
whereas if any one might officiate in the Ministry, (upon any pretense
whatsoever) without Gods outward call, others might as well as he, and so we
must needs have an irremediable confusion both in the Ministers and in their
ministrations: Dares any man to be a Princes Ambassador (though most able to do
him service) without his appointment? But the Ministers are Gods Ambassadors, 2
Cor. 5. 20. There needs no variety of arguments in this case; for till earthly
Potentates shall declare it to be no rebellion against themselves for men to
turn uncommissioned soldiers, under pretense of fighting their battles, they
must acknowledge it to be grand rebellion against the King of heaven, for men
to turn uncommissioned Ministers, under pretense of doing him service; For
Saint Paul having said, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, 2 Cor. 10. 4. has in effect
told us, that the Minister is Gods soldier; and therefore is sure of his
Commission: But let us further examine this gift of Prayer in relation to the
public worship of God, and as we find no just reason to admit them to the work
of the Ministry who are not Ministers, because they have that gift; so we shall
find no just reason to reject those that are true Ministers, as insufficient or
unfit for the work of the Ministry, because they have it not; nor to allow such
Ministers, who have it, to reject the set forms established and approved by the
Church: For if any reason may be given why ungifted men should be thought not
sufficiently qualified for the Ministry; or set Prayers not sufficiently
qualified for gifted men; That reason must relate either to God, or to the
People, or to the Ministers. But they who consult with their consciences before
they speak, and then speak according to the result of those consultations, are
not afraid to averr, That in all these respects it is most requisite that the
public worship of God should not rely upon the personal abilities of the
Ministers in praying, but should be performed and discharged by constant set
forms of Prayer; not by uncertain, and much less by premeditated effusions.

1. In respect of God, whose name is by set forms glorified more truly, because
they are deliberate and judicious; more zealously, because they are propper and
efficacious; more univerly, because they are known to all, both as judicious,
and as efficacious: And what can be desired more in Gods public worship, then
that it be truly Christian in it self without heresy, truly Christian in us
without hypocrisy, and truly Christian in us all without singularity: For if
it be so, it will certainly not be defective either for want of truth and
verity, or for want of zeal and sincerity, which are both to be in it as it is
a duty of Christian Religion; Nor yet for want of extent or universality, which
is to be in it, as it is a duty of Christian Communion.

2. It is requisite that the public worship of God should not rely upon the
personal abilities of the Ministers in praying, but should be performed by
constant set forms of prayer, in regard of the people, because they are thereby
more truly edified, being edified in their understandings, not led on
hood-winckt by an implicit says to blind obedience, in the greatest
performances of Religion; Being edified in their wills, not distracted by
attention, when they should be united in affection; for the soul being finite
cannot be wholly busied in the one, but it must partly neglect the other: And
also being edified in their memories; for by often hearing the same prayers,
they are taught to pray when their occasions will not permit them to resort to
the house of prayer: In a word, being edified in their consciences, in that
they are taught and inured to come to the holy work of Religion, not as Judges
to make them proud and censorious, nor as spies to make them peevish and
captious, but as communicants, to make them devout and Religious.

For whilst the Minister is praying what the people know not beforehand, they
are in truth but as Judges, unless you will have them resign their souls upon
uncertainties; But whilst they are praying with him in a known form of prayer,
they are certainly as Communicants: Therefore it is an unsufferable injury to
the people to be tied to speak to God in prayer only by the mouth of their
Minister: First, because it does not satisfy their consciences, which cannot
be satisfied but with certainty as well as piety; for though the will or
affection may assent to a desire in a prayer not known before, yet not with the
same full assent as if it had been known, partly because the soul is assenting
whilst it is praying, and so what it bestows upon one act, it takes from the
other: and partly, because the soul cannot assent so fully nor so firmly upon
the sudden, as it can upon deliberation; not so fully, because not upon the
same evidence; not so firmly, because not upon the same assurance of faith:
Secondly, because it does disturb, if not destroy their Communion with Christ,
which is the chief end that Christians ought to aim at in all their prayers:
For not being sure that their prayer will be such as to join their Savior with
them in the same intercession, they cannot be sure it will be such as to join
them with their Savior in the same Communion; and so they are in danger of
losing both the benefit and the comfort of all their public prayers; for the
benefit of them depends altogether upon Christ's intercession, the comfort of
them depends altogether upon Christ's Communion. Thirdly, because it does
disturb, if not destroy their Communion one with another, which destructive way
ought to be most carefully avoided and most hatefully detested by all good
Christians: For next to the breach of piety in Religion, they ought to
abominate the breach of charity in Communion; For love and concord is the very
soul of Christianity; By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if
ye have love one to another, Joh. 13. 35. And it was the Characteristical note
of the first and best Christians, And the multitude of them that believed were
of one heart and of one soul, Act. 4. 32. And doubtless nothing does more
immediately nor more powerfully conduce to unity in affection, then unity in
Religion: Wherefore since the same common devotions are the most effectual
means to produce and to preserve this unity, they who are implacable enemies to
the one, cannot be cordial friends to the other; It is reported of Julian the
Apostate, that after he had conceived an inveterate hatred against the
Christians, he had no readier way to execute his hatred against them, but by
endeavoring to make them hate one another; And so gathering the most
dissenting Christian Bishops, and the most factious of the people into his own
Palace, he advised them to lay aside all Civil discords, and to keep the peace
of the State, but every one securely to follow his own Religion, without any
regard to the peace of the Church; Vt civilibus discordiis consopitis, suae
quisque Religioni s^rviret intrepidus, says Ammian^s Marcellinus: But what his
intent was by this advice, Saint Augustine as a Divine more clearly explaineth
then their Historian, Eo modo ^^^abat Christianorum nomen posse perire de
terris, si unitati Ecclesiae de qua lapsus fuerat, in^ideret, and sacrilegas
dissensiones, liberas esse permitteret; He thought that by this means the very
name of Christians would perish from the earth, if according to his envy
against the Church from which he had fallen, he should permit the Priests and
the people a free liberty of sacrilegious dissentions: If we turn this Thesis
into an Hypothesis, it may not be amiss to say, that a free liberty of
maintaining what doctrines, and of exercising what Devotions every man thinks
fit, is a liberty of sacrilegious dissentions, (for consent in Doctrine and in
devotion commonly go together,) and this is indeed a sacrilegious liberty,
because it robs God of his chiefest glory, even of his public worship, and
Gods Church of her best Patrimony, even of her truth and peace: Which may be a
liberty of man's taking, but sure not of Gods giving; for Gods intent in giving
us a written word, was that all Christians might have the grounds of One
Religion; And his intent in giving so many patterns of prayer in that written
word, was that all Christians might have the grounds of One Communion; And the
right way of edification for all Churches, is certainly to lay their foundation
upon these grounds which God has given them, that is, to establish a set form
of Doctrine whereby to maintain the Truth of Religion, and a set form of
devotion whereby to maintain the Peace of Communion.

3. It is requisite that the public worship of God should not rely upon the
personal abilities of the Ministers in praying, but should be performed by
constant set forms of prayer, in regard of the Ministers themselves, that they
be not led into temptation, either through pride vilifying others, or through
vain glory magnifying themselves; and that they be not led into sin,
particularly the sins of heresy and schism, which are desperate sins in
private men, but damnable sins in Ministers, yet must needs be incident to
those who rely upon their own gifts in praying, more then upon Gods, or their
Churches prayers: For if their gift forsake them (as who dares promise its
certain continuance) they may easily fall into an erroneous expression, which
rather then recant, they may as stiffly maintain by perverse argumentation;
there is the danger of heresy. And if they abuse their gift, they may easily
fall into the humor and love of ostentation, and so scorn to be regulated and
confined by their Church, upholding their abominable ostentation by a more
abominable separation there is the danger of schism.

Besides, such men commonly refuse to tie themselves so precisely to any
particular form of words, though it be of their own making, but they may
sometimes add, always alter according as any emergen occasion offered or
affection suggested shall require; so that they can never truly say with the
Psalmist, Paratum cor meum Deus, Paratum cor meum, O God, my heart is ready, my
heart is ready, (which yet the Psalmist thought twice worth his saying, sc.
Psalm* 57. ver. 7. and Psalm. 108. ver. 1.) And much less can they say, O God, my
tongue is ready, my tongue is ready, (though that be the readiness they most
labor for, and most glory in) for every new affection may unsettle their
heart, and every new fancy may unsettle their tongue: so that either the
heart must be false to its own preparation, because it may be changed by a new
affection, or the tongue must be false to the heart, because it may take a new
expression: I have a very good precedent, (though a bad occasion) to put the
gift of prayer in the lowest forms of Gods gifts that concern the exercise of
Religion. For Saint Paul in effect has done it before me, who put diversity
of tongues, not only after the gift of healing, but also after helps in
government, 1 Cor. 12. 28. or helps and governments, that is, Lay Elders and
Deacons (if some late glosses may be embraced) and surely the gift of prayer
must come under the gift of tongues as comprehended in it, or come below the
gift of tongues as outpassed by it; so I may well put it below the Desk, when
Saint Paul according to them puts it below the poor men's Box; And Saint
Chrysostom gives this reason for it, (...): (Chrysostom. hom. 29. and 32. in
Corinth.) Because they thought so highly of themselves for the gift of tongues,
therefore Saint Paul always names that in the last place, after all the rest;
There is the same reason now why Saint Paul's Successors in the Ministry, should
do the like concerning the gift of prayer; yet I would have laid my hand upon
my mouth, before I would have spoken so unkindly to or of my brethren, were it
not to make them lay their hands upon their hearts before they speak so
confidently nay indeed so uncomely to Our Father; For as it were better my
tongue should cleave to the roof of my mouth, then I should disparage the gift
of prayer; so it were better their tongues should cleave to the roofs of their
mouths, then they should abuse that gift either to ostentation, or to faction,
or which is yet worse, to Irreligion; For by such abuse not only man is grossly
deceived, but also God is grievously dishonored; Doubtless he that bids both
Priests and people keep their feet when they go to the house of God, that they
may be more ready to hear then to give the sacrifices of fools, does much more
bid the Priests keep their hearts and their mouths, that they may not tempt the
people to give the fools sacrifice, for want either of such affections, or of
such expressions as may truly be fit to be offered upon Gods Altar.

And this is plain from the ensuing words, Be not rash with thy mouth, and let
not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God, (Eccles. 5. 1. 2.)
Hebr. (...) Al Tebahal gnal Pica, ne fe^tines super tuo ore: Do not make haste
upon your mouth; Here may easily be much more haste then good speed; For your
mouth may make haste upon your heart uttering what is scarce yet suggested, and
you may make haste upon your mouth, uttering what is scarce yet digested: The
word (...) Bahal, is sometimes to be fearful, sometimes to be hasty, and thence
signifies to make such haste as men use to make in frights, when fear has
wholly surprised their wits: And such a haste as goes without wit, (perchance
without fear too, for men who are audacious are seldom timorous) is in a man's
own house great imprudence, but in Gods house it is moreover great impiety: And
let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before God. The better to keep
us from the haste of the tongue, he disswades us from the haste of the heart;
for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks; therefore if the
heart be fraught with hasty affections, the tongue will soon be fraught with
hasty expressions: For he that will permit his heart to love without
deliberation, will also permit his mouth to speak without it, since it is very
easy for the heart to come into the mouth, when once the assent is come into
the heart.

Therefore he says, Let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing though
utterance belongs properly to the mouth; the reason is, because if the heart
has once spoken it within, the mouth will hardly refrain from speaking it
without: Accordingly the Psalmist when he prayed, set a watch O Lord before my
mouth, and keep the door of ^y lips, he did also pray, Incline not mine heart
to any evil thing, (Psalm. 141. 3, 4.) for there could be no watch set upon his
mouth, unless it were first set upon his heart: And indeed here is such a
reason alleged as is enough to set a watch both upon all our mouths, and upon
all our hearts, in that it is said, For God is in heaven, thou upon earth,
therefore let thy words be few: Were he on earth with thee, yet thou ought
to dread his infinite Majesty; How much more now that he is in heaven above
thee, so high as to overlook thee, to overtop thee, to over power thee! Thus
the reason is enforced from Gods Majesty.

Again, were he on earth with thee, yet thou ought to consider and admire
his transcendent purity; for he is of purer eyes then to behold iniquity; of
purer ears then to hear it; of purer heart then to regard it; and consequently
of purer hands then not to punish it: How much more now that he is in heaven
the proper place of purities, of pure persons, of pure actions, and of pure
affections; and thou on earth, where persons and actions and affections are all
unclean and impure: Thus the reason is enforced from Gods purity: If thou art
not afraid because of his Majesty; yet thou may be ashamed because of his
purity, that the word either of thy mind or of thy mouth should be injudicious
or indeliberate; for that is not agreeable with the purity of reason, and much
less with the purity of Religion: Therefore let thy words be few, such as have
been weighed in the balance of the sanctury before they be presented in it as
an offering to that holy One, whose holiness does not only inhabit the
sanctuary, but also does sanctify it. And this reason does our Savior himself
intimate unto us; not only from the shortness of his own most holy prayer, but
also from the introduction of it, Our Father which art in heaven, as if he had
said, God is in heaven, thou art on earth, therefore let thy words be few.

Surely this Text, which was given of purpose to prevent vanities in Divine
service according to the judgment of our Church, (as appears by the contents,)
had need be bl^ed out of Gods word, and out of man's heart, that the world may
contentedly give up Liturgy to Enthusiasm; that is, proper and deliberate
prayers, fit to engage holy affections, and to express holy desires, for
extravagant and extemporary effusions; such as are commonly improper, but
always indeliberate, if not in regard of the Minister, yet surely in regard of
the people, who yet notwithstanding ought no more to take the truth and
goodness of their Religion upon the Ministers word, then to rely for the
practice of it upon his righteousness, or to expect the reward of it from his
salvation.

SECT. XII. Set forms and conceived prayers compared together; That set forms
do better remedy all inconv^niences, and more establish the conscience: are not
guilty of will worship, nor of quenching the spirit; nor of superstitious
fromalities; and that it is less dangerous if not more Christian, to
discountenance the gift, then the spirit of prayer.
HE that considers the great distance of God and man, the excellencies of his
makers glory, the miseries of his own infirmity, the impertinencies and
alienations of his thoughts (which may as well put him out in his own, as put
him by in his Churches prayers) the multiplicity of his imperfections, the
treacherousness of his memory, the slowness of his apprehension, the dullness of
his affections, will heartily bless God for providing him premeditated forms as
a remedy, and will carefully watch himself, lest he should turn his remedy into
a disease, by adding to all the rest, the deadness of his own heart; So that
all those inconveniences art not only better prevented, but also better
remedied by set forms, then by conceived prayers: Men's phansies may be elevated
by extemporary effusions, but their consciences are best edified by known
Prayers, and it is not for us to invite men to serve God with their phansies but
with their consciences: By the manifestation of the truth commending our selves
to every man's conscience in the sight of God, says Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 4. 2.
not by the pretense of Revelations, commending our selves to every man's
curiosity in the sight of the World; That's the ready way to bring men first to
weak imaginations, then to strong delusions; first to believe any thing, then
to believe a lie; first to receive matters of Religion without judgment, then
to receive matters of irreligion against conscience: But let us hear both
parties speak for themselves against one another: They say our set forms float
in generalities; we say their no forms rove in uncertainties; both must confess
that generalities in matters of Christianity may concern all Christians, but
uncertainties may concern none at all.

They say, we are guilty of will worship in making set forms of prayer, without
order of the Text; we say, that we have Gods own express order for set forms,
1. by several dictates of the Text, partieularly Luke 11. 1. Lord teach us to
pray as John also taught his Disciples, and it is not be doubted but he taught
his Disciples to pray by a set form, as teaching either their eyes or their
ears, but not being able to teach their hearts, by several forms in the Text,
particularly the Psalms, of which the Divine Areopagite has said, (...), (5.
S. Dionys. lib. de Eccl. Hier. cap. 3.) The most holy writings of the Divine
hymns do wholly aim at this, that they may celebrate all the holy words, and
all the holy works of God; and shall we think they do not teach and require
Gods Church, after their example, to celebrate the same words and works. 3. By
the general drift and scope of the Text; For God having given us a written word
for the rule of our Religion; has by the same reason, enjoined us a written
word for the practice of it, since there is as great a necessity that we should
have a certainty of practice, as a certainty of knowledge in things belonging
to our salvation, so that our Enthusiasts ought to appeal to unknown traditions
for the rule of their Religion, before they ought to obtrude unknown
imaginations for the practice of it; However, let all the world judge, whether
will worship can possibly be in using a Religion of Gods, and not rather of man's
making: They say we quench the spirit, but we know we inflame him, because
approved and known prayers do most warm judicious affections; and we doubt not
but the spirit assisteth a man in his Judgment or reason which he has only as
a man, rather then in his fancy or apprehension, which he has common with a
beast: For as the spirit assisteth Angels by revelation, because they know by
intuition; so he assisteth men by deliberation, because they know by Reason and
by discourse.

They say we are given to superstitious formalities, because we desire a set
form of Prayer; we advise them not to be given to irreligious blasphemies, in
casting reproaches upon formed prayers, which were at first of Gods own making
in his holy Word, and are still of his making, not of ours, if they be
agreeable to his Word; For all truth (whosoever speaks it) is from the Spirit
of Truth; and therefore to blaspheme the Truth, is to blaspheme the Spirit: And
the question will certainly hold much more in Gods Church Militant, then in
Gods State Militant; Who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy
the armies of the living God? 1 Samuel 17. 26.

They say we discountenance the Gift of Prayer; we know we do not; only we
prefer the Gift of Prayer in the Church, above the Gift of Prayer in particular
Ministers, or the Gift of Prayer as it is exercised to edification, above the
same gift as it is or may be exercised to ostentation; wherein we follow Saint
Paul's Doctrine, who dehorteth the Ministers of his time from arrogance in the
use of their spiritual gifts, first from the efficient cause of those gifts,
that they have them not from themselves, but from God; As God has dealt to
every man the measure of faith. Secondly, from the final cause of those Gifts,
that they have them not for themselves, but for their neighbors; not for
ostentation but for edification; So we being many are one body in Christ, and
every one members one of another, Romans 12. 3, 5. And we say moreover, it is
more Christian to discountenance the Gift, then the Spirit of Prayer; For the
Gift may be and often is merely from natural or from customary abilities; But
the Spirit of Prayer is only from the Grace of God; And it is unjust and
ungodly, That either nature or custom should dare stand in competition with
Grace, and much more in defiance against it.

1. Whereas now a days if some grave and sober Minister say Prayers either of
Gods or of the Churches making, though he say them with a most firm attention,
and a most devout affection, yet his person is disregarded, his function
disparaged, his prayers despised.

2. But if some mere novice (perchance a mere layman) tumble out his own
extemporary thoughts, (scarce fit to be esteemed or called prayers) though with
more readiness of expression, then holiness of affection, yet he is presently
admired as one strangely assisted by the Spirit, and the People are in effect
taught to say with them of Lycaonia, concerning such Enthusiasts, The Gods are
come down to us in the likeness of men, Acts 14. 11. Thus is the Spirit of
Prayer (and with it the grace of God) vilified in the one, whiles nothing but
the Gift of Prayer, and with it, custom or perchance only nature, is magnified
in the other: For natural parts in attaining that gift, do go beyond all
acquired abilities; so that nature is exalted, but study (as well as Grace) is
debased by it, for it is clear, that where natural abilities of Fancy, and
confidence, and volubility are wanting, all the pains that men can take in
searching the Scriptures, and all the documents they can get by searching them,
will not enable them to attain this gift; So little Religion is there in our
late advancing the Gift of prayer, by depressing the Spirit of prayer; and yet
only upon this mistake (I might have said upon this mischief) has it come to
pass, That the Personal abilities of men have been accepted and approved in
Gods own service, not only without, but also against Gods own Commission.

SECT. XIII. That forms of public Prayer are not to be disliked, because they
cannot, or at least do not, particularly provide either Deprecations against
private men's occasional miseries, or Thanksgivings for their occasional
mercies: yet our Church not defective in Occasionals, though chiefly furnished
with Eternals: The danger of contemning religious forms of Prayer, and gadding
after conceived Prayers.
NO man ought to pretend the Spirit of God, either for rejecting Gods authority
in his Church, or forbear disobeying Gods command in his holy word: And if
these two may bear the sway, set forms of Prayer will justly claim the
pre-eminence in Gods public worship, above all conceived Prayers whatsoever;
yet there is one main Plea why Ministers should labor to attain the gift of
Prayer, and that is, That they may be able to speak, where commonly their
Church is silent, and (as need shall require) either make deprecations against
private men's occasional miseries, or thanksgivings for their occasional
mercies: And yet even in this respect, The gift of Prayer may be more safely
used upon premeditation, then without it: For supposing a Minister furnished
with abilities of expressing himself readily and fitly upon all emergencies,
yet there being at least a possibility of miscarriage in his sudden effusions,
and those miscarriages which intervene in prayer being doubtless unsufferable,
if not unpardonable, it would scarce be prudent, if it were pious, in such a
man to adventure himself wholly upon his extemporary faculty; But even in such
a case, either to form his Prayer in his mind, if he have time, or to use some
form already in his memory, if he have not. So that his Prayer though it may
seem conceived in regard of the Occasion, yet will be little other then formed
in regard of the premeditation; But this by way of Caution, in the use of the
Gift; As for the Gift it self, be it said not only by way of Concession, but
also of Congratulation, that in this respect, and for this end it is to be most
chiefly desired, and may be most profitably exercised by any Minister, so that
in regard merely of this ministration, we may not unfitly apply unto such
Ministers as have this Gift, that eulogie of Saint Paul, Qui been
ministraverint, gradum bonum sibi acquirent and multam fiduciam in fide quae
est in Christo Jesu, 1 Timothy 3. 13. They that have ministered well, (shall)
purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the Faith which is
in Christ Jesus: No doubt but they have ministered, and do minister very well,
who minister to the people of God in their corporal and much more in their
spiritual necessities, and such Ministers do purchase to themselves a good
Degree in the Ministry, and a great boldness in the Faith; only they were best
take heed, That they turn not this great boldness in their faith, to a greater
boldness in their Ministry; For boldness in their faith may be commended, when
boldness in their Ministry may be justly condemned; And they will turn the
boldness of their faith into the boldness of their Ministry, if they minister
(though in this excellent kind) not as Demetrius, who had a good report of all
men, and of the truth it self: but as Diotrephes who loved to have the
pre-eminence, prating against others with malicious words, and not only casting
the Brethren out of the Church, but also casting the Church out of the Nation;
under pretense of the want of this Gift: For which intolerable pride and
presumption, not only an Apostle of Christ, but also a mere heathen Poet will
one day rise up Judgment against them, who makes Agamemnon say thus of
Achilles, (...),
(...); (Ilid. a.)


If so be the Gods have made him a most famous warrior, Have they therefore
licenced him to reproach other men? If God Almighty has given to some
particular Minister a special endowment, has he therefore given him leave
either to condemn his Brethren, or to condemn his Church? Surely, no and much
less upon so slight a ground either of Reason or of Religion: For neither ought
there to be so great provision made for occasional emergencies, as for
continual necessities; and if there ought, yet is not the Church bound to make
it. First there ought not to be so great provision made for occasional
emergencies, as for continual necessities; because these emergencies, whether
corporal or spiritual, yet as they are occasional, they are merely temporal,
(for occasion is the opportunity of time) but Christianity is chiefly to busy
it self about eternals. Again, as they are occasional, they are mere
contingencies, but Religion is chiefly to busy it self about certainties; The
Form by which Saint John Baptist taught his Disciples to pray, is lost, without
any mischief to Religion, because it was merely Occasional, the reason thereof
expiring with its use: But the Form by which our blessed Savior taught his
Disciples to pray, God would not suffer to be lost, for fear Religion might
have been lost with it, because that Prayer is doctrinal and eternal, never to
expire either in its reason or in its use; And how shall we then seek to
advance Occasionals above Eternals in our Praying? Surely he that says, Pray
continually, (1 These. 5. 17.) supposes such matter of our Prayers as is
constant, not as is emergent; as is continual, not as is occasional; So that if
I first provide for occasionals in my Devotions, and Eternity may be
subservient to Time, the accessory may chance draw the principal, which is
against the dictates of nature; but if I first provide for eternals, Time is
subservient to Eternity, the Principal will undoubtedly draw the accessory,
which is according to the dictates of Grace: It Is an excellent Prayer of our own
Church to Almighty God, That thou being our ruler and guide, we may so pass
through things temporal, that finally we lose not the things eternal; If God be
my ruler and guide, I shall slightly glance upon temporals, as upon things in
my passage, but I shall wholly fix upon eternals, as upon things that belong to
my journeys end.

Fear not Zachary (says the Angel) for thy prayer is heard, and thy wife
Elizabeth shall bear a Son; This man doubtless prayed for eternals in the
discharge of his Priestly office, yet has a grant of temporals: On the other
side, Hannah prayed for temporals (that she might have a son) yet gives thanks
in her Song as if she had received eternals: Religious souls distill all their
thoughts in a pure limbeck, so as to admit no dross nor dreggs of the earth in
their distillation.

If you look upon the occasion of those heavenly prayers in the Psalms, you
will think many of them personal and particular, such as belonged only to King
David's temporals wants and distresses; But if you look upon the matter of these
prayers, you will find all of them doctrinal and universal, such as do belong
to all good Christians spiritual wants and distresses: The Spirit of God
teaches us in our prayers to turn occasionals into eternals, not to turn
eternals into occasionals; we justly dislike that Tenent which would make the
Rule of our Religion (the holy Scriptures) rather occasional then doctrinal;
And how can we like that invention which would make the practice of our
Religion (our public Prayers) not so truly Doctrinal as Occasional? that is
indeed, not so truly Eternal as Temporal: Attention is best in Prayer when it
is fixed wholly upon God, and why not Affection too? Conversion to my self may
be an aversion from my God; but surely conversion to my God cannot possibly be
an aversion from my self: I may easily so look after occasionals as to neglect
eternals, to my great loss, and greater sin; but if I look well after eternals,
it can be neither loss nor sin in me though I should chance to neglect
occasionals: So that it is both irrational and irreligious to say, That there
ought not to be so great provision made for occasional emergencies, as for
continual necessities in our private prayers; but if there ought, yet surely
the Church is not bound to make that provision in her public Prayers; and if
this be made good too, then the Gift of Prayer, though it may be of excellent
use in private houses, yet can have no pretense to cast set forms of Prayer out
of Gods house, And surely this Assertion, That the Church is not bound to make
provision for occasional emergencies, but only for continual necessities in her
ordinary public Prayers, may be made good from the very nature of
Common Prayer, which is to be of common concernments, such as are no more to be
restrained to particular times then to particular persons: Thus Saint
Chrysostom himself explaineth what he means by his (...), by his common
supplications, (...), which has given us grace to make our common
suppplications, and teaches us, what we should mean by our Common Prayers,
when he says, Granting us in this world knowledge of thy truth, and in the
world to come, life everlasting; For common supplications or common Prayers are
such as all other good Christians would be ready to make as well as we, for
that the matter of them concerns them All as well as Us; To wit, knowledge of
God, and life in God; Such Petitions as these (which are common to all
Christians alike) are those which properly constitute Common Prayer; for that
ought to be common in its matter, before it be common in its use: And such
common Petitions as these, is the Church bound to make as she is Catholic or
Christian; and as for other less common Petitions, the Church makes them only
as she is National: A common good is the proper subject of Common Prayer, that
is to say, A spiritual good which is common to all Christians, or a temporal
good, which is common to all of one Society, as they all are one, either by the
union of Nature, or by the union of Grace and Love. These goods are certain and
known to all, and the Church which has the common care of all, is bound to
provide such prayers as may best express our desires concerning these; And upon
any public occasion, though it be temporal, our Church does accordingly still
make such Provision both for occasional Prayers and Praises. But as concerning
any particular good which this or that private man may need upon this or that
particular occasion, it is uncertain and unknown; it comes not under the
Churches knowledge, and how can it come under the Churches care? Such
particulars are infinite, and as infinite, they cannot be the object of the
Churches certain knowledge, much less should they be the subject of the
Churches constant prayers: There needs a particular confession that such
occasional necessities or distresses may be known, before there can be a
particular supplication that they may be remedied; and yet none are more averse
from particular Confession, then those that are most angry with the Church, for
the want of such particular Petitions: But to say the truth, The Church has
sufficiently provided for such particulars, in that she has taken the Psalms
of David into her public Devotions, which Book is a (...)* or to use
Epiphanius his word, (...); Arcula medica, a Box of Medicines for all diseases:
Here he that has a dead heart shall find affections to enliven it; he that
has a slow tongue, expressions to quicken it: Nor is it possible for that man
to want either faith, or repentance, or thankfulness, or any other true
spiritual good, to comfort and strengthen him either against the evil of sin,
or the evil of punishment, who can truly apply the prayers of the Psalmist to
his own heart, and truly apply his heart to God: and no Prayer whatsoever can
either comfort or strengthen him, without this twofold application, viz. of the
Prayer to his own heart, and of his heart to God: And as for variety of words,
let him not trouble himself; for he were better cordially say with David, Have
mercy upon me O God after thy great goodness; or, In thee O Lord have I put my
trust, let me never be put to confusion, then verbally expatiate in greater
discourses but lesser desires, of this Mercy, or of this Trust; He will find
more true contentment to his soul from the use of one short ejaculation of
Gods, then in the use of many enlargements of his own making; And he were
better in brief say with the Publican, God be merciful to me a sinner; which
equally concerns any other true Penitent, then make a long prayer with the
Pharisee, which may only concern himself: For it is more like Heathen then like
Christians, for men to think they shall be heard for their much speaking, Mat.
6. 7. and yet if they will needs speak much, it is more probable God will hear
them speaking in his words, then in their own: So that if God has sufficiently
provided for our occasional necessities in the holy Scriptures; our Church has
likewise sufficiently provided for the same in translating those holy
Scriptures, and making them a great part of her public service, that we may
know how to use them upon and how to apply them to our several occasions: For
as that general promise, whosoever believes on him shall not be ashamed, (Romans
10. 11.) does warrant every good Christian to make particular application of
Gods promises to his own soul by special faith; so that other general promise,
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, (Romans 10. 13.)
does warrant every good Christian to make particular application of his own
soul to God by special Prayer; And as the holy Scriptures are most abundantly
sufficient in the rules and examples of special faith; so also in the rules and
examples of special prayers: And as we justly say, That the holy Scriptures do
show their original to have been from God, because they speak so much in so
little, containing so many Truths in so few words; for only he that understood
all things at once, was able to intend and comprize so many things together; so
we as justly say, The Church has taken the best course she could to improve
our understandings in those divine Truths, in that she has made it easy for
us to understand the holy Scriptures: And consequently, though she had devised
millions of particular prayers for no other purpose, but to instruct us to pray
upon particular occasions, yet she could not have instructed us half so well as
now she has, merely by imparting to us Gods own Instructions; And till the
Church of Rome shall do the same, it will be vain for her Champions to object
that she has out-gone the Protestant Churches in the care of the peoples
souls; but this by the way, to show the grounds we go upon in our Religion, are
equally good, against the Papists and against the Enthusiasts; But neither is
this all that we can say for our Church in this behalf, for in truth she has
provided such admirable prayers as are not only according to the Rule of Gods
holy Word, but also very much according to the Genius of it, comprizing much in
little, having more of Faith, Hope and Charity in one of her little collects,
then is to be found in many of their long prayers who either revile her
Devotions, or renounce her Communion; So that if we will not be as wasps, good
for nothing but to buz and sting, but rather as Bees ready to gather honey even
from weeds, and much more from the roses of Sharon, we shall easily find to the
joy of our own hearts, and the stopping of others mouths, That our Church in
her Common Prayers has taught us such Generals as may sufficiently supply for
all particulars; And has taught us such eternals as ought to be in our
account, (as they are in themselves) infinitely beyond all Occasionals; our
blessed Savior himself has taught us this lesson concerning the manner of our
prayers, Your Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him,
Mat. 6. 8. as if he had said, you need not ask your heavenly Father (as you
need your earthly parents) in many words, but only with true and upright
hearts; this made our Church delight in short prayers, because she rather
desired to show a relenting heart, then an overflowing tongue; as praying to
him that weighs only hearts, not words in the balance of his Sanctuary: A
short prayer best suits with an hearty desire, which is too earnest to be long
in uttering, and also with the desires of our hearts in regard of heavenly
things, which most commonly are too weak to be long in desiring; The Church in
her short prayers has taken a great care for our earnestness, and withal
provided a certain cure for our weakness; and if any man think that Through
Jesus Christ our Lord, comes in too soon, because the Prayers are short; or too
often, because they are many; let him know, That this one single observation in
these five words, speaks more to God for us, then we by thousands of continued
Periods in our longest prayers are able to speak for our own selves; and if
there were no other reason but this, yet for this reason alone were many short
prayers to be preferred before one long prayer, both in our private and in our
public Devotions.

Again, our blessed Savior has also taught us this lesson concerning the
matter of our Prayers, Seek ye first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness,
and all these things shall be added unto you, Mat. 6. 33. as if he had said,
Regard chiefly your Continual, not your Occasional; your Spiritual, not your
Temporal necessities in your Prayers; be earnest with God to give you Faith,
Hope, Charity, Religion, Repentance, Obedience, Justice, and the like, to
supply your spiritual wants and necessities, and you shall not want any
temporal necessaries; for you shall from your spiritual supplies, find either a
certain remedy against your temporal wants, or a sufficient recompense for
them, or an immortal comfort in them. There is no occasional necessity can
befall the soul, save only by way of comparison, that upon some occasions she
may be in a greater need of the act of Faith; upon others, in a greater need of
the act of Repentance; But her necessities, as also her endowments, are
properly continual, because they are spiritual; therefore all the noise that is
made about using the gift of Prayer in praying against occasional necessities,
or praising for occasional mercies, does not much excite us to seek first the
Kingdom of God, and his righteousness; for his Kingdom and righteousness are
both eternal; but rather to seek first those things which our Savior calls
Additaments, or Adiections; for whatsoever is occasional is temporal; and
whatsoever is temporal ought to be reckoned in the Catalogue of those things
concerning* which our Savior has said (...), Adjicientur vobis, All these
things shall be added unto you. If we heartily Pray for Faith and Repentance,
and the like spiritual endowments, God will surely give them; And he will give
them liberally, that is to say, in great abundance, that they may be truly
worth his giving, and upon our greatest necessities or occasions, that they may
be as truly worth our receiving; He will give them in their acts as well as in
their habits, that his gifts may be complete; And he will give them in our
necessities, That his gifts may be convenient, then greatest when our wants are
so; according to that of Saint James, If any of you lack wisdom (or any other
spiritual gift) let him ask of God that gives to all men liberally and
upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, Jam. 1. 5. God gives liberally;
therefore he gives the whole gift, in the Act as well as in the Habit: and he
upbraideth not, therefore he gives it most when we most want it; for his
gifts, as they are with liberality, not to begrutch them, so they are without
Repentance, not to upbraid them: It Is true, he cannot give us any one spiritual
gift, before we want it; but as true, that he most willingly gives them all,
according to our wants; So that if by our frequent and fervent prayers we do
obtain of God those spiritual gifts which concern the continual, we need not be
very solicitous about those which only concern the occasional necessities of
our souls; For if our continual necessities be supplied, our occasional
necessities cannot want supply, should any such indeed befall our souls: and as
for the occasional necessities of our bodies, they are not worth our own, much
less our Churches prayers, but only in relation to our souls: So little reason
is there that the pretense of occasional necessities should unsettle and
distract our own private forms, much less unloosen and destroy our Churches
public forms of constant Devotions, wherein we are sure we do not seek our own
interests, or temporal advantages, and much less our unrighteousness, but only
the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness: Without doubt, Innocence, Piety, and
Charity, (which may be as truly sought, and more surely found in set forms then
in conceived prayers) are wholly and entirely our spiritual interests; and if
we cordially ask these in our prayers, we shall so rightly seek the Kingdom of
God in it self, that we shall joyfully find it in our own souls: For the
Kingdom of God is Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.
17. and therefore is to be sought by such Prayers as may best express and
increase our faith, that so we may obtain righteousness; And our repentance,
that so we may obtain peace; and our obedience, that so we may obtain joy in
the Holy Ghost; Such prayers God having given us a Church to teach, (more then
any other Church in the Christian world) and not given us hearts to learn, it is
to de feared, (unless we speedily and heartily repent,) he will pronounce the
same sentence, or rather execute the same judgment against us, as he did
against the Israelites, But my people would not hear my voice, and Israel would
not obey me; so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and let them follow
their own imaginations; Psalm. 8^. 12, 13. It Is in the Hebrew (...) Bishirru^h
libbam, id est, In contemplatione aut visione cordis eorum, (...) Bemaraith, so
Jarchi; or, In pertinacia aut duritie (cordis eorum) (...) Bechozek, so Ezra;
The one says, I gave them up to the contemplations of their own hearts, and
that was bad enough; for it is said concerning man, that every imagination of
the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually, (Genesis 6. 5.) The other
says, I gave them up to the hardness of their hearts, and that was a great
deal worse; for to be hardened in evil imaginations is much worse then simply to
be in them; for that is not only to be sinful, but also to be under the
captivity and bondage of sin; He that follows his imagination without his
reason, does in effect degenerate from a man into a Beast; But he that hardneth
himself in his imagination, against his own right reason, and much more against
Gods true Religion, does degenerate from a man almost to be a Devil.

These are the sad Judgments of God upon those who will not hear his voice,
nor obey his Commands; Wherefore we cannot be too solicitous in hearing him,
nor too dutiful in obeying him; And consequently when we are once sure that it is
his voice which speaks to us, and his command which is laid upon us, we must
speedily and wholly resolve upon lending our ears to the voice, and lending our
hearts to the command: For he that bids us prove all things, does not bid us to
be always proving; for it follows, hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5. 21.

I will prove my Religion before I embrace it, that I may draw near to God with
my conscience, and not as an hypocrite; But I will hold fast my Religion when I
have proved it, that I fall not from God against my conscience as an Apostate:
It Is not specious pretenses can make others religious, and God forbid they
should make me lose my Religion: Men may pretend to the spirit of prayer who
have it not, but I am sure they had the spirit of prayer who made such heavenly
prayers as the holy Spirit of God does justify by his Doctrine, and will
accompany with his intercession: And doubtless every particular Christian is
bound to make sure of such prayers, both for his private and for his public
devotions; and when he has gotten such prayers, is bound not to leave them,
unless we will say, the Apostles rule, Hold fast that which is good, is not to
be observed in all good, but only in the very best. The Preacher sought to find
out acceptable words, and that which was written was upright, even words of
Truth, Eccles. 12. ^10. If he that preaches ought to seek for acceptable
words, that is, words suitable both to the matters he speaks of, and the persons
he speaks to, then much more he that prays, since praying ought to be more
carefully provided, and more conscionably performed then preaching: For in
preaching a man speaks to men, but in praying a man speaks to God.

And for this cause the Church thinks it her duty to provide for us acceptable
words in praying, whilst she leaves us to provide our own acceptable words in
preaching: The Prophet Hosea exhorts the Israelites to take with them words,
and turn to the Lord, Hos. 14. 2. He asks not Gold nor Silver, not burnt
offerings (says Rabbi David) but good words from you, that with them you will
confess your sins, and return unto the Lord with all your heart, and not only
with your lips: Here it is plain by his Gloss, that the Prophet enjoins a form of
confession, and bids them take good words that they may have good hearts; nay
it is plain by the Text it self; for those good words, or that form of confession
is particularly expressed as well as enjoined in the next words, Say unto him,
Take away all iniquity and receive us graciously; But it were in vain to pray
unto God to receive us graciously, if we did pray ungraciously; therefore
taking with us words according to Gods command in Hosea, must needs well agree
with the Spirit of grace and of supplications, according to his promise in
Zechariah (Zech. 12. 10.) And as the Papists do vainly arrogate, and more
vainly appropriated the Title of Religion to their monastical vows, so the
Enthusiasts do as vainly arrogate, and more vainly appropriate the Title of the
Spirit to their fantastical prayers; and good Protestants have no more reason
to think they want these prayers to make them spiritual, then that they want
those vows to make them Religious.

I do not discourage or discountenance any particular man's gifts; for I do
heartily wish as Moses did* I would to God all the Lords people were Prophets;
but I must needs profess, that he which ascended on high and led captivity
captive to give gifts unto men, has given the greatest gifts where he has
given the greatest promises; and he has given greater promises to his Church,
then to any member or Minster of the same: If I follow the Church making use of
the gift of prayer which God has given her, I do that which God has required
of me: For the Church has commission from God to teach me to pray, or that of
Luke 11. 1. was not written for our instruction; But if I follow any other man's
gifts who has not that commission, I may justly fear that God who will one day
say to him, Who has required this at your hands for making such prayers, will
not say much less to me, for hearing them. As for that slight objection of
deadness and formality men are subject to, more from set forms then from
conceived prayers, it is in its consequence a blasphemy against the holy
Scriptures; for it reaches the prayers penned there by the Holy Ghost, as well
as penned here by the Church, so that I hope none will blame me for calling the
objection slight, now I have proved it wicked: For how is it possible for any
man to say that prayer by book is flat and dead, without undervaluing all the
prayers in the holy Bible, and contemning the very Book of books? Let him next
say, Evangelium Atramentarium, away with this Inkie-Gospel; but withal let him
know, that he cannot thus turn Enthusiast, unless he will first turn Papist; So
he shall turn to the worse for his person; and he cannot depend upon
suggestions instead of books, but he must turn prayer from being an act of
Reason, nay from being an act of Faith, to be an act of fancy, if not of
faction, And so he shall turn to the worse also for his prayers; yet all this
while we cannot but take notice that our adversaries are very hard put to it
for an accusation, when they are fain to fetch it from our hearts, which they
cannot know, should not judge; dealing with us as some of the Rabbis dealt
with Job; for when the Text had said of him, In all this Job sinned not with
his lips, (as we doubt not, but it does also in effect say of our Church
concerning her Common Prayers) two of them ( sc. Ralbag and Jarchi) are pleased
to add this gloss, (...) Abal belibbo Chata, But yet sure he sinned in his
heart*

To conclude, a set form of Doctrine we must have, or be Heretical; A set form
of Discipline we must have, or be irregular; and why not also have a set form
of devotion, or be irreligious? for we cannot well be unanimously Religious
without a set form of public prayer, and the want of unanimity will soon beget
the want of Religion; for God is love; and therefore we cannot be without love,
but we must be without God; and consequently men cannot be long without true
charity, but they will also be without true piety: And as for making the Common
Prayer Book an Idol, if it be not an objection of great impiety by calling true
Religion Idolatry, yet it is an argument of great absurdity, because it may
cast the Bible, must cast the Sabbath out of the Church: For men may Idolize
one good Book as well as another, so the Bible may go ere long: but some have
already Idolized the Sabbath, so that must stay no longer: I do the rather
instance upon this latter, for that it comes nearest our present case.

1. Because public prayer is the duty of the Sabbath; and that ought to be
public in its substance, that is, in its matter and form, as well as in its
Accidents, that is, time, place, and persons.

2. Because the same Method is to be observed in words as in time; Gods
consecration is to be the rule of ours in them both; he has consecrated, we
may; what he has consecrated we must; he has said make holy, we may; he has
said make holy the Sabbath day, we must; he has said, when ye pray say thus,
we must; he has said, after this manner therefore pray, we may: Had he not
given us that latitude, we might not have taken it, but must have only used
such prayers in his public worship as his holy Spirit had left us in the holy
Scriptures: Now he has given this latitude, we must make the best use of it by
making and using such prayers as we know are after this manner, though not in
these Words; we have as great need of set forms of prayers to find our tongues,
as of set forms of Laws to bind our heads to the good behavior; and God
himself has in effect told us as much in giving us so many set forms of
prayers in the holy Bible.

SECT. XIV. The third and last part of the Churches trust concerning Religion
is touching the holy Sacraments, wherein our Church is not faulty either in the
number, or in the administration of them, as exactly following our Saviors
institution; nor in the manner of administering, as following it with reverence.
REligion being above the light of nature to understand it, must needs be above
the power of nature to command it; Hence the acts of the Theological virtues
are prescribed by the positive Law of God, because they belong properly to
Religion; But the acts of moral virtues are prescribed by the Law of nature,
because they belong to Reason; yet are they in truth injurious to Religion, who
will allow nothing to be moral, but what they can prove to be natural; For the
positive Law of God does constitute moralities to the Christian, as well as the
inbred Law of nature does constitute moralities to the Man: This appears
plainly in the Sacraments, which are not to be accounted as Ceremonies, because
they come not under the authority of the Church either for their institution,
or alteration, or abolition, and must therefore be accounted as moralities,
though they are not at all commanded by the Law of nature, but only by the Law
of God.

That these Sacraments are a part of the Churches trust, is unquestionable,
because the Gospel is. For the vocal word, and the visible word, Verbum Vocale,
and verbum visibile, both alike are duties of the Christian Religion for the
glory of God, and of the Christian Communion for the edification of man, but
all the duties both of Religion and Communion are committed to the Churches
trust, God having appointed his own Ministers as his special Trustees, both for
preaching his word, and for administering his Sacraments: So that no man can
administer a Sacrament but in the person of God; and he has not licensed every
one that will, to take upon him his person, but only such to whom he has given
his special deputation; And this is more peculiarly manifest concerning the two
Sacraments, properly so called, that is Baptism and the Lords holy Supper; For
our blessed Savior said only to his Apostles, Go ye therefore and baptize, in
respect of the one; and do ye this in remembrance of me, in respect of the
other; As for the five additional Sacraments, they were never looked upon as
integral parts of Gods ordinary public worship, and therefore though they
could be proved Sacraments, yet they would not come under our present
discourse; But in truth they cannot be proved Sacraments, according to the
proper definition of a Sacrament, which is this, A Sacrament is an outward
visible sign of an inward spiritual grace, given to us and ordained by Christ
himself, as a means to convey that grace, and as a pledge to assure us thereof;
Let us examine this definition by its causes, and we shall easily perceive that
it belongs only to Baptism, and the Holy Eucharist, and therefore they two only
are to be called Sacraments; First, by its efficient cause, [ Given and
ordained by Christ himself] which is clear of these two; for they were
instituted by him, and have his precept and promise in the very words of their
institution, which cannot be asserted concerning any of the other; Secondly, by
its material cause, [ outward visible sign, inward spiritual Grace] which are
both manifestly known in Baptism and the Holy Eucharist, but neither in any of
the rest: For Penance has no outward visible sign at all, and Matrimony,
Orders, Confirmation, Extreme unction, have no outward visible signs of Christ's
appointing: And much less have any of these that inward spiritual Grace which
is annexed to Baptism and the Holy Eucharist; To wit, Christ with all his
merits and mercies whereby of God He is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness,
and sanctification, and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. For we dare not say that any
man is by any of these five either born and initiated, or nourished and
confirmed in Christ: Thirdly, by its formal cause, [ An outward visible sign of
an inward spiritual Grace.] Whereby it appears that the internal and proper
form of a Sacrament is the necessary conjunction or connection of the sign and
the thing signified; which conjunction is so undeniable in our two Sacraments,
that Baptism is called the washing of regeneration (Tit. 3. 5.) And the holy
Eucharist the Communion of the body and blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16. For
that these two are not only signs and seals, but also conveyances of grace unto
the soul; whereas the other five though they have something of the sign, yet
they have nothing at all of the seal, or of the conveyance of grace: Lastly, by
its final cause, [ As a means to convey Grace, and as a pledge to assure us
thereof] The end of a Sacrament is partly our Communion with Christ, and partly
our acknowledgement of that Communion: This twofold end is very apparent in
Baptism and in the holy Eucharist, which does procure our Communion with
Christ, and also require our acknowledgement of that Communion; but in the
rest, either the one is without the other, or there is a want of both: For
either there is no Communion with Christ, or there is no acknowledgement of
that Communion; whereas a Sacrament is a seal of Gods Covenant, and therefore
in its own nature is a double pledge; to wit, of Gods grace and favor to man,
and of man's duty and thankfulness to God; For as it is a sign of Gods grace to
us, so it should be a sign of Gods grace in us: For in the very signification
of a Sacrament there is a mutual respect; one on Gods part offering grace,
another on man's part promising obedience; If either of these be wanting, the
holy rite may be a mystery, but it cannot be a Sacrament properly so called,
since a Sacrament is the seal of a Covenant, and a Covenant is a mutual
engagement of two parties, which in this case, are God and Man.

Therefore a Sacrament is from the very end of its institution, perpetual in
its continuance, and common in its use; Perpetual in its continuance, because
Gods Covenant is not for a day but for ever, it is an everlasting Covenant; And
common in its use, because Gods Covenant is not for one, but for all; it is a
general, an universal Covenant: Non enim propter unius seculi homines venit
Christus, sed propter omnes qui illius membra futuri sunt, says Iren^us, (lib.
4. adver. haereses, cap. 39.) Christ came not into the world for the men of one
age, (or of one order) but for all that should be his true and faithful members
in all ages (and all orders) of men whatsoever: And upon this ground we cannot
but say that the Sacraments which do exhibit and convey Christ, do alike belong
to men of all ages, and of all orders; Whereas Penance, Matrimony, Order,
Confirmation, and Extr^am ^unction, do not so; for they are either not
perpetual in their continuance, as not belonging to all times; or not common in
their use, as not belonging to all persons, though under the same Covenant, and
of the same faith: So that our Church has not erred in the number of the
Sacraments, by excluding these from that number, because she looks on a
Sacrament as a seal of Gods grace, equally belonging to all that are under the
same Covenant of grace, and as a Testimony of man's faithfulness, equally
belonging to all that are bound to profess the same Christian faith: As it is a
seal of Gods Covenant, so it is perpetual in its continuance, and mnst belong
to all times, for the Covenant does so: As it is a Testimony of man's
faithfulness, so it is common in its use, and must belong to all persons, for
the profession of faith does so; and we can avow both these only concerning
Baptism and the Lords Supper, and accordingly dare not avow any but these to be
properly called Sacraments.

Now as concerning the administration of these Sacraments, there is little or
no contention about Baptism, though now it be commonly administered by
aspersion, whereas heretofore not only in hotter, but also in these our colder
climates it was administered altogether by immersion; For all do allow that
Axiom, Magis and minus non variat speciem; so as the element be water, it is not
material to Baptism, whether it be more or less; for the least drop of Christ's
blood (signified by the water in Baptism, and applied to the soul) is able to
wash and cleanse it from all sin: But there are many and great contentions
about the administration of the Holy Eucharist; whereby men may have made that
a Division, which God made a Communion: One main reason has been, that some
would not regard Christ's Command, (hence the wine came to be left out) and yet
would observe his practice: Hence water came to be taken in; and hence also
that sharp dispute betwixt the Greek and Latin Church, the one rejecting the
use of unleavened, the other of leavened bread: whereas it ought to be without
all question, That what was of Christ's command in this Holy Sacrament, is still
indispensable; not so what was only of his practice or example; So says Saint
Paul to the Corinthians, I have received of the Lord that which I also
delivered to you, (1 Cor. 11. 23.) bringing them back to Christ's command, to
have the same elements of bread and wine as he appointed, and to use them for
the same end, even for his remembrance: But he brings them not back to Christ's
example, to have either unleavened bread, or water mixed with their wine, and
much less to use the same posture he did, that they may receive sitting or
leaning, or to observe the same time he did, that they may receive after
Supper; He leaves all these, and the like, as things indifferent, to the
disposal of the Church; for they are indifferent in regard of the Sacrament,
though they may be necessary in regard of us, viz. when they are commanded,
because we are bound to follow the Churches order in things indifferent, to
preserve the Unity of Communion, as the Church is bound to follow Christ's order
in things necessary, to preserve the Verity of Religion. And if we desire to
know what is to be judged necessary, what indifferent in regard of this
Sacrament, since both were joined together in our Saviors practice; I answer,
that must be accounted necessary which was substantial, either as belonging to
the essence or to the end of the Sacrament: That must be accounted indifferent
which was circumstantial, as belonging to the Sacrament only at that time, sc.
of the Jewish Pass over, when the Jews were bound to eat unleavened bread, or
in that country, as the mingling water with wine, which was usual in those
hotter climates; But the not using wine in the holy Communion; cannot be
accounted Indifferent, because wine is one of the material parts belonging to
the essence of the holy Communion, and there can be no whole Communion without
it, as there can be no whole being of any thing without one of its essential
Parts; Besides, as The using wine belongs to the essence, so likewise it
belongs to the end of this holy Sacrament, which is the remembrance of Christ:
For so says Saint Paul, As often as ye eat this bread, And (he says not, Or)
drink this cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. 26. The
conjunction copulative [ And] will not allow the proposition, being copulative,
to be true, unless both its parts be true; and therefore we cannot show the
Lords death only by eating this bread, unless we also drink this cup; for if we
have but a half Sacrament, we can have but a half remembrance of Christ: In
Baptism, though our forefathers used immersion, we now only use aspersion, yet
both they and we have the same Sacrament, because both use water, and so have
the same essential matter of Baptism, as well as the same essential form: But
in the holy Eucharist it may be doubted whether the present Lay-Romanists have
the same Sacrament with their forefathers, because they now are not permitted
to have the wine, which their forefathers had, till full a thousand years
after Christ.

And truly in this respect our common people are much more happy then those of
the Papacy, That they have the whole Sacrament of the blessed Eucharist, and
thereby a full remembrance of Christ, and a full Communion with him, as well as
the Priest: For if the blood be with the Body by concomitancy, why should the
Priest have it twice, who eats of the bread, as well as the Layman, and yet
besides drinks of the cup? If the blood be not with the body, it is clear the
Layman has it not at all, and so he is most uncharitably and unjustly
defrauded of that spiritual nourishment which Christ has given him. To let
alone the Dispute of Sacrilege in the case, for a man to rob God of that
service which himself has commanded, or rather the Determination of that
Dispute, for so has Pope Gelasius determined it in his decretal Epistle
recited by Gratian, in these words, Aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur; Quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterii, sine grandi
Sacrilegio non potest provenire. (de consecr. did. 2. cap. 12.) Either let
them take all the Sacrament, or let them take none; For what mystery God has
made One, man cannot divide or make Two, without great Sacrilege; I say to let
alone the Sacrilege in the case, (and yet I cannot see how any man can with a
good conscience communicate in a Sacrilege) This Uncharitableness and
Injustice is enough to make any considerate man out of love with that Church
which deals with him so uncharitably and so unjustly: So unjustly as to deny
him what is undoubtedly his due: So uncharitably, as to deny him what is
immortally his comfort, even the conveyance and assurance of blessed Communion
in his soul with the eternal Son of God; so that if a good conscience move me
not for Gods sake, yet a good consideration will move me for mine own sake to
bless God for placing me in such a Church, as gives me a whole and a full
communion, because I can assure my self, that receiving a whole communions as
my Savior has appointed, nothing but mine own want of Faith and Repentance
can keep me from receiving my Savior, and with him all the blessings and
comforts of his Salvation; whereas a man that receives but one Part of this
blessed Sacrament, cannot be assured that he shall receive his Savior with it;
for though Christ has graciously promised that he will be with his own
institutions, yet he has absolutely disclaimed that he will be with ours;
concerning these he has plainly said, In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, Mat. 15. 8. and much more will it follow
from hence, In vain do they worship me, doing for duties their own commandments
instead of mine. Bellarmine tells us, that Johannes Ragusaeus was eight days
in the Council of Basil making an Oration against the Hussites concerning the
Communion under both kinds: If he had been eight years, it had been to as
little purpose; for it is not any man's declamation can justify a willful neglect
of Christ's institution; If Christ has commanded this thing, let his command be
showed; if not, let not the thing be attempted, much less allowed, since he
only has the authority of ordering and instituting the signs of Grace, who
has the right of promising grace, and the power of giving it, when these signs
be used according to his order: and he having instituted two signs of grace in
this blessed Sacrament, if I receive but one, by what Faith can I hope for his
grace, unless I will hope for it without his Promise, and without his Power? So
that upon these grounds a half Sacrament is no Sacrament; for Christ having
annexed his Promise to his command, If I do not what he has commanded, How can
I expect what he has promised? Therefore since my Faith depends wholly upon my
Saviors promise, not; at all upon his Churches power, I can have no Faith in,
because he has made no promise to a half Sacrament; and yet withal I cannot
see but the Church may as well Baptize without naming the first and third
persons of the Trinity, from those Texts which speak of Baptizing in the name
of the Lord Jesus, as administer the holy Communion without the cup, from those
Texts which speak of breaking bread; For sure the Churches power is as great in
the one Sacrament, as it is in the other, and so in a short time we may by the
Churches power, come to have no Sacrament: And it is worth our enquiry, whether
or no he be not a Sacramentarian, who believes the Sacrament to be without the
signs, as well as he who believes the signs to be without the Grace or the
thing signified.

The last thing I am to consider about the Sacraments as they are in our
Church, is, the manner of Administering; And I am not afraid to averr, That as
she has outgone the Pap^sts in the administration it self, so she has outgone
other Protestants in the manner of Administering: And this is so evident in
Baptism, that I need not insist upon its proof, because our Church therein
still retains many, ancient solemnities which have been discountenanced, if
not disallowed by the Reformed Church in other Countries, not to recede from
her Sister, the Reformed Church, but to continue with her Mother, The Church
Catholic; For she looks upon those solemnities she retains as upon so many
rites of the Catholic Church, and has sufficiently proved them so to be, and
therefore cannot look upon the rejection of those rites as a part of her
reformation, because she desires and professes so to be Reformed as also to be
Catholic.

And it is no less evident in the holy Communion, wherein the manner of
administering in our Church* is much more full of Reverence then in other
Protestant Churches; For some of them receive the Body and Blood of Christ
sitting, as if they were Copes-mates with their Savior; so the Dutch: Others
standing, as if they were in haste to be gone from him; so the French: But only
our Church requires kneeling, which as it is the most proper gesture of Piety,
so is it moreover a gesture of Humility.

As for sitting, it was never accounted a Gesture belonging to Prayer; and
therefore whereas it is said, Then went King David in, and sat before the
Lord, (2 Samuel 7. 18.) that is before the Ark [(...) liphnei haaron] as both
Kimchi and Jarchi interpret it) Junius thus renders the words, Restitit coram
Iehova, He remained before the Lord, and says concerning the Hebrew word (...)
Iesheb consedit, He sat, it was a Catachresis, an abuse of its signification:
And indeed Rabbi David Kimchi upon the place, shows he was not willing to
believe that sitting was David's posture when he prayed before the Ark; And
therefore he slightly passes by the gloss of those Rabbis who inferred from
hence, That the Kings of the house of David might set as they prayed in the
Sanctuary; for says he, it is written of the Seraphims and all the host of
heaven (...) shehem gnomedim, That they were standing before the Lord; And he
rather adhereth to those, who reading the word (with a ts^re) (...) Vajeshib
and consedit, And he sat before the Lord, thus expounded it (...) samach
gnatsmo, He confirmed his strength (in praying) or, who reading the word with a
Camets (...) vaiashab, and reversus fuit, And he returned before the Lord, thus
expounded it, (...) iashab gnetsmo bithepillah, He converted his strength to
Prayer: but he cares not to say, That he sat when he Prayed; for that was a
gesture not becoming a Supplicant.

As for standing, though it be a gesture belonging to Prayer as well as
Kneeling, yet is it not a gesture of so much piety, and surely it is of far
less humility; whereas what has a worthy Receiver else to do, but wholly to
contemplate his Saviors Goodness, and his own unworthiness? The first
contemplation will make him labor what he can, to show his Piety: The second
will make him as zealous to show his Humility: We cannot deny but the Christian
is best disposed to receive Christ when he is praying, and for that reason our
Church would have us be Praying when we come to receive him; and it is
certainly more fitting we should kneel then stand when we are praying; It is an
express Article of the Protestants Discipline in France, That the due reverence
belonging to the holy Communion be carefully maintained, (cap. 12. art. 12.)
and upon this ground does our Church think it fit to maintain kneeling rather
then standing at the holy Communion, the better to maintain and to improve that
due reverence: In a word, we make that profession concerning this blessed
Sacrament, which the Primitive Christians made, (as it is recorded by Iustine
Martyr, toward the end of his second Apology) (...), etc. For we receive not
these (elements,) as common bread, or as common wine; But as by the Word of
God, Jesus Christ our Savior being incarnate, had both flesh and blood for our
salvation: So that food, over which the Word that came from God has prayed and
given thanks, (whence our flesh and blood are nourished, after it is changed)
we are taught in the flesh and blood of that Incarnate Jesus; [(...): Incarnati
illius Jesus carnem and sanguinem esse edocti sumus:] These words have been much
urged both for Transubstantiation, and for Consubstantiation; but since they
have been urged to prove both, we may safely conclude they can prove neither;
Two proofs are taken from them; The first is, That he says, we receive it not
as common bread; but that proves it is bread, though not common bread: The
second, that he says, The bread is the flesh of the incarnate Jesus, that is
such flesh as Christ took in his incarnation: But that proves, it is not flesh
under the appearance of bread, or in conjunction with bread; besides he says,
Our flesh and blood are nourished by it; but sure our flesh is nourished by
bread, not by the body of Christ, that is only the nourishment of our souls:
And yet still, though we embrace neither of these opinions, we do most
willingly profess with that holy Martyr, That we receive these elements, not as
common bread, nor as common wine, but as the very flesh and blood of our
incarnate Jesus; And therefore we desire to use such reverence in receiving
this holy Eucharist* as may be suitable with this profession; For what Saint
Paul said would come to pass among the Corinthians upon a right use of
Preaching, will we hope much more come to pass amongst us upon a right use of
Administering; If there comes in one that believes not, or one unlearned, he is
convinced of all, he is judged of all; And thus are the secrets of his heart
made manifest, and so falling down on his face, he will worship God, and
report, That God is in you of a Truth, 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. He is not like to
fall on his face, whiles he sees us either sit or stand: Our outward
reverence, if used, may convince and condemn him; if not used, will convince
and condemn our selves: For if he sees us not true worshippers, he will not
think us true Believers: We will therefore kneel that we may worship, and we
will therefore worship that we may make an Alient a true Believer, and much
more show our selves to be true Believers.

CAP. III. That the Communion of the Church of England, is conscionably
embraced and retained, by All the people of this Nation, and not rejected, much
less renounced by any of them, but against the Rules of Conscience.
SECT. I. Every particular man ought to labor to be of such a Communion, as he
is sure is truly Christian, both in Doctrine, and in Devotion. The Rule whereby
to choose such a Christian Communion, the Proofs whereby to maintain it.
THAT man cannot be truly said to believe the Communion of Saints, who does not
labor to make himself one of that Communion; This he cannot attempt without
joining himself to those who profess to know and to worship God in Christ; and
this he cannot attain, without joining himself to those who do truly so know,
and rightly so worship God.

So that although the Communion of Saints may be sought among all sorts of
Christians, yet is it not to be found but only among good Christians, such as
are publicly known to be true believers and right worshippers; For Christian
Communion is founded both in Doctrine and in Devotion; In Doctrine to make men
of one mind, in Devotion to make men of one mouth; And since Doctrine and
Devotion are the two integral Parts of Religion, the one ^anctifying the
understanding, the other sanctifying the will, (that so Religion may fully do
its work, in knitting or binding the whole soul unto God) it is manifest that
Christian Communion is founded in Christian Religion; and the truest Christian
Communion, in the truest Christian Religion; Accordingly every particular man
is bound to join himself to that Church which does profess the truest Christian
Religion both in Doctrine and in Devotion, that so he may embrace the truest
Christian Communion: And because all Churches do alike magnify themselves and
vilify others, it is necessary that in the choice of our Christian Communion
we observe the Apostles general Axiom, Not he that commends himself is
approved, but whom the Lord commends, 2 Cor. 10. 18. In the business of
Religion and of eternal Salvation, we may not rely upon our own judgments or
the judgments of any other men, but only upon the judgment and approbation of
God, who is the Author of Religion, and the Giver of Salvation: Therefore it is
not for any man to be of this or that Church because it commends it self, but
because God commends it; And where should we seek, where can we find Gods
commendation but in his word? So it is plain I must choose my Church from Gods
word, or I can never be sure that God does commend my choice; and this
consideration alone must needs make a conscientious man afraid of choosing that
Church for the guide of his Communion, which refuses to take Gods word for the
guide of her Religion. For the Churches power concerning Religion in the
Apostles times was but ministerial; and how should it come in our times to be
magisterial? For so it is said, Who is Paul? and who is Apollo? but Ministers
by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man? 1 Cor. 3. 5. They are
Ministers of your faith, not Lords and Masters of it; Nay in that they are
Ministers, it is evident they cannot be Masters of your Faith; for there is a
direct opposition between a Minister and a Master; you are bound to have a
special regard to their Ministry, that you may believe, but not to depend or
rely upon their authority in your belief: For thus has Christ our Lord
appointed, That your Faith should come by the Churches Ministry, but from his
own Authority (...) And therefore you must go to his Church for your Communion,
that you may go to himself for your Religion: Christ's Church has not a
coordinate authority that she may command with Christ in matters of Religion,
(for so she might also command against him) but only a subordinace Authority to
command in and for him; in his name, and for his glory; Thus Aristotle (lib. 6.
Eth. cap. ult.) ingeniously answers their objection who would make Prudence
to be above Sapience, because Prudence commands Sapience, and he answers it
by this distinction, (...), Illius causa praecipit, non autem illi; Prudence
commands for Sapience, but not over her; we are willing to look upon Christ's
Church as upon the best Prudence in the world, but withal we must look upon
Christ himself as the only Sapience, the only true and eternal wisdom, and
accordingly say, That the Church commands for Christ, but not over him; He
that commands over another, is certainly his superior; but he that
commands for another is not so, but rather his inferior; As Physic
commands or prescribes for health, and therefore in that regard is not
superior but inferior to health, being made subservient to its recovery or
continuance: And if we will not allow this distinction, we must (according to
Aristotle) affirm the state or Commonwealth to be above God himself, (for she
prescribes his worship) and if we will allow it, we may not deny the Church to
be under him, (...), (says Aristotle) wherefore if it be absurd in the
judgment of a heathen, to allow the civil state a power eminent above, or
equal with the false Gods, because she commands their worship; Then much more
ought it to be absurd in the judgment of a Christian, to allow the
Ecclesiastical State a power eminent above, or equal with the true God, merely
upon the ground and reason of the same command.

Yet on the other side, as Prudence ought to prescribe for Sapience, so the
Church ought to prescribe for Christ; And as he that neglects the particular
prescriptions of Prudence, is the further from attaining the general dictates
of Sapience; So he that neglects the particular directions of Christ's Church,
is the farther from apprehending the General instructions of Christ's Word; I
must then take both Christ's Word and Christ's Church for my guides in the choice
of my Christian Communion; His Word for my guide that I be not guilty of
superstition; His Church for my guide, that I be not guilty of Faction; And
having taken these two guides, either I shall meet with no objections from mine
own conscience, (and it is no matter what I meet with from other men's tongues)
against my Religion, or I shall meet with very good solutions to answer them;
As for example, Let this be the Catechism concerning my Religion.

Quest. 1. Upon what authority do you profess your Religion?

Answ. Upon the highest authority in heaven and in earth, the authority of God
and of his Church; The authority of God; for it is consonant to his word as my
Rule: The authority of Gods Church; for it is consonant to her Practice as my
Example.

Quest. 2. Do you think that you are bound to ground your Religion upon this
twofold authority?

Answ. I do, especially as to the public exercise or profession of it; For
without the first, I shall have superstition instead of Religion; without the
second, I shall have faction instead of Communion.

Quest. 3. How can you prove that your particular Church has authority from
God to order you in the outward exercise of Religion?

Answ. By the same proofs of the Text, which prove any Church whatsoever to
have that authority; For Christ's commission to Saint Peter, Feed my sheep, John
20. 16. is by him derived unto other Pastors, Feed the Flock of God, which is
among you, 1 Pet. 5. 2. He says not, Feed that part of my flock which is among
you, to help or to assist me, but Feed the Flock of God, to honor and obey
him; And he says, the flock of God which is among you, to show that the flocks
needed no more look abroad for their Pastors, then the Pastors needed look
abroad for their flocks, since they were actually one among the other; And yet
if the words had been less punctual, they had not been less prevalent; For feed
the flock of God, must alike concern all Churches, since no prophecy (or
command) of the Scripture, is of any private interpretation, (2 Pet. 1. 20.)
and therefore this command must alike concern all Churches.

Quest. 4. What need you look after the Authority of God in the choice or
practice of your Religion, is not his Church allotted you for your only guide?

Answ. No, it is not for my Religion, though it be for my Communion; For if I
serve God with a blind obedience, I cannot serve him with my conscience; and
that is no other then a blind obedience, to serve him upon another, not upon
his own command; They that would persuade me to this, should make the ninth
Article of the Apostles Creed, the First; and teach me to say, I believe the
holy Catholic Church; before I say, I believe in God the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; For all the world cannot deny, but my belief in God is the only ground
of all my Faith, even as my love of God is the only ground of all my obedience:
And since all Religion consists in faith and obedience, well I may look upon my
Church as the conveyance, but I must look upon God only, as the Donor and
Giver, or the Author of my Religion.

SECT. II. That the Communion of the Church of England is truly Christian, in
Doctrine free from Heresy, and from the necessary cause thereof, a false
ground or foundation of Faith; that is, Believing upon the Authority of man
instead of God.
I had little Reason, and should have less Religion to be true to my Church, if
my Church were not true to my Savior, the eternal Truth: Therefore I must
needs acquit my Church from Heresy, that I may keep my self from Apostasy;
For if she has fallen away from Christ, I might lawfully fall away from her;
at least internally by withdrawing my affection, which ought to be fixed upon
Gods Truth, if not externally, by withdrawing my person, which ought not to
disturb the Churches Peace. Let me see then how my Church has kept Gods Truth,
that I may learn how to keep my Church: And herein I cannot but persuade my
self, that what our blessed Savior once spoke to those Jews which believed on
him, he still speaks to us Christians who profess the same belief, If ye
continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed; And ye shall know the
Truth, and the Truth shall make you free, John 8. 31, 32. And by the rule of
contraries, If we continue not in his word, then are we not his Disciples in
deed, but only in show, and we shall not know the Truth, and the Truth shall
not make us free: Therefore no Church can boast of being his Disciple, which
does not continue in his Word, that she may continue in his Truth: And in this
respect I cannot but continue in my Church, that I may continue both in his
Word and in his Truth, because I see she has continued in both; so that the
Truth which has made her free, has made me a bondsman; for I am not free to go
from the Church, whiles she is free by coming to, and abiding in the Truth; I
must be contented to lose my Liberty, that I may keep my Piety, wherein though
I have a seeming loss, yet I have a real gain, even the gain of godliness,
which is great gain in this world by sanctifying the soul, but greater in the
next by saving it: And this is according to our blessed Saviors Prayer,
Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy word is Truth, John 17. 17. The same is
the Holy Religion to sanctify us, which is the True Religion to save us; The
sanctification it has from Gods Truth, the Truth it has from Gods Word; and
consequently a Religion that is not built upon Gods Word, can neither have
Sanctification, nor Truth; This is the only certain and infallible foundation
of the Catholic Faith, according to that of Saint Paul, Ye are of the household
of God, and are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus
Christ himself being the chief cornerstone, Ephesians. 2. 19, 20. Upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets; that is, upon the Old and New
Testament, Supra novum and vetus Testamentum, as says Saint Ambrose; And
Epiphanius does in effect give the same gloss, in saying, That our blessed
Savior is called the chief cornerstone, (...); Because he did bind as it were
in one knot both the People and the Truths of the Old and New Testament; so
that we must have the holy Scriptures for our foundation, or we cannot have our
Savior Christ for the chief cornerstone of our building. The same Epiphanius
tells us, that our blessed Savior was therefore called (...), Magni consilii
Angelus, (for so the Seventy have rendered that Text, Isa. 9. 6.) The Angel of
the great Counsel, (...),) Epiph. in Her. Arian.) because he declared the will
of his Father unto men: And sure we must go to the Holy Scriptures if we desire
to find that declaration: Nay indeed Aquinas also w^tnesseth the same in saying
that it is most proper for Divinity to argue from authority, (and not from
reason,) because she has all her principles from Revelation; Argumentari ex
authoritate est maxim proprium hujus Doctrine, eo quod principia hujus
Doctrinae per revelationem habentur: (in 1. par. qu. 1. ar. 8. ad. 2.) And
least we should doubt where to look for that Revelation, and consequently for
that authority from which we ought to argue, he tells us presently after we must
look for it from the Apostles and Prophets, in the Canonical Scriptures, and
from no body else. Innititur fides nostra revelationi Apostolis and Prophetis
factae, qui Canonicos libros scripserunt; non autem revelationi, siqua fuit
aliis doctoribus facta: Our faith relyeth upon the revelation that was made to
the Apostles and Prophets who writ the Canonical Scriptures, and not upon any
Revelation made before or since to any other Doctor whatsoever; And he proves
his assertion from Saint Augustine in an Epistle to Saint Hierom, wherein he
says thus, Solis enim scripturarum libris qui Canonici appellantur, didici
hunc honorem defer ut nullum auctorem eorum in scribendo errasse aliquid
firmissime credam; Alios autem ita lego, ut quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque
praepolleant, non ideo verum putem quod ipsi ita senserunt vel scripserunt: I
have learned to give this honor only to the Canonical Books of the Holy
Scriptures, that I firmly believe the Authors of those books to have erred in
nothing: But as for other Authors, though of never so great learning and
piety, yet I do not think the Doctrine true, because they have writ it: I will
add but one more Testimony, and that shall be from Gratian himself, the Father
of the Canonists, who in the second part of the Decree, ( cause 8. quest. 1.
cap ult.) cites these words out of reverend Bid, Quibus in sacris literis una
est credendi pariter and Vivendi regula praescripta, To whom in the Holy
Scripture there is prescribed one rule, both of believing and of living; (
Quibus to whom) he means to Clergymen and to Laymen, though the gloss is
pleased to add, Laicis tamen sufficit Pictura pro Doctrina, Pictures may
suffice for Laymens Books.

It Is to no purpose to cite moreover the authority of Councils; for sure
Schoolmen, Fathers and Canonists are enough to outweigh a few later Jesuits,
who would sain have us go to man rather then to God for the foundation of our
Faith; In controversiis Religionis, ultimum judicium est summi Pontificis,
says Bellarmine, lib. 4. de Pontif. cap. 1.. Sed nec. In controversies of
Religion the last Judgment belongs to the Pope; And again, Solum Petrum
Christus vocavit Petram and fundamentum, non Petrum cum Concilio; ex quo
apparet totam firmitatem Conciliorum esse a Pontifice non partim a Pontifice,
partim a Concilio, ib. c 3.. Contra. Our blessed Savior called Peter alone a
Rock, and a foundation; not Peter with a Council; From whence it is evident
that the whole validity of Councils (and by con^equent of the Catholic
Church,) is wholly from the Pope, not partly from the Pope, and partly from a
Council.

If the Council of Constance and of Basil had been of this belief, the contrary
would never have been defined for a Catholic verity; Veritas de potestate
Concilii generalis universalem Ecclesiam repraesentantis, supra Papam and
quemlibet alterum, declarata per Constantiense and hoc Basiliense generalia
Concilia, est veritas fidei Catholicae; (Consil. Basil. sess. 33.) This truth
declared by the general Councils of Constance and Basil, of the power of a
general Council, representing the universal Church, above the Pope, or any
other, is a truth belonging to the Catholic Faith; To which they add this for
a second, That the Pope cannot dissolve or remove a General Council without
their own consents; and after that bring in this for a third verity of the
Catholic faith, Veritatibus duabus praedictis pertinaciter repu^nans, est
censendus Haereticus; He that pertinaciously opposes the two former verities,
is to be accounted an Heretic: Which their three Catholic verities are again
repeated in the thirty eighth Session; and in the fortieth Session Pope Foelix
upon his knees takes a solemn Oath to maintain the decrees of these two, as
well as of the other general Councils; and after he has so done, subscribes
the same Oath with his own hand, offers it upon the Holy Altar, and promises
to take it again in the first public Consistory that he should hold, sc. (at
Rome with the Cardinals;) Hanc autem professionem mea manu subscripsi, and tibi
omnipoten^i Deo, cui in die tremendi judicii redditurus sum de hoc and aliis
meis operibus rationem, pura mente super Altar offero, quam in primo publico
consistorio solenniter repetam; (Council. Basil. sess. 40.) I made this
digression only to show, That unless the Holy Scriptures be taken for the
foundation of our faith, we are like to have none; For a general Council is not
this foundation, says Bellarmine; The Pope is not say these two Councils, and
the Pope himself swears on their side; So Bellarmine defines against the
Councils, the Councils define against the Pope, and the Pope not only defines,
but also swears against himself: And we conceive that Saint Paul defined
against them all, when he said, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord, 1
Cor. 1. 31. and again, That your faith should not stand in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God, 1 Cor. 2. 5. It Is only Gods truth which can be the
foundation of our faith: whether propounded by the Scriptures or by the Church:
as says Aquinas, Formale objectum Fidei est veritas prima, secundum quod
manifestatur in Scripturis sacris and Doctrina Ecclesiae, quae procedit ex
veritate prima; The formal object of faith is the first truth, according as it
is manifested in the holy Scriptures, and in the doctrine of the Church, which
proceeds from the first truth: He is willing to take in the Church, but he is
not willing to leave out the Scriptures, nay indeed he prefers the
Scriptures above the Church, in the manifestation of Gods truth, when he says,
Doctrina Ecclesiae quae procedit ex veritate prima in Scripturis sacris
manifestata; (22ae. qu. 5. art. 3. c.) The Doctrine of the Church which
proceeds from the first truth manifested in the holy Scriptures. So that
according to Aquinas Gods truth first comes to the Scriptures, and from them
to the Church; That truth the Scriptures propound to the Church by way of
definition; That same truth the Church propounds to us by way of declaration:
Shall we think the declaration may overthrow the definition of truth, or the
Church may overthrow the Scripture? This were in effect to allow that we as
Christians, do glory in men more then in God, and that our faith in Christ does
more stand in the wisdom of man, then in the power of God; Such a foundation of
faith as this, which relyes upon man, is laid upon the sand, or upon grass; For
all flesh is grass; But the foundation of faith which relyes upon the
Scriptures, is laid upon a Rock; The word of the Lord endures for ever, and
this is the word, which by the Gospel is preached unto you, 1 Pet. 1. 24, 25.
This foundation which is laid upon Gods word, is as firm and as infallible as
God himself, for all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, (2. Tim. 3. 16.)
And this is the foundation of our faith, not as Protestants, but as Christians;
we vindicate it as Protestants, but we hold it as Christians; For no Christian
Church or Council did lay any other foundation of faith, before that unhappy
Council of Trent, which began not till the year of our Lord 1545. and ended not
till the year 1563. All the cavils that have been raised against the holy
Scriptures, have been raised since that time, to the great dishonor of Christ,
the great disturbance of Christendom, the great discontent of good Christians,
and the great disadvantage of the Christian Faith: For the foundation cannot
possibly give that firmness to the building, which is not in it self: therefore
there cannot be a greater disadvantage to the Christian Faith, then to ground
it upon an infirm and an unsure foundation: And such a foundation is the word
of man, instead of the word of God: For he that believes the most Divine
truths only upon humane authority, can have but an humane, an infirm, an
uncertain Faith: Therefore Divine truths must be believed upon Divine
authority, that we may have a Divine faith concerning them: For it is absurd in
Reason, impious in Religion, to have but a humane faith of Divine Truths:
because the habit and act are infinitely unproportionable to the Object: For
there may be a twofold error in our faith; the one materially, when we believe
what God has not revealed, And so they only are erroneous in the faith, who
believe falsities or uncertainties: The other formally, when we believe what
God has revealed, but not upon the authority of his revelation, and so they
also may be erroneous in the faith, who believe the most sure and certain
Truths: The ready way to avoid both these errors, is, to take the written word
of God for the foundation of our faith: wherein we are sure to meet with Gods
truth or verity for the matter of our belief, and with Gods Authority or
Testimony for the cause of our believing: And since our Church teaches this
and no other faith, no man can say she is guilty of Heresy, that will not make
himself guilty of Blasphemy.

For the Communion of our Church is free from Heresy, not only Materially, in
that she believes no untruths or uncertainties, but also Formally, in that she
believes Gods truths upon Gods own authority: So that to call such a faith
Heresy, which is wholly of God, and through God, must needs be blasphemy: For
my part, I confess that I do not see how I can be sufficiently thankful to God
for making me a member of such a Communion, and therefore am sure I cannot be
too zealous for it, nor too constant in it; A Communion which neither has
Heresy in the Doctrine of faith, nor the cause of Heresy in the foundation of
faith: And truly to be rid of Heresy, in its self and in its cause, are both
very great blessing; but yet the latter is the greater of the two: For a true
reason of believing, which rids us from Heresy in its cause, may partly excuse
even a falsity in the belief, when a man believes what is not true, because he
thinks God has revealed it; But a false reason of believing* can scarce
justify a truth in the belief, when a man believes what is true, but not upon
the authority of Gods revelation; The one desires to be a true believer in a
false article, the other resolves to be a false believer in a true article of
faith: The one in the cause of his faith believes the truth, whilst in the
doctrine of it, he believes an error; the other in the cause of his faith
believes an error, (for every man is a liar, and* may suggest a lie) whilst in
the Doctrine of it, he believes a truth; the one in the uprightness of his
heart cleaves to God, when in his mouth he departs from him; the other in the
perverseness of his heart departs from God, when in his lips he draws near unto
him: The uprightness of heart makes the one a true man in his error, as S.
Cyprian in his false Tenent of rebaptiz ation; the perverseness of* heart makes
the other a false man in his truth; as Tertullian in any true doctrine which he
maintained, after he attributed more to Montanus then to the Holy Ghost: A
faith which is unsound in its Doctrine, but sound in its foundation, is so
explicitly false in its profession, as that it is implicitly true in its
affection* and the truth which is in its affection may recover, must restrain
the untruth which is in its profession: So that such a man may say with Saint
Augustine, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo, I may be erroneous, I will not
be an Heretic; but a faith which is unsound in its foundation, though it be
sound in Doctrine, is so explicitly true in its profession, as that it is
implicitly false in its affection, and the falseness which is in its
affection, may destroy, must diminish the truth which is in its profession; so
that we may justly say of such a man, he may not be erroneous, and yet he must
be an Heretic, because he believes truth not upon the authority of the first
truth, but upon that authority which may teach him a lie instead of truth; that
is upon that authority which is not in fallible, and therefore must beget in
him a fallible, may beget in him a false faith.

SECT. III. That the communion of the Church of England is truly Christian in
devotion, free from impiety, either by corrupt Invocation, or Adoration.
THE choice as well as the Duty of Religion being enjoined in the three first
commandments, concerning its internal acts in the first, concerning its
external reverence in the second, concerning its external profession in the
third, and the choice as well as the Duty of communion being enjoined in the
fourth Commandment, it is evident that every man is bound first to make choice of
his Religion, then of his Communion; first to make sure that his worship of God
be true and right, before he communicate in the public exercise of that
worship: This is the Method Saint Paul commended in the Macedonians, and
therefore commands in us, saying, They first gave their own selves to the
Lord, and unto us by the will of God, 2 Cor. 8. 5. They gave themselves first
to the Lord in the choice of their Religion, then to us (his Church) in the
choice of their Communion; (...), says Saint Chrysostom, fulfilling the Laws
of God, and also by charity being linked and joined to us: So that in his
gloss, the faith is before the charity, the Law of Religion before the bond of
Communion; And so he explaineth these words by the will of God, to show they
gave themselves unto him, not for his own sake, but for Gods sake, (...), They
gave themselves to us not through any humane affection, but for the Divine
command; therein following Gods will, not their own; If this were the Method
they observed in giving of their substance, then much more in giving of their
souls; they gave themselves first to God, then to his Church; so must we; And
consequently we must be sure the Communion of our Church is truly Christian in
devotion, (as well as in Doctrine,) that we may give our selves to our Church,
and conscionably join in her Communion; And when we are sure of this, we must
give our selves to our Church and to her Communion, by the will of God: For it
is the will of God, that we should keep his Commandments in that order which he
has given them, and consequently nothing but the apparent breach of the three
first Commandments concerning Religion can enervate the obligation of the
fourth concerning Communion, or of the fifth concerning Obedience.

And I am clearly bound to my Church, both by the fourth Commandment to embrace
her Communion, and by the fifth Commandment, to obey her authority, unless I
can prove that she has disobeyed God in setting up a false Religion, against
the three first Commandments: For truly there can scarce be a false (or
superstitious) public worship without the united breach of all the three first
Commandments; for what prayer is against the first Commandment in the Object
invocated, is against the second Commandment in the gesture accompanying,
against the third, in the words expressing that invocation: For as with the
heart man believes according to the first, so with the body man worshippeth
according to the second, and with the tongue man confesses according to the
third Commandment; Wherefore if the faith be false, the adoration and the
confession cannot be true; As for example, in that prayer to the blessed
Virgin, Tuspes certa miserorum, Vere matter orphanorum, Tu levamen oppressorum,
medicamen infirmorum, Omnibus es Omnia; Te rogamus voto pari, laud digna
singulari, ut errantes in hoc mari, nos in portu salutari, T^asistat gratia,
Amen: (Sequentia in conceptione B. Mariae.) There is a false faith in believing
that of the blessed Virgin which is true only of God; particularly, that she is
all in all, which the Apostle peculiarly says of God, 1 Cor. 15. 28. and
reason it self bids us say of him only; for what is it to be all in all, but to
be wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, redemption and salvation, which are
the immediate effects or effluencies and emanations of omnisciency, omnipotency
and al-sufficiency? And as there is in this superstitious prayer a false faith
against the first, so there is also a false adoration against the second, a
false profession against the third Commandment; and we can do no less in right
to Religion, then charge such prayers as these both with idolatry and with
blasphemy; and till those that use them can justify their Religion, (and it is
palpable from their very composures, such prayers have been of no long use in
the Church,) they cannot in justice claim our Communion; Therefore it is a
singular blessing which we enjoy, that we have no other object of our public
prayers, but God alone, in whom we may and must believe as our Almighty
Creator, and Al-merciful Savior; for there is no other way to keep us from
idolatry and from blasphemy in praying, since the Apostles question is so
propounded, as to be declared unanswerable: How shall they call on him, in whom
they have not believed? Romans 10. 14. Where it is evident that faith is made the
only ground of invocation, and consequently since we can believe only in God,
we ought to pray only to God: For when the Apostle speaks only of God, saying,
The same Lord over all, is rich unto all that call upon him; for whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved: How then shall they call
upon him, in whom they have not believed? it is rather for Sophisters then for
Divines, to bring in the Saints as his fellow-sharers, either in the faith or
in the invocation, unless we could also bring them in to be his fellow-sharers
in the Lordship; for because men have faith in God as Lord over all, and as
rich unto all that call upon him, that is, because they believe in his Almighty
power and in his all-saving mercy, therefore it is that they make their prayers
unto him: And since they cannot believe in the Saints as such Almighty and
All-saving Lords, they may not call upon them, or pray unto them; suo modo
credere, will not serve the turn, it must be omni modo For why not as well say,
I may have a Saint or Angel after some sort for my God, though God himself has
said, Thou shall have no other Gods but me, as say, I may after some sort
believe in a Saint or Angel, since the Text says plainly, have faith in God,
Mar. 11. 22. and again, Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness, Romans 4. 3. and again, To him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness, Romans
4. 5. Can any Saint or Angel justify a sinner? and why should I have faith in
him, if I cannot have Justistcation from him? and again, Abraham was strong in
faith, giving glory to God, Romans 4. 20. Ought any Saint or Angel to have that
glory which is proper only to God? And what glory is proper only to God, but
for a man to believe in him, as the first Truth, and to put his whole trust in
him, as the chiefest good? We must degrade faith, and suffer it no longer to be
a Theological Virtue, if it may have any other but only God for its object; And
the like also may be said of Prayer; We must deny that to be an elicite act of
the understanding apprehending Gods infinity, and make it only a little
lip-labor, before we can bring it down so low as to befit a Saint or Angel;
For mental prayer, which is only in the heart, (without which the Verbal is no
more then an empty sound) is in vain offered up to any but only to him that is
the searcher of Hearts: And he that says, Give me thy Heart, has not said,
Give another thy Tongue, when it expresses the elevation or lifting up of thy
heart: Sancte Petre miserere mei, salva me, aperi mihi aditum coeli; and that
Prayer to the blessed Virgin, Tu nos ab host protege, and hora mortis suscipe,
(and the like) if spoken only in the heart, are spoken surely in vain, for they
know not our hearts, and are moreover spoken in sin, because they know them
not. So the very sense of the prayer is wicked, because it supposes a man a
God; And how then can any Divine excuse the words from wickedness, whereby
alone we are able to judge of the sense? Yet Bellarmine has found out an
excuse for them, saying, Non agitur de verbis, sed de sensu verborum; nam
quantum ad verba, licet dicere Sancte Petre miserere mei, salva me; Item, Da
mihi sanitatem corporis, da patientiam, etc. Dummodo intelligamus Salva me and
miserere mei, orando pro me, Da mihi hoc and illud tuis precibus and meritis,
(lib. 1. de beatitudine sanctorum, cap. 17.) It Is no matter for the words of
the Prayers, so as the sense be right; For in words we may say, O Saint Peter,
have mercy upon me and save me, as long as our meaning is, save me and have
mercy upon me by praying for me, or, O Saint Peter give me health or patience,
etc. as long as our meaning is, give it me by thy prayers and merits* If this
Interpretation may be allowed to add new words, that we may make a new sense,
farewell to Aristotle's Book De Interpretatione; for only he that is the
prolocutor, can be the Interpreter; we must overthrow the ground of all reason
to make good sense out of bad words. Conceptus sunt signa verum, verba
conceptuum, is the first ground in Logic, Conceits or apprehensions are the
expresses of things, as words are of conceits or apprehensions: Take away this
ground, and take away the use of all Logic, and consequently the exercise of
Reason: for if a man's speech be other then his meaning, how shall another
understand him? If his meaning be other then the thing, how shall he understand
himself? Nay we must overthrow the ground of all Religion* as far as it is
expressed in words, to make hese and the like good Prayers; For Religion, as
far as it is expressed in words, is regulated by the third Commandment, that
bids us not take the name of the Lord our God in vain, in the manner of our
speaking, meddles not with our thinking, or with our meaning; so that if the
manner of our speaking be faulty when we pray, we do take the name of God in
vain, or there is no obligation, there can be no violation of the third
Commandment: Who can meet with such elusions as these in matters of Religion,
and not be moved out of the zeal of godliness to exclaim with the Prophet, Hear
ye now, O House, not of David, but of Goliath, Is it a small thing for you to
weary men, but will you weary my God also? Isa. 7. 13. Is it not enough and too
much, that ye teach us to equivocate with men, but will ye also teach us to
equivocate with our God? Will ye at the same time maintain a Liturgy, and set
up a Directory; a Liturgy in words, but a Directory in sense? Your Liturgy
is, O Saint Mary, O Saint Peter, give me health and salvation; But your
Directory is, O Lord help me, O Lord save me; or is this Catholic in you, to
have your Directory better then your Liturgy? your meaning better then your
words? your intention better then your expression? or is it fitting if it were
possible, for men to say in words, and unsay in sense the same things,
especially in their prayers, and not palpably collude with God and men? And
what have we done else but reformed that in words, which you your selves do
reform in sense? and why then do you so uncessantly revile, so unconscionably
oppose our Reformation? Is it not affected Atheism not to reform what is really
superstitious, as it is abominable blasphemy to call that superstition which
is indeed true Religion? May any Christian abjure and renounce such Prayers, as
the Spirit of God has taught, and the Son of God does assist, without abjuring
and renouncing God himself? Is not this indeed the most dreadful and most
formidable kind of abjuration that ever was, to abjure the intercession of God
the Son, and the Communion of God the Holy Ghost? or is it lawful to deal with
a true Christian form of Prayer, as the Jews did with Christ, who when Pilate
said, Why, what evil has he done? cried out so much the more exceedingly,
Crucify him, Mar. 15. 14. We dare not think of wishing an Interdict upon
Religion; for that is to crucify Christ; but we are bound to wish an Interdict
upon Idolatry and Blasphemy; for that is to crucify the two thieves, which rob
God of his honor, and Gods Church of her Truth and Peace; For I ask seriously
of any Christian and Conscientious Divine, who cares either for Christianity or
for Conscience, May we blaspheme God with our mouths, and say, That we honor
him in our hearts, and think thereby to excuse our blasphemy? May we invocate
the creature as the Creator, in our prayers, and say, we mean the Creator, and
think thereby to excuse our Idolatry? Does it not indeed concern our Religion
to be truly Christian in words as well as in sense, that if there came in one
unlearned, he may be convinced of all, he may be judged of all, and falling
down on his face, may worship God? 1 Cor. 14. 24, 25. and not worship the
Saints in word, and say, He worships God in sense: This is the unhappiness of
those who are obliged to a superstitious form of public worship; if they mean
as they speak, they are guilty of Idolatry and of Blasphemy; if they do not
mean as they speak, they are guilty of falsness and of hypocrisy: So necessary
was it for our Church to reform the Liturgy in those Prayers which were
directed to the Saints instead of God* And so happy are we (if at least we know
our own happiness) who do enjoy the benefit of that Reformation.

For surely it is no more lawful to honor him as God who is not God, then it
is not to honor him as God, who is so: It Is one proof of the Deity of the Holy
Ghost that he has a Temple, 1 Cor. 6. 19. And since the worship is greater
then the Temple, How shall we worship any that is not God? Franciscus Davidis
was justly condemned for denying the Divinity of Christ, because he denied his
Invocation; and how then can we bestow Invocation upon the Saints, and not
acknowledge their Divinity?

Doubtless, though they are Gods nearest and dearest friends, yet such honor
(to them) is too great to be due; And since it is not due, because they are his
friends, we may be sure it is not acceptable; So that if there were no other
argument but this alone, to prove that the Saints do not hear them that pray,
this were enough to prove it, That they do not openly reject and reprove their
prayers; for else without doubt they would say now, as the Angel did
heretofore, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants; worship God, Rev.
19. 10. and 22. 9. The reason is plain and undeniable, for I am thy
fellow servants, and must exclude Saints and Angels both alike out of our
Liturgies.

Thus does Justine Martyr describe the worship which was professed and
practiced by the Primitive Christians, saying, (...); Apol. 2. We worship God
the Creator of the universe in the first, and his Son in the second place, and
his Prophetical Spirit in the third; No mention at all of Saints or Angels to
be worshipped in any place; much less to come in before the Holy Ghost, as by a
false comma upon the same authors words, not two leaves before, Bellarmine
would prove the Angels were anciently worshipped; the words are these, (...);
We reverence and worship the true God, and his Son, which came from him, and
taught us these things, and the Host of the good Angels, and also the
Prophetical Spirit; The meaning of the Martyr is this, That they worshipped God
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; only he describes the Son more at large, as
one who had revealed his Fathers will, and made known the Host of Angels
amongst other his Revelations; but the Jesuit by a comma parting the Host of
Angels, from the things revealed, reckons them up as things worshipped, which
comma we may not allow, (though it be now in the Paris Edition.) First because
it is absolutely against the forecited place, which says, the Holy Ghost was
worshipped in the third place, viz. with the Father and the Son, whereas if the
Angels may step in before him, he must be contented with the fourth place.
Secondly, Because it is an Article of our Christian Faith, that the Unity in
Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped: but if the Angels may step
in before the Holy Ghost, we must say, not the Trinity in Unity, but the
Quaternity in Community is to be worshipped. Thirdly, Because this exposition
supposes the blessed Martyr to prefer the Angels before, if not above God the
Holy Ghost, which were to expunge him out of the Catalogue of the Fathers, and
leave him among the grossest Heretics; whereas on the contrary, he is so far
from asserting the worship of Angels, That in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew,
He proves the Angel which appeared to Lot was indeed the Son of God, because
Lot worshipped him; which proof had been nothing worth, had he thought it
lawful to worship Angels. 4. Because the Greek Text will not bear this comma,
without some confusion in the words, and more in the sense, which the Latin
interpreter well observing, has thus rendered the place, Verum hunc ipsum (so
Deum Patrem) and qui ab eo venit, atque iste nos and bonorum Angelorum
exercitum docuit, Filium and Spiritum Propheticum colimus and adoramus.
Fifthly, If the comma should be allowed, yet would it not justify Bellarmines
conclusion, for he makes this Inference from it, That some kind of worship
greater then Civil, less then Divine, is due to Angels; whereas if they be
indeed to be worshipped by virtue of this quotation, They have equal worship
with God the Father and the Son, and they must have it before God the Holy
Ghost.

I will not here insist upon arguments from the uncertainty of this worship,
because I meet with too too many from the Impiety of it: It Is uncertain whether
all that are cannonized are Saints: wherefore it may be imprudent, but it is
certain they are not Gods: wherefore it must be impious to offer up our Prayers
unto them; For that is a spiritual sacrifice which is due only unto God: Haec
est Christiana Religio ut colatur unus Deus, quia non facit animan^ beatam nisi
unus Deus, says Saint Augustine, (Tract. 23. in Evang. Johan.) This is the
Christian Religion that we worship one God, because none can make the soul
blessed but only God; None else made the soul but only God, therefore none else
may have the homage of the soul; none else can make the soul blessed, therefore
to none else should be the desire of the soul: So says the Prophet Isaiah, O
Lord, we have waited for thee, the desire of our soul is to thy name, and to
the remembrance of thee; with my soul have I desired thee in the night, yea,
with my Spirit within me will I seek thee early, Isa. 26. 8, 9. Till I can (in
my Prayers) have too much desire of my soul for thee, I may not bestow the
least part of that desire away from thee: All the desire of my soul is to thy
name and to the remembrance of thee, yet can I not glorify thy name as I
ought, nor remember thee as I would; yea though with my soul I have desired
thee in the night, and with my spirit within me I seek thee early, yet have I
not so great desires in my soul, as I have defects in my desires; All the
desire of my soul and of my spirit is too little for my God; I have none to
spare for any else, and if I had, yet might I not give it, unless I had
something greater then it, to give unto my God* This is the sin which is called
(...) Iniquitas judicata vel judicantis, digna quae a judicibus puniatur; An
iniquity to be punished by the Judge; for a man to give that honor to the
creature which is due only to the Creator: for it is in effect to deny the God
that is above; For I should have denied the God that is above, Job 31. 28. The
earnest longings of my soul to converse with God in the actions of holy
Religion, are the best preparative for my soul to converse with him in the
fruition of a blessed immortality; my Religion must reach him, or his
blessedness will not reach me: It Is not conversing with Saints or Angels can
give my soul a true gust of eternal blessedness, and much less a happy
enjoyment of it: I should be loath to mispend my time upon so barren, so
unfruitful a Religion, and much less to hazard my eternity upon it: The Heathen
Philosopher Hierocles could say, It was the work of wisdom To make a God out of
a man as far as was possible, [(...);] The Christian Divine may not say less of
Religion, which is the only true wisdom; It Is its work to transform a man into
God; uniting the understanding to him by faith and contemplation, uniting the
will to him by charity and affection; Thus says the Apostle, We all with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. In
which words are briefly described both the work of Religion, and the power of
it: The work of Religion, is, with open face to behold, as in a glass, the
glory of the Lord; for the soul cannot well fix its eye, (and much less its
love) upon any inferior glory; The Power of Religion is to change us into the
same image of the Lord, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord;
for it is only the love and the spirit of the Lord which can change the soul
from glory to glory; the love of the Lord working that change formally, the
Spirit of the Lord working that change efficiently upon the soul, from glory to
glory, that is, from the glory of Religion, to the glory of Fruition; from the
glory of Holiness, to the glory of Happiness; from the glory of knowing and
loving God, to the glory of possessing and enjoying him: This being the work of
Religion, to behold the glory of the Lord, I dare look on nothing as Religion
which does not that work: This being the power of Religion, to change the soul
into that glory, I dare not be of that Religion which has not that power; Let
those that please behold the glory of the creature, instead of the Creator,
they will not find it sufficient to content, much less to change their souls; I
desire a Religion which may change me into the image of the Lord; and sure I am
that Religion must teach me to behold his face, which will change me into his
image; for no other can have the assistance of his Spirit, and therefore no
other can have the power to work this change.

This is the great blessing I have received from God by this his now distressed
Church, That I have been called to the Verity of his Religion; nor do I see how
I can thankfully embrace, and dutifully obey this Call, but only by persisting
in the Unity of her Communion; Such a Communion as joins me with the Saints,
(whether they be Angels or men, in the manner of my worshipping) not as joins
the Saints or Angels with God in the equality of worshp: The Pater noster as it
was used heretofore in the private devotions of English Papists, allowed not
this practice; for therein this was the first Petition, Hallowed be thy name
among men on earth, as it is among Angels in heaven; The second this, O Father,
let thy Kingdom come, and reign among us men on earth, as thou reignest among
thy Angels in heaven; The third this, Make us to fulfill thy will here on
earth, as thy Angels do in heaven: Now Prayer being the actual hallowing of
Gods name, the exercising of his Kingdom, the fulfilling of his will, must be
directed only unto God, unless we will plainly thwart these three Petitions,
and resolve to do these three Duties otherwise then the Angels do in heaven;
For without doubt they fix their contemplation only on God, and place their
Fruition only in him: And so does our Church in all her Prayers, first teaching
us to contemplate God as the first truth, that we may pray with knowledge and
understanding; then to enjoy him as the chiefest good, that we may pray with
zeal and affection: ex. gr. O God from whom all holy desires, all good
counsels, and all just works do proceed; there is the contemplation of God to
enlighten the understanding; Give unto thy servants that Peace which this world
cannot give, that both our hearts may be set to obey thy Commandments, and also
that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time
in rest and quietness; there is the fruition of God to inflame the will and
affections: The soul cannot have this Fruition without having that
contemplation; and therefore they who teach and enjoin Prayers to any but to
God, are in truth injurious to the very contentation, and much more to the
salvation of souls.

SECT. IV. That the Communion of the Church of England obliges those in
conscience, who are members of that Church, to retain it; and not to reject it,
much less to renounce it: by no less then five Commandments of the Decalogue.
IT having been declared that the Communion of the Church of England is founded
in the Truth of Religion, It cannot be reasonably denied but that even her
enemies are bound to her internal, and much more her sons are bound to her
external Communion: And that both are also bound in conscience, because
Religion will not be contented with a lesser obligation: The Doctrine being
from God which we profess, and the Devotion being from God which we practice;
All Christians that live at never so great a distance from us, are bound to
believe our Doctrine, and to love our Devotion, and that's enough to constitute
an internal Communion; But those Christians who live amongst us, are also bound
to profess our Doctrine, and to practice our Devotion, and consequently are not
only obliged to our internal, but also to our external Communion: And this
obligation is so great as to reach the very Conscience, and so strong as to
bind it; For where Religion binds the conscience by virtue of the three first
Commandments, there Communion must needs bind the Conscience by virtue of the
fourth Commandment; that not only every man in private, but also all men in
public may glorify God in Heart, and Body, and Words, and Works; This being
the undoubted End for which God instituted the Sabbath, and therefore the
undoubted Duty which belongs to its institution. And this would God have the
meanest of his people know and practice, and accordingly put the Psalms
concerning it into an Alphabetical method, that they might be the more
diligently observed, and the more easily remembered by all the Jews: as for
example, the 111. Psalm is written Alphabetically, the whole argument whereof
is nothing else, but the Praise of God for his works of Creation, Preservation,
Redemption, and teaches us to praise him not only privately in our own houses,
but also publicly in his, for so it is said, ver. 1. I will give thanks unto
the Lord with my whole heart, secretly among the faithful, (that is according
to the duty of Religion in the three first Commandments,) and in the
Congregation (that is openly among the faithful, according to the duty of
Communion in the fourth Commandment:) so also the hundred forty and fifth is
written Alphabetically, which is so properly a Psalm of praise, that the Title
of it is (...) Tehillah, Laus, because it is nothing else but the praise of
God: whence the Jews called him a son of the world to come, who did every day
say this Psalm not only with his mouth, but also with his heart; And this Psalm
is not contented with private praises, I will magnify thee O God my King, and
I will praise thy name for ever and ever, ver. 1. but requires also public
praises, so that men shall speak of the might of thy mavelous acts, ver. 6.
and all thy works praise thee O Lord, and thy Saints give thanks unto thee,
ver. 10. The private praise is according to the duty of Religion in the three
first; the public praise is according to the duty of Communion in the fourth
Commandment. Wherefore since the fourth Commandment presupposes the three
former in its observation, it can do no less then presuppose them also in its
obligation, so that a true and right public worship of Almighty God obliges
all to come who are called to it, by no less then four of Gods own
Commandments; and we may be sure that our blessed Savior who will condemn us
at the last day or our wilful omissions of any one Commandment belonging to
the second, will much more condemn us for our wilful omissions of all the
Commandments belonging to the First Table: If he will say, Depart ye cursed
into everlasting fire, because ye gave me no meat, ye gave me no drink, then
much more because ye gave me no honor, ye gave me no praise: If because ye
took me not into your houses, then much more because ye took me not into your
hearts; If because ye clothed me not, then much more because ye glorified me
not; If because ye visited me not in the prison, then much more because ye
visited me not in the Temple; Thus we have as much obligation upon the
conscience as can be from the first Table of the Decalogue, to keep Communion
with our Church in the public worship of God, because she inviteth us to
nothing but what is our indisputable and indispensable duty toward God, even
to profess our belief in him, our fear of him, our love to him, with all our
heart, with all our mind, and with all our soul, and to practice what we
profess by giving him thanks, by calling upon him, by honoring his holy Name
and his Word, and by serving him truly all the days of our life; And we have
also as much obligation upon the conscience as well can be from the second
Table of the Decalogue, to keep Communion with our Church in the same public
worship of Almighty God: I speak of such obligations as arise from the order
and relation of man to his neighbor, which all flow from the fifth
Commandment, whereby every man is obliged to submit himself to those spiritual,
Pastors and Guides which God has set over him, and much more when they all
agree in one, which we call the authority of this our Church: Then Obedite
praepositis vestris, Obey them that have the guide or rule you, and submit your
selves, (Heb. 13. 17.) obliges most certainly to an undeniable; and were not
this age given to question every thing but its own inventions, I would also
have said to an unquestionable obedience. And this obligation which binds us to
our spiritual Pastors and Guides, has not lost its force and virtue, though we
may think we have lost our Church; First because of the authority which the
Church has to bind us; secondly because of the duty to which we are bound.
First, because of the authority which the Church has to bind us, since God
has committed us to her charge; For Christ taught as one having authority,
Mat. 7. 29. So does his Church: He taught as one having authority from God; she
teaches as one having authority from Christ. It Is not matter of custom or of
convenience, that the Church does teach, and we do learn, but matter of command
and of conscience; Therefore says Saint Paul to Titus, These things speak; and
exhort, and rebuke with all authority, Tit. 2. 15. (...) cum omnis imperio,
with all power and command; for as Prudence has three acts, consiliari,
judicare, praecipere, to consult, to judge, and to command; so has the Church
which God has appointed as an external Prudence to guide and govern us in the
exercise of Religion; it is not enough for her to advise, and to judge, but she
must also command in the name of God; And this is Beza his own gloss upon the
place, (...), Cum omni imperio, id est, cum autoritate summa tanquam Dei
legatus, nequesuo sed illius nomine agens omnia; itaque adiecit, Nemo te
Despiciat; Quibus verbis grex potius videtur a Paulo, quam Pastor ipse, officii
admoneri; with all power and command, that is, with the highest authority, as
Gods Legate, saying and doing nothing in his own, but all in Gods Name; And
therefore he adds, Let no man despiso thee; By which words the Apostle seems
not to admonish the Priests, but the people of their duty; So Beza; and most
truly; for to say in relation to the Priest, that has nothing but prayers and
tears for his defense, Let no man despise thee, were the ready way to make him
most despicable; But to say it in relation to the people (to those who have a
great number to countenance any insolency, and as great a power to continue it)
and to say it in the name of God, is to say that, which if it does not make the
people tractable, will certainly make them inexcusable: And this Saint Paul
says so frequently, that we are bound to look upon it as his common dialect;
and therefore as our own special duty. I will instance only in that Text, which
as it allows the necessity of Ecclesiastical Discipline, so it allayes the
severity of it, (for these times though they most show the want or necessity of
Church government, yet will they least endure the severity of the same:) And
that Text is in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, the third Chapter, 14.
and 15. Verses; And if any men obey not our word by this Epistle, note that
man, and have no company with him, that he may be ashamed; yet count him not as
an enemy, but admonish him as a brother. It Is without all doubt, and therefore
should be without all dispute, that these words were not written occasionally
but aoctrinally, and consequently contain in them such a precept as now at this
time concerns us no less then it did at that time concern the Thessalonians;
And our Church is no less entrusted with this precept then theirs was, and as
much bound to execute this command of observing, admonishing and avoiding such
as obey not the Apostles Word or Doctrine, whether by his own Epistles, or by
the Churches Sermons: Whether by his writing, or by her speaking; whether by
his Hand, or by her mouth; What remains then, if I obey not, but wilfully
persist in disobeying the Apostles Doctrine taught me by this Church which God
has set over me, but that I look upon my self as one excommunicated by this
Canon of the Holy Ghost, and consequently as one whose sins are bound and
retained in heaven, though possibly not so much as taken notice of here on
Earth; And therefore I have great reason to fear, that sentence which a Bishop
of this Church has recorded upon this very Text, though now I see no visible
Judge to pronounce it, In nomine Dei, etc. In the name of the living God and of
Jesus Christ before whom I stand, and before whom all flesh shall appear, by
the authority of his word, and by the power of the Holy Ghost, I divide thee
from the fellowship of the Gospel, and declare that thou art no more a member
of the body of Christ: Thy name is put out of the book of life; Thou have no
part in the life to come; thou art not in Christ, and Christ is departed from
thee; I deliver thee to Satan the Prince of darkness, thy reward shall be in
the lake that burns with fire and brimstone; Thou shall starve and wither and
not abide; The Grace of God is taken out of thy Heart; The face of the Lord is
against all them that do evil, they shall not taste of his mercy: (Bishop Jewel
in his Commentary, on 2 These. 3.) This is a sentence that I have reason to
fear, if I be disobedient to the Doctrine, and bid defiance to the worship of
Almighty God, which I have learned in this Church. For rather then the
Synagogue of Satan shall be confounded with the Church of God, Christ himself
will reassume that Power, which he has given to his Ministers; he will become
the judge, rather then obstinate sinners shall want the sentence of
condemnation: Nay it is to be feared that he is become the Judge already, and
has moreover ratified his own sentence; for surely men are divided from the
fellowship of the Gospel, Christ is departed from them, and the grace of God is
taken out of their hearts, when they altogether delight in divisions, and are
as children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine,
nay, carried away with all deceivableness of unrighteousnesness, because they
received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved; And indeed men
are first generally carried away by the deceivableness of unrighteousness, and
after that by the deceivableness of untruth; The deceivableness of
unrighteousness will not let them receive the love of the truth, and then the
deceivableness of untruth will not let them retein the Doctrine of it; as it
follows, For this cause God shall send them strong delusions, that they should
believe a lie, that they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 11, 12. They first have pleasure in
unrighteousness and will not believe the truth, and from thence proceed to have
pleasure in untruth, that they may defend and maintain their unrighteousness;
First, they will not give themselves to believe the truth: then God gives them
to belielieve a lie; First, they contemn those whom God has sent, then God
sends them strong delusions; First they believe not the truth, because they
have pleasure in their sins; then they believe a lie, that they may perish in
their sins. O the unspeakable mercy of God who has given us this warning, to
day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; O the impartial Justice
of God, who has given us this doom, that if we hear not his voice to day, we
shall harden our hearts to morrow: Let us consider how the Primitive Christians
obeyed their spiritual guides, and we shall never want the Method, and much
less lose the zeal of our obedience; We will never let it be said that we have
lived so many years to understand our Religion, and now mean to live the rest
of our days to abandon it, always remembering that heavenly contemplation of
the Angelical Doctor, Ratio Aeternitatis consequitur Immutabilitatem, sicut
ratio temporis consequitur motum; (1 par. qu. 10. art. 2.) Eternity is founded
upon unchangeableness, as time is founded upon change: Therefore we cannot lay
a greater reproach upon Religion, then to think or to show it changeable: as if
it rather belonged to time, then to eternity: Secondly, this obligation which
binds us to our spiritual Pastors and Guides, has not lost its force of
binding us, because of the duty to which we are bound, which is the public
practice of Religion: A duty which we cannot perform without the direction of
the Church, (for without that, when we come together, every one will have a
Psalm, a Doctrine, a tongue, a revelation, an interpretation, 1 Cor. 14* 26.)
and yet a duty which we cannot wilfully neglect, without the danger, if not the
damnation of our souls: For this comes near that damnable sin of spiritual
slothfulness, which regards not Communion with God, and he that regards not
communion with God here, how can he hope for the fruition of God hereafter? It Is
the common course of men now to say, are not Abana and Pharphar, Rivers of
Damascus, better then all the Waters of Israel? may I not wash in them and be
clean? But they consider not, that the way to follow Naaman in his wrath, is to
out go him in his leprosy, and that those Heathens who gave him the contrary
advice, have in that, given judgment against such Christians, My Father, if
the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it?
How much rather then, when he says unto thee Wash and be clean? It Is little
less then madness to spend those precious minutes in cavilling disputations,
which would be much better spent in soul-saving devotions: For after once Cain
had expostulated with God, saying, Am I my brothers keeper? Genesis 4. 9. he staid
not long in his presence; for so it is written, ver. 16. And Cain went out from
the presence of the Lord: What is it for a man to cavil at Religion, instead of
practicing it, but to expostulate with God, as if he could quit that score by
his objection, which he is bound to pay by his obedience? or as if it were for
his advantage, to be quarrelling with his Creditor, whilst he should be saying
Forgive us our debts? Will he indeed not be so holy as to delight in the
presence of Gods grace, and shall he be so happy as to delight in the presence
of his glory? Is it our misery that we cannot be sufficiently joyful in the
Lord, and shall it also be our sin that we will needs be angry with him?
Tristitia de bono spirituali est peccatum prepinquum odio Deo, says the
Casuist, To be sorry for the overture of any Spiritual Good, is a sin that
comes near the hatred of God, and therefore to be maliciously bent against such
a good must needs be to hate him; This consideration may stop the mouths, if
not wound the hearts of those who make it their work to revile such heavenly
prayers as cannot be received with too much admiration, nor repeated with too
much devotion; for this is little other then to revile God and his Church in
one and the same breath: to revile God in his Religion, and to revile Gods
Church in her communion; Whether a man think himself so perfect as to need no
spiritual Guide to take care of him, or think his Church so imperfect as to
seek for his spiritual guide from some other place, the case is all one as to
the contempt, though very different as to the cause of it; For the Church
calling him to the Practice of those duties which are truly Christian, in the
name and by the Authority of Christ, It Is not his cavilling against his Mother
on earth, can dispense with his Undutifulness against Her, and much less
against his Father in heaven. If God be rightly invocated and adored, and his
name truly glorified according to the Duties of Religion, He is no less then a
Separatist from God, who refuses to join in that Invocation, Adoration and
Glorification, according to the Duty of Communion: For neither can an erroneous
cnnscie^ce excuse him in point of Religion, nor an erroneous conceit excuse him
in point of Communion.

First, an erroneous conscience cannot excuse him in point of Religion; For an
erroneous conscience cannot absolve or discharge any man from doing his bounden
duty to God, and therefore not from Invocating, Adoring and Glorifying his holy
name: since it is unjust that error should be a privilege, and impossible
that a man's conscience should be above Gods command: but here are no less then
three of Gods Commandments that oblige him to the duties of Religion.

Secondly, an ereoneous conceit cannot excuse him in point of Communion; For an
erroneous conceit has much less power then an erroneous conscience, to excuse
him for disobeying Gods command; and here are no less then two of Gods
Commandments that oblige him to the duty of Communion, to wit, The fourth,
because the Communion concerns Gods public worship; and the fifth, because the
public worship is commanded by public authority; For the Communion being
indeed with the eternal Son of God, (as it must be since the Religion is truly
from him, in all its performances of Invocation, Adoration, and Administration)
it is not his thinking, or any man's saying, That he may not Communicate with
Heretics or Schismatics, can excuse him for not communicating with his
Brethren, and much less with his Savior, whose Communion is ever to be desired
with great earnestness, and never to be deserted, without great shame, and
greater sin: According to that excellent exhortation of our Church, But when
you depart, I beseech you ponder with your selves, from whomye depart; ye
depart from the Lords Table, ye depart from your Brethren, and from the banquet
of most heavenly food; What greater sin then to depart from the Lords heavenly
table and food? What greater shame then to depart from your own Brethren, and
to be able to give no conscientious reason of your departure? To depart from
the Lord in his Religion, is against the three first Commandments; To depart
from your Brethren in their Communion with the Lord, is against the fourth, and
with his Church is against the fifth Commandment; Is it not then unfound and
unsafe to allege the fifth Commandment for the apparent breach of it self, and
also of the other four? And yet even that Commandment is unduely alleged for
your departure: For besides that such an allegation of it denies Paternal
authority where God has given it, and which certainly does oblige you, and
supposes Paternal authority where God has not given it, and which cannot
oblige you, there is also a supposal of such an authority as God cannot give;
For God cannot deny himself, and therefore he cannot given an authority to his
Church against himself, but only for himself; and consequently not against
Religion, but only for Religion: This is all the authority Saint Paul claims,
The Lord has given us authority for edification, not for destruction, 2 Cor.
10. 8. Nay more, This is all the authority the Church can claim, and that in
the judgment of Aquinas himself, Quum Potestas Praelati spiritualis, qui non
est Dominus sed Dispensator, in aedificationem s^t data, and non in
destructionem, ut patet 2. ad Cor. 10. Sicut Praelatus non potest imperare ea
quae secundum se Deo displicent, sc. Peccata: It a non potest prohibere ea quae
secundum se Deo placent, sc. Virtutis opera: (22ae. quest. 88. art. 12. ad
secundum) When the Power of a spiritual Prelate, who is not a Lord, but only a
Dispencer of the Word and Sacraments, is given for edification, and not for
destruction, as it is manifest 2 Cor. 10. Even as a Prelate cannot command
those things which in themselves are displeasing to God, to wit, the committing
of any sin: So he cannot forbid those things which in themselves are pleasing
unto God, to wit, the working of any virtue; How much less can he forbid the
works of many virtues together, by forbidding the exercise of true Religion?
Therefore let me always give an ear to the holy Prophets Exhortation, O Praise
the Lord with me, and let us magnify his name together, Psalm. 34. 3. For where
God is praised and magnified in the Religion, I am very strictly bound to join
my self in the Communion; Nay more, Let me always give my heart to the holy
Prophets resolution, I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the
house of the Lord, Psalm. 122. 1. where God calls to the practice of
godliness, it is not for another to say to me, You shall not go, nor for me to
say to my self, I will not: For I must be glad of the Call, and much more of
the Practice. Now Christ the eternal Son of God calls us to the practice of
the true Christian Religion three several ways; By his Word, by his Example,
and by his Communion; By his Word, for he commands us to perform all the
duties of Religion; By his Example, for himself whiles he was upon earth, did
perform them: And by his Communion, for now he is in heaven, he recommendeth to
his Father all our Religious performances, so making intercession to God for
us, as also with us: How shall I answer him at the last day, if I neglect his
Word, if I reject his Example, if I renounce his Communion? His Word pierces
mine Ear, his Example pierces mine Eye, but his Communion pierces my Heart:
His Word and his Example pierce my sense, but his Communion pierces my soul:
For if it were said of Saul's Messengers, (nay of Saul himself) when they saw
the company of the Prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over
them, that the Spirit of God was upon them, and they also prophesied, 1 Samuel
19. 20. Then surely when I see a company of Christians praying, and Christ
himself standing as appointed over them, (for so himself has avowed, where two
or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them,
Mat. 18. 20.) if the Spirit of God be in me, I will also pray with them; and it
must be some evil Spirit in me, that makes me either reject or renounce their
prayers. For if there be indeed The Communion of Saints saying unto me, We will
go into the house of the Lord, I am bound to have the affection which is due to
that Communion, and say, I was glad when they said unto me, we will go: for
this indefinite Particle When, not defining one set time, will suffer me to
exclude no time: It Is like a general Commission, which not prescribing what day
to do the business, leaves it to be done any day, and to neglect no opportunity
of doing it: Indefinitum in materia necessaria aequipollet universali, when the
duty it self is absolutely necessary, though it be set down as indifinite, yet
we must look upon it as universal; for though the Casuists do tell us
concerning affirmative precepts, Ligant semper sed non ad semper, That they
bind us at all times, but not to all times* yet we must understand their
meaning only of our actual exercise and performance of those duties; not of our
habitual disposition and desire to perform them; For there is not one minute of
our life, wherein we are not bound to be in a disposition and desire of serving
God: And thus does Solomon Jarchi expound the Prophets, (...) Shamacti,
Laetatus sum, I was glad; I did hear (says he) the sons of men, saying, When
will this David die, that his son Solomon may succeed, and build the Temple,
that so we may go to the house of the Lord? (...) Vaani Shomeach; And I was
very glad to hear them say so. Thus (says he) David preferred Gods service
before his life; And so will every man who knows he has such a Religion, as
if he rightly follow it, will bring him to salvation; Aben Ezra goes further in
his gloss, and says, That All the people of Israel was of David's mind, and
that every one of them did say as well as he, (...) I was glad when they said
unto me, we will go into the house of the Lord; Why should we Christians have a
worse Zeal, upon better Hopes? For he that will not be glad when others say
unto him, We will go into the house of the Lord, may live to be sorry, That
there is not a house of God for him to go to. But O Thou who came to give
light to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, Remove not the
Candlestick away from us, because we have neglected and abused the light of
Grace; But let the Priests of the Lord still serve the Lord between the Porch
and the Altar, weeping and saying, Be favorable O Lord, be favorable unto thy
People, Let not thine heritage be brought to such confusion, lest the Heathen
be Lords thereof: Wherefore should they say among the Heathen, where is now
their God? And let us thy undutiful, unthankful, unworthy people, still enjoy
the inestimable freedom of thy Gospel, Public Communions in thy Church, and
Public Prayers and Praises in thy Name; Heal our backslidings, and repair
those great and wide breaches which we have lately made, in our Piety, in our
Fidelity, and in our Charity; And amidst the many inconstancies, and many more
impieties of this wicked world, make thine own sheep still hear thy voice, and
thine own people still secure and glad in thee; That (notwithstanding all
obstacles and oppositions) they shall yet more and more worthily praise and
adore thy most holy and Reverend name among the faithful in this life, and in
the great Congregation of Saints and Angels in the life to come; being all of
us joined, now in affection, hereafter in possession, with that heavenly
consort, and holy Communion, which is always saying Hallelujah, Salvation, and
glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God; Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, world without end, Amen.

Una est in trepida mihi re medicina, Jehovae
Cor patrium, Os verax, omnipotensque manus.
FINIS.
Deo Trinuni Gloria in aeternum.

