A LETTER Lately sent by A Reverend Bishop FROM THE TOVVER, TO A PRIVATE
FRIEND: AND By him thought fit to be published.



LONDON, Printed for NATH: BUTTER. MDCXLII.

TO MY MVCH RESPECTED GOOD FRIEND, Mr H. S.
Worthy Sir,
YOu think it strange that I should salute you from hence; how can you choose,
when I do yet still wonder to see my self here? My intentions and this place
are such strangers, that I cannot enough marvel how they met. But, howsoever,
I do in all humility kiss the rod, wherewith I smart, as well knowing whose
hand it is that wields it; To that infinite justice who can be innocent? But to
my King and Country never heart was, or can be more clear; and I shall
beshrew my hand if it shall have (against my thoughts) justly offended either;
and if either say so, I reply not; as having learned not to contest with those
that can command Legions.

In the mean time it is a kind, but a cold complement, that you pity me; an
affection well placed where a man deserves to be miserable; for me, I am not
conscious of such merit. You tell me in what fair terms I stood not long
since, with the world; how large room I had in the hearts of the best men: But
can you tell me how I lost it? Truly I have in the presence of my God narrowly
searched my own bosom; I have unpartially ransackt this fag-end of my life, and
curiously examined every step of my ways; and I cannot, by the most exact
scrutiny of my saddest thoughts, find what it is that I have done to forfeit
that good estimation, wherewith, you say, I was once blessed.

I can secretly arraign and condemn my self of infinite transgressions,
before the Tribunal of heaven: Who, that dwells in an house of clay, can be pure
in his sight, that charge his Angels with folly? O God when I look upon the
reckonings betwixt Thee and my soul, and find my shameful areres, I can be
most vile in my own sight, because I have deserved to be so in thine: Yet,
even then, in thy most pure eyes, give me leave, the whiles, not to abdicate
my sincerity; thou know my heart desires to be right with thee, what ever
my failings may have been; and I know what value thou put upon those
sincere desires, notwithstanding all the intermixtures of our miserable
infirmities: These I can penitently bewail to thee; but in the mean time,
what have I done to men? Let them not spare to shame me with the late sinful
declinations of my age, and fetch blushes (if they can) from a wrinkled face.

Let mine enemies (for such I perceive I have, and those are the surest
monitors) say what I have offended; For their better irritation my clear
conscience bids me boldly to take up the challenge of good Samuel, Behold, here
I am; witwitnesse against me before the Lord, and before his Anointed; Whose
Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom
have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes
therewith? and I will restore it you.

Can they say that I bore up the reyns of government too hard; and exercised my
jurisdiction in a rigorous and tyrannical way, insolently Lording it over my
charge? Malice it self, perhaps, would, but dare not speak it; or, if it
should, the attestation of so grave and numerous a Clergy would choke such
impudence; let them witness, whether they were not still entertained by me
with an equal return of reverence, as if they had been all Bishops with me,
or I only a Presbyter with them; according to the old rule of Egbert,
Archbishop of York; Intra domum Episcopus collegam se presbyterorum esse
cognoscat; Let them say, whether ought here looked like despotical, or sounded
rather of imperious commands, then of brotherly complying; whether I have not
rather from some beholders, undergone the censure of a too humble remissness;
as perhaps stooping too low beneath the eminence of Episcopal dignity; whether
I have not suffered as much in some opinions, for the winning mildness of my
administration, as some others for a rough severity.

Can they say (for this aspersion is likewise common) that I barred the free
course of religious exercises, by the suppression of painful and peaceable
Preachers? If shame will suffer any man to object it, let me challenge him to
instance but in one name; Nay, the contrary is so famously known in the
Western parts, that every mouth will herein justify me. What free admission
and encouragement have I always given to all the Sons of peace, that came with
Gods message in their mouths? What mis-suggestions have I waved? What blows
have I borne off in the behalf of some of them, from some gainsayers? How
have I often and publicly professed, that as well might we complain of too
many stars in the sky, as too many Orthodox Preachers in the Church?

Can they complain that I fretted the necks of my Clergy with the uneasy
yoke of new and illegal impositions? Let them whom I have thus hurt, blazon
my unjust severity, and write their wrongs in marble: But, if disliking all
novel devices, I have held close to those ancient rules which limited the
obedience of our godly predecessors; If I have grated upon no man's conscience
by the pressure (no not by the tender) of the late Oath, or any unprescribed
Ceremony; If I have freely in the Committee, appointed by the most honorable
House of Peers, declared my open dislike of all innovations, both in Doctrine
and rites, why does my innocence suffer?

Can they challenge me as a close and back-staire-friend to Popery or
Arminianisme, who have in so many Pulpits, and so many Presses, cried down
both? Surely the very paper that I have spent in the refutation of both these,
is enough to stop more mouths then can be guilty of this calumny.

Can they check me with a lazy silence in my place, with infrequence of
preaching? Let the populous Auditories where I have lived, witness, whether
having furnished all the Churches near me with able Preachers, I took not all
oportunities of supplying such courses, as I could get, in my Cathedral; and
when my tongue was silent, let the world say whether my hand were idle.

Lastly, since no man can offer to upbraid me with too much pomp, which is
wont to be the common eyesore of our envied profession: Can any man pretend to
a ground of taxing me (as I perceive one of late has most unjustly done) of
too much worldlynesse? Surely, of all the vices forbidden in the Decalogue,
there is no one which my heart upon due examination can less fasten upon me
then this: He that made it, knows that he has put into it a true disregard
(save only for necessary use) of the world, and of all that it can boast of,
whether for profit, pleasure, or glory.

No, no; I know the world too well to dote upon it; whiles I am in it, how can I
but use it? but I never care, never yield to enjoy it. It were too great a
shame for a Philosopher, a Christian, a Divine, a Bishop to have his thoughts
grovelling here upon earth; for mine, they scorn the employment; and look upon
all these sublunary distractions (as upon this man's false censure) with no
other eyes then contempt.

And now, Sir, since I cannot (how secretly faulty soever) guess at my own
public exorbitances, I beseech you, where you hear my name traduced, learn
of mine accusers (whose Lyncean eyes would seem to see farther into me then my
own) what singular offense I have committed.

If perhaps my calling be my crime; It is no other then the most holy Fathers
of the Church in the Primitive and succeeding Ages, ever since the Apostles,
(many of them also blessed Martyrs) have been guilty of; it is no other then
all the holy Doctors of the Church, in all generations, ever since, have
celebrated, as most reverend, sacred, inviolable; it is no other then all the
whole Christian world, excepting one small handful of our neighbors, (whose
condition denied them the opportunity of this government) is known to enjoy
without contradiction: How safe is it erring in such company? If my offense be
in my pen, which has (as it could) undertaken the defense of that Apostolical
institution, (though with all modesty, and fair respects to the Churches
differing from us) I cannot deprecate a truth: and such I know this to be:
which is since so cleared by better hands, that I well hope the better-informed
world cannot but sit down convinced; Neither doubt I, but that, as metals
receive the more luster with often rubbing, this truth the more agitation it
undergoes, shall appear every day more glorious. Only may the good spirit of
the Almighty speedily dispell all those duskie prejudices from the minds of
men, which may hinder them from discerning so clear a light.

Shortly then, knowing nothing by my self, whereby I have deserved to alienate
any good heart from me, I shall resolve to rest securely upon the acquiting
testimony of a good conscience, and the secret approbation of my gracious God;
who shall one day cause mine innocence to break forth as the morning light,
and shall give me beauty for bonds, and for a light and momentany affliction,
an eternal weight of glory. To shut up all, and to surcease your trouble. I
write not this, as one that would pumpe for favor and reputation from the
disaffected multitude, (for I charge you, that what passes privately betwixt
us, may not fall under common eyes) but only with this desire, and intention,
to give you true grounds, where you shall hear my name mentioned, with a
causeless offense, to yield me a just and charitable vindication. Go you on
still to do the office of a true friend, yea, the duty of a just man; in
speaking in the cause of the dumb, in righting the innocent, in rectifiing the
mis-guided; and lastly, the service of a faithful and Christian patriot, in
helping the times with the best aid of your prayers; which is the daily task of

From the Tower, Jan. 24. 1641. Your much devoted, and thankful friend, JO:
NORVIC.

TO MY RIGHT Reverend good Lord, JOSEPH, Lord Bishop of NORWICH.
My very good Lord,
I Received, after much entreaty, your meek and modest vindication of your
self; I pretended want of satisfaction concerning some late actions of your
Lordships, but now I must tell you, and the world together, I was fully
convinced of your desert and integrity, before, and this my request was but to
draw from your Lordship such a declaration of your self, as might convince
others, by my divulging it abroad. But of this you have now sent me, I must say
as not more a friend to you then truth, you have not done your self right; you
have not followed your cause half thoroughly: and therefore give me leave (for
I will take it) a little more to betray you to the eyes of men, and more openly
to bewail your bashful innocence.

I cannot without a vocal compassion behold your injured virtue, the most
remarkable example of the malignitie of our times; which when I looked it
should receive its crown from God and men, quite contrary to my expectation, I
find cast down, and trampled in the dust.

It is not full two years ago, when in that innovating age you suffered under
storms and threats from over-busie instruments: every step waited on by
intrapping spies and informers; and brought so far into the month of danger,
that that Accuser, Kilvert, durst openly threaten you, to be the next man
designed for his Inquisition. How often have you stood as a shield between
those men and danger, who can now complain you are a Bishop; when, if you had
not been so, where had they been at this hour? How many of those
Antiprelaticall men, even the most rigid of them, have we heard blessing God
for such a Diocesan, by whose provision and government, great has been the
company of Preachers, and acknowledging the Sun of the Gospel, with your
approach, setting in your Western Sea; or rather rising there, in more perfect
luster, when the world justly complained it went down in some other parts of
the Kingdom? What prayers, what praises, what wishes were then, on all sides,
poured out for you? I should be accounted your flatterer, should I but mention
them: Whereas now in these days of Reformation, when you might justly expect a
reward of your former sufferings, as deserving (let me considently speak it)
the greatest share, I see you as much driven at, on the other side, by an
ignorant fury of those you defended, and smarting as an enemy to that truth,
the maintaining of which has raised against you so many dangerous adversaries.
I find you still the same man you were before; and yet, what is strange,
groaning under the same burden of censure, and worse, from quite contrary
hands; even from those, whose duty it is to promote and vindicate you; and yet
who think they do that very truth you maintain good service, in punishing you
its defender. A miserably misguided zeal! Father for give them, for they know
not what they do. In the mean time, what have they to answer for, who when
they can find no real blemish upon you, dare like the Romish Imagers in Q.
Mary's days, paint fiends and faults upon your coat; as those cunningly-cruell
men, in the Primitive times, clothing the harmless Christian Martyrs with the
skins of salvage Bears and Bulls, that they might be baited, and torn by the
deceived Mastiffes, which would have fawned upon them, had they appeared in
their own shapes: But I forbear; Only this, my Lord, if you thus sink, and
suffer under evil and killing tongues, happy, thrice happy are you; you know
one has said it, that will make it good: I shall not, I seriously profess,
pity, but envy you, for having this eternal honor to expire among scoffs,
and unjust ignominy, with our great Master. And therefore now, rouse up those
drooping spirits, which age and restless labors have left you; fix your eyes
steadfastly, with blessed Stephen, upon heaven, and rest your thoughts there, as
no doubt you do, with a calm and smiling confidence; and know, every stone is
thrown at you, shall turn a precious one, to deck your crown of glory. Into
the bosom of our gracious God, whom we have thus long served, and enjoyed
together, I securely commend you; And, till I meet you in another world,
however this world judge of you, shall continue a constant lover of your tried
goodness.

Jan. 29. 1641. H. S.


