THE MARQVES HAMILTONS SPEECH Before the Kings most excellent Majesty:
CONCERNING His return into England.

^ poken in Parliament in Scotland, Novem. 6. 1641.

With a brief and exact Commemoration of all the wicked Plots of the Papists,
from the first intended malice unto this day against the PROTESTANTS.

First printed at Edinburgh by James Brison, and now reprinted in London for
T.B. 1641.

Marquess HAMILTONS SPEECH.
Dread Sovereign,
I Stand not up presuming any thing on my audacity, but am respectively
suggested by the judicious Counsels of most of your loyal and well affected
Subjects: It is not unknown unto your Majesty, what develish machinations of
late have been plotted, not only against my self, but likewise against many
more pious and Religious members of this honorable House; and God knows, what
succeeding danger may now be in agitation. Wherefore I have received letters
diverse times from that strong pillar of Religion, Mr. ^ym, and many other pious
men from England, who have oftentimes seriously requested me to move their
quotidian welwishes unto your M^j^stie, beseeching you to respect their
serviceable prayers: But not to wander in these preliminate Exordiums, or to
suspend your divine care any longer in its expectation: I speak it not in my
own behalf, but in the general and universal name of the whole Kingdom of
England. That in respect of these manifold perils, and impendent stratagems in
this Kingdom, and the late formidible insurrection in Ireland, that mother of
dissension, and nurse of Rebels, your sacred Majesty would preview your
safety, and return into your flourishing paradise England, with all presupposed
expedition: Pardon I pray my boldness herein: but I speak not this, as if I or
we were weary of the emploiment of your blessed person: No, God (that knows the
secrets of all hearts) knows the intent of my unguilty mind in that regard;
for I speak freely, I could both live and dye in the happiness of your
presence; But I speak it out of my indulgence to your Majesty, who have been
always careful in my service for the safety of your royal Person.

For if the Irish recusants should reduce their treason-growing malice
hitherward, our fortifications are not so strong as theirs of England, neither
can your Majesty be so secure in this Kingdom, as in your own. Alas! England
has grown big in expecttion of your return, and I dare boldly say, your
Royal Consort the Queen, would esteem that a most happy day wherein your
Majesty shall safely return.

But the chiefest argument that can possibly incite you hereunto, is that,
concerning the Prince, whom (as we hear) Philips that father of Papistery, did
labor to seduce; but thanks be to God, who did avert his wicked
imaginations, and according to the Psalmist, He that dug a pit of
Babilonish impiety to intrappe that illustruous stem of Honor, is fallen
himself therein; and I hope your Majesty will deservedly vindicate his
treachery audacity.

Then a second argument appears from their inconstancy of Religion, which
(like a wavering door) hangs upon two hinges; and unless your Majesty do with
an exact ratification confirm the settled form of the Doctrine and Discipline
of the Church of England, I fear it will sink as low in heretical opinions,
as it swelled before in Popish ceremonies: yet these are but superficial
Ambages to the real intent of my heart, which aims only at your security; yet
withal, I confess, that if ten thousand enemies should entrench your Royal
person, they would seem but as a Pigmie to Hercules, for the irradiation of
your splendent Majesty, would (like the arising Sun) dissipate those mists of
disloyalty.

Kings are placed on Gods own Throne upon earth, therefore whosoever aims at
them, aims at the divine nature, and whosoever aims at that, shall receive an
irrecoverable precipitation; for God does give his Angels charge over them, who
will pitch their tents of defense about them.

Yet I ingenuously acknowledge, that your mature return to England with
opportune tempestivity, would kindle the flame of their loves, for they wait
in expectation of the establishment of a formal reformation.

One thing especially I beseech your Majesty to take into grave consideration,
viz. The manifold plots of the Papists against our Protestant Religion. First,
that formidable Armado in eighty eight, which was almost invincible, had not
Gods al-powerfull hand scattered them: Then that Hel-begotten plot of
Gunpowder-treason, which likewise God of his infinite mercy did prevent: Then
lately those stratagems against my self, and many other noble persons in this
Kingdom, and now last of all, those new sprung up Hidra's in Ireland, who like
base catterpillars crawle amongst the fragrant flowers of true Protestants, but
I hope Gods impartial hand will avert their nefarious intents. I beseech your
Majesty to ponder the precedent premises, and you will find, that Conclusio
sequitur deteriorem partem.

First, I entreat your Royal mind to ratify the form of Religion in this
Kingdom, and in respect of these perilous times whether your Majesty can be
more secure here, or in England, I leave that to your own judgment: In the
mean while, I beseech you accept of my devotion herein, and my prayers both
external, internal, and eternal, shall conclude with this inference,

Vivat in eternum Rex Carolus quem Deus nunc and in secula seculorum defendat,
oro.

FINIS.

