THE GOLDEN LAW, AND EMPERIAL PRINCIPLE, OR THE Universal Monarch, ViZ. The
Sovereignty of Salus populi (not voluntas nor voluptas populi) over all Powers
and Potentates whatsoever; yea, over all things in this World, though never so
sacred, or precious, as over our Religion and Laws, Lives and Liberties, as
here is cautioned; Proving that God himself, prefers man, and complies to him
in all things, when in just competition; Besides many other Usefuls, to rectify
and so to satisfy the conscience scruples of all sorts about the High and
Disputable Point of this Time; as, who has right to the Government of our
three Countries, England, etc. making good also this Position, that Individual
Rights may not Rival it, nor contend, but comply as does God, rather then
endanger the safety of Salus, etc.

Better it is, that one Man die (much more lose his Right, if any) then the
whole Nation perish, to in-right Him. COurteous Reader, Read, I heartily
entreat thee, both the Epistle to the Reader and the Contents also, for they
will I hope not only content thee, but give thee light also into what shall, as
into the Book following.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for William Lee, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pauls-Chain, 1656.

TO HIS HIGHNESS, THE Lord Protector.
May it please Your Highness,
SHould I either of ignorance, or as fearing to presume (as it may be called)
not Dedicate this to You, yet the thing it self so relates to Your Highness, as
that it self-ly does it, do I what I can: I hope then it will not be notion'd
Presumption, if I bear it company, and come along with it in these Lines,
reverently to dictate for it, as Aaron for Moses, also, as so postur'd, to wait
on your Highness, and withal, to crave pardon, if I make bold to subscribe my
self

Your Highness most humble Servant, S. H.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT has been, and is at this instant, the great Controversy of this Nation,
who it is that has right to the Government, etc. and offensive Arms are taken
up in behalf of Chapter Stuart, under pretense of his right thereto, which
enforces defensive Arms to oppose Him, as having no such right, also to
prevent factioning for Him, to the endangering our Countries to ruin. Our
Intention in this following Tract, is, to clear this Point so fully, as that
the weakest capacity may (if not wilfully blind) plainly see it; Our Hopes are,
that when its so resolved, they will then side with the right side, for Right
sake, so for their own, and their Countries peace and safeties sake, and to
save it, and themselves, and theirs from Ruin. Courteous Reader, Read through
I pray thee, before thou judge; the Roman and Pagan Laws enjoin thee to do
so, how then do the Christian Laws of Justice and Charity? So that, if this or
that distaste thee, or resolve thee not, thou yet shall I hope be pleased in
both, before thou have done, and so I have done, and rest thine. And yet

Courteous Reader, I must make bold, for a few words more, I heartily entreat
thee, of thy humanity and civility to excuse the common and trivial slips of
Orthography and Pointing, etc. so if some Capitals should want their Italica
distinctions and ornaments, the like for Method, all which though useful and
pleasing, yet are immaterial to Matter, and but ceremonies to substance, as
Rose-leaves, and Verge-salt are to a sound and wholesome dish of meat; yet would
I have accomodated thee with those also, but necessitated interruptions checked
me. In short, let thy goodness excuse our failings, and accept well our fair
intentions and endeavors, though they want the beauty of taking language,
which hides almost all other defects; and yet the truth is, I aimed aimed both
at Reason and Rhethorick; but principally the first, as first in worth and
chiefdom; for let all know, that its an easy business to write Histories, or
Relations, which is but to tell Tales finely, and nothing of self abilities,
except trimness of rendering, but those that define, bound, and circumscribe
aright, had need to have the spirit, the soul, and energie of Reason, for
nothing is so deep, so high, so soaring, and searching, nor so approaching to a
God, as is god-like Reason. As for Rhethorick, its a fine, a nice, a beautiful
vanity. But to Reason (say all sorts what they please) all Powers Mortal, or
Immortal (but the Immortal God) must stoop, and do homage to; and yet this
Romish Harlot Rhetoric, has by her Paintings, and Dressings, and her Wiles
and Impostures, for Impost sake, as for silver shrines, sovereignty and salary,
got the start or better of her, cause most men are bad and naught in points of
intentions or judgments; and now adieu,

S. H.

The Contents of the Book.
1. HIS Highness Right to the Government is made good at Sect. 43. to 53. so at
78. All Objections against Him are answered as they fall out. 2. That neither
Charles Stuart, or any of that Race, have now any Right thereto, is made
apparent at Sect. 75. to 78. So Sect. 16. to 18, etc. 3. What unjust Usurpation
is, Sect. 101. which quits his Highness, besides the References for his Rights
before. 4. What Arbytrarie Government is, which also quits his Highness, so any
Governor so governing, though Law with our cautions be deviated or declined.
5. Moses-story-storyed, or set out: see at Sect. 79. which suits with his
Highness case and condition at this time. 6. The grand and puzzling question,
viz. who shall be Judge in all Disputes, Things, Cases, Questions, and
Controversies; resolved at Sect. 83. 7. The power and place of the Universal
and Highest Public Judge, or Magistrate, Sect. 102. 8. Many useful things
concerning Law, and Lawyers, and other requisites you shall find here and
there. 9. The Sovereignty of Salus Populi, or the public Peace and Welfare is
made good by Sect. 2, to Sect. 18. 10. An Answer to those who except against
our Armies, or Forces by Land and Sea, and Taxes thereon, see Sect. 72. and
that they are slaves, and not Freemen. 11. Some Usefulls of Magna Charta,
Sect. 106. to 113. satisfied. 12. An humble Addresment to his Highness, or any
Governor, in behalf of the People, for remedy of things amiss, and to prevent
clandestines, and so any treacherous plots to assasinate, or the Insurrections
of the people; so all bold, impudent, uncivil, rude, and Boorish clamours and
exclamations to incense the People to an endangering the Peace and safety of
the Nation, Sect. 124. 13. An answer to the exceptions against such an
Addresment, Sect. 125. 14. An Addresment to all Foreign States, Kings,
Princes, or Governors whatsoever, in behalf of their People, etc. Sect. 126.
15. An Apology to all our worthy Commanders, Captains, Officers, and common
Soldiers to satisfy them why we attribute all the brave achievements, to his
Highness name only, Sect. 127. 16. A Caution to Lawyers, Sect. 114. 17. A
Paradoxical conclusion, 128.
SALVS, HER SOVEREIGNTY, etc.
Sect. 1.

WE are constrained by the ignorance and pravity of the Multitude, to
Tautoligize it in repetitions, even to a wearying of our selves and the world
with words, and yet it will not do, and therefore we must yet do it; So we are
forced to present our selves on the Theater once more in behalf of The peoples
safety and welfare.
Salus her Sovereignty, so in behalf of Salus her The Governor.
Sovereign, etc.

Her Sovereignty we make good by the Arguments following. His by Sect. 43. to
53. so 78. to 83.

2. We will first begin with Scripture Arguments the better to infallible it,
yet as fortified with right Reason also, in things of this nature, else were
they forfeited, etc. We will next pursue it with right Reason, which will
self-ly infallible it, yet not to the Ignorants and conceiteds
self-ish; but together we dare inscribe it with -- Scriptum est.

For Scripture.

3. Christ says, the Sabbath was made for man, yea for Individuals, how then
for the Universal. It was made for him chiefly in points of humanity, as in
Acts and Offices of Mercy, Charity, Love, Justice, and just necessities; see
Deuteronomy. 5. That thou and thine, both servants and beasts may rest, and remember
that thou wast a servant in Egypt, and how acceptable and welcome Rest was, or
would have been to thee, etc.

4. Thus, in just competition, all things comply to Humane necessities, and God
is then best served, in the omission of Sacrifice for Mercy; so you cannot
glorify, honor, serve, love, obey, and worship God better, then to decline
him, and incline to, or prefer Mercy before Sacrifice, that is, wave the
Sabbath in its religious rites, duties, and observations, if they clash with
Mercy, make God then on just occasions and grounds, a God of mercy, and you
magnify him most, for his mercy is above all his works, and does magnificent
him, but yet take heed you incroach not on mercy's good nature beyond our
cautions, which if you do, Justice will be meet with you, for she is bound not
to see Mercy abused.

5. Again, its better that one man die, then all the people perish; and now all
the people must perish, to inright one unrighteous man.

6. The Man then to die, was a righteous Man, the People he was to die for,
were most unrighteous, and yet he must die, that they may live. Now all the
righteous people must die, for one unrighteous man, that he may live, to live
on them, and Lord it over them.

7. The Man then to die, was a God also, the People he was to die for, were By
do generating.
Devils, and yet he must die, but now, etc.

9. Thus much for Scripture Arguments in behalf of Salus Sovereignty, as justly
necessitated: We come next to right Reason, which agrees with Scriptures, so
its the same in Nature, though not in Name.

10. Right Reason says then, That Physic and Food are servants to their ends,
life and health: So Kings, Princes, and Powers, are the like to the Peoples
safety and welfare; there being no other end and use of them as such, but such,
etc.

11. Moreover, we see that all sorts do, and must one ways or other as they are
able, venture their single Individual persons, lives, estates, and rights for
the Public, or may be justly enforced, else the Public might perish, and so
the Individuals thereof.

12. Magna Charta, so Law, Privileges, and Rights, are pleadable twixt
Individuals, and justice is their due accordingly; but not by any one against
the highest public Governor, in opposition to public necessities, or as they
clash therewith, of which, how, and on what terms he is Judge, judge ye by
Sect. 83. etc.

13. Here no Law for, or if a Law against, is of no value, the Principality of
our Principle will not allow thereof, as you shall find ere we have done, and
you do find before what God has, does, and will do in the like case, in what
relates to him. In short, we cannot allow Law, which is but a bare name, a very
nullity in this case, a dead thing, enlivened only by letters and words, but
most by opinion, to Lord it over its the Public.
Lord, whose servant it is, and by and for whom it was made, and may (if it
carry it self amiss) be chastised: Sure it was not raised to raze him, etc. The
Parliament Lawmakers, were Law-breakers, as the Public was necessitated.

15. I conceive by all the aforesaids, that Salus Sovereignty stands clear, and
is apparent, and so who are true, and who are Traitors thereto; so that now we
may venture to inscribe it with Scriptum est.

We next reason and infer from the aforesaids as follows, That

16. Seeing God and his Laws, so Religion, Reason, the Sabbath, and Sacrifice,
likewise Individual rights, yea the very lives, honors, and estates of good,
honest, just and innocent men, have, do, and must on just necessities, lose and
decline all self-rights, and comply to necessitated Salus. What then can nocent
Charles Stuart, or his siders with, say for themselves, who for forfeited
deputative Rights, forfeit their faith, love and loyalty to their Lord, the
Public welfare, by exigenting it to intolerable sufferings and dangers, yea to
ruin by factioning their Country into Divisions and Parties one against
another in an hostile way? Do they not by this render themselves Traitors, as
contrary to trust, duty, and engagement, to trecherize it? Are they not
Murderers and Thievs of all slain, and lost, and taken from on both sides, as
inforcers thereto? I appeal.

Again,

17. His Right to the Crown is not Natural, or selfly Hereditary, but politic,
and deputative, and so is, as are other Laws, alterable, (though they had not
forfeited it) as is conducing to the welfare and safety of Salus, how then as
forfeited also? On which grounds they did make it Null by an Act, and by
another Act condemned him, as siding with his Father etc.

18. And as there is a Law that made it Treason, and so to forfeit self-rights
of life, and livelihood, as of lands and estate, etc. for attempting against
the King, as the Public welfare was concerned in him, and the King did, and
might by Law and Reason exact the same, as so relating to the public good of
peace and safety; by the same Law of Reason, or lex talionis, as much is due
upon the King, or any of his, yea more, as more engaged by trust, oath,
honors, and tribute or revenues, of and from the people for that end and
purpose; and the King himself by his opinion, and exaction of the same, says
as much, and so condemns himself and his for Delinquents, as so acting, and
justifies his executioners for their acting thereafter on such. If it be said,
that the King traytor'd such, or as it related to himself only, and not as to
the Public. I answer, It may be so, but it rendered him weak, or wicked and
unjust, or both if so; for it was, and is in Nature and Reason, and intention
of Laws, so the Lawmakers, as we say before, as it publicly related, etc. for
what is Unus to the Universe, or to our highest principle, also of one so
engaged as before, by trust, oath, and tribute, and so his end of being what he
was, and having what he had?

But to absolute this point, I will make bold to insert a few lines just as
they are in my Army Armed, which sure with what is said, will satisfy or
silence each one.

We will suppose then as high as we can, as that Charles Stuart is innocent, and
absolutely wronged of his right, What then? yea further, suppose they were his
self-rights, as they are not; and not forfeited, as they are; what then? Where
does any one find it in the Law of Religion and Reason, that to inright one,
they may hazard the ruin of millions; if the wronged could right themselves
the right way, as on the wrongers only, I dispute not against it; but to wrong
infinite innocents to right one nocent, or admit innocent, o^ which yet they
may fail, is unspeakable madness, folly, and injustice: by this why may not
Clients clearly injured by their Lawyer, or their Adversary, hostile it, and
gather an Army of men, Esau-like, and so enforce his Adversary to do as much
for his defense; so these two Murderers must meet with their multitudes, and
the innocent fools on both sides must murder each other, under the notion of
siding with for rights, and yet may this be much better done for known
self-rights, then for known forfeited deputatives, not to the ruin of a
multitude only, but of a Nation, to whom they were bound by Oath, Honor,
Trust, and Tribute, and so owe duty and service answerable.

How also can Foreign Religious Princes and States then in Honor and Honesty
answer it, to Murder and Thieve it, in pretending to help such to their
Rights; but the truth is, they help them only to be helped in the like cases; so
we are like to have a mad world of it, when Religious Princes and States, as
called, shall help to support one another in Tyrannies, Thefts, and Murders,
under the Notion of Rights; but woe to those that call good evil, and evil good;
I marvel exceedingly that such just, religious, and honorable Princes and
States, do not send over their Armies now and then, to help each innocent
individual wronged of his self-rights by his Adversary, or his Lawyer: for its
a much fairer, goodlier, and juster ground and pretense then the other, though
both be naught, as teaching both sides naughtiness, as to invade each others
rights, under pretense of righteousness. Thus much for our Army Armed.

19. Show they then not great weakness or wickedness, not to know, or not to
acknowledge, things of so easy a comprehension, made good as before, by
Scriptures, Religion, and Reasons, or to perpetrate such trecheries and
perfideous actions, contrary to all.

20. Show they not both great Wickedness and Weakness, to expose their own
Honors, Lives, and Estates, who many of them did and might have lived happily
and Prince-like, or in a sweet, comfortable, and competent condition, but have
now forfeited and lost all the aforesaids, upon ignoble, base, and treacherous
ends, courses, and designs, and so undone also their Wives and Children, and
brought themselves to end their days dishonourably, miserably and untimely:
Is It nothing to expose all as before, so their kindred and friends, and their
native Country to the Sword, Fire, and Famine, besides many other miseries and
sufferings, as now in its prime of plenty, beauty, and bravery to devastation
and ruin; as if Winter had anticipated it in time to seize on, and surprise
the Summers Riches and Treasure, and all her goodly ornaments and endowments,
and so to render our Fields, Meads, and Downs, Golgotha's and Akeldama's.

21. Well, but all we have said, or can say, will not do, for they love Charles
Stuart, and hate the Lord Protector; the First also has Right on his side, the
Last is very Unrighteous.

21. Goodly Arguments for love and hate, so for judging about right or wrong;
however by this they are orthodox and authentic, in judgment therefore they
may love and hate any one, also act any thing as relates to either, etc.

22. But are not these treacherous colors and pretenses? for do they not rather
trecherously love and hate themselves, as their own ends, lusts, and desires,
which in conclusion will ruin them? etc.

23. What are their allowable grounds for loving Charles Stuart at all, or at
such a rate and degree, as to degrade themselves, and theirs, and their native
Country, as before: Will they ruin the Universe for Unus?

24. As for his Right, it has in part been answered at 16. and see in full 75.
But for the wrongs done by his Father and Himself to the English, they are past
over in silence. Is It not an argument of impudence, or insolence, or both?

25. They love not the Lord Protector, also he has no right on his side, as
they say; but we say, for his Right to the Government, see 43, to 53.

26. And truly we find by their dealings, that they love Him not, yea we find
that they hate him, etc. But why not love? or why at all, or thus Hate? I
conceive they are to seek of Reasons or causes for either, but admit in
admittals, as that cause were for both, and to their degree also, yet where
learn they to revenge at all, how then to such a height, likewise, to the
hazard of their Countries ruin, by involving it into Factions and Parties, for
that end; for is not his Highness at this time the very hinge on which the
safety and welfare of this State hangs, rests, and depends?

But for all their objections and exceptions hitherto against him, they are I
conceive, sufficiently answered in our Army Armed, and Protector protected; so
that reservedness were better, and more becoming, also more fair and just, till
they find the said Answers answered, as insufficient or unjust; as we have
cautioned and qualified them.

27. Many good things has he done, why are they past over so, Equity requires
Retaliation, etc. for which of his Good Deeds then would you stone him; or if
for any Evil, make it appear, or that it amounts to a stoning? Oh you his
immediate Assasinators, you Madmen, you Murderers, you Traitors to your
Country, by indangering its ruin: Are you hired? so was Judas to murder
himself as well as his Master. You fools, how think you to escape? The Jesuits
have befool you, as they did Raviliac, to be presently conveyed away by an
Angel; but the Devil prevented the Angel, and Tyburn the Traitor.
or if it did, its for the Innocent to cast the first Stone, and not the
Guilty, so none shall be cast: But were he guilty, and that to your degree, yet
who authorized you to cast stones, etc. which we shall make appear you may not
do at all; How then as Salus safety is concerned in Him: For,

28. Know Friends, that had such or such an one murdered my Mother, and now
opportunity of war favors me so, as that he being placed just opposite to me,
I could kill him, but my Father is accidentally placed just before, also close
to him, so that I cannot shoot, or kill one, but I must kill both; what fine
pretense trow will bear me out to attempt it, and so turn paracide to my
Father, under color of love, duty, and justice to my Mother, and of hate and
revenge, to, and on her ruiner; surely, as so postured, I will not only spare,
but protect what I can such a naughty man. How then ought I to protect what I
can, mine, and my Parents, and my Countries Protector, that has often ventured
his life, and all his fortunes, to redeem and recover my well near lost Mother
Our Country so each one, and theirs.
, and does still save and protect her; why then at all offend him, etc. much
more seeing you cannot wrong him, but our Mother must suffer also.

29. On what grounds now take up Arms for Charles Stuart; as for his Right, so
your love to him: We have already, and will further answer you in due place; So
for your groundless hate to his Highness, or though grounded, etc. So that now
your Arms taking up under the Notion of and for Charles Stuart, must needs be
for your own by and base ends, as to side with him, hoping to insinuate into
him, and deceive him with such and such pretenses, and so gain him to side with
you, for your own ends sake; though he also have his own ends also, as well as
your selves; yet both of you, Simeon and Levi-like, agree in your Levities,
your wickedness, etc. against your selves and yours, and so your Country, etc.

30. Your ends must be then to be righted of your wrongs, as you will call
them, so to help you to your Fields and Vinyards again which you have lost by
your former trecheries, also hoping of an addition and further enlargement of
them; likewise of advancement to places of profit, power, honor, and command,
etc. to these, and not to Charles Stuart are ye Stewards.

31. But is not this to build Castles in the Air, as to hazard the certainties
you have, and so go on in your Trecherizings, in hope of revenge and
advancement, which are so remote in point of likelihood as before: Is not your
advancements more like to be Hamon like, then that of Mordecat? Have not diverse
of you been already advanced and mounted to Hamons height, to your downfals?
Will not Love and Loyalty to your Native Country, its Peace and Safety, so the
experience of others sufferings by such attempts, and the infinite hazards you
self-ly run, also involve your Country into, nor the loss of what you have and
sweetly enjoy, etc. Will none of these I say warn you against your selves, who
are only your own enemies, etc.

32. How can you digest it? How answer it; thus to Traytorize, Murder, and
Thieve it, to bring your ends about, under pretense for Charls' Stuart? and
admit this also, how yet I say can you in points of wisdom, reason, humanity,
and justice, answer it? Care you not what you do, to undo all, and your selves
also? There is not one Argument of wisdom, sense, reason; justice, or humanity
on your side, in your way of proceedings, pretend what you will, find one if
you can; and if not, what are you in the mean while, that are in this neither
wise, rational, true, nor honest, but the quite contrary to all; contrary then
your selves in the aforesaids; and so you shall know what you are, by what you
should be.

33. Should your Charles conquer, as its very unlikely, also infinitely
dangerous, mischievous, and hazardous to an universal ruin, etc. yet he
conquers not: for what is that conquest to you, that conquers you, and yours, and
your Country also, and makes you all absolute slaves to the conqueror so
called, and the conqueror a slave also to his competitors: can you promise to
your selves the privileges you now enjoy from your conqueror, who is more
remote in nature and grace Good qualitiies and abilities: also he is a stranger
etc.
, so also in power to help himself and you; for the Kingers of your King will
be his and your King, etc. and show him only to hide their own King-hoods, so
also their Tyrannies to, and abuses of the people, which his name and presence
of King must cover, and these also will befool you with promises and pretenses,
to gain you to second the King, that so ye may second, and so first them, in
points of Conquest, and so of Linghood, and then you shall have plenty of
Chymera's, and Castles in the Air, and Aerie Utopia's for your pains: thus
Joab-like, with their smiles, they smite you under the fifth rib; you shall
have Butter and Milk also in Lordly dishes, etc. but not one word of the Nail
Yours and your Countries slaveries.
that must pierce your Temples, and fasten you to the ground past rising, etc.

Know you the end and issues of war, when once begun, and on foot? Does it not
usually immortalize it in Mortalities, and make sport of casting Firebrands in
good earnest, as if in jest, like Joab and Abners gallants, that rose up to
play, but never lay down again till tumbled down? Is not lovely, youthful, and
natural green, a more seemly, comfortable, and acceptable color for your grain
and grass, so for your Orchards, Gardens, Edens, and Paradises, then is the
bloody, the gory, the savage, or sanguine hew? Would you have Foot and Horse,
Troops and Companies, devour up, demolish, or trample down your goodly
Cornfieldsd, so your Granaries and Grass, and render all as dismal as a
deserted Desert? Must the Summer, and you be thus surprised, prize you all at
no better rate then so? Would you return to Egypt again, the house of Bondage,
and so have the Star Chamber stare over you as before, and the High Commission
commit you ad placitum? Would you that Doctors Commons should once more turn
you to graze on the Commons? Would you that Pole Money, and Monopolies, also
Ship Money, should oppress you again? Think you that Taxes, Custom, and Excise
shall cease? No, no, weaklings they are, as is the Militia, Flowers of the
Crown; if these wither, whither will the Crown go? for so the Militia will be
mastered, for want of its Mistress Pecunia.
, etc. But this must not be; as for us, we are forced to have the said Sesments
for defense sake, they for offense sake, though none offend them: Would you
that Prelacy and Priesthood should perk up again, and under pretense of
Religion, Gods honor, worship, and service, and nonconformist etc.
be-heretick, and sect you, and then dissect you by persecutions, punishments,
and banishments, also hamper your licentiate liberty of Conscience, as they
will call them, as so many extravagancies from the Orthodox Faith, and their
implicit fooleries; then when too late, your prudence will see your
improvidence, to lose such a favor, through your insensibleness, ingratitude,
and licenciateness, etc. then may you (like the Brazen-head) cry out, that time
was, but is not, for now its past.

35. Nor do I reason cunningly, on purpose to establish his Highness in the
Government, otherwise then I conceive is right, also conduces to the peace,
welfare, and safety of our Nation, etc. beyond any change that can be
accidentally or forcibly made; but as for what may be carefully, wisely, and
peaceably contrived for his Highness Honor, and his Posterities safety, and
our Nations, etc. surely will in prudence and providence be complied to; for,
the safety of the Nations is his, so each ones safety, etc. so its hazards,
dangers, exigents, or ruin, are his, so his posterities, so each ones also;
for they are so interwoven, that the web will be quite lost, if either be lost,
etc. Personal greatness may be good and necessary for the honor of our Nation,
as the Presenter of such a People is ocularly conspicuous, as well as in Fame
and Name; for that such appearances begets it: as they did in Solomon, who made
use of both, to beget, amplify, and continue his greatness: and as the Mayor
of London must not only in name Lord it, also in power and extent of Command
and Government, exceed Barnets, or St Albons Governors, but also in ocular and
specious presentiments, else his Sun of glory may decline, and retrograde it, as
on the Dyal of Ahaz. With all humility I do therefore presume, as love, duty,
and loyalty bind me for his Highness, so our Countries welfare and safety, so
each Individuals, that in season, before death natural, or casual prevent,
thoughts may be how to leave this our Country, now under his Highness charge,
so his Posterities, safe and secure, in its after way, manner, and kind of
Government, lest Greatness alone without Safety bring us all to little or
nothing; it will much conduce to his Highness honor, so to his safety, whilst
living, for when the adversary sees his hopes dashed by a future certain way of
safe Government, he will find it bootless to attempt on the present Governor,
or futures, and for my part, let his Highness Posterity have the name and
honor of the Presentment thereof; yet in such a secure way, as may secure
themselves and us all; which sure for their safety, so our Countries, his
Highness will comply to, and cast for, as for his own life time, I do think
that all or most do conceive themselves to be as well and safe under him, as
under any other Governor whatsoever, from experience of his care and wisdom
hitherto. But Sir, you are Mortal, and withal momentary, therefore honor your
Name, and your Posterity, whilst here, and when gone, by so providing for them,
that so al sorts may account you their Countries Savior, next their Savior:
Sure, I am a Member of our Nation, and so concerned in duty and with all
humility, to exhibit my conceptions, by way of hints and memorandums; for its
and your good Sir, as the Syrians servant said, to his Lord and Master
familiarly; Father, what if the Prophet had said for your good so and so; how
then when he only advises you to wash and be clean, return home, safe, sound,
and secure, etc. and his servants advice he took well, and obeyed it, and so
was saved, etc. else etc. Did not the Lord Joab also hear a poor woman from the
Wall, etc. by which King David's City was saved, so the Citizens, and the Lord
Joab and his Army also? All which else in opposition might have been lost, and
destroyed one another. And Solomon hints also of a poor man that saved another
City, but etc. Its the highest of honors to leave all safe; and they and
theirs are worthy of honor and dignities that do it; but honors and greatness
without safety, is to stand on the precipe of a Precipice, as pinacled on the
highest point of the Temple, ready for precipitation; which thou O God in
heaven, and you gods on earth, I humbly pray you forbid, by timely providing
for and against, all for, and against; which till it be, this whole Nation
stands so placed as before, though not minded, if your Highness should miscarry
which God forbid; for I see such clandestines and ambushments attend
continually for your surprisal, that I faint on thoughts thereof, both for you,
and yours, our selves, and the whole Nation, etc.

36. But yet fully to clear it, that I partialize not in my plea in behalf of
his Highness, let us suppose that Perkin Warbeck, or the Traitor Raviliac, or
the Rayler Rabshekah, or the Excepters own self, had inforcedly, and so
usurpingly gained the Government, and governed much amiss also, but not
destructively, I yet would, yea I ought to support them, though not for their
own sakes, yet on the terms and cautions at Sect. 28. viz. as my Father, my
Mother, my Countries safety is concerned in them, except I could evidently find
a way to displace them without endangering our Country to murders, slaughters,
fire, famine, and all sorts of devastations to ruin, also safely and
certainly, without the aforesaid miseries, supply their places with better men,
etc. else as good abide as we are, as run such hazardous adventures, etc.

37. Why then attempt against the Lord Protector? whom we have or will prove no
Usurper, but to have a true and just Right to the Government, as also governs
well, though not to each ones fancy or mind, nor may, nor can, etc. For God
himself in Samuel could not do it; for no remedy, but they would discharge him,
though they could no ways charge him, etc.

38. Would his Highness resign, and will us to fit our selves with Governors
and Government to our minds, the whole Land would be in a confusion; factions
(like Hydra's heads) would multiply, and so divide us, we should never agree,
cause each one would have his friend, or one of his Church or Faction to rule,
that so that party or faction might rule in and by him: Are we not in a
happiness then that the place is possessed, by which means we are kept from
ruining our selves, to place one there; who when there, though it were God
himself (as before) he cannot please men of contrary minds, humors, and ends,
nor the same man in his several humors; so humorous and vain a thing is man.

39. Let the Exclaimer and Excepter (by imagination) place himself in the
Government, and cast how to come off without casting, so with honor in
corresponding it wisely with other States and Princes, and giving his own
people content, let him present before him the continual Suits and Petitions of
different Sects and parties, and that he is never free from complaints of one
nature or other, nor from Visits and Addresments to and from Foreign States
and Princes, or his own people; how also he is never quit nor quiet from
clamors and exclamations of crossed parties, that he cannot, nor in justice may
not comply to; then likewise, the continual dangers that attend him from the
revengeful, envious, and hateful, as any way crossed, or not complied to; and how
he cannot please any, though he endeavor to please all; so that surprisals do
continually haunt him, by reason whereof he cannot have time to come off in his
thoughts and cares about the aforesaids; and a world of things more, which much
check him in his recreations and refreshments, so in his retreats; besides the
awe and fear of treacherous surprisals: Surely all things before fully presented
to him, would awe and affright him from approaching the Throne, and go near to
cause him to Reproach it.

40. Take up Arms then (if Arms you will take up) even with your Enemy (as you
esteem and call him) seeing he sides with, and protects your friend, yea your
self, and your Mother, your Country, that bare you, and brought you up, yea
oppose with him your dear friend, your King, so called; for your Kings sake,
your Country, and for shame be no longer be-foold with pretenses, hopes, and
promises of Castles in the Air, and aerie Utopia's; nor with smiles and salutes
of how do my Brother? and by and by you are thrild or smit under the fifth
rib; remember all the hazards you undergo at Sect. 34. so diverse other places,
and for future, compress and comply, and do no more so, and so recover your
selves like men; for I will assure you, you now act like children, babes, and
sucklings.

41. Its our wisest course then to comply to the present Government, and so
settle an Agreement amongst our selves, to prevent divisions; for there is no
likelihood of bettering our selves, had we free liberty to do it, but of ruin
rather; and did Foreign Princes and States see us so settled, it would stave
them off from attempting on us, and so secure us, and enable us to attempt on
them, especially on those that have wronged us, and will not right us, etc. But

42. I will now make head against all excepters and objectors whatsoever
against his Highness as an Usurper, and so to have no right to the Government,
etc. which is sufficiently done in our Army Armed, and Protector Protected,
with what else is (for ought I know) objectable against him; but I will (with
addition of this) fortify it (I hope) past forfeiting etc.

43. Be then ingenious, upright, and fair conditioned (my Reader) I pray thee,
and do as thou would be done to; cease judging, censuring, and condemning,
till thou have seen what is said in his behalf; and then let not the passions of
partiality, love or hate, obstacle ingenious, judgment, but come off like a
man, etc.

Let it be remembered then, that when the Lord Fairfax declined going against
the Scot, his Highness being then in Ireland, whither he was sent to curb that
stubborn and rebellious people, which ( Caesar-like, or rather like himself) he
did in a trice, preventing veni, vidi, vici, with vici only, he was then sent
for, and chosen by the said Parliament to undertake against the Scot; which he
did with the like success and suddenness, all things considered; his Highness
was then also invested with the Militia or Sword, as Defender of the three
Nations, which is in nature Protector, yea King, as so self-ly sworded, and as
so chosen by the Parliament, he was chosen and empowered (as before) by the whole
Nation, each individual therein, as in the Army Armed, and Protector Protected,
is fully set out, and made good against all opposers and objecters, be whom
they will, etc.

45. Again, his Right of Turn and place chose him, for he was next in place to
the said Lord Fairfax; so it had been injustice and a dishonor to him to have
declined him, and incline to any other, without just cause of exception, as
unable, or unfaithful, or short of sufficientcies to undergo; but his apparent
perfections, and the Parliaments continued choice employments of him, spoke and
evidenced for him as before.

46. His own known worth of Wisdom and Care, Fortitude and good Fortune chose
him (had the Parliament not chose him) as the hopefullest to preserve, defend,
and protect our Countries.

47. His own, so his Soldiers Honors and Safeties chose him, and would have
justified an usurpation, and retension, (as called) til secured against after
claps of dispowering, and then of over-powering; and I conceive it had been
Self and Public Treachery, not to have so usurped or assumed, also held the
power, til he had thoroughly provided for his own and his Soldiers safety, as
before, so our Countries also what he could.

48. His Countries necessities chose him, as in likelihood its most hopeful
Deliverer, Defender, and Protector, by reason of his known perfections of
faithfulness, wisdom, fame, and fortitude; and these are beyond the giddy, the
ignorant, the partial, and passionate, vocal, or articulate free choice of the
people, as called: And this alone authorized Moses to assume and hold the
Government, for the Peoples safety etc.

49. Lastly, As so chosen and empowered by all before, God also chose him; for
whom, or what Wisdom, Reason* Justice, Mercy, and just Necessity chose, and
allow of, God does, must, and will approve of, who is them al, etc. so he is of
God, and by Divine ordination, as well as by humane; which also, yea therefore
is also Divine, being as before: So he is chosen by Divine and Humane
ordination, the Governor of our three Countries, deny it who can: But for his
Government, it concerns his Highness to look to it, for I meddle not with it,
only his Right thereto; and I think I am right, etc.

50. The aforesaids standing clear and good, I say then, that reverence, love,
and loyalty are his just dues, as to any King or Prince that ever was, as he is
beyond them al in points of choice and desert, as has or shall appear: so also
is a sobriety in judging and censuring of him about things out of our reach,
and out of his (oft-times) to act as he should, or would; so many lets, and
obstacles of al sorts Governors have, that they cannot as they should, or
would, etc.

51. It must not be forgot then that according to Sect. 44. his Highness is
chosen and empowered with the universal Militia, and so King'd in power,
according to the Law, and custom of choice, as by the free Votes of the
People, and I say somewhat beyond, in that way of choice, as chosen by a
Parliament chosen by the People, who in respect of the rude multitude of the
Country chusers, are a company of wise and knowing men, having also al our
other Arguments, that Index-like, points and sends them to him: Whereas in
choosing Parliaments or Kings, Princes, or Governors of Nations, or of any
sort, there is seldom knowledge of, or respect to perfections; but to
partiality only; for the passions and affections of love and hate, fear and
hope, friendship or relation to, so power, force, or fraud, and an hundred by
and particular ends, as packt, hired and faction'd thereto, and not choiseness,
chose, the chosen; yet this is called free choice, and the liberty of the
People so magnified and cried up, but we must cry it down, for down it is in
nature, though thus graced, I say then, that Licentiateness is not a liberty,
but the only bondage; Were fitting Boundaries set for choosing, to fetch in the
Choice, the wise, worthy, and able, and keep out the worthless, etc. also to
keep the so chosen within their said bounds, that they extravagant not; I allow
then of such a Liberty, else not: But these useful Boundaries they would also
call Bindings, and a loss of Liberty and Privileges,; so it appears, that their
Freedom is only Licentiateness, which is the only Bondage, as before; and our
Freedom is conducing Bindings, etc. now how we shall agree, I know not, seeing
we thus disagree.

52. Things thus considered, show me (if you can) the Man, the Parliament,
King, Prince, or Power whatsoever, so chosen in all particulars, etc. but I know
you cannot; however, he is so chosen the highest Governor (if the just and
universal Sword be Supreme or highest) as clearly shows his Right, and quits
him of Usurpation, and enjoins al sorts to obedience, and all the Duties at
Sect. 50. And that is enough to make good our Assertion, and yet the Desertless
would desert him, though thus asserted.

We have yet something also to say concerning the Lord Fairfax, which seems to
suit with this point: Know then, that when the said Lord Fairfax had the
universal Militia or Power in his Power, and that the Parliament and City
bandyed against him and the Army, to disband them, and in conclusion rise in
Arms to enforce it; he held his Power, for his own and his Soldiers Honors
and Safety, so for his Countries; and finding himself in plight to put them to
it, did so, and to make short, came in like a Conqueror, yet as conquered,
with Modesty and Mildness; for what Lex talionis would have allowed him to do
to such as would have undone him, and also endangered the Nation to ruinous
Division, let Justice her self judge; considering that both He and the Army had
been most faithful and valiant in behalf of them and our Country. But I take it
that it was only the The Pulpits Incendiary I take it, makes this good.
Presbyterial party of the Parliament, so of the Clergy and City, that incensed
the people against him, not for the common good sake, but their own ends only,
as that the Presbytery might Prelate it under the Notion of Priests, and so
crush all other Sects in Religion (as called) but themselves, The name of
Presbytery is not offensive to me, but their natures of Pride and Pretenses,
which produce contention. Romans 14. so nor Reason allow not the sword but the
sword of the Spirit; and yet the sword also against Invaders of the
Fundamentals, so the Peoples peace, etc.
the only Sect, as out, or against Religion, if such a Regiment be against it,
and Righteousness in that point for it. However it appeared that he was a
Prince in just Power, also used it Prince-like, as defensively, and not
offensively; also for just Self and Public ends, and this he might, and so may
any; for its the end of Power so to do: To wise eyes he was Roy in Right of
Might and just Power, if used as before, and the Parliament but his Viceroys,
and did act only on their been gessere, and his been placitum or permission,
for what he then did, he could always have done, and might, on our premises,
else not; but support them rather, as the end of just Power is both to support
and suppress, Wherein came he short in that little brunt of his Highness?
However he showed by that Act, what he might, and would, as he conceived,
conducing, and as justly necessitated: and so would my Excepter do, if in their
place, Serpentinely save his head, and his head his Country, etc.
as the general or just particulars necessitate; why else is it a Power but for
such ends? For can any one in reason think that just power empowered for that
end; or however, being in Nature, Reason, and Religion, bound to right what
they can the wronged, whether Individuals, or the Universal; as did Moses in
both: who though not formally empowered, yet having Power, righted his
individual wronged brother, and next, his Brethren the People: and so may any,
with our cautions, principles, and premises, else not. Can then I say such
Powers see themselves unjustly and inhumanly acted against for all their
Humanities, which rather call for Gratitudes; and Gratias, instead of such
ingratitude? and yet like senseless Momes, sit still; it cannot be. Can they also
see their Country neglected, as not acted for, as it ought; or acted against,
as it ought not; and like the senseless sit still? it cannot be: However it ought
not be; Hints or memorandums.
but they may ( Moses-like) without our Cautions, act against such Actors; yet
not without our Cautions, etc.

Subordinate Swords and Powers have their Superiors, or the Supreme to awe and
command them, and enforce a rendition of their Powers; but the Supreme is King
in Nature, and asks more then Grace to govern it; and its well if any way
governed: For who shall say to the King Or any highest Power, in point of Power.
what do thou?

Capitulate not then (oh thou naked Man) petulantly and daringly with the
Brandisht and Flaming Blade, or Universal Sword or Power, lest it sanguine it
self in thy Sanguis; but rather Serpent-like, save thy Head, so thy Feet, yea
thy whole Body, by thy application to our application and addresment, else al
thy pretended courage and faithfulness to the cause, are but foolish and
vainglorious follies, as insensibleness, wilfulness, and stubbornness, instead
of resolution and courage for etc. To what end should a Venice glass malapertly
justle it, or contend with an Iron pot? except in our way of Oratory, of
Reason, and Humanity: As spare me (oh noble Sir, I pray you) for I am too weak
and brittle to deal with you, so choose rather to Incumbe, then try it out with
such a Combahant.

Al Powers (though unjust) will yet if they can, Rule, and not be Ruled, and
that oft-times unjustly; but if justly (though unjust) happy are the Ruled: But
just Powers may according to justice and just necessities, rule and overruled.
Know then that just or unjust Powers (though a little unjust) are Just; for God
himself found folly in Heaven amongst his Angels etc.

The King himself was of our Judgment, and we of his: That to part with the
Militia, was to part with Abishag his Mistress, for the Kingdom followed it,
cause it un-king'd him, and King'd his un-kingers in point of Power: and asso,
of al things ad placitum, the Parliament impowering his Highness, In power.
King-like, left him to himself, in point of Power to govern if he would, or
see just cause, which he may with our Principles and premises of just
necessities and conducings, as before; and as did and might the Lord Fairfax on
the same account: for none must be so silly as to think that the universal
Power will (if it can help it) be overpowered It may abide persuasion, but no
compulsive Invasion, especially to unjust sufferings and dangers.
; whatever in a wise policy, it may connive, pretend, and comply to, and it
comes off honestly, fairly, and well, if with a little wronging, al things
considered, for so Angels will do: Thus the Lord Fairfax did no wrong; or if
any, but little, also as of necessity enforced thereto; but wisely Sentinel'd
and Perdu'd it to prevent Surprisals, and the better to surprise his Surprizers.

And the Parliament as before outing the King, and his Seed, and immediately
investing his Highness with the Militia, the Kings Abishag or Mistress, or
rather, with the Kingdom it self, he succeeds the King as the next Man, by an
Act As their doings, which they never undid.
of Parliament, as Governor in point of Power, either in Esse, Posse, or
Potentia; and thus (besides al other Arguments, he claims Right to the
Government; and if he Governs as he has done, and promises to do, and provide
also as we have hinted, we are happy, and he is worthy of the Government, and
We unworthy of such a Governor.

53. But sure for this my doing I shall not escape censuring as a Flatterer, a
Time-server, etc. in this Tract, etc. I cannot deny but so it may be, but I do
deny that so it is: Now who is it can conclude from possibilities, to
certainties, as that things are, cause they may be; which as they cannot say,
they say nothing; for I can from possibilities (if they be good Arguments) make
guilty the most innocent, etc. But the Laws of Logic and Love, so of Civility,
Humanity, and Charity are against such conclusions, and in doubtfuls for the
contrary, etc. as for the fairest and most friendly construction; which to make
good, I have and do present you also with many allowable reasons and grounds
for what I do; and do here seriously and ingeniously protest, that I would not
have set Pen to Paper, but to discover falsehood, and make Truth apparent; for
there is no reason that his Highness should be wronged or censured as an
Usurper, besides many other unjust Objections and Exceptions against him; and
the censurers go clear away, as just and true in the same; and his Highness
remain as guilty, to his great dishonor: for Untruths in point of judgment do
as much abuse, as do those of relation; for the people misled in either, are
thereby incensed against his Highness, as if guilty, etc. so fall to factioning
it for and against, to the endangering of all, etc.

54. Nor may the censure of Flattery, nor any depravings, etc. obstacle or
check duties of any nature, especially of so high concernment, for so no good
thing almost will be done, and many evils must be done; for there is not any
good thing but may be vilified and depraved; nor any bad, but may be rendered
speciously good etc. Let the Performer then stand clear in his own heart and
Conscience, and so rest resolved for the rest, else farewell al goodness and
good things, if we be afraid of Sanballats Foxes, who would demolish goodness
it self, they are so Bad.

Object. 55. You are contented that I do my Country all the good service I can,
but you except that I plead thus for the Protector, also you would not have me
to hint nor mind him of these his Rights, etc, for it will pride him, and he is
proud enough already.

Answ. If it be any factious Incendiaries or trouble-States that object thus, I
answer, Why except they at what they are the Causers of? For had they not
endangered our Country by crying up the King of Scots Rights, and crying down
the Lord Protectors, and so divided and factioned the people to the Hazard and
Ruin of al, I had been silent; so they clearly excuse me, and condemn
themselves of what they accuse me of, by necessitating me to do it. Whoever
else objects, I conceive this answer will satisfy them also.

Object. 56. But its objected, That the Law makes this or that not Treason,
except against a King, nor binds, except for a King, etc. so such are not
Traitors, nor capable of Trial as such, etc.

Answ. If so, I know not what to say to such a Law, nor such Lawyers; and yet
they shall know by and by, that I know what to say to both, so care for neither
of them in this case.

By this also (it may be) they will say, that the Parliament could not, nor can
his Highness now, make Laws or Ordinances without a King, etc. Oh the force
that is in words, ceremonies, and opinion: But we shall show by and by that our
Principle is too hard for them al, as well as for all at Sect. 16.

However they will by this (if so) enforce his Highness to King it in Title, to
entitle him to the aforesaids. But we will take to pieces these positions, and
examine them, etc. so shall we see what confession they will make.

57. If as against the King be Treason, what then is it against the Kings King?
Sure the greater is greater then the less, and contains it; Now whether the
Peoples welfare and safety be not greater then Charles Stuart's Right, if Right,
see Sect. 3. to 17. Then whether Salus be not highly concerned in the present
Governor thereof, see Sect. 28. etc.

58. Note, our Principle, Kings the highest Governor in point of Power
(however called or entitled) in all things, as Salus is necessitated, or justly
conduced to, especially in point of Safety, so his own safety in relation
thereto; so that as before, neither Words, nor Letters, nor no Law for, or if
against, nor any thing is valuable or pleadable in opposition thereto; else the
aforesaids were higher then the highest; to which all at Sect. 16. stoop,
yield, and comply; yet some of our Laws and Lawyers (as before) are lawless, and
will not, so must be out-lawed, etc.

59. What Is the word King, but a composition of Letters in themselves nothing;
for to people of another language, they are only sounds, etc. so the power of
the word is in thy conception or opinion of it, or of custom; but the right
power is in the extent of just power; next, in the worth and perfections of the
person empowered: See then what most Kings are, at Sect. 51. to 52. and see
what his Highness is at Sect. 4. to 5. and so who then are Kings.

60. His Highness has the Militia of three Nations in his hand, Does this, or
the Title King, King? Next, he is chosen in points of choice, beyond all or
most Kings or Governors, as before; also has choice parts: Kings these, or the
Title King?

61. Is a King of Scotland alone, cause called and ceremony'd like a King, such
a King as is the Protector of our three Nations?

62. There was no King in Israel, etc. There was then to be none, for they
never had any; What Is then the Meaning, but that there was no Universal
Governor at that time? Governor then is the Genus, and so contains all
Species or kinds of Governors, however called; which howsoever in point of
Species, he is yet a Governor or Ruler in the Genus: Thus Judges, Captains,
Priests, Prophets and Kings, at different times King'd it in Genus and Species,
though not alike speciously.

63. Treason then against the King, was not as he was a single Man, or as
called King, but as he was the Universal Governor, in whose safety the Peoples
safety was concerned: It was not Treason as it related to words, expressions,
or Titles, but to his place or office, and its relate, the people as before.

64. Let the Lord Protector then have what name or Title you please, it matters
not, he is a King in nature, as well as the rest, or best; However, as he is
the Universal Governor, Thirty two Kings as called, and Translated, Joshua
slew on this side Jordan; they were (I believe) but the highest Governors of
Cities. I think the L. Mayor of London is for h^^ time as good as the best of
them.
in whose safety Salus safety is concerned, this and that, or what was Treason
to the King so called, is the same to him at least, he being more etc. its
Treason then to the Public for any to attempt upon, or against her Highest or
Chiefest Governor, Defender, or Protector, to the endangering her Protection,
Welfare, and Safety.

66. Its considerable also that Law has two parts, viz. its Ceremonials, and
its Essentials, etc. its Ceremonials are words, expressions, and names, so also
such and such ways, courses and forms to proceed by etc. its Essentials are
Justice, Rights, and Safety, of which this last is first; so in competition,
Justice and Rights must comply to Safety, etc. If the Essentials must comply to
Safety, what then can the Ceremonies of Law in just competition with its Lord,
the Peoples Safety, say to it? What reason have they, or is it ignorance,
obstinacy, or wilfulness, etc. Must the Lord, the Public Welfare, be a servant
to its servants? Yea, be destroyed by them? viz. by words and names, so by
manners and ways of proceeding; Ceremonials all to the Essentials before, the
Essentials at Sect. 16. in competition comply, but our Trivials are very
troublesome.

67. Remember then as before, that the Highest Governor, as Salus, is concerned
and necessitated, is not bound to Law it self, much less to Lawyers, or any
Ceremonials; for in behalf of Salus, he is Judge and Lord of the Law as is
conducing.

68. Else as before, how could Salus on exigents be saved or provided for, if
words and letters say nay, and none might gainsay them.

71. So may he act, also do and undo, without, yea against Law, yea Law it
self, much more Laws, Letters, which are often great lets to its intention, as
the Public is justly necessitated, cause the Public is Lord of the Law, and
who made it for its own end, and not against, and if in error or accident it be
against, it must be made to know its place, is to give place.

72. Well, but yet ye are not at quiet, but are much troubled at one thing, you
would fain be free Englishmen, and not under the Sword, nor Taxes. Be it so,
Give then these Weaklings their wills, etc. so the Army is disarmed, and Taxes
discharged, and now I hope we shall hear no more news of you, and yet what means
this noise, this clattering of Armor and Weapons, this thundering of Canons
and other shot, this bouncing and running of rampant Horsemen to and fro, what
these shriekings and cryings out of all sorts? Whence these streams of Blood?
How came these mangled and slain Carcasses? Whence those frighted Fugitives?
What Is the matter of this smoke, fire, and flame? etc. Surely from hence all,
Your Army discharged, the Hydra Faction has charged you with ten Armies for
that one, and so overcharged you; for now Royalists, Peers, Prelates, and
Priests, so Lawyers and Gospellers of all sorts and fashions, yea every several
Sect, Church, and Faction are in Arms to offend one another, and defend
themselves, and to Rule and Soveraignize it if they can; and Foreigners
hearing thereof, take the advantage, and strike in amongst them, and whilst
your selves fight for the bone, the stranger Doegs may chance get it; however,
the Land may be ruined before it be righted, or recovered by any side. All
these miseries, and this our bondage, your licentiate liberty, your freedom
has brought us to, which the bondage of an Army and Taxes would have freed us
from, and now you wish (when too late) oh that the Army were on foot again to
save our Heads, etc. and for Taxes, you would rather then fail take the Devils
counsel, part with all rather then your lives, or rather then Husbands and
Wives, Parents and Children, also near and dear friends and Kindred should be
parted by slaughters and massacrings, or so mangled and made away, and your
selves live a dying life of grief, care, misery, nakedness and want, even to a
continual expiring.

73. Had the poor Savoyans had a protecting, a defending Army (which could they
have been in season aware of) sure they would, also have taxt themselves
according to the Devils Doctrine, rather then come under the hands and Paws of
such Devils, etc.

74. Lets know then your minds in season, whether you will have any protecting
Armies by Sea and Land, Brave Royal and Imperial Forces or no, to save you from
Royalists, and the rest, that so we may know how to please you, though we
please you not.

75. That the King of Scots as called has no right to the Government, is
without any more ado apparent in nature and reason, from what is already said,
to any common understanding almost, how then to the comprehensive, as having
(contrary to the very end, use, and being of Governors) sided with his Father
against his Mother, his Country, in transcendent trecheries, etc. and that his
Father was highly treacherous to his trust, appears by the Lord Chief Justice
Cook of Ireland his Kings Case, heard, accepted, and confirmed by Parliament,
on which the King was executed by their order; besides his often needless and
causless oppression of the People, as appears at Sect. 95.

76. Again, the Parliament made an Act against any of that Race for ever being
Kings and Governors of this Nation etc. and this as the whole Body of the
People was contracted in them, they might do; so may they make or mar any
other Laws, as conduces to the Peoples Welfare and Safety, as they have that
of ten pounds in the hundred to eight, and then to six pounds for use moneys,
which if they find amiss, they may alter again, and advance it to what degree
they find it capable of, or depress it as they please; As the Hollanders, and
other Countries, raise, and raze their exchange moneys, as avails to the
Public: Our Principle will justify it also, and what not?

77. In short, as they may make one Law, so may they many, or any, and as they
may mar, alter, or unmake one, or more, so may they ad infinitum, as conduces
to the Public; for the Power that empowered them for the least, or any,
influenced them for all conducings, and against all seducings, of which they
conceived that Race to to reign here was one; and therefore they arraigned one,
and razed out the rest. So by all our Arguments his Highness is the next man,
being so chosen as before.

78. Now whatever Ordinance or Act the Parliament made against any one
Universal Governor for future, yet if before, or afterward, they have empowered
the Lord Protector with the universal Militia of our three Nations or
Countries, as their Defender and Protector, and so left him, and so he still
stands, besides all our other ways of Choice and Investure of him, in case they
had not so done, they for their parts by so doing, (besides what we have said
and done) have to our best understanding postured him in the place, and
condition he now stands, for all the said Act: for if in words, or by an
Ordinance or Act they say, we will not for future have any one alone universal
Governor more, etc. and yet before, or then, or after, gave him the triple, or
threefold Militia, they King'd him in point of Power, call him as you please;
and they were so King'd themselves by the People, though not so called, and yet
called so by a King K. James
, for to say in words, or by an Act of Parliament, We will not that any one man
rule as before, etc. and yet in actions do it, which are more real, also of
later edition, and so more authentic, as seeming to revoke what they said; and
is as much as to say, we are now of another mind and judgment, and will have
this Gentleman however to Rule and Govern for his time, etc.

79. Yet we humbly make bold to say, that it concerns his Highness of his own
goodness, nobleness, and ingenuity, and for his Honor and Renown sake, to make
good what he can the ends of such a be-trust, as the welfare of the People, and
their Safety, etc. and to consider of our contents, and in season to provide
accordingly, etc. However, his Highness Rights as before, I am forced to make
good, for our former reasons sake; also to prevent and affront the Invaders
thereof, to our endangering to ruin.

80. Object. But it may be said, this impowering him as before, was only a
be-trust, etc. a redelivery being expected when exacted.

Answ. So was the Parliaments from the People, a be-trust, as on intention and
expectation of a rendition, etc. But those Mortals would have immortalized it,
and might with our cautions, so the Arguments are idem, though not The
Parliament by reason of their divisions, had opposite ends and could not mind
the main.
ad idem.

Again, a Betrust is answered; as the main ends of it are answered, the Peoples
Safety, etc. And here I ingeniously protest, I see not but that his Highness
has, does, and will as faithfully and sufficiently quit himself, as I conceive
any can, or would do that should possess that place, say Praters what they
please, and if he shall please to make good our Contents as before, he would
Crown us, and we should then do well to do as much by him, for we cannot do too
much for our Savior, as we cannot for our Savior.

82. However, I conceive, yea I think that I may safely positive it, and say,
that neither his Highness to the Parliament, nor the Parliament to the People,
might part with their Powers or Commissions, but on our cautions at Sect. 47.
and that their engagements and be-trusts forbade and charged them to the
contrary.

Object. But its urged that his Highness was the Parliaments servant So was the
Parliament the Peoples, so the Argument is the same.
, so ought to obey, and deliver up his Power when called for, it being only a
be-trust, also he promised so to do, etc.

For the Truth of this, that none may be deceived, I will set it right, and
then leave it to judgment: I say then,

Answ. I deny that he was the Parliament servant, and if he was, I care not; so
nor for his promise, if any, and as its said, to be a Be-trust, see Sect. 80.

Are the Servants of a Lords Family the Stewards, cause the Steward entertains
them, and takes them in, seeing he pays them out of his Lords Treasury? Are
they not both (though differently degree'd) servants to one and the same Lord?
in opposition or competition, then who shall the meanest servant comply to? Yea
may not the case be such, as that he ought not obey, but with respectiveness
(if he have power) soberly oppose the Steward in his Lords behalf, and for his
own safety, if he find that he endanger either? But you will say, who shall be
Judge? for any one may pretend, etc. For this, see Sect. 83. and then Judge you.

Nor may the Stewards own servants, as may not the Lords own servants, so nor
the Kings, when he was, be true to, or side with, or obey their own Masters in
opposition to their grand Master, the Public; This the Parliament, so that
next before, judged on the servants side, when it came to be agitated before
them, and so allowed of the servants or subjects judgment and disobedience,
and punished those as Traitors that were true to their private Master or Trust,
against their grand Master, the Public: see our Sect. 63. as before, for
judgeing.

If also neither the promises, nor the sacred vows of a Wife cannot bind her
to God, in opposition of her Husbands Rights, cause obedience is better then
sacrifice, and for that she is not a self-power, as is a Widow, who may vow,
and if vow, must perform; but a Wife might soon be head her Head, with such
pretenses and licenciate services, etc. so nor can Magistrates, Governors, nor
any Powers make a vow, promise, or covenant amongst our selves, but if it prove
endangering or destructive to the Public, which is our Lord and Husband, and
the supreme Lex, to which we are subordinate, but it may be renounced: In our
own concernments we may promise, vow, and keep, else not, and yet not
destructives, or endangerings to ruin, but what have we to do to bind others,
how then our Soraigne the Public, whom we are bound to unbinde,

But who shall judge of all, is a main question.

83. This (hitherto) has been a troublesome and puzzling question; and the
Questionist applauds himself for wise, learned, knowing, and able, though a
weakling, if he can but pose his Adversary, who might have posed him, had he
first asked the Question, however both sides are Dilemma'd, and stand postur'd
like Lots Wife, or as two silent Statues, etc.

Now seeing none of our Magies, either of Layicks or Levites, Lawyers or
Gospellers, of any kind, name, nature, or degree, I have heard them thus
notion'd, but never read any of them.
no not the occularly conspicuous Cardinals, as called; nor the notion'd,
sublime, or Seraphick Doctor, nor the Sentential Master have resolved this,
since the world was a world, so that it still puzzleth all sorts; it falls to
the share of the poor and illiterate, and therefore despicable Carpenters son
to essay it, and so to venture beyond his Ne plus ultra; which he does, as so
constrained -- Courteous Gentlemen and Readers, both this, and diverse other
things in this book with an awful remisness, and a wary fear; wherein if he
err, or fail, so might, so do the Cardinals, and the Seraphicks aforesaid, and
in this they are errant, in that they attempt not at all to give satisfaction,
also not sufficiently (being Magies) to quit dis-satisfaction.

We say then as follows,

1. Law, and Lawyers are conclusive Judges of what is within the circuit and
precinct of their Jurisdiction, yet Appeals may be to Higher Courts, or to the
Chancery, or to the highest Judge, or Lord Chancellor, at Sect. 3. 5, 6.
following; and again, for judgment on any of their judgments, see Sect. 7.
except taken out of their hands in season, and referred, etc.

2. Arbytrators, or any trusted or referred to, though injudicious, yea
injurious, are yet concluding Judges; yet we may as at first judge of their
judgment, etc.

3. The Parliament are concluding Judges (when in being) for the Public, and
for particulars also, if referred to, but all may as at 6, 7. on their
judgments.

4. Yet any who is empowered, or has power, and will conducingly and savingly
improve it, as did Moses, so according to our cautions is a Judge, a Magistrate
for the Public good, in opposition to any indangerings, or too much sufferings
by or from any; and who shall Judge of this, see Sect. 6, 7. both for
conclusive and inclusive judgings, etc. in short, Power will be Judge,
concludingly; but ought not abuse their power, yet they may be judged on.

5. The Parliament not being, then the Highest public Magistrate, King, or
Protector, as you please, with their wise and faithful Council (if for the
Public) are Judges conclusive, so for Individuals, if he please, yet according
to Law, except referred to; or if Law be Lawless, as dubious, or its Letter
ridged, against just necessity, or right Reason, he as highest Lord Chancellor,
with his wise Council, may catechize and chastise it, and always accept its
dubious acceptations, with the humanest constructions; for such is or should be
Lawyers and Laws ayms, and intentions, for such are their pretensions, etc.

6. Just necessities ( private or public) allow any man, yea a servant over
his Master, to turn Judge and Magistrate for the present, if he will venture to
put himself on the judgment of Law, and its Issue, or refer himself to those
it concerns, to suffer if he have offended; here it concerns him, or any one,
well to open and state their cause apparently in each particular, and so refer
and appeal, or abide the Trial, and its issue; or who has power or might to
act so, ought state his case rightly, and then appeal in point of Right, as at
7th.

7. Note, all sorts may from all concluding Judges of what name, nature, kind,
or degree soever they be, appeal for judgment of their judgments, so for any
actions, doings, things, sayings, or censures, judgments or opinions, or
disputes, or controversies, to any one, or more, or as we please, or
universally to all honest, rational, good, wise, and just men, of judicious
understandings, to see how they will judge thereof, though we should be
concluded as before; and this is as much as can be had.

8. Any one in their own concernments, though injudicious, is a conclusive
Judge, but any one as at 7. may judge of his judgment.

9. But as more, of the Public are concerned, then the Public Magistrate for
the Public, and for Privates the Law etc. as at Sect. 17. except they refer,
are Judges conclusive, yet any may, as at 7.

10. The Highest Judge, who (like Moses) makes other Judges to present him, and
to supply his place as a Judge, for he judges by them, sure he is a conclusive
Judge then, as was Moses, cause you cannot go higher then the highest, and may
if he please, personally judge all, yet as at 5. before, etc. So will he also
hear the advice of those Judges or Counselors, and from all, gather what is
uprightest and best, the best he can, etc. and though in the integrity of his
cause and proceedings he may like God at Sect. 89. appeal, yet will he not (if
wise) dispower himself till securd, if then.

Thus, we may hear, and be heard, and judge of one another judgments, though
not conclusively, for the conclusive judgments are as before.

Now if the highest Judges at Sect. 3. 5. 10. deal amiss with us, I know no
better way to do good on them, safely and securely, then as at Sect. 1, 2, 4.
but if subordinates abuse us, then to appeal to superiors, or to the supreme,
as the Chancery, or the Lord Chancelors, at 3. 5. 10. before, etc. and from
thence to Sect. 7.

According to the 8th, a Master of a Family, though his wife, children, and
servants, should have right on their sides, in point of reason, or the
rationality of their judgments) yet his reason and judgment, or if you will
call it, his Will and pleasure in his own concernments and affairs (as having
right, justice, and equity on his side) shall stand and conclude things for
ordering and disposing, thus if he build a house, he may hear the judgments of
the aforesaids, or of any one, and it may be they may be more rational then is
he, but they suit not with his mind, will, nor way, so he will have it built to
his own content, and this is his right and due; the like of any thing, as one
is self-ly or principally empowered, and concerned, and that Law checks not;
and if this Power were not, there would be no end of things for disputes,
oppositions and reasonings, also authority and propriety would be overthrown;
for if rational Right should carry it against righteousness, as against the
rights of dues, justice, and proprieties, witty children and servants, so
diverse others might sometimes rule and govern their wiser, or however, their
more just Governors, and have they will and way in what is their Parents, or
their Masters, or the Magistrates, or another proprieties and rights to order
and dispose, etc. cause their judgments may chance to be better, though worse,
or not so good; as overthrowing justice, authority, and propriety, to a
confusion of all, as is already done in most houses, where under pretense of a
Religious Conscience, As not knowing his power and place.
the witty and wily Wife, Children, and Servants, go several ways, and leave
the weak Master masterless; but let all such know, that the Master of a Family,
though he have failings, is King and Priest in his own house, to order etc. and
he is a Judge and Resolver of Conscience also in all indifferents in Religion
to his own family, only Fundamentals must stand firm and fixed on all sides,
etc. but this is no place for this, but its worthy of a place and settling
right, else it will unsettle Government, for the witty Governed will sometime
govern their wiser Governors, which must not be, etc.

Note, None are concluding Judges where things come not under their command,
nor are referred to them, though it be apparent that right is on such side; Yet
the Antagonist may still vie it out, thus, two dispute, but it relates to no
concluding jurisdiction, and refer it they will not, so the apparently
vanquished (though justly concluded against) yet cannot be concluded by any,
but he may still vie it out with his Antagonist, if he will, wilful it; but his
Adversary (though the other will not) may appeal to all ingenious and rational
spirits, and so rest satisfied, and answer the fool no longer in his folly.
Thus much in point of Judging. We go on.

88. Law, the highest Governor is bound to, as he is only self-ly concerned,
except justly necessitated, which quits any one as well as himself, but as the
Public is concerned in him, or any, or alone, he is not bound to it, for the
Lord of the Law is Lawless.

89. If the Universal Public Governor pretend, judge, or deal amiss, or
contrary to his Be-trust, its not well; but what shall we do with them more then
with each poor Arbytrator, so with Lawyers, Clergymen, Physicians and
Chyrurgions, who some of all of them at times In points of Trust, as by their
ignorance, carelessness, and unfaithfulness, so also by some of the^ in their
intentional making preys and prizes on us, most cruelly, often beyond Tyrants,
etc.
abuse us as much, or more, as often to loss of life and estate, and our souls
also; all which by so doing, forfeit their Be-trusts, and so their reputations;
and yet we go on in trusting: in short, we suffer more by them, yet say less.

Truly I for my part know no better way for the People to deal with the highest
Governor, then as I shall set out at the conclusion of this Book; nor for
Governors that are of honor and integrity, then nobly for their Honors sake
to do as did Samuel of himself (for he was not called to account) nobly appeal
to the people in point of his uprightness toward them, and they as fairly quit
him: yea God himself also, for his Honor sake, that he might stand clear in
points of Justice concerning his dealing with his Vinyard, so with his people,
says, Judge oh ye Jews, or all, or any that does, or shall hear and know of my
dealing with it, and you, what more could I have done, etc. and what less could
it do to me in point of retaliation? and yet it has affronted me with wild
grapes for tame, etc. Also judge oh House of Israel twixt my ways and yours, I
appeal to you, so clear is my case, that I dare adventure to make the judged
(yea my enemies) my Judges, etc. thus let Governors nobly satisfy the
scruples of the People, etc. but see at the end of the Book this more perfect.

90. But lets suppose that the Parliament have not settled Custom, Excise, nor
Taxes, though I conceive they did all, so also Convoy and Algier money, etc. by
Acts, Orders, or Ordinances, etc. and yet all is said not no to be sufficient
for some sudden and extraordinary Public occasions and exigents, etc. What Is
then to be done? The universal Public Governor urges his want; its replied,
it cannot be by reason of other, and the said great Incomes, etc. so its a
pretense: next, you say, is the highest Governor Judge alone? For answer to
both which, I send you to Sect. 83. Also its urged, that its against Magna
Charta; see therefore Sect. 106. to 111.

Lastly, you say, that a Parliament must be called, etc.

To this I will now answer you; lets suppose the case is sudden and desperate,
etc. as that the Hollander is now in the Downs with a mighty Navy, and our
Sea-Forces unready, or abroad, etc. And the Scots King has a great Army with
him, and thereon, that all the Factions in Scotland, England, and Ireland, do
or will Arm it past disarming, if not seen to in season, etc. and Treasure is
pretended to be wanting, and all are so divided, they know not which side to
appear on etc. Would you now dispute about Laws allowance, and ceremonial ways
of proceeding, so about Parliaments, when dispatching is most necessary to
prevent our Dispatching; who on this sudden and desperate accident is Judge,
say ye? who will you apply to, say I, to take a course to oppose them, but to
him who has the universal Power in his hand, though he were an Usurper, yet no
destroyer? For who else can, or who else dare (he being in Being) assume the
Power? What course will you take on such exigents, or on some hardships or ill
usage? Keeping to our Cautions, that is, to take heed of endangering the Nation
to ruin by opposite Arms, etc. Can you take a better course then the
conclusion of the Book will afford you; or as we do with Arbytrators,
Physicians, Chyrurgians and Lawyers, on like exigents; whom we can only with
good language, move to be faithful to their trust, also just and humane, and
so to maintain their honors and reputations, and then adventure their killing
and undoing of us.

I have supposed as before, on purpose to see if on any occasions, or exigents,
you will allow the governor and his wise-counsel without a Law, yea against it,
so without a Parliament, when it cannot be timely called to be Judges, or take
a course to save you, and us all, as they can; if ye say no, then we may be
lost by divisions and foreign oppositions; if ye answer yea, then ye grant as
much as I desire; that is, exigents and necessities may be, or may be
pretended, though you and I discern them not, and that the Governors must be
trusted, and so must, yea ought, without Law or Parliaments, etc. save the
people as they can, and for his pretending right or wrong, I have, and do send
you to Sect. 124. and if ye have a better, a wiser way on pretenses, surprisals
or exigents, etc. show it, and we comply, etc.

91. The intention of Laws, is to save us, and do us good, if the letter and
intention clash, which will you cleave too; for to contraries you cannot, and
to destructives you ought not, make the Laws then, Oh ye Lawyers, more wisely
and in plain terms, that admit not of such doubtful and betraying
constructions, that so we may not be befooled, nor destroyed by them, nor you.

Object. 94. If thus as before, say you, why then was the King called to
account? why suffered he, etc. for he had his pretenses, etc.

Answ. Truly, if we had not had a visible, authority, and powerful power to
deal with him, we ought to have suffered according to our position, rather
then endanger our Country to ruin, but the whole Nation, who sent up the
Parliament, and were bound in Honor, Honesty, and Conscience to second them,
and were satisfied about seconding them, came up by hundreds and thousands,
etc. offering to live and die with them. So that to my seeming, we made it
hazardable and doubtful, by dallying with him; for I conceive he might easily
have been surprised long before, but wise and just policies might prolong it for
useful ends sake. So I may be deceived, therefore will not deceive, so I judge
not.

95. But as there was a visible, likely, and an authorized able power as before,
in likeli-hood to carry it, without such indangering to ruin, etc. so there
was causes proportionable for such procedure, as ye may find in the L. Chief
Justice Cook's Kings case. But what likely and just pretense could the King
have to want, and so raise treasure, by ship money, Privy seals, Pole-mony, and
what not, he was at Peace with all neighbor Nations, Princes, and States. So
also within himself, so was not enforced to keep three Armies, so long on foot
to keep three Nations from Armies; also to oppose Forrainers, nor to have such
forces at Sea, to oppose our many enemies that would have seized on us, he was
no way exigented so might take his course by Parliament, but have not we been
surprised by the Hollander, and exceedingly exigented as unprovided? most of
our forces being abroad, or unready, and a long time the contention held, to
the expense of much treasure; neither Rupert, nor the French, nor the Breast men
of War meddled with him; employed he so many brave Fleets abroad, and that for
useful, honorable, and humane ends and uses, as in mating the unmatchable The
Hollander and Turk.
, and redeeming of many poor be-slaved souls, did Foreign Ambassadors throng
in upon him as on us? who for the honor of our Country and our Governor
thereof, must be answerably entertained, and so must those sent abroad,
accordingly: And must not his Highness of force, though self-ly humble, keep
such a state and port, as may keep up the honor of such a State or People,
also his own State answerably, as the Presenter of such a People, so that
nothing may render us despicable, but rather double respect, as was the Sheba
Queens about Solomon; and though Solomon counted all things vain, it was but
respectively, for he knew also there were other respects that rendered them
useful; His Fame, as vain as it was by this account, yet made him famous, and
did much conduce to him in points of fear, love, aw, reverence, and revenues,
etc.

96. And what if our Countries, our Nations, etc. were called the House of the
North, or Nore, or of Great Britain, as Spains is in a Bravery and Glory, only
to out-brave, the House of Austria.

97. But if you be not yet satisfied about your Highest Power and Governor,
his just Power and Place, as necessitated, though I conceive I have
sufficiently asserted my Assertion. What say you to this of Moses following?
Sure, you dare not question his Right of Governing and Judging, seeing God in
the Scriptures appears for him, and against his opposers; so dare you not
charge him as an Usurper: But if you dare not, I dare; and yet am I not
insolent; for I can discharge him when I please. I say then, that according to
the received Tenants of Usurpation, he was an Usurper; but according to our
definition or right Acceptance, at Sect. 47, 48. etc. he was none, but very
Authentic and Lawful.

Who is it proves Moses chosen Governor by the universal free choice of the
People? If not, What was he then by your sayings? But ours quits him, and so
renders him a true and right Governor, and a Righteous one also.

98. But you will say, he was chosen, and called, or sent of God, so no Usurper.

What Is this to man, as to them who know it not? They had only Moses word, in
his own behalf for it, except they would accept of him for his Miracles sake,
which yet they cared not for, as of God: For can you say that they entertained
him 'cause of God? Surely no, they were not so Godly: For why then excluded
they Samuel whom they knew was of God? Why outed they God himself in Samuel?
Samuel, this stubborn, this rebellious, this stiff-neckt people, have
de-thron'd, uncrown'd, and dis-scepter'd me as well as thee: Sure, they that
care not for God himself, care not for any sent from him; so it appears they
entertained Moses only as a most hopeful Deliverer, and upon no other grounds,
he giving good evidences thereof, by his wisdom, care, carriage, faithfulness,
and miracles, etc. and the same grounds kept him in Government, for they knew
not how to better themselves. So we say, that Moses was truly, justly, and
authentically chosen and empowered, according to our Tenants; so that none of
their choicest, or best chosen Kings or Governors, were more lawful Powers
then was the unchosen Moses.

99. But we will begin with Moses ab origin, that we may the better see the
true state of things, for our use. Its necessary then to take knowledge that
the Israelites lived together in Goshen, where Joseph placed them, and not
mixtly or scatteringly amongst the Egyptians; so they had their own Religion,
Laws, and Government, Civil, and Ecclesiastical, which they enjoyed about four
hundred years till Moses time; their Laws must needs be their Magna Charta,
their Rights, Dues, and Privileges, viz. to preserve them in safety amongst
themselves, so in their Rights of all sorts, and to relieve them from wrong,
etc. These, none but empowered Powers by choice and consent, might justly
invade or evade, by adding to, altering, or taking from, except with our
cautions, which it may be they were not capable of; as are not many of our
Pleaders for Magna, who are often too positive and absolute, and so endanger, or
destroy all.

But when the Monarch Moses comes, he seemingly heaves the Door off the hinges,
and turns the House out at the Windows, and like an impetuous Torrent, bears
down their Laws, their Magna Charta, and all things before him; and yet he does
no such thing, but bears up all: In their positive and l^teral strictness he
bears them down, else they might upon some emergencies or exigents, bear him
and his people down; but in their fair and well conditioned conducing
Intentionals for the Public good, he bears all up: So, what he in their
positive acceptance suppresseth, to avoid suppression, he advances by wise
Respectives, and so puts down Solomon the Wise Moses was wise, Solomon witty.
, with the Wise. For according to just necessities, he invades, and evades Law,
and so adds, alters, and abrogates, etc. and yet neither Usurpers nor
Arbytraters it, as we have or will show; for, all being performed, according to
our Principles and premises, he alters not their Magna in its intentions, but
only in its dimensions, as contracting or enlarging it as it best conduced, and
so bends and inclines it to just necessities inclinations; and in so doing,
magnified it and himself: Thus, as some of their privileges by reason of their
weaknesses or wilfulnesses in their journey, might prove offensive to them, he
contracts, them and so enlarges their liberties and privileges in binding
them; for, its a freedom, a privilege to be bound, when (if at liberty) we
would mischief our selves; thus, our Chyrurgions to free us, bind us, and our
Physicians do almost kill us, to keep us alive, and make us live: So, their
right Privileges would have wronged them, and it was some necessitated wronged
doings (enforced by themselves) righted them at that time, and in that
condition.

Circumcision it self, their most essential privilege, and the flower of their
Crown, or Charta, etc. was circumcised; and though in its nature seemingly most
unseemly, savage, and severe; yet as it was enjoyed and enjoined, it was their
only badge, mark, or character to distinguish them from Heathens and Pagans,
and so render them refined, as the People of God, so that a curse went on the
uncircumsised, and now it was a curse to be circumcised, for, for their forty
years journey its laid aside, and so in that point they pass so long for
Pagans: Their Law for Theft is altered to fourfold satisfaction, or servitude;
so they hang not, as do we, but reserve their Delinquents for useful service,
private or public, yet to give the privated satisfaction, which done, they
return to themselves, and are their own men again. A most severe Law, or trial
for a suspected Wife is added, but seeing I cannot reach the reason thereof
(though reason there might be) I compress, etc. and choose rather to think, then
to express my self impertinently, or to my compression.

These three are only instanced to make appear his self, (yet not self-ish)
alterations, additions, or abbrogations, as wise respective considerations call
for, but infinite more of all sorts may be observed he did; for, as appears in
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy, he new modeled their whole
Government, both Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military, yet for the Public Good,
Peace and Safety sake, and not for any by-ends of his own.

I put all on Moses cause Moses to the people is all in all.
Infinite, troublesome, and chargeable sacrifices did Moses also institute and
put on them, besides a world of other busying performances to take up their
giddy heads in their long journey, enough to make Loyalty turn Loyalist, and
Religion a Rebel; and yet these Rebels rebelled not as yet.

Their Civil Government he wholly alters, adds to, or abrogates, as appears by
his four last books, for its said, Moses did or commanded this, and that, etc.
By their Religious or Ecclesiastical Government, he does the like; for he sets
them a seventh day, with the other 3 commands, never articulately set or
commanded before; he also dictates to them the six last, which of themselves are
Dictators, and so set themselves, but not their ceremonies; as Reason says
plainly, Thou shall not steal, but it says not so plainly, Thou shall restore
just fourfold, so its disputable what Retaliation is rightest. The whole
Priesthood were of his creating, and he makes his brother Aaron a Prelate, or
prime Priest; he robes, rayments, and ornaments him from head to foot, with
taking Types, Ceremonies, and Oculars The Occults were laid up in the Sanctum
Sanctorum. where only the High Priest might enter.
to take the People; the lesser, the lower or subordinate Priests he also
creates, principles, and lessons them (as he did their Prelate) of their
charge, and offices, etc. and when he sees his time, he disrobes Aaron, and
robes his son Eleazer in his place.

The Military Discipline he also orders and settles it in chief on his Disciple
and Servant Joshua, Painces, Nobles and Priests, so the Soldier and all sorts,
obey him.
and nothing is done without, or against his order, nor any thing left undone
that he commands, or countermands. He punishes to the purpose the 3 Rebellious
Princes, and all their company and accomplices, for their bold prate, as, What
have thou to do with us thou Usurper, we know thy Original, and whom thou art?
Art thou any more then a poor castaway, Number. 16.
recovered by accident, as if to cast us away under color of saving us? Whence
then these thy presumptions? In short, thou take too much upon thee Moses,
What? will thou who the other day pretended to be our Deliverer only, now turn
our Jailer, and bind us to thy severities, some of them under the notion of
Sacrifice? A fine piece of Hypocrisy! What? will thou that wast against King
Pharaoh's Kinging it, so his Oppressions, Cruelties, and Tyrannies, also
against Monarchy and Kinghood, or such Kingly Government, Will thou now Lord
and Master, yea King it over us? for what Monarch or King ever did more, or so
much as does the Monarch Moses? Are we thy slaves or vassals that thou handlest
us thus arbytrarily? for thou have razed out our Laws, our Privileges, our
Charta, etc. and put what thou please in their places, and if taken knowledge
of, then thou punishest, or destroyest us at thy pleasure; witness thy
massacring of three thousand of the Lords people at about, Exodus 32.27.
beside many other mischiefs done to us, etc.

Again, thou have under pretense of a Paradise, a Canaan, a heavenly Jerusalem,
etc. brought us out of Canaan, as out of a Country that flows with Milk and
Honey, to an Utopia that has nothing in it of acceptables, Number. 16 13.14.
but only of name, fame, and opinion; for not Egypt now, but this thy Canaan is
our House of Bondage, from which would to God we were freed and delivered, etc.
make us not blind Moses, cause we cannot see invisibles, which thou only as a
Magi may etc. if thou can: In short, come thou down to us, if thou will,
for we will not come up to thee, etc.

But, seeing Moses though he did thus self-ly Monarchize it, yet it was not
self-ishly, but for the Public good, he still varying as necessities and
conveniences varied; 250* Captains amongst them.
so though he might decline Law, yet he vagar'id not therefrom, nor governed
arbytrarily, etc. It cost these Rebels dear, as the ruin of themselves and
their whole Families, as an exemplary punishment to deter and awe others from
the like attempt, and so was conducing to the saving of the whole Body, the
Family, or House of this People, by lopping off a limb thereof, which else by
such factionings and rebellions might have been endangered to ruin.

Nor did Moses spare his brother Aaron, nor Miriam his sister, but handled them
severely for their severities to him; as in their daring to vie it out with him
in right of Power, etc. As, What? Has the Lord spoke only by Moses? Has he
not spoken by us also? See Numb. 12. so that Miriam was leprous'd as white as
snow: a tincture that fairly set off her foul and black qualities; and the
Prelate Aaron was put to the Penance of a Palinodia, or Peccavi. Alas, my Lord
Moses! I beseech thee charge us not with this sin, I know we have done
foolishly. Here Is a great descention of a Brother, and a Prelate, to a Laick
Brother. Surely, the Prince, the Monarch, the Laick Moses, was in Power, Place,
and Nature, superior to the Prelate Aaron: But now the Words of Contempt.
Laics are a Exodus 32.27.
Lay people, and the Levites their Lords, till some Moses be-meet with them.

He also commanded his Priests, the Levites, by his Law Martial, without Trial,
to kill and butcher their Brethren, and they obey, and so killed three thousand
at a bout; and ever since, many of that Tribe have continued Butchers. In their
cruelties to the people.


He enforced the People themselves also to drink the dust of their dirty
Calves, though gilded; and of their gods, cause golden.

Thus, he has the whole Legislative Power in his hand, as appears by all
before. He also self-ly judges all sorts a long season, till on advice he made
Judges, who were accountable to him, etc. yet in all these proceedings nothing
for self ends, but only as necessitated, or convenienced for the common good;
for if Kinghood, Near to a Queen as being a Kings daughter.
Prelacy, or pleasures, or his own ends he had aimed at in their delivery,
sure, his Queen Mother Pharaoh's daughter, and Egypt for her sake, with his own
wisdom, learning, and policy, as a Magi, would have gone near to have King'd
him, however to advance him as high, or higher, in all likelihood, and that
without any such sufferings, or danger of ruineing by so rude and boisterous a
people; how then is Moses an Usurper? How, Arbytrary in Government by the
aforesaids? Yet I have heard, that Machiavel makes him both, though he be
neither. But what may not Much-evil do if we undo him not? which we will if we
can.

For should the People have had the Government in their own hands, and only
asked Moses advice and counsel in point of their deliverance; or should Moses
have taken any of them in by way of counsel and advice, surely they had
returned to the house of Bondage again; however, never to Canaan; for by
dissentions, disputes, and contentions, oppositions, and contests, they would
have destroyed themselves in the way; so he was necessitated to Monarchize it,
and self-ly manage all, as without the People, or their Parliaments consent, or
council; and yet he does all things well, wisely and faithfully for their good.
And this may be his Highness case at this time, why he dare not (as we are
factiously divided, qualified, and conditioned) make use of Parliaments or
People, in points of advice and counsel, lest contests and disputes for self
ends, and priorities of parties and places to rule and carry it, delay or cross
all; and so his Highness is enforced to Moses it all along.

100. By our times Tenent also, Joshua was an Usurper, for he was only of his
Master Moses making; nay, what will become of most of their Kings and
Governors, Saul, David, and Jeroboam excepted, who were only authentic,
according to received Tenants, as chosen by the People, as well as of God? For
Saul, see 1 Samuel 9.2. For David, see 1 Samuel 18.5. For Jeroboam, see 1 Kings
12.3.20. Solomon was only created by his Father, the rest created themselves;
for neither did any Law, or the People create them; Ergo, The People may (by
our times positions and practice, as did the three Princes against Moses before,
and some of our Clergy now against his Highness) rebel it, and so most
uncivilly, malapertly, and audaciously, mouth, and clamor it against their
Kings and Governors, to the incensing of the People, and so to the endangering
the Public; also not owning them for lawful Powers and Authorities, the
Judges, nor any can acknowledge, or act under them, but might (for good
examples sake) had they Might, justly rebel against them, though to the ruin
of all: A most judicious and Judge-like kind of reasoning! Thus might most of
their Kings and Governors have been served. But our principle, viz. The Safety
of the People, is of another mind, and flies to our cautions, as to so many
Cities of Refuge, from such Sinons.

Yea, consider further, what abuses Besides their own personal vices.
some of the best of their Kings and Governors offered to the People, and yet
our Principles and Cautions allow no ruinous rebellion, but only to proceed as
we have cautioned, or as at Sect. 124, And we condemn all such actions, for all
the greatness of the Actors, and say, they deserve thereafter; and its only
Salus safety that saves both them and us.

Saul massacred eighty and odd Priests at a bout, and ruined their City Nob,
with all the innocents therein, both men, women, and children. David make
drunk, and then murdered Uriah, and ravished his Wife, and most unconscionably
gave half of his endeared brother Jonathans son Mephibosheth his land, to his
servant, that Traitor Ziba; and yet there was (I take it) oaths, vows, and
covenants betwixt Jonathan and David, to be faithful to each others seed.

Ahab most hypocritally (under pretense of Religion, as zeal to the honor of
God and his name) caused Naboth to be stoned as a Blasphemer, and that done,
stole his Vinyard also under the same vizor. Solomon also oppressed the People
so, one way or other, as it obstacled his son Rehoboams Kinging. Yet the People
wisely connived at all in Solomon, so in the rest, rather then endanger the
whole Public by inciting clamours or rebellions, or any unseemly, malapert,
provoking carriage or language.

The three aforesaid degenerated Gentlemen or Princes, What Is a Libertine in
prisonment to these, so to Moses proceedingss?
Saul, David, and Solomon, in these, and those particulars, were yet good Kings
and Governors to the General; Must the General suffer or be endangered for
Individual or Particular sufferings? Surely no, it must not; yet keep to our
Cautions, and take your course, else keep at distance.

Said not David of Saul, though his enemy, yea, and the enemy also of God and
man, as to the Priests aforesaid, etc. Weep and mourn O ye Daughters of
Jerusalem! Weep and mourn for Saul, who clothed you with Scarlet, and fed you
with (Nectar and Ambrosia) milk and honey, and decked your ears with Pendants, 2 Samuel 1.
and your Apparel with all kinds of pleasing Beautifyings, and amorously
trimmed your Tresses; who also fought your Battles, and foiled your enemies,
and lost himself to save you.

And for King David, a better, a more faithful, or valianter King or Governor,
could not be to the Public, then was he.

As for Solomon his son, though he oppressed some parties of the People, in the
Building of his House at Millo, etc. yet the generality had such Peace and
Plenty as St John's Jerusalem promises to her Citizens and Inhabitants; for
silver and gold rivaled it in number and weight with the stones in the street,
and in value with new Jerusalems twelve gates, etc. Must these be made away for
those? Must the Public suffer for some Individual or particular sufferings;
Your judgments, you wise and just men.

For the Peoples answering of Rehoboam, or his reply to them, it was not an
unauthorised, nor an inconsiderable party that performed it, but was like our
Parliament in nature, so in their power and proceedings with and against the
King, for it was the act of the whole Kingdom whom they presented, and by whom
they were authorized, who were in honor and honesty bound to second them, and
they did so; Rehoboam also was not settled, nor as yet accepted of the people,
who had thus reserved themselves, till they had found out his reserves; Heir to
the Crown he was not, and nothing had he done by way of merit, and desert of a
Scepter, so he could not lay any just claim thereto, and so they justly
disclaimed him, having a likely power to do it, without endangering their
Country, and well he deserved it, that would so malapertly tell a whole Nation
to their Teeth (he having no right as before to the Government, but their good
wills) how he would serve them: How could they do less having power, then desert
and dispower him so? But had he been settled, received, and invested with the
universal Militia, or power, so as it would have hazarded the Nations ruin;
sure, the people would (as did David) connive at Joab, and say, The sons of
Zerviah are too hard for me, so is the King for us: So He was but young in his
Kingdom, as not yet established.
Saul as wisely held his peace, when some of the people scornfully said, How
shall this man save us: also they brought him no presents; Thus Saul and David
kept to our cautions, else might they have been cauteriz'd, etc.

And though the Prophets reproved some of their Kings and Governors, etc. yet
was it not in public, as on a Theater or Scaffold, viz. in their public
Pulpits, which are confluenc'd with people, as is Cheapside cross, or the
Exchange, and there malapertly, daringly, and contemptuously clamor, and
exclaim, to an incensing the people, and so to an endangering the public; but
they performed it only 'twixt the King and themselves; or if in public, yet
respectively, in private, as not at their Exchange, so nor in such insulting
and incensing posture and language, as before.

All their Usurping Kings (if you will have it so) which were all but the before
Excepteds, took upon them Moses-like almost, both in Civil, Ecclesiastical, and
Military affairs; their Priests they made and unmade ad placitum; the like of
their Warriors of all sorts, as you may read of Saul, David, and Solomon, and
the rest. Saul when he see any one fit for the War, took him to him, and yet no
endangering rebellion ensued thereon.

Yea Joshua, Moses Minister or Servant, equaled his Master in Sovereignty of
command, though an Usurper by this Times Tenants, as only invested by his
Master Moses; yet was he obeyed of all the Nobles, Princes, and Peers, so of
the Soldiery, Priesthood, and People of all sorts, without endangering
rebellion, or irreverent and uncivil clamours, gests, or gestures: Read his
Book, and you shall find this Servant, this Usurper (if an Usurper you will have
him, though we say otherwise, as having the Peoples Necessities and Safety that
chose him, and authorized him rather then fail to assume, to usurp and hold the
Government, of, by, and from his Master Moses only, he ruling for the Peoples
good, welfare, and safety, and not for his own by ends of any nature, in
opposition to theirs) did justly master it, and rule over his masters, the
People; yet servant like, for their service, as before.

For, Joshua ordered the Priesthood, and Levites, so all things else, and that
self-ly; so that self doings, if Well, are well enough; for, the main is
well-doing, how, is ceremonial to well, or the thing it self; Yet let
Ceremonies be also observed if they may with safety and convenience; if not,
Circumcise them.

Its true, Joshua came well fortified and seconded with Miracles and Wonders
for his reception, equal in value and worth, though not in multitude to his
Master Moses, under whom he was brought up, as was his Master under the
Egyptian Magies; and no doubt Moses instructed him with wisdom and policy how
to govern the people when he was gone, as not daring to leave them to
themselves: But here wise Moses fay'ld in not providing Joshua's but only a
Joshua, Some absolute certain way of safe Government.
etc. Let the siege of Ai, and Jericho, so his rivalling it with his master in
dividing of Jordan's Rivers, Red Sea-like, with other Miracles that his Story
or Book yields; especially his mating him, in fixing and stationing the remote,
the immense, the unbounded and unstay'd Sun in his impetuous hurry, and swift
career, on his own Theater or Stage, only with a God-like command, as, Sun
stand thou still, and stir not, etc. Witness for him, that he mated as before,
not only his Master, but his Masters All the People.
also; yet by servanting it to them all in his administrations and services of
all sorts of humanities, for their good, their peace, and welfares, etc.

I am posed, so positive it not.
How punished he poor Achan for a theftless theft to see to? For could Achan
steal where he might kill? Ah me! yet it killed Achan, and infinite Innocents
enough (did not our Principle forbid) to have rebelled it, etc. But a wise, a
wary, a David, and Saul-like connivance and compliance on any side, (where the
sons of Zerviah are too hard) prohibit such proceedings; yet the depraved of
our Clergy, and wicked Laity, make a profession of such Prate, such Practice.

Lastly, What did any of their aforesaid Kings or Governors aforehand, for
their King-hoods. Moses excepted, who performed beyond exception, in their
point of Redemption. Be ingenious then, oh you our Moses, his adversaries, and
deny it if you can, has he not Moses-like, declined all Egyptian pleasures,
blandishments, and delights, besides safety, ease, and rest, and put himself on
all sorts of hardships, dangers, and sufferings for his Brethrens sake? Has
not his limbs, life and liberty been engaged to disingage us? Came he not
seconded and fortified with Miracles (for this our time) when miracles are
miraculous, as out of date: Thus our Moses mated Moses, respectively in
miracles, though not in multitude, nor positively; I am sure I have heard,
This, That, and the Other Victory, has been acknowledged miraculous, and of a
Divine Dye, or the hand of God or a Deity seconding man; take it which way you
please, its miraculous; either for man himself to act so, or for God to second
a man so.

Now if Moses deliver his people with such hardships and sufferings each way,
will you not allow him to preserve himself and them when he has done? Which he
cannot do, but hazard both, if he should deliver the Power out of his hand into
theirs? For how knows he how it will be handled? He knows his own Power and
Faithfulness, an others he could not know; But he knew well enough none was
capable to that degree, therefore he is necessitated to hold the Government
from the whole Nation and all their Governors, till he had tutored his servant
Joshua for that purpose, he also held it for their ends, not his own, except in
part for his safety, with theirs; and it was a just and wise assumption and
retention, all things considered. If you will say each one may pretend so. I
answer, which answer may serve for all such allegations and sayings, as for
this, they may so pretend, and abuse with pretenses, which I neither allow of,
nor can help; but the Position as I have postured it, is in self right, though
some do abuse with it.

Thus Moses was truly and justly their Lord As their Deliverer.
Protector at least, yea their King in nature, and point of Power, though not
of grace; as wanting the beauty and glory of the Name King, and some other
ceremonials and perquisites, necessary to opinion, but not to judgment; which
says, that its Natures, and not Names; its occults, and not occulars, entitle
to the title King, etc.

But some treacherous and politic pretending Cavaliers or Malignants, would
have Moses resign up his Militia, his Abishag, or Mistress, to Adonijah; for it
was only a Trust till delivered out of Pharaoh's hand; as for future, they were
resolved to protect themselves, or choose their Protector. But wise and wary
Moses did see, that this was but to dis-arm him, and then arm themselves
against him; for when done, he was undone: For that now, Royalists and all
sorts of Malignants, like the three seditious Princes, with their accomplices and
companions, would have called him to account for executing their King Pharaoh
in the Red Sea, and so un-kinging them for future, others would have had a bout
with him for changing their Laws, and invading their Magna, etc. so for
usurping the Government, though all for the best, etc. Others for tampering
with their Religion, and bringing in a world of Novelties, and so creating of
Sects. etc. as they may please to notion them; and all sorts, for his enticing
them out of Egypt, their Canaan, by his blandishments and flatteries of an
Utopian Canaan; for to them the Wilderness (which was but the way to Canaan)
past for Canaan it self as being out of hopes and expectation, by reason of
their long, their tedious, and wearysome journey, of ever meeting with any
other, being also tired with sufferings by the way, amongst the rest, the loss
of their Egyptian Fleshpots, and choice sallads of all sorts, troubled them;
so it was much better with them when they were under King Pharaoh, or served
the Queen of Heaven, though in Hell, and sacrificed to her, then now, as they
are under their new sacrificer, their earthly Monarch Moses, whose Heaven to
them is Hell.

So let Moses his intentions and endeavors be never so fair and good, yet if
accidentals cross, he is crossed; for like weaklings, they judge by accidental
issues, and not by ingenious grounds, ends, intentions, and apparent
endeavors, etc.

Their often murmuring against him, as we have in part instanced, makes good
these to be their intentions on him, could they with pretenses and arguments
have argued him out of his Armor, or to lay aside his lance: But wise and wary
Moses, though Dove-like meek and mild he was, and no Serpent, yet had a
Serpent, and was himself Serpentine, so would not be outed by arguments, nor
untruss, to be trussed up, therefore held his power, for his own, and their
good and safety, and so improved it, and abused it not for self ends.

Now whether the aforesaids suit with his Highness Actions, Doings, and
Endeavors, and his Usage by our seditious Korahs, Dathans, and Abirams, in
their exclamations, censures, and trecheries against Him, 'cause of some
crossing accidents and sufferings in our way to Canaan, so in their intentions
on his rendition of his power, as only a Trust, for that now they would trust
to themselves, and whether the intentions of those pretensions, reach not to
call him to an account for all? As should Moses, had he been so mopish, I
appeal; and so do I, whether they be not very good reasons in his Highness, as
in Moses, to retain the Power, had we no other reasons for his so doing, but
them. But I add also, that for his keeping the Power and Government with our
cautions, I see not but that God and his Highness are incorporated therein (as
I think I may make bold to say God and Samuel were) so that to clamor, except,
or clandestine it, or to incense the people to faction or party it against him,
and so against their Country and themselves, its like those three seditious
Gentlemen or Princes against Moses, and so against God: so now against our
Moses, as we have cautioned it, is against God; for we have proved him of God,
and so of Divine Ordination, in his relation of right to the Government; so
that out one, out both, in that point: And what are those that will out both
God and man! But etc.

Now lets suppose that any King or Governor over us, should (which God forbid)
Solomon-like; infinite it in Wives and Concubines, or like Edward the fourth,
or King David, abuse their Subjects wives, and murder their husbands, or
Saul-like, murder eighty and odd Priests at a bout, yet none of these
particulars justify a rebellion to endanger our ruin, nor to uncivil, rude,
boorish, and clownish clamors, or impudent darings, but only to reverend,
peaceable and quiet information; for what Prince, or Governor, or men of Power
and Place, can bear such insolent dares and threatenings to their disgrace,
whereas men of the meanest rank, though faulty, cannot endure publikly to be
made Publicans, let each one examine himself, and he will find it an infinite
dishonor to bear with such Malapertness, as if awed, which renders such Powers
contemptible, and invites rather to a stiffness to oppose, then to hearken to
by way of remedy; nor have we to do with any in such a way, though we see (as
in the aforesaid Princes,) such and such vices and failings in some
particulars, so long as they are in the general good Governors to the People,
for they are but men in parts, though gods in place and power; and they must
have their grains of weight, as must meaner men, as they have greater Trials
and Temptations.

I will yet suppose higher, admit an honest Heathen, Pagan, or Atheist (if you
will have it so) were in Government, and dissembles a Religion and Zeal, the
better to please, rule, and govern, etc. and he does govern well and justly,
and gives thee thy conscience, with our cautions against unconscionables under
color thereof, what is this to thee that he is a Pagan, an Infidel as thou
call'st him; to God it is, and to none else. One has thrown down Baal's Altar,
what is this to the Bawlers? who under pretense for Baal, have their own base
ends; for its Baal is only concerned, who if he be offended, knows how to right
himself. See then thou perform the duty of thy place, as at our application
Sect. 124. also pray for him or them, likewise endeavor by thy good counsel,
so thy precepts and practice, to settle in each one, love, obedience, and
peaceableness toward him, for his humanities, goodness, and protection of
thee, thine, and all sorts, as thy Native Country, etc. and for the care,
pains, and hazards he undergoes for thee, and us all.

101. Object. But it may be said, to what end these stories of Moses, Joshua,
Judges or Kings, etc. What are they to us? we have our own Laws and Government
settled, etc. and such and such privileges agreed on, as they had not.

Answ. Yes, they are to us, and you have already seen it, could you conceive,
or remember what ye have seen, and you shall see it to the full, if you can
fully see.

We have proved 1. That neither Moses, nor Joshua were Usurpers, though not
vocally chosen by the people, 'cause yet better chosen, viz. by some of our
principles, as by the Peoples necessities; next, as taking and accepting, or
assuming the Government, not for their own by, base, or unjust ends, but as
necessitated for the Peoples good, and so improving their proceedings; and who
does as did they, are no Usurpers, nor Arbytrarie Governors, etc. Unjust
Usurpation is to invade the Government, without so many of our grounds at Sect.
43. to 53. so 78. to 83. as will justify the assumption and retention.

2. Admit Usurpers they, or any of the Kings were, yet governing well, or
though somewhat amiss, yet not destructively; no attempts are to be made against
them, to the endangering of the Public, but application only, as at Sect. 124.
For though Moses was taken for an Usurper by the three Princes and the Peoples
murmurings and undertakings against him, you see how they were punished for it,
and that justly, considering he improved his best endeavors for the Public
good, nor were his near relates, Aaron and Miriam favored, but upon their
submission.

3. Though as faulty as the aforesaid Princes, yea as Jeroboam; yet we say as
next before, that only sober, reverend, and peaceable Language and Applications
are to be made, etc.

4. That on exigents and just necessities for the general good, as did Moses,
when he durst not trust, nor use the peoples counsel in their delivery, or
passage to Canaan, by reason of our Reasons before, he was forced to Monarchize
it, and so self-ly to order and manage all; and had he not so done, they had
been undone. The like may other Governors on enforcing exigents do.

I grant such proceedings as at 4th to be amiss, were the People capable; if
not, they are just and right as I have ordered and cautioned them, else not.

Note, what follows, is spoken as it relates to the Public.

And now I will give you my judgment at large what is Arbytrarie Power; for I
believe my betters every way are as bad as my self, if not worse, as, mistaken
in it; and so shall we be in all things, if we call things so and so, and so
let them go without further pursuit or prosecution of them, by distinguishing
and distributing, so by defining or bounding, etc. likewise if we indefinite
it, when we should demonstrate, and universalize it Rethorically for Logically,
and so infer as from the last, and so are often too late.

Arbytrarie power (you will say) is to rule by Will and not by Law; but I say,
this is not right, 'cause not rightly bounded and cautioned; for, you infer,
that what is not of Law, is of Lust and Will in the worst sense, and it may so
be, and yet also it may not be so; so whilst you neither define nor distinguish
aright, you confound and destroy all.

By your definition of Arbytrarie Power, as before, Moses is condemned, who is
justified both of God and man, as you have heard; so also you condemn al
proceedings that are not according to Law, as if of lust and Will, in your
sense, which is not so; for, if of a will rightly rectified, and justly
necessitated too, call it as you will, though a will it be, as not Legal Law,
yet its in it self or nature a Law, that binds against endangering or
destructive Laws self-ly so, or made so by accidents or exigents, or by the
peoples pravities or weaknesses.

I say then, that to rule by Law (when lawless) is cunningly to rule
arbytrarily, as by Lust and Will, and color it with Law, against the very end
of Law and Governors; and to rule by Will as we have cautioned it, is to rule
by Law, though against Law, for its a lawful Will, as agreeing with Laws end
and intention (though it fall out with its letter) which is for conducings to
public peace and safety.

If you shall still say, that this invasion, or that evasion or abrogation of
Law must be with the peoples consent in a Parliament, I say so too, if it may
be so, provided rightly composed and constituted; if not, not; but as we have
said before.

I say then ^ummarily as foll^weth, That

Arbytrarie Power is to rule by, or to keep to Law, or Laws letter, when they
prove endangering, etc. or not so complying to the Public as others, except
you would that the Public should be endangered, or destroyed, or not better
benefited.

Next, Arbytrarie Power is, to break, or not use public benefiting Laws for
the Public or particulars their accomodations, but only for partial or self
ends sake.

Aga^n, Its also to alter good Laws for worse, or not to accomodate with better
if it may be.

Lastly, Its self-ly to alter good or bad Laws for better, without giving the
people their due and right of honor and consent by way of a Parliament, if
They and the Time be capable thereof; if not, not; but this is a fair condition
failing, if a failing.





A. is for ought I know, to rule like a Madman, or a wicked and wily
Machiavel; as under pretense of zeal to Law, to act lawlesses, as things
dangerous to the Public: This is to rule by Will, and Lust, and cuningly
color it with Law, and so is arbytrary power though Legal.

Will therefore, and Arbytrarie Power (as you call it, yet) if qualified as at
B. is the only wise, just, safe and lawful (though not legal) ruling and
governing. See then to wise qualifications, and let foolish articulations and
quarrellings go.

Our Position in it self is right, though any one under any color or pretense
should do wrong by it, Wrong grounds.
either in degree or Pedigree.

Clamor no more then hence-forward, that this, or that is without, against, or
contrary to Law, and therefore Arbytrarie, if our Position at B. bear it out,
seeing it has reason, wisdom, and the public good, and just necessities on
its side, and only ignorance and folly against it.

And except so qualified, we allow no deviation from Law but will that each
Individual (but not the public) suffer; and attend its alteration by wise
Suffrages, etc.

But the Law has held us too long from the Lord and Judge of the Law, to whom
we now return to perform the remain of our Duty.

We say then, That

102. The highest Universal Judge, may, as I have in part said before, self-ly
judge all, but yet according to the Laws in being, 'cause they are each ones
rule and guide, else they might be surpised and betrayed, etc. But he being
the highest Judge, is a Chancellor also; and as he may create a Chancery, so may
he self-ly Chancellor it, and check the ridged letter of the Law for its
intention, which the subordinate and substitute Judges cannot do without appeal
to him, or license from him, from hence grows pardons, as the offense and
offender may admit thereof, which ask many considerations, why one for the same
fact may be justly pardoned, and not another; as this for one of them, as that
he has been very faithful and serviceable, yea a deliverer of his Country, or
as his life may exceedingly conduce thereto, and our Country would suffer much
to lose him; but the Truth is, here are more considerations to be had, then I
can now consider of.

103. So all public Offices that relate to him, he must self-ly perform, or
see performed, and he ought also to call them to account about their faithful
discharge of them to the people, or to him for the people, also to hear the
people if he can, in their appeals, and punish their abusers, etc. and this is
Moses, yea King-like. King David descended to hear the tatling Tekoite; and his
son Solomon the two Huzzies, the Harlots.

Surely the Judges in difficulties of Law, may not self-ly resolve it, but as
Moses's Judges, who it may be might some of them, and in some points, be as, or
more able then Moses, yet, as it was dubious, and so too hard for them, Moses
(as Joab to David) must have the honor of it, by acknowledging it his right of
place, so as if of ability, though sometimes not so able, so that he with them,
or any other of his wise Counselors, may, resolve it, though Moses self-ly
resolved all.

104. Certainly, it concerns the highest Governor, who is Judge of all, and
should (could it be) judge all, it concerns him, I conceive, to be an absolute
rationalist, for that reason is the intention of Law, and the Gospel also,
though some Lawyers and Gospellers often reach it not; but being so, where Law
fails, or is dark, obscure, or ridged, yet right reason will reach it, and if
he be not strongly rational, the Lawyers, but especially the Gospellers, will
be too hard for him, and ever and anon surprise him: one, with, this is Law,
that, not; also, ere is no Law for this, and here is Law against that etc. and
those of the depraved Clergy will with their wyles, Metaphysics, and
Supernaturals beguil us, and out Phusis, Nature, and Reason, and grace also;
but they ought not, nor shall, etc for we shall (I hope) find Commensurators
for all, let them commence as high as they can.

But Magna Charta is pleaded in behalf of our Privileges, so Law also.

106. This Magna etc. I never read, but now I will read something of it, yet by
imagination only, and when done, answer them, and by that, answer all as are so
conditioned, the rest will answer for themselves.

This Magna Charta is Law, and Law is in part already resolved, and here the
rest shall. Suppose then as follows.

107. That the People did well and wisely make sure work for the privilege of
calling their Parliaments once in two years, and to sit till such or such a
time, and this they claim still, and except, as wronged, and a great piece of
injustice, and breach of trust in the Governor, not to make good the same.

I answer, Are we in the condition we were? will our present condition allow
thereof? If we were as we were, it were claimable, but not as we are. The King,
Peers, Prelates, and Priests of all sorts, had their places in Parliament, or
privileges to their mind, and so had Lawyers also; so when Parliaments were
called, they need not faction it for their places, being already placed, and
that in great pomp, power and command, and questioned not their security, they
were so secure, till at last Elihu's little dark cloud appeared, whose
expansion and extension, they foresee, would cloud their whole Heaven of glory,
and render it dark and despicable: But now every Parliament is packt and
composed on purpose, of several parties, for the restoration of the
aforesaids: Also the Priests of all sorts sect it, so do all religious persons
faction and party it; yea, the several Churches clash: so that the distinct
Bodies of Parliament and People, make one Body of Dissentanies or things
diverse, and some of absolute contraries: so that what by the weakness of some,
and the wickedness and wilfulness of othersome, and the ignorance of most, time
is lost in confounding contests: Also Religion's rigidness and Meandrian
intricacies are too hard for most of them, so for all sorts, and does more
confound and trouble, then does confusion it self.

The infinity of Sects and Opinions makes good what I say, which to dissolve,
is more then an Herculean labor, and asks time, till the dissolution of Time
to end it.

A wise Governor seeing this, and that the time present is not as that past;
so that the aforesaid considerations will not allow the calling of a
Parliament, by reason of over-powering factions, to the endangering the peace
and safety of the People, which his place, trust, charge enjoins him to
prevent, so he cannot give way thereto, else would; for its not now a liberty,
but a bondage, and so is contrary to his end of a faithful Governor; and would
you have him faithless, and act contrary to his end, as to endanger? etc. I
hope no.

108. For the aforesaid reasons, as by you constrained, he is forced to supply
Parliaments by himself, and by a wise and faithful Council, so by
Proclamations, Orders and Ordinances, yet all in a safe way, also ready, quick
and short, without loss of time, yet this lets not the Countries from
presenting usefuls to him and his Council, making them clear, without scruples,
the which no question but he will, as occasions will give way, take into
consideration: This being so, what cause of complaint have you against him, for
that which your selves are causes of? reflect then as well as prospect, and so
you will see that your errors are errant.

Thus Magna Charta, and Law, and these our privileges (I conceive) are
answered, and provided for.

Suppose next, that neither

109. Magna, nor Law will allow pressing of Soldiers, etc. only beat the Drum,
and so take all that will come, etc.

Answ. But suppose none come, or very few, and so, much short for number and
fitness for the occasion; for the whole Land being Sects, Parties, and
Factions, none it may be will come, but such as are for, and so like of the
Design: But these will not go against the King, nor those will not go for the
Lord Protector, they own not the Power, nor the cause, etc. All which we have
now satisfied. The Sects also oppose one another, and only side with
themselves, What now shall we do? Admit we are exigented, and the Magistrates
wisdom and faithfulness enjoins him against all dangers and sufferings of the
People, and to all, accommodation, and his honor lies thereon, but Magna
Charta, and Law, will not allow thereof; so he must sit still, and see Magna
Charta, and Law, destroy his Country, by giving way to Insurrections, and
foreign Invasions, as wanting Soldiery to make opposition, Can Law or
Lawyers answer this? No, no, our principles, and Positions (sure) are too hard
for them all: Save the people any way then, oh ye men of Might, though you
destroy the Law, and etc.

Thirdly suppose, That

110. Magna, and Law, etc. will not allow Taxes nor Sesments, nor to raise
money or means any way, without a Parliament, etc. yet the Governors place as
before, is to save us, which he cannot do, for our great Privileges by Law,
Magna, etc. is to destroy us rather, by not allowing such savings, though on
exigents; for this see Sect. 113. and be satisfied.

111. What need I instance more? this foot of Hercules hints to you what his
whole body is, and so how to shape his garments for him.

112. The privileges of Magna, etc. I allow of and claim, as we are capable of
them, but we disclaim them, and must be allowed to provide against their
malgnity; if saving Magna Charta (through our failings) on exigencies will
destroy us, as before is instanced.

113. Now if the highest Judge who is trusted to the uttermost of Trust, shall
press for, or take course for means, beyond what Law has provided for, and
shall urge the public occasions for them, and addresments are thereon to the
Judges, to know the Law, sure, I conceive the Judges are quit, if they comply
to the highest Judge, as if to Moses, and make answer, that the Highest Power
is Universal Judge both of particulars, and for the Public, as was Moses;
particulars to ease himself, he has made us Judges of, yet given us the Laws
for our guide, and so not left us to our wills, nor own judgments; and this
power he may at pleasure call for, and place it where he please; the public
Power for judging and ordering, he has reserved to himself, so we have not to
do with, but we can tell you, that if it be demanded for the Public, then by
the instances at Magna Charta, its Law sufficient; for the Law is not above its
Lord, the Public or common good, and for the truth of his pretense you must
not dishonor him with suspicion, whom all the people have honored with so high
a Trust, and its conceived that he will not so abuse the Trust of the People,
nor abase his own honor: so as to trecherize it to them; so, he has Law on
his side, though Law side not with him, or be against him, as its for the Lord
of the Law, and as he is empowered, trusted, and made judge of al relating
thereto, and as his faithfulness enjoins him; so for the present either comply,
or address to him, as at Sect. 124.

Now because I have hinted that I conceived the best course to deal
prevailingly and safely with those of highest power and place, etc. (whoever
they be) is with well and lined Language, Penned.
and fitting addresments, etc. I will here therefore for this once,
individualize, and venture humbly to solicit his Highness in behalf of
himself, so of our selves, with these poor following Lines of mine, til abler
Pens shall undertake it.

To his Highness the Lord Protector.
May it please your Highness,
That like as God descended to hear his servants, Abraham and Moses, in behalf
of himself, 124.
and his and their people, etc. and as Man (viz. the Syrian and Job their
servants, and David and Solomon the Tekoite and the two Harlots) also descended
to do as much, and so imitated God in that kind, so you will be pleased to
imitate God, and such good men, and do the like in behalf of your self, and
your people etc.

Your servant says then, to your Highness, as Abraham to God; God forbid the
just God should be unjust: and as Moses said, Raze me out of thy Book, rather
then thy Honor, thy great Name, or this Thy People should suffer; for what will
the Gentiles say, if so? or, what is it they will not say, etc. to the great
dishonor of thy great Name, etc.

In both which sayings they aim at the Honor of God, and good of his people:
as first, that they would not have Gods honor any way to suffer, or receive
the least touch or tincture of any blemish or abasement; but that as he is a
juct God, so his proceedings should answer it, lest it reflect on him to his
dishonor: Next, they take care of their People and Brethren, and so press God
thereafter, and God complies to them both, in both, etc.

In point of power.
Now seeing that by God himself you are a God on earth, these sayings Sir,
relate to you also (as you so relate) in points of your own honor, so of your
Peoples welfare, etc. yet know Sir, that the same God says also, that you are
but a Man, and like a Man must die; and man, Gods servant, makes bold likewise
to say as much; and without either of their sayings, your experience (Sir)
knows and says it also.

Your servant does then most humbly beseech your Highness (as Abraham and Moses
did God before) by all that does or can engage man, or is near and dear to him,
and so prevalent with him, that for your own Honors sake, and next, for your
peoples sake, you will hear him in behalf of both, and comply accordingly, or
raze him out of your Of Protection.
Book also, etc.

First, That your great Name, Fame, and Renown, may not receive the least
tincture, blemish, or abasement, but that it may appear clear, bright, fair and
full to all eyes, and so may attract awe, admiration, and reverence, and
conduce to a full heightning thereof, and that as well from Heathens and
Pagans, as Christians. so from Foreign and stranger States, Princes, and
People, as from your own, that so if the Queen of Sheba shall chance to hear
thereof, and so give your Highness a visit, she may double her devoiions, and
admiration of your wisdom and goodness, by your wise, just and well-governing,
and happyfying the People under your charge; as, by accomodating them with what
good Laws, and lawful Liberties you may, and easing them of what pressures and
sufferings you may also, and giving them fair satiisfaction for the rest; and
then may you Sir, like God, with much honor, etc. ascend in your seeming
descention of giving account, which is rather wisely to call to account, by
setting off your own Heroic integrity, so your Nobleness and Worthyness of
mind and spirit, in all your proceedings, which dare the Eagles eye, and the
illustrious and all-seeing Sun's penetrations in his height of brightness:
Next, in setting out your Adversaries unjust Retaliation by their
insensibleness, neglects, and ingratitude; yea more, as, by their rude, their
bold, and uncivil censures, clamours, and exclamations of all sorts; yea,
further or most of all, by their Clandestines and Trecheries of all kinds: And
on these grounds you may Sir, as did God himself, appeal in a God-like posture,
and language suitable. What is it O my adversaries of all sorts, that you can
require more at my hands, by way of accommodation, then I have done? What less
by way of offense? And yet consider with your selves how you have retaliated
me! For what more wrong can you do me by way of Ingratitude, Neglect, and
Dis-respect, then you have done! and yet, more you have done in your bold,
rude, and uncivil clamours and exclamations, etc. yea, the most you can do, in
your Trecheries and Rebellions of all sorts? What less can you do in point of
compensation, by way of Honor, Love, and Service, then to do nothing at all,
or what is worse then all, as the quite contrary, etc.

Judge then your selves, Oh House of Great Britain, of Mine and Your Ways; Is It
fair that you retaliate nothing for all things, or some things worse then
nothing? As wild Grapes for Tame; and Thorns and Thistles for Rose-buds and
Violets.

Yea, oh unspeakable! Hard usage.
Have you not crowned me with Thorns and Thistles, instead of the flowery
Coronets and Chaplets, of Myrtle, Bays, and Laurel, Grief at your ingratitude
acquired and merited for your sakes, and so have drawn blood both from my head
and my heart.

Thus doing, your People shall meet you, as did Jephtah's daughter her father,
with her consorts and damsels, tryumphantly, with plaudites and acclamation of
joy and praises, so with prayers for your long and happy continuance amongst
them; and if your Highness please to approach your People, it shall be like the
Summer Suns accession on Winters retreat; and your retreat Sir from them shall
be like his.

Can you Sir, or any Governor, receive greater Honor, Glory, and Renown, or
sweeter content, then by such Sun-like doings as before on your part, and then
on the Peoples part such joy and cheerfulness, with acc^amations to you for the
same, acknowledging you the Father and Sun of Great Britain, etc. Consider I
beseech you Sir of what I say, and so leave your name renowned, when you have
left this transitory world, by immortaliZing it as before; and whilst you are
here Sir, it will surely conduce to prolong your days, besides happyfying them;
for who dares or will attempt against such a Hero? And yet truly Sir, there is
no security in Too much confidence.
security; for as our Savior said, He knew what was in man, so would not trust
him; So we know not what is in man, and therefore must not trust him, and yet we
must, and not seem to distrust him though we do.

But Sir, I am afraid that I have transgrest both in quantity and quality, as
failing of a fitting Dialect, so by encroaching on your Highness patience in
prolixing it, Here then I period: And yet who can check and take off himself on
so spacious and useful a subject? but I must and will: Only I do with all
humility crave pardon for my failings any way; However Sir, they are of
weakness, and not of wickedness; and I conceive it will honor your Highness to
make the best of fair intentio^s and endeavors, and to pardon the truly
penitent: And now I have done, only venture to subscribe my self

Your HIGHNESS most humble Servant, S. H.


Truly if the aforesaid course and way will not avail and do, I see not but that
the Governor and governed, Prince and people, one or both are undone; for
Factions and Arms usually attend both sides, to the ruin of both.

125. But I foresee that there are spirits that will object against what is said
in behalf of Governors in points of honoring, cringing, and bowing to them,
so for entitleing, and Petitioning to, etc. and say, Why all this trow? We know
whence Governors are; I am of as good a House and Family, Name and Breed, as
is he etc. They are men, and no more, if so much; strip, and we are alike, or I
may pass for him, and he for me; into the world we come alike, and so we shall
go out: Who shall in the Charnel house distinguish from Kings Princes, and
Peers, and other men? Nay, it may be mean men may pass for the mighty, etc.
Besides, it prides the already proud, and it inviteth them to contemn their
Brethren, who by Nature are alike, and in Grace it may be much unlike, as far
beyond them, etc.

Answ. I must and will yield to Truths, as that there are inconveniences on
both sides; First, Sufferings by the governed, by the Governors, as before; so
it shall do well in those that supply the place of Prophets, or any other, to say
to them as Samuel to Saul, 1 Samuel 15.17. and Nathan to David, 2 Samuel 12.7, 8.
the Lord has raised thee to this and that, also thou have had, and now have,
and may have so and so; Why then thus? Why so and so? etc. And thus
memorandum them modestly what they are, and whence, and whither they must, etc.
and so caution them against contempt, and injuring their Brethren the People,
and to al kinds of accomodations of them.

Next, these inconveniences following, fall on the Governors side, by reason of
the Peoples ignorance, and want of self-government, viz. slightings and
contempts, often to disobedience and rebellion, to the ruin of both sides; so
that Governors are enforced to use force, also publicly to State it, and to
assume or entertain Titles, and al kind of specious pretenses, and awful
presentiments (though self-ly humble, and contemners of al) only to beget awe,
reverence, and respect; and so obedience, peace and quiet; and to quit the
contrary etc. And God in Scriptures allows of Titles; as my King, etc. yea of
Cyrus, my King, mine Anointed; nay, God does hyperbolize it, and says of al
Powers, You are gods; and if gods, what not in point of Titles, so of al
answerables? As in David and Solomon, and diverse others, both for State and
Estates: As just and wise policies advise to for conducings sake, and against
al unjust seducings, abusings, or betrayings thereby etc.

But none I say did ever Monarchize or King it as did Moses, though never
King'd, nor Titled, nor invested by the People, yet sufficiently and
authentically invested and authorized, as we have proved, and being answerably
aided both from Heaven and Earth against his rebellious opposers, titles or
specious taking or overtaking presentiments of any kind, he needed not, having
such chastising Miracles to attend him, as made him awful, and rendered him
rather like a God then a man, in point of Power; for Thunder, Lightning, Storms
and Tempests attended him from Heaven; and from Hell or the Earth, Earthquakes,
Chasmaes, and Voragoes were at his command etc. These attract awe, reverence,
and obedience sufficiently; so he needed not any other attractions, as Titles,
or the Glories and Braveries of a Court; but where they are not, Conspicuities
may be of consequence: For all Powers are not furnished with Thunderbolts from
Heaven, as was Moses, so nor with Chasmaes and Whirl-pits from Hell, as was He.

Again, we bow and bend to al Inferior Powers, with a reverend and humble
respect, as to our Parents and Masters, entitling them according to their
Relations, Places, and Degrees; also obey and reverence them: and as occasion
is of gaining any favor, or to attain forgiveness of any offense, we beg and
entreat, and bend also; yea and kneel it; and what is all this but in nature
petitioning, the like to Governors, that yet are governed by the highest
Governor; we stand bare, bow and bend, also petition them, and that with
humble language and posture, answerable to their Places and Powers; as we would
gain favors, yea Justice, and our Rights, etc. or to pardon our offenses etc.
Thus we do to Governors of our Hall-companies, so to the Lord Mayor, the
Judges, and al sorts of Magistrates etc. and will you do less to the highest
Powers? And if it be more, yet it may be less, and not so much by way of
proportion, considering them with the Governors before: Object no more then,
but perform your duties by giving them their dues etc. And for any objection
you can bring out of Scripture, as, you shall not affect Titles, nor give Titles
to any man, nor call nor be called gracious lords; had I time, I can easily
answer them by Scriptures, so by Reason, which is Scripture to the wise, and
its in part done already, by what is done: Is not Sarah commended for obeying,
and lording her husband Abraham? and yet they were consorts. Potiphars wife
preserved her self in all things concerning Joseph, til her lord came home.
What Is due then from the remote in Degree and Relation, if such Relates must so
retaliate? Christ the contemner of Titles and vainglories in himself, as not of
this world, yet said, You say well, I am your Lord and master, etc. But I
cannot further enlarge, and to the wise I need not, and to the wilful I will
not; so I do for this time period this point.

126. And now I will make bold with a few words to all stranger Princes and
States, Powers and Potentates of all kinds, near or remote, in behalf of their
people, so of themselves and us.

To you then, oh you Sovereign Powers etc. I address my self in these
following lines.

BE pleased to take notice, that much of what is said to his Highness our own
Governor, relates to, and concerns you also; what so does, you may more
self-ly apply; what not, pass by. However, I hope that you will find, that I
have done you (not only) all the Right I can, but all that can be done you,
Justice: So your Honors, and great Names and Renowns, enjoin Retaliation
answerably in points of Protection, and happyfying the People under you, that
have denuded themselves of all their Powers, and invested you therewith, and by
so great a Be-trust have put themselves wholly into your hands and powers,
resting only on your Honors Nobleness and Faithfulness toward them; which to
forfeit or fail of, I want expressions to say what it is: Let (if not a
Christian yet) a Pagan principle prevail with you, for though delivered by a
Christian, as by Christ himself, and so belongs to all Christians; yet its a
Natural, a Rational, a Moral, and so a Gentile Principle likewise, and belongs
to man as a man; so that if Religion will avail with you, so; if not, yet
Reason and Gentilisme must, so you must of necessity, Do as you would be done
to, and so retaliate rightly, as before: Take heed, Oh all you Powers, that you
Atheism not the people by your Actions, which are seen into; which if you do,
I know, and you may know what attends you. Teach them not, nor justify them
not, by your doings; You punish (and that justly) petty failings respectively,
as Murders, Thefts, Trecheries, and all perfideous dealings, etc. and render
such base, and vile people: What then are your selves if you do the Without
just necessity.
like? that is, Take from, or oppress without Public or private.
just cause? or bereave of Life, Limb, or Liberty: is it not murder, theft and
injustice; and what are such by your own condemnings, and executing such? Is It
not also an abasing your selves in your Honors and Renowns etc. by such
dishonorable courses? as render you infinitely below your selves? Does it not
intimate Atheism and Hypocrisy, to the ruining of Religion, and so your own,
and all kind of Regiments, if seen into by the People? For pious policies and
Pretenses will not always hold and serve, if such great depravings and
prevarications second etc. Be like the Syrian (great Sirs) advised by your
Servant, and see you wash in Jordan, and not in Damascus waters or rivers: Let
it be your delights then, to delight and refresh the poor souls that have
resigned up into your hands; all that is, or can be near or dear to man; as
their Estates, their Liberties, and their Lives; for all are in your Power; yea
their very Souls and Consciences are in a manner at your command; for that
extremity of sufferings and torments may vanquish the most valiant, and cause
them rather to venture on God then man.

How can you hear, see, or know of the cries, lamentations, languishings and
sufferings of the oppressed poor creatures, and pass it by? Where is Sense,
Nature, and Humanity? How does this answer to Manhood, so to your places
professions, and engagements? See then that you hearken not to Rehoboams young
Heads or Counselors, but to the wise, the sage, the grave etc. And remember
what Solomon says, That Justice establishes Thrones, and that Oppressions
make a wise man mad; its easy to infer then what the contrary does, so what in
time to expect. But I have done with this point, only conclude with Lex
talionis; Do, as you would be done to: Else how can, or why should you expect,
but as you perform?

127. And yet, Oh you Princes, Powers, and States etc. though I have done, as
before; yet I have not done, so must begin again on another score or account,
etc.

Be pleased then (great Sirs) to extend your Scepters, and so allow of my
addresment once more. I hope then that by this time, Oh ye Princes, ye are
fully satisfied about the right of our Worthy Governor to the Government of
England, etc. and that your Peer Prince, as called, has no right thereto, as
having forfeited it; besides all our other Arguments against him, these
standing clear without the least scruple; sure you cannot act or proceed
against the light of Religion, Reason, Nature, Justice, and Rights, and so
against God: I hope you cannot nor will not so abase your Honors, Fames, and
great Names, etc. Convince us, Oh you Princes, Convince us, for that's
Prince-like; and then if we comply not, you have some color to compel;
otherwise Club-law is Peasant, and not Prince-like.

We hope then, yea we build on your Honors Renowns and Noble Natures, that you
will not under pretense of a Princes Right, unjustly invade or molest us,
seeing we have disproved it; which if you do, we hope our God will go along
with us, as he has done hitherto; and why should you (Oh ye Princes) malign
or oppose a just Prince our Governor, whom you find by our Arguments not only
worthy of it, but to have as great a Right to it: Sure, you are Christians, and
if not, yet you are men, you are Gentiles then etc. We shall desire no more of
you then of Gentiles, who by Nature knew and did the Law etc. which do you
likewise, and then we have done, and so have you, if so you will have done; for
I am sure we may be secure; cause you may not by the Pagans or Gentiles Laws do
otherwise then what is right, and so will not come nor send hither unjustly, or
hostilely invade us; which if you do, we hope the God, the Lord of Hosts will
be for us, as before etc.

Be advised and take heed (Oh Princes) what you do; and know that the name of
War etc. though your pretenses seem never so just, will not quit your killing
from murders, nor your takings from, and spoylings, from Thefts; Here Lex
talionis calls on you again, for your Renowns sake see you answer it: Had you
just cause to invade and hostile it against us, and we would not give you
satisfaction, I would not speak; but as the case stands I may not be silent.
Had we just cause to invade you, it concerns you to say as much to us by way of
satisfaction: but if we have no cause, its better for us to sit still, then
rise to fall; its the like for you. And if any of your selves or your People
should plot to assassinate our Worthy Governor at all. How then our Arguments
considered? Let those who have a hand therein know, that what they do, they
teach to do; they justify and warrant to be done to them by Lex talionis, so
endanger your selves thereby, but Wisdom, Policy, Equity, Justice, God, Nature,
Religion and Reason, so your Honors and Renowns, forbid to do, or teach such
doings; and we conceive that there is not any of you will rebel against them
all; so our hopes are (Oh you men of Might, Power, Place, and Renown) that you
will not so abase your Honors and great Names, and so not act any thing that
shall blemish, or stain the beauty, glory, and luster of your Renowns, but do
as you would be done to, or expect to be done so to, by right of Retaliation.
But on presumption of your Noble Natures, Honors, and Renowns, I will not
presume any further to offend by prolix or tedious enlargements, except to
subscribe my self

Your Majesty's etc. most humble Servant S. H.


127. But lest our other worthy Commanders; Officers, and Soldiery of all
sorts, should conceive themselves wronged, slighted, or neglected, for that all
the brave achievements are only attributed to his Highness, they having
performed so worthily as they did. I do answer them, that I do take notice of
their worthy and brave performances, and do here acknowledge them; only this
place allows not individual acknowledgement by Encomiums answerable, which some
able pen should do well to undertake: I hope also that they are not to seek,
that in great achievements, the honor and praise is usually contracted, by
attributing it to the General, or prime Commander and Manager of al, as being
too hard and tedious to delineate each individual performance. And there is
some reason for the aforesaids, cause if things miscarry under the said
General, in his management of them, though he fail neither in wisdom, care,
faithfulness, nor fortitude: but only some of his subordinate Commanders,
Officers, or Soldiery do; yet the dishonor is attributed to him only, and
they go free: Retaliation then will do him this Justice and Right, as so to
compensate him rightly for such wrong etc. Thus the Sweden King, so the great
Alexander, likewise Caesar and Spinola, with Scanderbeg, and many others, did
contract and magazine all the Honor etc. in their own names, which (no
question) some of their Commanders, Officers, and Soldiery had a great share
in, as helping to purchase it by their brave performances; and their
Antagonists, Tilly, Darius, Pompey etc. lost the Honor; yet it may be not by
any failing in themselves, but by the failings of some of their subordinate
Commanders, Officers, and Soldiery etc. or by some accident: And thus I hope
the generous Soldiery of al sorts will be satisfied, and my Readers also rest
resolved etc.

128. I have now done, only I will conclude paradoxically, as venture to
entertain a hope beyond or against hope; as that the world is grown so
ingenious that none will take exceptions at what I have writ, no, though I
accidentally cross them in their private ends, as they cross themselves and
theirs, in crossing the Public, which in conclusion will one way or other tend
to individual sufferings and crosses; al which I labor to prevent, by
endeavoring to prevent divisions and factions; so the raging and forraging
sword, likewise fire and famine, with all kinds of devastations and miseries
attending war; that so they may live in peace and safety, and enjoy one
another, so what they have, with sweet and serene quiet and content etc. and if
for this they will hate me, I am out of al hopes ever to gain their love, though
I merit it; for I cannot, nor can any express love, care, faithfulness, or
affection, beyond the aforesaids: And now I have done, being come to Hercules
pillars, or Ne plus ultra, my

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
MY earnest desire to make sure work before I end, has begot these following
Lines.

Its considerable, that the expression Parliament as ours of late are
conditioned) is accepted too entirely, as if a fair and wel-body'd Unite,
composed and made up of many Individuals, or Unites, in that one Body, as if
also united in their hearts, judgments, ends, and aims for the Public good, as
are their presentiments and pretenses, and so were disclaimers of al self ends,
as they clash therewith; but we find it otherwise: For first, instead of the
honorable name of a Parliament, which (if right) is their due, they are (if
dissected) in the general, a composition of Sects, Factions, and Parties
divided (in that seeming, entire, and united fair (Unite, or Body) etc. who
have their self ends, in opposition one of another, and al of them in neglect
and opposition of the general, as it affronts their particulars: In short, its
like a divided Kingdom, and so its rather a Kings- Ruin of any Government
Doom, then a Kingdom, etc.

Thus considered, To whom should his Highness and the Soldiery have resigned
their Powers? Not to a Parliament sure in the right sense, but to a divided
Kingdom, as to several parties and factions, to enable them to ruin one
another and al of them the Public, whereas the General and Soldiery preserved
them from so doing or being so done to; for they would have fallen foul, or out
amongst themselves, and contented for the Power, only to overpower the rest,
and the Presbytery were the most likely to carry it, as to appearance the
strongest party, as the Lord Fairfax story makes good, whose Principles are to
Prince themselves, and precipitate al sorts, under the notion of Sects etc. al
which his Highness and the Army foreseeing, how can it in Reason or Religion be
expected that they should so tamely deliver up their Power to several parties,
as fore, al adverse to one another, so to his Highness and his party also, and
that under the notion and presentment, as if to a Parliament rightly
constituted.

Each party or faction also desires and endeavors for the Power, only to
overpower the rest, etc. Do they not then justify his Highness and his Party,
who have it, to hold it, whose Principles are only public, and self
preservation; and his precepts and practice hitherto make it good? Do they not
then condemn themselves, for condemning him? I appeal.

Certainly, if wise each party were, they would be glad he has and holds the
Power; for should he resign it amongst them, it would enforce them to implore
his re-acceptance thereof, to prevent the resignation of their Lives and
Beings, by destructive contests about it.

Parliaments (if right) I honor as much as any, and I know that there was in
each of them many wise and good men, worthy of honor, which I may not here
individualize; But what is this to the multitude, amongst whom the honor and
reputation of such are lost, as was Christ in the crowd? And as are the
reputations of many wise and good men, who suffer in and under the general
notion of the giddy headed multitude.

I say as much by all notion'd Sects, Parties, Factions, and Churches, or
however called, that there are many wise and good men amongst al sorts of them,
but they are in points of reputation and distinction lost also (as before) in
the multitude, and so suffer as much as the most insufferable amongst them.

But 'cause al sorts are so choice of their Governors, let them choose of the
choycest, as of those so praised in Scripture, as before: Let Us know your minds
then, whether you will have Moses or Joshua, or Saul, David, or Solomon; whereof
if you choose, you know what to trust to by their stories; Be well advised then
before any of them be sent for, or else give God Almighty time and directions
to creat you one.

Object. But the Lord Fairfax delivered up his Commission and Power without all
this ado, and no such Issues ensued thereon.

Answ. What are Examples to Arguments? Are accidental Issues also grounds for
wise men? And yet the Lord Fairfax might see himself, so his Country, and his
Party in safety, for that he might foresee that the Power remained in the hands
of his own Party, as with his Soldiery, etc. who sure would not suffer their
General to suffer, as would not Saul's servants see Jonathan suffer; an example
somewhat suiting with this: And this was no disobedience, 'cause such an
obedience was not due.

Again, the Lord Fairfax might foresee also that his Highness was to supply his
place, whose Wisdom, Fortitude, and Faithfulness, he might from experience be
confident would secure him, as the Soldiery did Jonathan.

Object. But his Highness was empowered only to defend, and not to rule and
govern.

Answ. This Hydra multiplies in heads under various Visors, for expressions are
altered, but the Objection is answered before under other Notions and Rendrings:
But we will lop off this head also, and so I hope send the Hyleding packing. We
say then, that the People empowered the Parliament to rule only, and not to
overruled, but whether they kept to this rule or no, I appeal. So if it be the
Parliament that thus object, we answer them by themselves, as before. Again, we
say, that it is not a right Parliament, but so many divided parties that object,
and so its best answered by not answering. If any one party, or individual
person object, we say that parties or persons are no concluding Judges etc.

But we have justified the Power where it is, by the Lord Fairfax story, page
22. so by Moses story, page 54. Sect. 97. so his Highness own story, Sect. 43.
to 53. besides diverse other places, and lastly, as appears in our Army Armed,
p. 9. Again, let any one show me who it is has right at al, or so much as has
his Highness, al things considered, seeing the King of Scot's race is razed out
by the whole Nation, and so by every Individual, as by their Parliament.

But it is time I give over, having (I Am afraid) wearyed my Readers as well as my
self, as having surpised them of their better pleasures, delights, and
refreshments, so of their sweet retired Retreats; but I Will endeavor to make
them amends by an ingenious acknowledgement, so also (if I can) by accomodating
them with a more pleasing piece or subject, etc.

And yet I had need begin again, and write as much in defense of what I have
writ, as it self is: For, Forlorn Hope-like, I have exposed my self almost to
the enmity of all the world, except I have won upon any ingenious and judicious
spirits, which are very rare to be found: I am then in thine hands Courteous
Reader, Use me humanely and civilly, I pray thee, and I desire no more; and
less thou can not in justice do me: If then thou findst me failing, or short
in any thing, or see more, or beyond me, pride it not, nor contemn me, but
know thou art advanced on our shoulders, so on others, and so have thy prospect
ample, clear, and fair about thee; and thy artificial Optics and Prospectives
also, to amplify thy sight, and dispel Opacity. But were thou housed in some
dark or Prospectless ground room, and so must fetch in all by thy own natural
Prospectives only, as by thy grasping and comprehensive understanding, as do
Silkworms and Spiders their curiosities, out of their own Bowels, then would
thou like Job in another case, see thy error, and cry out with him, Once, yea
twice have I spoken, etc. but for future will be wiser, and so compress or
remiss it. But charm the Charmer never so ably, yet the deaf Adder will not
hear, etc. so if our Reader will not comply to apparent Reason, 1 Cor. 15.32.
then am I forced to conclude against such, that I have had to do all this while
with Ephesians, etc. Note the next, etc. That

The Epistle to Foreign Princes and States was writ as hints and cautions to
them, upon hearing of the unheard of, barbarous and hellish massacring of the
Protestant Waldenses, which through them strikes at all Protestants. Oh
murtherous Religion, alias, a cunning Regiment under the name thereof! Be wise,
oh ye Govetnours of all sorts.

But if after all this pains taken to satisfy all sorts, for their own good,
as their peace and safety, so for the Public Good, peace and safety also, they
yet will not inquire after such Books, as will so pleasure them; or if they
meet with them, yet not read them thorough, but only here and there, and so
may chance to meet with something, that rather offends, then satisfies them,
which is provided for presently after, or in some other place; or if they do
read it through, and then cast it by, as if never of use more, and so after a
while forget all, or many useful concernments; so that if their own hearts,
suggest, except, or object this, or that, etc. or if they shall hear others do
so, they are not prepared for either, and repair to the Book for satisfaction
they will not; what shall we say then to such, but as before, that we have had
to do with Ephesians.

Why also do not Friends, that have read such Books, mind their friends and
acquaintance of them, that so Universal satisfaction may be, and the benefit of
Peace, Quiet, and Safety answerable thereto.

Courteous Reader, The thing that I feared is fallen upon me, for the Errata
has made work for thy goodness and humanity, it might have been thy own case
as its mine, do as thou would be done to, and so here is no Errata, though
there be almost nothing else; however if thou finds them not, I will not.

Eccles. 9.4. There was a poor man saved a City, etc.

Est. 6.1, 2: Ahashuerus read the Cronicles, etc.

VALE.

