A WONDER and yet no WONDER: A GREAT Red Dragon in Heaven.

REVEL. 12. 3. And there appeared another Wonder in Heaven, And behold a great
red Drogon, etc.

2 COR. 11. 14. And no marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel
of light.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Giles Calvert, at the black spread Eagle at
the West end of Paul's. 1651.

To my deerly beloved friends which are in Christ Jesus, Grace, Mercy, and
Peace from God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ.
THat which at this time moved me to present you with this ensuing Discourse,
is that heavenly and glorious shape and form, wherewith the great Red Dragon is
now come forth in the Spirits of Professors; never was the Dragon in more
glorious habit then now: O how he is arrayed, how his mouth is full fraught with
pretended immediate and perfect enjoyments of God in the Spirit, under color
of which he seeks to deceive, and by his tail to draw those down, out of
heaven into the earth, that have shined as stars in heaven: he is great, and he
is red, that is to say, he is mighty and he is bloody; His mightiness and
bloodyness lie hid under his glorious appearances; He is called in Scripture
that old Serpent, whose tail is full of windings and turnings, who was of old
in the beginning, Genesis 3. He is called likewise the Devil and Satan, a Deceiver
and an Adversary; he is all these names under beautiful Discoveries and
appearances of God; he is wrapped up and covered in and under Doctrines,
Speakings, Writings of men and Discoveries of God, he ushereth in Errors with
glorious truths. In his appearing to Professors he looks first how their
Natures are inclined, he casts an eye first at the bent of their Spirits,
That way which they are inclined he will suit himself in apparel, if they be
inclined toward Notions, Fictions, Forms, or pretended high enjoyments of God
without power, he suits himself accordingly; he makes use of Scripture likewise
to strengthen him in his Designs. These and many others are his subtilties now
adays: this Dragon is described to be a wonder in heaven, Revel. 12. because
of his seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads: a wonder
indeed you will say it is, when you come to be taken up with John into the
Spirit: The Dragon wants no wisdom to tempt, deceive, and devour, for he has
seven heads; no power to bring about his designs, for he has ten horns; and he
wants no glory wherewith to promise to professors, if they will fall down and
worship him, because he has seven Crowns.

Beloved Friends, therefore I have written this ensuing Discourse likewise, to
show you the multiplicity of subtilty, power, and glory, that is in him to
deceive, and which I have seen to be in him; Do not therefore, O do not slight
what I have written, though confused and scattered; it is the day of small
things which God would not have you despise, consider well what I have written,
before you begin to censure it: and if you find any truth in what I write,
mind that more then he that writ it. If you inquire whose this Discourse is, it
is the discourse of a bruised Reed, and of smoking flax, of a suckling, of a
babe in Christ, out of whose mouth God will perfect his praise.

Yours in him who is the truth, and no lie. Edw. Hide. Junior.

REVEL. 12. 3, 4. And there appeared another wonder in heaven and behold a
great Red Dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven crowns upon his
heads. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast
them to the earth, And the Dragon stood before the woman which was ready to be
delivered for to devour her child as soon as it was born.


IN the beginning of this Chapter, There is a great wonder spoken of which
appeared to John, and which he saw, (a door being opened in heaven to him.) The
wonder is as follows, A woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon under her
feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve stars, This woman is the Church of
Christ, his Spouse, the Lambs bride, as appears by many places of Scripture, as
Ephesians. 5. 32. Revel, 31. 9. The Sun wherewith she is clothed, is that light
and glory which shines forth in the Gospel, which is Christ the Son of
Righteousness, for so he is called in Malac. 4. 2. but unto you that fear my
Name shall the Sun of Righteousness appear with healing in his wings. The Moon
is a light below the Sun, and borrows its light from the Sun; and is nothing
but that light and glory which shined and does now shine forth in the Law: The
term under her feet, is nothing else but beneath her; the Crown of twelve
stars which is upon her head, holds forth that Royal and Kingly glory
wherewith the Church of Christ is clothed, so that the meaning of the wonder
is this, It holds forth that multiplicity of glory which the Church of Christ
is in and under, for there is a glory of the Sun, a glory of the Moon, and a
glory of the stars; a crown of twelve stars above her, the Sun of righteousness
in the midst of her, and the Moon under her feet; so that there is glory above
her, glory in the midst of her, and glory beneath her, insomuch that she is
hemmed in with glory; or it holds forth that variety of glory under which the
Church is, for there is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, and another
of the stars, for one star differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 5. 41. This
woman so clothed with glory being with child, and cried traveling in birth
and pain to be delivered, there appears presently another wonder in heaven,
which is that which I intend now to speak to:

And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold a great red Dragon,
having seven heads and ten horns, and seven Crowns upon his heads, etc. The
words are one of the Wonders which John saw, being taken up by the Spirit into
heaven, there being a door opened to him: It is said, in heaven it appeared to
him, from whence we may draw this conclusion, That there is no seeing of a
Wonder but in heaven, and there is no seeing of heaven without being taken up
by the Spirit into it, unless a door be opened in heaven to us; If we have a
desire (friends) to see a Wonder, we must desire God to take us up into heaven,
and there to open the door of heaven to us, for so John was taken up into
heaven, see Revel. 1. 10. and there a door was opened to him, see Revel. 4. 1.
This Wonder is a Wonder indeed; What, That a great Red Dragon should be seen in
heaven: Stand astonished and be amazed, o ye heavens! was there ever such a
thing heard of! If you could but see it you would stand astonished and admire!
But to come nearer to the words, Behold, it is a word of Speculation; See, take
notice of, what, a great Red Dragon, where may you say, in heaven: O
Wonderful! this is a strange thing indeed, how can this be? To make it plain,
we shall enquire what this word Wonder is, it is somewhat seen which causes
admiration; It signifies a sign; what this Wonder or sign is, It is a great Red
Dragon in heaven, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven Crowns upon his
heads: But you will ask me, what is this great Red Dragon in heaven? I shall
show you what it is by and by, but first we shall enquire into,

1. What heaven is, in which this great Red Dragon appeared. 2. What the
appearing of the great Red Dragon in heaven is. 3. Wherefore it is called
another Wonder? 4. What the great Red Dragon is. 5. What those Epithites are
which are given unto him. 6. The place where he is. 7. His seven heads. 8. His
ten horns. 9. His seven Crowns upon his heads. 10. What his Tail is. 11. What
the third part of the Stats of heaven are, which by the tail of the great red
Dragon are drawn out of heaven, and cast into the earth. 12. What the earth is,
into which the great Red Dragon casts the third part of the stars of heaven.
13. What the meaning of the great Red Dragon's standing before the woman, which
was ready to be delivered, is. 14. What the meaning of that saying is, For to
devour her child as soon as it was born.
The first thing to be enquired into is, what heaven is, in which this great
red Dragon appeared: Heaven is taken variously in Scripture, sometimes it is
taken for the material heaven, the Firmament, Genesis 1. 8. Sometimes it is taken
for things that are or may be shaken; yet once more I shake not only earth but
heaven it self; and this word yet once more, signifies the removing of those
things that are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which
cannot be shaken may remain, Heb. 12. 26, 27. Now those things that are or may
be shaken are Prophesies, Tongues, and Knowledge, see 1 Cor. 13. 8. But heaven
in this place is taken for the glory and light of God, which Stephen saw when
he was praying.

The second thing to be inquired into, is, what the appearing of the great Red
Dragon in heaven, is:

It is this, there was seen a great Red Dragon in heaven by John, it was such
an appearance as was accompanied with seeing, so that John could say, I saw it;
and it was no lying wonder that he saw, but a true one: what an excellent thing
it is for a man to declare nothing but what he has seen; what has appeared
indeed to him, by a door being opened in heaven to him, as John did, or by
being taken up in the Spirit as he was.

The third thing to be enquired into, is, Why it is called another Wonder; That
is, because of the Wonder going before, in the first verse of this Chapter; And
there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the Sun, etc.

The fourth thing to be enquired into, is, What this great Red Dragon or Wonder
is; It is the old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the
old world, Revel. 12. 9. Revel. 20. 2. And he laid hold on the Dragon, that old
Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a thousand years; So that
if any enquire what the great Red Dragon is that John saw, It is the old
Serpent called the Devil and Satan: but what is the old Serpent the Devil
and Satan? He is called the Devil and Satan, and he is the Devil and Satan.
The Wonder is the Dragon in heaven, the Dragon is the old Serpent; the old
Serpent is the Devil and Satan: I pray mind it, for there are some now adays
that hold neither Dragon, old Serpent, Devil not Satan; you see that there
are such, and that from Scripture (if you do not deny Scripture) and I my self,
by woeful experience have found that there are such.

Quest. But may some say, What is the cause why the Dragon is the old Serpent,
and the Serpent is called the Devil and Satan.

Answ. The Dragon is the old Serpent, because the Serpent was from the
beginning; he it was that craftily and subtly insinuated into Adam and Eve,
and prevailed with them for to eat that, the fruit whereof was death: and he
is called the Serpent because of his subtlety, and because of those windings
and turnings that are in him, as I shall show hereafter: and the Serpent is
called the Devil, because of his accusing the Saints day and night before God;
for the word devil signifies an Accuser: and he is called Satan because of
that aversness that is in him against the Saints, for Satan signifies an
Adversary: the Serpent, Devil and Satan are nothing but the Dragon
multiplied, the Dragon come forth into variety, the Dragon made known under
three denominations; for as I said before, the Dragon is the Serpent, and the
Serpent is called the Devil, and Satan, and he is the Devil and Satan.

The fifth thing to be enquired into, is, what those Epethites are, which are
given to the great Red Dragon, they are two:

First, he is Great. Secondly, he is Red.
First, he is Great; that is, he is a hughe Dragon, very large and big, his
greatness does many times affright a Saint; it was not a little one that John
saw, but a great one, such a one as did beget admiration: a Saints adversary is
a great Devil, a mighty one, not a small one; that is the reason many times
that Saints are faint to take to themselves the whole Armor of God, to
withstand strong and great Goliath.

Secondly, He is Red, That is another Epethite which is given to the Dragon; as
greatness holds forth bigness and mightiness, so redness betokens bloudiness,
cruelty: O! he is a bloody and cruel Dragon; no less than the blood of Saints
will content him: If he can but draw blood of a Saint, he is satisfied: Saints,
see what an enemy you have to wrestle with; but let not his greatness and
bloudiness affright you, for he is a chained Dragon. Jude v. 6.

The sixth thing to be enquired into, is, the place where he is, that is in
Heaven: John saw this wonder in Heaven. Heaven, as I said before, was the glory
of God; It is not a local place, which some fancy to be in the Firmament;
neither consists it in meats and drinks, but in Righteousness, Peace, and
Joy. Romans 14. 17.

The seventh thing to be enquired into is, what the great red Dragons seven
heads are: Seven you know is a perfect number; and the head holds forth Wisdom,
Policy, and Craftiness; for in the head are all these: We use to say, such a
one has a wise, crafty, politic head: So that the meaning is this, That
there is a perfection of Wisdom, Policy, and Craftiness in the great red
Dragon, to tempt, deceive, devour, and the like. O friends, look about you; he
has not only a politic crafty head, for to tempt, deceive, devour, and the
like; but he has a perfection of heads, and they are full of policy and
craftiness; which policy and craftiness, he makes use of against the Saints, to
perplex and rouble them on every side, night and day.

The eighth thing to be enquired into is, what those ten Horns of the great red
Dragon are: His Horns hold forth his power and strength: We use to say, there
is strength in Horns; The number ten being joined to them, it holds forth this,
That multiplicity of strength and power that is in the great red Dragon to
bring about his Designs: He has not only Wisdom, Policy, and Craftiness in him
for the acting of his Designs, but he has a multiplicity of strength and power
likewise to bring about his Designs: If a man had never so much wisdom and
policy to act his Designs yet if he wanted strength, his wisdom and policy
would stand him in little steed* Wisdom without strength avails little: But
the Dragon has both, and a multiplicity of both, as I said before, and
therefore O Saints beware of him.

The ninth thing to be enquired into is, What the seven Crowns upon the great
red Dragons head are: Seven (as I said before) is a perfect number; Crowns hold
forth this to us, Dignity, Rule, and Royalty; So that the meaning of it is
this, There is a perfection of Dignity, Rule, and Royalty, wherewith the Dragon
is invested; His Crowns upon his heads, speak him to be a perfect King and
Ruler; he delights to be King, and to reign in the whole world; but especially
in Saints; he would fain be King there, he would fain wear the Crown in a
Saint: O that Saints would therefore take heed of him, and not suffer him to
use his scepter in their hearts; but let Jesus Christ use his scepter, whose
right it is.

The tenth thing to be enquired into is, what the tail of the great red Dragon
is: It is those windings and turnings that are in the great red Dragon: The
tail of the Dragon it turns this way, and that way, and if it cannot prevail,
it will turn every way; see how the tail of the great red Dragon several ways
winded and turned toward Jesus Christ, when he was had by the Spirit into the
Wilderness to be tempted, in Mat. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. First, the
Tempter came to Christ, and said; If thou be the Son of God, command these
stones to be made Bread: Here the Devil would make Christ question his
Sonship; Jesus Christ he had heard a voice from the most excellent glory, that
he was Gods beloved Son; now the Devil he endeavors to make Christ question
that he was Gods Son; he says unto him, If thou be the Son of God, turn
these stones into Bread; As if he should have said, Thou a Son of God, and
cannot turn these stones into Bread? A Son of God can do it; it bespeaks thee
not to be a Son of God, if thou do not turn these stones into Bread; He
endeavors to make him question his Sonship from his not turning stones into
bread: just so he deals with a poor soul, Thou a son of God and not do this;
that is to say, subdue corruption, and withstand sin? When the Devil has
gotten a poor soul into the wilderness, as he did Christ, so that the poor soul
is ready to favnish for bread from heaven, then the Devil says unto him, to
make him question his sonship, If thou be a son of God, relieve thy self,
succor thy self, for a son of God can turn stones into bread: But Christ said
unto him, It is written; What is written? This; That man shall not live by
Bread alone, but by every Word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. When the
Devil could not prevail this way, see how his tail winds another way; Then the
Devil takes him up into the holy City, and sets him on a Pinnacle of the
Temple, and says unto him; If thou be the Son of God, cast thy self down; for
it is written, He shall give his Angels charge concerning thee, and in their
hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a
stone. Here he tempts him to destroy himself, moving this to Christ as an
Argument to do it; that is to say, if thou be the Son of God, thou may
cast thy self down, thou need not fear; for he shall give his Angels charge
over his Son, and they shall bear thee up in their hands, they shall hold thee
up, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone: As if he should have said, Thou
need not fear doing of it, God has given a charge to Angels to keep thee
from hurt; so that if thou do it, Angels will bear thee up and keep thee;
they have a charge to do it, and they must perform that to God: just so the
Devil sets upon poor souls, when he tempts them to make away themselves; O
(says Satan) thou may destroy thy self, Angels will bear thee up and keep
thee, lest any hurt befall thee; thou may do this, and that, for thou art
under the protection of Angels: This Satan tempts them to when poor souls are
in the wilderness, that is in a bewildred condition; But Christ said unto him,
It is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God. When the Devil
could not prevail this way, see how the Dragon winds his tail another way:
Again, the Devil takes him up into an exceeding high Mountain, and shows him
all the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them; and says unto him, All
these things will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. Here the
Devil sets Jesus Christ on high, and shows him all the glory of the world,
promising Christ it all, if he would be a worshipper of him: As if he should
have said, Do but turn a worshiper of me, thou shall have all the glory of all
the Kingdoms of this world: He seeks here to make Christ worship him, by
showing and promising him the worlds glory. Thus he seeks to prevail upon poor
souls, to make them worshippers of him, he presents the glory of this world
before them; as profit, credit, esteem, honor, repute, and the like, and
promises them they shall have all of it, if they will worship him: How many
poor souls have bin caught in this snare? But Jesus said unto Satan, Get thee
hence Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him
only shall thou serve. Then the Devil leaves him etc. So that you see what the
tail of the great red Dragon is, that is to say those windings and turnings
that are in the great red Dragon; and how Jesus Christ answers the Devil in
all these three temptations; which may teach us how to answer him when the
Devil tempts us: for as the windings of his tail are against Jesus Christ, so
they are against us; He tempts us (as I said before) sometimes to question our
sonship and sometimes to destroy our selves; and someimes to fall down and
worship him, by his set^ing before us the glory of the world; as he did before
Christ.

The eleventh thing to be enquired into, is, What the third part of the stars
of Heaven are which by the tail of the great red Dragon are drawn out of
heaven, and cast into the earth; The third part of the stars of heaven, are
those that are unstable, infirm, unsettled, not built upon the s^re foundation,
that in appearance have shined like stars in heaven; they are not to be
understood the material stars, but it is a Metaphorical kind of expression,
borrowed from the stars; they shined as the stars: As there has bin some in
our days, that have shined so in show, but are now cast down out of heaven into
the earth, so that now their lights are put out, they themselves are become
earthly, worldly, carnal, and the like.

The twelfth thing to be be enquired into is, What the earth is into which the
great red Dragon casts the third part of the stars of heaven: The earth
sometimes is put for the men of the earth; As, O earth hear the word of the
Lord: sometimes it is put for the material earth, as Genesis 1. 20. but here it is
to be taken for that which the first man is off; the first man is of the earth,
earthly: so that it is taken for that earthly mindedness, worldliness,
wickedness, wretchedness, and filthiness which was in Adam after his fall.

The thirteenth thing to be enquired into, is, What the meaning of the great
red Dragons standing before the woman which was ready to be delivered is;
standing is a posture of readiness to devour; so that it holds forth this, the
readiness that the Dragon is in to devour the man-child; and that term before
her, that is, before the woman's face, facing of the woman; the woman's readiness
to be delivered, signifies her being nigh at hand to bring forth: Now what a
sad thing it would be for a woman to have one that seeks her life, and the life
of her child, stand facing of her when she is ready to bring forth; it will
endanger both the woman and child: so it is here; O what a sad thing it is to
the Church of Christ, to have the great red Dragon stand facing of her when she
is ready to be delivered of Jesus Christ; it is the only way to make the Church
of Christ miscarry. Thus you see that the meaning of the Dragons standing
before the woman holds forth, That there is a readiness in the Dragon to devour
the Babe, either by facing of the woman, and so making of her miscarry by
reason of fear, or by devouting of the Babe when he is born.

The fourteenth thing to be enquired into is, what the meaning of that saying
is, for to devour her child as soon as it was born. To devour is to eat up
quite, to make an end of; as soon as it was born; that is, so soon as it was
brought forth. So soon as ever the Saints of God are in a readiness to bring
forth Christ in them, the great red Dragon stands before their face for to
devour him; he cannot endure Christ should be in them, or brought forth in
them, but seeks to destroy him (...) just as Herod, and the Scribes and
Pharisees after Christ was born did seek to devour Christ without us so the
Dragon seeks to devour him within us and for this purpose she stands before us
and faceth us, that he might be the more ready to catch and lay hold of Christ
and quash the appearing of him in us* You know what a sad thing it would be for
a woman, to have her child as soon as it was brought forth snatched from her,
and devoured and eaten up before her face: O how it would trouble her! So for a
soul to have Jesus Christ so soon as he is brought forth in it snatched from it,
and devoured and eaten up before its face; O what a sad case that soul will be
in! O how it will cry out for is Jesus is Jesus; as the woman would for her
child* O my child, my child!

The terms in the words being thus explained, the first Thesis or Basis upon
which I shall build my discourse, is this;

That there is such a thing as the great red Dragon in heaven. It is clear from
the words, and it is clear from other Scriptures as that Scripture in Luke 10.
18. says Christ to his Disciples, I beheld Satan fall as lightning from
heaven: he was in heaven, and Christ saw him fall from his seat.

Question. But you will ask me, What? Is Satan in heaven?

To that I answer as follows:

First, Satan in heaven, is Satan in a Priestly shape. Secondly, Satan in
heaven, is Satan in a Prophetical shape. Thirdly, Satan in heaven, is Satan in
a Kingly shape.
First of all, Satan in heaven, is Satan in a Priestly shape; appearing as the
Priest Christ Jesus, acting his Priesthood, doing the very office and work of
Christ as offering sacrifice to God, putting up petitions to him, praying, and
the like.

Secondly, Satan in heaven, is Satan in a Prophetical shape; as the Prophet
Christ, acting him as a Prophet, prophecy as he did, that is to say, speak to
edification, exhortation, reproof, and of things to come: O how Satan has bin
in heaven in some in this respect in our days! In what a Prophetical shape he
has appeared, who have prophesied out of their own hearts, who have followed
their own spirits, and have seen nothing but vanity and lying Divination;
saying, The Lord says, and the Lord has not sent them; and they have made
others to hope that they would confirm the word, and they have with their lies
made the heart of the righteous sad, when God has not made sad: Ezekiel. 13. All
which we cannot but see fulfilled in our days.

Thirdly, Satan in heaven, is Satan in a Kingly shape; acting the Kingly Office
of Christ, reigning, ruling, and commanding, within the heart and without, as
Christ.

But to make things more plain, the Dragon in heaven, is the Dragon on high.

Secondly, The Dragon in glory.

Thirdly, The Dragon at rest. For heaven presents us with all these three
things, Height, Glory, and Rest.

First of all, The Dragon in heaven, is the Dragon on High; that is to say, in
the Chair, Seat, and Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, and saying
that he is God; 2 These. 2. 4. He it is that exalts himself as the Eagle, that
sets his nest among the stars: Obad. 1. 4. He is that Lucifier that ascends
into heaven, and that exalts his Throne above the stars, that sits upon the
mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North: Isa. 14. 13. He is that
Capernaum, which is exalted unto heaven, and which shall be brought down unto
hell. Matthew. 11. 23.

Secondly, The Dragon in heaven, is the Dragon in Glory; which is nothing else,
but the Dragon in an Angel of Light: 2 Cor. 11. 14. Gal. 1. 8. And no marvel,
for Satan himself is changed into an Angel of Light. And Satan was changed into
an Angel of Light in those false Apostles in this respect, in preaching another
Jesus, Spirit, and Gospel, that was not preached, received, and accepted: and
truly we may see the Dragon changed into an Angel of Light in our days, in this
respect; There is another Jesus preached, that was not preached; not that Jesus
which dyed at Jerusalem, but one which is within us, say some; when as he that
dyed at Jerusalem, and he within us, is all one Jesus; or another Jesus, that
is, they preach salvation by works; another Spirit, which is a Spirit of
freedom to do any manner of wickedness; and another Gospel, which is
justification by Works; not that Gospel which Paul preached; That Christ dyed
at Jerusalem for our sins, according to the Scripture; and that he was buried,
and that he rose again: 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. In which saying lies hid more glory
than we dream of, and is more hard to be believed than many think it is.

Thirdly, The Dragon in heaven, is the Dragon at rest; for Heaven notes rest:
See Revel. 18. 7. She says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and
shall see no sorrow: She sits a Queen; sitting notes rest; she sits a Queen,
that is, as one in State and Honor; and no Widow, that is, she is in no
Widows state, which is a sorrowful state; she sits a Queen, there is the great
red Dragons being at rest in her, which is the Dragons being in heaven.

I shall further illustrate it by these four following things; that is to say,

The Dragon in Heaven, is the Dragon in and under things that seem to savor of
Piety, Zeal, Holiness, and Righteousness: The Dragon in Heaven, is the Dragon
(I say) covered over with a seeming savor of Piety, Zeal, and Holiness; He
pretends much Piety, Zeal, and Holiness in Professors; much Prayer, much
Fasting, much keeping of the Sabbath, much giving of Alms; as in the Scribes
and Pharisees he did; When the Sons of God came to present themselves before
God, He came with them: Job. 1. 6. which was to show how religious he was: but
under these his specious shows lies subtilty, mingled with bloudyness and
cruelty.

Secondly, The Dragon in Heaven is the Dragon in Peace; for Heaven notes Peace:
that is, at quiet with a Professor, that he does not disturb nor molest him
night nor day; so that the poor soul knows not what to do. Now the Dragon is
then in Peace, when he sees all is so in the soul as he would have it, he will
never trouble that soul; but if it be not so in the soul as he would have it,
(as it is not in Saints.) O then he is never at Peace and Quiet* but is always
tempting and troubling it, so that the soul has no quiet in its Spirit; the
Dragon thinking thereby to bring about his Designs.

Thirdly, The Dragon in Heaven* is the Dragon in joy; Now then, the Dragon is
in joy (if I may so say) when by his tempting and troubling of a Saint, he has
gotten the best of him, then he rejoices; O how merry and joyful he would be
indeed, if he could quite ruin a Saint; The Dragons joyfulness, lies in the
Saints sadness, trouble, and overthrow; The more or less sad, troubled, or
overcome they are, the more or less is his joy.

Lastly, The Dragon in Heaven, is the Dragon in a pretended, perfect,
immediate, and high enjoyments of God in the Spirit, Allegorizing the
Scripture, and so denying the letter thereof: Those whose eyes God has opened,
cannot but subscribe to this, for this is to be seen now a days in Professors:
O how have they pretended perfect immediate enjoyments of God in the Spirit,
under pretense whereof denying the Scripture; O how they have vaunted and said,
we enjoy God immediately, that is without the Scripture: Alas what is the
Scripture say they, how scornfully they have spoken of it, though it be
profitable for Instruction, that the man of God be thoroughly perfect to
salvation; as Paul says, Some there are that Allegorize the Scripture, and
under pretense of that, make void the Letter: which allegorizing the Scripture,
they call the spiritual interpretation of the Letter; when as the spiritual
interpretation of the letter, is that interpretation which the Spirit of God
gives of the Letter; It is true, there are some things in Scripture which are
to be taken otherwise then they are set down in the letter, that is, when they
are allegorically, parabolically, and symbolically spoken: But they allegorize
every place of Scripture almost, which I know no warrant for, and so deny the
letter: I will name but one place of Scripture, and that is in 1 John 4. 2.
Every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ come in the flesh is of God; that is,
come within us, say they: And so under pretense of this deny Jesus Christ in
manifestation in the flesh, and suffering at Jerusalem, etc. and so utterly
overthrow what Christ has done for us, and so they become the greatest
Antichrists in the world. There are two sorts of Professors in the world that
deny Jesus Christ come in the flesh.

One sort of Professors are those that altogether look at Jesus Christ within
them, and deny him without them; and these are those that deny Jesus Christ
come in the flesh, and so are the Antichrist.

There is a second sort of Professors, that look at Jesus Christ altogether
without them, as one suffering at Jerusalem, and being raised, etc. but never
look at him as within them, they never find the Life, Power and Spirit of him
within them; and so they are Antichrist as well as the other: Now that
Professor which acknowledges Christ come in the flesh, and Christ come in his
flesh, and whose faith is fixed on Christ as one in the Heavens, and in every
place, and as one that is in his heart, as well as he is in the Heavens and in
every place, is not Antichrist.

If it be so, that there is such a thing as the great red Dragon in Heaven,
then beg of God a sight of him in Heaven, for you cannot see him till a door be
opened in Heaven to you, as there was to John: He may stand at your right hand
and left hand, and you see him not: Till you be taken up by the Spirit into
Heaven, you cannot discern his seven heads, ten horns, and seven crowns; that
is to say those multiplicities of subtilties, policies and glory wherewith he
deceives poor Souls; and till you know his tricks you cannot beware of them,
but he will set upon you on every side, and you shall see it not; he will blind
your eyes, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ shall not
shine into your Souls, he will have you one way or another, and if he cannot
prevail one way, he will another; he will endevor to catch you by the
inclination of your mind and nature, he will watch which way they are carried,
and so set a trap for your spirit.

Secondly, If it be so, That there is such a thing as the great red Dragon in
Heaven, then Friends, take heed of him, for he stands at Joshuah's right hand;
he will appear in his white raiment to you, because you are Saints; he will put
on his most beautiful robes when he appears to Saints, thereby to deceive them:
Take heed of his Heads, lamb-like Horns, and glorious Crowns, lest by his
subtilty, strength and glory he fetch you down from your professions; and
though he appear in never so much glory, stoop not at all, and do not obeisance
to him, O noble Saints, no not a jot, notwithstanding his crowns of glory.

Thirdly, If it be so, That there is such a thing as the great red Dragon in
Heaven, having seven heads, ten horns, and seven crowns upon his heads, be not
afraid of him, let not his monstrousness trouble you, do not fear, lest he
should by his policy and strength set upon you; fear not his strength nor
policy, your God will strengthen you with strength in your Souls by the Spirit
against him; never think that you shall not be able to deal or grapple with
him, seeing God will make perfect his strength in your weaknesses: Do not cry
out, O surely, surely I shall be overcome by his temptations; but rather fill
your mouths as Christ did his against him, with It is written, It is written,
It is written, and bring no railing accusation against him, as Moses durst not;
but cry, The Lord, even the Lord that has chosen Jerusalem, rebuke him: then
you shall see him go from you, and leave you, as he did Christ.

Fourthly, If there be such a thing as the great red Dragon in Heaven, and that
this Dragon is the old Serpent, and the Serpent is the Devil and Satan; then
this may serve to inform some that deny the Dragon, old Serpent, Devil and
Satan, that say there is none such; I say, this may serve to inform them of the
truth of it, that there are such.

Quest. But may some say, If there be such, from whence is the Dragons rise?
otherwise the Serpent, Devil and Satan. 2. What was his fall? And 3. where is
this Dragon, otherwise the Serpent, Devil and Satan?

Answ. Without question, his rise with other Angels was from God; but his not
keephis first state, but falling away from it, was from himself, and in himself.

Secondly, What was his fall?

It was this; He being at first a good and holy Angel himself, and partaking of
the brightness of the angelical Glory, living and dwelling in the same with the
rest of his Brethren the Angels, fell from his first estate or principality,
and lost his own former habitation or beginning, and God has reserved him in
everlasting chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day, Jude v.
6. The forsaking of the Society of his fellow good Angels (if I may so say,)
and forsaking of his first estate of Glory, leaving his former habitation, was
his fall; like Adam and us, who left our first estate and habitation which was
in God, and fell to the eating of that which was forbidden.

3. Where is this Dragon? He is in the Air: 2. He is in the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. wherein in times past ye walked according to the
course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the
Spirit that now works in the children of disobedience.

The second Thesis or Basis upon which I shall build my Discourse is this, That
the Tail of the great red Dragon is that by which the Dragon draws the third
part of the stars of Heaven out of Heaven into Earth. This is clear from the
words, what the Dragon, and the Tail of the Dragon is, and what Heaven and
Earth is, I have at large showed before, and therefore I will not unfold the
terms again, but make some Application of the words.

First, This may serve to inform us of the truth of this, how that the great
red Dragon by his tail draws the third part of the stars of Heaven out of
Heaven, and casts them into the Earth: This we may see fulfilled in our days;
how many shining stars has the tail of the great red Dragon drawn out of
Heaven, and cast into the Earth? So that though they shined as stars in Heaven
before, now they are become earthly, worldly, carnal and wicked, and do not
stick to commit all manner of wickedness with greediness.

Quest. But may some say, How does the Dragon with his tail draw the third part
of the stars of Heaven out of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth? These manner
of ways following; That is to say:

First, He deals with them as with Adam and Eve; just as he drew Adam and Eve
to eat of that which is forbidden, so he draws the stars of Heaven out of
Heaven, and casts them into the Earth. See how he drew them to eat of that
which was forbidden, Genesis 3. Yea, says the Serpent unto the woman, has God
said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? No, says the woman, We may
eat of the fruit of the trees of the garden; but of the fruit of the tree that
is in the midst of the garden we may not eat of it, nor touch it, for God has
said it, lest we dye. Yea has he said it? is it indeed so? are you not
mistaken? are you sure God spoke it? See how the Serpent sets upon her, and
endeavors to make her question the authority of Gods Word: And has God said,
Ye shall surely dye, that is certainly dye? If you eat, ye shall not certainly
dye: Here the Serpent makes himself to have more power then God; Ye may eat
safely, ye shall not, though God has said it, dye; For God does know, that in
the day ye eat thereof your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods,
knowing good and evil. As if the Serpent should say, Let God say what he will,
you shall not dye; for instead of dying, if you eat, your eyes shall be opened,
and you shall be as gods in the knowing of good and evil: Come, says the
Serpent, eat, do not fear, you shall not dye, for you shall know good and evil,
and ye shall know good and evil as gods know it, even that very day you eat it
shall be so, ye shall no sooner eat but it shall be so. These things he gives
as Reasons that the woman should not dye if she did eat, because her eyes
should be opened, and they shall know good and evil as God that very day they
did eat. Now when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and pleasant
to the eyes, and that it was a tree to be desired to make one wise, the woman
takes of the fruit thereof, and presently falls upon eating. See, when the
Serpent had made her question the authority of Gods Word, and told her that she
should not certainly dye if she did eat, but her eyes should be opened, and she
should be as God in the knowing of good and evil; and likewise had persuaded
her that the tree was good in respect of food, and pleasantness to the eye, and
that it was a tree to be desired, because it makes one wise, the woman together
with the man presently takes of the fruit of it, and eats, as I said before.
The man and the woman had a desire to have their eyes opened, they had a desire
to see, but not in the light of God; they thirsted after knowledge, they coveted
to be as God in knowing good and evil, they coveted to be that which God would
not have them, they coveted to satisfy their eyes and their pallates, they
coveted wisdom that was not the wisdom of God; and this was their fall: So that
though they shined like stars of Heaven before, now they are cast down from
thence into Earth, and are become now earthly, worldly, carnal and sinful. So
that this is one way that the Dragon draws stars out of Heaven into Earth, by
making Souls question the Authority of Gods Word, whether or no it be true.

The second way or manner, how the great red Dragon draws with his Tail the
third part of the stars of Heaven out of Heaven, and casts them to the Earth,
is, by taking of them up into an exceeding high mountain, that is, by lifting
them up on high, and so showing of them the glory of this world, and by
promising them it, if they will fall down and worship him. Thus he has dealt
with many in our days, he has exalted them on high, and given them a sight of
his glory, as credit, honor, repute, esteem in the world, which are the Devils
glory. Now those that have been like shining stars in Heaven, in the appearance
of others the great red Dragon, by the presenting of this his glory before
them, has by his Tail drawn them out of Heaven, and cast them inthe Earth. So
that this is another way the Dragon takes to draw the third part of the stars
of Heaven out of Heaven, and cast them into the Earth, he shows them the glory
of this world, and by that draws them out of Heaven into Earth, as he has done
many in our days, who are turned from their shining like stars in Heaven to the
Devils glory; that is, they seek after credit, honor, repute and esteem in the
world, of which thing we have had woeful experience in our days.

The third way and manner how the great red Dragon draws with his Tail the
third part of the stars of Heaven out of Heaven, and casts them to the Earth,
is by his false application of Scripture to Professors, as that place of
Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful. And if all things be lawful,
then say they, all manner of wickedness is lawful, and so we may commit it: The
Apostle says not there, that all manner of wickedness is lawful, as
fornication, idolatry, adultery, and the like; for says the Apostle in Verse.
13. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord. And besides if we look
in the beginning of that 13 Verse, he speaks of meats for the belly: And in 1
Cor. 10. 23. he speaks not there neither, that all manner of wickedness is
lawful, though many say it is confirmed from these places of Scripture; for he
speaks against that in the beginning of the Chapter; and besides he speaks
there of going to feasts, and eating of meats: and in Verse. 19. he speaks of
his liberty to do those things, which the weak could not. And then that of Romans
14. 14. the Dragon makes a false application of to poor Souls: I know and am
persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self, but to
him that esteems any thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. Say some,
nothing is unclean to us, no not sin; we can commit any sin, for we esteem not
any thing to be unclean, but those that do, to those it is sin. O subtle Devil!
He speaks in the Chapter of observing days, and eating herbs; he does not there
speak that sin in it self is not unclean; whether they esteemed it not to be
unclean, or whether they esteemed it to be unclean, sin is unclean. And then
that place of Scripture the Devil makes application of to Professors, Tit. 1.
15. Unto the pure all things are pure, but unto them that are defiled and
unbeleeving, is nothing pure, but even their minds and consciences are defiled.
We are pure, say they, and so all things are pure to us, adultery, fornication,
etc. we are not defiled, but believing, and so all things are pure to us, but
those that believe not their minds and consciences are defiled. O poor
creatures, where are you? who has bewitched you? The meaning of that place is
not, that sin is pure to those that are pure and believing, that is a delusion
of Satan; for those words all things are meant days and meats: See in Romans 14.
20. All things, says he, indeed are pure, but it is evil for that man who
eats with offense. In which Chapter he speaks of meats and days, as I said
before, which are now pure to him, seeing the Ceremonial Law is abolished by
Christ, which put a difference between meats. Thus you see how the Devil
beguiles them, thereby leading them to all manner of wickedness. So that this
is another way the Dragon takes to cast shining stars out of Heaven into Earth,
he makes false application of Scripture to them, and so draws them out of
Heaven into Earth.

The fourth way and manner, how the great red Dragon draws with his Tail the
third part of the stars of Heaven out of Heaven, and casts them to the Earth,
is by ushering in Errors with these six glorious Truths following; that is to
say,

God does all things. Is all things. All things are in God. All things are of
God. All things are through God. And all things are to God.
First of all, God does all things; and it is clear from Scripture, 1 Cor. 12.
6. He works all in all: But yet it is to be taken, that he does all things in
his Son, nothing out of his Son; by him and in him he made the world, and he
upholds it by him. But with and under this glorious Truth the Devil ushereth in
somewhat that is not truth, thereby to draw those that are like shining stars
in Heaven out of Heaven into the Earth; that which he ushereth in in this
saying, God does all things, is this; If he does all things, then he does sin,
he acts sin, there is not any thing that is but he does it, wickedness is that
he does: With this snare the Dragon catches many Souls.

Secondly, God is all things; and it is dear likewise from Scripture, 1 Cor.
15. 28. That God may be all in all. He is all things in and to Saints, he is
Righteousness, Peace, Joy, strength against sin, and he is all out of them,
abroad in the world, he rules and he raigns. God is all, that is, he is the
Substance of all things, he goes beyond all, he is all in this respect
likewise, because he brings about all things; so that this is a glorious Truth,
God is all things: Now the Dragon he ushereth in with this Truth this Error, If
God be all things, then he is sin and wickedness; and if he be all things, then
he is this Dog, this Tobacco-pipe, he is me, and I am him, as I have heard some
say.

Thirdly, All things are in God; this is a glorious Truth likewise from
Scripture; All creatures, all created things are in him: But yet it is not to
be taken, that they are materially in him, but vertually, radically. Now this
great red Dragon ushereth in with this glorious Truth another Error, thereby,
as I said before, to draw shining stars out of Heaven into Earth, which Error
is, If all things be in God, then surely sin is in him, and I am in him, though
I walk never so wretchedly. But stay a little, you run too fast: There is a
twofold Being in God.

First, There is a Being in him so as to live, move, and have our Being.

Secondly, There is Being in him, by virtue of being born again. So that here
you are caught.

Fourthly, All things are of God; this is clear from Scripture likewise, Romans
11. ult. for of him are all things, and that in 1 Cor. 8. But to us there is
but one God the Father, of whom are all things: all creatures all created
things which belong to the old Creation and to the new Creation, are of him
though in a different sense they are of him, but yet because they are of him,
yet this does not follow that these creatures and created things are himself,
as some say, then were every created thing and creature a God, and so make an
infinite number of Gods: all things are of God, say they, if all things be of
him, then sin is of him and not of the Devil; and we are of him, and if we be
of him, then we are himself, for whatsoever is of him is himself. Stay a
little, that will not follow, for as I said before, if that were a truth, what
a many Gods would you make! And besides that will not follow, that sin is of
him because all things are of him, for the Scripture says, sin is of the
Devil, and therefore not of him, he is not the cause of it; These are those
Errors which the great Red Dragon ushereth in with this truth, All things are
of him.

Fifthly, All things are through God; This is a glorious truth suitable to
Scripture, see Romans 11. ult. For of him and through him are all things; It is
through him that such a thing comes to pass, and that such a thing is, and that
we are alive: it was through him that the Jews were cut off, and the Gentiles
ingraffed into a good Olive tree; it is through him, that is, it was Gods
doings: here the great red Dragon ushereth in an Error with this glorious
Truth, Are all things through him? then sin is through him, all that wickedness
that I commit is through him, that is, by his means; it is through Gods means
that I am an adulterer, fornicator, etc. he is the Author of it. O thou
deceived creature, the Devil has thee fast; sin is through your corrupt
nature, and the Devil, and not through God.

Sixthly, All things are to him; that is a a Truth likewise from Scripture,
Romans 11. ult. And to him are all things, to whom be praise, etc. All things are
to him, that is, to his praise, to set forth his praise: And here the great red
Dragon ushereth in this Error, If all things be to his praise, then sin is, and
therefore I will sin, for all my sins that I commit shall be to his praise, and
the more I sin the more it shall be to his praise. These are the six manner of
ways by which the Dragon ushereth in Error with Truth, thereby to draw the
stars of Heaven out of Heaven, and cast them to the Earth.

The fifth way and manner how the great red Dragon draws with his Tall the
stars of Heaven out of Heaven, and casts them to the Earth, is by the Dragons
winding with his Tail into Professors rotten and unsound Principles. But you
will ask me, What are they? These following: that is to say;

That they are very God, and infinite and Almighty as the very God is; That
they are in Honor, Excellency, Majesty and Power eq^ally and the same with the
true God; That the eternal Majesty dwells in them, and no where else; That
there is no such thing as the Holiness and Righteousness of God; That
unrighteousness in them, and the acts of uncleanness, profane swearing,
drunkenness, and the like filthiness and bruitishness, are not unholy and
forbidden in the Word; That these acts in them and others are approved of by
God, and that such acts, and the persons that commit them, are like God: That
the acts of denying and blaspheming God, or the Holiness and Righteousness of
God; That the acts of cursing God, swearing profanely and falsely by his Name,
and the acts of lying, stealing, cozening and defrauding others; the acts of
murder, adultery, incest, fornication, unclean Sodomy drunkenness, filthy and
lascizious speaking, are not things in themselves shameful, wicked, sinful,
impious, abominable and detestable in any person: That the acts of adultery,
drunkenness, swearing, and the like open wickedness, are in their own nature as
holy and righteous as the duties of prayer, and giving of thanks; That
whatsoever is acted by them, whether whoredom, adultery, drunkenness, and the
like, may be committed without sin; and that such acts are acted by the true
God, or by the Majesty of God, and by the Eternity that is in them: That Heaven
and all happiness consist in the acting of those things which are sin and
wickedness; That those are most perfect, and like to God and Eternity, which do
commit the greatest sins without least remorse or sense; That there is no such
thing really and truly as unrighteousness and sin, but as a man or a woman
judges thereof; and that there is neither Heaven nor Hell, neither Salvation
nor Damnation, and that these are one and the same thing, and that there is not
any distinction between them, or between light and darkness; That Reason is
God: That we shall not have peace and quietness in our spirits, till we come
into this liberty of whoring, swearing, and the like: That man is deified; That
the spirit after a man is dead goes into a Dog or Cat; That God believes in
God: That all the women in the world are but one man's wife in unity, and all
the men in the world are but one woman's husband in unity; so that one man may
lie with all the women in the world, for they are his wife in unity, and one
woman may lie with all men in the world, for they are her husband in unity:
That there is no act that is sinful before God; That the holy Spirit is not
God: That Jesus Christ has no other then a humane nature. These and many
others are the Principles that the great red Dragon with his Tail winds into
Professors, thereby to cast them out of Heaven into Earth. And therefore
Friends take heed of him, he is very subtle, his Tail is full of windings and
turnings; if it were possible he would deceive the very Elect: If you be
Professors in show, and not in deed, he will drag you down from Heaven into
Earth; that is, he will drag you down from your glorious profession into Earth;
that is, into such an estate of earthly-mindedness and wickedness, that all
that see you, and behold you, shall say of you, as it shall be said of Babylon
when she is destroyed; Alas, alas, that great City that was clothed with fine
linen, and purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones, and
pearls, for in one hour so great riches is come to naught, Revel. 18. 16, 17.
So shall they say of you, O glorious Professors, that have been as stars
shining in Heaven, clothed with fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and decked
with gold, and precious stones, and pearls, which are nothing but the parts,
and gifts, and righteousness of men; Alas, alas, those glorious Professors, for
in one hour, as it were, are they come to naught. So that you see how the
Dragon draws Professors out of Heaven into Earth, by winding with his Tail
false and unsound principles into them.

Quest. But may some say, You hold a falling away from grace, do you not?

Answ. No; but I hold a falling away which is now fulfilled before the day of
Christ come, spoken of in 2 These. 2. 3. And besides I hold a falling away from
the end of the Commandment, which is Charity out of a pure heart, and a good
Conscience, and of faith unfeigned, from which some having swerved, have turned
aside to vain jangling, which was Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 6, 20.
And also a falling away from the heavenly gifts of those that are enlightened,
and are made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good Word of God,
and of the powers of the world to come, Hebr. 6. 4, 5. If Professors have
reached no further then Charity, though it be out of a pure heart, and of a
good Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, and no further then a being
enlightened, and a tasting of the heavenly gifts, and a being made partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and a tasting of the good Word of God, and of the powers of the
World to come, they are liable to be by the Tail of this great red Dragon drawn
out of Heaven, that is, drawn from these into Earth; so that they will become
earthly, filthy, vain, and the like.

The third Basis or Thesis upon which I shall build my Discourse is this, That
there is multiplicity of subtilty, strength and glory in the great red Dragon
to deceive, accuse, set upon, tempt and destroy. This is clear from the words;
and it will appear to be so from other places of Scripture: see Genesis 3. 1. Now
the Serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field which the Lord God had
made: That shows that there is a multiplicity of subtilty in him. We wrestle
not only with flesh and blood, but with principalities and powers, Ephesians. ult.
Chap. That place of Scripture shows, that there is a multiplicity of power in
him. If thou will fall down and worship me, says the Serpent to Christ, I will
give you all the glory of the world: That speaks a multiplicity of glory in the
Dragon.

We shall a little hold forth his subtilty, power and glory.

First we shall speak of his subtilty; see Job 1. 6. When the sons of God came
to present themselves before the Lord, Satan he came among them. See his
subtilty in it, under pretense in coming to pray with the sons of God, he came
to accuse and set upon Job, as you shall see by and by; And the Lord said unto
him, From whence come thou? Then Satan answered the Lord, From going to and
fro in the Earth, and from walking up and down in it: See his subtilty here, in
leaving out like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. And the Lord said
unto Satan, Have thou considered, or have thou set thy heart, on my servant
Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and upright man, one
that fears God, and escheweth evil? Then answered Satan the Lord, and said,
Does Job fear God for naught? Have thou not made a bedg about him, and about
his house, and about all that he has on every side? Behold his subtilty again
in accusing Job: As if Satan should have said, Thou have made a fence against
all that he has, and he serves thee for that, it is not for naught that he
serves thee; thou have increased his substance, and blessed the work of his
hand, and he serves thee for that; but put forth thy hand now, and touch all
that he has, and he will fall acursing of thee, and that to thy face. And the
Lord said unto him, Behold all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself
put not forth thy hand. So Satan goes forth from the presence of the Lord.
After he had Gods Job, away he went, it was for Job that Satan presented
himself before the Lord. Now in Cap. 2. they came the second time to present
themselves before the Lord, and Satan came with them: And the Lord said unto
him, from whence come thou? And Satan gave him the like answer as before: And
the Lord said unto him, Have thou considered my servant Job, a perfect and
upright man, that fears God, and escheweth evil? and still he holds fast
his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy him without
cause. The subtilty of the Serpent in presenting himself before the Lord, was
not only to accuse Job, but likewise to move God against Job for to destroy him
without cause. And Satan answered the Lord, Skin for skin, yea all that a man
has will he give for his life: But put forth thy hand now, and touch his bone
and flesh, and he will curse thee to thy face. See how he further accuses Job
before God, that so God might destroy him, or that he might have him to
destroy: As if Satan should have said to the Lord thus; All that a man has,
before he will lose his life, he will part with all, yea skin for skin; but do
but touch his bone and flesh, and he will fall acursing of thee to thy face,
even before thy face. Satan cannot endure a Job, but he is always accusing and
setting upon him. And the Lord said unto him, Behold he is in thy hand, but
save his life. Though God delivers us with Job into the hands of Satan, yet he
will not have Satan take away our life: As Satan presented himself before the
Lord with the sons of God, so he does now present himself with the Saints
before God, but it is to accuse us to God, that he might have a commission from
God to set upon us, to afflict us, not only in our goods, but in our body: He
speaks of us to God as he did of Job, It is not for naught that yo serve God,
says Satan to poor Souls; you fear him for this and for that, he has thus and
thus blessed you, and made a hedge about you; and if God should put forth his
hand, and touch you, you would curse him. See his subtilty in Zech. 3. 1. There
is Satan standing at the right hand of Joshua the high Priest, who stood before
the Angel of the Lord. His subtilty in standing at Joshuahs right hand was to
resist and withstand Joshuah: Satan he had espied Ioshuahs filthy rayments that
were upon him, as he stood before the Angel: Now his subtilty in standing there
was to withstand Joshuah: Thou have filthy garments, and stand thou before
the Angel? what do thou here with these filthy garments on thee? But
afterward he was clothed with change of raiment. So he speaks to a poor Soul
many times when he presents himself before God, What do thou here with these
sinful garments upon thee? how dare thou come before God with these? thereby
to keep it from God; this is his subtilty. And we may see his subtilty in the
words; he stands before the woman, but it was to devour the man-child.

Secondly, We shall a little consider the Dragons power. But you will ask me
what is it.

First, The power of the Dragon is expressions of Scripture. Secondly, Sin.
Thirdly, Darkness.
First, The power of the Dragon is expression of Scripture. I pray bear with me
a little: In this expression my meaning is, he makes use of Scripture whereby
to strengthen himself against a Saint, as he did against Christ; see how he did
it against Christ, in Mat. 4. 6. says the Devil to Christ, Cast thy self down,
for he has given his Angels charge over thee, to bear thee up, lest at any
time thou dash thy foot against the stones. So he says to a poor Soul, Thou
may kill thy self, God has given his Angels charge over thee to keep thee.
As the strength of sin is the Law, so the strength of Satan is Scripture, (as I
may so say.)

Secondly, Sin: The power of the Dragon is sin; that is, the Dragon makes use
of sin, whereby to strengthen himself against a Soul, 1 John 3. 6. Whosoever
abides in him, sins not: Whosoever sins, has not seen nor known him.
Now says the Dragon to the Soul, You do not abide in God because you sin; you
have sinned, says the Devil, and you cannot deny it, and therefore you have
not seen nor known God; when as the Soul has not only sinned, but only the Law
in the flesh, sin in the Soul, not the mind has sinned. Now for want of
distinction between the spiritual part and the fleshly part of the Soul, the
Soul is so troubled by Satan, that it knows not what to do.

Thirdly, Darkness: The power of the Dragon is darkness; that is, he makes use
of darkness, whereby to strengthen himself against the Soul: If we say we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, 1 John 1. 6. Now says the
Dragon, You are in the dark, and you walk in darkness, and the Soul knows it is
in darkness, therefore you have no fellowship with God and Christ: And the poor
Soul is troubled, that it knows not what to do; when as that darkness is called
there a hating our brother, 1 Ioh. 2. 11.

Thirdly, We shall a little speak of the Dragons glory: His glory is honor,
repute, esteem, preferment; his crowns which are upon his heads are his glory,
which hold forth royalty and rule, as I said before; That angelical light into
which he is changed, is his glory; that heavenly light in which he appears to
Saints is his glory, his lamb-like horns are his glory, his seeming savor of
piety, zeal and holiness is his glory, as I said before.

If it be so, That there is a multiplicy of subtilty, strength and glory in the
red Dragon to accuse, set upon, tempt and destroy, then take heed of his
subtilty, power and glory, lest you be ensnared in either: if he cannot catch
you by his subtilty, he will have you by his power; and if he cannot have you
by his power, then he will catch you by his glory: Be you therefore wise as
Serpents, and consider what you have to deal withal; watch and pray, lest ye
enter into temptation, and let your eyes be always opened, for this Dragon goes
up and down like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

The fourth Basis or Thesis upon which I shall build my Discourse, is this,
That no sooner is the Church of Christ ready to bring forth Christ in her, but
the Dragon stands ready, before her face, to devour him. This is clear from the
words: The Dragons aim is not so much to devour the Church of Christ, though he
stands before it, but Christ in the Church of Christ; his enmity is more at
Christ, then the woman; he cannot endure Christ should be in the Church, he
will labor as much as possible he can to devour him, and the reason of it, is,
because he is to rule with a rod of Iron the Nations: Now the Dragon he would
rule, and therefore the Dragon has great wrath against the Lamb, knowing his
time to be short. When he was seen by John to be cast out of Heaven into Earth,
he falls a persecuting the woman that brought forth Christ: When the Dragon
could do nothing to Christ he sets upon the woman, when she was flying into the
wilderness, which is her place, where she is nourished for a time, and times,
and half a time, from the face of the Serpent. The Dragon casts out of his
mouth water as a flood after the woman, that he might cause her to be carried
away therewith. And when the Dragon could do no good with the woman, he was
wroth with her, and went to make War with the remnant of her seed. First he
seeks to destroy Christ in us; if he cannot prevail that way, then he will seek
to devour the woman that brings forth Christ; when he cannot do that, then he
will seek to devour her seed.

First, If it be so, That no sooner is the Church of Christ ready to bring
forth Jesus Christ, but the Dragon stands ready to devour him, then let the
woman and her seed beware of him, let her seed especially: And as for the
woman, she has a place prepared for her in the Wilderness, from the face of
the Serpent, Revel. 12. 14. A great blessedness it is, though it be in the
wilderness, that is, in a bewilded state, for there the child Jesus is kept
from the Dragons mouth. O ye remnant of the woman's seed! therefore the Dragon
went to make war with you; and therefore I will direct my speech to you: It is
you the Dragon aims at, it is you the Dragon will have about with, it is you
that he will make war with; stand to your arms therefore, be not without your
weapons always in your hands; be always girt about with truth, and having on
the breast plate of Righteousness, and your feet shod with the preparation of
the Gospel of Peace; and above all, take the shield of Faith, wherewith you
shall be able to quench all the fiery darts of the Devil: And take the helmet
of Salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God; praying
always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit, and watching thereunto
with all perseverance, lest you be conquered, and your Jesus devoured before
your face. Above all take the shield of Faith: The best weapon to fight against
the Dragon is Faith.

Quest. But you will ask me, What is it? and how shall we use it? I shall
according to my light show you that, because Faith is little spoken of now
adays, and so make an end.

Ans. First, I shall show you what Faith is; It is the fixing of the heart on
Christ, Ps. 57. 7. It is the substance of things hoped for, and the evidence of
things not seen, Hebr. 1. 1.

First of all, Faith is the substance of things hoped for by us; that is, it is
the ground or confidence of things hoped for; it gives us ground and confidence
of things that are hoped for by us.

Secondly, It is the evidence of, or it is that which evidenceth to our
spirits, things not seen; that is, things we do not see, it is that which
evidenceth to us things not seen, or it is the conviction of things not seen by
us, it convinces us of things not seen.

The next thing is, how faith is to be used against the Dragon; just as Jacob
used it when he wrestled with the Angel: But how was that? See Genesis 32. 24, 25,
26, 27, 28, 29. And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him,
until the breaking of the day: And when he saw that he prevailed not against
him, he touched the hollow of Jacobs thigh, and the hollow of Jacobs thigh was
out of joint. Here is Jacob and an Angel wrestling together till break of day;
here is the Angel not prevailing: when the Angel saw he prevailed not against
Jacob, he put Jacobs thigh out of joint as he wrestled with him, which was to
try Jacobs faith. See here the hollow of Jacobs thigh out of joint: After the
doing of which by the Angel, he says, Let me go, Jacob: The Angel would have
been gone, had not Jacobs faith kept him from going: Says Jacob, I will not
let thee go without a blessing: As if he should have said, Bless me, and then
thou shall go; I must be blessed, and I am resolved to be blessed,
notwithstanding the hollow of my thigh is out of joint: Here is Jacobs faith,
he would not let go, but he would hang upon the Angel still. Just as if two
were wrestling together, and the one should put out the hollow of the thigh of
the other, and that other, though he could not wrestle, should hang upon the
other, and hold him with his hands: So it is here; Jacob, though he cannot
wrestle, yet he hangs upon and holds with his hands the Angel, and is resolved
he will hang there, and if the Angel went he would go with him, hanging upon
him, unless the Angel blessed him: Behold, what faith is here? When the Angel
saw he would not let him go unless he blessed him, the Angel asked him his
name; and he said his name was Jacob: And the Angel said, Thou shall no more be
called Jacob, but Israel; which signifies a prevailer and conqueror: There is
the blessing. So that let your hearts be fixed on Christ, as one that is not
only above you, that is to say, in the Heavens, but also within you; and do not
mind the Dragon so much as faith in Christ: We fight against the Dragon and sin
many times, and never think of Christ; but let your eyes be set upon him, and
do not wrestle with the Dragon, but with Christ against the Dragon, and then
you wrestle aright. We wrestle with the Dragon, and not with Christ against the
Dragon, we never think of him, and that is the reason we do not prevail:
Wrestle with Christ against the Dragon, and let your eyes be placed on him, and
though he touch the hollow of your thigh, and put it out of joint, as I may so
say, that is, take away your strength, so that you cannot wrestle with Christ,
as many times he does take away our power, to see whether we, though we cannot
wrestle, yet will depend and hang upon him; tell Christ, if he attempts to go
away from you, that though you cannot wrestle with him, yet you will depend and
hang upon him, that if he go away, it shall be with you hanging upon him;
though he say to you, Let me go, yet do you reply again to him, and say, We
will not let thee go, except thou bless us: Then he will enquire of your names,
and give you other names, and call you Israelites, that is, Prevailers over the
Dragon.

FINIS.

