THE DECLARATION OF Duke HAMILTON, CONCERNING His Engagement against England,
and his coming in with the King of Scots.

AND, His Speech and Confession made to diverse Officers of the Army, upon his
DeathBed; With the Protestation and Resolution of the Citizens of Worcester
concerning the present Government.

ALSO, The old Duchess of Hamilton's Prophecy (Grandmother to the foresaid
Duke) concerning the routing of the Scots Army, and the extirpation of the
Family of the Stuarts.

TOGETHER, With the Copy of a Letter from Edinburgh in Scotland, communicating
the transactions of affairs in that Nation.

London, Printed by Robert Wood, 1651 Sept. 16..

Duke Hamilton's DECLARATION CONCERNING His coming into England with the King
of Scots.
SIR,
I Make no question, but you have had a large account given you of the Battle
which was fought here in this City, wherein the Mercies of God were very
eminent toward us, and is as a Crown to all those blessings which the Lord
has vouchsased us formerly. This City is indeed become a sad Spectacle and was
very noisome, by reason of the multitudes of dead carcasses, both of man and
beast, (for the Fight was very fierce, and the slaughter of the Enemy great)
till care was taken for their removal (by Gods blessing) to prevent Infection.
We hope the Malignants of this place will learn by the present calamities, to
see into their own Follies, and behold the hand of God upon them in those
miseries which they have drawn upon Themselves, by their former and later
compliances with the Enemy; their remissness in Government, their murmuring
and complaining of wants; for, under that pretense, in our greatest extremity,
the day before the Scottish Army entered the City, not five pounds could be
raised among them for present supply, though now their Plunder be rated at an
extraordinary value. His Excellency the Lord General has been very noble in
all things, and has infinitely won the hearts of the Inhabitants of this City,
who repent them of their former malignancy, and protest hereafter to be
faithful to the Parliament, and to live and die in defense of the present
Government.

Duke Hamilton is dead of the wounds which he received in the late Fight; a
little before he dyed, lying in great extremity with the pain of his leg, and
every hour expecting to be dissolved, he declared before several Officers of
the Army, and diverse Gentlemen of quality who were present with him, That he
was heartily sorry that ever he engaged against the Parliament; and that he was
confident his coming into England was contray to the Will of God; wishing that
he had been admonished by his Grandmother, who Prophetically told his Father in
the Year 1648. when he came with that numerous Scotch Army into England, which
was routed in Lancashire, that if he did engage against England, it would be
the ruin of him and his Posterity; saying further, That she was confident that
the Army would be totally routed, and the Family of the Stuarts would in very
few years be utterly extirpated both in England and Scotland.

Whose words hitherto have proved Oracular; for his Father being taken
prisoner, was beheaded at Westminster, and the son mortally wounded in the late
Fight here, dyed yesterday of his VVounds in this City; he seemed very
sorrowful for his sins, and earnestly desired those about him to join in
prayers with him to the Lord, that he might find mercy and forgiveness.

The Commissioners of the Militia are disbanding their Militia Forces, and with
some endeavors of satisfaction to them, answerable to their willingness in
the Parliament's Service; and that in so great a number. They are likewise
careful in ridding the Country of straglers; also in seizing and securing the
persons and estates of such as adhered to the Scottish King, most of which were
Papists of this Country; and in Summoning the Country to level the new Works
and Fortifications about the City.

Worcester, Sept. 13.
The Copy of a Letter from Edinburgh in Scotland, relating the state of
affairs in that Nation.
SIR,
LIevrenant Genesis Monk is now Master of the field in this Nation, all parts
falling down before the power of the Parliament of England; yet there is a
malignant spirit in many, they are not to be trusted, only with an hand of awe
over them. The old Cavalier party curse the Presbyterians, and say that they
and their pride and insolency has been the cause of all this evil that has
befaln their King and his friends; and the Presbyterian party accuse the old
Royalists for being so heady to run with their King so fast in his own way: But
we say it is the wickedness of the one, and perfideousnesse of the other has
provoked the Lord to humble them. The Lord grant they may make a right use of
it.

Here is old (or rather new) howling among the Ladies in Scotland, for their
Husbands, Fathers, Sons, Friends, that are flam and taken in England and
Scotland, and it seems some of them (like Pilats wife) gave their Husbands
warning, begging of them not to go out in this War. The Marquess of Arguile
would fain make pretense that he has not been guilty of the late transactions,
though he had too great an hand in the Treaty with the King, and something
since. Indeed he had so much discerning it seems into the Scots Kings designs,
that he justly began to fear, that if he prospered, he should find the same
feward that Montrosse had from him and his party, and therefore he so far
obstructed that party that he saw designed to undermine him, that the very
common Soldiers have jusled him and abused him, as he went along the streets,
before the Scots King marched into England.

The Scots Gentry lay much fault upon their Ministers, that they preached to
them as if the English Designs were far otherwise then they find them: But we
find much falsenesse in this Nation, yet some we hope are godly.

We have fallen upon several Parties in Scotland, where they were
respectively, and every day almost some prisoners are brought in, or some place
reduced; so that the power of the Lord has wonderfully appeared for us,
Montrosse and Aberdeen have submitted.

Captain Hume does some mischief by robing, but we have sent some parties to
find him out.

Edinburgh, 14. Sept. 1651.
FINIS.

