A TREATISE OF MONARCHY, Containing two Parts: 1. Concerning Monarchy in
general. 2. Concerning this particular Monarchy.


Wherein all the maine Questions occurrent in both, are stated, disputed, and
determined:

And in the close, the Contention now in being, is moderately debated, and the
readiest means of Reconcilement proposed.

Done by an earnest Desirer of his Countries Peace.

LONDON, Printed for John Bellamy, and Ralph Smith, and are to be sold at the
three golden Lions in Cornhill.

Anno Dom. 1643.

THE PREFACE:
I Write not this Discourse to foment or heighten the woeful dissension of the
Kingdom; but if possible to cure, or at least to allay it: That former too
many have done already, this latter, much too few.

When a Patient lies sick under the destroying paroxismes of a Fever, every
stander-by will be telling his Medicine, though he be no Physician: O then let
no Son of this State account it presumption in me, for putting in my
judgment, and speaking that which I conceive might, if not remove, yet
mitigate this fatal distemperature of our common Mother: at another time
perhaps it might be censurable, but in this exigence laudable.

Something I was full of, which I conceited might do good; here I have
produced it. And now if any man can find a better way to appeasement, for the
sake of peace let him speedily declare it.

I intend not these ensuing Disputes to any high-flowne judgments, who look
down on all men's, but their own, to censure, not to be informed, nor to any
which has designs of his own, which on the opportunity of this Division he
means to follow; nor to any who is already possessed by an opinion, which he
resolves to make good: But to the calm and impartial spirit of every
judicious, peaceful man; Let him weigh my Assertions by my grounds on which I
build them, and if he find them any where unsound, let him show me in what,
and I will gladly and thankfully reform my error: For as I love not obstinacy
in groundless opinions in others, so I would avoid it in my self.

I have not annexed my Name, not that I am ashamed to own what I conceive to
be the truth; but because I know who I am, and that my Name could add no
estimation to the Treatise: Nor do I desire it should: They who search for
Truth must regard Things, not Persons: Give me therefore the now common Liberty
to go namelesse; many have taken it for worse ends. If any condemn me for any
thing here, it must be for endeavoring a thanklesse Moderation 'twixt two
Extremes. But I will detain you no longer at the door.

The Contents of the ensuing Treatise.
Part. 1. Of Monarchy in general.
Cap. 1. Of Political Government. ITs Original: How far forth is is from
God? Sect. 1. Its end: whether the end of government be the peoples good? Sect.
2. Its division into several sorts. Sect. 3.
Cap. 2. Of the division of Monarchy into absolute and limited. Whether
absolute Monarchy be a lawful Government? Sect. 1. Of three degrees of
absolutenes in Monarchy. Sect. 2. Whether Resistance be lawful in absolute
Monarchy? Sect. 3. What it is which constituteth a Monarchy limited? Sect. 4.
How far subjection is due in a limited Monarchy? Sect. 5. How far
resistance is lawful in a limited Monarchy? Sect. 6. Who shall be Judge of the
excesses of a limited Monarch? Sect. 7.
Cap. 3. Of the division of Monarchy into elective and successive. Elective and
successive Monarchies, what they are? Sect. 1. Whether all Monarchy be
originally from the peoples consent? Sect. 2. Of Monarchy by divine
Institution. Sect. 3. Of Monarchy by prescription. Sect. 4. Of Monarchy by
Conquest. Sect. 5. Whether Conquest can give a just Title? Sect. 5. Whether a
successive Monarch may not be also limited? Sect. 6.
Cap. 4. Of the division of Monarchy into simple and mixed. Simple and mixed
Monarchy what they are? Sect. 1. What it is which constituteth a Monarchy
mixed? Sect. 2. How far the Princes power extends in a mixed Monarchy? Sect.
3.

Part 2. Of this particular Monarchy.
Cap. 1. Whether the power wherewith our Kings be invested be an absolute or
limited and moderated Power? The Question stated. Sect. 1. Proved radically
limited. Sect. 2. Contrary Arguments answered. Sect. 3. and 4.
Cap. 2. Wherein and how this Monarchy is limited and defined? Cap. 3. Whether
it be of a simple or mixed constitution? It is proved to be fundamental mixed.
Sect. 1. The Arguments for the contrary are answered. Sect. 2. Whether the
Authority of the two Houses be subordinate and derived from the Kings? Sect. 3.
The Question resolved and cleared. Sect. 4.
Cap. 4. How far forth this Monarchy is mixed, and what part of the power is
referred to a mixed subject? Cap. 5. How far forth the two estates may oppose
the Will and proceedings of the Monarch? The Question duly stated. Sect. 1, 2.
Whether Resistance of Instruments of illegal Commands be lawful? Sect. 3.
Proved lawful. Sect. 3. Contrary Arguments dissolved. Sect. 4.
Cap. 6. In what cases the other Estates may assume the Arms of the Kingdom
for resistance of Instruments of arbitrary Commands? Answered negatively. Sect.
1. Affirmatively. Sect. 2.
Cap. 7. Where the legal power of final Judging of these cases does reside,
the three estates differing about them? The Question is stated and determined.
Sect. 1. Arguments contrary are answered. Sect. 2. What to be done in such
dissension. Sect. 3.
Cap. 8. The former Truths brought home to the present contention. Sect. 1. A
moderate debate concerning the present contention. Sect. 2. The speediest
means of Reconcilement proposed. Sect. 3.

A TREATISE OF MONARCHY.
PART. I.
CAP. I. Of Political Government, and its Distinction into several Kinds.
GOvernment and Subjection are Relatives, Potestatis Exercitium, the exercise
of a Moral Power. One of these is the Root and Measure of the other; which if
it exceed, is exorbitant, is not Government, but a Transgression of it. This
Power and Government is differenced with respect to the Governed, to wit, a
Family, which is called Oeconomicall: or a public society, which is called
Political, or Magistracy. Concerning this Magistracy we will treat 1. in
general. 2. Of the principal kind of it.

In general concerning Magistracy, There are two things about which I find
difficulty and difference, viz. the Original, and the End.

Authority, how far from God, how far from Men.
First for the Original: There seem to be two extremes in Opinion; while some
amplify the Divinity thereof: Others speak so slightly of it, as if there were
little else but Humane Institution in it. I will briefly lay down my
apprehensions of the evident truth in this point: and it may be, things being
clearly and disctinctly set down, there will be no real ground for contrariety
in this matter. Three things herein must necessarily be distinguished, viz. 1.
The Constitution of Power of Magistracy in general. 2. The Limitation of it
to this or that kind. 3. The Determination of it to this or that Individual
Person or Line.

For the first of these, 1. It is Gods express Ordinance that in the societies
of Mankind, there should be a Magistracy or Government. At first when there
were but two, God ordained it, Genesis 3.16. St. Paul affirms as much of the
Powers that be, none excepted, Romans 13 1. 2 This Power where ever placed ought
to be respected as a participation of divine Sovereignty, Psalm, 82.1.6. and
every soul ought to be subject to it for the Lords sake 1 Pet. 2.13. that is,
for conscience sake of Gods Ordinance, Romans 13.5. and under penalty of
Damnation, v. 2. These are Truths against which there is no color of
opposition. Indeed this Power may be claymed by them who have it not; and where
there is a limitation of this Power, subjection may be claymed in cases which
are without those limits: But to this Ordinance of Power where it is, and when
it requires subjection, it must be given; as before.

For the second. 1. In some particular communities the Limitation of it to this
or that kind, is an immediate Ordinance of God: so Kingly Power was appointed
to the Jews on their desire, 1 Samuel 8.9. whether they had not a kind of
Monarchical Government before, I will not stand on it: but it is evident that
then, on their earnest desire God himself condescended to an establishment of
Regalitie in that state. 2. But for a general binding Ordinance, God has
given no word, either to command or commend one kind above another: Men may
according to their Relations to the form they live under, to their affections
and judgments in diverse respects, prefer this or that form above the rest;
but we have no divine limitation: and it were an absurdity to think so; for
then we should uncharitably condemn all the Communities which have not that
form for violation of Gods Ordinance and pronounce those other Powers
unlawful. 3. This then must have another and lower fountain to flow from,
which can be no other then Humane. The higher Power is Gods Ordinance: That it
resideth in One, or more; in such or such a way is from humane designment: for
when God leaves a matter indifferent, the restriction of this indifferency is
left to secondary causes. And I conceive this is St. Peter's meaning, when he
calls Magistracy (...), Humane Creature; S. Paul calls it Gods Ordinance,
because the Power is Gods: S. Peter calls it humane Ordinance, because the
specification of it to this or that form, is from the societies of Mankind. I
confess it may be called a humane Creature, in regard of its subject, which is
a Man, or Men: or its End which is to rule over Men for the good of Men, but
the other seems more natural and it induces no disparagement to Authority,
being so understood. But how ever you take that place, yet the thing affirmed
stands good, that God by no word binds any people to this or that form, till
they by their own Act bind themselves.

For the third: the same is to be said of it, as of the second: some particular
men we find whom God was pleased by his own immediate choice to invest with
this his Ordinance of Authority: Moses, Saul, David, yea God by his immediate
Ordinance determined the Government of that people to David's posterity and
made it successive; so that that People after his appointment and word was made
known to them, and the room void by Saul's death, was as immediately bound by
divine Law to have David, and his Sons after him to be Magistrates, as to
Magistracy it self. But God has not done so for every people: ascriptum est
cannot be alleged for the endowing this or that person or stock with
Sovereignty over a community: They alone had the privilege of an extraordinary
Word. All others have the ordinary and mediate hand of God to enthrone them:
They attain this determination of Authority to their Persons by the tacit and
virtuall, or else express and formal consent of that Society of men they
govern, either in their own persons, or the root of their succession, as I
doubt not, in the sequel it will be made appear. But let no man think that
it is any lessening or weakening of Gods Ordinance in them, to teach that it is
annexed to their Persons by a humane Mean: for though it be not so full a
title to come to it by them simple Providence of God, as by the express
Precept of God: yet when by the disposing hand of Gods Providence a Right is
conveyed to a person or family, by the means of a public Fundamental Oath,
Contract and Agreement of a State, it is equivalent then to a Divine Word; and
within the bounds of that public Agreement the conveyed Power is as
Obligatory, as if an immediate word had designed it. Thus it appears that they
which say there is divinum quiddam in Sovereigns, and that they have their
power from God, speak in some sense truth; As also they which say that
originally Power is in the People, may in a sound sense be understood. And in
these things we have Dr. Ferns consent in his late discourse upon this subject.
Sect. 3.

Whether the end of Government be the peoples good?
if we consider what was looked at when God ordained it. That was the Good of
the society of men over which it is set: So Saint Paul, Romans 13.4. (...). God
aimed at it in the Institution of Government: and so do all men in the choice
of it, where they may be choosers: such a Government, and such persons to sway
it, as may most conduce to public Weal. Also it is the measure of all the
Acts of the Governor: and he is good or bad according as he uses his Power to
the good of the State wherewith he is entrusted. That is the end: but not the
sole end; The preservation of the Power and Honor of the Governor is an end
too: but I think not coordinate, but subordinate to the other: because
doubtless in the Constitution of Government, that is first thought on, and this
in congruity to that; Also the reason why the Power and Honor of the
Magistrate must be preserved, is for the public societies sake because its
welfare depends thereon: And if it fall out that one of them must suffer: every
good Magistrate will descend something from his greatness be it for the good of
the Community: On the other side, though every subject ought for the honor and
good of the Magistrate to give up his private; yet none ought to advance the
greatness of his Sovereign with the public detriment. Whence in my
apprehension the end of Magistracy is the good of the whole Body, Head, and
Members conjunctly: but if we speak divisim, then the good of the Society is
the Ultime end: and next to that, as conducent to that, the Governors Greatness
and Prerogative. And herein also accords Dr. Fern with us. Sect. 3. Where he
says, That the people are the end of the governing Power. There is another
question of mainer concernment, here in our general discourse of Authority
fitly to be handled. viz. How far subjection is due to it? but because it
has a great dependence on the kinds and States of Power, and cannot be so well
conceived without the Precognition thereof: I will refer it to after
opportunities.

For the division of this Power of Magistracy. It cannot Division of
Magistracy.
for it is one simple thing an indivisible bcame of Divine Perfection; yet for
our more distinct conceaving thereof. Men have framed several distinctions of
it. So with respect of its measure, it is absolute or limited: In respect of
its manner. It is as St. Peter divides it, Supreme, or Subordinate. In respect
of its Mean of acquiring it is Elective, or successive; for I conceive that of
Conquest, and Prescription of usuage are reducible to one of these, as will
appear afterward. In respect of its degrees it is Nomotheticall or
Architectonicall and Gubernative or Executive. And in respect of the subject of
its residence there is an ancient and usual distinction of it into
Monarchical, Aristocraticall and Democraticall. These either simple or mixed of
two, or all three together, of which the Predominant gives the denomination.
These are not accurate specificative, Divisions of Power, for it admits none
such, but partitions of it according to diverse respects. The course of my
intention directs me to speak only of Monarchical Power, which is the chief
and most usual form of Government in the world; The other two being apt to
resolve into this, but this not so apt to dissolve into them.

CHAP. II. Of the Division of Monarchy into absolute and limited.
Monarchical Power.

First, of the distinction of Monarchy into Absolute and Limited. Absolute
Monarchy is when the Sovereignty is so fully in one, that it has no Limits or
Bounds under God, but his own Will. It is when a people are absolutely
resigned up or resign up themselves to be governed by the will of one man.
Such were the ancient Eastern Monarchies, and that of the Persian and Turk at
this day, as far as we know. This is a lawful Government and therefore where
men put themselves into this utmost degree of subjection by Oath and Contract,
Whether absolute Monarchy be a lawful government.
or are borne and brought unto it by Gods Providence, it binds them and they
must abide it* because an Oath to a lawful thing is Obligatory. This in
Scripture is very evident as Ezekiel. 17 16.18.19. Where Judgment is denounced
against the King of Judah for breaking the Oath made to the King of Babylon;
and it is called Gods Oath, yet doubtless this was an Oath of absolute
subjection. And Romans 13. the power which then was, was absolute; yet the
Apostle not excluding it; calls it Gods ordinance, and commands subjection to
it: so Christ commands tribute to be paid, and pays it himself; yet it was an
arbitrary tax, the production of an absolute power. Also the sovereignty of
masters over servants was absolute, and the same in Economy as absolute
Monarchy is in policy, yet the Apostle enjoynes not masters called to
Christianity to renounce that title as too great and rigid to be kept but
exhorts them to moderation in the exercise of it; and servants to remain
contented in the condition of their servitude. More might be said to legitimate
this kind of government, but it needs not in so plain a case.

This absolute Monarchy has three degrees, yet all within Three degrees of
absoluteness.
whose will is the peoples Law, does set himself no stated Rule or Law to rule
by, but by immediate Edicts and commands of his own will governes them, as in
his own and Councels judgment he thinks fit. Secondly, when he sets down a
Rule and Law by which he will ordinarily govern, reserving to himself liberty
to vary from it, wherein, and as often as in his discretion he judges fit: and in
this the Sovereign is as free as the former, only the people are at a more
certainty what he expects from them in ordinary. Thirdly, when he not only
sets down an express Rule and Law to govern by, but also promises and
engages himself in many cases not to alter that rule: but this engagement is an
after condescent and act of grace, not dissolving the absolute oath of
subjection, which went before it, nor is intended to be the rule of his power,
but of the exercise of it. This Ruler is not so absolute as the former in the
use of his power, for he has put a bond on that, which he cannot break
without breach of promise; that is, without sin: but he is as absolute in his
power, if he will sinfully put it forth into act, it has no politic bounds,
for the people still owe him absolute subjection, that not being dissolved or
lessened by an act of grace coming afterward.

Whether resistance be lawful in absolute Monarchy.
and, Whether any resistance be lawful, is a question which here must be
decided. For the due effecting whereof, we must premise some needful
distinctions to avoid confusion. Obedience is twofold; first, Positive and
active, when in conscience of an authority we do the thing commanded:
secondly, Negative and passive, when though we answer not Authority by doing,
yet we do it by contented undergoing the penalty imposed. Proportionably
resistance is twofold: first, Positive, by an opposing of force: secondly,
Negative, when only so much is done as may defend our selves from force,
without return of force against the Assailant. Now this negative resistance is
also twofold: first, In inferior and sufferable cases: secondly, or in the
supreme case and last necessity of life and death: and then too it is first,
either of particular person or persons; secondly, or of the whole community.
And if of particular persons, then either under plea and pretense of equity
assaulted; or else without any plea at all, merely for will and pleasure sake:
for to that degree of rage and cruelty sometimes the heart of man is given
over. All these are very distinguishable cases, and will be of use either in
this or the ensuing disputes.



It is better to obey God then men: For the Law of the inferior gives place to
the superior. In things defined by God, it should be all one with us for the
Magistrate to command us to transgress that, as to command us an
impossibility; and impossibilities fall under no Law. But on this ground no man
must quarrel with Authority, or reject its commands as unlawful, unless
there be an open unlawfulness in the face of the act commanded. For if the
unlawfulness be hidden in the ground or reason of the action, inferiors must
not be curious to enquire into the grounds or reasons of the commands of
superiors; for such license of enquiry would often frustrate great
undertakings, which much depend on speed and secrecy of execution. I speak all
this of absolute government, where the will and reason of the Monarch is made
the higher power, and its expression the supreme Law of a State.

Thirdly, suppose an absolute Monarch should so degenerate David did so in his
particular case, when pursued by Saul: he made negative resistance by flight,
and doubtless he intended positive resistance against any instrument, if the
negative would not have served the turn: else why did he so strengthen
himself by Forces? sure not to make positive resistance, and lay violent hands
upon the Person of the Lords Anointed, as it appeared; yet for some reason he
did it doubtless, which could be none other, but by that force of Arms to
defend himself against the violence of any mis-imployed inferior hands. If
then he might do it for his particular safety, much rather may it be done for
the public. 2. Such an act is without the compass of any the most absolute
Potentate; and therefore to resist in it, can be to resist no power, nor the
violation of any due of subjection. For, first, the most submisse subjection
ever intended by any community, when they put themselves under another power,
was the command of a reasonable will and power; but to will and command the
destruction of the whole body over which a power is placed, were an act of will
most unreasonable and self-destructive, and so not the act of such a will, to
which subjection was intended by any reasonable creatures. Secondly the public
good and being is armed at in the utmost bond of subjection; for in the
constitution of such unlimited sovereignty, though every particular man's good
and being is subjected to the will of One supreme yet certainly the
conservation of the whole Public was intended by it; which being invaded; the
intent of the constitution is overthrown and an act is done which can be
supposed to be within the compass of no political power: So that did Nero as
it was reported of him in his immanity thirst for the destruction of whole
Rome; and if he were truly what the Senate pronounced him to be, Humani generis
hostis, then it might justify a negative resistance of his person; and a
positive, of any Agent should be set on so inhumane a service. And the united
Provinces are allowed in resisting Philip 2d. though he had bin their absolute
Monarch, if he resolved the extirpation of the whole people, and the planting
the country with Spaniards, as it is reported he did. And that assertion of
some, that All resistance is against the Apostles prohibition. Resistance by
power of Arms is utterly unlawful, cannot be justified in such a latitude.
But of this more will be spoken in the current of this discourse.

David, and the rescuing of Jonathan from the causlesse cruel intent of his
Fathers putting him to death. As also such an act of will carrying no color of
reason with it, cannot be esteemed the act of a rational will, and so no will
intended to be the Law of Sovereignty. Not that I think a Monarch of such
absoluteness is bound to yield a reason why he commands any man to be put to
death, before his command be obeyed; but I conceive the person so commanded to
death may be justified before God and men for protecting himself by escape,
or otherwise, unless some reason or cause be made known to him of such
command.

Fifthly, Persons subject to an unlimited dominion must Pet. 2.18, 19 20. if
well doing be mistaken by the reason and judgment of the power for ill doing,
and we be punished for it, yet the Magistrate going according to his misguided
reason it is the command of a reasonable will, and so to be submitted to;
because such a one suffers by Law, in a State where the Lords will is the Law.
Secondly, In commands of the power where is the plea of reason and equity on
the part of the commander, whether it be such indeed, some power must judge,
but the constitution of absolute Monarchy resolves all judgment into the will
of the Monarch, as the supreme Law: so that if his will judicially censure it
just it must be yielded to as if it were just without repeal or redressement
by any created power. And let none complain of this as a hard condition, when
they or their Ancestors have subjected themselves to such a power by oath, or
political contract: If it be Gods ordinance to such, it must be subjected to
and its exorbitances born, as he says in Tac^tu^, as men bear famine,
pestilence, and other effects of Gods displeasure.

Sixthly in absolute Monarchy the person of the Monarch Saul or David. In such
a State all lawful power is below him, so that he is incapable of any penal
hand which must be from a superior, or it is unjust. I have bin the longer on
this absolute Monarchy, because though it does not concern us, yet it will
give light to the stating of doubts in governments of a more restrained nature:
for what is true here in the full extent of power, is there also as true within
the compass of their power.

What makes a Monarchy limited?
What it is which constitutes it in the state of a limited Monarchy.

First, A Monarchy may be stinted in the exercise of its

ab externo, not from the free determination of his own will. And now Kings
have not divine words and binding Laws to constitute them in their
Sovereignty, but derive it from ordinary providence, the sole mean hereof is
the consent and fundamental contract of a Nation of men, which consent puts
them in their power, which can be no more nor other then is conveyed to them by
such contract of subjection, This is the root of all sovereignty individuated
and existent in this or that person or family; till this come and lift him up
he is a private man, not differing in state from the rest of his brethren; but
then he becomes another man, his person is sacred by that sovereignty conveyed
to it, which is Gods ordinance and image. The truth hereof will be more fully
discovered, when we come to speak of Elective and Successive Monarchy.

comes thus to be legal, or defined to a rule of Law, either by original
constitution, or by after-condescent. By original constitution, when the
society public conferres on one man a power by limited contract, resigning
themselves to his government by such a Law, reserving to themselves such
immunities: In this case, they which at first had power over themselves, had
power to set their own terms of subjection; and he which has no title of
power over them but by their act, can de jure have no greater then what is put
over to him by that act By after-condescent, viz. when a Lord, who by conquest,
or other right, has an absolute arbitrary power; but not liking to hold by
such a right, does either formally or virtually desert it, and take a new
legal right as judging it more safe for him to hold by, and desirable of the
people to be governed by. This is equivalent to that by original constitution;
yea, is all one with it: for this is in that respect a secondary original
constitution. But if it be objected, that this being a voluntary condescent is
an act of grace, and so does not derogate from his former absoluteness as was
said before of an absolute Monarch, who confines himself to govern by one
rule; I answer. This differs essentially from that: for there, a free Lord, of
grace yields to rule by such a Law, reserving the fullness of power, and still
requiring of the people a bond and oath of utmost indefinite subjection; so
that it amounts not to a limitation of radical power: whereas here is a change
of title, and a resolution to be subjected to, in no other way, then according
to such a frame of government; and accordingly no other bond or oath of
allegiance is required, or taken, then according to such a Law: this amounts to
a limitation of radical power. And therefore they speak too generally, who
affirm of all acts of grace proceeding from Princes to people, as if they did
not limit absoluteness: It Is true of acts of grace of that first kind; but
yet you see, an act of grace may be such a one, as may amount to a resignation
of that absoluteness into a more mild and moderate power unless we should
hold it out of the power of an absolute Lord to be other; or that by free
condescent, and act of grace, a man cannot as well part with, or exchange his
right and title to a thing, as define himself in the use and exercise; which I
think none will affirm.



How far subject o^ is due in a limited Monarchy?
First, How far subjection is due? As far as they are Gods Ordinance, as
far as they are a power and they are a power as far as the Contract
fundamental from which under God their authority is derived does extend. As
absolute Lords must be obeyed as far as their Will enjoynes, because their
Will is the measure of their Power, and their subjects Law: so these in the
utmost extent of the Law of the Land, which is the measure of their power, and
their subjects duty of obedience. I say so far, but I do not say no further:
for I believe, though on our former grounds it clearly follows that such
Authority transcends its bounds if it command beyond the Law: and the Subject
legally is not bound to subjection in such case, yet in Conscience a Subject is
bound to yield to the Magistrate, even when he cannot de jure, challenge
obedience, to prevent scandal or any occasion of slighting the power which may
sometimes grow, even upon a just refusal: I say, for these causes a subject
ought not to use his liberty, but morem gerere, if it be in a thing in which he
can possibly without subversion, and in which his act may not be made a leading
case, and so bring on a prescription against public Liberty.

How far it is Lawful to resist
Secondly, how far it is lawful to resist the exorbitant Illegal Commands of
such a Monarch? 1. As before in lighter cases, in which it may be done, for the
reasons alleged, de jure recedere.

viz. By appeal to Law, by Concealment, by Flight, is lawful to be made,
because such a Command is politically powerles, it proceeds not from Gods
Ordinance in him: and so we sin not against Gods Ordinance in such
Non-submission, or Negative resistance.

3. For Instruments or Agents in such commands, if the

4. For the person of the Sovereign, I conceive it, as well Quicquia efficit
tale est magis tale. I answer, That rule even in natural causes is liable to
abundance of restrictions: And in the particular in hand it holds not. Where
the cause does bereave himself of that perfection by which it works, in the
very act of causing, and convey it to that effect, It does not remain more such
then the effect, but much less, and below it, as if I convey an estate of Land
to another, it does not hold that after such conveyance I have a better Estate
remaining in me then that other, but rather the contrary; because what was in
one is passed to the other: The Servant who at the year of Iubile would not go
out free, but have his ear boared, and given his Master a full Lordship over
him: can we argue, that he had afterward more power over himself then his
Master, because he gave his Master that power over him, by that act of
Oeconomicall Contract. Thus the Community whose consent establishes a Power
over them cannot be said universally to have an eminency of Power above that
which they constitute; sometimes they have, sometimes they have not: and to
judge when they have, when not respect must be had to the Origiginall Contract
and Fundamental Constitution of that State, if they have constituted a
Monarchy, that is, invested one man with the Sovereignty of Power, and
subjected all the rest to him; Then it were unreasonable to say, they yet have
it in themselves; Or have a power of recalling that Supremacy which by Oath
and Contract they themselves transferred on another: Unles we make this Oath
and Contract less binding then private ones, dissoluble at pleasure, and so
all Monarchs Tenants at will from their people. But if they in such
Constitution reserve a power in the body to oppose and displace the Magistrate
for exorbitancies, and reserve to themselves a Tribunal to try him in, that
man is not a Monarch but the Officer and Substitute of him or them to whom such
Power over him is reserved or conferred. The Issue is this, If he be a Monarch
he has the Apex or Culmen Potestatis, and all his Subjects divisim and
conjunction, are below him: They have divested themselves of all superiority
and no Power left for a Positive Opposition of the Person of him whom they have
invested.

Who shall be the Judge of the excesses of the Monarch?
I answer, A frame of Government cannot be imagined of that perfection but that
some inconveniences there will be possible for which there can be provided no
remedy: Many miseries to which a people under an absolute Monarchy are liable
are prevented by this Legal Allay and definement of Power. But this is exposed
to one defect from which that is free, that is an impossibility of constituting
a Judge to determine this last controversy, viz. the Sovereigns transgressing
his fundamental limits. This Judge must be either some Forraigner, and then ^e
lose the freedom of the State, by subjecting it to an external power in the
greatest case: or else within the body: If so then 1. either the Monarch
himself, and then you destroy the frame of the State, and make it absolute;
for to define a Power to a Law, and then to make him Judge of his Deviations
from that Law, is to absolve him from all Law. Or else 2. the Community and
their Deputies must have this power: and then, as before, you put the apex
Potestatis, the prime (...) in the whole body, or a part of it, and destroy the
being of Monarchy: The Ruler not being Gods immediate Minister but of that
Power, be it where it will to which he is accomptable for his actions. So that
I conceive in a limited legal Monarchy, there can be no stated internal Judge
of the Monarchs actions, if there grow a fundamental Variance betwixt him and
the Community. But you will say, It is all one way to absoluteness to assign
him no Judge as to make him his own Judge. Answ. I say not simply in this case
there is no Judge: But that there can be no Judge legal and constituted within
that frame of Government: but it is a transcendent case beyond the provision of
that Government, and must have an extraordinary Judge, and way of devision.

In this great and difficult case, I will deliver my apprehensions freely and
clearly, submitting them to the censure of better Judgments. Suppose the
controversy to happen in a Government fundamentally legal, and the people no
further subjected then to Government by such a Law.

1. If the act in which the exorbitance and transgression

2. If it be mortal and such as suffered, dissolves the frame illegality and
destructive nature is to be set open and redresment sought by Petition; which
if failing, Prevention by resistance ought to be. But first that it is such
must be made apparent; and if it be apparent, and an Appeal made ad
conscientiam generis humani, especially of those of that Community, then the
fundamental Laws of that Monarchy must judge and pronounce the sentence in
every man's conscience; and every man (as far as concerns him) must follow
the evidence of Truth in his own soul, to oppose, or not oppose, according as
he can in conscience acquit or condemn the act of carriage of the Governor.
For I conceive in a Case which transcends the frame and provision of the
Government they are bound to. People are unbound, and in state as if they had
no Government; and the superior Law of Reason and Conscience must be Judge:
wherein every one must proceed with the utmost advice and impartiality: For if
he err in judgment he either resists Gods Ordinance, or puts his hand to
the subversion of the State and Policy he lives in.

And this power of judging argues not a superiority in those who Judge, over
him who is Judged for it is not Authoritative and Civil, but moral, residing
in reasonable Creatures and lawful for them to execute, because never divested
and put off by any act in the constitution of a legal Government, but rather
the reservation of it intended: For when they define the Superior to a Law,
and constitute no Power to Judge of his Excesses from that Law, it is evident
they reserve to themselves, not a Formal Authoritative Power, but a moral
Power, such as they had originally before the Constitution of the Government;
which must needs remain, being not conveyed away in the Constitution.

CHAP. III. Of the division of Monarchy into Elective and Successive.
THe second division of Monarchy, which I intend to Elective and successive
Monarchy what they are?
Elective Monarchy is that, where by the fundamental constitution of the
State, the supreme power is conveyed but to the person of him whom they take
for their Prince; the people reserving to themselves power, by men deputed by
the same constitution to elect a new person on the decease of the former.
Successive is, where by the fundamental constitution of the State, the
Sovereignty is conferred on one Prince; and in that one, as a root and
beginning to his heirs, after a form and line of succession, constituted also
by the fundamentals of that Government. In the first, the Peoples oath and
contract of subjection extends but to one person: In the other, to the whole
Race and Line of Successors; which continuing, the bond of subjection
continues; or which failing, the people return to their first liberty, of
choosing a new person, or succession to be invested with Sovereignty.

I do conceive that in the first original all Monarchy, yea All Monarchy
whether originally from consent?
is elective: that is, is constituted, and draws its force and right from the
consent and choice of that Community over which it swayeth. And that triple
distinction of Monarchy in o that which is gotten by Conquest, Prescription, or
Choice is, not of distinct parts unless by Choice be meant full and formal
Choice: my reason is, because man being a voluntary agent and subjection being
a moral act, it does essentially depend on consent: so that a man may by force
and extremity be brought under the power of another, as unreasonable creatures
are, to be disposed of, and trampled on, whether they will or no: But a bond of
subjection cannot be put on him, nor a right to claim Obedience and Service
acquired, unless a man become bound by some act of his own Will. For, suppose
another, from whom I am originally free, be stronger then I, and so bring me
under his mercy do I therefore sin if I do not what he commands me? or can
that act of violence pass into a moral title, without a moral principle?

Monarchy by divine institution.
I will begin with that of divine institution. Saul and David were by the
Sacrament of anointing designed to the Kingdom, as it were by Gods own hand,
which notwithstanding, they were not actually Kings till the Peoples consent
established them therein: That unction was a manifestation of the appointment
of God, and when it was made known to the People, I think it had the power of
Precept, to restrain the Peoples choice to that person; which if they had not
done, they had resisted Gods ordinance. Yet they were not thereby actually
endowed with Kingly power, but remained as private men, till the Peoples choice
put them in actual possession of that Power, which in David was not till after
many years.

Monarchy by prescription.
it was by virtue of an Universal consent by that Usuage and Prescription
proved and employed: For in a Popular state, where one Man in the Community, by
reason of great estate, Wisdom, or other Perfection is in the eye of all the
rest, all reverence him, and his advice they follow: and the respect continues
from the People to the house and family, for diverse generations. In this case,
subjection at first is arbitrary in the people; and if in time it become
necessary, it is because their Custom is their Law; and its long continuance
is equivalent to a formal Election: so that this Tenure and Right if it be
good and more then at pleasure, as it was at first, the considerate must needs
ascribe it to a consent, and implicit choice of the People.

But the mayn Question is concerning Monarchy archieved Monarchy by conquest.
where at first sight the Right seems gotten by the Sword, without the consent
and Choice of the People, yea against it. Conquest is either 1. Total where a
full Conquest is made, by a total subduing a people to the Will of the Victor:
or 2. Partial, where an entrance is made by the Sword: But the People either
because of the Right claymed by the Invader; or their unwillingnesse to suffer
the Miseries of War, or their apparent inability to stand out in a way of
Resistance, or some other consideration, submit to a composition and contract
of subjection to the Invader. In this latter it is evident, the Sovereigns
Power is from the Peoples consent; and the Government is such as the Contract
and fundamental agreement makes it to be if it be the first Agreement, and the
pretender has no former Title which remains in force, for then this latter is
invalid, if it include not and amount to a relinquishing and disanulling of the
Old. But the difficulty is concerning a full and mere Conquest; and of this I
will speak my mind clearly. Such a War and Invasion of a People, which ends
in a Conquest, 1. it is either upon the pretense or claim of a Title of
Sovereignty over the People invaded: and then, if the pretender prevail, it is
properly no Conquest, but the vindication of a Title by force of Arms. And the
Government is not Original, but such as the Title is by which he claymes it.
2. Or it is by One who has no challenge of Right descending to him to justify
his claim and Invasion of a People: Then if he subdue, he may properly be said
to come to his Government by Conquest.

And there be who wholly condemn this title of Conquest as unlawful, Whether
conquest give a just title?
and take it for nothing else but a National and public robbery: so one of
the Answerers to Doctor Fern, says in his p. 10. Conquest may give such a
right as Plunderers use to take in houses they can master. -- It is inhumane to
talk of right of Conquest in a Civil, in a Christian State. But I cannot
allow of so indefinite a Censure: rather I think the right of Conquest is such
as the precedent War was: if that were lawful, so is the Conquest: For a
Prince may be invaded, or so far injured by a neighbor People, or they may
be set on such a pernicious enmity against him and his people, that the safety
of himself and people may compel to such a War, which war if it end in
Conquest, who can judge such Title unlawful? Suppose then Conquest may be a
lawful way of acquisition: yet an immediate cause of right of Sovereignty;
that is, of a Civil power of Government to which obedience is due, it cannot
be: I say, an immediate cause, for a remote impulsive cause it often is, but not
an immediate formal cause; for that must ever be the consent of the people,
whereby they accept of, and resign up themselves to a Government, and then
their Persons are morally bound, and not before. Thus far the force of conquest
may go; it may give a man title over, and power to possess and dispose of the
Country and Goods of the Conquered; yea, the Bodies and lives of the Conquered
are at the Will and Pleasure of the Conqueror: But it still is at the Peoples
choice to come into a moral condition of subjection or not. When they are thus
at the mercy of the Victor, if to save life they consent to a condition of
servitude or subjection, then that consent, oath, or covenant, which they in
that extremity make, being in relicita, binds them, and they owe moral Duty.
But if they would rather suffer the utmost violence of the Conqueror, and will
consent to no terms of subjection as Numantia in Spain, and many other People
have resolved; they die or remain a free People. Be they captived or possessed
at pleasure, they owe no duty, neither do they sin in not obeying; nor do
they resist Gods ordinance, if at any time of advantage they use force to free
themselves from such a violent possession: yea perhaps, if before by contract
they were bound to another, they should sin if to avoid death or bondage they
should swear or covenant fealty to a Conqueror, and it were more noble and
laudable to die in the service, and for the faith to their natural Sovereign.
Thus I am persuaded it will appear an uncontrolable truth in Policy, that the
consent of the People, either by themselves or their Ancestors is the only mean
in ordinary providence by which sovereignty is conferred on any Person or
Family: neither can Gods ordinance be conveyed and People engaged in conscience
by any other means.

It has been affirmed by some, that mixture and limitation Whether a Monarch
by succession may not be limited?
as if where ever Sovereignty is entailed to a succession, it must needs be
absolute: But I must profess I cannot see how it can stand with truth: Rather
I think, that both Elective and Hereditary Monarchy are indifferently capable
of absoluteness or limitation. If a free, and not pre-ingaged People to any
Government, by public compact yield up themselves to a Person, to be commanded
by his Will as their supreme Law, during his natural life, and no longer, can
it be denied but that he is an absolute, and yet Elective Monarch? unless you
will say, he is not absolute, because he cannot by his Will, as by a Law, bind
them to elect his son to succeed him, and change their Government into
hereditary. But his being limited in this Clause does not disparage his
Sovereignty, or make his power of Government limited, because this belongs not
to present Government, but is a mere provision for the future. Again, if the
power of Ruling according to a Law, be by consent conveyed to one Person, and
his heirs to succeed after him, how this should come to be absolute and the
entailement should overthrow the constitution, I cannot imagine: If the whole
latitude of power may be by a People made hereditary sure a proportion may as
well; unless the limitation be such as includes a repugnancy to be perpetual.
Indeed this enstating of a succession makes that power irrevocable, during the
continuance of that succession but it makes it neither greater nor less in the
Successor then was in his Progenitors, from whom he derives it.

In a successive Monarchy the Successor holds by the original Right of him who
is the root of succession; and is de jure King the immediate instant after his
Predecessors decease: Also the people are bound (...) him, though they never
take any Oath to his person. For as he commands in virtue of the original
Right, so they are bound to obey by virtue of the original Covenant, and
national Contract of Subjection: the new oath taken either by King or People,
is but a reviving of the old; that the Conscience of it by renewing might be
the more fresh and vigorous: it neither gives any new power, nor adds or
detracts from the old, unless by common agreement an alteration be made; and
so the foundation in that clause is new, which cannot be without the consent of
both parties.

CHAP. IIII. Of the Division of Monarchy into Simple and Mixed.
Simple and mixed Monarchy, what?
that all the rest is by deputation from him: so that there is no authority in
the whole Body but his, or derived from him: And that One is either
individually one Person, and then it is a simple Monarchy: Or one associate
Body, chosen either out of the Nobility, whence the Government is called a
simple Aristocraty: or out of the Community, without respect of birth or state,
which is termed a simple Democracy. The supreme authority residing exclusively
in one of these three, denominates the Government simple, which ever it be.

Now experience teaching People, that several inconveniences are in each of
these, which is avoided by the other: as aptness to Tyranny in simple
Monarchy: aptness to destructive Factions in an Aristocracy: and aptness to
Confusion and Tumult in a Democracy. As on the contrary, each of them has some
good which the others want, viz. Unity and strength in a Monarchy; Counsel and
Wisdom in an Aristocracy; Liberty and respect of Common good in a Democracy.
Hence the wisdom of men deeply seen in State matters guided them to frame a
mixture of all three, uniting them into one Form, that so the good of all
might be enjoyed, and the evil of them avoided. And this mixture is either
equal, when the highest command in a State by the first Constitution of it is
equally seated in all three; and then (if firm Union can be in a mixture of
Equality) it can be called by the name of neither of them but by the general
style of a Mixed State: or if there be priority of Order in one of the three,
(as I think there must be or else there can be no Unity) it may take the name
of that which has the precedence. But the firmer Union is, where one of the
three is predominant and in that regard gives the denomination to the whole: So
we call it a Mixed Monarchy, where the primity of share in the supreme power is
in one.

Now I conceive to the constituting of Mixed Monarchy What it is which
constitutes a mixed Monarchy?
)

1. The Sovereign power must be originally in all three, viz. If the
composition be of all three so that one must not hold his power from the other,
but all equally from the fundamental

2. A full equality must not be in the three estates, though

3. A power then must be sought wherewith the Monarch mixture; nor so titular
as to destroy the Monarchy; which I conceive maybe in these particulars.

1. If he be the head and Fountain of the power which governs and executes the
established Laws, so that both the other States as well conjunctim as divisim,
be his sworn subjects, and owe obedience to his commands, which are according
to established Laws.

2. If he has a sole or chief power in capacitating and putting those persons
or societies in such States and conditions, as whereunto such Supreme power by
the foundations of the Government does belong, and is annexed: so that though
the Aristocratical and Democraticall power which is conjoined to his, be not
from him: yet the definement and determination of it to such persons is from
him, by a necessary consecution.

3. If the power of convocating or causing to be put in existence, and
dissolving such a Court or Meeting of the two other estates as is
authoritative, be in him.

4. If his authority be the last and greatest, though not the sole, which must
establish and add a consummatum to every Act. I say these, or any of these put
into one person makes that State Monarchical, because the other, though they
depend not on him quoad essentiam et actus formales, but on the prime
constitution of the Government, yet quoad existentiam et determinationem ad
subjecta, they do.

The Supreme power being either the Legislative or the Gubernative. In a mixed
Monarchy sometimes the mixture is the seat of the Legislative power, which is
the chief of the two: The power of constituting officers for governing by
those Laws being left to the Monarch: Or else the Primacie of both these
powers is jointly in all three: For if the Legislative be in one, then the
Monarchy is not mixed but simple, for that is the Superior, if that be in one,
all else must needs be so too: By Legislative, I mean the power of making new
Laws, if any new be needful to be added to the foundation: and the Authentic
power of interpreting the old; For I take it, this is a branch of the
Legislative and is as great, and in effect the same power.

Every mixed Monarchy is limited: but it is not necessary

Now concerning the extent of the Princes power, and the How far the Princes
power extends in a mixed Monarchy?
almost the same is to be said, which was before in a limited: for it is a
general rule in this matter: such as the Constitution of Government is, such
is the Ordinance of God: such as the Ordinance is, such must our duty of
subjection be. No Power can challenge an obedience beyond its own measure; for
if it might, we should destroy all Rules and differences of Government, and
make all absolute and at pleasure. In every mixed Principality.

First, Look what Power is solely entrusted and committed

Secondly, those acts belonging to the power which is stated in the production
of Acts belonging to that power, which is committed in common to them: Else
suppose those Acts valid which are done by any major part, that is, any two of
the three, then you put it in the power of any two, by a confederacy at
pleasure to disanull the third, or suspend all its Acts, and make it a bare
Cipher in Government.



de jure exempt from any penal hand.

ipso facto overthrow the Frame, and turn it into absoluteness: So that if
one of these, or two, say their power is invaded, and the Government assaulted
by the other, the Accused denying it, it does become a controversy: of this
question there is no legal Judge, it is a case beyond the possible provision
of such a Government. The Accusing side must make it evident to every man's
Conscience. In this case, which is beyond the Government, the Appeal must be
to the Community, as if there were no Government; and as by Evidence men's
Consciences are convinced, they are bound to give their utmost assistance. For
the intention of the Frame in such States, justifies the exercise of any power,
conducing to the safety of the Universality and Government established.

PART II. Of this particular MONARCHY.
CHAP. I. Whether the Power wherewith our Kings are invested, be an Absolute,
or Limited and Moderated Power?


Concerning the Essential Composure of this Government, that it is
Monarchical, is by none to be questioned: but the enquiry must be about the
Frame of it. And so there are seven great questions to be prosecuted.

Quest. 1. stated.
First, whether it be a Limited Monarchy, or Absolute? Here the question is not
concerning Power in the Exercise, but the Root and being of it: for none will
deny but that the way of Government used, and to be used in this Realm, is a
designed way: Only some speak as if this Definement were an act of Grace from
the Monarchs themselves, being pleased at the suit, and for the good of the
People, to let their power run into act through such a course and current of
Law: whereas, if they at any time shall think fit on great causes to vary from
that way, and use the full extent of their power, none ought to contradict, or
refuse to obey. Neither is it the question, Whether they sin against God if
they abuse their power, and run out into acts of injury at pleasure, and
violate those Laws which they have by Public Faith and Oath promised to
observe; for none will deny this to be true, even in the most absolute Monarch
in the world. But the point controverted is punctually this, Whether the
Authority which is inherent in our Kings be boundless and absolute, or limited
and determined, so that the acts which they do, or command to be done without
that compass and bounds, be not only sinful in themselves, but invalid and
non-authoritative to others?

Now for the determining hereof, I conceive and am in Assert.
that the Sovereignty of our Kings is radically and fundamentally limited, and
not only in the Use and Exercise of it: And am persuaded so on these grounds
and Reasons.

First, Because the Kings Majesty himself, who best Declar from Newmarket
Mart. 9. 1641
the Law is the measure of his power: which is as full a concession of the
thing as words can express. If it be the measure of it, then his power is
limited by it; for the measure is the limits and bounds of the thing limited.
And in his Answer to both the Houses concerning the Militia, speaking of the
men named to him, says, If more power shall be thought fit to be granted to
them, then by Law is in the Crown it self, His Majesty holds it reasonable,
that the same be by some Law first vested in him, with power to transfer it
to the these persons, etc. In which passage it is granted that the Powers of
the Crown are by Law, and that the King has no more then are vested in him by
Law.



Liege, that is, Legal Sovereign; and we his Liege that is, his Legal
Subjects: what do these names argue, but that his Sovereignty and our
subjection is legal that is, restrained by Law?

Prescription were sufficient: In all ages, beyond record, the Laws and
Customs of the Kingdom have been the Rule of Government; Liberties have been
stood upon, and Grants thereof, with limitations of Royal power, made and
acknowledged by Magna Charta, and other public and solemn acts; and no
Obedience acknowledged to be due but that which is according to Law, nor
claimed but under some pretext and title of Law.



Pleaders for defensive arms Sect. 2. and 4.
Some there be which have lately written on this subject, who take another way
to prove our Government limited by Law, viz. by denying all absolute Government
to be lawful; affirming that Absolute Monarchy is not at all Gods Ordinance,
and so no lawful power secured from resistance. What is their ground for this?
God allows no man to rule as he list, nor puts men's lives in the pleasure of
the Monarch: It is a power arbitrary and injurious. But I desire those Authors
to consider, that in absolute Monarchy there is not a resignation of men to any
Will or list, but to the reasonable Will of the Monarch, which having the Law
of reason to direct it, is kept from injurious acts. But see for defense of
this Government, Part 1. cap. 2.

Having set down those Reasons on which my Judgment Absoluteness of
Monarchical Power in this Land; and pressed Obedience on the Consciences of
People in the utmost extremity, which can be due in the most absolute Monarchy
in the world; but I seldom or never heard or read them make any difference of
Powers, but usually bring their proofs from those Scriptures, where subjection
is commanded to the higher Powers, and all resistance of them forbidden and
from Examples taken out of the manner of the government of Israel and Judah: as
if any were so impious to contradict those truths, and they were not as well
obeyed in Limited Government as in Absolute; or as if Examples taken out of one
Government do always hold in another, unless their aim were to deny all
distinction of Governments, and to hold all absolute, who have any where the
supreme power conveyed to them.

Among these, I wonder most at that late discourse of Dr. Fern, who in my
Judgment avoucheth things inconsistent, and evidently contradictory one to the
other: For in his Preface he acknowledges our Obedience to be limited and
circumscribed by the Laws of the Land, and accordingly to be yielded or denied
to the higher Power; and that he is as much against an absolute Power in the
King and to raise him to an arbitrary way of Government, as against resistance
on the Subjests part: also, that his power is limited by Law, Sect. 5. Yet on
the other side he affirms, That the King holds his Crown by conquest; that it
is descended to him by three Conquests, Sect. 2. that we even our Senate of
Parliament has not so much plea for resistance as the ancient Roman Senate
had under the Roman Emperors, whose power we know was absolute, Sect, 2. that
in Monarchy the judgment of many is reduced to one: that Monarchy settles the
chief power and final Judgment in one, Sect. 5 what is this but to confess
him limited: and yet to maintain him absolute?

Arguments on the contrary dissolved.
But let us come to the Arguments. First, say they, our Kings came to their
right by Conquest; yea, says the Dr. by three Conquests: He means the Saxons,
Danes, and Normans, as appears afterward: Therefore their right is absolute.
Here, that they may advance themselves, they care not though it be on the ruin
of public liberty, by bringing a whole Nation into the condition of conquered
slaves: But to the Argument. 1. Suppose the Antecedent true, the Consequution
is not always true; for as is evident before in the first Part. All Conquest
does not put the Conqueror into an absolute right. He may come to a right by
Conquest: but not sole Conquest; but a partial, occasioning a Right by final
Agreement; and then the right is specificated by that fundamental agreement:
Also he may by sword prosecute a claim of another nature: and in his war
intend only an acquiring of that claimed right, and after conquest rest in
that: Yea farther, he may win a Kingdom merely by the Sword and enter on it by
right of Conquest: yet considering that right of conquest has too much of
force in it to be safe and permanent; he may think conquest the best mean of
getting a Kingdom, but not of holding, and in wisdom for himself and
posterity, gain the affections of the people by deserting that Title, and
taking a new by Politic agreement, or descend from that right by fundamental
grants of liberties to the people, and limitations to his own power: but these
things I said in effect before, in the first part, only here I have recalled
them, to show what a non sequitur there is in the Argument. But that which I
chiefly intend, is to show the infirmity or falsehood of the Antecedent: it is
an Assertion most untrue in it self; and pernicious to the State: Our Princes
profess no other way of coming to the Crown, but by right of succession to
rule free subjects in a legal Monarchy. All the little show of proof these
Assertors have, is from the root of succession: So William commonly called the
Conqueror. For that of the Saxons was an expulsion not a Conquest, for as our
Histories record, They coming into the Kingdom drove out the Britains, and
by degrees planted themselves under their Commanders; and no doubt continued
the freedom they had in Germany: unles we should think that by conquering
they lost their own Liberties to the Kings for whom they conquered and expelled
the British into Wales. Rather I conceive, the Original of the subjects
liberty was by those our forefathers brought out of Germany: Where, as
Tacitus reports, Tacit. de Morib. German. Sect. 3. and 5.
nec Regibus infinita aut libera potestas: Their Kings had no absolute but
limited power: and all weighty matters were dispatched by general meetings of
all the Estates. Who sees not here the antiquity of our Liberties and frame of
Government? so they were governed in Germany, and so here to this day, for by
transplanting themselves, they changed their soil; not their manners and
Government: Then, that of the Danes was indeed a violent Conquest; and, as all
violent rules, it lasted not long; when the English expelled them they
recovered their Country and Liberties together. Thus it is clear, the English
Liberty remained to them till the Norman Invasion, notwithstanding that Danish
interruption. Now for Duke William, I know nothing they have in him but the
bare style of Conqueror, which seems to make for them: The very truth is, and
every intelligent reader of the History of those times will attest it, that
Duke William pretended the grant and gift of King Edward who died without
children and he came with forces into this Kingdom, not to Conquer but make
good his Title against his enemies: his end of entering the Land was not to
gain a new absolute Title but to vindicate the old limited one, whereby the
English Saxon Kings his Predecessors held this Kingdom. Though his Title was
not so good as it should be, Camb^^n. Britan. Norma^.
yet it was better then Harolds, who was only the Son of Goodwyn, Steward of
King Edwards house; Whereas William was Cosen to Emma mother to the said King
Edward; by whom he was adopted; and by solemn promise of King Edward was to
succeed him: Of which promise Harold himself became surety, and bound by oath
to see it performed: Here was a fair Title, especially Edgar Atheling the
right Heir being of tender age, and disaffected by the people. Neither did he
proceed to a full Conquest, but after Harola who usurped the Crown was slain in
battle, and none to succeed him, the Throne being void, the people chose rather
to submit to William and his Title, then endure the hazard of ruining war, by
opposing him, to set up a new King: It is not to be imagined, that such a
Realm as England could be conquered by so few, in such a space, if the peoples
voluntary acceptance of him and his claim had not facilitated and shortened his
undertaking. Thus we have it related in Mr. Cambd^n, that before Harold usurped
the Crown, most men thought it the wisest Policy to set the Crown on Williams
head, that by performing the Oath and promise, a War might be prevented: And
that Harold by assuming the Crown, provoked the whole Clergy and
Ecclesiastical State against him: and we know how potent in those days the
Clergy were in State affairs: Also that after one battle fought wherein Harold
was slain, he went to London, was received by the Londoners, and solemnly
inaugurated King as unto whom by his own saying the Kingdom was by Gods
Providence appointed, and by virtue of a gift from his Lord and Cosen King
Edward, the glorious, granted: so that after that battle the remainder of the
war was dispatched by English forces and Leaders But suppose he did come in a
Conqueror, yet he did not establish the Kingdom on those terms, but on the
old Laws, which he retained and authorized for himself and his Successors to
govern by. Indeed after his settlement in the Kingdom, some Norman Customs
he brought in, and to gratify his soldiers dispossessed many English of their
estates, dealing in it too much like a Conqueror: but the trial by twelve men,
and other fundamentalls of Government, wherein the English freedom consists,
he left untouched, which have remained till this day: On the same Title he
claimed and was inaugurated, was he King which was a title of rightful
succession to Edward: therefore he was indeed King not as Conqueror, but as
Edwards Successor, and on the same right as he and his Predecessors held the
Crown. As also by the grant of the former Laws and form of Government, he
did equivalently put himself and successors into the State of legal Monarchs,
and in that Tenure have all the Kings of this Land held the Crown till this
day, when these men would rake up and put a Title of Conquest upon them, which
never was claimed or made use of by him who is the first root of their
succession.

Another reason which they produce is the successive nature Part 1. Chap. 2.
Sect. 6. That succession does not prove a Monarchy absolute from limitation,
though it proves it absolution from interruption and discontinuance, during the
being of that succession to which it is defined. And that which they object
that our Kings are actually so before they take the Oath of governing by Law,
and so they would be, did they never take that Oath; wherefore it is no
Limitation of their royal power, is there also answered in the next Sect. and
that so fully, that no more need be said. The same Law which gives the King his
Crown immediately upon the decease of his Predecessor, conveyes it to him with
the same Determinations and Prerogatives annexed, with which his Progeintors
enjoyed it so that he entering on that Original Right, his subjects are bound
to yield obedience, before they take any Oath: And he is bound to the Laws of
the Monarchy before he actually renewes the bond by any Personal Oath. There
is yet another argument usually brought to this purpose, taken from the Oath of
Allegiance: but of that I shall have occasion to speak hereafter.

CHAP. II. Supposing it be in the Platform limited. Quest. 2.
Wherein, and how far forth it is limited and defined?
Nomotheticall power; so that their power extends not to establish any Act,
which has the Being and state of a Law of the Land: nor give an authenticke
sense to any Law of doubtful and controverted meaning, solely and by
themselves, but together with the concurrent Authority of the two other Estates
in Parliament.





Medium to prove the Absoluteness of this Government yet if it be more
thoroughly considered, it is rather a proof of the contrary; and every one who
is a successive Monarch is so far limited in his power that he cannot leave it
to whom he pleases, but to whom the Fundamental Law concerning that Succession
has designed it. And herein though our Monarchy be not so far limited as that
of France is said to be, where the King cannot leave it to his Daughter, but to
his Heir male, yet restrained it is; so that should he affect another more, or
judge another fitter to succeed, yet he cannot please himself in this, but is
limited to the next Heir borne, not adopted or denominated: which was the case
'twixt Queen Mary and the Lady Jane.

Lastly, in point of Revenue wherein their Power extends Magna Charta, and
lately by the Petition of Right, the case of Ship Money, Conduct-money, etc.
Nor, as I conceive, to make an Alienation of any Lands, or other Revenues
annexed by Law to the Crown. I meddle not with personal limitations, whereby
Kings, as well as private men, may limit themselves by Promise and Covenant,
which being particular, bind only themselves; but of those which are radical,
and have continued during the whole current of succession from unknown times.
Other limitations, it is likely, may be produced by those who are skillful in
the Laws: but I believe they will be such as are reducible to some of these,
which I take to be the principal and most apparent limitations of this
Monarchy, and are a most convincing induction to prove my Assertion in the
former Chapter, That this Monarchy, in the very Mold and Frame of it, is of
limited constitution.

CHAP. III. Whether it be of a Simple or Mixed Constitution? Quest. 3.

WHen the Government is simple, when mixed; also Part 1. Cap. 3. Now I conceive
it a clear and undoubted Truth, that the Authority of this Land is of a
compounded and mixed nature in the very root and constitution thereof. And my
judgment is established on these grounds.

Answer to the 19. Proposit.
and Democracy in the house of Commons. Now (as before was made appear in the
first Part) it is no mixture which is not in the Root and Supremacy of Power:
for though it have a subordination of inferior Officers, and though the Powers
inferior be seated in a mixed subject, yet that makes it not a mixed
Government; for it is compatible to the simplest in the world, to have
subordinate mixtures.



major will appear, if we consider how many ways provision may be made in a
Political Frame to remedy and restrain the excesses of Monarchy. I can
imagine but three ways. First, by constituting a legal power above it, that
it may be regulated thereby, as by an overruling power: Thus we must not
conceive of our two houses of Parliament, as if they could remedy the
exorbitances of the Prince by an Authority superior to his; for this were to
subordinate him to the two Houses, to set a superior above the Sovereign,
that is, to destroy the being of his Monarchical power. Secondly, by an
original conveyance to him of a limited and legal power so that beyond it he
can do no potestative act; yet constituting no formal legal power to
refrain or redress his possible exorbitances; here is limitation without
mixture of another constituted power: As the former of these overthrowes the
power of the Sovereign, so this makes no provision for the iudemnity of the
people. Thirdly, now the never enough to be admired wisdom of the Architects
and Contrivers of the frame of Government in this Realm (who ever they were)
have found a third way, by which they have conserved the Sovereignty of the
Prince; and also made an excellent provision for the Peoples freedom, by
constituting two Estates of men, who are for their condition Subjects, and yet
have that interest in the Government, that they can both moderate and redress
the excesses and illegalities of the Royal power, which (I say) cannot be
done, but by a mixture, that is, by putting into their hands a power to meddle
in acts of the highest function of Government; a power not depending on his
will, but radically their own, and so sufficient to moderate the Sovereigns
power.

Now what can reasonably be said in opposition to these

First, this mixture seems not to be of distinct powers but of Sol, This were
probable, supposing the Parliament were only in the nature of a Counsel; but
we know it is also a Court, the High Court of Parliament: Now it is evident
that a Court is the seat and subject of Authority and power, and not barely of
counsel and advice.

Sol. Suppose them no entire Court divided from the King, yet they are two
Estates of the three which make up the supreme Court; so that they have a power
and authority, though not complete and sufficing to perfect an Act, without the
concourse of the third: For it appears by the Acts of that Court, that every
of the three Estates has a Legislative power in it; every Act being enacted by
the Kings most excellent Majesty, and by the Authority of the Lords and Commons
assembled in Parliament.

Whether the authority of the two Houses be derived from the King?
viz. Whether the authority of both the Houses be a subordinate authority, and
derived from the King as its original? Three Reasons seem strong for the
affirmative: First, because it is his Parliament, so called and acknowledged:
If his Court, then the power whereby they are a Court is his power, derived
from him, as the power of other Courts is. Secondly, because he has the power
of calling and dissolving it. Thirdly, because he is acknowledged in the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy to be the Head, and of supreme authority in the
Kingdom, and all subject to him.

And whereas some make answer that he is Singulis major, but Vniversis minor,
Treatise entitituled, A fuller Answer to Dr. Fern.
so the Answerer to Doctor Fern, I wonder that the Proposition of the
Observator, that the King is Vniversis minor, should be so much exploded. Every
member scorsi^^ is a subject, but all collection in their houses are not: And
he says simply, the Houses are coordinate to the King, nor subordinate; that
the Lords style, Comites, or Peers, implies in Parliament a co-ordinative
society with his Majesty in the Government. I conceive this Answerer to avoid
one extreme falls on another; for this is a very overthrow of all Monarchy, and
to reduce all Government to Democracy; For look where the apex potestatis is,
there is the Government. Also it is against Common Reason: For the King, is he
not King of the Kingdom? and what is the Kingdom but all united? all the
particulars knit together in one body politic? so that if he be King of the
Kingdom, he is Vniversis major too; for the King is major, and the Kingdom is
the united universe of the People. Thus those expressions are some of them
false, some though secundum quid true; yet spoken simply, and in that manner,
are scandalous and incompatible to Monarchy. Thus you see what may be said on
the one side, to prove the King to be the original of all power, even of that
which is in the Houses of Parliament assembled.

On the other side are as weighty Arguments to prove the contrary, viz. That
the two Houses authority is not dependent, nor derived from the Royal power.
First, the authority of the Houses being Legislative, is the supreme, and so
cannot be derived. Three concurrent Powers producing one supreme act, as
con-cause, joint causes of the same highest effect cannot have a subordination
among themselves in respect of that casualty; it not being imaginable how a
power can cause the supreme effect, and yet be a subordinate and derived power.
Secondly, the end of constituting these two Estates being the limiting and
preventing the excesses of the third, their power must not be totally dependent
and derived from the third, for then it were unsuitable for the end for which
it was ordained: For to limit an Agent by a power subordinate and depending on
himself, is all one as to leave him at large without any limitation at all.
Thirdly, that which has been spoken of a mixed Monarchy, does fully prove
that the two other powers which concur with the Monarch, to constitute the
mixture, must not be altogether subordinate to it, and derived from it. I must
profess these Reasons to prevail with me, that I cannot conceive how the
authority of the two Houses can in the whole being of it, be a dependent and
derived power.

That we may find out the truth amidst this potent contradiction of both sides,
Resolution of the Question.
recourse must be had to the Architecture of this Government, whereof I must
declare my self to be so great an Admirer, that what ever more then humane
wisdom had the contriving of it, whether done at once, or by degrees found out
and perfected, I conceive it unparalleld for exactness of true policy in the
whole world; such a care for the Sovereignty of the Monarch, such a provision
for the liberty of the People, and that one may be justly allayed, and yet
consist without impeachment of the other, that I wonder how our Forefathers in
those rude unpolished times could attain such an accurate composure. First then
suppose a people, either compelled to it by conquest, or agreeing to it by free
consent, Nobles and Commons set over themselves by public compact one
Sovereign, and resign up themselves to him and his heirs, to be governed by
such and such Fundamental Laws: there is a supremacy of power set up, though
limited to one course of exercise. Secondly, then because in all Governments
after cases will come, it requiring an addition of Laws, suppose them
covenanting with their Sovereign, that if cause be to constitute any other
Laws, he shall not by his sole power do that work, but they reserve at
first, or afterward it is granted them (which is all one) a hand of
concurrence therein, that they will be bound by no Laws, but what they join
with him in the making of. Thirdly, because though the Nobles may personally
convene, yet the Commons (being so many) cannot well come together by
themselves to the doing of such a work, it be also agreed, that every
Corporation of the Commons shall have power to depute one or more to be for the
whole in this public legislative business; that so the Nobles by themselves,
the Commons by their Deputies assembling, there may be representatively the
whole body, having Commission to execute that reserved authority for
establishing new Laws. Fourthly, because the occasion and need of making new
Laws, and authentic expounding the old, would not be constant and perpetual,
and it would carry an appearance of a Government in which were three Heads and
chief Powers, they did not stablish these Estates to be constantly existent,
but occasionally, as the causes for which they were ordained should emerge and
happen to be. Fifthly, because a Monarchy was intended and therefore a
Supremacy of power (as far as possible) must be reserved for one, it was
concluded that these two Estates should be Assemblies of his Subjects sworn to
him, and all former Laws; the new, which by agreement of Powers should be
enacted, were to be his Laws, and they bound to obey him in them as soon as
established: And being supposed that he who was to govern by the Laws, and
for the furtherance of whose Government the new Laws were to be made, should
best understand when there was need, and the assembling and dissolving the two
Estates meeting, was a power of great privilege, it was put into the Princes
hand by writ to convocate and bring to existence, and to adjourne and dismiss
such meetings Sixthly, in process of time Princes not caring much to have
their Government looked into, or to have any power in act but their own, took
advantage of this power of convocating those Estates, and did more seldom then
need required make use of it; whereon provision was made, and a time set within
which an Assembly of Parliament was to be had. Now when you have made these
suppositions in your mind, you have the very model and platform of this
Monarchy, and we shall easily find what to answer to the arguments before
produced on either side. For first it is his Parliament, because an assembly of
his subjects, convocated by his Writ, to be his Council, to assist him in
making Laws for him to govern by: yet not his, as other Courts are altogether
deriving their whole authority from the fullness which is in him. Also his
power of assembling and dissolving proves him thus far above them, because in
their existence they depend on him; but their power and authority quoad
specificationem, the being and kind of it, is from original constitution: for
they expect no Commission and authority from him, more then for their meeting
and reducing into existence; but existing, they work according to the
privileges of their constitution, their acts proceeding from their conjunct
authority with the Kings, not from its subordination to the Kings. The oath of
Allegiance binds them, and respects them as his subjects, to obey him,
governing according to established Laws: it supposes and is built upon the
foundations of this Government, and must not be interpreted to overthrow them*
he is thereby acknowledged to be supreme so far as to rule them by Laws
already made; not so far as to make Laws without them, so that it is no
derogation to their power; and I believe of these things none can make any
question. Therein consists the accurate Judgment of the Contrivers of this
Form, they have given so much into the hands of the sovereign, as to make him
truly a Monarch; and they have reserved so much in the hands of the two
Estates, as to enable them to preserve their own liberty.

CHAP. IIII.
I Shall be the briefer in this, because an answer to it may be easily
collected out of the precedent Questions: for he who knows how far this
Government is limited, will soon discern how far it is mixed, for the
Limitation is mostly affected by the mixture: Three points of mixture.
but distinctly, I conceive that there are three parts of the power referred to
the joint concourse of all three Estates: So that either of them not consenting
or suspending its influence the rest cannot reduce that power ordinarily and
legally into act.



properties by requiring impositions not granted him by Law, is often
confested: And that the other Estates cannot do it by themselves, I conceive
it as unquestionable: For it were strange to give that to the secondary and
assisting Powers, which is denied to the Sovereign and principal. If it be
objected that every Corporation electing Deputies, and authorizing them to be
vice totius Communitatis, do thereby grant them power, and entrust them as to
make laws to bind them, so to dispose of any part of their estate, either by
rate or payment for the public good: I answer, that they are by that
deputation enabled as for one, so for the other; that is, according to the
fundamental usuage of the Kingdom; that is, by the joint consent of the other
estates, for though the house of Commons is chosen by the people, and they
represent the people, yet the representation does not give them a power which
was not in the people. Now the people have no power to do an act which either
directly, or by consequence does put it in the will and pleasure of any one or
two of the Estates, to overthrow the other: But this power of opening and
shutting the Purse of the Kingdom is such a power, that if it be in one or two
of the Estates, without the third, then they by that power might necessitate
that other to do any act, or disable it from its own defense. This and the
Legislative power have such a neernesse, that they cannot be divided, but must
be in the same subject: this is so great a power, that put it absolutely in any
Estate single, you make that Estate in effect absolute, making the rest
dependent and beholding to it for their subsistence.

Thirdly, the power of dispatching the affairs of the ardua regni, which the
Writ for convocating the other Estates does mention, supposing thereby that
such difficulties are not to be dispatched by the power of one alone; for if
they were, why then are the two other convocated to be assisting? I acknowledge
many matters of great moment may be done by the Regal power, and in such case
it may be said, that the other Estates are gathered ad molius tra^sigendum,
that the advice and sense of the Community may be for direction. But I conceive
there be two sorts of affairs, which ought not to be transacted without the
concurrence of all three. First, such as concern the public safety and weal,
so far as stable detriment or advantage comes to the whole body by the well or
ill carriage thereof; for then there is the same reason as in making new Laws:
For why was not the power of making any new Laws left in the hands of one, but
reserved for the concurrence of all three? save because the end of the
Architects was, that no new thing which was of so much concernment as the
stable good and damage of the Kingdom, should be introduced without the
consent and advice of the whole: so that if any business be of that moment,
that it is equipollent to a Law in the public interest, it should be managed
by such an authority and way as that is. Secondly, such as introduce a
necessity of public charge, be it matter of War or else, if to the effecting
of it the Purse of the Kingdom be required, it is evident that it ought to be
done by the concurrence of all, because they only jointly (as appears before)
have power to impose a public charge on the estates of men. And it were all
one to put the power of our estates in the hands of one, as to put the power of
such undertakings in his sole hands, which of necessity bring after them an
engagement of public expense.

CHAP. V.
THis Question is in the general already handled in the

exceeding the Authority which God and the Laws have conferred on him, is no
way to be opposed either by any or all his Subjects, but in conscience to Gods
ordinance obeyed. This is granted on all sides.

Secondly, if the will and command of the Monarch exceed Peter, He was free,
and need not have done it.

Thirdly, if he command a thing which the Law gives Fern in his Preface
acknowledges obedience to be limited and circumscribed by the established Laws
of the Land, and accordingly to be yielded or denied. And Sect. 1. says he,
We may and ought to deny obedience to such commands of the Prince as are
unlawful by the Law of God, yea by the established Laws of the land. Here he
says more then we say; yea more then should be said, as appears in the second
Position: it is not universally true, that we ought.

Fourthly, if he exceed the limits of the Law, and proceed Fern allows Sect.
4. Cries to God, Petition to the Prince, Denial of Obedience, Denial of
Subsidy, etc.

Fifthly but the point in controversy is about positive and the confused
handling of it, it usually is: by distinguishing twix't forceable resistance
used against the Kings own person, or against inferior Officers and
Instruments advising to, or executing the illegal commands.

Sect. 2. And to divert a private evil by inducing a public, is unjust and
unlawful: so that for this point of force against the person of the Prince: I
think there ought to be no contention. If any have bin so rash to hold it
lawful on these grounds, that the whole Kingdom is above him because they
make him King, and that by miscarriage he may make a forfeiture, and so lay
himself open to force: I do judge these grounds very insufficient: unles the
Kingdom reserve a superiority to it self, or there be a fundamental clause of
forfeiture on specified causes; and then it is not properly a Monarchy: but all
this has been already handled in the general Part.

Secondly, for Instruments of oppression of public liberty if the wrong be
destructive, and no other means of prevention, but force, be left: I am
persuaded it may be used, and positive resistance made against them; And if I
find any contradiction from the most rigid Patrones of Royalty, it must be only
in this point. And here I must complain of the indistinct dealing of that
Doctor in this matter; who mingleth both these points together: and scarce
speaks any thing to resolve men's consciences in this: But speaks either in
general, or else of force against the Princes own person: Whereas I think,
the case which sticks most on the conscience at this time, is this latter: Of
opposing, mi^-leading and mis-imployed subjects, which he speaks very little
to. Nay, he seems to me, after all his disclaiming of resistance, to come home
to us, and though sparingly, yet to assent to lawfullnes of resistance in this
point. For Sect. 2. speaking of David's guard of armed men: He says, It was to
secure his person against the cutthroats of Saul, if sent to take away his
life: He means to secure it by force, for Soldiers are for force: He means
no negative securing by flight, for that may be done even against Saul
himself: but he speaks of such a securing which might only be against
cutthroats. So then he grants securing by force against these: But they went
on Saul's command, and mostly with his presence. Again, in the instance of
Elisha, he seems to acknowledge lawfullnesse of personal defense against the
sudden and illegal assaults of Messengers, he means by force, for he speaks of
such which he will not allow in public, which can be understood of none, but
by force: But it appears the Doctor in his whole discourse has avoided this
point of resistance of mis-imployed subjects; which yet is the alone point
which would have given satisfaction: for before it appears, we agree in all
the rest, and in this too for ought I know, he having not distinctly said any
thing against it.

Now concerning this case of forceable resistance of inferior Whether
resistance of Instruments of will be lawful?
I will maintain my Assertion by convincing Arguments. 2. I will show the
invalidity of what is said against it.

Assert. 1.
This then is my Assertion: The two Estates in Parliament may lawfully by force
of Arms resist any persons or number of persons advising or assisting the King
in the performance of a command illegal and destructive to themselves, or the
public.

Fern calls them, Cutthroats. If the case be put, What if the Sovereign
himself in person be present with such Assaylants, joining his personal
assistence in the execution of his Commands? It is much to be lamented, that
the will of the Prince should be so impetuous in any subverting Act, as to
hazard his own person in the prosecution of it. Yet supposing such a case, all
counsels and courses must betaken, that no violence be offered to his person,
and Profession of none intended: But no reason the presence of his person
should privilege ruining Instruments from suppression, and give them an
immunity to spoil and destroy subjects, better themselves; His person being
secured from wrong; His power cannot be violated in such an Act, in which none
of it can be conferred on the Agents. And sure David, though he avoided laying
hands or using any violence against the person of Saul, and on no extremity
would have done it: Yet for the Cutthroats about him, if no other means would
have secured him, he would have rescued himself by force from their outrage:
Though Saul was in their company: Else what intended he by all that force of
Soldiers: And his enquiry of God at Keilah: by which it is plain, He had an
intent to have kept the place by force, if the people would have stuck to him:
Neither is it to the purpose which the Dr. says, Sect. 2. That his example was
extraordinary, because he was anointed and designed to succeed Saul, for that
being but a designation, did not exempt him from the duty of subjection for the
present, or lessen it, as is plain by the great conscience he made of not
touching Saul: But he knew it was one thing to violate Saul's Person and Power,
and another to resist those Instruments of Tyranny, the Cutthroats which were
about him.

Secondly, Because without such power of resistance in Fern calls it: These
are all: but what are these to hinder, if a Prince be minded to overthrow all,
and bring the whole Government to his own Will? For Prayer, and Petition, these
are put in to fill up the number: They are no limitations, they may be used in
the most absolute Monarchy; for denial of obedience, that may keep me from
being an Instrument of public servitude; but Princes Wills never want them
which will yield obedience, if I deny it; Yea enough to destroy all the rest,
if nothing be left them but to suffer: Then for denial of Subsidy, if he may
by thousands of Instruments take all, or what he, or they please, and I must
not resist: what need he care whether the people deny or grant: If a Prince be
taught, that he may do it: cases and reasons will soon be brought to persuade
him, that in them he may lawfully do it; as late experiences have given us too
much Testimony: Thus it is apparent, that the denial of this Power of
Resistance of Instruments overthrowes and makes invalid all Government, but
that which is absolute: and reduces the whole world de jure to an absolute
subjection, that is, servitude: for the end of all constitution of moderated
forms is not that the supreme power might not lawfully exorbitate, but that it
might have no power to exorbitate.

The Dr. is conscious hereof; and therefore tells us in his Sect. 5. This is
the very reason which is made for the Popes power of curbing and deposing Kings
in case of heresy: because else the Church, says the Papist, has no means
for the maintenance of the Catholic Faith, and its own safety: But who sees
not the vast difference 'twixt these two? and that the same reason may be
concluding here, which is apparently non concluding there; For 1. They thereby
would draw to the Pope an authoritative power: we no such superior power: but
only a power of resistance for self-conservation which nature and the Law of
reason gives to every one; and may stand with the condition of subjection and
inferiority. 2. They on this reason give the Pope a Power over the very person
of the King; we only of resisting of unauthorized invading destroyers, coming
under the color of an authority which is not in the Sovereign to be derived.
3. They prove a civil right for spiritual reasons, we only for civil
reasons. 4. The Church and the faith are constituted in their very formal
being from Christ himself, who is the head and great Shepherd immediately in
his own person: and as it is his own family; so he keeps the power of
preserving it in his own hands; having made direct and particular promises to
assure us of their upholding against all subvertion, by his own power: so that
here is assurance enough, without visible means of force for a spiritual
body, which lives by faith. But in a civil State there is no such assurance
nor supporting promises: power only in the undefined being of it, being Gods
immediate Ordinance, and not in this specificated or determinate being:
wherefore it has no such immediate provision made for its preservation, no
promise of a divine power for its standing: but as it is left by God to men's
wisdom to contrive the frame, so to their providence to establish means of
preservation. As the body is outward and Civil, so the upholding means must
be such; spiritual and infallibly assuring a Formed State has not, as the
Church and Faith have; if there be none of outward force and power neither,
then none at all it has, and is in ill case indeed. But there is an art full
of venom, when a truth can not be beaten down by just reasoning, then to
make it odious by hateful comparisons: so in this case aspersions are cast, as
if the Patrons of Resistance did borrow the Popish and Jesuiticall grounds, and
their Positions as dangerous to Kings, as the Jesuits hell-bred and bloody
Principles: whereas it appears by all this discourse, and I am persuaded is
written in Capital Letters in the very Conscience of them which despitefully
object it, that there is no congruity at all 'twixt their Doctrines, no more
then 'twixt Light and Darkness.

Thirdly, because such power is due to a public State for

Fourthly, because it is a power put into the two Estates by they should betray
the very trust reposed in them by the Fundamentals of the Kingdom if they
should not. An authority Legislative they have: Now to make Laws and to
preserve Laws are acts of the same power; yea, if three powers jointly have
interest in making of Laws, surely either of these severally have, and ought
to use that power in preserving them. Also that the authority which the Houses
have is as well given them for preserving the government by established laws,
as for establishment of laws to govern by, is a truth proved by the constant
use of their power to that end, in correcting the exorbitance of inferior
Courts, questioning delinquent Judges and Officers of State for violations, and
much is done in this kind by the sole authority of the Houses, without the
concurrence or expectance of Royal power: so then, supposing they have such an
authority for safety of public Government, to question and censure inferior
Officers for transgressions, though pretending the Kings authority, can it be
denied but that their authority will bear them out to use forcible resistance
against such, be

Fifthly, the Kings Warrant under his hand exempts not a Malefactor from the
censure of a Court of Justice, nor punishment imposed by Law, but the Judge
must proceed against him according to Law: for the Law is the Kings public and
authoritative Will; but a private Warrant to do an unlawful act, is his
private and unauthoritative Will: wherefore the Judge ought to take no notice
of such Warrant, but to deal with the Offender as no other then a private man.
This proves that such Instruments thus illegally warranted, are not authorized;
and therefore their violence may be by force resisted, as the assaults of
private men, by any; and then much rather by the Houses of Parliament: which,
supposing them divided from the King to have no complete authority, yet sure
they have two parts of the greatest Legislative authority. But I fear I shall
seem superfluous, in producing Arguments to prove so clear a truth: Is it
credible that any one will maintain so abject an esteem of their authority,
that it will not extend to resistance of private men, who should endeavor the
subversion of the whole frame of Government, on no other Warrant then the Kings
Will and Pleasure? Must they be merely passive? Is patience, and the denial of
their Votes to a subversion, all the opposition they must use, if a King (which
God forbid) should on his Royal pleasure send Cutthroats to destroy them as
they sit in their Houses? Is all their authority (if the King desert them or
worse) no more then to Petition, and suffer; and by a moderate use of their
power of denying, dissent from being willing to be destroyed? If power of
resisting by force of subverters armed by the Kings Will (for by his Authority
they cannot) be unlawful for them, all these absurdities must follow: yea, the
vilest Instrument of Oppression, showing but a Warrant from the King to bear
him out, may range and rage all his days through a Kingdom, to waste and
spoil, tax and distraine, and at utmost of his insolence must have no more
done to him by the Parliament it self, then to stay his hand, as the basest
Servant may his Masters, or the meanest Subject the Kings own hand; by the
Doctors own confession. Consider then and admire, if any men of learning will
deny this power of forcible resistance of Ministers, of subverting commands to
be lawful. I have thus far confirmed my assertion, not that I find any openly
opposing it, but because the Doctor and some other seem to have a mind that
way, and do strike at it, though not professedly and in open dispute.

For the several proofs brought in behalf of Resistance, some of them prove
as much as is here asserted; others are not to the purpose. Particularly, that
of the Peoples rescuing Jonathan from his Fathers bloody resolution proves
lawfulness of hindering unreasonable self-destructive purposes, even in
absolute Monarchies, if it prove any thing. That of Vzzal's thrusting out by
the Priests, is not to the purpose: but David's raising and keeping Forces about
him, and his purpose at Keilah, proves the point directly viz. Lawfulness of
forcible resistance of Cutthroats, even though Saul himself were in presence:
This the Doctor sees plainly, and therefore shuffles it off, by saying, His
example is extraordinary; as if he were not a present Subject, because he was
designed by Gods revealed counsel to be a future King. And he confesses
Elisha's example of shutting the door against the Kings messenger proves
personal defense against sudden illegal assaults of messengers, which is the
thing in Question.

Arguments on the contrary dissolved.
The Doctors proofs from the old Testament come not to the matter: Moses, and
afterward the Kings, were of Gods particular designation, setting them
absolutely over the people, on no condition or limitation; so that did they
prove any thing, yet they concern not us, respecting a Government of another
nature. But particularly, that of Corah and the Princes rebelling against
Moses, is not to the matter; it was a resistance of Moses own Person and
Office; and doubtless penury of other proofs caused this and the rest here to
be alleged: For that 1 Samuel 8 18. how inconsequent is it, to say, the people
should cry unto the Lord, therefore they had no other means to help them but
cries to God; though (I confess) in that Monarchy they had not. That speech 1 Samuel 26 9. was most true there, and is as true here, but not to the purpose,
being spoken of the Kings own Person. But the maine authority brought against
resistance, is that Romans 13. and on that Doctor Fern builds his whole
discourse: Let us therefore something more largely consider what is deduced out
of that Text. First, he supposes the King to be the Supreme in Saint Peter, and
the Higher power in Saint Paul. Secondly, he collects All persons, every soul
is forbidden to resist. Thirdly, that then was a standing Senate, which not
long before had the supreme Power in the Roman State: It is confessed; but
that they could challenge more at that time when Saint Paul writ then our great
Council will or can, I deny: For that State devolving into Monarchy by
Conquest, they were brought under an Absolute Monarchy, the Senate it self
swearing full subjection to the Prince; his Edicts and Acts of Will were Laws,
and the Senates consent only pro forma, and at pleasure required. He who reads
Tacitus cannot but see the Senate brought to a condition of basest servitude,
and all Laws and Lives depending on the will of the Prince: I wonder then the
Doctor should make such a parallel. Indeed the Senate had been far more then
ever our Parliaments were or ought to be: but now that was far less then our
Parliament has been, or (I hope) ever will be: They were become the sworn
Vassals of an absolute Emperor, ours the sworn Subjects of a Liege or Legal
Prince. Fourthly, he says, then was more cause of Resistance, when Kings were
Enemies to Religion, and had overthrown Laws and Liberties. I answer, There
were no causes for Resistance: Not their enmity to Religion, had they but a
legal power, because Religion then was no part of the Laws and so its
violation no subversion of established government. And for the overthrow of
Laws and Liberties, that was past and done, and the government new, the Senate
and all the rest actually sworn to absolute Principality: Now an Ordinance of
absolute Monarchy was constituted, the sacred bond of an Oath had made it
inviolate. But what would he infer hence, all being granted him? Sure this he
does intend, That every soul among us, several, and conjoined in a Senate,
must be subject for conscience, must not resist, under pain of Damnation: All
this, and what ever besides he can justly infer out of that Text, we readily
grant: But can any living man hence collect, that therefore no resistance may
be made to fellow subjects, executing destructive illegal acts of the Princes
will in a legal Monarchy? Will he affirm that the Ordinance of God is
resisted, and Damnation incurred thereby? Gods Ordinance is the Power, and the
Person invested with that power; but here force is offered to neither as before
I have made it appear. And herein we have B. Bilso^ consenting, where he
says, Bi^s^n of subje^^ p 94, and 280.
that the superior power here forbidden to be resisted, is not the Princes
will against his Laws but agreeing with his Laws. I think the day it self
is not more clear then this satisfaction, to all that can be concluded out of
that Text: so the foundation of all that discourse is taken from it, if his
intent were thence to prove unlawfulness of Resistance of Instruments of
Arbitrarinesse in this Kingdom.

Let us also consider the force of his Reasons, whether they impugn this point
in hand. He says, such power of resistance would be no fit means of safety to
a State, but prove a remedy worse then the diseases. His Reasons, first,
because it does tend to the overthrow of that order, which is the life of a
Commonwealth; it would open a way to People, upon the like pretenses, to
resist, and even overthrow power duly administered. 2 It may proceed to a change
of government. 3. It is accompanied with the evils of Civill-Warre. 4. On the
same ground the two Houses proceed against the King, may the people proceed to
resistance against them; accusing them not to discharge their trust. Lastly,
seeing some must be trusted in every State. It is reason the highest and final
trust, should be in the highest power. These are his main reasons on which he
builds his conclusion against resistance.

To his first, I say it were strange if resistance of distructive disorder
should tend to the overthrow of Order: It may for the time disturb, as Physic
while it is in working disturbes the natural body, if the peccant humors make
strong opposition: but lure it tends to health, and so does this resistance of
disorder to Order. Neither would it open a way for the people to violate the
Powers; for doing right can open no way to the doing of wrong If any wicked
seditious spirits should make use of the Vail of Justice to cover unnatural
Rebellion: Shall a peoples right and liberty be taken from them to prevent such
possible abuse? Rather let the foulness of such pretenses discover it self,
so God and good men will abhor them: such Cloakes of Rebellion have in former
ages been taken off, and the Authors brought to just confusion, without the
expense of the liberties of this Kingdom.

To the second; must not Instruments be resisted, which actually intend, and
seeked a chang of Government: because such resistance may proceed to a chang of
Government? Is not an unlikely possibility of change to be hazarded, rather
then a certain one suffered? But I say, It cannot proceed to a chang of
Government, unles it exceed the measure of lawful resistance: yea it is
impossible, that resistance of Instruments should ever proceed to a change of
Government; for that includes the greatest resistance and violation of the
person and power of the Monarch, the lawfullnesse of which I utterly disclaim.

Thirdly, it is not ever accompanied with the evils of Civil War: But when
the Princes Will finds enough Instruments of their Countries ruin to raise
it. And then the mischife of that war must light on those which raise it: But
suppose it may ensue, yet a temporary evil of war is to be chosen rather then
a perpetual loss of liberty, and subversion of the established frame of a
Government.

In the fourth, I deny the parity of reason: for the two Houses are bodies
constituted and endowed with legislative authority, and trust of preservation
of the frame, by the Fundamentalls of the Kingdom: which the people out of
those Houses are not. Again the Government being composed of a threefold
consenting power, one to restrain the exorbitance of another: All three
together are absolute and equivalent to the power of the most absolute Monarch:
The concurrent Will of all three, makes a Law, and so it is the Kingdoms Law.

To the last, I answer, In every State some must be trusted, and the highest
trust is in him who has the Supreme power: These two the Supreme Trust, and
the Supreme Power are inseparable: And such as the power is, such is the
trust: An absolute power supposes an absolute trust: A Power allayed with the
annexion of another power as here it is, supposes a trust of the same nature.
A joint trust, yet saving the supremacy of the Monarch, so far forth as it may
be saved, How far forth the sword is in the hand of the Monarch?
and not be absolute and the others authority nullified. It may be further
argued: that it being the Prerogative Royal to have the managing of the sword,
that is, legal force, in the Kingdom; none can, on any pretense whatever use
lawful force, either against him, or any, but by his Will: for it is committed
to him by law, and to none but whom he assigns it to: so that the Laws of the
Kingdom putting all power of force and Arms into his trust, have placed him,
and all those who serve him, in a state of irresistiblenes in respect of any
lawful force. This is a point much stood on and on this ground, the Parliament
now assuming the disposing of the Militia by an Ordinance, it is complained on,
as a usurping of what the Law has committed to the King as his Prerogative;
The opposing of which Ordinance by a Commission of Array, was the beginning of
this miserable Civill-Warre. I will distinctly lay down my Answer hereto,
submitting it to every impartial judgment.



sc. absolutely, to use at will, where the Monarchy is absolute; or with
limitation, to use according to Law, where the Monarchy is limited: so that, in
this Government the Arms and sword of the Kingdom is the Kings, to a defined
use committed to him; viz For defense of the Laws and Frame of Government
established, and not for arbitrary purposes, or to enable Ministers to execute
commands of mere Will.

formally legal, yet it is eminently legal, justified by the very intent of
the Architects of the Government, when for these uses they committed the Arms
to the King. And no doubt they may command the strength of the Kingdom to save
the being of the Kingdom: for none can reasonably imagine the Architectonicall
Powers, when they committed the power of government and Arms to one to
preserve the Frame they had composed, did thereby intend to disable any, much
less the two Estates, from preserving it, in case the King should fail to do
it in this last need. And thus doing the Kings Work, it ought to be
interpreted as done by his Will: because as the Law is his Will, so that the
Law should be preserved is his Will, which he expressed when he undertook the
government: It Is his deliberate Will, and ought to be done, though at any time
he oppose by an after-Will, for that is his sudden Will, as Doctor Fern
himself Sect. 1. does teach us to distinguish.

CHAP. VI. In what cases the other Estates may, without or against
WHo ever were the Authors of that Book lately Whether it be lawful to take
up arms against the Magistrate, perverting his power to a wrong end?
Scripture and Reason pleaded for defensive Arms, have laid new and over-large
grounds for resistance. Two Assertions they endeavor to maintain: First, those
Governors (whether supreme or others) who under pretense of authority from
Gods Ordinance, disturb the quiet and peaceable life in Godliness and Honesty,
are far from being Gods Ordinance in so doing, Sect. 3. Secondly, This
Tyranny not being Gods Ordinance, they which resist it even with Arms, resist
not the Ordinance of God. Hereon, Sect. 4. they free Christians, even in the
Apostles time, and so under the Roman Emperors, or any other Government, from
necessity of passive subjection in case of persecution; affirming, that the
Christians in those first Persecutions, had they been strong enough, might have
used Arms for defense against the Tyranny of their Emperors. Their ground is
from the Reasons used by the Apostle Romans 13. where he commands subjection, and
forbids resistance to the higher power, because they are Gods ordinance, his
Ministers for praise to well-doers, for terror to evil doers. But I must
profess my self to dissent from them in this opinion, conceiving that the
Apostle in urging those Reasons drawn from the due ends of Power, does intend
to press them to subjection by showing them what benefit comes to men by
authority in its due use; and not to show them how far they are bound to be
subject, and in what cases they may resist: For had he such a meaning at that
time, when the Governors did altogether cross those ends of their Ordination,
he had taught them rather a Doctrine of Resistance then Subjection: shall we
conceive that he would press subjection to Powers in the hands of Heathens
and Persecutors, if he had not intended they should passively be subject unto
them, even under those Persecutions? Rather I approve the received Doctrine of
the Saints in ancient and modern times, who could never find this license in
that place of the Apostle: and do concur with Master Buroughs, Answ. to Dr.
Fern Sect. 2.
professing against resistance of authority, though abused: If those (says he)
who have power to make Laws, make sinful Laws, and so give authority to any
to force obedience we say here there must be either flying, or passive
Obedience. And again, We acknowledge we must not resist for Religion, if the
Laws of the land be against it. But what do they say against this? In making
such Laws against Religion the Magistrates are not Gods ordinance; and
therefore to resist is not to resist Gods ordinance: As an inferior
Magistrate, who has a Commission of Power for such ends, is resistible if he
exceed his Commission, and abuse his Power for other ends; so Princes being
Gods Ministers, and having a deputed Commission from him to such ends, viz. the
promotion of godliness, Peace, Justice, if they pervert their power to
contrary ends, may be resisted without violation of Gods ordinance. That I may
give a satisfactory answer to this, which is the sum of their long
discourse, I must lay it down in several Assertions.

First, I acknowledge Gods ordinance is not only Power, sc. the good of the
People.

Secondly, it is also Gods ordinance, that there should be

Thirdly, when they who have this final civil Judicature Paul did) to the
supreme; if it be the supreme, which through mistake or corruption does
mis-censure, from whom there lies no Civil Appeal, then without resistance of
that Judgment we must passively submit: And he who in his own knowledge of
innocence or goodness of his cause shall by force resist, that man erects a
Tribunal in his own heart against the Magistrates Tribunal; cleares himself
by a private Judgment against a public, and executes his own sentence by
force against the Magistrates sentence, which he has repealed and made void
in his own heart. In unjust Censures by the highest Magistrate, from whom
there is no Appeal but to God, the sentence cannot be opposed till God reverse
it to whom we have appealed: In the mean time we must suffer, as Christ did,
notwithstanding his Appeal, 1 Pet. 2.23. and so must we notwithstanding our
Appeal, 1 Pet. 4 19. for he did so for our example. If an Appeal to God, or a
censure in the Judgment of the condemned might give him power of resistance,
none would be guilty, or submit to the Magistrates censure any further ^hen
they please. I desire those Authors, before they settle their judgment in such
grounds (which I fear will bring too much scandal) to weigh these
particulars. First, their opinion takes away from the Magistrate the chief
part of Gods ordinance, sc. power of definitive judgment of Laws and
Persons, who are the good, and who the bad, to be held so in Civil
proceedings. Secondly, they justify the Conscience of Papists, Heretics, and
grossest Malefactors to resist the Magistrate, in case they be persuaded their
cause is good. Thirdly, they draw men off from the commands of Patience under
persecution, and conforming to Christ and his Apostles, in their patient
enduring without verbal or real opposition, though Christ could not have
wanted power to have done it, as he tells Peter. Fourthly, they deprive the
Primitive and Modern Martyrs of the glory of suffering, imputing it either to
their ignorance or disability. Fifthly, it is a wonder, that since in Christ's
and his Apostles time there was so much use of this power of resistance, they
would by no express word show the Christians this liberty, but condemn
resistance so severely. Sixthly, there is in the case of the Parliament now
taking up Arms no need of these offensive grounds; Religion being now a part
of our National Law, and cannot suffer but the Law must suffer with it.

sc. 1. 1. When arms ought not to be assumed.
It ought not to be done against all illegal proceedings, but such which are
subversive and unsufferable. Secondly, not public resistance, but in excesses
inducing public evils: for to repel private injuries of highest nature with
public hazard and disturbance, will not quit cost, unless in a private case
the common Liberty be struck at. Thirdly, not when the government is actually
subverted, and a new form (though never so injuriously) set up, and the People
already engaged in an Oath of absolute subjection: for the remedy comes too
late, and the establishment of the new makes the former irrevocable by any
justifiable power, within the compass of that Oath of God: This was the case
of the Senate of Rome in Saint Paul's time. 2. When they may be assumed.
Secondly, affirmatively: I conceive three cases when the other Estates may
lawfully assume the force of the Kingdom, the King not joining, or dissenting,
though the same be by Law committed to him. First, when there is invasion
actually made, or imminently feared by a foreign Power. Secondly, when by an
intestine Faction the Laws and Frame of government are secretly undermined, or
openly assaulted: In both these cases the Being of the Government being
endangered, their trust binds, as to assist the King in securing, so to secure
it by themselves, the King refusing. In extreme necessities the liberty of
Voices cannot take place, neither ought a Negative Voice to hinder in this
exigence, there being no freedom of deliberation and choice, when the Question
is about the last end: Their assuming the sword in these cases is for the King,
whose Being (as King) depends on the Being of the Kingdom; and being
interpretatively his act, is no disparagement of his Prerogative. Thirdly, in
case the Fundamental Rights of either of the three Estates be invaded by one
or both the rest, the wronged may lawfully assume force for its own defense;
because else it were not free, but dependent on the pleasure of the other. Also
the suppression of either of them, or the diminishing of their Fundamental
Rights, carries with it the dissolution of the Government: And therefore those
grounds which justify force to preserve its Being, allows this case, which is
a direct innovation of its Being and Frame.

CHAP. VII. Where the Legal Power of Final judging in these cases does
reside, Quest. 7.
in case the three Estates differ about the same?
IN this Question (for our more distinct proceeding) some The Question stated.
that we meddle not here with the judicature of Questions of inferior nature,
viz. such as are 'twixt subject and subject, or the King and a subject, in
matter of particular right, which may be decided other way, without detriment
of the public Frame, or diminution of the privileges of either of the three
Estates. Secondly difference is to be made even in the Questions of utmost
danger: First, for it may be alleged to be either from without, by invasion of
foreign Enemies; or by a confederacy of intestine subverters, in which neither
of the three Estates are alleged to be interessed, and so the case may be
judged without relation to either of them, or detriment to their privileges.
Here I conceive a greater latitude of power may be given to some to judge
without the other; for it inferres not a subordinating of any of the three to
the other. Secondly, or else it may be alleged by one or two of the Estates
against the other, that not contenting it self with the Powers allowed to it
by the Laws of the Government, it seeks to swallow up, or entrench on the
privileges of the other, either by immediate endeavors, or else by protecting
and interessing it self in the subversive plots of other men. Thirdly, in this
case we must also distinguish betwixt, first, authority of raising Forces for
defense against such subversion, being known and evident: secondly and
authority of judging and final determining, that the accused Estate is guilty
of such design and endeavor of subversion, when it is denied and protested
against. This last is the particular in this Question to be considered; not
whether the People are bound to obey the authority of two, or one of the
Legislative Estates in resisting the subversive assaies of the other, being
apparent and self-evident; which I take in this Treatise to be clear. But when
such plea of subversion is more obscure and questionable, which of the three
Estates has the power of ultime and supreme judicature by Vote or sentence to
determine it against the other; so that the People are bound to rest in that
determination, and accordingly to give their assistance, eo nomine, because it
is by such Power so noted and declared? Determination of the Question.


For my part in so great a cause, if my earnest desire of public good, and
peace, may justify me to deliver my mind, I will prescribe to the uery
Question: for it includes a solecisme in government of a mixed temperature: To
demand which Estate may challenge this power of final determination of
Fundamental controversies arising betwixt them is to demand which of them
shall be absolute: For I conceive that in the first part hereof, I have made it
good, that this final utmost controversy arising betwixt the three
Legislative Estates, can have no legal, constituted Judge in a mixed
government: for in such difference, he who affirms that the people are bound
to follow the Judgment of the King against that of the Parliament, destroys
the mixture into absoluteness: And he who affirms that they are bound to
cleave to the Judgment of the two Houses against that of the King, resolves
the Monarchy into an Aristocracie, or Democracie, according as he places this
final Judgment. Whereas I take it to be an evident truth, that in a mixed
government no power is to be attributed to either Estate, which directly, or by
necessary consequence, destroys the liberty of the other.

Yet it is strange to see, how in this Epidemicall division of

First, Dr. Fern lays down two reasons, Dissolution of Arguments placing it
in the King.
why this final Judgment should belong to the King^ 1. Monarchy, says he,
Sect. 5. settles the chief power and final Judgment in one. This Position of
his can be absolutely true no where but in absolute Monarchies: and in effect,
his book knows no other then absolute government. 2. Seeing some one must be
trusted in every State, It is reason, says he, Sect 5. the highest and final
trust, should be in the higher and Supreme power. I presume by final trust,
he means the trust of determining these Supreme and final disagreements; and
accordingly I answer; It is not necessary that any one be trusted with a
binding power of Judicature in these cases; for by the foundations of this
government, none is, yea, none can be trusted with it: for to intend a mixed
government, and yet to settle the last resolution of all judgment in one, is
to contradict their very intention. Neither in a constituted government must we
dispose of powers according to the guess of our reason; for men's apprehensions
are various; The Dr. thinks this power fittest for the King: His answerers
judge it fittest for the two Houses, and give their reasons for it too. Powers
must there reside, where they are de facto by the Architects of a government
placed: he who can bring a fundamental Act stating this power in any, says
something to the matter: but to give our conjectures, where it should be, is
but to provide fuel for contention.

Dissolution of the ^rguments placing it in the two Houses.
On the contrary, The Author of that which is called A Fuller Answer to that Dr.
has two maine Assertions placing this Judgment in the two Houses.

1. The final and casting result of this States Judgment concerning what
these Laws, dangers, and means of prevention are, resides in the two Houses
of Parliament, says he, p. 10.

2. In this final resolution of the States Judgment, the people are to rest,
ibidem, page 14. Good Lord! What extreme opposition is between these two sorts
of men? If the maintenance of these extremes be the ground of this war, then
our Kingdom is miserable, and our Government lost which side soever overcome:
for I have, more then once, made it good, that these Assertions are destructive
on both sides: But I am rather persuaded, that these Officious Propugners
overdoe their work, and give more to them whose cause they plead, then they
ever intended to assume: Nay, rather give to every one their due: give no power
to one of these three to crush and undo the other at pleasure: But why does
this Answer give all that to the two Houses which ere while they would not
suffer when the Judges in the case of Ship Money had given it to the King? sure
when they denied it to him they did not intend it to themselves. 1. He tells
us In them resides the reason of the State: And that the same reason and
Judgment of the State which first gave this government its being, and
constitution; therefore all the people are to be led by it and submit to it as
their public reason and Judgment.

I answer, If by state, he mean the whole Kingdom: I say, the reason of the
two Houses divided from the King, is not the reason of the Kingdom, for it is
not the Kings reason, who is the head and chief in the Kingdom. If by state
be meant the people, then it must be granted, that as far forth as they
represent them, their reason is to be accounted the reason of the Kingdom: and
does bind so far forth as the public reason of the Kingdom can bind
after they have restrained their reason and will to a condition of subjection:
so that put case it be the reason of the state, yet not the same which first
gave this Government its being: for then it was the reason of a State, yet free
and to use their reason and Judgment in ordaining a Government: but now the
reason of a State bound by Oath to a Government, and not at liberty to resolve
again: Or to assume a supreme power of judging, distructive to the frame of
Government they have established, and restrained themselves unto Their reason
is ours, so far as they are an ordained representative body: But I have
before demonstrated, that in this frame, the Houses could not be ordained a
legal Tribunal to pass Judgment in this last case: for then the Architects
by giving them that Judicature, had subordinated the King to them, and so had
constituted no Monarchy. 2. He argues, the Parliament being the Court of
supreme Judicature and the Kings great and highest Council, therefore that is
not to be denied to it, which inferior Courts ordinarily have power to do, viz
To judge matters of right between the King and Subject: Yea, in the highest
case of all: The Kings power to tax the subject in case of danger, and his
being sole Judge of that danger, was brought to cognizance, and passed by the
Judges in the Exchequor. I answer, 1. There is not the same reason betwixt the
Parliament and other courts. In these ^he King is Judge, the Judges being
deputed by him, and judging by his authority; so that if any of his Rights be
tried before them, it is his own Judgment, and he judges himself; and
therefore it is fit he should be bound by his own sentence: But in Parliament
the King and People are Judges, and that not by an authority derived from him,
but originally invested in themselves. So that when the two Estates judge
without him in any case not prejudged by him, it cannot be called his
Judgment, (as that of the other Courts, being done by his authority) and if he
be bound by any Judgment of the two Estates without him, he is bound by an
external power which is not his own; that is, he is subordinated to another
power in the State where he is supreme; which is contradictory. Secondly, in
other Courts, if any case of right be judged 'twixt him and the subject, they
are cases of particular Rights which diminish not Royalty if determined against
him. Or if they pass cases of general right, (as they did in that of
Ship Money) it is but declaratively to show what is by Law due to one and the
other: yet their Judgment is revocable, and liable to a repeal by a superior
Court, as that was by Parliament. But if the Kings Prerogatives should be
subjected to the Judgment of the two Estates, the King dissenting, then he
should be subject to a sentence in the highest Court, and so irremediable; a
Judicatory should be set up to determine of his highest Rights without him,
from which he could have no remedy. Thus maine causes may be alleged, why,
though other Courts do judge his Rights, yet the two Estates in Parliament
(without him) cannot: and it is from no defect in their power, but rather from
the eminency of it, that they cannot. If one deputed by common consent of
three, does by the power they have given them determine controversies between
those three, it is not for either of them to challenge right to judge those
cases, because one who is inferior to them does it. Indeed if the power of the
two Houses were a deputed power, as the power of other Courts is, this Argument
were of good strength: but they being concurrents in a supreme Court by a power
originally their own, I conceive it hard to put the power of final Judgment
in all controversies 'twixt Him and them exclusively, or solely into their
hands.

If it be demanded then, how this cause can be decided? What be done in such a
Contention?
I answer, If the non-decision be tolerable, it must remain undecided, whiles
the Principle of legal decision is thus divided, and by that division each
suspends the others power. If it be such as is destructive, and necessitates a
determination, this must be made evident; and then every Person must aid that
Part, which in his best Reason and Judgment stands for public good, against
the destructive. And the Laws and Government which he stands for, and is
sworn to justifies and bears him out in it, yea; binds him to it. If any
wonder I should justify a power in the two Houses to resist, and command aid
against any Agents of destructive commands of the King, and yet not allow them
power of judging when those Agents or commands are destructive. I answer, I
do not simply deny them power of judging and declaring this; but I deny them
to be a legal Court ordained to judge of this case authoritatively, so as to
bind all People to receive and rest in their judgment for conscience of its
authority, and because they have Voted it: It Is the evidence, not the power of
their Votes, must bind our Reason and Practice in this case: We ought to
conceive their Votes the Discoveries made by the best eyes of the Kingdom and
which in likelihood should see most: But when they Vote a thing against the
proceedings of the Third and supreme Estate, our Consciences must have evidence
of Truth to guide them, and not the sole authority of Votes; and that for the
Reason so often alleged.

CHAP. VIII. The contention now in being is debated, and the readiest means of
Reconcilement proposed.
THus have I (for my own satisfaction, and the Conscience peruse the same) set
down what I verily conceive to be the truth concerning those high matters,
first of Monarchy in general, and then of this of England, and have given my
determination concerning all the weighty Questions which arise considerable in
the course of handling both: Now nothing remains, but to resolve the
Conscience by this precedent light, what to judge of the unhappy contention,
which now is broken out into open war, between the King and the two Houses.
But this depending on matter of fact, is more fitly referred to every man's own
memory and Judgment; and nothing is to be done, but to acquaint himself with
the certain truth of those matters of fact, and then to judge thereof according
to the former Rules. To this issue the whole controversy is brought, That the
two Houses may lawfully resist by force of Arms, all counsels and attempts of
what men soever, tending to the subversion of the established Frame of
Government, or themselves and their Fundamental Privileges; which is
equivalent to the other; yea, though they are warranted by the commands and
personal presence of the King himself: And that clearly, this is no
resistance of the higher power in our Government (so no force be intended or
used against the Kings own Person) nor does it come within the censure of
Saint Paul Romans 13. nor any other Scripture, nor right Reason grounded thereon:
so that the Conscience assured hereof, has nothing else to do but to enquire
whether the truth of Factlyes either in the Affirmative of the two Houses; That
the Kingdom was in imminent danger, the King refusing to join with them for
prevention of it, when they assumed the Militia for defense: Or else in the
Kings Negative. Much has been said on both sides, to draw the Consciences of
men to adherence; and many (no doubt) have judged according to their pre
engaged affections: Many Papers have I seen running out on both sides to
unjustifiable extremes, and have much helped on the contention, by making the
breach wider: yea, I have read more said for them then (I am persuaded,
notwithstanding the heat of the contention) either will say for

A debate upon the contention.
Now for a man to resolve his Conscience about the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of this War, the course is not to cry it down indefinitely, as a Resistance
of Gods ordinance, nor of the higher Power: Nor to justify it, because the
cause stood for is Religion, and expurgation of in-crept corruptions in Church
and State: For all standing for Religion and Reformation is not a justifiable
cause to take up Arms; we having proved it before, that in this Kingdom
nothing can warrant it, but apparent danger from destructive Counselors and
Instruments. Neither is it enough to demand, as Doctor Fern does Sect 6. Who
were first in Arms? for the other part will by their Almanac find Arms and
Forces gathered and employed before those in Hull: Declar. of the Lords and
Commons of Apr 3. 1642.
but that is not the resolving enquiry; it may fall out the defensive part may
be first in Arms, to prevent the ruin of counsels and Plots which are
apparently contrived, but not executed. The resolving enquiry (I think) must
be, Whether at the Parliaments taking up of Arms, the Commonwealth, Frame of
established Government, or (which is all one) the Being and radical Powers of
Parliament were in apparent danger of subversion? For if so, then the Arms and
Force used against the Counselors or Agents thereof is proved lawful by all
the precedent discourse.

Now it will be alleged, and is in part acknowledged, His Majesty's Answ. to
the Petit. of the houses March 26. 1642.
that there was a grand intention and plot of altering the Government of this
Kingdom, and reducing it to an arbitrary way. They will not say his Majesty
was conscious of it; but it was aimed at by many about him, and in power with
him, whom it concerned to have him absolute: By these men he was told that such
things were Law, which if they had bin so, then he had bin absolute by law.
They will instance in the long and purposed disuse of Parliaments: The
arbitrary Taxes and Impositions on most of the Commodities of the Kingdom: The
encroachnent of the Arbitrary Courts upon the Legal: The Imposition of
Ship Money: And the Judges opinion that the King had power to tax the subject
in times of danger, and that he is the sole Judge of that danger: The raising
an Army, and forcing the subject to furnish the same with Coat and
Conduct-money. The intention of bringing up the Army, to subvert, or at best,
to awe and confine the Parliament to bounds of proceeding of their own
setting. All this before or upon the beginning of the Parliament. Then the
evidences and proofs against the Earl of Strafford, His Majesty's coming
with the terror of such an attendance into the House of Commons, to demand such
a number of Members. Here is a succession of designs, all before the least
show of resistance: for his Majesty's coming to the House was Iannuary 4.
1641. And the first Petition to his Majesty about the Militia was not till the
26. of the same: And their resolution to settle it by themselves, His Majesty's
refusing was not till March 1. And among all these there is not one but tends
to destroy the frame of Government. Not that every one who had a hand in them
did aim at such a destruction; but looking on the design it self (and we
must judge of men's intentions by the nature of their Counsels and
enterprises,) every one of them strikes at the foundation of this legal frame,
and tends to the introduction of Absoluteness and Arbitrarinesse in the
Sovereign.

I acknowledge, that since that time, there is a Plea on both sides of danger
of subversion: The King withdrew from London: and often affirms that He was
driven thence, and could no longer remain in safety: And the two Houses on the
former designs plead a danger of subversion from evil Counselors. Both
sides now complain of danger, and have taken up Arms to repel that danger:
but these complaints of danger, and taking up of Arms by both sides, was all
since the succession of those fore-recited plots. I know what has been
intended or done since the taking of Arms may be all affirmed to be for
defense against danger; the withdrawment of so many Members of both Houses, the
acts of hostility on both sides, the taxing, spoiling, and undoing of thousands
of innocent people, all must be excused by necessity of War, and
self-defense. But what can be said for all those Plots and Essaies, which were
the Parliaments first grounds of Fears and Forces? Were they removed before
they took up Arms, and so their assuming them made causlesse and inexcusable?
You will say, Those were the Plots of men in grace and authority about His
Majesty, and that the illegality of those proceedings being made known to him,
He disclaimes them professing solemnly he has no intent but to govern by Law;
and acknowledges that the Law is the measure of his power. But they do tell
you, That they object nothing against his Majesty, they impute nothing to Him,
nor use force against Him, but those destructive Counselors, and their
Abbettors which are about Him; because their danger is not from His intentions,
but from theirs. It is answered, that His Majesty offers to secure them, the
Laws, Liberties, and Religion, by any Acts they shall devise to that purpose.
Parliam. Remonstrance May 19. 1642
They will tell you, Their danger is not from want of Laws to secure them, for
they are secured by Law already; their danger is from Men, and their Plots and
Designs to overthrow Law; and a danger of subversion of Law cannot be secured
by Law; succeeding Laws can be no better nor stronger then former Laws: so
that where those men and their counsels are in power, whose aim has been the
subversion of Parliaments, Liberties, and Laws; and those Doctrines remain
affirmed and maintained by the Clergy of that side, which subvert all
limitations of Monarchy, make all Laws Acts of grace, and revocable Immunities
granted to Subjects; condemning for Rebellion all force used even by the
Parliament it self, against the meanest Instruments of violence employed by
the Princes Will; making the Princes Will and Gods Ordinance one and the same
thing, of the same latitude; so that resistance of one is resistance of the
other: such Counselors and such Doctrines are (they say) the ground of
public danger, from which no Laws but Justice can secure us. Public Liberty
and Power of forcible resistance of Instruments of servitude are so conjoined,
that if you make it unlawful simply to use such power of resistance, you make
it unlawful for a People to be free.

What course then can be sufficient to answer their Demands Means of
reconcilement proposed.
Though I incur the censure of high Presumption, yet I will be so bold to
afford my opinion herein, submitting it to the censure of every Judicious
Reader; wishing it were worthy to be scanned by those, in whose hands it is to
heal our divisions. What honest heart does not bleed, to see the ruin of this
late flourishing Kingdom go on so fast? Who can do other then speak his
mind, who conceives he thinks of any thing which may conduce to Peace and
the re-uniting of this divided Body? Suffer me therefore to disclose my heart
in a case, in which every good man has a deep interest. Thus then I could
heartily desire.



Answ. to the Petition of Commons Ian. 28. 1641.
Secondly, that His Majesty would be pleased (according to his gracious
Resolution, viz. To deny only those things, the granting whereof would alter
the Fundamental Laws, and endanger the foundation on which public happiness
is built:) to condescend to all Acts of safety, both by establishing of Laws
tending to it; and removal of Persons of destructive counsels and Judgments,
because the danger alleged is from such.

Militia of the Kingdom may be by them (making use of his Majesty's Authority)
employed in bringing to pass their long fomented, and not yet deserted
design; His Majesty would be pleased (for this present) to authorize such over
the Militia whom the Houses shall approve of, not thereby disparaging his power
over the Militia, which by Law is invested in him; but satisfying by a
condescent of grace their Fears from apprehensions of present danger.

assuming the Militia, have gone from the Houses to serve and adhere to his
Majesty: For since the time that both parts have declared themselves to be in
danger, many good subjects and Patriots have followed the parts, from
conscience and persuasion of the truth of Allegations on either side, as their
care and opinion of either Part has lead them; (not that I can acquit them,
who on any mis-leading assist the destructive party, from guilt, as Accessaries
and Instruments of so unnatural a design) but that I cannot see how the
authority and freedom of either of the three Estates can choose but undergo a
show of disparagement, if its adherents and propugners (when it cries out of
danger of subversion from the other, and calls and requires their assistance)
should be proceeded against and punished as Delinquents, when they profess
their aim has been no more then to preserve the just rights of any of the
fundamental Estates of the Kingdom, without impairment of the other.

Fifthly that if possible, all those might be readmitted into

Sixthly, that his Majesty (for the sake of Peace, and present Negative voice,
resolving to give his royal assent to what shall pass by the major part of
both Houses freely voting, concerning all matters of grievance and difference
now depending in the two Houses. I am confident, if ever this War be transacted
without the ruin of one side, which will endanger, if not undo the whole, it
must be by some such way of remission of rigor on both sides as I have now
described: Which the God of Peace, in whose hands are the hearts and counsels
of men, speedily and graciously effect for his Name sake.

FINIS.

