A SERMON GATHERED And set forth by that Divine Spirit which God has given to
me JAMES HVNT, AND Dedicated to all those which do love God and the Truth.
IT is written in the 3. Chapter of John and the 3. verse. Jesus Christ who is
the powerful God of Heaven and of earth, he does tell you plainly, except a
man be borne again he cannot see the Kingdom of God; for that which is borne of
the flesh, is fleshly, and that which is borne of the spirit, is spirit, verse.
the 6. and now my new birth which God has wrought in me, I hope the same will
be a plain pattern for all those which shall read my book, or hear it, read;
for I acknowledge, that first I was the Son of man bearing the Image of the
earthly, but by the Divine power and glory of the word of God, which is made
manifest in the New Testament; I am made the Son of God, and b^are the Image
of the heavenly, for the Image of God is the soul, which is the inw^ man,
which is justified and glorified by the Divine power and glory of the word of
God, for whom God does call, them he does justify and whom he does justify,
them he does glorify. Romans 8. Chapter and the 30. verse. Again, St. Paul does
tell you plainly, in the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians, the 3. Chap^er and the
18. verse. We all with open face beholding as in a glass, the glory of the
Lord, are changed into the Image of God from glory to glory, by the divine
power and spirit of the Lord: now if the Apostle should have said, we shall be
changed, that would have signified, in the world to come; but its says
plainly, we are changed, which does plainly signify, here in this world; it is
plainly written in the first Epistle of Peter, the 1. Chapter and the 23 verse.
Being born again not with corruptible seed, but by the word of God which lives
and abides for ever, and this is the word which by the Gospel is preached unto
you, verse. 15. And it is plainly written in the 1. Epistle to the Corinthians,
the 6. Chapter and the 17. verse. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit;
and now I shall make it plainly appear, Gods true Preacher, he is both man and
woman in signification of Scripture; for Saint Paul does tell you plainly in
the 1. Epistle to the Corinthians the 4. Chapter and the 15. verse. Though you
have ten Thousand Instructers, yet you have not many Fathers; for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel, and for to beget does signify a
man: Again in the 4. Chapter to the Gallathians, there he says, my little
Children in whom I travel in Birth, until Christ be formed in you, and to
travel in birth does signify, a woman, for as every natural Child, has a
Father and Mother of the flesh, so on the other side, God is the Father and
Mother of the spirits, I say again, of the spirits of all those people which
are and shall be reconciled to Jesus Christ, and to the Ministration of the New
Testament, which is our glorious Gospel of love and peace, it is plainly
written in the 1. Chapter of James. Every good and perfect gift is from above,
and comes down from the Father of lights; and if his free will we are
begotten by the word of truth, for Christ is the Word and the Truth; for it is
plainly written in the 1. Chapter of John and the 14. verse. The Word was made
flesh and dwelt amongst us, and thus I have proved in brief, Christ is the
Word, and Christ is God: And Gods Word does tell you plainly, in the 4. Chapter
to the Gallathians, and the 26. verse. Jerusalem which is above is free, which
is the Mother of us al^, but of what all, I say of all those which are and
shall be borne again by the Divine power and glory of the Word of God, and by
Gods help, I have made it plainly appear, Gods true Preacher, he is both man
and woman in signification of Scripture; for now I say again, Christ is the
Word, and Christ is God, and he that is joined to God is one spirit, and a man
is begotten and born again by the Divine power of the Word of God, and now by
Gods help, I will boldly say, as it is written in the 2. Chapter of Peter, and
the 2 v. Even as new born babes desire the sinsere milk of the word that ye may
grow thereby; and now I say again, that ye may all grow thereby in heavenly
wisdom, until you come into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of
the Son of God unto a perfect man, even to the measure, and statute of the
falnesse of Christ, as you may read in the 4. Chapter to the Ephesians; but ye
Clergy and some of ye great men of the world, which have been bread up in the
latin School, you say a man can come to no true perfection here in this world;
but I shall plainly prove, you are all deceived in your judgment, for it is
plainly written in the same Chapter, Jesus Christ, he ascended up on high, and
gave guilts unto men, some Apostles, and Prophets, and Teachers, for the work
of the Ministry, and for the perfecting of the Saints: And now ye Clergy, you
say you are Gods Ministers; but now I say, are not you ashamed for to judge
your selves for to be such poor dunses that you are not able for to teach the
people for to grow up into no hight of heavenly perfection; but now ye deluding
Clergy, by the power of God I shall make you see and understand, God has made
me a perfect man; for Gods word does tell you in the 10. Chapter to the
Hebrews, and the 14. verse. by one offering, Christ has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified; but how, and by what means are we sanctified, I say by the
true light and glory of Gods Word; for it is plainly written in the 17. Chapter
of John and the 17. verse. Christ says, sanctify them through the truth, thy
Word is truth, for Christ is the word and the truth, and Christ does tell you
plainly, the glory which God his Father gave unto him, he does give to his
Saints, that they may be all one in us, that the world may believe that thou
have sent me; now here in this Chapter, I have proved that for all true
believers, we are joined to God the Father and to God the Son, and now ye
Clergy, I pray what say you, am not I come to true and sound perfection, and do
you not know a handful of Wheat is as perfect Wheat as a whole Bushel; for
it is of the same substance, though it be not so great in substance, and I hope
ye all know a natural Child as soon as it is born, it has the perfect shape
and Image of a man; but he does grow by degrees in stature and tallnesse,
until he come unto the fu^l age and stature and talenesse of a man: even so,
in like manner, as soon as a man is truly sanctified by the devine power of
the word of God, he is a newborn babe in Christ, but then he does grow up in
glory by degrees, until he become to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus, even to
the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ, which is agreeable unto that
portion of Scripture which I have before mentioned; and now I say again, which
is agreeable unto the devine power and glory of my new birth, which God my
Father, and Jesus Christ has wrought in me.

And now by Gods help, I will boldly say, with Saint Paul, as it is written in
the 2. Epistle to the Corinthians the 4. Chapter. and the 6. verse. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness has shined in our hearts for to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. And now I say again, Which knowledge does shine in me so clear that I
do behold Gods glorious face, not with my bodily eyes, which are temporal,
but with my spiritual eyes which are heavenly and eternal. And now ye learned
Scholars which have been bred up in the Greek and Latin^ School, I must tell
you plainly, if you can be able for to prove, that there is no true God, nor
no true Gospel, why then you may prove, that a man can come to no true
perfection here in this world, But now ye deluding Synod, from your
Antichrist^n stool, I pray stand up and arise: For by the true light and glory
of my new birth. I shall set open your eyes, for Christ does tell you plainly,
Except a man be borne again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, and now ye
Lords Knights, and Burgeses in Parliament, I must tell you plainly, and boldly,
by the true light and glory of my New birth, God has made me able to show you
the true light and glory of the Kingdom of God; For it is plainly written in
the first Chap^er to the Coloss. and the 12. and 13. verse. God our Father he
has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son; but how are we
translated into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ; I say by the true light and glory
of his word, for Christ has a Church here on earth, which is visible and
invisible; the visible Church does signify all those people which are, and
shall be reconciled to Christ, and to the ministration of the new Testament,
which is the book of life; the invisible Church, that is the souls of the
people, which is to be discerned by the eye of Faith, for Jesus Christ has a
glorious Church in himself, for God our glorious Father he gave us his Son for
to be head over all things to the Church which is his body, as you may read in
the first Chapter to the Ephesians, and the 22. verse, and now ye High Court of
Parliament, I pray mark this point of Scripture, for the Apostle does call the
true Church the body of Christ: for as a temporal tree has many bows and
branches, and all make but one tree; even so in like manner, for all those that
will be reconciled to Christ, and to the obedience of his Word, your souls
which is the inward man shall be ingrafted in to the Mystical body of Christ,
although we be thousand in number, and now ye deluding Synod, I understand
there is many opinions amongst you about Religion, but now I shall make to
plainly appear, there is but two sots of people here in this world; for all
those that are not in Christ, they are out of Christ, and all those that are
out of Christ, they are yet under the bondage of the Devil; and Gods Word does
tell you plainly in the 5. Chapter and the 17. verse. of the 2. Epistle to the
Corinthians, If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; now this word any
man does signify any man which is here on earth: let him be rich of poor, if
he be in Christ, he is a new creature, and for to be a new creature is to be
reconciled to Christ, and to the ministration of the New testament, and with
all those that are new man in Christ, old things are past away and behold all
things are become new, verse. 17. For as Circumcision, and the blood or Bulls
and Goats, and those Ordinances which you may read at large in the 9. Chapter
to the Hebrews, did belong to the old Law and Testament, which Christ has
abolished by his suffering on the Cross; Now on the other side, Baptism, and
the Bread and Wine, they are those Ordinances which does belong to the
Mystical body of Christ, and to the ministration of the New Testament, which
shall stand and abide for ever. And now ye high Court of Parliament, it is
plainly reported, you do intend to set forth and order, that there must be
Elders in every Parish, and the Elders and Clergy they must examine the people
before they come to receive the Sacrament of Bread and Wine, but now, I hope,
you shall plainly understand, God has made me a preaching Elder for to try
and prove the Clergy; for now ye Clergy, I must tell you plainly, no man has
any right in the sight of God, for to be partakers of the holy Communion of
Bread and Wine, but those that will be reconciled to Christ, and to the
ministration of the New Testament, whereunto the Sacrament of Bread and Wine
does belong, for Christ does tell you plainly in the 22. Chap. of Luke, This
cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you; and now by Gods
help, I will show you in brief what a great error the Clergy are in, for
every Lords day they read a Chapter in the old Law and Testament, and another
in the New, and when they are up in their Pulpits, in their Doctrine they join
the old Law and Testament, and the New together, as if they were both as one,
and in so doing, they have most shamefully blinded, and deceived all those
people which are as yet held under their power. For now I say plainly and
boldly, if there be any one of ye Clergy or any other man that can find any
one place of Scripture in the New Testament, for to prove that the old Law and
Testament is allowed of God for to be joined to the mystical body of Christ,
which I have plainly proved for to be the true and glorious Church, if I cannot
find five other plain and clear truths of Scripture, for to prove that you
are utterly deceived in your judgment, why then I will be content to be put to
death, under the judgment of ye Lords, Knights, and Burgesses to Parliament,
which are gathered together, for the trial of the Spirits. And new ye Synod,
you say old Ceremonies they must be laid aside: and now I say, I pray forsake
your Tenthes and Tithes, for you shall be s^undly tried. For Gods Word does
tell you plainly in the 7. Chapter to the Hebrews, and the 5. verse, The Sons
of Levi they had a commandment to receive tithes of the people, according to
the Law. And now ye learned Synod, I hope you know the Leviticall Priesthood
was in force in the time of the old Law, for the 11. ver. does tell you, Under
the Leviticall Priesthood the people received the Law, but the 12. verse will
tell you palinely, The Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law, for Christ has quite abolished the old Law by his
suff^ring on the Cross, and ye Synod and Clergy, I must tell you plainly,
your Tenths and Tithes shall vanish away with the old Law; And now ye high
Court of Parliament, I pray remember that you have made open profession unto
all the world that you have a desire for to pull down the Kingdom of
Antichrist, but by you power, you force the people for to pay Tenths and tithes
to the Clergy, and in so doing you do very powerfully uphold the Kingdom of
Antichrist. For now I must tell you plainly, and boldly, Tenths and Tithes
does not belong to the glorious Priesthood of our and Savior Jesus Christ. But
then some man may say, what means shall the Clergy have for to live upon? My
answer is, for all those that shall be found to be true preachers, for to show
the people by what means they may grow up in heavenly perfection until they
come to be perfect men in Christ; there shall be money gathered for you, which
shall be sufficient for to maintain you with meat, drink, and apparel, and
the holy Apostles of Christ they were well content with those things, and so I
hope will ye Clergy: for your coveting after Tenths and Tithes, the same does
strongly blind your eyes.

And now ye Magistrates and Church wardens, I pray take not that thing in hand:

For to fight against the power of God,
which you are not able to withstand.
For God has made me a powerful instrument,
as you shall know and find,
For to open the peoples eyes,
whom the Clergy has kept blind.
But some of you do say, I shall preach in the Church, and you will be well
content, if I can get authority from the high Court of Parliament: but by the
power of God you and the high Court of Parliament shall see and understand,
Gods authority does far exceed the authority of of any mortal man; for it is
not in the Parliaments power for to make a man a Preacher, for they shall
find, God has made me able for to be their teacher: for to show them, and
you, the plain and perfect way, how true peace and sound religion you may
quietly enjoy. For these things God has made me for to behold with my
spiritall eye, for which I honor my King, and worship the holy and powerful
Tirnity.

FINIS.

