THESE SPIRITVALL VERSES OF JAMES HUNT, Concerning the Downfall of the
Ceremonies.

Whereby the Bishops and their Clergy have made, as it were, a trade to
blind and deceive the Children of God, whom Christ Jesus has redeemed from
the bondage of Hell and corruption, by his suffering upon the Cross, and the
power of his Resurrection.

LONDON: Printed for Andrew Coe. 1642.

(...) Wherefore Greek and Latin that seems to be so bright as the Sun
beam,
I pray give me leave to interpret a woman's dream,
Which said, she was a dreamed she had on a Lawyers gown,
Which does plainly signify their crafty kingdom will come down;
For if they will be joined to the God of peace,
Their crafty Law must end and cease;
But master Lawyer, you may think this is an ill sound,
To tell us our crafty kingdom will go down,
But I would entreat you not to think so,
For I am your friend and not your foe;
For I shall sing you a pleasant song,
You may be School masters to teach other Nations the English tongue,
For God will gather all Nations into Religion one;
So by degrees all shall be taught the English tongue;
For the Word which proceeds from the God of peace,
Does plainly say, that tongues shall cease: 1 Cor. 13.
But Lord Bishops and deep Doctors which Schollership so much adore,
You may perceive this being so, your Universities will grow poor,
But the children of God shall glorify his name therefore,
For they shall plainly understa^d, they are thetosels of the whore;
For henceforth no man shall need the Universities,
For to learn the wisdom of the wise;
For there are very few mysteries in the Gospel that be so strong,
But they may be unfolded by the plain true English tongue;
For now I make no doubt, but Babylon will be quite thrown down,
By the clear voice of the Trumpet sound;
I mean by the powerful Preaching of Gods grace,
That true and sound Religion will take place;
These things I behold with my spiritual eye,
For which the name of God, I honor, worship, and magnify.
CHristian Brethren, God has laid the Gospel in such a complete way, that if
there be a mystery or parable that speaks something darkly in one place, I
can find two or three other places for to prove and justify what that dark
mystery signifies, so that is the true and perfect way to interpret the
mysteries of God to the true meaning and signification, wherefore Christ says
plainly, First seek the Kingdom of Heaven and the righteousness thereof, and
then all things shall be added unto you: I understand and can prove that Christ
and his Gospel signifies Christ and his Kingdom, and all those people that
are and shall be reconciled to Christ, and to the obedience of his Word, which
is revealed in his Gospel, they are those whom God has ordained for to reign
with Christ in glory for ever. Now I hope the Clergy of England, nor no other
man will fight against that which they pray for in the Lords Prayer, which
says, Thy King dome come, thy will be done: Wherefore seeing it is Gods good
will and pleasure, to show his power in weakness, for to raise me up to show
unto all people the true and perfect way, how they may be delivered from the
bondage of hell and corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of
God: I say again, I hope the Clergy nor no other man will show themselves for
to be so unwise, as to fight against that which they pray for every day: It is
written in the 22 Chapter of the Revelations, verse. 16. Christ says plainly, J
Jesus have sent mine Angels to testefie unto you these things in the Churches;
The Angel plainly signifies for to be the Minister and Messenger of Jesus
Christ, whom God our glorious Father, and Christ Jesus our Redeemer, has
raised up for the establishing of true and sound Religion: Wherefore if the
Honorable High Court of Parliament will be pleased to take notice hereof, it
may be a good means to help forward Reformation; which will be to the praise
and glory of God, and to the confounding of false doctrine and false worship,
which belongs to the devil, which God has promised shall come to confusion;
and God is true, and his Gospel is true, and every title of his Word shall be
performed.

Now for matters of Law, I would feign know what difference can arise betwixt
man and man, but that a Justice of Peace, and a Jury of twelve men, may make a
peaceable end, and so every man may have his right. It is written in the
seventh Chap. by S. John, verse. 51. Nicodemus said concerning Christ; Does our
Law judge any man before it hear and know what he does; So I hope our Royal
King and Honorable Parliament, will not maintain any such Law, that a man
shall be cast in prison, as I have been eight times, and now am threatened to be
cast in prison again, for speaking and justifying nothing but the very truth,
to the praise and glory of God. But that I shall be brought unto my trial, to
show the cause why I cry out so much against the Clergy, which are under the
authority of the Bishops, which have linked themselves together, as in a
chain, against Christ and his elect children; Wherefore I beseech some good
Christian people, for the mercies of God, and true love that is in Jesus
Christ, that you will stand my friend, for to entreat the High Court of
Parliament, that I may be brought to my trial; that the same abominable bond
of iniquity may be broke; and on the other side, the spirit of God may be
granted to have his free course; for the which, you need not doubt but that
Christ will reward you with the Crown of his everlasting glory: And so God
save the King and Queen, and their royal issue; with all the Nobility and
Communalty of this Land, and guide them all with thy grace and holy Spirit,
that they may lead their lives pleasing and acceptable in thy sight, that they
may reign with Christ in glory here in this world, and in the world to come
for evermore world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

