The Worlds Wonder, OR, Joyful News from Scotland and Ireland.

COMPRISED In the ensuing Predictions, and Monthly Observations, for this
prsent year, 1651. Foreshewing the great things that will come to pass in
England, Ireland and Scotland, the several fights that will happen between the
Lord Genesis Cromwell and the Scots, and the Lord Genesis Deputy Ireton, and the
Irish; the event and success thereof, and what will befall the King of Scots,
and Major Genesis Massey. A great Victory to be obtained by the English, in the
Month of July, upon the eclipsing of the Sun, as it was in Jermany, when the
renouned King of Sweden, charging in the Van against the Emperor, with his
Sword in one hand, and his Pistol in the other, in his Buf-Coat, was slain upon
the place: with a description of the said fight, and the Kings ^peech to his
Soldiery, at the head of each Regiment, upon their engaging against the Enemy.
A great fight in Ireland, and the total routing of the Enemy in Scotland, 15
Marquesses, Earls, and Lords taken prisoners, all their Ordnance, Arms,
Ammunition, Bag, and Baggage. A great fight at Sea by the Parliaments Navy.
Diverse Ships taken, sunk, and burned: joyful tidings for the London Merchants,
and exceeding good news for the Country Farmers, and Citizens. Together, with
a new Prophecy of the Presbyterians, and what will befall them this Summer; to
the great admiration of All that shall read this ensuing Subject.

Extracted out of the Original, Licensed according to Order,

woodcut of the moon, crescent at bottom, man's face in the shadow North


LONDON, Printed by John Clowes, 1651.

The Worlds Wonder,
I Hope I may crave pardon, and as easily obtain it, for beginning my
Prognostics, considering that they comprise, (and are amplified, with) very
remarkable Observations, and rational Predictions; wherein you may apparently
discern and foresee, the great things that will happen in England, Ireland,
Scotland, France, Denmark, Sweden, and other parts of Europe; as also the event
and success of the English Armies, in their several designs and motions, either
by Sea or Land, against Scot, Irish, French, Deane, and Portingal; and to the
end, that these Prognostics may appear the more easy and facile, (to each
respective capacity and understanding) I have in reference thereunto, drawn up
and composed these ensuing annexals, in order to their due stinction and course
of each months Progress and actions; but by reason January has produced
little of concernment, I shall therefore more fully and particularly, insist
upon the rest of the ensuing months, for this present year, 1651; and first,
give me leave to present you, February viz.

February, 1651.
HOw pleasently does this month begin with my brother Commoner? The Nation
smiles, every one is merry with his Mistrisse, and think the worst is past; I
wish it were so; Great plots are contriving between our souldery, and the
Scots, when we poor Commoners know it not; neither is it fit we should; it is
not our places; and if every one had kept the place God set him in, this Nation
had not been in the pickle it is now in; let the Clergyman mind his Bible, and
the Plowman his Plow: We know not, neither was any man able to tell us, what
sin it was the Devil first committed, only, Jude 6. God spared not the Angels
that left their first station: Let not us leave ours to turn Statesmen, etc.
Mars sets Retrogade; Treaties break off; it is the sword must end the difference
when all is done: Our neighbor Kingdoms are afraid of us they have cause enough;
therefore, good Presbyter, let me advise thee to be wise, why should thou
bring thy self into a premunery, and fall before thy time? Be wise, or else thy
Motto shall be miserum est fuisse.

March.
This month threatens great dissension in Scotland; between the Nations; the
Nobility divide; the Clergy break in pieces, and the Commonalty falls by
hundreds; and great is the breach through the Scottish Territories. Do, fall
out, and fight to, it shall never trouble me.

But give me leave to give a timely admonition to their young King; Oh that he
would be so wise to hear, I question not, but some will bear the honesty to
tell him, or the malice against me, to tell him of it. It is only, Ier. 45.
4. 5. somewhat applied to his Person; The great Jehovah of Heaven and earth, the
Redeemer of the world, the Savior of Saints, has said thus, That which I have
built will I destroy, and that which I have planted will I pluck up, even thy
whole family; and seeks tbou great things to thy self, seek them not. If I
speak to wise men, this is enough; yet I cannot but conclude some, nay much
good to the Commonwealth this year, viz. Prosperity and happiness; surely
justice will this year come down from heaven to visit the earth; peace, Plenty,
and prosperity seems to attend the English Nation.

April.
The season of this month being suitable, produces great action in the field;
and I expect more wonders this month to be either agitated or transacted, then
either the eyes of our fathers, grandfathers, or great grandfathers, ever saw
or dreamt of; Now expect another rout in Scotland, and that near the County of
Fife, where a gallant army of horse and foot lie bleeding, great guns and
little guns, together with all their baggage, oatmeal, and salt lost, and
taken, their young King attempts a fight beyond the Seas; the States of Holland
begin to smell a Rat, but are not wise enough to make a snare, etc. Bitter
weather abroad, and stormy at Sea, Pirates grow numerous, and the London
Merchant loses much, who can help it? But the States prudence and providence,
who employing Genesis Blake and sending an additional fleet unto him, ensnares
these Rovers; who after a short fight, sink, burns, and takes them all; and
with his Navy, adorned with these Trophies, the white flag and the red cross,
the blue flag, and tbe golden harp, fails to and fro upon the British Irish,
French, and Danish seas, clearing the several Channels of all Englands Enemies.

May.
ME thinks this month begins merrily as it should do, and it being
Cookoo-time, Citizens Servants will be ready to salute their Mistresses, etc.
Well! be it so, they will find a very untoward time of it; for it is a scurvy
Trade to be a Pyrate. This year will be a far more plentiful then healthful,
men's bodies will be vexed exceedingly with Coughs and Catarchs, and other
Diseases proceeding of cold and moisture will be enidemical, and of no long
continuance, which signifies death of women; and in all probability, there may
die three women for one man: much about this time, the little Queen in France
draws to a period of her days. The latter end of this March produces a great
Sea Fight, look to it France, for thou wilt-suffer: Beware Portugal, there is
not a Nation under the Moon shall offend us, and escape unpunished.

June.
THis Month begins with fair weather, and brings smiles to the Country
Farmer for his Harvest: But surely the Devil or Robin-goodfellow is in the
Scots; Scotland! Scotland! Do not thou see how thy Clergy cheats thee: if
ever mortal men were mad to be undone, you are of that number: The actions of
the latter end of this month, and the beginning of the next, amaze all Europe,
I had almost said the World; for an unparalleld Victory is obtained in Ireland,
another near the Mountains in Scotland, and about 15. Marquesses, Earls, and
Lords taken, and safly committed: If any happen to be headless about this time,
they will fall the lighter.

July.
IF any ask how this month will begin, the answer is ready, to wit, just as
the last ended, finding out knaves, such as set the Nation together by the
ears, such as sowed the seed of sedition in stead of the truth, such as
Widows and Fatherless Children daily pray against, such as one day shall
dearly answer, for the blood that has been spilt in this civil War, such as
have endeavored to make themselves by maring others; but now justice seizes
on them, and pays them their wages. About the 14. or 20. day produces tidings
of another great Battle Northward, which will again crown both our friends and
Armies with laurel; and it will also continue and end in execution of justice
upon Malefactors. Let the Army score their valor upon the heads of their
enemies in the name of God, but let peace and quietness be amongst themselves;
for though discord make a harmony in music, yet it does not so in an Army.
About this time we gather from the conjunction of Saturn and Mars, that the Sun
will be eclipsed, during a great part of the fight; but upon the Scots flight,
it appears in its glorious splendour again, which proves as fatal to the Scots,
as the great blow given to the Emperor of Jermany, by the late great blow
given to the Emperor of Jermany, by the late renowned King of Sweden, who upon
a pitched field with 15000. men, totally subdued that potent Army of Jermans,
consisting of 45000 l. and with his sword in one hand and his Pistol in the
other, a little before the fight began, rode to each Regiment, uttering these
words, Gentlemen and fellow Soldiers, I hope you are all willing to venture
your lives with me this day, for the advancement of the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, and for the establishing of his truth, etc. but the Soldiery being
overjoyed at his affable expressions, sounded forth great acclamations, that
they would live and die with him. Then replied the King, in the name of God,
let us fall on, I your Sovereign, and Cap. Genesis will be the first man that shall
charge in the van, which accordingly he did in his Buff-coat, without Armor,
where after 6 hours fight, this gallant Prince was slain: At which time the Sun
was darkened for the space of half an hour.

August.
ON the very beginning of this month, the Sun cuts the assendent of the year,
and the mid-heaven of the conjunction of Saturn and Mars, and sure the honest
Commoner begins to love the Parliament, apparently discerning now who has done
them good, and preserved them and theirs from Egiptian bondage.

September, and October.
THese two Months produce little action, either by Sea or Land, looking with a
pretty quiet face, and seems to promise some fair accord amongst our selves,
which the Lord grant us, and then let men; Devil, and Pope be our opposers.

November.
THis month begins severely, it is pity it is not likely to hold, I hope my
brother Commoner will like the Law a little better then he was wont to do; if
not, let but Neighbors live quietly, and there will be the less need of it.
This month cannot nor will not leave us till it has set Saturn and Mars
together by the ears.

December.
THe Sun begins to shine on the beginning of this month, affording us
seasonable weather, temperate actions, but suddenly the wind rises high, and
men's brains are entoxicated, they sit by the fire, and ponder in the winter
what they will do next Spring; but in the mean time women cannot agree with
their Husbands, who can help it? if the sheets cannot make them friends, I
cannot,

So farewell*
FINIS.

