POEMS. By W. H.

-- cineri gloria sera venit.


LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the George in Fleetstreet, near Cliffords
Inn Gate, 1655.

POEMS.
Commanded to write VERSES.
MADAM,
SInce your Command inspires
My willing heart with Lyrick fires,
Though my Composure owe its Birth,
Or to cold Water, or dull Earth,
Wanting the active qualities
That sprightly Fire and Air comprise;
Yet guided by that Influence,
I may with those Defects dispense:
And Raptures no less winning vent
Then the famed Thracian Instrument.
What though old sullen Saturn lie
Brooding on my Nativity,
So your bright eyes the Clouds dispell,
Which on my drooping Fancy dwell?
But stay, what Glass have we so bright,
To do your matchless beauty right?
Nature but from her own disgrace
Can add no luster to that face;
Nor from her patterns can we find,
A Form to represent your mind.
The figures which this World invest
Are Images in which expressed
Some truer Essences appear,
Which not to sight subjected are.
So you fair Celia inwardly
Dissemble well the Deity,
And counterfeit in flesh and skin
The finenesse of a Cherubin:
But fair one, if you must put on
This Orders Institution,
Admitted to this Hierarchy,
A Guardian Angel be to me.
The Walk.
Blessed Walk, that with your leavy arms embrace
In small, what beauty the dilated face
Of the whole World contains! The Violet,
Bowing its humble head down at her feet,
Pays homage for the livery of her veins:
Roses and Lillies, and what beautuous stains
Nature adornes the Sping with, are but all
Faint Copies of this fair Original.
She is a moving Paradise, does view
Your greens, not to refresh her self, but you.
This path's the Ecliptic, heat prolifick hence
Is shed on you by her kind influence;
She is (alas) too like the Sun, who grants
That warmth to all, which in himself he wants.
You thus obliged, this benefit return,
Teach her by Lectures visible to burn;
That She, when Zephyre moves each whispring bough
To kiss his neighbor, thence may learn to allow
The real seals of kindness, and be taught
By twining Woodbines what sweet joys are caught
In such embraces: Thus and thousand ways
Told you by amorous Fairies, and the lays
Of your fond Guardian, waken her desires,
Requiting your own warmth with equal fires.
Husbandry.
WHen I began my Love to sow,
Because with Venus Doves I plowed,
Fool that I was, I did not know
That frowns for furrows were allowed.
The broken heart to make Clods torn
By the sharp Harrows of disdain,
Crumbled by pressing rolls of scorn,
Gives issue to the springing grain.
Coyness shuts Love into a Stove,
So frost-bound lands their own heat feed:
Neglect sits brooding upon Love
As pregnant Snow on Winter-seed.
The Harvest is not till we two
Shall into one contracted be;
Loves crop alone does richer grow
Decreasing to Identity.
All other things not nourished are
But by Assimilation:
Love, in himself and Diet spare,
Grows fat by Contradiction.
Mutual Love.
FRom our loves, Heat and light are taught to twine,
In their bright nuptial bed of solar beams.
From our loves Them and Isis learn to join,
Loosing themselves in one another streams.
And if Fate smile, the Fire loves emblem bears,
If not, the Water represents our tears.
From our Loves all magnetic virtue grows,
Steel to the obdurate Loadstone is inclind.
From our Loves all the power of Chemists flows,
Earth by the Sun is into Gold refind.
And if Fate smile, this shall Loves Arrows head,
If not, in those is our hard fortune read.
From our still springing loves the youthful Bays,
Is in a robe of lasting verdure dressed,
From our firm loves the Cypress learns to raise,
Green in despite of storms, her deathless crest.
And if Fate smile, with that our Temples bound,
If not, with this our Hearses shall be crowned.
The forsaken Maid.
GO fickle Man and teach the Moon to change,
The Winds to vary, the coy Be to range:
You that despise the conquest of a Town
Renderd without resistance of one frown.
Is this of easy faith the recompense?
Is my prone loves too prodigal expense,
Rewarded with disdain? did ever dart,
Rebound from such a penetrable heart?
Diana, in the service of whose Shrine,
My self to single life I will confine,
Revenge thy Votaresse; for unto thee
The reeling Ocean bends his a zure knee.
And since he loves upon rough Seas to ride,
Grant such an Adria, whose swelling Tide,
And stormy tongue may his false Vessel wrack,
And make the Cordage of his heart to crack.
Another.
KNow falsest Man, as my love was
Greater then thine, or thy desert,
My scorn shall likewise thine surpass,
And thus I tear thee from my heart.
Thou art so far my love below,
That then my anger thou art less;
I neither love nor quarrel now,
But pity thy unworthiness.
Go join, before thou think to wed,
Thy heart and tongue in Wedlocks knot:
Can peace be reaped from his bed,
Who with himself accords not?
Go learn to weigh thy words upon
The balance of reality,
And having that perfection
Attaind, come then, and I Will scorn thee.
J. C.
Anagr. I can be any Lover.
SEE how the letters of thy Name impart
The very whispers of thy heart.
This name came surely out of Adams mint,
It bears so well thy Natures print.
Woman, materia prima, does present,
Is to all Forms indifferent,
As Pictures do at once with various eyes,
Distinctly view all companies,
With such a steadfast look, that each man would
Swear they did only him behold.
Thus run we in a Wheel, where steadfast ground
To fix our footing is not found,
Whilst Woman's heart incliningly does move
Like twigs to every sigh of Love.
She who imparts her smiles to more then one,
May many like, but can love none.
The force of all things in contraction lies,
And love thrives by Monopolies.
Those Glasses that collect the scatterd rays
Into one point, a flame can raise:
Straiten the object, you increase loves store;
So loving less, you love the more.
De Melidoria.
e Joh. Barclaij, Poem. lib, 2.
WHy languish I ye Gods alone?
Why only I? when not one groan
Afflicts her for whom I dye:
You mighty powers of Love, oh why
Does Meledore despise your darts,
And their effects too, bleeding hearts?
If thus (oh Gods) ye suffer her
Unpunished, none will prefer
Your Altars; such examples may
Become the ruin of your sway.
With Venus and her mighty Son
Expostulating thus, I won
This answer: Alas ( Cupid cries)
I hood-winkt am; my closed eyes
Bound with a Fillet, that my Bow
Can none but roving Shafts let go;
Hence it is that Troops of violent
Youth, their misplaced loves resent;
That some love rashly; some again
Congealed are with cold disdain:
Would thou thy Mistress, I inspire,
And in her breast convey that fire
Which nature suffers not to find
Birth from thy tears? Do but unbind
My eyes, and I will take such aim,
As she shall not escape my flame:
Thus spoke the Boy, my ready hand
Prepared was to loose the band
From his fair eyelids, that his sight
Might to his Dart give steady flight;
When my good Genius prudent ear,
Whisperd to my rash soul, Beware:
Ah shameless Boy, deceitful Love,
I see thy plot, should I remove
Those chains of darkness from thy eyes,
Thou Melidore so much would prize,
That strait my rival thou would be,
And warm her for thy self, not me.
Delay.
Upon advice to deferr Loves Consummation.
DElay, whose Parents Phlegm and Slumber are,
Think thou two Snailes drawing thy leaden Car,
Can keep pace with the fiery wheels of loves
Chariot, that receives motion from swift Doves?
Go visit Feavours, such as conscience wrack
With fear of punishment in death, there slack
The pulse, or dwell upon the fatal tongues
Of Judges, shut up their contagious lungs:
Thou may a Goal rejoice, but not decree
To Loves glad Prisoners a Jubilee.
How can thou think thy Frost with Icy Laws
Can bind my tears, when Love thy cold chain thaws?
He more intense for fighting Ice will be,
And raise his heat unto the eighth degree.
Thus through thy coldness I shall feircer burn,
And by thy Winter into Cinders turn.
But since from Ignorance fears often arise,
And thence are stolen unequal Victories,
Let us describe this Foe, muster his force:
A handlesse thing it is, and chills the sourse
Of brave attempts. Eyes he pretends to much,
Yet our experience often shows that such
Exactness in Surveying, opes a gate
To be surprizd by Semele's sad Fate.
It Is a mere trunk, has not for progre^s feet,
Coward that fears his own desires to meet.
His Friends are scarce; the Heavens, whose flight debates
The race with thought, are no confederates:
The World is love in act; suspend this fire,
The Globe to its old Chaos will retire:
Infernal souls, but for his loathed stay
Might hope their Night would open into Day.
How can this Cripple then, not with one Band
Aided by Earth, Heaven, Hell, his power withstand,
Who has of Earth, Heaven, Hell, the forces broke,
Imposed on Neptunes self his scorching yoke?
But if thou needst will haunt me, let thy Mace
Arrest delight when I my Love embrace.
Upon Cloris her visit after Marriage,
A pastoral Dialogue betwixt Codrus and Damon forsaken rivalls.
Codrus. WHy ( Damon) did Arcadian Pan ordain
To drive our Flocks from that Meridian plain
Where Cloris perpendicular shot beams
Scorched up our lawnes but that cool Charwells streams
Might here abate those flames which higher were
Then the faint moisture of our Flocks could bear?

Damon. Codrus, I wot the dog that tended there
Our Flocks was he which in the heavenly sphere
So hotly hunts the Lion that the trace
of Virgo scarce his fiery steps allaies;
Into our veins a feavour he conveyed,
And on our vital Spirits fiercely preyed.

Codrus. Oh why then brought she back her torred Zone?
Conquered her Trophyes? Let us not alone
After so many deaths? renewed our flame
When it was impossible to quench the same?
It is the punishment of Hell to show
The torturd souls those joys they must not know?

Damon. Though my Flock languish under her aspect;
My panting Dog his office too neglect;
Though I refuse repast, and by her eyes
Inflamed, prostrate my self her sacrifice,
I shall yet covet still her dubious rays,
Whose light revives as much as her heat slayes.

Codrus. If Thyrcis slept not in her shady hair,
If in his arms her snow not melted were,
We might expect a more successful day,
And to some hopes our willing hearts betray,
Which now live desperate without joy of light;
Her black eyes shed on us perpetual night.

Damon. Codrus because his ragged flock was thin,
His Sheep walk bare, and his Ewes did not yene,
His noble Love (hear this O Swains) resignd
His eyes delight a wealthier mate to find;
But she (rash in her choice) gave her embrace
To one whose bread courser then Codrus was.

Codrus. Damon (then whom none e're did longer burn;
Nor at his rate, upon so small return)
Damon (the pride and glory of the mead
When Nymphs and Swains their tuned measures tread)
Begged of her that a better choice might prove
She loved her self, since him she could not love.

Damon. Had Thyrsis flocks in milk abounded more,
I should not with such grief my loss deplore.

Codrus. Could Thyrsis pipe more worthily resound
Cloris, oh Cloris, I had comfort found.

Both. That our heart-wracking sighs no gain bequeath
To Cloris, is a dying after death.

On the infrequency of Celias Letters.
DId not true love disdain to own
His spirit all duration
From paper-fuell, I might guess
Thy love and writing both surcease
Together; But I cannot think
The life and Blood of love is Ink;
Yet as when Phoebus leaves our coast
(The surface bound with chains of frost)
Life is sustained by course repast,
Such as in Spring nauseates the taste,
So in my winter whilst you shine
In the remotest Tropic sign
Stramineous food paper and quill
May fodder hungry love until
He reobtaine solstitiall hours
To feast upon thy beauties flowers.
The wonders then of Nature we
Within out selves will justify:
Or what monumentall boast
The first world made, the latter lost:
Thy pointed flame shall constant 'bide
As an eternal Pyramid;
The never dying Lamp of Urnes
Revivid in my bosom burns:
The attractive virtue of the North
Resembles thy magnetic worth;
And from my scorcht heart through mine eyes
Aetnean flashes shall arise:
we shall make good when more unite
The fable of Hermaphrodite:
The Spring and Harvest of our bliss
The ripe and budding Orange is;
We little worlds shall thus rehearse
The wond^rs of the Universe
As a small watch keeps equal pace
With the vast Sun's impetnous race
To her questioning his Estate.
Prithee no more, how can Love sail?
Thy providence becalmes our Seas:
Suspensive care binds up each gale;
Fear does the lazy current freize.
Forecast and Love, the Lover swears,
Removed as the two Poles should be:
But if on them must roll the spheres
Of our well tuned felicity:
If Sums and Terrars I must bring,
Nor may my Inventory hide,
Know I am richer then the King
Who guilt Pactolus yellow Fide.
For Love is our Philosophers stone;
And whatsoever does please thy sense,
My prising estimation
Shall elevate to quintessence.
Thy lips each cup to wine shall charm,
As the Suns kisses do the Vine;
Naked embraces keep us warm;
And stripped, then May thou art more fine.
And when thou have me in thy arms,
(The power of Fancie's then most high)
Instate me by those mighty charms
In some imperial monarchy.
Thus I am thy wealth, thou art mine:
And what to each other we appear,
If Love us two in one combine
The same then in our selves we are,
The Spring.
SEE how the Spring courts thee, Emaphilis;
The painted Meadows to invite thy eyes
But on their rich embroydery* the shade
Of every grove is now an harbor made
Where devout birds (to celebrate thy praise)
Each morn and evening offer up their lays,
Now the soft wind his winter-rage deposes
Sollicites Gardens for the breath of Rosses.
To pay as homage to thy sweeter lips,
Where such Nectarean fragrancy he sips
That richly laden to the East he roues
And with thy breath perfumes those spicy groves:
Their native fount and sacred Naiades
These Issuing streams renouncing to the press;
whom finding they with purling murmurs chide:
That Natures Law Commands away their tide:
wishing that winter would confine their race
In Icy chains, that they might stand and gaze;
If thou can thus inflame Natures cold rheum
What wonder that my youthful flood consume?
The cruel Mistress.
TELL me O love why Celia, smooth
As Seas when winds forbear to sooth
Their waves to wanton curles, then down
More soft which does the Thistle Crown,
Whither then is the milky road
That leads to Joves supreme abode,
Should harder far and rougher be
Then most obdurate rocks to me;
Sheds on my hopes as little day
As the pale Moon's aclipsed ray?
My heart would break, but that I hear
Love gently whisper in my ear,
Actions of women by affection lead
Must backward like the sacred tongue, be read
To his Mistress, Desiring him to absent himself.
SEE how this river's liquid glass
Can never cease its motion,
Until he hide his Crystal face
In The bosom of the Ocean.
The amorous Nymphs who closely guide
His purling Chariots reins,
Declare that loves impetuous tide
To be represt disdaines.
Charm Zephyr that his gentle wing
Not with Narcissus play;
The Sun in his diurnall ring
From Thetis lap delay.
Stop the departed souls career
To its appointed blisses;
All thi^ effected, you may steer
Me to abstain your kisses.
To his scornful Mistress.
LOve in's first infant days had 's Wardrobe full;
Sometimes we found him courting in a Bull.
Then, dressed in snowy plumes, his long neck is
Made pliable and fit to reach a kiss:
When aptest for embraces he became
Either a winding Snake, or curling Flame:
And cunningly a pressing kiss to gain,
The Virgins honor in a Grape would stain:
When he consulted Lawns for privacies,
The Shepherd, or his Ram was his disguise:
But the blood raging to a rape, put on
A Satyr, or a wilder Stallion;
And for variety, in Thetis Court
Did like a Dolphin with the Sea-Nymph sport:
But since the sad Barbarian yoke has bowd
The Grecian neck, Love has less change allowd,
Contracted lives in eyes; no flaming robes
Wears, but are lent him in your Crystal Globes:
Not worth a waterd Garment; when he wears
That Element he steals it from my tears.
A Snake he is (alas) when folded in
Your frowns, where too much sting guards the fair skin
A Shepherd unto cares, and only sips
The blushing Grape of your Nectarean lips:
The Ram Bull stallion Satyrs only fight
Loves battles now in my wild appetite.
He in his Swan too suffers a restraint,
Cygnaean only in my dying plaint.
Since all his actions love to moralls turns,
And faintly now in things less real burns,
In such a weakness contraries destroy,
And she his murdresse is, who now is coy.
To Mr. J. L.
Upon his Treatise of Dialling.
OLd time but for thy art, alone would pass,
And idly bear his solitary glass:
Though he fly fast, thy judgment mounted on
The wings of fancy, yoakes his motion:
Each little sand falls not unquestioned by
The due observance of thy piercing eye;
Each moment you converse with so, that thus
Discoursing his stage seems not tedious:
others perhaps by their mechanic art
May ask him what is a clock, then let him part:
Thou in thy circles conjur'st him to stay
Till he relate to thee the month and day;
All propositions of the Globe do bring
To be confessed as well in dialling:
What lucky signs successively do run,
By the reclining chariot of the Sun;
And in a various dialect of Schemes
Interprets't all the motions of his beams
How many hours each day he travells in
When he arrives diogonall Inn.
Other books show the trade of dialling,
But thine the art and reason of the thing:
Thou know the spring and cause that makes it go;
Addest new wheels; demonstrated all so
That weak eyes now may see what was before
Defective in the famed Osorius store:
A lim at least of this celestial trade
Asleep till now lay in the Gnomons shade;
Nor teach thou as those who first did find
With much circumference the Indian mine;
Thy needle points the nearest way, and has
Made straight the obliquity of the old path;
Thou nor thine art our praises need, yet I
Will for this miracle both deify.
Thine art enlightens by a shade, of that
Nothing a real Science you create.
Epithalamium,
To the L. T. married in the North.
WElcome fairest, Thee our rhyme
Congratulates rather then him
Who shines obliquely on our Clime.
Thy beams directly pointed fall,
That we our Bear the Cancer call,
This Zone style Equinoctial.
The mists our Germane Seas create
Thy eyes (though Phoebus mediate)
Originally dissipate.
Cassiope, though heavenly fair,
Hides her new face and burnisht Chair,
When you enlighten the days air.
They only rule material sense,
Your loves example may dispense
To inflamed souls chaste influence.
Unto that flame which doubly warmes
(Thy beauty's Summer, and loves charms)
May time nor sickness threaten harms.
My Hymen's torch on northen shore
Dilate into a Pharos; For
Besieged by cold fire burns the more
To Eugenio,
A description of the love of true Friendship.
MAN, of a troubled Spirit, prone to fight,
In fortitude placing too much delight,
Unjustly Friendship disinherited,
No dowry to her has proportioned
Amongst the moral Sisters of the will;
Goddess of youth though she, yet should not fill
Their cups, be she none of the wheels, her right
Is in the treasure, draws the appetite
To amiable good; But if the rain
Be held by Prudence (for she guides the wain)
This virtue next inheritrix is she,
Fitted to turn upon that axletree;
For lamely would the wills bright chariot move
If not informed by friendly heat of Love,
Whose lightning shoots directly, never bends
Reflecting glances upon private ends.
Indeed her sister (of a bastard race)
Squints on her good, like Venus in her glass;
Mechanic love, desire with usury,
Which nere is lent but for utility,
Or some return of pleasure to the sense;
A thrifty worldling hight Concupiscence.
The first a wealthy Queen of generous strain;
The latter indigent, and works for gain;
That, from the bosom of the deity;
Derives the luster of her pedigree;
Who of this wonder truly is possessed
Has heavens Epitome lodged in his breast;
This Children to their Parents give; by this
Perfumd with Frankincense the alter is;
That Is Gold refined, whose solidity
(The perfect emblem of true constancy)
Being ductile, will consume it self and pine
Even to small threads, to make another fine:
Self-loving this as subtle Mercury,
Which parted, to it self again does fly
Ad amicum and cognatum T. S.
AETernae, primo repetam de font Sobrine
A nobis initum foedus amicitiae;
Non erat in causis probitas promiscua morum,
Quodque iisdem tecum ritibus oro deum,
Nec simul edocti quod avenam in flavimus unam,
Nec Quod de nostra stripe racemus eras?
Hae modo conciliatrices si mentibus essent
Convictus, virtus, strips eademque fides
Debueram plures arsisse hac lege, merentes
Aeque de nostra forsan amicitia.
Causa subest ex Naturae penetralibus hausta,
Esse meae paritas indolis atque tuae:
Si flammam admoveas flammae, si fluctibus undas,
Res in idem, fuerat quae modo bina, redit.
Confusi pariter genio coalescimus uno,
Compagesque tuae mentis ubique mea est:
Cumque meum tecum similaribus undique constet
Partibus ingenium, prona synaxis erat:
Virtutis seges ampla tuae sit matter amoris,
Matter amicitiae non critilla meae:
Plures inter amor diffunditur; ipso duorum
Tantum, qui fiunt unus, amicitia est,
Quicquid id est quod nos a nobis cogit amari
Nos eadem ratio temet amare facit.
To the same being sick of a feavour. Horat: od: 2. 17.
AM not I in thy feavour sacrifiz'd?
That you alone by Fate should besurpriz'd,
(You my sole Sunshine, my Souls wealth and pride)
Is both by me and by the Gods denide:
If hasty death take thee (my soul) away,
Can I, a loathed imperfect carcass stay?
No no; Our twisted lives must be cut both
Together; This I dare confirm by oath,
When e're thou leapst into the fatal boat
I Will leap in, glad with thee in death to float:
Nor shall that dubious monster, breathing fire,
Nor Gyges hundred hands did he respire,
Pluck me from this resolve approved so
By Fate and Justice: whither Scorpio
Fierce in my Horoscope, or Capricorn
Oppressing Latium with his watery horn,
Or Libra brooded my nativity,
It Is sure our mutual Stars strangley agree.
To the same,
Recovered of the small Pox.
NAture foreseeing that if thou were gone,
And we her younger Children left alone,
None could with Virtue feed this beggerd age
(For with thee Heir is gone, and Heritage)
In pity longer lent us Thee, that so
Thou might lead mankind, and teach how to go,
How to speak Languages, to discourse how,
How the created book of things to know,
How with smooth cadence harsher verse to file,
Within soft numbers to confine a style,
And lastly how to love a friend, for this
Lesson the Crown of humane actions is.
Nor was it in pity to our state alone.
She, as all do, reflected on her own,
And gave thee longer breath, that our desire
Might learn of thine her beauty to admire
Nor out of pity to thy youth, whose hearse
Not to thy self, but to the Universe
Had Shipwreck been; For thou had stood being dead
Above the sphere of being pitied.
Let then this thy redintegrated wrack
Not Irksome be if only for our sake,
(For friendship is the greatest argument
Moves us to be from Angels here content)
Yet one inducement more thy stay may plead,
That nature has so clean thy prison made;
What though she pit thy skin? She only can
Deface the woman in thee, not thee Man.
To the same.
LEt me not live if I not wonder why
In night of rural contemplation I,
So long have dreamed, when from thy lips I might
As instantly gain intellectual light
As by this Amphitheater of air
The Sudden beams of Sol imbibed are;
Why then by reflex Letters like the Moon
Shine I, when thou invit'st me to thy Noon?
Why do I vainly sweat here to control
The assertours of the perishable Soul,
Where all the reason I encounter, can
Scarce win belief a tustick is a man.
To reconcile the contradiction
Of Freedom with Predestination,
To be resolved the Earth does roast upon
Her Ax is as a spit against the Sun,
Or what bold Argive fleet durst to translate
Of those beasts that first straid from Ararat,
Only the noxious to America,
And how these puny Pilots found the way,
Or whether from the habitable Moon,
Like Saturn, they, and Vulcan, tumbled down,
Whether abroad Imaginations work,
Whether in numbers potency does lurk,
Whether all Earth intended was for gold,
And thousands more we doubtfully do hold?
Thus we poor Scepticks in the region
Of Fancy float, foes to assertion,
But I will perch on thee, and make my stand
Of settled knowledge on thy steady hand.
To the same, On my Library, A SATYR.
A Hundred here together buriedly,
Still jangling with eternal enmity,
Contesting after death; The stagirite
Advances there with his trust band, to fight
Against Ideas: The Epicurean Band
In Arms which pleasure guilt, here ready stand
To charge the rusty Sword of the severe
Stoic. Phlebotomizing Galen there
Triumphs in blood, and not the bad alone
Exterminates his corporation,
But makes joint Ostracismes for the good;
Till later wits resenting Natures food
In greatest need Promiscuously had been
Disgarisond, invent new discipline,
Strengthening the vitalls with some cordial dose,
Which Nature might which unbroke files oppose.
But upon fresh supplies let her cashire,
If not reducible, each mutineer.
On yonder shelfe we may the heritage
Find of this heathen sword fallen to our age:
A doubtful blade whose fore-edge guards the sense
Of Stoics Fate; The sharp back is the fence
Of Lernean Predestination,
The bane of Crowns and true devotion.
The wills ability Pelagius calls
What Peripateticks style Pure Naturalls.
The point by which Philosophy did use
To prove Ideas, you will confess obtuse
To that by which Religion now maintains
Uncouth Chimaeras of exorbitant brains.
As the worlds noble Soul, the generous Sun
By an equivocall conjunction
Begets the basest creeping progeny,
So when the princely Sire Philosophy
Adulterates faith, the monsters that arise
Degenerate to bastard Heresies.
Thus have I made a short narration
Here of a posthumus contention:
They to thy Judgment all submit their hate,
Hoping thy presence soon will moderate
Their vast dissent, as element all strife
Is ^inder far when actuated by life.
To the same, on his Poems and Translations.
IF what we know be made our selves, (for by
Dev^sting all materiality,
And melting the bare species into
Our intellect; Our selves are what we know)
Thou art in largeness of thy knowing mind
As a Seraphick essence unconfind,
Content within those narrow walls to dwell,
Yet can so far that point of flesh outswell
That thine intelligence extends through all
Languages which we Europaean call.
What Colossaean strides do thou enlarge!
Fixing one foot in Sequan's watery barge
Do in Po the other lave, teaching each Swan
A note more dying then their Idiom can:
Vexed Tagus Nympths receive of thee new dresses,
Composing in Thame's glass their golden tresses:
Yea more I Have seen thy young Muse bath her wing
In the deep waters of Stagira's Spring.
Nor do thy beams warm by reflex alone;
Those that emerge directly from the Sun
Of thy rich Fancy, warm our loves, as well
As those whom other Languages repel;
Thou the divine acts thus do imitate,
As well conserve an Author, as create.
On then brave youth, Learnings full Systeme; Go
Enlarge thy self to a vast Folio;
That the world in suspense where to bestow
That admiration which it late did ow
To the large knowing Belgic Magazine [ H. Grot]
May justly pay it thee as his assign:
If future hours with laden thighs shall strive
To fill as well thine intellectual hive
As those are past, the Court of Honor must
To Crown thee, ravish Garlands from his dust.
To the same on his Poems,
That he would likewise manifest his more Serious labors.
THou Natures step here treadest in,
Do show us but thy Souls fair skin,
What Fancy more then Intellect did spin.
Thus Nature shows the roses paint,
Us with the outside does acquaint,
But keeps reserved the soul of the fair plant.
Thy sails all see swelling with have;
Yet the hid ballast steeres as fast
His steady course as the apparent mast.
For though carved works only appear
We know there is a Basis here
Does them together with the Fabric bear.
And that thy lightning Intellect,
Though in the clouds yet undetect
Can Natures bowels pierce with its aspect.
Melting through stubborn doubts his way,
Whilst Fancy guilds things with her ray,
And but oth' surface does of Nature play.
But whilst thy Intellect does wear
Thy Phancies dress, his motions are
In Epicides not his proper sphere.
Break forth and let his double sign
In their own orbs distinctly shine;
Castor alone bodes danger to the Pine.
To the same
On His Translation of two Spanish Novells.
THis Transplantation of Sicilian Loves
To the more pleasing shades of Albion's groves
Though I admire, yet not the thing betrays
My soul to so much wonder, as the ways
And manner of effecting; That thy youth
Untravail'd there, should with such happy truth
Unlock us this Iberian Cabinet,
Whose diamonds you in polisht English set,
Such as may teach the eyes of any dame
In The British Court to give and take a flame;
Herein the greatest miracle we see,
That Spain for this has traveld unto thee.
To the same.
DAmon, thrice happy are thy lays
Which Amarillis deignes to praise,
And teach them no restless flame,
But Centers thy love there whence first it came!
Her Soul she, and her wealthy flocks
Mingles with thine; Braids her bright locks
Becomingly with thy brown shade,
Whence the Morn is so sweetly doubtful made.
Oh may that twisted twilights power
Infuse in each successive hour
Eternal calmes, untainted rays!
Your tresses rule her nights, and hers your days!
Whilst Thyrsis his sad reed inspires
With naught but sighs and hopeless fires;
Yet glad to spy from his dark Cell
The dawn of Joy from others night expel.
On the Marriage of my dear Kinsman T. S. Esquire and Mrs. D. E.
WHilst the young world was in minority
Much was indulged; no proximity
Of equal blood could then style marriage
Incestuous: But in her riper age
Nature a politician grew, and laid
A sin on wedlock that at home was made:
That Families being mixed, the world might so
Both Issue propogate and Friendship too,
How will you two then Natures frown abide,
Who are in worthiness so near allide?
(For sure she meant that other virtues be
Enlarged thus, as well as Amity.)
Civility you might have taught the North,
She the South Chastity: But now this worth
Is wanting unto both, 'cause you engrosse
And to your selves communicate this loss.
But since best tempers vertae soon admit,
Your two well-tuned complections may so fit
A ^^cond race, and natural goodness lend,
That nature shall not thus miss of her end.
On matchless couple then, Hymen smiles, on,
And by a perfect generation
Such living Statues of your selves erect,
That they those virtues which this age reject
May teach the future, and to act restore,
All Honor, living only now in power.
Be thou the Adam, she the Eve that may
Pople a true real Vtopia.
To Mrs. D. S. on the birth of Sidney, her second Son.
Dear Neice.
MAY rest drown all thy pains: But never sleep
Thy painful merits whilst feet Verses keep,
And Muses wings they shall along, and blow
Thy Fame abroad, whilst time shall circuits go
To judge strifes elementall, and arowse
The drousy world to mind this noble spouse.
How opportunely her Heroic fruit
Waving her own, does our torn sex recruit
Two Boys have sprung from her wombs lively mold,
'Ere both the Parents forty Summers told.
She might such humane Goddesses produce
As might the relapsed world again amuse
Into Idolatry, and justify
Bright Cyprias fable, each poetic ly
Old Greece or any modern lover made
To deify the beauty of a Maid.
But The prizing her mate 'bove her own eyes
Him rather with his likeness gratifies;
The reason, if a Poet may divine,
Why all her Blossoms quicken masculine
Is, that her Brethren (never extant seen,
But possible) by Fate have kindred been
Into her flesh, which flowers in Virgin Snow
Benumbed, slept in their winter cause, till now
That Nuptial Sun approacht, whose piercing ray
Opening their Urn, recalled them into day.
On this trade Angels wait, and on their wing
Created Souls into new Bodies bring:
What power has Love, that can set Heaven a task
To make a Gem, when he prepares the Cask?
And if well set, or void of heinous flaw,
Ordained by the Creatures gracious Law
For his own weating, which himself will own
An Ornament even to his burnisht Crown.
On then fair spouse, and ease the pangs of Birth
By thinking you enrich both Heaven and Earth.
Think you may live till they in honors sphere
Brighter then the Tindaridae appear;
And then you cannot die? the lives you gave,
They amply will repay, despoile the grave
Of your Immortal name: may you behold
Them fully act the praise I faintly told.
Horat: Od. 3. 3.
A Man endeed uwith Virtue fears nothing.
THe presence of a Tyrant, nor the zeal
Of Citizens forcing rebellions,
Can shake a squarely solid soul, the seal
Infringe of honest resolutions:
Untroubled He on stormy Adria Sails;
At Thunder is undaunted as the oak:
If nature in a general ruin fails
He with contented mind sustaines the stroke.
To Sr. J. G. wishing me to regain my fortunes by compliance with the
Parliament.
THE resignation of my self and mine
I prostrate at the footstep of his Shrine,
Who for the mighty love he bore to me
Laid out himself in each capacity,
Unasked pawnes his deity, and shrouds
All mighty feebleness in humane clouds,
And even that Cottage did to death engage
For three days, to redeem our Heritage;
For no less price then his humanity
Could ransom us, stamped with divinity.
The story of this noble Surety (friend)
Should to such ecstasy our zeales extend,
That our Estates or selves we never should deem
So free, as when they morgag'd are for him:
I therefore can with a contented mind
Shake hands with all the wealth of either Inde;
In a clear conscience finding riches more
Then there the Sun bequeaths unto his Ore;
Who drinks with sacred Druids at the brook,
(Whose unjust sufferings are for guilt mistook,)
And from their mouth (now the forbidden tree
Alas, of knowledge) sucks divinity,
With Angels on an honest bed of leaves
Redintegrated Paradise conceaves;
For Heaven is only Gods revealed face;
So these make Paradise, and not the place.
The World.
JS this that goodly Edifice
So gaz' d upon by greedy eyes?
A scene where cruelty's expressed,
Or Stage of folly es at the best.
Who can the Music understand
From the soft touch of Natures hand,
When man her chiefest Instrument
So harshly jarres without consent.
Do not her natural agents too
Fail in their operations, so
That he to whom they best appear
Sees but the Tombs of what they were?
Her chiefest Actions then are such
That no external sense may touch;
Shown doubtfully to the minds sight
By the dark Phancy's glimmering light.
The Night indeed which hides all
Things else discloseth the Stars pale
And sickly faces; but our sense
Cannot perceive their Influence.
They are the hidden books of Fate,
Where what with pains we calculate
And doubt, is only plainly known
To those assist their motion.
The close conveyances that move
With silent virtue from above
Incessantly on things below,
Our duller eyes can never know.
Nothing but color, shape and light
Create their species in our sight:
All substances avoid the sense
Close couched under accidents,
In which attired by nature, we
Their loose apparel only see;
Spirits alone Intuitive,
Can to the heart of essence dive.
Why then should we desire to sleep
Grovelling like swine in mire, so deep,
The mind for breath can find no way,
Choked up, and crowded into clay.
Stripped of the flesh, in the clear spring
Of Truth she bathes her soring wing
On whom do all Ideas shine
Reflected from the Glass divine.
Gray Hairs.
WElcome gray hairs, whose light I gladly trust
To guide me to my peaceful bed of dust:
My life's bright Stars, whose wakefull eyes shut mine;
Stand on my head as Tapers on my shrine,
The worlds grand noise of nothing (which invades
My soul) exclude from deaths approaching shades;
But as the day is ushered in by one
And the same Star that shows the day is done,
This twilight of my head, this doubtful sphere,
My Bodies Evening, my souls Morning Star,
The allay of white amongst the browner hairs
As well the birth as death of day declares;
As he whom from the Hill saw the moist Tomb,
Of earth, together with her pregnant womb,
This mingled color with ambiguous strife
Demonstrates my decaying into life.
Thus life and death compound the world; Each weed
That fades revives by sowing its own seed:
Matter supposed the whole Creation
Is nothing but form and privation:
No borrowed tresses then no cheating die
Shall to false life my dying locks belly;
I shall a perfect Microcosme grow
When as the Alps, I crowned am with snow.
I will believe this white the milky way
Which leads unto the Court of endless day.
Then let my life's flame so intensely burn
That all my hairs may into ashes turn,
Whence may arise a Phoenix to repay
With Hallelujahs this Eygnean lay.
A Dialogue upon death.
Phillis. Damon. Phil: DAmon amidst the blisses we
In joint affections fully prove,
Does it not sometimes trouble thee,
To think that death must part our love?

Dam: Though sweets concentrate in thy arms,
And that alone I revell there,
A willing prisoner to those charms,
Love cannot teach me death to fear.

Phil: Say of these sweets I should beguile
Thy taste by my inconstancy,
And on thy rival Thyrsis smile,
Would not that loss work grief in thee?

Dam: Oh nothing more; For here to be
Is Hell and thy embraces lack;
Yet is it Heaven even without thee
To dye; Then only art thou black.

Phil: Then only art thou black my dear;
When death shall blast thy vital light;
Whilst I in life's bright day appear,
Thou sleepst forgot in deaths sad Night.

Dam: Thou art thick-sighted; could thou see
Far off, the other side of death
Would such a prospect open thee
As thou must needs be sick of breath.

Phil: How can that be, when sense does keep
The door of pleasure? That destroyed,
The soul if it survive, must sleep,
Senseless of delectation void.

Dam Sense is the door of such delight
As beasts receive; through which alas
(Since Nature's nothing but a fight,)
More enemies then friends do pass:
Nor is the soul less capable,
But naked does her object prove
More truly; as more sensible
Is this fair hand stripped of its glove.

Phil: My Damon sure has sufeirted
Of Phillis, and would fain get hence;
Yet mannerly he vailes his dead
Love under a divine pretense.

Dam: Whilst I am flesh thou needst not fear
Of love in my warm breath a dearth;
For since affections earthly are
They must love thee the fairest Earth.

Phil: If thou receive a certain good
Of pleasure in enjoying me,
It Is wisdom then to period
Thy wishes in a certainty.

Dam: Joys reaped on earth like grasped air
Away even in enjoyment fly;
Certain are only such as bear
The stamped of immortality.

Phil: Shall we for hope of future bliss
The good of present Love neglect?
Who will a Wren possessed dismiss,
A flying Eagle to expect?

Dam: Who use not here the Heavenly way,
And in desire of thither go,
Will at their death uncertain stray
Losing themselves in endless woe.

Phil: Since death such hazards wait upon
I Will unfrequent love's vain delight,
And wing my contemplation
For prea-equaintance with that height.

Dam: Come then, let us feed our flocks above
On Sions hill; so will delights
Grow fresher in the vale of Love:
Change thus may whet chafte appetites.

Death.
SUnk eyes, cold lips, chaps fallen, cheeks pale and wan
Are only bugbeares falsely frighting man;
This is the vizard, not deaths proper face,
For who looks through it with the eye of Grace
Shall find death decked in so divine a ray
That none would be such a self-foe to stay
In mortal Clouds, did not the wiser hand
Of supreme power join with his strict command,
Pangs in our dissolution, which all shun,
But would wish, if they knew life then begun.
Man is a Creature mixed of Heaven and Earth;
Of beast and Angel; when he leaves this breath
He is all Angel; The Souls future eye
Is by the prospect of Etern^ty
Determined only; who content does rest
With present good no better is then Beast.
The heathens proved since the soul cannot find
In Natures store to satisfy the mind,
Her essence Supernat'rall, and shall have
Her truest object not before the Grave.
Could I surmise the Immateriall mate
Of this dull flesh should languish after fate
Like widdowed Turtles; or the glimmering light
Bereaved of her dark lanthorn should be quite
Blown out by death; or dwell on faithless mire,
Inhopitable fens, like foolish fire
Wandering through dismal vales of horrid night
The approach of death deservedly might fright.
But faiths clear eye more certainly surveyes
Then any optic Organ, for the rays
That show her object to us are divine
Reflected by The omniscient Christalline.
They then who surely know death leade^h right
To a vast Sea of ravishing delight
Cannot, when he knocks at their earthen Gate,
Suffer him storm his entrance, but dilate
Their ready hearts as to a friend, for now
He bears no sting, no horror in his brow;
The Christiall-Ruby stream which did pursue
The spear that sluc't Christ's side did his grim hue
To white and red, beautys complexion:
He comes no more to spoil thy mansion,
But to afford thee that Inheritance
Which cannot be conceived without a Trance;
To be translated to the fellowship
Of Angels, there with an immortal lip
To drink Nectarean bowls of endless good,
Where the Creators face is the Souls food.
The best condition here is but to be
An elect spouse to that great deity,
But death the Bride-maid leads us to the bed
Where youth and pleasures are eternised:
When I consider the whole world obeys
Creations law, only untame man strayes,
I cannot think this is his proper sphere
Where all his actions move irregular
Nor shall my wishes ever so exclude
The decent orderly vicissitude
Of Natures constant Harmony, to pray
For a harsh jarring by unruly stay.
These with the p^ines and shame of doting age
Wit cause the mind betimes to loath her Cage.
On the death of my dear brother Mr. H. S. drowned.
The Tomb.
WHy weeps this Marble? can his frigid power
Thicken the ambient air into a shower?
Ah no; these tears have sure an other cause
Then the necessity of Natures Laws;
These tears their spring have from within; there lies
The spoil of Nature, crime of destinies:
How well this silent sadness does become
His awful shade; the horror of the Tomb
Strikes palenesse through my soul; yet I must on
And pay the rights of my devotion.
Pardon you guardian Angels (who attend
And keep his bones safe from the stygian fiend)
That I disturb your watch with untuned lays
I come to mourn and not to sing, his praise.
A Sun that sat in floods, but, oh sad have,
Ere the Meridian of his age was past,
A purer day the East did nere disclose;
Then in his clear affections orient rose
Tempestuous passion did in him appear
But Physic, as the lightnings purge the air:
Martial his temper was, yet overcame
Others by smiles, himself by force did tame;
Here lies the best of man: nature with thee
Lost her perfection and integrity.
On the same.
The Boast.
HOW well this brittle Boat does personate
Man's frail estate?
Whose concave filled with lightsome air did scorn
The proudest storm:
Man's fleshy boat bears up, whilst breath does last
He fears no blast:
Poor floating Bark, whilst on yon mount you stood
Rain was your food.
Now the same moisture which once made thee grow
Does thee oreflow.
Rash youth has too much sail, his giddy path
No ballast has;
He thinks his Keel of wit can cut all waves,
And pass those Graves,
Can shoot all Cataracts and safely steer
The fourscorth year.
But stoop thine ear ill-councelld youth, and hark,
Look on this Bark,
His Emblem whom it carried, both defied
Storms, yet soon dyed;
Only this difference, that sunk downward, this
Waighd up to bl^sse.
On the same.
The Tempers.
THe Elements that do man's house compose
Are all his chiefest foes;
Fire, Air, Earth, Water, all are at debate,
Which shall predominate*
Sometimes the Tyrant fire in feavours raves,
And brings us to our graves,
Sometimes the Air in whirling of our brains
And windy Colicks reigns;
Now Earth with melancoly man invades,
Making us walking shades;
Now water in salt Rheumes works our decay
And dropseys quench our day*
But this war equal was in him; the fight:
Harmony and delight,
Till Treacherous Thames taking the waters part
Surpised his open heart.
To my dear Sister Mrs. S.
The Chamber.
Entering your door Istarted back, sure this
(Said I) deaths shady house and household is,
And yonder shines a beauty (as of old
Magnificent Tombs eternal Lamps did hold,
In lieu of life's light) a fair Taper hid
In a dark lanthorn; an eye shut in's lid;
A flower in shade; a star in nights dark womb;
An alablaster Column to a Tomb.
But why this night in day can thy fair eye
Delight in such an Aethiops company?
Man has too many natural clouds; his blood
And flesh so blind his hood winked soul that good
Is scarce discerned from bad; why should we then
Seek out an artificial darkesome den?
The better part of nature hidden lies;
The stars indeed we may behold, and Skies,
But not their Influence; we see the fire
But not then heat; why then should we desire
More night, when darkness so ore Nature lies
That all things mask their better qualities:
To the same.
Thursday:
NOw I Am resolved the crasy Universe
Grows old, the Sun himself is nigh his hearse;
Seven Daughters in one week his youthful rays
Were wont to get; but since his strength decays
Six are the most: Thursday is lost; for we
Who boast our selves skilled in the Astronomy
Of your day-shedding eyes, by that light swear
That day is lost in which you not appear*
That thy dark fancy might a giant-woe
Beget, thou makst a night Herculean too;
The late Astronomers have found it true,
We have lost many days, but it is by you
Our calculation erres; and we shall rage
If you go on to cheat us of our age;
One day in Seven is lost; and in threescore
We are bereaved of nine years, and more:
So will your grief dilate it self like day,
And all as you, become untimely gray.
To the same.
^he Rose.
AFter the honey drops of pearly showers
Urania walked to gather flowers:
Sweet Rose (I heard her say) why are these fears?
Are these drops on thy cheek thy tears?
By those thy beauty fresher is, thy smell
Arabian spices does excel.
This rain (the Rose replied) feeds and betrays
My odours; adds and cuts off days:
Had not I spread my leaves to catch this dew
My scent had not invited you,
Urania sighed and softly said, it is so,
Showers blow the rose and ripen woe:
For mine (a less) when washed in floods sweet clean,
Heaven put his hand forth and did glean.
To the same.
Man's Life.
MAn's life was once a span; now one of those
Atoms of which old Sophies did compose
The world; a thing so small, no emptiness
Nature can find at all by his decease;
Nor need she to attenuate the air,
And spreading it, his vacancy repair,
The swellings that in hearts and eyes arise
Repay with ample bulk deaths robberies.
Why should we then weep for a thing so slight
Converting life's short day to a long night?
For sorrows make one Month seem many years,
Times multiplying glass is made of tears.
Our life is but a painted perspective;
Grief the false light that does the distance give;
Nor does it with delight (as shaddowing)
Set off, but as a staff fixed in a spring
Seem crookt and larger; then dry up thy tears,
Since through a double mean naught right appears.
To the same.
The Excuse.
NOr can your sexes easiness excuse
Or countenance your tears to be profuse.
Some she is there are, whose breath is only sighs:
Who weep their own, in others obsequies:
But in the reason, like the Sun at noon,
Dispells usurping clouds of Passion;
Where feminine defects are wanting, there
All Femininee xcuses wanting are;
Think not, since virtue then above them reares*
A woman's name can privilege thy tears:
Fortune material things only controwles
But does her self pay homage unto souls:
There has no power, can do no injury,
The Pavement where the stars their dances form
By their own Music, is above all storm:
For Meteors but imperfect mixtures are
In the raw bosom of distemperd air:
Then let thy soul shine in her Crystal sphere,
They Are Comets in the troubled air appear.
To the same.
The Reasons.
IS it because he died, or that his years
Not many were, that causes all these tears?
If for the first, you should have always wept,
Even in his life from first acquaintance kept
Sorrow awake, for that you know his Fate
Prefixed had a necessary date;
How unadvisedly do you lament
Because things mortal are not permanent?
Or is 't because he ere his aged Snow,
Or Autumn came, was ravishd from the bough?
Ask but the sacred Oracle, you there
Shall find, untimely deaths no windfall are.
The grand example, Miracle of good,
(In virtue only old) slain in the bud
Newly disclosing man. It were a shame
To wish then that of his, a longer flame.
Who would not die before subdued by age?
That Conquest often Fortune pursues with rage;
Or sin in that advantage wounds him worse:
To wish him long life then, had been a curse.
To the same.
The Tears.
YOu modern wits who call this world a star,
Who say, the other planets too worlds are,
And that the spots that in the midstar found
Are to the people there Islands and ground;
And that the water which surrounds the Earth
Reflects to each, and gives their shining birth;
The brightness of these tears had you but seen
Fallen from her eyes, no argument had been
To contradict that water here displayes
To them as they to us siderious rays.
Her Tears have then the stars a better right
And a more clear propriety to light.
For stars receive their borrowd beams from far,
These bring their own along with them, and are
Born in the sphere of light; Others may blind
Themselves with weeping much, because they spend
The brightness of their eyes upon their tears,
But hers are inexhaustible; she spares
Beams to her tears as Tapers lend their light
And should excess of tears rob her of sight,
Two of these moist sparks might restore't: our eyes
An humor watery chrystalline comprise,
Why may not then two crystal drops restore
That sight a Crystal humor gave before.
Love dewes his locks here, woes each drop to fall
A pupil in his eye and sight recall:
And I hope fortune passing through this rain
Will at last see to recompense her pain.
On the death of my much honored Uncle Mr. G. Sandys.
PArdon (great Soul) if duty grounded on
Blood and affections firm devotion
Force my weak muse to sacrilege, and by
Short-payment rob thy sacred memory.
To be thy wits Executor, though I
No title have, yet a small Legacy
Fitting my small reception did thou leave,
Which from thy learned works I did receive;
I should then prove unthankful to deny
Some spices to embalm that memory,
Whose Soul and better part thy lines alone
Establish in Eternity's bright throne:
Our humble art the body of thy fame
Only to Memphian mummie tries to frame;
Which though a swarthy dryness it puts on
Is raised yet above corruption.
A Tomb of rarest art, Magnificent
As 'ere the East did to thy eyes present,
Erected by great Falklands learned hands
To thee alive, in his eloqiums stands.
Thy body we are only then to interre,
And to those matchless Epitaphs refer
The hasty passenger that cannot stay
To hear thy larger Muse her worth display.
Unless unto the Crowd about the Hearse
(Those busy Sons of sense) I shall rehearse
What worth in thy material part did dwell,
And at the funeral thy Scutcheons spell;
Declare the extraction of thy noble line,
What graces from all parts of thee did shine,
That age thy sense did not at seventy cloud,
And thee a youth all then but death allowed:
As for thy Soul, if any do enquire,
It Is making Anthems in the heavenly Quire.
Epitaph on Sir R. D.
HEre lies the pattern of good men;
Heaven and Earths loved Citizen.
The Worlds faint wishes scarce can reach
The good he did by action teach:
So hating semblence, that his mind
Left her deportment still behind,
That he far better was then ere
Unto the worlds eye did appear,
The poor can witness this, who cry
Aloud their loss, his Charity;
The same and feeble now must creep
To show their crutch is laid asleep.
His Household Servants, Tenants, all
Weep here their Fathers Funeral:
The war that gorged on his Estate
His Table never could abate;
If ever he unjust was known,
'Twas in receding from his own;
Exchanging what with trouble he
Might save, to keep tranquillity.
His host of virtues struck such fear
Into his foes, they did not dare
To lay on his, that penalty
They did on others Loyalty;
Which bore with him as high a rate
As those who bought it with their 'state.
Prudence and Innocence had made
A league no harm should him invade,
Peaceful amidst the wars his life,
As in the Elementall strife.
Of bodies that are temperd well
Harmonious Souls at quiet dwell,
When the worst humor had prevaild
Upon the State, his vita^ls faild*
To show, this feeling members health
Was wrapped up in the Commonwealth.
Grace Compared to the Sun.
GRace as the Sun, incessantly its light
Dilates upon the Universal face.
Pagans that sit in Antipodian night
Taste, by reflex of reason, beams of grace.
Their sickly planet (Queen of night not sleep)
Her wakefull eye in the Suns beams may steep.
Grace is the Souls Soul; the informing part
Reason (like Phosphere) ushers in the day;
But the terene affections of the heart
Repel which Pharean clouds this sacred ray.
Internal, as external night alone
Springs from the Earths interposition.
Goodness is prized by her own latitude;
The Persian (wisest of Idolaters)
Adores the Sun as the most common good,
From whose balm Natures hand nothing interrs.
Worse then the Caliph is that votary
Who worships a less loving deity.
The Sun would raise this Globe to nobler birth,
Transforming into Gold each mineral;
But in disposure of the Stubbourn Earth
Renders his virtue ineffectuall?
Thus grace endeavors all to sublimate:
Then blame thy self if not regenerate.
Upon the Nativity of our savior and Sacrament then received.
SEe from his watery Tropic how the Sun
Approaches by a double motion!
The same flight tending to the western seas
Wheels Northward by insensible degrees;
So this blessed day bears to our Intellect
(As its bright fire) a duplycate respect:
None but a two-fac'd Janus can be guest
And fit himself unto this double feast.
That must before jointly the Manger see,
And view behind the execrable Tree.
Here the blessed Virgins living milk, and there
The fatal streams of the Sons blood appear;
Crowns at his tender feet in Bethlem ly;
Thorns bind his manly brows in Calvary;
The ashamed Sun from this his light withdrew;
A new born star the other joy'd to show:
To furnish out this feast, lo, in the pot
Death here consults the salting Antidot:
But least the sad allay should interfer,
And corrupt this days smile into a tear,
This very death makes up a fuller mirth
Bequeathing to the worthy Guest new birth;
As to the mystic head, beseemingly,
So to each member gives Nativity:
The difference only this, the deity
Born to our flesh, into his Spirit we.
FINIS.

