THE EPITAPH OF A Godly Man, especially a Man of God: OR, The HAPPINESS by DEATH
OF HOLINESS in LIFE. Delineated in a SERMON preached at the Funeral of Mr ADAM
PEMBERTON late Minister of the Parish of St Fosters Foster-lane: Who ended this
mortal, April the 8th, 1655. and was buried in hope of an immortal life the
11th of the same Month.

By NATH: HARDY M. A. and Preacher to the Parish of St Dionis Back Church.

REVEL. 14 13. And I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me, W^ite, Blessed
are they which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea, says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. Aug: de
discipl: Christ: Tract: 1. c. 12. Prorsus confirmo, audeo dicere, Credidi
propter quod locutus sum, non potest male mori qui been vixerit. Chrysostom: in
Psalm: 114. (...). LONDON. Printed by J. G. for Nathanaell Webb and William
Grantham at the Black Bear near the little North-door of S. Paul's Church, 1655.

To the Reverend Mr. John Pemberton, Minister of Charleton in Kent: Contentment
here, and Enjoyment hereafter.
Reverend Sir,
I Am very sensible that this Dedication will revive the memory of your great
loss, and thereby renew your grief, But withal, this publication will
perpetuate the memory of your dead Son, and that may be your comfort. Indeed,
this (as I conceive* was the chief cause why it was so earnestly* desired by
many of his friends, and this (I am sure) was the only reason why it was at
length yielded to by me.

But truly, so precious is his name, that I am abundantly assured it will live
though he be dead, not only in the inkie characters of this paper, but the
tender affections of many hearts: The truth is, might prayers have prevailed
with God for his life, he had not yet died; and would tears have brought him
back from the dead, he had again lived. What the name of the place was where
the Angel of the Judge. 2. 5.
Lord spoke to the children of Israel, so that they lift up their voices and
wept, might justly have been given to that Church upon the day of his
Enterrement, it was BOCHIM, a place of weeping; every eye almost bedewing his
grave with tears. And though in respect of him Job 14. 7, 8, 9, 10.
they were as needless, so fruitless; the case being (as holy Job observes)
far different between a withered root, and a dead man; yet as the Jews said
of Christ weeping for Lazarus, it might well be said of them, Behold how Joh.
11. 36.
they loved him: and doubtless, he cannot but be remembered by them to whom he
was so much endeared.

This I have thought fit to mention (Good Sir) as for his honor, so your joy;
at least the mitigation of your forrow for him, who lived so beloved, and died
so lamented, 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8.
and though he is buried, will not be forgotten. Yet still, that which is, and
ought to be, your greatest consolation, is the good hope you have of his
eternal salvation, on whom, having finished his short course, in keeping the
faith, and fighting the good fight, (I trust) the crown of righteousness is
already in part, and shall be in that day fully conferred by the Lord the
righteous Judge.

And now (worthy friend) I cannot but take notice of that whereof (I am
confident) you are not unmindfull, the various dispensation of Divine
Providence toward you and yours. Both your hopeful Sons he was pleased to
take away in the Morning of their Youth, and you have lived to the Evening of
Old Age. Both their years put together could not make up much above two thirds
of those you have already lived to, and ( if it be Gods will) may you see many
more, for the sake, as of your surviving Children, Grandchildren, so
especially the Church; that having expended a long life in Gods service, you
may at last exchange it for an eternal life in his glory.

So prays Your Truly Loving friend, NATH: HARDY.

The EPITAPH of a Godly man, especially a Man of GOD.
PHIL. chap. 1. ver. 21. To me to live is CHRIST, and to die is gain.
WOrds both short and sweet, brief and pithy, few in expression, and large in
extension. That of Solomon is an ample Epitome, summing up the whole duty of
man in these two, Fear God, and Eccles 12. 13.
keep his commandments. That of our Blessed Savior is a comprehensive
compendium, comprizing the whole Law of God in these two, Thou shall love the
Lord thy God, and thou shall love Mat. 22. 37, 3^
thy neighbor as thy self. But lo! in this abridgment we are taught both how
to live, and how to die, Quantum in quantillo, how much is here folded up in a
little; what counsel for life, what comfort in death does this Scripture
afford! Happy is he who so reads this copy as to write after it, vieweth
these steps as to tread in them, being able to say, if not with the same
measure, yet at least with the like truth of affection and confidence in
Christ: To me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.

I find among Expositors a double Version of this Verse:

1. Some Modern, both Protestant and Popish Interpreters; and one among the
Ancients, read this verse as if it were one entire Proposition, whereof Christ
is the subject, and gain the predicate: Christ is to me gain both in life and
death. According to this sense there is a double truth contained in them.

First, That both life and death are gain to a good man: In the former verse,
our Apostle expresses his confidence, that both his life and death should be
Christ's glory: and here, that they would be his gain, Utraque mihi
conducibilia, Theod. in loc.
is Theodoret's note, both shall conduce to my benefit. Ostendit sive vitam,
sive mortem, sibi censuram Est. ibid.
in salutem, so Estius: he shows that whatever happened, whether the
continuation of his life, or the acceleration of his death, it should work for
his good; in Lap. ibid.
which respect he seems to say, Nec mori timeo, nec vivere recuso, as Lapide
well glosseth, I neither refuse to live, nor fear to die. In how happy an
estate is every holy man, to whom no condition comes amiss, prosperity or
adversity, wealth or want, health or sickness, life or death. Lucri bonus odor
ex re qualibet, says the worldling, gain is sweet out of any thing. The Saint
finds truly sweet gain in every thing.

Secondly, That it is Christ who makes both life and death gain to a good man.
It was S. Paul's hope, first, that Christ should be magnified by him: And next,
that he he should be comforted by Christ, both in life and death: Unus est
Christus qut tam in morte quam in vita nos facit Calv. i^.
beatos, says Calvin upon the place. Indeed, Christ is the Christians All in
all estares* as David said concerning God, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and
there is none on Psalm. 73. 25.
earth I desire in comparison of thee: so says a Christian in this case
concerning Christ, Whom have I in death but thee? and there is none in life I
desire in comparison of thee. The comfort of life is in the knowledge, and the
profit of death is in the fruition of Christ: if we be without Christ, it is
hard to say whether is better to live or die: the truth is, both are hurtful,
whilst life will prove an increase of sin, and death sends to torment; but if
Christ be ours, both will be to our advantage, according to that of the 1 Cor.
3. 21, 22, 23.
Apostle, All things are yours, whether life or death, things present, or
things to come, all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is Gods.

2. But because all Greek copies divide the verse into clauses, and (as Zanchy
well observes) it is not Zanch. ib.
safe to recede from the plain reading of the Text unless necessity compel,
(whereas here the verse being read according to the Original, is more full,
and no less true) I shall adhere to our last as the best Translation, and so
much the rather, because in this construction it holds well in connection both
with what praecedeth and follows: Therefore his expectation was, that Christ
should be magnified and he not ashamed whether he did live or die, because if
he lived it should be Christ if he died it should be gain; and so no cause in
either of shame to himself, but from both there would accrue honor to Christ.
Again, therefore he did not wot what to choose, whether life or death, because
to him on the one hand to live was Christ, and on the other to die was gain.

To look upon the words in themselves, you have in them some things supposed,
and some things proposed: The things supposed are (...), and (...), as a
presence of life, so a certainty of death: The things proposed are the
dedication of his life to Christ, and the advantage of death to himself. Of the
former more briefly: Of the later more largely.

1. To live, to die, are the things supposed; the one common to all others with
S. Paul: the other common to S. Paul with all others.

First, S. Paul lived, so do all men, so do all animals: what our Apostle
says of bodies, I may of life: There is a 1 Cor. 15. 44.
natural body, and there is a spiritual body; so there is a natural, and
there is a spiritual life; this is an hidden, but that a manifest life; this
an enclosure, but that a common; it is common to Heathen with Christians, to
beasts with men; the little ant, the crawling worms have a share in life as
well as we; so that these may say as well as S. Paul, To me to live: why should
we be so much in love with, or dote upon this life, which we have no more
interest in than the meanest living creature? indeed, it is a mercy for which
we ought to be thankful, it is a talent which we are to improve, but it is no
privilege wherein we should glory, whereof we should boast, or wherewith we
should be too much affected.

Secondly, As S. Paul lived, so he made account of dying: Others live as well
as he, and he must die as well as others. The (...) is as certain as the (...),
as sure as we live we must die: man is no less subject to perishing than the
beast; yea, the good man has no more exemption than the bad; for so the
Prophet Esaias asserts, The righteous Isa. 57. 1.
perishes. Indeed, our Apostle elsewhere calls righteousness Ephesians. 6. 14.
a breast plate, but it is not death-proof; and though it delivers in, yet
not from death: It is true, death is the Romans 6. 23.
wages of sin, but still, it is here the lot of a Saint: perfect innocence
should not have known mortality, but grace in the best is mixed with that
sin, which brings death; Christ (I grant) has taken away death, but so as
he has taken away sin for the present, only in part, not fully: sin is taken
away ne praesit, death ne obsit; the power and guilt of the one, the sting and
venom of the other; but neither ne sit* not the being of either.

And indeed, it is not without manifold reason that Divine Providence has so
ordered it:

1. That the members may be conformable to their head, and we may follow Christ
the same way of death in which he has gone before us to glory.

2. That by the pulling down of the wall, the moss may be fully-plucked out,
and by the dissolution of the body, its infirmity and frailty wholly purged
away.

3. That the power of God may appear the more glorious in raising us up after
death has laid us in the grave, and the grave turned us into dust.

4. Finally, That the strength of our faith might appear the more in believing
we shall live though we die: For these Reasons the wise God has appointed his
own children to walk through the valley of the shadow of death.

To carry it yet one step further, and that in a few words, it is no other than
S. Paul (who was not only a Christian, but an Apostle) who takes it for
granted, that he must die; neither the word nor the work of righteousness can
secure from death; Prophets, Apostles, Ministers, as well as others, are
mortal, and must die. Indeed, they are (according to our Saviors metaphor)
the lights of the world* but such as after a while may be blown out by Mat. 5.
14. Isa. 5 6. Rev. 1. 20.
a violent, however must go out by a natural death. Clouds they are from whom
the rain of instruction falls upon the people, but at length they themselves
vanish away. Finally, Angels they are in respect of their Office, but still
they are Men in regard of their nature, and must die like men. S. Paul himself
hence supposes it as a thing which sooner or later would befall him. And so I
have given a dispatch to the first, pass we on to the

Next and principal part of the Text, the things that are Gen: 2d.
proposed, concerning the things supposed, which accordingly are two: namely,
Christ the scope of the one, and Gain the attendant on the other; which when I
have viewed severally, I shall look upon them jointly, and so put a period to
my discourse on this Scripture.

To me to live is Christ:] is the first Propsition to be Part. 1.
discussed. It is that which according to that twofold life a Christian leads;
namely, spiritual, and temporal, is capable of a threefold interpretation:

1. Many of the Fathers understand this [ to live] in a Expos. 1.
spiritual sense, and so this phrase, To me to live is Christ, Gal. 2. 20.
is made Synonimous with that of this very Apostle elsewhere, Christ lives in
me: To this purpose is that Paraphrase of devout Anselme upon this Text, That
by which Vide Anselm. Vide Chryso. in loc.
I live is Christ, I live not the old but the new man. And of eloquent
Chrysostom, I live not a common life, but Christ lives in me: and going on in
his rhetorical strain, he puts the Question, Why o blessed Apostle do not
thou breathe in the air, and tread on the earth as we do? Art not thou
nourished by food, and refreshed by sleep as we are? Yes, but this life he
despised, looking after another; he did not lead a sinful, but a spiritual
life, and so to him to live was Christ. Thus Origin occasionally speaking of
these words, says, In quibusdam vivit Jesus, in quibusdam defunctus Orig hom.
2. in Iudic.
est: Christ is as it were dead in some Christians, in some he lives, to wit,
in those who can say to me to Live is Christ: in this sense it is that Christ
is the efficient cause of a Christians life, and as the head communicates
motion to the members, and the root sap to the branches, so does Christ life to
all Christians.

2. One upon this Text expounding it of natural life, Expos. 2.
renders the sense thus, To me to live is Christ, that is, the Velasq. in loc.
only reason why I am content to live is Christ's pleasure: if Christ will have
me to live longer, I am willing; what seems good to him is so to me.
Consonant to this is that of S. Ambrose, To an holy man to Live is Christ,
quasi Ambros. de bono mortis, cap. 2.
servus enim non refugit vitae obsequium: since as a faithful servant he does
not refuse the work of life: if it may be an opportunity of advancing his
Masters glory, or like a good Soldier he is willing to stay in the field as
long as his Captain commands.

3. But lastly, and as I conceive most rationally we are Expos. 3.
to interpret this to live of S. Paul's natural life, and Christ as the final
cause of it; so that we may best render the meaning of these words in Estius
his Paraphrase, Vitam Est. in loc.
meam Christo and Evangelio consecravi: To me to Live is Christ, that is, I
have consecrated my life to Christ and his Gospel.

This is that which was true of Paul under a double notion, the one special,
as an Apostle; the other general, as a Christian.

1. Consider him as an Apostle, and so it lets us see what ought to be the
chief aim and scope of every Ministers Life; namely, the honor and glory of
Christ. Indeed, what other is the work, to which a Minister is called, and
about which he is to be employed: but (to use S. Paul's expression in the very
next chapter) the work of Phil. 2. 30.
Christ? What is it we are to publish but the Gospel of Christ? and therein the
love of Christ to lost sinners: in this respect we are compared to
Ambassadors, and as the 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Ambassadors business is to declare his Masters message, so is this our work
to make known the glad tidings of salvation by Christ, as being the great
errand about which he sends us. What is it we endeavor by publishing the
Gospel, yea not only by preaching but praying, and all other religious means,
but the gaining of souls to Christ? Upon this account we are called the friends
of the Bridegroom; Mat. 9. 15.
and as the friends office is to speak a good word in the Bridegrooms behalf,
and to conciliate the Brides favor and affection toward him: so is this our
employment to woo your souls that they may be married to Christ. Indeed, as
Saint Bernard has piously observed, Bern ep. 42.
That purity of heart which especially ought to be in a Bishop and Pastor of
the Church, consists in two things* to wit, in seeking the glory of Christ, and
the good of the people: it behooving him in all his words and works to seek not
himself, but either Christ's honor or the Peoples profit, or both; so doing,
Implebit nonsolum Pontificis officium, sed and Etymologiam nominis pontem
seipsum faciens inter Deum and proximum: he shall, according to the Etymology
of the Latin word, make him self (as it were) a bridge between God and his
neighbor, whereof the one part reaches God by advancing his glory, and the
other extends to his neighbor by furthering his benifit: (Oh that all we who
undertake this sacred Function would take out this lesson!) far be it from us
to live to our selves, either only or chiefly aiming at our own emolument: we
are among other resemblances compared to Eyes, and eyes which see all things
else, see Cant. 1. 15.
not themselves, no more should we look at our selves in any thing we do. It
is said of Ignatius, that the name JESUS was (as it were) engraven upon his
heart. Oh let our heart be fixed on, and then our life cannot but be devoted to
him, we are in a more special manner servants Jude v. 1.
of Jesus Christ, it is that character which the Apostle S. Jude gives of
himself, and whose work should we employ our selves about but his? we are the
soldiers 2 Timothy 2. ^.
of Jesus Christ (according to S. Paul's character of Timothy) and whose
commands should we observe if not his? Finally, we are as so many stewards
entrusted by Christ 1 Cor. 4. 1.
with his glory, his Gospel, and what an odious thing is it for a man not to
discharge his trust? Oh my brethren! if we should not live to Christ, who
should? our relations to him are nearer, our obligation greater than any
others, and therefore as we have opportunity let us lay out our abilities in
the service and for the glory of Christ.

2. But further consider him as a Christian, and so it is a pattern for all to
follow, and instructs us all what is the genuine character of a sincere Saint:
To him to live is Christ, as Christ is the Alpha or beginning of his
spiritual, so he is the Omega or end of his temporal life; the life of grace
he deriveth from him, the life of nature he devoteth to him; and indeed by the
one he is enabled to the other; it is only a principle of supernatural life
which inclines a man to order his conversation aright, and steer the course of
his life so as may best redound to Christ's honor. In this respect it is that
S. Paul says in the name not only of himself, but all believers; both
negatively, none of us lives to himself; and affirmatively, we live Romans 14.
7, 8.
unto the Lord: that memorable saying of the Emperor Jovinian is the Motto of
every Saint, Scopus vitae Christus, Christ is the Christians scope, and
whatever he is, or has, or does, it is all in reference to Christ. What the
end is to the agent, that is Christ to a Saint: the end is that which does both
excitare, and commensurare, stir up the agent to act, and according to which
he orders and squareth his actions; so it is with a Christian, in respect of
Christ that which both moves and squareth him in all that he goes about is
the glory of Christ* what the center is to the circumference, that wherein all
the lines which are drawn from every part of it do meet, that is Christ to the
Saint, all the lines of his thoughts, and words, and works tend to, meet in him.

And truly, good reason it should be thus, since all Christians are Christ's,
such to, and over whom he most justly lays a claim, and challenges a right.
It was David's acknowledgment to God, upon which he groundeth a prayer for
protection, I am thine, save me. It is Psalm. 119. 94.
every Christians acknowledgment to Christ, upon which he groundeth a resolve
of subjection, I am thine, o blessed Jesus! I will serve thee. I am thine, and
therefore my health, my strength, my life, all I am, have, or can do, is
thine. It is the character by which S. Paul describes believers, Gal. 5. 24.
(...), they that are Christ's, and so they are (as for other causes so)
chiefly, because they are redeemed by him. It is the reason alleged by the
Apostle himself writing to the Corinthians, Ye are not your own, for ye are 1
Cor. 6. 19, 20.
bought with a price: and now, since we are not our own, but his, and that by
so strong an engagement; it is but Bern.
equal that we should live to him, Quicquid es, debes creanti, quicquid potes
debes Redimenti, says Saint Bernard, Thou owe what thou art to thy Creator,
yea whatever thou art able to thy Redeemer. Whom should a captive live to, but
him that ransomed him? A slave but to him that bought him? A Christian but to
Christ who has delivered him from the slavery and captivity of sin? Indeed,
this is the end which Christ intended in purchasing us by his death: He gave
himself for us, (says the Apostle) Tit. 2. 14.
that he might purify us to himself a peculiar people: and more appositely to
our present purpose, He died for all, 2 Cor. 5. 15.
that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him
which died for them and rose again: Thus then the case stands, Christ has
bought us by his blood for himself: being thus bought by him, we owe our selves
and lives to him: no wonder if every believer upon this consideration says,
with this holy Apostle, To me to live is Christ.

But if this be the inseparable character of a Christian, Alas! where shall we
find him? it was the complaint of God, concerning Ephraim, by the Prophet
Hoseah, Hos. 10. 1.
Ephraim is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit to himself. And may not
Christ take up the same complaint of us? None of us lives to himself, says S.
Paul: nay, None of us but lives to himself, may we say. Gregory Nyssen
speaking occasionally of these words, thus comments, Greg Nyss. i^ Cant. hom.
15.
The Apostle saying to me, to live is Christ, (...), intends thus much, no
carnal affection lives in me; not pleasure, nor grief, nor anger, nor pride,
nor envy, nor revenge, nor covetousness, (...), but to him only I live, who
is none of all these. But, my brethren, which of us can excuse our selves from
living to some one or other of these lusts? Does not the ambitious man say, To
me to live is honor? The voluptuous, To me to live is pleasure? The envious,
To me to live is revenge? The covetous, To me to live is wealth? But where, oh!
where is the man can truly say* To me to live is Christ? We call our selves
Christians, but we are Christiani sine Christo, no better than the Ephesians in
their heathenish condition, of whom the Apostle says, That at that time they
were without Christ: Ephesians. 2. 12.
only this is the difference, Heathens are without any knowledge of Christ,
and loose Christians are without the effectual knowledge of Christ: and so
their condition worse than Heathens, who, though they have Christ in their ears
and mouths, yet he is not in all their thoughts, or affections, or actions.

Oh that the setting of this pattern before us might serve to shame us out of
our inordinate living to our selves, and quicken us in our indevours to live to
Christ; as Peter oh. 6. 63.
said in another case to Christ, Lord, whether should I go? thou have the words
of eternal life. Let us say in this, Lord, to whom should we live? thou have
the command of our natural life; yea, thou art the life of our life, and soul
of our soul: Oh that all our oil might empty it self into this golden
candlestick! that all our water might run in this channel, all our actions be
levelled at this mark CHRIST, and his honor: To this end, let us get our
hearts both enlarged with apprehensions of Christ's love to us, and inflamed
with love to him. The love of Christ 2 Cor. 5. 14.
(says the Apostle Paul) constrains us: a phrase which may be construed both
ways; either actively, the love of Christ to us; or passively, our love to
Christ: both of which have a sweet, yet strong influence.

1. Meditate we seriously on the love of Christ to us. How truly might our
blessed Savior say, whilst on earth; yea, now he is in heaven, To me to live
is man? he lived here to die, he lives there to intercede for man; his Fathers
will (which was our salvation) was not only Joh. ^. 34.
his work, but his food; and (as he says himself) His meat and his drink: so
much content he took, and delight he had in our redemption. Indeed, what was
there from first to last which had not a reference to us? he was born for us,
lived for us, died for us, rose again for us, is ascended, sits at Gods
right hand, and shall at last come again for us. Who can think on this
exceeding love of Christ, and not acknowledge himself obliged to this duty by
way of gratulation, it being most consonant to the law of thankfulness and
retaliation, that since to Christ to live; nay to die was man: to man at least
to live should be Christ.

2. Let the consideration of Christ's love inflame thee with love to Christ, and
that love will enable thee to live to him. It is a known saying, The soul is
not where it lives, but where it loves: And it is no less true, Whom the
soul loves, to him it will live. It is by faith that Christ lives in us, it
is by love that we live to Christ: let him be the sole object of thine
affections, and then he will be the chief end of thy actions.

That expression of the Spouse in the Canticles, My beloved Cant. 2. 16.
is mine, and I am his; is very considerable to this purpose: My beloved is
mine, in that she expresses her sense of Christ's affection toward her: and, I
am his, in that she insinuates her love toward Christ. And (which was the
fruit of it) the resignation of her self to Christ. Excellently does S. Bernard
illustrate these words, Ille Bern. in Cant. S^^m 68.
mihi, and ego illi. Ille mihi, quia ben gnus and misericors. Ego illi, quia
non sum ingrata. Ille mihi, gratiam ex gratia. Ego illi gratiam, progratia.
Ille meae liberationi, ego illius honori. Ille saluti meae, ego illius
voluntati. He is mine, and I am his. He mine, because he is merciful. I his,
because I am not unthankful. He conferreth on me, grace for grace. I return
him praise for his grace. He is for my deliverance, I for his honor. He for my
salvation, I in subjection to his will. Thus it was with the Spouse, and thus
will it be with every Christian, who duly pondreth upon the mercy of Christ
toward him, and has his soul affected with love and gratitude to Christ. To
end this, If there were not in us any spark of love to Christ, yet even
self-love cannot but strongly oblige us to live to Christ, inasmuch as this is
the only honorable, profitable, and pleasurable life.

1. No life so honorable as this: all actions are dignified, especially by the
end to which they tend; whence, the more noble the intention, the more noble
the operation: and what intention can be higher, or end nobler than the glory
of Christ? this is that which by a strange activity turns our earthly into an
heavenly, our natural into a spiritual life, which is the most excellent of
all lives. To live to a man's lusts debaseth his life, and makes it no better
than bestiall; to live to Christ exalts it, and renders it no less than
angelical.

2. No life truly profitable but this; the way to live to our selves, is to
live to Christ: whilst he has the glory, we have the benefit: and as his name
is advanced, so our good is advantaged. There is a strange riddle, and a
seeming contradiction in those words of God by the Prophet, Ephraim is an empty
vine, and brings forth fruit: Hos. 10. 1.
a vine is then said to be empty when it is fruitless, and can that which
brings forth fruit be said to be fruitless? But the next words [ to himself]
unfold the riddle, and reconcile the contradiction, since the fruit which is
brought forth to our selves is no fruit. What he said of the day wherein he had
done no good, Diem perdidi, I have lost a day: that may we say in this case,
that day and time of our life is lost wherein we live not to Christ.

Finally, this is the most pleasurable life, free from those cares and fears,
distraction and vexation, with which living to the world, and our lusts, is
encombred, full of those joys and sweet pleasures, and delights whereof all
others are ignorant. He that can say, To me to live is Christ, may say, To me
to live is peace of conscience, contentment of mind, and joy in the Holy
Ghost. In one word, this is the only way to make both our life comfortable,
and our death gainful. And so I am fallen on

The other branch of this Text, that which is here proposed Part. 2d.
by our Apostle concerning his death, in those words, To me to die is gain. To
die, whether violently, or naturally; by sickness, or a sword; be the manner,
or means of death what it will, it is gain not only not injurious, but
commodious; no hurt, but profit, no loss, but benefit: To me, and all such as
he was, whether faithful Ministers, or good Christians.

Indeed, this is primarily true of that dying to which S. Paul (being now in
chains at Rome) might especially refer, (I mean) a violent death for the
cause of Christ, by heathenish persecution: And so this is true of the death it
self, and true Martyrs may say the very (...), to die is gain to thm. Indeed,
to die for Christ is both an honor, and a gain; an advancement, and an
advantage. Ver. 29.
S. Paul in this very Chapter tells the Philippians, it was given to them to
suffer; as if this were a special choice gift, an extraordinary gratification
conferred by God upon a man when he calls him to suffer, and especially death
for his truth; yea, the death it self gains an increase of the reward, and a
further accession of glory: In this respect our blessed Savior says, He that
loses his life for Mat. 16. 25.
my sake, shall find it: which is in effect, He that loses, shall not lose;
yea, the very losing his life in this quarrel shall be an advantage to him,
whilst he shall find that life which infinitely exceeds this. Mors quippe
integriorem Cypr. de laud Martyr.
facit vitam, mors magis deducit ad gloriam, to use S. Cyprians expression,
such a death shall not only accelerate, but accumulate the glory of that other
life.

But besides this special, it is (according to a right construction) true also
in a general notion, not only of them that die for, but all that die in the
Lord: that death is a gain to them, only with this difference, to Martyrs
their dying is a gain, and all Christians gain by dying. Indeed, this gain is
not a direct and proper, but only an accidental effect, or rather a consequent
of death not flowing from, but following after it; that which death in its own
nature brings forth is evil, it causes not gain but loss, depriving good
as well as bad men of the sweet comforts of this present life; but in regard of
the good, Christ has by obtaining for them a life after death, made death of a
curse to become a blessing, of a punishment a benefit, of a departure an
entrance, and of a loss a gain: thus, as the waters of Marah were sweetened by
the tree, so is the bitterness of death allayed, the sting of it plucked out;
yea, the nature of it changed by the cross of Christ.

This being premised, I shall entreat you to walk awhile with me in this
pleasant field of deaths gain, which I shall endeavor to illustrate both
absolutely and comparatively, privatively and positively.

1. This will appear to be a truth absolutely, Death is a gain to a godly man,
if you consider both the evils from which he is freed, and the good things of
which he is possessed.

1. Privatively: death is a gain to true Christians in respect of those various
evils from which it delivers.

The evils of this present life are of two sorts: to wit, temporal and
spiritual, from both which death delivers.

Many are the miseries under which we groan in this Ambr. de fi^. Resur.
life; but Mors pro remedio, so S. Ambrose, death is a cure for them all: In
this respect it is that Seneca says aptly, it is Nullius mali materia,
multorum finis, The cause of Sen. de Benef. l. 7. c. 1.
none, but the end of many evils: Upon this account it was that death has
been, even by the heathens, looked upon as an advantage. When those two famous
carpenters, Vide Plut. de consol* ad Apoll
Agamedes, and Trophonius, had built a Temple for Apollo at Delphos, they
begged of him a Reward: To whom this answer was given by the Oracle, That it
should be conferred on them within nine days; within which time they died. And
when Cydippe begged of Juno a boon for her two Sons, Cleebis and Byto, she
found them in the morning dead in their beds, as if the Gods could not bestow a
greater benefit than death, by which men are freed from the calamities of life.
In this respect Seneca's Sen. consol. ^d Polyb. cap. 28.
comparison is very fi^, who resembles death to an haven, into which when the
ship enters, she is past all the danger of rocks, of sands, of waves, or
winds, to which she was continually liable upon the tumultuous seas. Indeed,
death is that which delivers our bodies from pains and aches, our eyes from
tears, and our hearts from sorrows: and in this respect S. John calls them who
die in the Lord, blessed, because they rest from their Revel. 14. 16.
labors, to wit, all labor both of mind and body with which here they are
oppressed. The truth is, many are Psalm. 34. 19.
the afflictions, as of all men, so especially of the righteous in this life.
They are sure to meet with persecution from wicked men for their righteousness
sake; as the tree is beaten with sticks for its fruits sake; yea, such is the
rage of persecutors, that they care not to what sorrows of hunger, cold,
nakedness, imprisonment, banishment, want, they expose them: besides, Almighty
God is pleased to chastise them for, whilst he lets others alone in sin, to
exercise their graces by adversity, whilst others enjoy prosperity: but when
death comes, it sets them free from all, as being the last chastisement which
God does inflict upon, and the last mischief which wicked men can do to the
godly. But these are the least of those evils from which death delivers a
believer; there are evils of another, an higher nature: and as the sense of
them is a sadder trouble, so the deliverance from them must needs be a greater
gain; such are divine dereliction, Satanicall temptation, the wickeds
conversation, and sins infection.

1. In this life the godly are oft-times enforced to go mourning all the day
long, because God hides his face: many clouds interpose that they cannot
behold the Sun of righteousness shining on them, but when the wind of death
comes it blows all these clouds away, and puts them in such an estate
wherein there shall be no interruption of their comfort.

2. Whilst we live on earth we must expect assaults from hell, we walk here
amongst snares; nor are we at any Quid aliud est haec vita nisi plena laqueis
inter laqueos ambulam^ etc. Ambr. de bon. mort. cap. 3.
time, or in any place, secure from Satan's suggestions; but death puts us out
of his reach, whilst our souls soar aloft, and so are like the flying-bird
out of the compass of his snare.

3. How we are forced to be as lillies among thorns, wheat among chafe; and
being thus mingled with the wicked, we complain with David, Woe are we that we
Psalm. 120. 5.
must dwell in Mesheck, and in the tents of Kedar: but when we die we shall be
separated from the ungodly, so that they shall no longer be to us as the
Canaanites were to the Israelies, Thorns in our eyes, and Pricks in our Josh.
23. 13.
sides.

4. Finally, so long as we continue in this world, the bur of corruption will
cleave to us; but death rids us of it: according to that of S. Paul, He that is
dead, is free from Romans 6. 7.
sin. In this respect, death is fitly called by S. Ambrose, Vitiorum
sepultura, the grave of our sins. And by Gregory Ambr. de bon. mort. cap. 4.
Greg Nyss* orat. in fun. Pulcher.
Nyssen, (...), the expurgation of wickedness: since till the vessel be
broken, the muddy water of corruption cannot be wholly poured out. Consuit the
experiences of the Saints, and you shall find them still complaining of
spiritual conflicts with their corruption. We are besieged on every side, (as
S. Cyprian observes) Cypr. sermon. 4. de morta^.
and, Oh how often is a breach made upon us! if covetousness be knocked down,
lust rises up; if lust be quelled, pride starteth forth; if pride be subdued,
anger exasperateth; thus are we forced to a continual struggling with our sins:
but when we die, the combat cease; and, as for the present, we are not under
sin; so then, we shall be without sin, or so much as the motions of sin.

Indeed, it very observable, that as death came in by sin, so sin goes out by
death: filia devoravit matrem, the daughter destroys the mother; nisi primi
parents peccassent non morerentur, peccarent justi nisi morerentur, had not
our first parents sinned they had not died, if we did not die we should not be
without sin: sin delivers to death, and death delivers from sin; and, so
that which was only the punishment, becomes the period of sinful evil. And
surely as S. Ambrose occasionally speaking of these words, says, Lucrum est
evasisse incrementa peccati, Ambros. de b^n^ mort. cap. 2.
lucrum fagisse deteriora and ad meliora transisse, it is no small gain to
avoid the increase of sin: nay, our Apostle utters these words, says S.
Cyprian, Lucrum Cypr. sermon. 4. de mortal.
maximum computans jam seculi laqueis non teneri, jam nullis peccatis and
vitiis carnis obnoxium fieri, accounting it the greatest gain no longer to be
subject to the sins of the flesh, and entangled in the fetters of the world:
indeed, this is as in it self, so in the estimation of every godly man the
chiefest gain; and, no wonder if accounting sin to be the greatest evil, he
esteem this the chiefest privilege of death, more rejoicing that it puts an
end to his sinnings, though they were never so small, than to his sufferings,
were they never so great.

In fine, death is both a total and final deliverance from all evils, except
it self, from which also we shall be delivered by the resurrection: in which
respect, an Ancient says elegantly, It is unjust to call it a death, rather a
recesse ^. Maxim.
from death; a separation from corruption, a freedom from bondage, rest from
trouble, ease of labors; and (ut in summa dicam) omnium consummationem
malorum; yea, the consummation of all evils.

And yet, in all that I have said I have told you but one half, and that the
less half of deaths gain: there is not only ademptio malorum, but adeptio
bonorum, a removal of evil, but the presence of good; and so positively, To
die is gain: For, though the happiness of our persons do not presently follow
upon death, but the resurrection; yet there is an happiness conferred upon our
souls immediately after death: and if you would know wherein this consists, I
answer,

1. When we die our souls go to paradise: a place of rest, and joy, and
comfort. Our first parents were cast out of paradise that they might die* and
we die that we may go to paradise. The Poet saw this when he said, Part tamen
meliore mei -- Ovid.
Though my body rot in the earth, yet my better part shall be carried above the
skies. Indeed, the souls of them that depart hence in the Lord are immediately
received into those celestial habitations.

2. When we die our souls go to God and Christ, in whose (...), etc. Greg. Naz.
orat. 20.
presence is fullness of joy: this is the reason why Gregory Naz: calls death a
benefactour, because it presently sends us to God, our Apostle (in the next
Verse save one) tells Verse 23.
us, He had a desire to depart and to be with Christ: thereby plainly
intimating, that when be did depart hence, he should be with Christ, to wit, in
his soul; and if you will Colos* 3. 1.
know where Christ is, you shall find it by other Scriptures, to be, far
above all heavens, at the right hand of Ephesians. 4. 10.
God. Indeed, the contract between Christ and the soul is made on earth, but
the marriage is consummated in heaven; here Christ is with us by his Spirit,
there we shall be with him, first in our souls, and at last in our persons. It
is much for a Prince to visit a poor man in his cottage, but it is far more
for him to take the poor man home with him to his palace. Esse Christum cum
paulo magna securitas. Bern in Ps. qui bab.
Esse paulum cum Christo summa foelicitas: It is our great security while we
live, that Christ is with us, but it shall be our felicity when we die that we
shall be with Christ.

3. Finally, when we die our souls are endowed with perfect purity and
spotless holiness, and grace receives its consummation by glory: the Apostle
makes mention Heb. 12. 29*
of the spirits of just men made perfect, that is, perfectly just and holy in
their spirits. Indeed, the perfection of glory is not till the resurrection
when soul and body shall be united; but in the mean time* the souls of them
that die in Christ are adorned with a perfection of grace; and if the
beginnings of grace be precious, what is the completion of it? if the first
fruits be desirable, what is the full crop? if the soul which has but one
dram of grace be more truly noble than if it had all other natural or moral
endowments, how glorious shall our souls be when they shall be as vessels
filled to the brim with fullness of grace!

By all this which has been said, the truth of this Apostolical Assertion
sufficiently appears, but that all Objestions may be removed be pleased to
consider it comparatively, and to weigh a while in the scales of reason both
the loss and the gain of death, that we may see how much the gain
preponderateth the loss, and so this Doctrine will remain undoubtedly true
notwithstanding whatever may be pretended to the contrary.

It is true, death bereaveth us of a mortal and transitory, but it is an inlet
to an immortal and everlasting life; it despoileth us of our worldly
possessions. I, but it puts us into possession of our heavenly inheritance,
it takes us from the society of our neighbors, bosom of our friends: I, but
it sends us to Abraham's bosom, and makes way for our society with Christ.
Finally, it severs the soul from the body; I, but it unites the soul to God:
what is it for the candle to be put out whilst we enjoy the light of the Sun?
for the standing-pools to be dry so long as we may drink at the fountain? for
our earthly comforts to be taken from us, when heavenly joys are conferred on
us? The truth is, death is not a privation, but a permutation: So holy Job
calls it a change, and that a blessed exchange of a cottage Job 14. 14.
for a palace, a wilderness for a paradise, a house of bondage for a place of
liberty, of brass for gold, pebles for pearls, earth for heaven. And, now tell
me, if upon all these considerations S. Paul had not just cause to say, To me
to die is gain.

The meditation whereof may serve as a check to those passions of grief and
fear which are apt in this matter to be exorbitant, the one in respect of our
friends, and the other of our own death. It is the use which Cyprian teaches
us to make of this very doctrine, Ut neque charorum lugeamus Cypr. sermon. 4. de
mortalit.
excessum, and cum accessionis propriae dies venerit incunctanter and libenter
ad Deum ipso vocante veniamus, That we should not too much bewail the departure
of our dearest relations, and when the day of our dissolution does approach,
that we readily and cheerfully obey Gods call.

1. Let the gain of death moderate our sorrow for our friends who sleep in
Jesus: Why should we be troubled for them who are at rest? sit down in sorrow
for them who are entered into joy? Why are we clad in black for them who walk in
white? and so many tears flow from our eyes for them who have all tears wiped
from theirs? It is storyed of the Thracians, that they mourn at the birth, and
rejoice at the death of their friends. Nec imprudenter, Ambros. de fid. Resur.
says S. Ambrose, nor was it without reason that they should account those fit
to be bewailed who are launching forth into the tempestuous sea of this world,
and attend them with joy who are got into the harbor of rest. We read
concerning Lazarus, that Christ rejoiced when he was dead, but wept being to
raise him to life. And Chrysologus his note is very apt to our present purpose,
Christ us recipiens Lazarum flevit, non amittens, Christ Chrysol. ser. 64.
bewaileth not the losing, but restoring of his life: according to which the
Greek Fathers make the reason of our Saviors tears to be, that he should now
call him Is pael. l. 2. ep. 175.
back to a miserable life. Indeed, as S. Hierome says concerning Nepotian, we
may say of every one who departs in Christ, Non tam plangendus est qui hac
luce caruerit Cypr. in Joh. l. 7. c. 21.
quam gratulandum ei qui de tantis malis evaserit, We are not so much to
condole his loss of this life, as to congratulate Hieron. ep. 3.
his deliverance from the miseries of this life.

Thou will say perhaps, It is my friend, my dearly beloved friend who is dead,
and can I choose but mourn? But, is he thy friend, and do thou envy him his
happiness? do thou dearly love him, and yet grieve at his welfare? He is thy
friend, and death is his benefit: and shall the benefit of another, especially
of thy friend, be thy sorrow? I, but he is snatched from my arms, I have a
great loss in his departure, and that is my trouble: True, this nature
promteth to, that we should be sensible of our own loss; yea, grace requires
that we should be sensible of such a loss as it is a cross inflicted upon us
by Divine Providence. Thus, patient Job, when the news came to him of his Job
1. 20.
childrens death, shaved his head, and rent his mantle: signs of that sorrow
which natural affection put him upon; yea, he fell down upon the ground and
worshipped: signs, that in his sorrow he looked higher, at the hand of God
which had done it. But, as with one eye we look on our loss, and weep; so with
another eye we must look on their gain, and rejoice; as it is a chastisement to
us, we must be affected with sorrow; as a mercy to them, with joy: and thus,
whilst we mingle these affections together, our sorrow will not be exorbitant.

Indeed, when any die, to whom we have reason to fear, death is the beginning
of sorrrow; there is sad cause of bitter mourning: but not for them who die in
the Lord. Scribitur David just flevisse filium parricidam, qui alium Hieron.
ep. 25.
parvulum, quia sciebat non peccasse, non flevit, David justly bewailed dead
Absalom, because he died in his rebellion, and therefore despaired of his
bliss; but when the other child dies, he dries his eyes, as not doubting
Illi deplorandi sunt in morte quos miseros infernus ex h^c vita recipit, etc.
Isid. Hispal. de sum. bon. l. 3. c. ult.
its happiness. They indeed cannot sufficiently be lamented at their death,
who dying in their sins, drop into hell; not they who are carried into those
heavenly mansions, says Isidore excellently.

2. Let the gain of death mitigate the fear which is apt to arise in us from
the apprehension of our own. When Abigail told Nabal the threatening words of
David, the Text says, His heart died within him, and became as a stone. ^ Sam.
25. 37.
Thus is it with the most of us, when any summons of death is given; nay, not
only with the most, but even sometimes with the best. Christ comes to the
Disciples on Mark* 6. 50.
the Sea, to preserve them from the storm, and they are troubled, death comes
to deliver us from all evil, and we exceedingly tremble. Indeed the reason is,
because we consider not that death is a deliverance, and so gain to us. What
Chrysologus says of Martyrs, is true of all Chrysol. Sermon. 108.
good men, Morte nascuntur, fine inchoant, occisione vivunt, and in coelis
lucent, qui in terris putabantur extincti, their death is a birth, and end a
beginning, they live by being killed, and whilst they are thought to be
extinguished on Earth, they shine in Heaven; and surely were this well pondered
by them, they would not seek consolation against death, but death it self
would be their consolation. Job 17. 14.
Those words of Job, I have said to Corruption, Thou art my Father, to the
Worm, Thou art my Mother, Orig ibid.
are not unfitly allegorized by Origin to this purpose; Ut pueri consolatores
habent parents, sic ego mortem and putredinem; as if he therefore called
Corruption and Worms his Father and Mother, because as Parents are comforters
to the Children, so were they to him.

It is true, the Separation of Soul and Body is terrible, and a natural fear
of it may be, cannot but be in all. I but it is as true in respect of the
godly, that when this separation is made, anima absolvitur, corpus resolvitur,
Ambrose de Bono Mort. c. 8.
quae absolvitur gaudet, quae resolvitur nihil sentit, as St. Ambrose
elegantly; the Soul is set at liberty, and rejoices, yea, the body is at
rest, and knows no trouble; and is such a separation to be feared? This life,
what is it but a going to death? and death, what is it but a going to life?
little cause then sure, why we should either too much love the one, or fear
the other: Non est timendum, says Tertullian, quod nos liberat ab omni
timendo, T^ cert. de Anim. ^p. 4.
shall that be the object of our fear, which freeth us from what ever is to be
feared? by death we gain glory, and shall we not glory over death? non
repuerascam, said a Roman, si Deus mihi largiretur, I would not be young
again, though God would grant it me, and he gives this reason, quia ab
hospitio ad domum discedam, because when I dye, I shall go from my Inn to my
home. Did ever child cry when his Fathers man came to fetch him home?

Alas beloved (as St. Ambrose rightly) non mors ipsa terribilis, Ambrose de
Bon. Mort. c. 8.
sed opinio de morte, not death it self, but our misapprehension of death, is
terrible to us; did we look through, beyond death, at the gain which
follows, it would not be dreadful, but amiable in our eyes, and with this
holy Apostle, we would not fear, but desire to depart: That of the wise man,
the righteous has Prove. 14. 32.
hope in his death, the Caldee reads, The righteous hops he shall dye; so
far is a good man (upon serious meditation of deaths gain) from fearing of,
that he hops for, his dissolution, and though he dare not rashly hasten, yet
he willingly entertaineth it, whenever sent by God to him.

To draw to an end: Be pleased to put both clauses together, since indeed they
cannot be asunder, If to us to live be Christ, to dye must needs be gain, to
dye cannot be gain, but only to them, to whom to live is Christ. If a good
life precede an happy death, cannot but follow: Nor is it probable, a gainful
death should be the consequent, if a religious life have not been the
antecedent.

Indeed if we observe the temper of many in the world, we shall find them
either inverting or separating these clauses.

1. Some there are who would invert these words, and make gain the predicate of
the former, and Christ of the latter; thus does every covetous man say, To me
to live is gain, and to dye is Christ; vain men who will have Gold to be their
God, and yet Christ to be their Redeemer, they will serve Mammon whilst they
live, and yet be saved by Christ when they dye; but it will be just with Christ
to say at death to all such Mammonists, in these words of God to the
Israelites, in the day of their distress, Go to Judges 2. 14.
the Gods which you have served, the gain which you have lived to, and let
that deliver in this hour of your death.

2. More there are who would sever these Clauses, whilst they would gladly say,
to dye is gain, but not to live is Christ: One was asked, whether he had
rather be Craessus or Socrates, his answer was, in vita Craesus, in morte
Socrates, he would be rich Craesus in his life, and good Socrates at his death;
you know whose prayer it was, Let me dye the death of the righteous, and let my
last end Numb. 23. 10.
be like his, and it is that no doubt, which many wish and desire; nay hope,
who yet regard not to live the life of the righteous, and that their course to
that end may be like his. But what a folly, nay madness is it, for men to
expect to reap what they do not sow? to sow to the flesh, and to the world,
and yet reap by Christ the gain of everlasting life after death? as therefore
we expect that one, let us endeavor the other; and if gain by death be our
hope, let living to Christ be our practice.

So that this Scripture thus considered, does plainly put a difference between
the precious and the vile, the godly and the wicked; whilst to these who live
to themselves, death is a loss; to those who live to Christ, it is a gain.
Adrian was wont to say, that death is pavor divitum, and pauperis desiderium;
the rich man's fear, and the poor man's desire. I may well apply it here, death
either is or may be the bad man's fear, but the good man's wish, or to use St.
Ambrose his expression, justis mors quietis est Ambrose de bono* Mort. cap. 8.
portus* nocentibus naufragium, it is an Haven to the Just* but a Shipwreck to
the Guilty; to those a bed of repose, to these a rack of torture: The man who
lives to the world, says to death, as Ahab to Eliah, Have thou found me oh 1
King. 21. 20.
mine Enemy! but he who lives to Christ, may say to it as David of Ahimaaz, It
comes with good tidings.

And now my brethren, would you on the one hand* see 2 Samuel 18. 27.
the reason why you are so fearful of death? it is because your consciences
accuse you, that you have not lived to Christ; suae quisque conscientia vulnus
accuset, non mortis acerbitatem, we may thank our own guilty consciences
Ambrose. l. d.
for our fears of death: It was not without reason, that St. Paul says, the
sting of death is sin, since death is only venomous and deadly to them who
live in sin: On the other hand, would you see the way to a joyful end? 1
Cor. 15. 56.
would you have comfort in, and gain after death? Oh let it be your study to
live to Christ. It is our Saviors counsel to his Disciples, Take no thought
for your life, let me alter it a little, take no thought for your death, but
Mat. 6. 25.
for your life; let your care be to advance Christ in your lives, and it will
be his care to confer the gain of glory and immortality upon you at your death.

And thus I have finished the Text*

Time, and your expectation hasten me to the sad occasion of this sorrowful
assembly. The early and unexpected death of this hopeful servant of Christ, in
the work of the Gospel, Master* Adam Pemberton; What S. Paul said concerning
Timothy* I 2 Timothy 3. 15.
need not doubt to say of him, that from a child he has known the holy
Scriptures, being the Son of such a Father, who strove to instill into his
tender years, both Religion and Learning. It pleased God to bestow upon him,
many choice natural endowments of an Acute wit, a Ready expression, and a good
memory. He wanted not acquired abilities, in the knowledge of Tongues and Arts,
those handmaids of Divinity, which none contemn but the ignorant, who because
they cannot be like others, would have others like them, and so whilst
darkness covers the Hemisphere, they may be thought to have as good eyes as
any. Besides these natural and acquired parts, I trust (and what ever any
proudly undertake, Man can go farther) he had some measure of supernatural
and infused graces, and experienced those saving operations of the blessed
spirit on his own heart.

Being thus competently (nay far more excellently then many of his years)
furnished for the work of the Ministry, he entered into holy Orders, and that by
the right door, preferring the beaten track of venerable Antiquity, before the
untroden by-path of Novelty. And now having undertaken this sacred employment,
how studious and sedulous, frequent and diligent he was in performing it, I
doubt not but a great part here present can attest. Commonly twice, this last
half year thrice, nay, many times oftener within the compass of a week, he
dispensed the mysteries of the Gospel to the people; so that I may truly say,
he exhausted himself, his strength, his health in this work, as it is
reported of Archimedes: studi is quibus obtinuit famam, amisit vitam, He lost
his life by those studies, which got him credit. So I may truly affirm of him,
by laboring to gain Souls to Christ, he impaired the health of his own
body, and in some sense accelerated his end.

As thus he did the work of the Lord laboriously, so in some measure
sucessefully; me thinks I read in the eyes of many here present their deep
sorrow for his loss, and that chiefly upon this account, the great good and
comfort their Souls found in, and by his labors: yea, it pleased God to give
him as it were a seal of his Ministry at his last Sermon; after which, one
that had been seduced by the errors of the times, came to him, humbly
acknowledging his own folly, heartily blessing God for his instructions, and
earnestly desiring confirmation by private conference with him.

And truly I cannot but take notice of Gods great mercy to himself in this
regard, that though he was but a tender plant, and so the more apt to be bended
any way; yea, though in this innovating age, the ready way to preferment (of
which young men are usually Ambitious) he to turn Novelist, or in plain terms
Schismatic, yet not consulting with flesh and blood, he stood firm in the
Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, and chose rather to side with
suffering Truth, then prospering Error; He owned the Church of England, and
that as before this last deformed Reformation, to be his Mother, zealously
preaching her Doctrine, asserting her Discipline, and bemoaning her sorrows,
which caused him not many days before his death to take up David's language,
Redeem Psalm. 25. 22.
Israel oh God, out of all his troubles. Nor did he only pity her sufferings,
and pray for her deliverance, but to the utmost of his power, he was ready to
help her children, his fellow* brethren, and laborers in the Gospel, who for
her sake, are reduced to extreme necessity. In this respect what St. Hierome
said of Nepotian, I may of him, Caecorum Hierom. Ep 3*
baculus, esurientium cibus, spes miserorum, Solamen lugentium fuit, he was a
staff to the blind, food to the hungry, an Anchor of the afflicted, and a
comfort of the mourners.

And now whilst this young Tree was thus growing up in grace and knowledge, in
favor with God and Man, so that they who sat under the shadow of his
Ministry, promised to themselves much comfort and contentment: Alas ( who can
mention it without tears) in the spring of the year, I and of his age, the
wind of a violent disease The 28. year of his life.
blasted him, and death removes him hence, to be transplanted in the
celestial Paradise. Having spent his life in the Lords work, he ended it on
the last Lords day, and Palm Sunday Apr. 8. A. D. 1655. Hier. ib.
on that day of rest, (yet withal of labor to a Minister) he rested from his
labors. So that quem haeredem putavimus funus tenemus, (to use St. Hieromes
phrase) we are forced to bemoane his fall with tears, who (being Elder) hoped
to have left him a remaining Pillar in the Church of God. Some few hours
before his dissolution, a Reverend Doctor of Divinity (his and my very good
friend) coming to visit him, and putting him upon the act of Resignation in
yiedling up himself to Gods dispose, his answer was, That if he might do God
any further service in his Church, he was willing to live; but if not, he was
content to submit to Gods will, saying in the words of my Text, (which since he
made use of, I made choice of) To me to live is Christ, and to dye is gain:
and truly by what you have already heard, there is reason to believe, that he
practiced the former, and hope, that he now experienceth the latter. Indeed his
death in respect of us was a loss, a great loss, and that every way; His
Father has lost the staff of his age, an observant Child; his Wife an
affectionate Husband, and his Children (poor babes whose sorrow is yet to come)
a careful Father. The Church has lost an obedient Son, this Parish a
painful, profitable Preacher, the Poor, a Zealous charitable Advocate and
Almoner: Nor must I leave out my self, who have lost an entire cordial
friend. But whilst his Father, Wife, Children, Parish, the Church, the Poor, my
self, may all truly say, to us his death is a loss, he said, and I hope
accordingly finds it verified; To me to dye is gain. I have only three
short words with which I shall close up my discourse.

1. To the near relations of this our deceased Brother, My word is submit,
durum verbum, an hard lesson I acknowledge, but yet such as I trust you will
endeavor to take forth: His aged Father I cannot better counsel, then in
Saint Hieromes words to Heliodorus, concerning Nepotian, Non doleas quod talem
amiseris, sed gaudeas quod talem habueris, you have more reason to rejoice that
once you had, then to mourn that now you have lost, such a Son. His dear
Consort I shall bespeak in Seneca's words, I dare not forbid Nedoleas exigere
non audeo pl^^ aequore dolere volo, Sen. Ep.
you to grieve at all, but I would not have you grieve to excess. That knot
which was tied between you, it was but till death did part you: and as if
Divine Providence would mind you upon what terms you had him, on that day
three years he was Married to, he is taken from you.

2. To the loving Parishioners and Auditors of this now silenced Preacher, my
word is, Remember, Remember all those wholesome counsels, faithful rebukes,
comfortable Doctrines, sound truths, which you heard dropping, nay, flowing
from his lips in this place, I doubt not but many of you dearly loved him,
show at once your love both to him and your selves, by endeavoring to practice
what he taught you, and let your greatest sorrow be not for him, but for your
selves, that you have no more profited, under his pious labors.

3. To all here present, my word is that of our Savior to his disciples,
Watch: A word which (I hope) will take so much the deeper impression upon you
that were his Auditors, because it was the last counsel himself gave you Mark
13. 37.
out of this place, that portion of holy Writ [What I say unto you, I say unto
all, Watch:] being then the subject of his discourse, And not only on you, but
us all; because it is that which his dead corpse now preaches to us. Indeed,
when we see one falling in his full strength, snatched away in the prime of his
days, have we not reason to watch? and watching, to prepare for the hour of
our death. Let it then be the care of us all whilst we live to live to Christ,
every one of us in our station consecrating our selves to, employing our
talents in his service, for his glory; so shall it be our comfort in, and bliss
after death. And whenever that time shall approach whether sooner or later to
any of us, we shall be able to say, with this our deceased Brother, in the
words of this holy Apostle, [To me to Live is CHRIST, and to Die is Gain.

FINIS.
The Works of Mr. Nathanael Hardy M. A. and Preacher to the Parish of St.
Dyonis Back-Church.
1 -- Justice Triumphing, or the Spoiler spoiled. A Sermon preached on the 5 of
Novem. in the Cathedral Church of S. Paul's, in 4to.

2 -- The Arraignment of Licentious Liberty, and oppressing Tyranny. In a
Sermon preached at a Fast before the Lords in Parliament in the Abbey-Church at
Westminster, in 4to.

3 -- Faiths victory over Nature. A Sermon preached at the funerals of Mr John
Rushout Junior, in 4to.

4 -- The safest Convoy, or the strongest Helper. A valedictory Sermon before
the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Bendish Baronet* His Majesty's Ambassador to
the Grand Seigniour at Constantinople, in 4to.

5 -- A Divine Prospective, Representing the Just man's Peaceful end. A Sermon
preached at the funeral of the Right Worshipful Sir John Gayre Knight, in 4to.

6 -- Love and Fear the inseparable Twins of a Blessed Matrimony. A Sermon
occasioned by the Nuptials between Mr William Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth
Adams, in 4to.

7 -- Divinity in Mortality: or, the Gospels Excellency, and the Preachers
frailty. A Sermon preached at the funerals of Mr Richard Goddard Minister of
the Parish of St Gregory's by St Paul's, in 4to.

8 and 9 Two Mites: or a Grateful acknowledgment of Gods Singular goodness. In
two Sermons, occasioned by his late unexpected recovery of a desperate
Sickness, in 4to.

10 -- Death's Allarum: or, Security's Warning-Piece. A Sermon Preached in St
Dionis Back-Church, at the funeral of Mrs Mary Smith the 9 of November in 4to.

11 -- The Epitaph of a Godly man, especially a man of Gods: or, the Happiness
by Death of Holiness in Life. A Sermon preached at the funeral of Mr Adam
Pemberton (late Minister of the Parish of St Fosters Foster-lane) the 11 of
April, in 4to.

12 -- The first Epistle General of St John unfolded and applied. The first
part, in 22 Sermons, in 4to.

Printed for Nathanael Webb, and William Grantham, at the black Bear near the
little North-door of S. Paul's-Church. 1655.


