Truth and Innocence, Prevailing against Error and Insolency: Wherein is
Examined and Discovered these following PARTICULARS.

I. Whether Baptism be Sprinkling or Dipping. II. Whether the Subject to be
Baptized, be Infants or Believers. III. Whether the punishment of Original Sin,
be the first or second Death. IV. Whether Man be in an immortal estate before
the Resurrection. V. As touching the Resurrection, whether these Bodies of ours
shall rise again and be made immortal, or whether it will be another Body. VI.
Of Gods Love to the whole Lump of Mankind made known. VII. Of the Personal
Reign of our blessed Savior upon Earth.
It being occasioned by way of Answer to Mr. Hezekiah Holland, sometimes
Preacher at Sutton-Valence in Kent, Whereunto also is Added, A SECOND PART:
Wherein is proved, That all the Laws and Statutes of King Jesus (in his last
Will and Testament) are practicable, and to be practiced by all the Lords
People (according to their several abilities) until the worlds end; with many
Objections Answered.

It being an Answer to one Mr. Simon Hendon of Benenden in Kent.

By George Hammon, Pastor to the Church of Christ in Biddenden, Kent.

Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common Salvation,
it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints,

Jude 3. LONDON, Printed for the Author, in the Year, 1660.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO Mr. Hezekiah Holland.
SIR,
I Have examined your Treatise, (entitled Truths Conflict with Error,) and
find it to be no other, but Error and Insolency striving against Truth and
Innocence; and is found to be no more ablier to stand, than Dagon was to stand
before the Ark of the Lord. I had writ a very considerable Piece in Answer to
the several Particulars in your Treatise, and was at the Press with it long
since, but taking these things into consideration, I did return back again with
it, and have it lying by me at this time: the Reasons that caused me to lay
that aside at present; was,

First, because I found very little asserted by you more, than what I had
before answered and disproved. And,

Secondly, because the answering of petty or inconsiderable Objections in
controverted Points, is but of little profit to the Reader. And,

Thirdly, because your self far remote, and also saying, that you would not
appear in the Press, or otherwise with me in this Controversy any more, as I
was informed by one that said they had it from your own mouth. And,

Fourthly, because I find that it is most profitable to the Reader, (for whose
sake I have written this) to lay down things in particular Points or Positions,
and to confirm it by Scriptures, and Reasons drawn from the Scriptures, which
is my method in the following Treatise; nevertheless I have answered every
thing cited by you, that has any weight in it, or at least that which appears
of any weight unto me. And,

Fifthly, because I had other Points to speak to, being desired thereunto by
some Friends; and such like occasions calling me thereunto, the which caused me
to be more briefer in the several Particulars than I would have been, and to
omit that large Discourse which I had written, and to contract my self into a
briefer method, and yet large enough to clear up the Truth, and unvail the
falsity of that long deceiving Doctrine of Infants Baptism; together with
several other Doctrins, which do attend it; the which being read and weighed
with an impartial heart, will appear to be the truth as it is in Jesus.

But Sir, what may I say to animate you to that thing? for as much as the way
of Truth is every where spoken against, and your self, and your Brethren the
greatest Persecutors thereof: Let not (I pray you) vain imaginations deceive
you any longer, persuading your selves, that you are the people whom God has
revealed his secrets unto; and that you are wise, and the knowledge of Gods
Mysteries are in your hearts, because of your parts and education; Remember
such may be deceived, and that the Priests of old were the greatest Enemies
that our blessed Savior had upon earth, how that they were the men that took
counsel, and gave Judas Thirty Pieces of Silver to betray his Master; and also
that it was the Priests, that gave the Soldiers large Money to make a lie, to
say that Christ was not risen from the dead, but his Disciples came by night
while they slept, and stole him away; which saying is reported amongst the Jews
to this day: and yet doubtless these men had human parts and learning, and also
zeal, and yet for all this had not the knowledge of the Mysteries of God; for
indeed it is the fulfilling of the Word of the Lord, which says, that God
hides his Wisdom from the wise and prudent, and reveals it to babes and
sucklings.

Sirs, Let these and such like Scriptures as these be, (of which there be many)
put you upon serious trial, with prayers and supplycations, that (if
peradventures) God may open your eyes, that you may see the Truth, that so you
may bring glory unto his Name, for it is not learning will do it, (although it
be good in its place) without the inspiration of the Almighty; and let not
Antiquity or Customs be your guide, for the aged do not always understand
judgment; but wait (at Wisdoms gate) on God by prayer, sighs and groans, lay
aside pride and vainglory, be not conformable to this world, in its pleasure,
honor, fashions, and friendship, and the like; but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your minds, and put on the Lord Jesus, and make no provision for
the flesh, to fulfill it in the lusts thereof; and by so doing you shall come to
know what is that good and acceptable, and perfect will of God, and your eyes
shall see out of obscurity, and your ears shall hear a voice behind you,
saying, This is the way walk in it, when you turn to the right hand, or to the
left, which shall guide your feet into the way of peace, and having served your
God and your Generation in the way of Truth, the gates (that the King of Glory
shall enter in at) shall be set wide open unto you, and all such as keep the
Truth with uprightness of heart, shall enter in thereat, to their everlasting
joy and felicity, never to have end; Which is the desire of him,

Who delights in the Conversion of Souls, and to be the Servant of all men for
Christ's sake; GEORGE HAMMON.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
FOR thy sake I have (yet once more) taken in hand to set out in order
(publicly) those things which will conduce much to thy Instruction, if thou
seriously read and peruse those things which are contained in the following
Treatise, although they much differ from the common opinion of men, yet try
them and be serious, not wise in thy own eye, but wise according to what is
written in the Scriptures; and if thou find in this Treatise any thing that
seems strange unto thee, be not over hasty to condemn it, or the Author, but
know assuredly, that he is one that aims and strives after Truth as much as
thy self, who ever thou art; and know that the things that are disapproved of
by men, are the things that are chosen of God and precious, and that in all
Ages (as I have formerly said) the Truth of God has been accounted Heresy;
and the assertors thereof Heretics; and turners of the world upside down;
therefore it much concerns thee, to be earnest with God in prayer and
supplication, to give thee a discerning spirit, that thou may discern
between Truth and Error.

I have in the following Treatise, showed in a methodical order, what Baptism
is, and that it is not Sprinkling or scattering a little water in the face of
the Subject, no, but a Dipping or Plunging, or a through washing of the person
Baptized; and also that the Subjects to be Baptized, are not Infants, (as such)
but such as have first believed in the Lord Jesus, or at least such as do make
a visible profession of faith; such were those that John the Baptist Baptized,
for they came and confessed their sins, and was Baptized of him in Jordan; and
also when the Eunuch said to Plilip, See here is water, What hinders me that I
may not be Baptized? and he said, If thou believes with all thy heart thou
may; and the Samaritans when they did believe the things concerning the
Kingdom of God, and the name of Jesus, they were Baptized both men and women:
So that the Scripture is plain, that testifies what Subject should be
Baptized. And that conceit (or more properly great deceit) about Original Sin,
in saying, That Infants dying in their Infancy, without being Baptized are
damned, and so bring in Infants Baptism to purge away Original Sin; I have
showed is no such thing, but a dream of men's own brains, and that there is not
one Text of Scripture, from Genesis to the Revelation, which says, that any
shall die the second Death for Original Sin; nay, the second Death was not so
much as threatened in any one Text of Scripture, either upon Adam or any of his
posterity for that sin, but the Death of the Body was threatened, and also
executed, for says the Lord, Dust thou art, and unto Dust thou shall return:
And as touching Man's Mortality, it is a general received Opinion, That the Soul
of Man is Immortal and dies not, although the Scripture says, that Christ
poured out his Soul to death, and made his Soul an offering for sin; but it is
supposed, that when men die, their Souls (if they have done evil) go
immediately to Hell, and in the Resurrection come again from thence to be
judged, to see whether they deserve it yea or nay; as though Souls should be
put into their torments before they are tried and judged, to see whether they
have deserved it yea or nay; for although some men's sins go before to Judgment,
so as that they are convicted before death, yet some men's sins come after them,
that there is not the sense of their sins at the time of death, but they come
after them unto Judgment: these things I have showed my opinion upon also, the
which amongst men is strangely looked upon, as a gross Error; however peruse it
for there is no dangerous consequence in it, for he that believes it, or he
that believes it not, may both meet with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the
Kingdom of God, if they walk uprightly, according to their several measures;
although if it be a Truth, as it appears to me to be, it is very necessary that
every godly man know it, for several reasons that I could give. But as touching
the Resurrection of the Body, (which I also have spoken to) that is of such
weight, that without believing it, and being steadfast in the same, it makes
Preaching void, and Faith void, and whosoever does deny it, their words eat as
does a Canker; and indeed I do not see (as yet) how such men as deny it can be
saved. I have also showed the great and universal love of God to all men, which
is the ground of Faith and Salvation to all that do believe and be saved; which
is a very comfortable Doctrine to all men, and I think that none can have cause
to be offended at it, but such as have their eyes evil, because Gods eye is
good. And as touching the Personal Reign of Christ upon Earth, ( viz. on the
Throne of his Father David, in Zion in Jerusalem) is that which causes the
godly to rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory; and it is that which
Christ has commanded us to pray for, though we understand it not as we should
do, when we pray, Thy Kingdom come, thy will be done in Earth, as it is done
in Heaven: but that he is to receive a Kindome and Reign upon Earth, I have
proved in its particular order, although briefly.

I have also added a second Part, entitled, The good ancient Laws and Statutes
of King Jesus, Vindicated, wherein I have proved the continuance of all the
Laws and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus, given forth in his last Will and
Testament, with many Objections answered; And also have showed who is the
traveling Woman; spoken of in Revellations 12. and who is her Man-child; and
who is the Remnant of her Seed; and to what Wilderness she is to flea into; and
for how long; and who are the two Witnesses; and the time and place of their
Prophecy; and many such like things, which I have showed my opinion upon in
the following Treatise; and therefore I desire thee, courteous Reader, to
peruse these things seriously, and desire the Lord to give thee an
understanding heart, to receive it so far forth as thou finds it agreeable to
the Word of the Lord, and sound Reason. It should have been published long
before this time, if extraordinary occasions had not hindered me; therefore it
is my desire, that they that have long waited for it, may excuse the matter,
because many are sensible of my great occasions taking me off from finishing of
it sooner: So desiring the Lord to make it to be a word in season unto thee,
and to fill thy heart with joy through believing, and also with the fruits of
righteousness, that having thy fruit in holiness, the end may be everlasting
life; which is the desire of,

Thy Friend and Brother, in the Faith and Profession of the Gospel of Christ,
GEORGE HAMMON.

THE CONTENTS OF THE Principal Matters Contained in this BOOK.
B
BAptism to be Dispensed to such as are of ripe years, and of understanding,
Page 5. to page 12. Baptism may not be Dispensed to Infants, for several
Reasons, page 13. to page 25. Of the Battle of the great Day, and the
Destruction of Gogg and his Company, page 89. to page 92.
G
Of Gods universal Love unto all men, and how far, page 64 to page 75.
M
Of Man's Mortality, and how far, page 35. to page 51.
O
Original Sin, and what punishment it brought upon Adam and his posterity, page
27. to page 34. And how all the Statutes and Ordinances of the Lord Jesus are
perpetuated, and to remain practicable to the Worlds end, page 106. to page
118. Of Objections against the perpetuity of some of Christ's Ordinances,
Answered, page 119. to page 181.
Q
Of several Queries Answered, page 209. to page 216.
R
Of the Resurrection of the Body, page 51. to page 63. Of the Reign of our
blessed Savior with his Saints upon Earth, page 76. to page 99.
S
Sprinkling proved not to be Baptism, for several Reasons, page 3. to page 5.
W
Of the Woman's Traveling and bringing forth the Man-child; and who it is; and
of her flight into the Wilderness; and what Wilderness it is; and how long she
shall remain there; and of the Persecution of the Remnant of her Seed; and who
they be, page 181. to 200. Of the two Witnesses Prophesying; and who they are,
page 200. to 208.
ERRATA.
PAge 3, 4, 5. read Anon, for Canaan, p. 15 l. 27 r. fall f. full, p. 36. l. 13
r. Job 14.7, etc. f. John 4. p. 38 l. 11 r. God f. Christ, p. 38 l. 34 r.
infused f. Inferred, p. 39 l. 7 r. God f. Christ Jesus, p. 94. l. 9 r. John f.
Jesus, p. 121 l. 25 r. how f. though, p. 132 l. 31 r. there f. the, p. 133. l.
16 r. should, p. 139 l. 7 and p 141 l. 17, 18. add this, although the outward
Court was taken, and the City trod under foot, yet no man could enter into the
Temple to deface it, p. 145 l. 17 r. not utterly destroyed, although defaced
and trampled upon, p. 146 l. 29 r. naturally, p. 148 l. 1 r. brought in, p. 150
l. 28 r. false f. face, p. 153 l. 21 r. mavelous, p. 157 l. 25 r. order f.
word, p. 158 l. 13 r. Babellish f. established, p. 161 l. 30 r. John only
excepted, p. 165 l. 10 r. Mystery f. Ministry, p. 174 l. 1 r. Jayl f. vail, p.
175 l. 16 r. was not the Church, p. 176 l. 24. and 30 r. shoke f spoke, p. 182
l. 27 r. Jayl f. Valey, p. 197 l. 1 r. Edom, p. 211 l. 13 add, such, p. 213 l.
26 r. dissolution f. desolation, p. 215 r. came not.

Mend in thy reading some other places, for I would have perused it more
nicely, and mended some other small faults and Parenthesi's, but wanted time.

Truth and Innocence, Prevailing against Error and Insolency.
SIR,
I Am come to the Examination and Trial of that which you call Truths Conflict
with Error, and find it to be no other, but Error and Insolency, striving
against Truth and Innocence, as will appear to the impartial Reader, when he
compares your (pretended) Answer with my former Book; but indeed as for an
Answer to my Book it is none (as I before have said) for the greatest part of
it is but a writing over again what you have formerly written, and is already
answered, and therefore I shall be brief in the Answer, because Tautolligies
suit not with my spirit.

Answ. And first I take notice that you see your self at a loss by granting
that Christ's Baptism was by plunging in water, because I have said, That if
Christ's Baptism were by Dipping or Plunging, and he left us an Example that we
should follow his steps, then we ought also to be dipped or plunged: but you
say, I read the Sentence in your parenthesis amiss; may you not be ashamed so
to say, seeing it is plain to be read in your Book: your words are these*
Christ only was plunged with the Spirit (receiving it without measure) so was
his water Baptism: these are your very words, with your parenthesis, page 3.
lin. 2. and so I leave him that reads to judge whether you do not confess that
Christ's water Baptism was the same with the Baptism of the Spirit, which you
say was by plunging.

Object. And whereas you say, That Christ went up into the mountain, and yet
not covered in the earth, and so he went into the water, and (yet) not covered
with it.

Answ. To which I Answer, and say, That it is not said that Christ was Baptized
in the Mountain; but it is said that he was Baptized in the Water: and so it
was said of Philip and the Eunuch: But it will he granted that Christ might go
many times into the water, and yet not be covered in it; but it cannot be
imagined, that John could dip, or plunge, or over-whelm, or sink (as the word
Baptizo will render it) Christ into the water, and yet Christ not covered in
water. And besides all this, the proper signification of Baptism is a Burial,
and Resurrection, as I before have showed; yet notwithstanding I shall give a
few Reasons here, to prove, that Baptism is dipping, or plunging: And the first
Reason is,

Reas. 1. Because the word (...), or (...), rendereth no other thing (as a
proper derivation) but mergo, or immergo; which is, to dip, to plunge, to
overwhelm, to thrust into the water, or to sink; and such like words as these,
which shows, that the person Baptized is to be covered in water.

Reas. 2. Secondly, Christ was so baptized, namely plunged, as you have
affirmed in your former Book, and we are to follow his examples, therefore are
to be covered (as Christ was) in Baptism.

Reas. 3. And Thirdly, it signifies a Burial, as says the Apostle Paul ( Romans
2.4. Col. 2.12.) and a man cannot be said to be buried unless he be covered
with earth, or the like.

Object. And this brings me to the Answer of your Objection, p. 7. where you
say, That Christ was buried in a rock, and had no earth to cover him, and
therefore it cannot be proved (say you) that persons baptized, must be covered
in the water.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That Christ was covered is clear, for his
body was put into a new Sepulcher, and a stone rolled against the door, or
mouth of the Sepulcher; for in that age it was usual to bury the dead in
Sepulchers, which are as our Graves; and that his body was covered, is evident;
because when Mary came early in the morning to the Sepulcher, although the
stone was rolled away from the mouth, yet she was fain to stoop down to look
into it, to see whether she could see Jesus; implying, that the earth covered
him out of her sight: but I need not trouble my self to prove that which is so
clear; for the Scripture says (although I suppose you had forgot it) That as
Jonah was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of
man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth, Matthew. 12.40. So
then as Jonah was covered in the Whales belly, so was the Son of man covered in
the heart of the earth; from whence you may see, that the Sepulcher which you
speak of, was not wood, but earth; and so Christ was buried and covered in the
heart of the earth: So then Persons baptized must be covered in water, or
otherwise no signification of burial in Baptism. And so I pass to the fourth
Reason, to prove baptism to be dipping, or plunging into the water.

Reas. 4. Because Baptism is figuratively represented by much water, and not by
a little; which implies the person baptized ought to be dipped or plunged, so
as to be covered in water, as the waters of Noah: And John abiding in Canaan
Baptizing, because there was much water, says the Text; to which you add
these two Objections.

Object. 1. First, That if the waters of Noah was baptism, then the ungodly
World was Baptized; for plunged, and covered they were, and perished, and so
the perishing Creatures were Baptized.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, The text does not say that Noah's water was
Baptism, but a figure of Baptism. Secondly, It is not denied that the same
water that is said to save the eight Souls which were in the Ark, was the same
that drowned them which was out of the Ark: which shows, that the water in
Baptism must not be small (for that is said to be a figure of Baptism) but
sufficient to cover the Persons baptized: That which we may learn from these
sayings is this, (and so I pass) That as the waters saved those in the Ark, and
drowned them that were out of the Ark; even so Baptism (being figuratively
represented in it) saves, and cleaneth (instrumentally) all those that have
Faith, and so be in Christ, the Ark of safety; and also destroys all that
attempt it, which believe not, or are not in Christ by Faith; and so the
Ordinances of Christ to one, are the savor of life unto life; and to the
other, the savor of death unto death: therefore take this word of Caution,
Take heel how, and to whom, you administer Baptism; let them first appear to
you that they are in the Ark; which is to say, let the persons Baptized, first
make it appear to you, by some visible demonstration, that they have Faith in
Christ, otherwise you see that you take a direct way to ruinate them; therefore
I say, take heed: And so I pass to the next thing, which is,

Object. John did abide at Canaan to baptize, because there was much water
there: But say you, The much water is not to be understood deep water, but
broad and shallow, so that an Infant could not be covered in it: and that John
did abide there, because his Disciples might see him administer that Ordinance
better than under the shadowing Banks of Jordan: And this is the Reason, says
my Antagonist, That John did abide at Canaan, not that the waters were
convenient; that is to say, deep to cover the Person baptized, but because
there was a convenient prospect whereby his Disciples might see the manner of
this administering of the Ordinance.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That this kind of reasoning seems to me to be
strange perverting of the Scripture: for the Scripture says, That John abode
at Canaan to baptize, because there was much water; or it may be read,
abundance of water, or deep water, from the word, (...): But you say, That the
reason why he tarried there to baptize, was, because there was a convenient
prospect, that his Disciples might see him baptize: clear contrary to what the
Scripture says. And if that were the Reason (as you say) then he might have
taken a Pitcher of Water into the Mountain (if sprinkling would have served the
turn; for a Pitcher of water would have baptized very many with your kind of
Baptism) and the Mountain had been a better prospect than the Valley.

Secondly, Canaan is the same water ( viz. the River) Jordan, and takes its
Name Canaan from the Name of the Village Canaan that stood by the River of
Jordan, as you may see if you look into the Map of that Country: And so it is
now, that one and the same River bears many Names, by reason of the adjacent
Villages and Towns that stand by the side of it, and the River called by the
same Name: This being considered, the River or Water of Canaan was not shallow,
but deep; for the swelling Waves of Jordan were great, and this is the same
River as before-said.

Again, Thirdly, it is clear, that John Baptized Men and Women there; which
should be read (if it were truly translated) that John dipped Men and Women
there; and if so, you and your Authors must be false, which say, it was not
deep enough to dip an Infant; and so I leave this Objection, and the Reasons to
prove Baptism to be Dipping, although I might add many more: The Reasons in
short you see are these:

First, Because the word Baptism, being truly translated, is to dip properly,
and such like words as beforementioned.

Secondly, Because Christ was dipped or plunged, and we engaged to follow his
example.

Thirdly, Baptism signifies Christ's Burial, and he was covered in the heart of
the earth.

Fourthly, and Lastly, the Scripture says, That John did tarry and Baptize at
Canaan, because there was much water: signifying to us, that much water is
requisite in Baptism, whereby the person baptized may be conveniently dipped or
plunged, so as to be covered in the water. And so I come to the Second Thing,
which is,

The Discourse of the Subject which is to be Baptized, whether Believing Men
and Women, or Infants?
To which I say, The Scripture will resolve the Doubt, if we well examine them,
who are the Subjects to be Baptized; and therefore I shall at present lay down
these Two Positions, and give you Scripture Reasons to prove them.

Position 1. The First is, That those that are the Disciples of Christ, ( viz.
Believing Men, and Women) may, and ought to be Baptized. Position 2. And
Secondly, That Infants (as such) may not be Baptized.
And first to the First, to prove that such as are Disciples, namely.
Believers, may, and ought to be Baptized: And the first Reason is,

Reason 1. Because the great Lawgiver, Christ Jesus, has taught us (in his
last Will and Testament) to make Disciples, and Baptize them that are so made,
as in Matthew. 28.18, 19. Go teach all Nations, and baptize them: or as the
Original rendereth it from these words, (...): Go Disciplize (or make Disciples
in) all Nations, and baptize THEM: etc. From whence we may (clearly) see, that
it was the Mind and Will of Christ, that they only should be Baptized that were
first taught, and made Disciples; and that Infants are not here (in the least)
included, is plain, because they are not capable to be taught; but those that
were commanded there to be baptized, were capable of being taught, therefore
could not be Infants. Secondly, Infants are not capable to bear the name
Disciple, because Christ says in Luke 14.26, 27. That whosoever denies not
himself, and takes up his Cross and follows him, cannot be his Disciple: So
then Infants being not capable so to do, cannot be Christ's Disciples; but such
as are to be baptized, must first be taught and made Disciples, and then
baptized, as is to be understood in the word baptize THEM; that is, such as
before have been taught and made Disciples: from whence you may see, that
Disciples ( viz. believing Men and Women) may, and ought to be baptized, it
being the last Will and Testament of the great Lawgiver, who also says, That
he that believes, and is baptized, shall be saved, Mark 16.15, 16. And so I
come to the Second Reason: which is,

Reas. 2. Because Disciples ( viz. Believers) were the Subjects that Christ and
the Apostles baptized, and we are to follow their steps: and now to prove that
Christ and the Apostles did baptize such, read John 4.1. When the Lord knew
that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus MADE, and baptized more Disciples than
John, though Jesus baptized not but his Disciples: from whence we may see that
Jesus MADE Disciples before he did baptize them; and also we see it was the
Apostles and Disciples practice so to do, as Acts. 8.12. its said, That when
the Samaritans did believe, they were baptized, Men and Women; but no mention
at all of Children: so then Believers are the subjects who are to be baptized.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Believers are the subjects, because none are accounted as
Members in the New Covenant (so as to have right to Gospel administrations) but
such as know the Lord, viz. believe in his Name; for so says the Scripture,
Heb. 8. For this is the Covenant that I make, After those days (says the
Lord) they shall not teach every one his neighbor, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for they shall know me from the least, even to the
greatest: From whence we see, that the least Member in the Gospel Covenant must
know the Lord; but Children of seven or eight days old know him not, and
therefore have not right to Gospel-administrations, only believers that know
God, for they shall all know him from the least to the greatest, as says the
text: And so I pass to the Fourth Reason: which is,

Reas. 4. Because those that have right to be Baptized, may, and ought to eat
the Lords Supper, the which is not meet for Children to do; for it is a Feast
that Believers only have a right to partake of: but all baptized ones, even
such as have right to the New Covenant, have right to the Supper, and all other
Covenant Privileges; for so says the Scripture, Acts 2.41, 42. Then they that
gladly received the Word, were baptized; and the same day was added to the
Church about three thousand Souls, and they continued steadfast in the Apostles
Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and Prayer: From whence we
see that no more were baptized but those that gladly received the Word, and
they that were baptized continued in the Apostles Doctrine, in Fellowship, and
in breaking of Bread ( viz. the Lords Supper) and Prayer, therefore believing
Men and Women (and not Children) are the right subjects of Baptism, and ought
to be baptized, they having a Command enjoining them thereunto: And so I pass
to the Fifth Reason, to prove that Disciples ( viz. believing Men and Woman)
are the only fit subjects of Baptism: which is,

Reas. 5. Because Christ was baptized when he came to be of years of discretion
(being about thirty years old, as you may read, Luke 3.) and Christ was given
to be a leader to his People, Isa. 55.4. Now if Christ were not baptized before
he came to be of years of discretion, and he given to lead us an example, then
we ought not also to be baptized till we be of years of discretion, and so
follow his steps: The former of these is true, and the Consequence cannot (in
truth) be denied: And so I pass to the Sixth Reason, to prove believers the
only subjects of Baptism.

Reas. 6. Because Repentance, and Confession of sin, is required of Persons
before Baptism be administered unto them; for such was the Baptism of John, when
he was to prepare a People for the Lord, although the People which he baptized
were the seed of Abraham, and so in the Old Covenant, yet they came to John and
confessed their sins, and were baptized, and it was called the Baptism of
Repentance; and when they would have been baptized upon the account of being
Abraham's seed, and Children of the Covenant, John did reprove them; saying, O
generation of Vipers, who has forewarned you to flee from the Wrath to come?
Bring forth fruit worthy of amendment of life, and do not begin to say ye have
Abraham to your Father, for God is able of these stones to raise up Children
unto Abraham; and now is the Ax laid to the root of the Trees, and every Tree
which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, etc. Peruse this
diligently, and you may see that there was no admission unto Baptism without
Repentance; and it is the very same Doctrine that Peter taught, Acts 2.38.
Repent and be baptized every one of you for remission of sins, and ye shall
receive the gift of the holy Spirit: Hence you see there was Repentance
required of ever one that is Baptized; and this is acknowledged by the Old
Catechism, and Book of Common Prayers: and hence it came to pass, that the old
Godfathers and Godmothers (as we were wont to call them) did confess our sins
for us, it being a wicked deceiving invention of Pope Ignatius, whereby
thousands of poor souls were deceived, the Pope invented it, and the Priest
readily received it, and it being a custom, the people loved to have it so:
the Priest was to ask the child, Whether it would forsake the Devil, and all
his works? and the Godfather (or Surety) was to Answer in the behalf of the
Child, as though the Priest were a Juglor, and had jugled the man's voice into
the Child; saying, This is our (or my) desire: and then ask if it would be
Baptized? And the Answer was returned again (as it were in the person of the
Child) that it was its desire; when it was far from desiring any such thing;
and so far were the Sureties (themselves) from forsaking the Devil and all his
works, and from being Believers, that some were Drunkards, some Swearers, and
some Whore-mongers; and yet did dare, by the means of the Pope his Clergy, to
tell God (who is the searcher of all hearts) that they did believe, and forsake
the Devil and all his works, and yet were led captive by him at his Will.
Consider, O ye blind Priests, how you deceived the people, and made them
believe they did well, and worshipped God, when they told lies in the face of the
Congregation, and so did worship the Devil: Did you ever read of such a
practice in the Primitive time? No surely: Gods Soul abhors you. But courteous
Reader, hence thou may see, that the Pope and the Priest did confess by
their practice, that the person baptized must confess his sins himself, or some
other for him; which shows also, That the Person baptized was first to
confess his sin, and promise amendment of life, and so must be of mature years
before baptized. And now the greatest part of people being ashamed of Pope
Ignatius vanity, (I know not what they will do if they understood what they
learned in their old Catechism) but in very deed and truth, I am ready to
believe (and that not without ground, the more is the pity) that men are so
implicit in their Faith, as to believe and practice such things in the worship
and service of God (because it is in custom amongst men) as they are not able
to give an account of either to God or man, nor satisfy their own Conscience
(if they would but suffer themselves to be brought to a trial) but go on like a
blind Horse in a Mill, that has his circuit limited and cast up for him to go
in: And is not this a miserable delusion of the Devil whereby he has blinded
the eyes (of the understandings) of them which believe not, to think if they
take their practices from such and such wise learned men, that they shall do
well enough, not minding what the Lord has said (which shall stand sure to a
thousand generations) That he will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
naught the understanding of the prudent: and yet these foolish men will be so
wise for their bodies, that if they take but a small piece of silver of either
of these wise men, they will turn it over and over again to see whether it be
silver or counterfeit coin; but as for their Souls they run a hazard, leaving
the trial of it until the last day: and then when Christ says, Who has
required these things at your hands, being not able to give an account, they
stand speechless, and so receive the sentence, Take ye that unprofitable
Servant, and bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, and
there his Portion will be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth. And thus
I come to the Seventh Reason, to prove Believing Men and Women to be the only
fit subjects of Baptism: which is,

Reas. 7. Because Faith is required of all such as appear before God in any
Gospel-Ordinance, or administration; because the Gospel-administrations are the
administrations of the Spirit, and so require a spiritual faithful seed to
participate thereof, contrary to the administrations of the Law, which were
carnal Ordinances; for the Law was not of Faith, but the man which did it,
should live in it: but the Gospel is Faith, and that which requires Faith in
all that come to God through it; for as says the Eunuch, See here is water,
what hinders me to be baptized? (And Philips Answer was) If thou beleevest
thou may, Acts 8.37. implying, that Faith was that which would give him
admittance unto it; or the want of Faith would hinder him; for he that comes
to God, must believe that he is a rewarder of all them which diligently seek
him: And indeed we may see, that through Faith it is, that we stand in the
Grace of God and new Covenant, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. And so much briefly to the
Seventh Reason, to prove believing Men and Women to be the only subjects fit
for Baptism: And so I come to the 8. Reason: which is,

Reas. 8. Because Baptism represents the new Birth, and is a demonstration to
the world, that the Person baptized is new born of Water and of the Spirit; and
is significantly called, the washing in regeneration, and renewing the Holy
Ghost, Titus 3.5. Which shows, that they only are to be baptized, which are
new born, and thereby to represent to the world the work of God upon their
Soul, that as they have their Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience; so
they represent it by having their Bodies washed with pure water: not that the
water it self (as barely considered water) is pure; no, but the Commands of
God, and his Ordinances, are pure, inlightning the eyes; and so to the pure,
all things are pure: and so the Water in Baptism may be called pure, it being a
pure Ordinance and representing a pure work of God wrought in the Soul: And
hence it came to pass that our blind Priests gave thanks to God when they had
strewed, or sprinkled a little water on a Child's face, that the Child was
regenerated and born again, as though Baptism conferred grace, which if so,
doubtless Simon Magus also had not been in the gall of bitterness after
Baptism, unless he (could, and) had fell from Grace: O you blind guides, what
can you declare, a Person to be the Child of Wrath, and a Child of God (and an
heir to heaven) in half an hours time, without seeing any visible demonstration
of the Work of Grace wrought upon the Soul; and yet notwithstanding although
you do give thanks to God that they are regenerated and born again, yet so soon
as they be capable to be Preached to, you tell them if they will not Repent and
Believe, and such like things, they shall be Damned; and yet deny any falling
from Grace. What kind of strange confused Doctrine is this! What, half an hour
a-go a Child of Wrath, but now (being sprinkled) it is Regenerated and born
again, and an heir to heaven; and shortly in a damnable estate again, so that
if it do not Repent, and the like, it must be damned! Oh strange Confusion! It
makes me admire how the understanding of the wise comes to be so confounded,
only God has confounded the language of the builders of Babel; and hence it
comes to pass that their language is so confounded: Take heed therefore of
building of a way to Heaven of your own inventions. But to pass this Discourse,
you may see that Baptism represents a new Birth, and therefore the persons
baptized must first be new born, for that which is born of the flesh is flesh,
and that which is born of the spirit is spiritual: therefore believers which
are born again, are the only fit subjects of Baptism: And so I pass to the 9.
Reason, to prove believers the only subjects sit for Baptism: which is,

Reas. 9. Because Baptism is a visible manifestation of a Covenant made between
God and the Soul, whereby the Soul, visibly, puts off the old Man ( viz. the
lust of the Flesh) and puts on the new Man Christ Jesus in righteousness and
true holiness, not to serve any longer according to the Will of the Flesh, but
to God in newness of Spirit; and this is that the Apostle says to the
Galatians, Gal. 3.27. That as many as were baptized unto Christ, had put on
Christ: which shows, That Baptism is a visible putting on the Lord Christ,
which requires Faith in the person baptized; for if a person should be
baptized ten thousand times, and have not faith, he puts not on Christ, and so
not a fit Subject for Baptism; for Baptism represents a Death and Burial of the
old Man, and a rising to Life in the new Man; which cannot be represented by an
Infants being sprinkled, but by a Believers being baptized: So then, for as
much as Baptism is a visible demonstration of a Covenant made between God and
the Soul, wherein the Soul promises to put on Christ, and walk in him; and God
promising to give him his holy Spirit to assist him in his so walking: which
shows, That the person thus Covenanting in Baptism, must be a Believer. And so
I pass to the 10. and last Reason, that (at present) I shall represent unto
you, to prove that Believers are the only fit Subjects of Baptism: which is,

Reas. 10. Because without Faith it is unprofitable for any to appear before
God (in any Gospel Ordinance) for without Faith they cannot please him, in
their so appearing before him, Heb. 11.6. For he that comes (so) to God must
believe that he is a rewarder of all them that diligently seek him: Hence the
three thousand believing, and gladly received the Word, were baptized: The
Samaritans believing, also were baptized: Simon believing was baptized, Act. 8.
and the Eunuch also, with the Jaylors household: And without Faith, (or
profession of Faith at the least) none were admitted to Baptism, although that
they were in the first Covenant, being Abraham's seed, to whom was the Promise;
yet they came not to John's Baptism without confession of sins; and being
instructed in the Messiah which was to come, as you may read, Mat. 3. and Luke
3. at larg; and thus of old was the practice of the Ministers of the Gospel, to
prepare a Temple for the Lord of sanctified stones built up a spiritual house,
a peculiar people, to offer spiritual sacrifice to God, 1 Pet. 1.9. Which
clearly proves, That if the building of God in Gospel Times be a building
through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.19.12. then spiritual Believing Men and Women are
the persons which ought to be the subjects baptized; and being such fit matter,
and so fitly joined together, grows to be a holy Temple for the Lord: for as
the stones that Solomon's Temple was built of, were hewn in Hieroms Country
before they were brought to Jerusalem, and compacted as a Temple for God
(figuratively) to dwell in, even so now must the stones of the spiritual
building be hewed and fitted before they be laid in that building: Hence our
blessed Savior commanded his Disciples to go preach the Gospel, so as to make
Disciples by instructing of them, and then to baptize them, and such as did
gladly receive the word were baptized, and so the Lord added to his Church
daily such as should be saved: And this was the way of God of old, and is (the
way) and will for ever be found to be the right way of Jesus Christ, who is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever; therefore be not carried away with the
inventions of men, but walk as you have had Christ and the Apostles for an
example, doing all things according to the Primitive (pattern in the worship of
God) and as many as walk according to that rule, peace shall be unto them, and
mercy upon all the Israel of God: And so I leave this Subject, and come to
handle the second Position; which is,

Position 2. That Infants (as such) are not fit Subjects of Baptism.
IN the Discourse of which, I shall Answer my Antagonist in his aleaged Texts
of Scripture, with several more Objections of that nature (which is not aleaged
in his Book) and now briefly to the Reasons, which shows, That Infants are
not fit Subjects for to be Baptized: And so to the first Reason; which is,

Reas. 1. Because God has no where in Scripture appointed Infants to be
Baptized, either by Precept or by the Example of the Apostles, whole steps we
are to follow; and therefore it is an unlawful practice; for whosoever adds to
the Word of the Lord, God will add the Plagues which are written: And the
Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in the Name of the Lord, which he
has not commanded, the same Prophet must die, ( Deuteronomy. 18.20. Revel. 22.18.)
Therefore add thou not unto his word, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar, Prove. 30.6. But as for Gods ways (as in the time of the Law) it was very
plain, and perfect; as witness that Ordinance of Circumcision, there was the
manner of Circumcision, and the Person which was to be Circumcised plainly
discovered, as the foreskin of the flesh, and the Children of Abraham; and the
time when, even at eight days old: nay, his Servants and Slaves were to be
Circumcised; and in a word, no uncircumcised person must abide in that Land,
nor be accounted of Abraham's Family: which shows, That (in a spiritual sense)
none can be accounted Abraham's seed, but such as are Circumcised in heart,
(viz.) those that have the vayl of Ignorance and Unbelief taken away from off
their hearts; which causes the Apostle to say, That Abraham believed God, and
it was accounted unto him for Righteousness: Know ye therefore (says he) that
they which are of Faith, the same are the Children of Abraham: So then Infants,
not having the vail of Ignorance and Unbelief taken from off their hearts,
cannot be accounted of Abraham's Family; for he received Circumcision as a Seal
of the righteousness of that Faith which he received before Circumcision, that
he might be the Father of all them which do believe, Gal. 3.7. Romans 4.11. So
then Circumcision was a Seal of the Father-hood of the Faithful unto Abraham,
therefore the Faithful only are Abraham's seed, which cannot be Infants, because
they have not Faith; and that they have not Faith, is clear, because the
Apostle says, That there is but one Faith, and that one Faith is wrought in
the Soul by Hearing the Word Preached; the which Infants are not capable of, as
will be granted by all men (as I think:) One word or two more about Abraham's
Circumcision, (and so pass to the next Reason) which is, Abraham received it as
a seal of the righteousness of Faith; but none of his seed did receive it as a
seal, neither could do, because they could not have the Father-hood of the
Faithful sealed up unto them, it was only Abraham's prerogative; neither was it
ever called a seal to any of Abraham's seed; and much more I might say: But I
pass briefly to the second Reason, to prove Children not fit subjects to be
Baptized; which is,

Reas. 2. Because all that are Baptized, may, and ought to receive the Lords
Supper (unless they be scandalous in their Conversation after Baptism, and that
hinder them) but Children may not receive the Lords Supper: Ergo,

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Because Children are not in Gospel Covenant, because all
that are in Gospel Covenant need not to be taught to know the Lord, for they
all know him from the greatest to the least; but children of seven or eight
days old, knows not the Lord, and therefore are to be taught to know him
before they be admitted into that Covenant: Again, All that are Members of that
Covenant have right to the Ordinances of that Covenant (as my Antagonist says)
but the Lords Supper is an Ordinance of the new Covenant, and yet Infants
prohibited from that Ordinance, (as you say;) O wise Priest, where is your
understanding got now? surely it is brought to naught, as God has said, 1 Cor.
1.19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.

Reas. 4. Again, The Fourth Reason why Children may not be Baptized, and so
brought into Christ's House, or Vineyard; is, Because Infants are not capable to
labor there, and Christ has none but Laborers there, as you may read, Matthew.
20.1, 2, 3, 4. And the Fifth Reason is,

Reas. 5. Because Infants are not capable to be taught; but such as are
Baptized must be first taught; as Matthew. 28.18, 19. Mark 16.15, 16. Neither did
John, or Christ, or his Apostles, baptize any other but such as had been
(before) taught; which if they did, I humbly crave my Antagonist, or any of his
Brethren, to prove it: And if he, or they, do prove it, I do profess in the
presence of Almighty God (and men) to renounce my Judgment (in this particular)
and be of the same Judgment with them, and walk in the same steps: And so to
the Sixth and last Reason to prove, that Infants are not fit subjects to be
baptized; is,

Reas. 6. Because they are not capable to confess their sins, nor to know God,
nor to believe in his Name, nor to witness a new Birth, by showing the fruits
of Regeneration, the which qualifications must appear more or less in all that
are fit subjects of Baptism, as I before have proved: And in a word, you (my
Antagonist) nor any of your Brethren, were never yet able to prove such a
practice warrantable by the Word of God:

And so I pass to the Grounds and Reasons given by my Antagonist, and others,
to prove, That Infants are fit subjects to be baptized: which is, (say they)

Object. 1. If the Kingdom of Heaven do belong to Infants, then the Ordinances
of the Kingdom does belong unto them; but the Kingdom does belong unto them;
Therefore the Ordinances of the Kingdom does belong to them.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That if the Ordinances of the Kingdom do
belong to them (as my Antagonist says) then is he and the rest of his Brethren
in a great evil, in denying them the Lords Supper; which is (as they say) an
Ordinance of the Kingdom; and so they condemn themselves in the things which
they know.

And as for the Kingdom of God, it is taken for several things in Scripture; it
is compared to the preaching of the Gospel, as a draw-Net, as to Leven, to a
Merchant, and to the Church (sometimes) though very seldom, and to
Righteousness, and Joy in the holy Ghost; and it is compared to the state of
Glory, or the state of Glory is called by the name of the kingdom of Heaven, or
the kingdom of God; and that Infants (as such) have right to everlasting life
and glory by the righteousness of Christ, I never did deny; but yet
notwithstanding that, they can be accounted of as Members of the Kingdom, in
the other sense, that I deny; as first, They are not Members of the new
Covenant, and so consequently of the Church; because, as I have already showed,
that none are Members thereof, but such as know the Lord, from the least even
unto the greatest, and so need no teaching to know the Lord; but Infants know
not the Lord, and therefore are not of the new Covenant or Church of Christ:
But if you should ask me then how are they saved, and by what Covenant? I
should tell you, by that gracious Promise made by God, in Genesis 3. in these
words, the seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents head: and indeed had not
man sinned since the Fall, he then should have had no need of Baptism, or any
other act of obedience, as a means of his everlasting peace; for Salvation is a
free gift of God: but when we come to years of maturity, and the knowledge of
God, and then like Adam transgress it, we then have forfeited our happiness;
and hence it comes to pass that we have need of Repentance and Baptism to break
off our sins, that the forfeit which sin has laid upon our heavenly
inheritance might be removed, and then Salvation be given over full into our
lap (as I may say) as at the first; namely, as a free Gift and Repentance; and
Baptism is of no use to such as have not sinned against God manifest in Christ,
the which Infants have not done, and therefore no need of Baptism, as I (in a
former Treatise) have already showed more at large.

Object. 2. Secondly, The Children of Abraham were to be Circumcised at eight
days old, (says my Antagonist) and therefore why may not the Children of
Believers be baptized about that age?

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That God did command that the Children of
Abraham should be Circumcised at eight days old, but has not commanded the
Children of Believers to be Baptized at that age; which if he has, show the
place of Scripture where it is so written, and the Controversy will cease.

Secondly, Remember that there was far greater reason that Infants should be
Circumcised, than Infants now Baptized; because as the first Covenant was a
Covenant appertaining to the flesh, with carnal Ordinances; so the seed that
was to enjoy it, was a fleshly seed, and were to receive Circumcision upon a
fleshly account; namely, that they might be inrighted to dwell in the Land of
Canaan in their Fathers house, the which without Circumcision they might not
do: but there is no such damage liable to the seed of Believers being
unbaptized, so as to be cut off from the Nation, or their Fathers house; so
that as there is not the like command for Believers to baptize their Children,
as there was for Circumcision, neither is there the same Reason for it: But
that you may see this more at large, read my Book, entitled, Dagons Downfall,
where it is discoursed more at large: only this, know, That such as have Faith,
the same are accounted the Children of Abraham, and the only fit subjects to be
baptized; for not to Abraham and his seed, through the Law, was the Promise
made, of the heavenly inheritance, but to his seed that was by Faith: For as
says the Apostle, Romans 9.8. The Children of the flesh, are not the Children of
God; but in Isaac, ( viz. Christ) shall thy seed be called; for ye are all the
sons of God by believing in Christ Jesus: for as many as have been baptized
unto Christ, have put on Christ; and if ye are Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs, according to Promise: therefore plead not your right to Gospel
or Heavenly Enjoyments by virtue of being the Child of a Believer; for if you
were the very son of Abraham's body, yet it would not avail any thing upon a
Gospel account, as says John the Baptist to such as would have pleaded their
interest in the Gospel Covenant and Privileges, by their being the Children of
faithful Abraham; saying, Do not begin to say, you have Abraham to your Father;
for without you be of the same Faith (as if he should say) it will avail you
nothing: but know, that God is now laying the Ax to the root of the Trees, to
cut down those that are unfruitful, and raise up stones, (viz.) the Gentiles,
to believe in Christ, and so to be accounted the Children of Abraham through
Faith; and know that Repentance, or Faith was never required as an antecedent
to Circumcision, as it is required in point of Baptism.

Again, If it be objected from the words of Paul, That Children are holy, and
therefore may be baptized?

I Answer, That their holiness gives them not right to Baptism, unless you can
show a text of Scripture which commands, that all holy Persons should be
Baptized; for it is the Command makes it a Duty, as the want of a Command makes
it Will Worship; for we know that Abraham was long in Covenant with God, and
Faithful, and yet was not Circumcised till there was a Command given him to do
it: And also we find, That Lot was a very righteous, holy man, and yet never
was Circumcised at all; so that it is the Command which makes the Practice
lawful: and if you have a Command for Infants to be Baptized, or that all holy
Persons must be Baptized, produce the Command, and then I shall say it is
lawful: but in the mean time, till you can produce a Commandment (or Example
for it, by those, whose steps we are to follow) give me leave to call it a
Tradition of Man, and Will Worship. Moreover, Take notice that the Holiness
spoken by Paul in that place, 1 Cor. 7.13, 14. is Matrimonial Holiness, so that
the unbeleeving Wife is as Holy (in the sense there spoken, although she be an
Infidel) as the Children: for the Text says, The unbeleeving Wife is
sanctified; which is no otherwise to be understood, but according to that
Holiness, or unholiness, spoken of in Ezra 10.3. And that you may see this also
more clearly proved, read my former Treatise, entitled, Zions Redemption
Vindicated.

And again, If it be Objected out of 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. that Infants were
Baptized; because the Text says, That our Fathers were all baptized to Moses
in the Cloud, and Sea.

My Answer is, That I have also formerly proved, That that Baptism there spoken
of, was not water Baptism; and have given the Reasons wherefore it was not, and
therefore I shall omit to speak of that here, and shall say no more but this,
That it is clear, that they were not Children which were baptized, but the
Fathers; for so says the Text.

Secondly, They that were baptized, sinned, and fell in the wilderness; which
shows that they were the Fathers, for the Children died not there.

And Thirdly, They were those that saw the great signs, and believed; which was
not the Infants.

And Fourthly, The Text does not say, that the Infants were baptized; and if
the Conclusion be drawn, That all that passed through the Sea were Baptized, and
so consequently the Infants: I Answer and say, The word All, means none but the
Elders, or Fathers of Families restrictively; for the Text calls them so: or
otherwise we may conclude, that their Cattle were Baptized, for they also
passed through the Sea; but the Text says it was the Fathers: the which
brings me to the next Objection; which is, say they,

Object. 3. In the time of the Law, when the Father of the Family was in
Covenant, so was the Children also; and so we may see it to be in the time of
the Gospel, by those Houshoulds which were baptized.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That those that so think, are much mistaken;
for Christ shows that its clear another matter, for his Coming was to destroy
the old Customs of the Law that consisted in implicit carnal shows of
Religion; and tells us, that he came not to bring such Peace, but rather a
Sword: a Family and a House divided against it self, the Father against the
Son, and the Son against the Father; and the Mother and Daughter one against
another, and a man's Foes to be those of his own house: So that from hence you
may see; that the Fathers obedience in Gospel-time, does not bring the Children
to the like Conformity; but sometimes the Children shall rise up against their
Parents, and cause them to be put to death.

But peradventure some will say, What do you think of those several Households
that were Baptized in the Primitive time, as the Jaylors Household, and
Cornelius's, and Lydia's, and the Household of Stephanus; and the like?

To which I say, That they were not Infants which bore the Name of the Household
there, but Believers: and that you may see this, read, Acts 33. and 44, 45, 46.
that those of Cornelius Household were all come together to hear the Word of
God, and were converted, and spoke with new Tongues, and did magnify God,
which could not be Infants.

Secondly, You may see that the Jaylors Household were such and not Infants; (
Acts 16.34.) for the Text says, that when the Jailer had been Baptized, he
brought them (viz. Paul and Silus) into his house, and set Meat before them,
and rejoiced, and believed in God, with all his house: From whence we may see,
that as the Text says, that they were all baptized; even so it says, that his
household did Rejoice, and Believe in God; so then all that were baptized, were
Believers, and not Infants.

Thirdly, And the like was said of the household of Lydia, ( Acts 16.40.) for
says the Text, They entered into the house of Lydia, and comforted the
Brethren, and departed: which shows, That they that were baptized in Lydia's
house, were Brethren, which were capable to receive comfort from the Apostles;
which also shows to us that they were not Infants, but Believers.

And Fourthly, As for the Household of Stephanus, they are said to addict (or
give) themselves to the administering unto the Saints, 1 Cor. 16.15. which
cannot be understood to be Infants, for they are not capable so to do; take
this word by the way, It cannot be proved that there were any Children in
either of these Families, nor that any of them were Married Couples; but if it
were both granted, yet it would not prove the matter, because the word whole
Households, respects the Major part, or the like, and not every indivividial
person in the house.

And so I pass to the next Objection, which is drawn from Matthew. 28.18.

Object. 4. Go preach the Gospel to all Nations, and baptize them; but Infants
are part of the Nations, (says my Antagonist) therefore ought te be baptized.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, If my Antagonist be not Moon-blind, I am much
deceived, for he can see Infants to be part of the Nation when he talks of
Baptism, and not see them part of the Nation so as to be Preached too: What are
Infants part of the Nations, and comprehended in that Text, then why preach you
not to them; for the Text says, Preach unto them: methinks your language
being so divided, discovers you to be one of Babels builders, but no more as
to that; only this observe, that the word should be read, Go Desciplize all
Nations, or make Disciples in all Nations, and Baptize them, as the Greek Word
will render it, (...), etc. And that was Christ's own practice, to make
Disciples, and then Baptize them, as you may read, John 4.1. But your practice
is clear contrary, for you first Baptize them, and then make them Disciples, if
you can; and so I pass, saying that the word All Nations, sometimes is to be
understood the Major part, and sometimes the Lesser and better part, as God
promised to Abraham, that in his seed should all the Nations be blessed: which
is to be understood not All, or the Major part, but the Lesser and better part;
for few there be that be the blessed Ones indeed: And so to the next Objection,
which is drawn from Acts 15.

Object. 5. They would have put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples: IN
SHORT, THEIR MEANING IS, THAT INFANTS ARE DISCIPLES, THAT IS THE THING THEY
WOULD PROVE FROM THAT TEXT, IF THEY COVLD.

Answ. To which I Answer, saying; That I shall not trouble the Reader with a
large Answer, because I have already Answered this Text (also,) and therefore I
shall give a short word to prove that Infants cannot bear the Name Disciple,
and so leave it; because it is the Answer to the whole Matter: And now that
Children cannot bear the Name Disciple, you may read, Luke 14. which says, If
any deny not himself, and take up his Cross and follow Christ, he cannot be his
Disciple: But Infants are not capable so to do; therefore cannot bear the Name
of Christ's Disciples: And we know that the word Disciple, is a Scholar; and I
pray, can a person be called a Scholar of Christ, till he has learned of
Christ, or is at least capable to learn of him: But an Infant is not a Scholar
of Christ, having not learned any thing of him, neither is he at present
capable to learn any thing of him; therefore no Disciple: And so I pass to the
next Objection; which is,

Object. 6. Christ says, Suffer little Children to come unto me; and he put
his hands upon them, etc. Mat. 19.14.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That although this be the main place which
has been alleged, and made use of by the Priests in their Baby-sprinkling,
yet I shall show that this place is much against them if it be well understood;
and that you may see it so to be, take notice, that Christ's Disciples which
forbad these little Ones to be brought, were such as were the Administrators of
Baptism: which shows, That there was no such practice as to Baptize Infants,
because they would not then have forbid them to be brought.

And Secondly, That they were not brought to be baptized, is clear, because the
Parents brought them not to the Disciples which were the baptizers.

And Thirdly, It is also clear, that they were not brought to be baptized,
because that Christ did for them as their Parents did desire, and yet baptized
them not, for he baptized none, but left that work to his Disciples.

But peradventure some may say, Wherefore were these Children brought to Christ?

My Answer is, That it was to Cure them of some Disease, or Infirmity, which
did accompany them: And if any should ask me what Reason I could give to prove
it? I Answer, These Two, or Three, in short:

The First is, Because he was at that time in the work of Cureing of all manner
of Sicknesses; as you may see, Matthew. 19.1, 2, 3.

And Secondly, His Way or Method in Curing, was, by putting his hands upon
those that had infirmity, as is clear from many Scriptures; but I shall cite
but one Text at present (because I study brevity) which is, Luke 4.40. in these
words, Now when the Sun was setting, all they that had any sick with diverse
Diseases, brought them unto him, and he laid his Hands on every of them, and
healed them: And for this end, they brought little Children that he might put
his Hands upon them also; but his Disciples (fearing their Master would be
troubled with their crying, and the like) forbad them, (but Children being part
of those whom Christ Redeemed, he had as great love to them, as to the Men and
Women) and said, Suffer them to come, and do not hinder them: and gives a
weighty Reason why he was willing to do them good; because, says he, of such
is the kingdom of God; therefore hinder them not of any benefit that may
conduce to their good, or ease.

So then in the First place you see that Christ was at that time about the work
of Healing.

And Secondly, His Way in Healing, was by putting his Hands upon them whom he
Healed.

And Thirdly, They brought the Children to him that he might put his Hands on
them also.

And Fourthly, and Lastly, Christ did convey a blessing unto them, by doing
that to them for which they were brought, and yet baptized them not (as before
said) and that it was Healing of their Body, and not any spiritual thing, is
clear; for as they were not capable to receive a spiritual blessing, so there
was no eminent need of it, for they had right to the kingdom of God before,
which is the greatest blessing of all blessings. Add this, That in all
likelihood their Parents did not mind to get for themselves spiritual
blessings, and much less for their Children; for if they had minded that so
much as they should have done, they would have followed Christ, and so have
been of the Number of his Disciples; but they were not his Disciples, for his
Disciples forbad them; and indeed many did follow Christ which minded no
spiritual good, but temporal only, as some to receive Cure for their
infirmities, (for he went about doing good) and some followed him because they
eat of the Loaves, and were filled, Joh. 6.26. And thus much as to that
Objection; Their Parents neither brought them to be Baptized, neither did
Christ Baptize them, yet did do for them the same for which they were brought:
And so I pass to the next Objection; which is,

Object. 7. Circumcision (say they) was a Tipe of Baptism, and Baptism came in
the room and place of it.

Answ. To which I Answer, that neither of the Assertions are true: As First,
Circumcision was never a Type of Baptism, but was a Type of the Circumcision of
the heart, as Romans 2. and two last verses; and as the Circumcision of the flesh
did denote persons heirs to the temporal Land of Canaan, so the Circumcision of
the heart ( viz. the vail of Ignorance and unbelief being taken away) does
entitle Persons as heirs of that heavenly Land:

And Secondly, That Baptism came not in the room, or place of Circumcision, is
plain; Because it is impossible for one thing to be said to stand in the room
and place of another, until the first is taken away; but Circumcision and
Baptism was practiced both together for several years, and therefore one could
not come in the room and place of the other: And so I pass to the next false,
or supposed, ground of Infants Baptism; which is,

Object. 8. There never was but one Covenant (says my Antagonist) since the
Fall, and Children were in that Covenant, and never cast out, and therefore are
to be baptized.

Answ. And first, that there was two Covenants made with Abraham, is clear; one
in Genesis 12. and the other in Genesis 17. And that God might make it plain, that he
did make two several Covenants with Abraham, he sets it forth by his Wife and
Bondwoman, and the two Seeds, by their two Seeds; as says the Apostle, Gal.
4.22. it is written, That Abraham had two Sons, one by a Bondwoman, and the
other by the Freewoman; (and says the Apostle) These are the TWO Covenants:
And also says, (in verse. 30.) Cast out the Bondwoman, and her Son: From
whence we take notice, that one Covenant, viz. the fleshly one, and her seed,
was to be cast out, to give place to the spiritual one, and her Seed; which
shows, That there is two Covenants: And now that these are two in substance,
as well as in Administrations; we may see the Apostle makes distinction between
the Covenant and the Ordinances, or the Administrations of the Covenant;
saying, Verily, the first Covenant had Ordinances of divine service, and a
worldly sanctuary, etc. And the Apostle further says, That the Administrations
of the second Covenant was far better, it being spiritual Administrations, and
the other carnal: but because I have spoken before of this also, I shall be
brief; saying, That carnal administrations cannot be the administrations of a
spiritual Covenant: For (as it is said in another sense) a good Tree cannot
bring forth evil fruit; but the administrations of the Covenant was faulty and
carnal by your own grant, how then could it be a spiritual Covenant? but that
Covenant, and Administrations, and Seed was carnal and faulty, and must be cast
out, is clear; for the Scripture is plain, Cast out the Bondwoman ( viz. the
first Covenant) and her Seed, and touch not her Ordinances or Administrations,
for they are carnal, and were but shadows of good things to come.

But says my Antagonist, I can prove that there is Five Covenants as well as
you can prove that there is Two; as one with Noah, and one with Abraham, and
one with David, and the like.

I Answer, That was but a speaking over again, or making known his Covenant to
these several men; but that I may try you, I pray resolve where the Scripture
is written, that says there is Five Covenants, or Three: the Scripture says
plainly, that there is Two, as a New, and an Old Covenant; a better, and a
worse; a first, and a second; one faulty, and one perfect: but the Scripture no
where says that there is Five, nay or Three; so then you are seen and found to
be at a loss. And because I have showed formerly what these Two Covenants are,
I pass; only take notice of an Objection in this particular; which is, (say you)

Object. If the first Covenant was but an earthly one, with earthly blessings,
what so great a hurt was it for the Jews to be cut off, and we Gentiles to be
grafted in; and what is all our blessings temporal, for we are grafted into
that stock from whence they were cut off away; say you.

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That methinks here you show your self to be
subtle or very simple; which of them (you are guilty of in this case) I shall
not determine: but by your flourishing it appears to be simplicity; for Solomon
says, That a Fool rages and is confident: But did you indeed dream, that the
stock from whence the Jews was cut, was any of the Covenants, no such thing
surely; but the stock was Abraham: that is to say, The Ax was laid to the root
of the Trees, to cut those off that had not Faith, and to raise up another seed
to Abraham, as John the Baptist (nay, also as the Prophet before) had said, and
so did of stones (as it were, viz. the Gentiles) raise up Children to Abraham,
for he was the stock, and not the Covenant, as you blindly did conceive; for as
Ishmael was cut off from Abraham's house, so was Hagar also, and Isaac was
placed with Sarah in her room; for so soon as Sarah had brought forth Seed to
Abraham, then Ishmael and Hagar must go both packing together, and Sarah and
Isaac must only live with Abraham; These are the Two Covenants: go learn what
it means, that you may distinguish (better) between Stock and Covenant another
time: And so I pass to the next and last Objection, which at present I shall
make use of; which is,

Object. 9. Although there be no plain Precept, or Example, for Infants
Baptism, yet it is no where forbidden that Infants should be baptized, (say
you;) And there is no Command, nor Example, for Women's eating of the Lords
Supper, and yet is lawful having good consequence leading thereunto.

Answ. To which I Answer, And first to the First; Although it be not forbidden
(in so many words) saying, Thou shall not Baptize thy Children; yet it is
vertually prohibited in the words written by St. Paul, in Col. 2.21, 22. and
many other places, it being an Invention of Man, and not from an Appointment of
God, as I before have showed: For consider, that there is many things that men
practice, pretending service to God, which is no where forbidden in so many
words, and yet is man's Tradition, and Vain: I shall only mention Two or Three
at present as your former practice, (viz.) The sign of the Cross in Baptism,
and your Surplices, and such vain Fangles; And also the present Practices of
the Church of Rome, which Baptize their Books, and Bells, and use Cream, Salt,
and Spittle, and several such foolish Ceremonies in Baptism, and in their other
kinds of Worship, such vain Traditions: And will any wise man account this to
be a warrantable Worship and Service to God (although it be their ancient
practice) surely no: yet notwithstanding, if you look into the Scriptures,
there is no Text that says, Thou shall not sign with the Cross, or use
Surplices, or baptize Books, or Bells, or use Cream, or Salt, or Spittle, in
baptism; there (...) no Text that says in so many words, thou shall not do any
of these things, only a general prohibition, which comprehends all these
particulars, and many more, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not the Traditions of
men; the which either of these are as well as Infants Baptism, and therefore
must not be meddled with: The sum of all is this,

First, That there is many things used amongst the Sons of Men, pretending
Worship to God, which is abomination unto the Lord; and yet no text of
Scripture forbidding in so many words; saying, Thou shall not do so.

And Secondly, Whereas it has been affirmed, That there is no Example, or
Command, for Women to Eat the Lords Supper: It Is false; for there is a plain
Precept, 1 Cor. 11.28. in these words, Let a man examine himself, and so let
him eat; which is Preceptory: that is, He must examine himself, and so he must
eat: The word (LET) is preceptory.

Object. But if it be Objected, that the Text says, Let a Man Examine himself,
and let a Man eat.

Answ. I Answer, It is read in the Greek, Let a Man, or Woman, examine
themselves; See 1 Cor. 11.28. the word is (...), which is a Woman as well as a
Man; and thus the Woman is to be (understood) employed in many places (although
not mentioned in our Translation) as well as the man: And so it is said, Genesis
5.2. That God made them Male and Female, and blessed them, and called THEIR
name Adam: And thus you may see that God has not left us to be guided by blind
Consequences, but has left us a plain Rule, And as many as walk according to
it, Peace be unto them, and Mercy upon all the Israel of God: So then there
being many things practiced pretending Worshipping of God, and are vain, and
yet not forbidden in so many words, Thou shall not do it: So that these may see
themselves Answered, which hopes that Infants Baptism may be lawful, because
the Scripture no where says, Thou shall not Baptize thy Children; neither is
it any where, Thou shall not Baptize thy Books, and Bells; and yet to do it, is
to practice a Tradition of Man, in the Service of God, and unlawful: And thus I
pass from this Objection, and also from this Subject of Discourse, and come to
the next; which is that of Original Sin.

Some Objections ANSWERED, TOUCHING Original Sin.
AS touching Original Sin, there has been a great Controversy, Whether it
made Adam, and his Posterity, guilty and liable to the Second Death, or to the
First only, or to both? And it being the main Controversy between me and my
Antagonist; I thought good to give my Opinion further upon it, and to Answer
such Objections as are offered by my Adversary, and possibly some others, as
time will admit of; and my Way or Method to make the Matter plain, shall be by
laying down this Position; which is,

Position 1. That the Sin which Adam committed in Paradise, did not make him
(and his) guilty of, and liable to the Second Death.
Which I shall prove by several plain and evident Reasons drawn from the
Scriptures; but before I speak unto it, be informed what I mean by the second
Death, and that is the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone, which the
Scripture calls the second Death, Revel. 20.14. for I do believe that the Wages
of Sin is Death; but as there is a twofold Covenant, so there is a twofold
death, viz. a first, and second Death: And that sin in Paradise made Adam (and
his) guilty of the first Death; but sin against God, manifest in Christ, makes
man guilty and liable to the second death: And so I come to the Reasons, to
prove, That Adams sin in Paradise, did not make him (and his) guilty of, and
liable to the second Death: And so to the First Reason; which is,

Reas. 1. Because God did neither threaten the second death, neither did he
pronounce a second death, (or any thing of that nature) in the Sentence; but
the first death only with sorrow, labor, and such like things, as the
punishment due to that sin: And first we may read the threatening, Genesis 2.17. in
these words, But of the Tree of Knowledge, of Good and Evil, thou shall not eat
of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, or, in dying,
thou shall die: Well for all this threatening Adam did eat, and thereby did
transgress Gods Law, whereupon God goes on to pass sentence upon Adam
according to what he threatened to bring upon him if he did eat (and transgress
his Law) and his sentence shows what death it was that he threatened, which
was the first death only; and not so much as one tittle intimated of the second
death in the sentence, as you may read, Chap. 3.17, 18. in these words, And
unto Adam he said, Because thou have hearkened unto the voice of thy Wife, and
have eat of the Tree whereof I commanded thee saying, Thou shall not eat of it:
Cursed is the ground for thy sake, Thorns and Thistles shall it bring forth
unto thee: in the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread till thou return to
the ground, for out of it was thou taken; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return: From whence we may see that there is not so much as a tittle of a
second death, but only the first death; Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return; that was to be the end of all.

Object. But it is Objected and said, That the death mentioned in the
threatening, must be understood a death of the Soul for ever, or a second death,
because Adam died not in his body, or the bodily death that day which he
sinned, but lived many days afterward.

Answ. In Answer to this Objection, Consider these two things: The First is,
That one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one
day, 2 Pet. 3.8. And Adam lived not a thousand years, (nor no man ever did) and
therefore Adam upon Gods account, died the same day, which day in Gods account
is a thousand years, which no man (as before said) ever attained to; and so
died, according to what God threatened within the compass or time of the Day, In
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die.

And Secondly, God that sees all things at once, and calls things that shall
be, as if they were, saw Adam dead the same hour that he sinned, and he was as
really dead in Gods account, as Christ was a Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world, or as Abrabam, Isaac, and Jacob, living in a state of Resurrection
when God appeared to Moses in the bush, Matthew. 22.30, 31, 32. And thus much
briefly to the first Objection; the second is,

Object. 2. What is meant by the Hebrew word (says my Antagonist) in dying,
thou shall die?

Answ. To which I Answer and say, That so soon as Adam had sinned, he was
mortalized, and in a dying condition, never continuing in one stay, but in the
midst of life subject to drop into the dust, and so in being in a dying
condition till he did return to dust; it was said, in dying he should die; that
is, he should be dying till he was dead: and this is meant by the word, in
dying thou shall die: And so I pass to the second Reason, to prove, That Adams
sin did not make him guilty of, nor liable to the second Death; which is,

Reas. 2. Because Adam had no second life promised (neither had he need of it)
while he stood in his Innocence; and only a second life presupposes a second
death; for a man cannot lose more than he has to loose, which was but only one
life, for the other came by Jesus Christ, who did by death abolish death, and
brought life and immortality to light; to which add this, That if Christ had
not died, and also risen from the dead, there had been no Resurrection, and
then having no second life, there had been no second death, for as by Man came
Death, so by Man came the Resurrection from the Dead: So then it was Gods love
to give man life, and put him into that happy condition in Paradise, but it was
man's sin that brought death, and a deprivation from that happy estate and
condition, it was Gods renewed love and unsearchable wisdom and mercy, to bring
man out of that Condition by a Resurrection from the Dead to a second life and
happy estate; but it is man's unsufferable perpetual wickedness, which brings
upon him the second death; for this is THE condemnation that Light is come into
the world, and men love darkness rather than light, Joh. 3. And thus we see
that there was no second life in Paradise to be lost, and therefore that sin
purchased not the second death. And so I pass to the Third Reason, to prove,
That Adams sin did not make him guilty of the second death; which is,

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Because if Adam had been guilty of the second death, and
that was the death intended, where it is said, in dying thou shall die; then
Gods Justice had not been satisfied unless Adam had died the second death, (and
all that were made guilty by that sin;) but none did die the second death for
that sin committed in Paradise; although the first death, or a change, (which
is as death) passes upon the Righteous, as well as the Wicked; and that if
they had been made guilty of the second death, they should also have died the
second death, is, because the Scripture says, That God will by no means clear
the guilty, Exodus 34.7. But if God did send Christ to take away the second
death, so, that many taste it not, and none taste it for that sin committed in
Paradise, Romans 5.18. then, God did use a means to clear the guilty, and so his
word is Yea and Nay, and not Yea and Amen; but it being the guilt of the first
death, God spares not his own precious Ones; but we must needs die, and be as
water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be gathered; neither does God respect
the Person of any man, yet he has used a means that his banished shall not be
for ever expelled from him, 2 Samuel 14.14. and in this sense man must die for
that sin, and so Justice satisfied, and so gives way to Mercy: And thus I pass
to the Fourth Reason, to prove, That the sin committed in Paradise, made not
Adam guilty and liable to the second death; which is,

Reas. 4. Fourthly, Because it argues a change in God in what he has
absolutely Decreed; for God did absolutely decree, That if Adam did eat, that
he should surely die; and Adam did eat: Therefore if that death that God
threatened to inflict upon Adam were the second death, (as some say) then God
changes in what he did absolutely Decree; for Adam and his, are not damned for
that sin, as is clear from many texts of Scripture, as Romans 5. etc. Add this
also, It makes God to be a Liar, and the Devil to speak the Truth, which were
blasphemy to assert: for as God said, That if Adam eat, he should die; so the
Devil said, They should not die: now if this be the second Death, there
mentioned, and Adam not die that death, and yet did eat, judge who it was that
spoke the Truth; but it being the first death that God intended in that place,
Gods Word was fulfilled, Adam did so die; and so Gods Word was true, and the
Devil was a liar from the beginning: But says my Antagonist, God may alter in
his threatenings, as in Nineveh, and Hezekiah, and the like; but my Antagonist
knows well that I have given him such an Answer unto it, that he is not able to
Answer; time will not suffer me hear to repeat it; read my former Book: only
this in short, Consider that before God sent Jonah to Nineveh, to proclaim
forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed; he did decree and declare it, That
in what instant he spoke, as touching the destroying of a People, if they did
repent, then he also would repent of the evil that he said he would bring upon
them, Jer. 18. but Nineveh did repent, and proclaim a Fast, and therefore God
was engaged, according to his Word, not to destroy them; but the case was not
so with Adam: And also Hezekiah did repent, and humbled himself with mourning;
and so God was constrained to hear, and answer his desire, according to his
Word. Hence he had Mercy on the House of Ahab, when he humbled himself; yet God
changes not in what he has Decreed, but does Decree to alter the Dispensation
of Mercy and Justice, according to his Creatures actings: And thus I leave the
Objection, having Answered it before, and also the Reason; and come now to the
Fifth Reason, to prove, That Adams sin did not make him guilty of, or liable to
the second death; which is,

Reas. 5. Fifthly, Because Adam was but a natural man, and had but a natural
life, and yet should have lived for ever, by eating of the Tree of Life, had he
not sinned; but when he had sinned, and thereby deprived himself of the Tree of
Life, then (in respect of Mortality) he had no prehemenence above the Beast of
the field, Eccles. 3.18, 19, 20. And that he was but a natural man, read 1 Cor.
15.44, 45. Moreover know, (as aforesaid) That there was no Promise of a second
life, till after the Fall; and therefore God could not threaten man with the
loss of that which he had not given, or promised to give unto him; and
therefore that sin in Paradise could not make Adam guilty of the second death,
because he never had a second life, or a promise of it in the state of
Innocence; neither sinned he against the new Covenant, or God manifest in
Christ, which brought the second life, and therefore not guilty of the second
death: And so I pass to the Sixth and last Reason, to prove, That Adams sin
made him not guilty of the second death, neither was that death intended by
God, either in the threatening, or in the sentence.

Reas, 6. Sixthly, and Lastly, Because that death which entered into the world
by Adams sin, passed and reigned over all men from Adam to Moses, Romans 5.12,
13, 14. in which time lived Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Noah, and Lot, and
several others; over whom the second death had no power: and yet that death
which Adam purchased by his sin, passed upon all men, and also reigned over
them; which shows, That the wages of Adams sin in Paradise, was but the first
death; for that death Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the rest, tasted of; and
so it reigned from Adam to Moses, over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression, that is against a prescript Law upon penalty
of death, which proves, That it was Adams sin (and we in him) which brought
that first death upon us; but as for the second death, it reigned not over
those holy men that lived between Adam and Moses; neither does it pass or reign
over any, till after the Resurrection, and the eternal Judgment; for THEN
shall the Wicked be cast into the Lake of Fire, which is the second Death, Rev.
20.12, 13, 14. So then that Death which entered into the World for Adams sin,
the which all tasted of from Adam to Moses, is seen to be no other death, but
what God threatened and pronounced in the sentence; namely, Dust thou art, and
to Dust thou shall return; even the first death: And thus I pass to the Answer
of some few Objections offered by my Antagonist; And the first is a Quotation,
Romans 5.16. with Chap. 8.1.

Object. 1. The offense of one sin came upon all to Condemnation; (i.e.)
Damnation; compared with Romans 8.1.

Answ. This Quotation has been already Answered; yet I shall speak a few words
to it in this place; which is, That the word Condemnation is used for the first
death, as well as for the second; as in Luke 23.40. And it is used indefinitely
in Romans 8.1. There is therefore no Condemnation to them that are in Christ
Jesus: it may be read, there is therefore no death to them that are in Christ
Jesus.

But you will say, Yea, the Righteous do die the first death.

But if you take notice, Paul is showing in that place, that Christ delivers
from that body of death, and in Christ we have victory, and shall conquer the
grave; and so in that sense, there is no death to the Righteous: for the word
(...), being an adverb, is undeclined; but (...), or (...), is the same, only
it being declined, may be read Judgment, or Punishment, or Death; and you do
only say the words differ, but give no Reason worth a figg to prove it; only
you say, that one sin was against Man, and the other against God: your meaning
is, The Malefactors sin was only against Man, and Adams against God. But I pray
be serious; do you not think that the Malefactor sinned against God? Or is not
Murder, or Stealing, or the like, a sin against God? What means this Discourse,
if it argue not gross ignorance, I am very much mistaken in my Judgment: But
looking a little forth, I find you citing an old Argument of Mr. Perkins's;
which is,

That sin that is committed against an infinite God, deserves an infinite
punishment; but Adams sin was such; Ergo, Where art thou Hammon, says my
Antagonist?

To which I Answer and say, That it is not our Question what Adams sin
deserved, but what the punishment was, which God was pleased to inflict upon
Adam for that transgression, the which I before have proved to be but the first
death, and such like punishment: And also I do say, and have said, That Adams
sin was so great that it caused him to lose all that God gave him, and to lay
his honor in the dust, and yet notwithstanding, it made him no more guilty of
the second death, than the Beasts which touched the Mountain (and therein
offended God) and must be thrust through with a Dart, and yet lost no more than
what it had to lose, Heb. 12.20. And if I should deny your Major Proposition,
you would be troubled to prove it, because Mr. Perkins has not done it already
for you: And whereas you ask, (by way of a jear,) Where I am? I could tell you,
That I may be found (through Mercy) at my Native place; although as for your
part, if I should ask where you are, (as in reference to either your Judgment
or Habitation) men know not, and it is possible, you care not (they should
know) where you are to be found; but this by degression: I pass, and come to
the Third Objection; which is, say you,

Object. 3. If Adam brought but a temporal death on men, then Christ died but a
temporal death to satisfy God.

Answ. That Christ did not die the second death; that is to say, Christ did not
suffer in the Lake of Fire and Brimstone, is clear; for if he had, he had been
irrecoverable: Take notice, that there is a great gulf fixed, so that those
that once come into that place (take heed) cannot go thence any more: Fie, fie,
what did Christ suffer in Hell with the Devil and Damned spirits! No surely,
although your Creed have taught you so to believe: And whereas you say, That
Christ was made a Curse for us; it is acknowledged that he was hanged upon a
Tree; and cursed is every one that hangs upon a tree: But I hope that it is
but a temporal curse; for otherwise, there be many of the Saints that have so
suffered, and then are in a cursed estate, and condition, if your opinion be
true; but it is not.

And whereas you say, That my Opinion makes Children but a little beholding to
Christ; for if he had not come, they had died but a temporal death, and so they
do still.

To which I Answer and say, It is true, that if Christ had not come, they had
died but a temporal death (for that sin committed in Paradise) and also that
they do die a temporal death notwithstanding, and yet your Conclusion false;
for Christ is very beneficial to them notwithstanding; so that if I had the
tongue of men and Angels, I could not express it as I should do: Time is
precious, take this in short, That Christ brings them to a resurrection, and
brings all the glory that is spoken of in the Scripture, to be there portion at
the other side of the grave; I could be very large, but I must speak now by
figures (as we say) and not by words at length, and leave you and the Reader to
enlarge it in your understanding: And for as much as you desire me to inform
you what should have become of the soul of man; I shall show you my opinion
about it, and the grounds and reasons from the Scripture, and if I be mistaken
in it, I hope some sympathyzing tender heart will be as ready to inform me
better in it, as the captious Spirit will be to cavil at it; and I hope I shall
receive such information with humility of mind, and thankfulness of heart; and
so I pass to the Subject of Discourse, namely, Man's Mortality.

A DISCOURSE Touching the Mortality of the Soul.
IN order to the clearing up of this Subject of Dicourse, I shall lay down this
Position; which is,

That man by sin, made himself wholly mortal.

So that when God shall take away his breath, which is from the time of death
till the time of Resurrection, he is no more then what he was before; God
breathed into him the breath of life, which was but dust, and also to dust he
does return; and the word Soul, is used for illustration sake, and very large
in its acceptance in Scripture, sometimes to be understood one thing, and
sometimes another; and that no man living can say of any one thing, this is the
soul, and this is not; but the whole individual man is taken for the soul; and
where there is spoken of soul and body, there is no more difference than there
is between Spirit and breath, only it is spoken by way of illustration; and the
Greek word (...), does signify several things, as the Mind, Will, Soul,
Delight, Pleasure, Affection, Disposition, Fantasy, Life, Breath, Wind,
Blast, Wrath, Anger, Memory, Thought, Stomach, Courage, Advice, Opinion, Heart,
Wit, Stoutness, Willingness, Promptness, or Readiness of Mind, also Sleep, and
also Man: these many significations, and more is derived from the word (...),
which we read in our Translation, Soul. But leaving these things, I shall come
suddenly to the Reasons, and then answer some Objections; but first see some
Scriptures which proves that Man is wholly mortal; and first see the words of
the Wise man, Eccles. 3.19, 20. in these words; For what befalls the sons of
men befalls Beasts, even one thing befalls them, as the one dies so dies
the other, yea they have all one breath, so that man has no pre-eminence above
a beast, for all is vanity, all go to one place, all are of the dust, and
return to dust again; Agreeable to the Word of the Lord, Genesis 3. Dust thou art,
and to dust thou shall return; and this is also further amplified, by John 4.7,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12. in these words, For there is hope of a tree if he be cut down
that it will sprout again, and the tender branches thereof, will not cease,
though the root thereof wax old in the ground, and the stock thereof die in the
earth, yet through the descent of water, it will bud and bring forth branches
like a plant; but man dies and wastes away, ye man gives up the Ghost, and
where is he? as the waters fall from the Sea, and the floods decay and dry up,
so man lies down; for we must needs die and be as water spilt upon the ground,
that cannot be gathered; neither does God respect the person of any man, yet he
has used a means, that his banished shall not be for ever expelled from him.
From whence we may see, that the estate of man is compared to the floods that
are dried up; that is, become as it were nothing, and is so to remain until the
resurrection, for by sin and death we are banished from the Lord, yet he has
used a means, namely, to bring us forth again at the Resurrection, that his
banished should not be for ever kept from him; but if the righteous go to
heaven so soon as they die, how are they banished from him? and become as water
spilt upon the ground? For what man is he that lives, and shall not see death?
Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah, Psalm. 89.48. 2 Samuel 14.14. No he cannot deliver his soul from the hand of the grave, when God
sets his heart to look upon man, as you may see, Job 34.14, 15. in these words,
If he set his heart upon man, if he gather unto himself his spirit and, his
breath all flesh shall perish together, and man shall again return unto dust.
From these words we see all flesh is to perish; and man is flesh, (yea the
whole man) for, that which is born of flesh is flesh: now the soul of man is
born of flesh, and if it be not spirit, it must die; and the Apostle says,
that the first man (meaning the whole man) was earth, earthy, and as is the
earthy, so are they that are earthy; howbeit, it was not first that which was
spiritual, but that which was natural, and then that which was spiritual;
speaking there of the man Adam, and the man Christ, affirming that the first
Adam was an earthly natural man, and the second Adam, ( viz. Christ) was a
heavenly spiritual man; so then the first man through his sin made himself
mortal, even the whole man: there is a multitude of Scriptures that proves
this thing, but time being very precious with me, I cannot at this time set
them in order before thee, but shall pass to some few Reasons, to prove man
wholly mortal; and the first is,

Reas. 1. First because Christ dyed soul and body, to purchase our souls and
bodies from the grave; and if Christ's soul dyed, it was really to that end that
our souls might not lie in the grave, and if we had dyed only in body, then
Christ had dyed only in body, but the whole man being mortal and returned to
dust; Christ also poured out his soul to death, and made his soul an offering
for sin, as says the Prophet, Isa. 53.10. When thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin; he shall see his seed, (mark that) he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, 12. Because he
has poured out his soul to death, and he was numbered with the strangers, and
he bore the sins of many, etc. From hence we see, that Christ's SOUL dyed, that
ours might live again, and not be left in the grave; which proves that our
souls are mortal and die; and so I pass to the second reason to prove, That the
whole man is mortal; which is;

Reas. 2. Secondly, because if man's body be mortal, and that die, and his soul
immortal and that live, then man has two lives, and two distinct Beings, which
is not; for if there be two distinct lives, and two distinct Beings, then Adam
was two distinct Creatures; and then it cannot be said, that as by the offense
of ONE, Judgment came upon all men to condemnation, for Adam upon that account
was TWO distinct beings, having two distinct lives; but man having but one
life, the whole man must be mortal, or the whole man immortal, and that the
whole man is mortal, the Scriptures and our experience does witness.

Reas. 3. Again Thirdly, Because otherwise Christ had done Lazarus wrong by
raising him from the dead, for if his Soul had been in Heaven four days, and
then Christ fetched it from thence, it was so far from an act of love (to him
whom Christ so well loved) that it was great prejudice; and also I strange that
Lazarus did not mention one tittle of the glory of Heaven, if he had been there
the four days that he was dead; but I remember that the Apostle says, That
David is not yet ascended into Heaven: but if Souls departed are there, he also
would have been there, and Christ would not have brought Lazarus from thence,
But no man has ascended yet to Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even
the Son of man which is in Heaven, John 3. And so I pass to the Fourth Reason:
which is,

Reas. 4. Because the Scripture says, that immortality only dwells in
Christ; but if every man have an immortal Soul dwelling in him, then
immortality dwells in every man: but the Scripture denies that, and says,
that immortality dwells in none but in Christ, or only in Christ, which is
one and the same; and that you may see this proved to you, read 1 Timothy 6.16. in
these words, v. 15. Which in his times shall show who is the blessed and only
Potentate, the KING of KINGS, and LORD of LORDS, who ONLY has immortality
dwelling in the light, that no man can approach unto; so then, immortality
dwells only in Christ, and the glory of man is as the flour of grass, for
they dye, and in the same day their thoughts perish; which shows that man is
wholly mortal; and so I pass to the Fifth Reason: which is,

Reas. 5. Because the Scripture says, Genesis 7.23. That every living substance,
was destroyed (in the flood) in which was the breath of life, (save Noah, and
those that were with him in the Ark) and then if the Soul have life, or be a
living substance, it was destroyed, as Joshua destroyed every living Soul with
the edge of the Sword, Josh. 11. The conclusion is this; that which may be
destroyed is mortal; but the Soul may be destroyed, and therefore mortal.

Reas. 6. Again Sixthly, Because that which is the mortal part of man bears the
name living Soul: which shows, that the whole man is mortal, for the
Scripture says, That God made man out of the dust of the earth, and breathed
upon him the breath of life, and he BECAME a living soul; (mark) it was not a
living Soul inferred into him, but by being breathed upon, the man that was
made of the dust of the earth, BECAME a living soul, (mark the word BECAME a
living soul) now it was not the breath that became a living Soul, but it was
the man which became a living soul: and if the breath be not that which is
called the living soul, what is man when his breath returns to God that gave
it? surely it is a dead lump; and when Paul speaks of mortality, and
immortality, he argues mortality from the very word LIVING SOUL, saying, The
first man was made a LIVING SOUL, and the second Adam a quickening Spirit; the
first man was of the earth earthy, and so forth: These things considered,
shows that the LIVING SOUL ( viz. the first man) was mortal, and the
quickening Spirit ( viz. the Second man Christ Jesus) was he that only had
immortality dwelt in him; so then, if mortality be attributed to that which is
called the LIVING SOUL, then it is plain that the whole man is mortal; and so I
pass to the Seventh Reason: which is,

Reason 7. Because if the Soul dye not, then it abides alone, and is
unfruitful, for it is not quickened unless it dye, as says the Apostle, and if
it dye not, then is not Christ the first fruits of it, for Christ is only the
first fruits of them that sleep; and indeed it was no argument of weight that
Christ used to the Saduces, to prove the Resurrection, if the soul dye not, for
he says, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to
him; or in his account, meaning by a Resurrection: but if the Soul dye not for
a time, how could Christ have used the words, all live to him, to prove a
Resurrection: for if it had been so that the soul dyed not, then they might
have said, it is true, their souls live to God, and so it had been no argument
at all to prove the Resurrection; but Christ brings it to prove the
Resurrection, implying, that there is no other living to God after this life is
ended, but in a Resurrection; which brings me to the Eight and last Reason to
prove Man wholly mortal; which is,

Reas. 8. Because as those that go to the Grave cannot praise God, so all our
glory in the enjoyment of our inheritance is promised to us, that we shall
receive it at the Revelation of Christ: or that God will reward us at the
Resurrection of the Just: and that was the main comfort of the godly in the
time of their afflictions, as Heb. 11.35. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9, 10.
And it was Paul's comfort at his death, saying, Henceforth is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge will give to me AT THAT
DAY; not before, take notice there is a time limited. For the hour is coming
that all that are in the graves shall come forth; and then those that are wise
shall shine as the firmament; add this, that if the dead rise not, then such as
are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, and the Saints of all men most
miserable; but if there be such a thing as a soul of the righteous which goes
to God; how can it be, that if the dead rise not, that the Saints of all men
are the most miserable, for they are in felicity whether the body rise yea or
nay? moreover, doubtless this opinion of the soul being immortal, has begot
all these vain errors, as prayer over the dead, and Purgatory, for that is the
received opinion, that men be not in their full joy, or torment till the
Resurrection; and some are so bold as to deny the Resurrection by reason of
this conceit; and I could show, that the Heathen in chief have been the authors
of this Opinion; but there be many things that I am fain to omit because of
time, and offer that only which is drawn from Scripture; and thus having
briefly given you these few Reasons, in the next place I shall instance that
which men call the Soul, and show that that is mortal, omitting the Opinion of
the Stoic, and Democritus, and Plato, and the like; I shall speak somewhat of
the received Opinion what the Soul is: and that is,

Some say it is the Understanding part of Man; the which if so, then all are
born without Souls, and many never have any; First, That Children have not
understanding at the time of their Birth, I think all will grant if the
Scripture did not prove it; and also that there be many that never have
understanding, but are natural fools; and therefore if the Understanding part
of Man be the Soul, then those that have no understanding have no Soul, and
they that have a Soul, if understanding be the Soul, it dies with the man, for
in the same day their thoughts perish, and the dead understand not, Eccles.
9.5. And if the faculties of man be understood to be the Soul, then it is easy
to prove them Temperatures and Mortal, because they are subject to increase and
diminish as the Creator is disposed; and madness (that may happen to man by
some obstruction in the body) quite mollifieth them; so then these things
considered, we may see that the whole man is mortal; time would fail me to
write the particular things appertaining to this subject of Discourse, and
therefore I shall pass to the answer of some few Objections, which may
comprehend the whole; but by the way give me leave to show you a glimpse of
what the Scripture calls the Soul, in which you may see how many things bear
the name of Soul in Scripture; and first it is taken for God, Heb. 10.28. it is
taken for the heart, 1 Samuel 18.1. for the eyes, Jer. 13.17. for the head, Psalm
16.10. for the stomach, Prove. 27.7. for hunger, Prove. 6.30. for the whole man,
Lev. 7.20. Acts 7.14. Romans 13.1. These, and many more in Scripture is called by
the name of Soul; but I come now to the Objections; which is,

Object. 1. Fear not him that can kill the body, but cannot kill the Soul, Mat.
10.28. implying that there is a soul which cannot be killed.

Answ. This is the most material Text that I know of to that purpose: but Luke
which is the most exact Writer, has recorded it thus, Luke 12.4, 5. And I say
unto you my friends, be not afraid of them that can kill the body, and
afterward have no more that they can do; but fear him which after he has
killed, has power to cast into hell, yea I say unto you fear him; which
shows to us, man can only destroy the body which is mortal, and must dye; but
God can destroy both the body which is mortal, and also cast the whole man into
hell when it is immortal after the Resurrection, and so he above all is to be
feared: and that this in short is the meaning of the words, is evident, because
the soul has been killed by man, Josh. 10.35. but after the Resurrection none
can destroy it but God; and so I pass to the next Objection; which is,

Object. 2. In Phil. 1.23, 24. For I am in a strait betwixt two, having a
desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.

Answ. To which I answer and say, That this text does not contradict the state
of Man's Mortality, because there is no time to the dead; that is to say, that
the time between Adams death and his Resurrection, will be to him but as the
twinkling of an eye; so that as there was no time to us from the creation to
our birth, so when we shall return to dust, (from whence we were taken, and
become like water spilt upon the ground) there will be no time also to us, till
the time of the resurrection; for there is no remembrance amongst the dead, as
says the Scripture; so then Paul might say, that he did desire to be dissolved
and to be with Christ; for the next thing to Death is the Resurrection, (and
glory for the godly) which time to them is as (before said) but as the
twinkling of an eye: Add this, that Paul tells us, that from the time of Death,
till the time of the Resurrection, the crown is laid up to be received at that
day, (mark that) read the text, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. in these words, For I am now
ready to be offered up, and the time of my departure is at hand; I have fought
a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth
there is laid up for me a crown of Righteousness, which God the righteous Judge
will give unto Me at that day; and not to me only, but unto them also that love
his appearance. From whence we may learn, that the godly man's glory is to be
conferred upon him at the time of Christ's appearance, and not at the time of
death, only at the time of death it is laid up sure, (for those that have dyed
in the faith) UNTIL THAT DAY, (namely, Christ's appearance) which time to the
dead will be no more then a moment, and so being dissolved we shall be with
Christ, which is far better; and so I shall pass to the next Objection; which
is,

Object. 3. There is such a thing as a soul that goes to heaven at death,
because the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. We know that if our earthly house of this
Tabernacle shall be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens, ( ver. 6.) Therefore we are always
confident knowing that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the
Lord.

Answ. To which I answer and say, That the Apostle in this place does not so
much as hint at such a thing as the soul being immortal, or distinct from the
body, but speaks of the happy estate and condition of the godly at that time,
when mortality shall be swallowed up of life, as you may see, (verse the 4.) in
these words, For we that are in this Tabernacle do groan being burdened, not
that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon, that mortality might be
swallowed up of life: From whence we may see, that the Apostle speaks in this
place of mortality, being swallowed up of life, meaning by the state of a
resurrection, as appears from the 9 and 10 verses, where he says, That it was
their care to labor, that whether absent from the Lord, or present, they might
be accepted of him; for (says he) we must all appear before the Judgment seat
of Christ, etc. implying, that our being present with the Lord, is not to be
till the day of Judgment, which day of Judgment, will not be until after the
Resurrection; so that Paul in this place (Equivolent with David) makes no
distance of time between the putting off this body, and the putting on
immortality, ( viz the Resurrection;) which shows, that there is no time to
the dead; so that this text speaks not against man being wholly mortal. And so
I pass to the next Objection; which is,

Object. 4. In Luke 12.20. in these words, Thou fool this night thy soul shall
be required of thee; And Luke 23.43. I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with
me in Paradise; And Luke 16.22, 23. And it came to pass that the beggar dyed,
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom; and the rich man dyed also,
and was buried, and in hell he lift up his eyes being in torments, and sees
Abraham a far off, and Lazarus in his bosom, etc. Which shows, there is an
immortal soul.

Answ. To which I answer, and first to the first, (and so in order) which is,
Luke 12.20. Thou fool this night shall thy soul be required of thee.

I answer to this, take notice and remember, that I have before showed, that
the word Soul, may be as well read life or breath, from the word ((...)) it
bearing many significations* for the word is a root, (as I may say) bearing
many branches: this considered, the text might be thus read, Thou fool this
night shall thy life be required of thee; and if so, there is no color for to
prove the Soul to be immortal; add this, that in answering this text, I also
have answered that which is written in the 1 King. 17.21, 22. where it is said,
That the soul of the (Shunamites) child came into him again and he revived; it
may be read, that the life (or breath) came into the child again, and he
revived; Thus may that text, Luke 12. and all texts of that nature be answered
according to truth; and so I come to the second text, Luke 16. which speaks of
Lazarus being in Abraham's bosom.

To which I answer and say, that it is but a Parable and was no more, so then
what is spoke of the trees, in Judge. 9.8. in these words, And the trees went
forth on a time to anoint a King over them, and they said unto the Olive tree,
reign thou over us; but the Olive tree said; shall I leave my fatness, etc.
Moreover consider the Obsurdities that follow, (if that be any more than a
Parable.)

As first, then there is knowledge after the flesh, but the Scripture says,
henceforth know we no man after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5. but if that text be more
then a Parable, then we shall henceforth know persons after the flesh; for the
Rich-man knew that he had seven brethren, and he had a care of them in
particular.

And secondly, he knew Abraham to be the father of the Children of Israel:
again if that be to be literally understood, then a soul has eyes, and
fingers, and a tongue, and a bosom, and the like.

And thirdly, it calls not only Lazarus a beggar, but Abraham the father of the
damned, and will Abraham (trow) own the damned, when they are in hell to be his
sons; no surely.

Fourthly, what then may we understand by this text of Scripture.

Answ. We are to understand it a Parable spoken by way of illustration, to show
the happy estate of all such as suffer here in this life, choosing reproach for
Christ's sake; that they shall (when this life is ended) enjoy everlasting
felicity; and that those that have chosen the pleasures of this present life,
shall hereafter be punished; yet notwithstanding, both the glory of the godly
and the punishment of the wicked, is not to be till the appearance of Jesus
Christ at the day of Judgment; for so says the Scriptures, 2 Pet. 2.9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of Judgment, to be punished: And hence the Devils asked
Christ, why he was come to trouble or torment them before the time, when he
cast them out of those whom they had possessed; and as I have said before, all
the wicked man's punishment, and the righteous man's glory, is reserved till that
time; and then shall the wicked be cast into a furnace of fire, there shall be
wailing and gnashing of teeth; then shall the righteous shine forth as the Son
in the kingdom of their father; who has ears to hear let him hear, Mat.
13.40, 41, 42, 43. 1 Pet. 1.8, 9, 10, 11. 2 These. 2.7, 8. John 5.28. Mat. 25,
31, 32, 33. Heb. 11.35. Revel. 22.12. Luke 21.27, 28. From these and many such
like Scriptures, we are taught, that both the reward of the righteous and the
Wicked, are reserved till the appearance of the Lord Jesus at the day of
Judgment; And as touching Hell, I have formerly written, that it is not in
being till the day of Judgment, and that the Devils place is in the air, he
being called the Prince thereof; and that also he compasses the earth by
walking to and fro in it; but if he were in Hell, ( viz. the Lake) he could not
so do, for from thence none can possibly come, when they are once there; but
let no sottish soul therefore take liberty to sin, for know (as I before have
said) that so soon as a wicked man dies, he shall be brought to Judgment, and
then receive a just recompense of reward; that is to say, in his account it
will be present to him, there being no time or remembrance of time amongst the
dead; so that the time between his death and resurrection, will be no more to
him, then the time was to him before he was born, that is to say, from the
Creation of the world to the time of his being; although it was a great time,
yet to him it was no time, no not a moment, neither will it be after death a
moment of time, till the Resurrection, in the account of the dead; therefore
take not liberty to sin, for if thou do, thy judgment slumbereth not, but
hasteneth, and will fall on thee in a moment, take heed; and thus I pass to the
last Scripture mentioned,

In Luke. 23.43. I say unto thee to day shall thou be with me in Paradise.

To which I answer and say, That although I have answered this text before in
another place, yet I shall speak somewhat to it here; and first consider, That
Christ was not that day in heaven, nor many days after, (as I before have
said) for Christ was three days both soul and body in the grave, as you may
read, Psalm. 16.10. compared with, Isa. 53.10, 12. and Acts. 2.31. And after he
was risen from the dead, and amongst his Disciples, He said touch me not, for I
am not yet ascended unto my Father, John 20.17. Which shows, That Christ was
not in Paradise himself that day, in which the words were spoken.

Secondly, it cannot be proved, That the Thief was dead the same day, neither
is it likely that he was, because that Christ was not dead himself till after
the ninth hour, Mat. 27.46, 47, 48, 50. And if Christ dyed not till after the
ninth hour, then there was not three hours more remaining of the day, and after
this time, (and in all likelihood very near to the end of the day) they
besaught Pilate, that their legs might be broke, that they might be taken down
from the Cross, because the preparation of the Sabbath drew near; that they
might not hang on the Cross upon the Sabbath day, for that day was an high day
with the Jews; and the text says, that they brake the legs of the first, and
of the second, and when they found Christ dead already, they brake not his
legs; the which implies clearly, that the other two Malefactors were not dead;
and also take notice, that the death of the Cross was a languishing death, and
it being unutial, or unlawful to bring the prisoners from their execution to
prison again; therefore that they might not make an escape but die according to
the Law, they brake their legs, and then by their so doing* there could be no
means of escape, but they must die; yet it does not follow, that they did die
the same day, for men may lie a whole day, nay they may lie days with their
legs broken, before they die; and I do dare presume to say, that they were both
alive very near the end of that day, and had nothing inflicted upon them to
shorten their lives, but being nailed through their hands and feet, and their
legs broken; and I dare presume, that many lie longer then they had to lie of
that day, that have been far more desperately wounded: Furthermore I dare
presume to say, that no man living can prove that the Malefactors were dead the
same day, and if it cannot be proved that they were dead that day, it cannot be
proved, that the soul of the penitent Thief was that day in heaven: moreover,
consider Christ did not tell the Thief that his SOUL should be with him in
Paradise; but says, thou shall be with me, not thy SOUL, but thou, ( viz. thou
Thief, or thou) Man, shall be with me) in Paradise, which was not so; then you
see that Christ was not ascended himself, but he poured out his soul to death,
and that lay in the grave, although God left it not there.

Secondly, it cannot be proved, that the Thief was dead that day, if there were
such a thing as the soul ascending into Heaven at the time of death.

And thirdly, the text does not say, the SOUL shall be with Christ, but thou (
i. e. thou) Man or Thief, (as before said) shall be with me.

These things considered, what may we understand of the text, which says,
verily I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

To which I answer and say, (as I before have said) that whereas Christ says,
to day shall thou be with me in Paradise, is but to give the Thief assurance of
his salvation; for his petition or request is, that the Lord would remember him
when he came into his Kingdom; and Christ to put him out of doubt, and to
administer comfort and assurance unto him, says, I say unto thee, to day thou
shall be with me in Paradise; as if he should have said to him, thou desired me
to remember thee when I come into my Kingdom, but to put thee out of doubt, I
will tell thee at present, (or to day) to thy comfort, that thou shall be with
me in Paradise: Does it follow therefore because Christ gives him a promise
that day of heaven, that therefore he must be in heaven the same day; it was
well for him that he had a promise of it that day, that thereby he may enjoy it
when David, (who is not ascended into heaven) shall enjoy it, with the rest of
the godly at that day before spoken of: so then that day was but the day of
promise, but the day of enjoyment is yet to come; namely, when the Lord Jesus
shall be revealed, and till that time we are to wait for it, because all the
Saints shall be made perfect, and enjoy their inheritance together. And thus I
pass from this Obsection, and hasten to the conclusion of this Subject of
discourse.

Object. 5. But if it be objected, that the souls of them that are slain cry
under the Alter Table, Rev. 6.10.

Answ. If they cry, then they are not in heaven, as is plain, because when they
come there, all crying and trouble shall vanish away.

Secondly, by Alter Table, we are to understand a place of Sacrifice; and by
Souls crying, we are to understand the blood of the Saints crying for
vengeance, for it is blood that cries for vengeance; and that the soul is (in
some places) to be understood blood, is clear; because the life or blood, is to
be understood all one in many places: and so it is said that Christ made his
soul an offering for sin; and that is to be understood, his life, or more
properly his blood, for without blood there is no remission of sins: And also I
have before showed, that the Greek word Soul, bears such a signification as
blood, and if so, it is very proper for the souls, ( viz. blood) to cry for
vengeance, for so did Abels blood cry for vengeance against Cain; and also
Christ's blood does cry for vengeance against such as are guilty of it, by
trampling it under foot, although it does speak (for the penitent) better
things then the blood of Abel. And thus we are to understand that sixth chapter
of the Revelations, that after the red Horse, (and he that sat upon him with
the great Sword) had took peace from the earth; then John saw the blood of the
just ones lying under the Alter Table; that is, the place where they were made
a sacrifice, or where they offered up their blood or lives a sacrifice for
Christ's sake, and the testimony of a good conscience; and that ( viz. blood)
cried for vengeance; and this is that which John saw and declared, when he
says, I saw the souls which were slain for the word of God, and the Testimony
which they held. And so I pass to the next and last objection, which is drawn
from the 1 Pet. 3.18, 19. in these words.

Object. 6. By which he went and preached, to the Spirits in Prison; therefore
there is an immortal soul.

Answ. To which I answer and say, that the meaning of this place is no other,
but that the spirit of Christ did preach to the old world in Noah's days, or
Christ by the same spirit (wherewith he was quickened) preached in the days of
Noah to those that are now dead or in Prison; for the word Prison is to be
understood, a place of security, to secure persons for the day of Judgment, to
be either acquitted and justfied, or condemned and executed; and this agrees
with Revel 20.13. where it is said, (as at a Goal delivery) That the Sea and
death, and the grave, delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were
all judged according to their works. And whereas it is read Hell in our
Translations, it is meant the grave, for so it should be read; the which if you
question it, you may read the margent note, and see it so read there: The like
expression there is in John 31.8. speaking of death, says, There the prisoners
rest together, the small and great are there, and the servant is free from his
Master, verse 19. So then it was the same spirit, that which raised Christ from
the dead; that preached in the days of Noah; observe this, (and I pass to the
conclusion) That it was not the quickened that preached to the Spirits, who were
disobedient in the days of Noah, (and now in prison) but it was the quickner,
there is the mystery of the text; mark well I have a few words more, and so I
shall leave this Subject of Discourse; which is,

First a few words (in particular) to my Antagonist, who says, That the soul
is immortal, because it was created after Gods Image.

Although he has contradicted himself (sadly) in what he holds, if he own what
he has written in the 13 and 14 and 15 pages of his former Book; entitled,
The condition of Adam in Paradise; where he says, that the whole man begets
the whole man, and also (else where) says, that if Adam did not beget the
whole man, viz. the soul) then did he not beget a perfect and complete
creature, as the beasts do in their kind; Page 12.

To which I answer and say, and first how my Antagonist will be able to prove
the soul (as he calls it) to be that which was created after Gods Image, I know
not, for the Scripture says. Genesis 1.26. that God said, let us make Man after
our Image, (not, let us make a soul after our Image;) and when God had made man
out of the dust of the earth, (after his own Image) then he breathed into him
the breath of life, (and then that which was made after Gods Image, e. i. the
Man) became a living soul; so that it was not a living soul that was put into
man, but the man that was made of the dust of the earth, became a living soul
by Gods breathing into him, (mark that.) But no more of this, because I have
spoken of it already in this Subject of Discourse.

But (secondly,) cannot the soul be mortal, because it is after Gods Image, how
then came Christ to die if not mortal, and yet he was after Gods Image, for he
was the express Image of his Fathers Person, Heb. 1.3. and yet notwithstanding,
was so mortal as to die body and soul, Isa. 53.12. And also the Apostle says,
that the Man (not soul) is the Image and glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. and yet man
dies; from whence you may see your self answered, and your reason or argument
nothing worth. And as to the other matter (viz.) the souls Parentage, I have
received much light in it, although not by my Antagonist, for I do suppose that
he wrote things from others, (for arguments sake) which was not his own
judgment, and therefore he spoke so cloudily; but that which caused me to
examine the matter more nisely, was the words of a beloved brother in a private
conference between him and my self, about the business, in the which (amongst
the rest of his discourse) he offered this thing as an obsurdity which would
follow, if the souls parentage was not on earth, for says he, it has been
known, that sometimes there has been such acts of uncleanness in
propagation, as the Parent with the child, and the child with the Parent, and
several acts of uncleanness has been committed; now me thinks (says he) it
is obsurd, to think that the pure God which hates uncleanness; in the least to
seem to own such a thing as to create or give a soul, or to put his hand to the
work (as we may say) in such an unclean action; but every creature having seed
in it self, does bring forth of it self according to its kind, and the man
which does abuse Gods ordinance, and way in propagation, must at last suffer
for it, etc. This and such like Discourse, did put me upon the search and trial
of things (since my last book was written) whereby if time would give me
admition at this time, I could give you an account of it more at large, but
time fails me, and calls for brevity, and therefore shall say no more to this
Subject of discourse, but this, (that is,) The Souls Immortality has been the
conceit of the Heathen Philosophers, which did suppose, that mortal virtue
should be rewarded hereafter, for that all men enjoyed blessing alike here in
this life, and not knowing that there was to be a Resurrection of the body,
whereby persons might receive the reward of what they have done in the body,
they have Imagined such a thing as the soul to live and receive a reward;
hereafter; and (indeed) the Church of Rome have readily received such an
Opinion; (also) from whence the Church of England have received it by
tradition; and I am ready to believe, that the Church of Rome have also abused
our Greek Copies in many particulars, to bear a face toward their opinion; as
that text in Mat. 10.28. and the stop, Luke 23.43. and many such places as in
reference to this Subject and others also; but however the wisdom of God is
such, as that they cannot bury the truth, because he has given to his people
that spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, to reconcile and keep the whole
body of the Scriptures in a sweet harmony; but as for us that believe, that
there is to be a Resurrection both of the just and unjust; let us not imagine
any such thing as a Souls Immortality (till the Resurrection;) but know that
our reward shall be given to us at that day. Methinks, the Church of England
seem to deny, such a place as Purgatory, and yet hold an Oppinion that is the
rise of it, and maintains it; for say the Papists, when persons die they do not
go to Hell or Heaven, but the soul goes to a place between both, viz.
Purgatory, and not to the full joy or punishment; and so say the Church of
England (in effect) that the soul is not in the full joy or torments till after
the day of Judgment, as though they could go to Heaven, into Gods presence, and
yet not have there full joy; as though in his presence there were not fullness
of joy, and at his right hand pleasures for evermore; and also, as though when
souls have been cast into Hell, and have been punished there, they shall be
brought from thence again to the Judgment seat of Christ, to be tried whether
they have deserved Hell ye or nay: O strange conceit of the pure Justice and
righteous dealing of God in his punishing sinners, what shall souls when they
have been long in Hell, come out again and enter into a body, it is some comfort
to them that they shall be a little while out of torments, but if they come
from Hell they have paid the utmost farthing, for when they are once there,
they shall in no wise come forth, until they have paid the utmost farthing.
These and many such things I might spend time about, but this I shall leave
with thee; (courteous reader) know, that when God takes away man's breath he
dies, and so dust returns to dust, and the Spirit ( viz. breath) to him that
gave it; and that breath that returns to God, as it made the man that was made
of earth, to become a living soul, capable to enjoy what God gave him; even so
in the Resurrection, when that dust is raised by God (and every bone and member
in its proper place) then shall God give forth the same breath of life again
into every man; and so they shall be thereby capable to receive according to
what they have done in the body, whether it be good, or whether it be evil; and
to this the Spirit of God bears witness in the holy Scriptures. And so I leave
this Subject, and come to the next, which is Gods love to the whole lump of
mankind, in using a means to bring them to a Resurrection of life and Glory;
and I shall handle them in two particular Subjects.

The first, will be the Resurrection; and the second, Gods love to man in point
of Salvation and glory; and so to the first Subject; namely, That although man
must dye and be like water spilt upon the ground, yet the Lord will bring him
up again from the dead to live for ever in glory, or misery, according as they
have received his grace, and walked worthy of it; or as they have slighted and
abused grace and mercy, and not walked worthy of it.

THE Resurrection of the Body PROVED.
AS touching this Subject of the Resurrection, I shall be brief, yet full
enough to prove it to be the truth of God, and the foundation of the godly man's
faith and hope; and my method to prove it, shall be by laying down this
Position; which is,

That the dead bodies of those that return to the dust, shall live again, and
arise and come to Judgment, to receive according to what they have done,
whether it be good or evil.

For so says our blessed Savior, ( John 5.28. in these words) Marvel not at
this, for the hour (or time as the word will bear it (...), Hora) is coming, in
the which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, they that have done good to the Resurrection of life, and they that have
done evil, to the Resurrection of Condemnation; for the Trumpet shall sound,
and the dead shall be raised incorruptible, and we shall be changed, 1 Cor.
15.52. And that this is true, weigh the following Reasons, which will confirm
the truth of the Position; and the first Reason is,

Reas. 1. Because Christ himself did both die and rise again to be the first
fruits of them that sleep, that he might bear a sure Testimony to prove the
Resurrection of the dead; as says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.20, 21. in these
words, But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of
them that sleep, for since by man came death, by man came also the Resurrection
of the dead; for as in (or by) Adam all die, even so in (or by) Christ shall
all (men) be made alive, but every one in his own order, verse. 22.23.

Reas. 2. Secondly, because the Scripture says, that our bodies shall be
redeemed from the Grave, and clothed with immortality; and indeed it was the
very thing that Saint Paul waited for and comforted himself in, Romans 8.19, 20,
21, 22, 33. in these words, For the earnest expectation of the creature,
waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God; for the creature was made
subject to vanity, not willingly but by reason of him who has subjected the
same, in hope because the creature it self also shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the children of God; for we
know that the whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain together until
now, and not only they, but ourselves also, which have the first fruits of the
Spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption,
to wit, the redemption of our bodies; From whence we may see, that the Apostle
did look and wait in his mind for the Resurrection of the BODY, which is to be
understood the Resurrection: and thus we see that our BODIES shall be redeemed
from the dust; (and all kind of Corruption) which proves the Resurrection: And
so I pass to the third reason; which is,

Reas. 3. Thirdly, because the Scripture says, the dead bodies of such as are
in the dust, shall arise again, and live, as says the Prophet, ( Isa. 26.19.)
in these words; Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall they
arise; awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of
Herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead, that is in it. The which agrees
with the words of the Prophet Ezekiel. which says; And as I prophesied, there was
a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came together, bone to his bone;
and when I beheld, lo the sinews and the flesh came upon them, and the skin
covered them about; and there was no breath in them: Then I Prophesied as he
commanded me, and the breath came upon them, and they lived and stood up upon
their feet, an exceeding great Army. From whence we may see, that there is to
be a Resurrection of the body out of the dust of the earth, to life again, that
all may come to Judgment to give an account of what they have done in the body,
whether it be good or evil. And so I come to the fourth Reason, to prove the
Resurrection of the body; which is,

Reas. 4. Fourthly, because the same IT which is sown in corruption, the same
IT rises in incorruption, and every seed shall have its own body; as says
Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 15.42. So also is the Resurrection, IT is sown in
corruption, IT IS raised in incorruption; for this corruptible must put on
incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality; so when this corruptible
has put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality, then
shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, death is swallowed up in
victory: O Death where is thy sting, O Grave where is thy victory; Which
clearly proves, that the same that goes to the dust, the same rises again
out of the dust; only the corruption putting on incorruption, and the mortal
putting on immortality, which cannot be understood another body, but the same
body, neither can it be true which is said, Death is swallowed up in victory;
(no) for if the dead bodies rise not out of the Graves, then the Grave has
victory, and is not conquered, so as to be said, O Grave where is thy victory;
but the victory of the Grave is destroyed by Christ's death and Resurrection,
that we should not be holden therein. All which proves there is to be a
Resurrection of the dead bodies out of the Graves. And so I come to the fifth
Reason, to prove the Resurrection of the dead; which is,

Reas. 5. Fifthly, Because Job also confirms this truth, saying; O that my
words were now written, O that they were now printed in a book, that they were
graven with an Iron Pen, and laid in the rock for ever; for I know that my
redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth; and
though after my skin worms devour this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God,
whom I shall see for my self, and my eyes shall behold and not another,
although my reins be consumed, Job 19.23, 24, 25, 26, 27. From hence we may
see, that although Job were in great afflictions, yet the consideration of the
Resurrection comforted him; and that he means the very same body is plain,
because he says, that although worms did devour his body, yet in his flesh,
with his eyes, (and not others) should he see Christ his Redeemer in the latter
day, stand upon the earth, whom he should behold for himself, and not another.
So then the very same Job that then was in misery, the very same Job was
afterward to see the Lord: to which add, that the very same body, that
suffers with Christ, the very same body shall reign with Christ; for it is
against pure justice, that one body should suffer with Christ, or for Christ's
sake, and then another body glorified, and that body which suffered to perish
for ever; this cannot be in justice, which also proves, that the same body
shall arise out of the dust. And so I pass to the sixth Reason further to
prove, that the dead bodies of men which now are asleep in the dust of the
earth, shall awake, live and be raised again from the dead; which is,

Reas. 6. Sixthly, Because Daniel further confirms the truth of this saying;
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt, Dan. 12.2. In
this text there is these two things considerable; the first is, that such as
sleep shall awake; and Secondly, the place where that they sleep, and that is
in the dust; and Thirdly, that it is not meant spiritually, that is to say, to
awake out of a state of a sleep of sin to Righteousness, because some of those
that awake, do awake to everlasting shame and contempt; which cannot be taken
in a spiritual fence; for I hope no man is so void of understanding, as to
think, that such as awake out of sin, and stand up from a spiritual death, that
they awake to everlasting shame and contempt; but some of those that do awake
Daniel says, do awake to everlasting shame and contempt; which shows, that
those that die and sleep in the dust, that the very same shall arise again,
even that which sleeps both of good and bad, some to everlasting Joy, and some
to shame and everlasting contempt: which clearly proves, that the dead bodies
of such as sleep in the earth, shall (even they themselves and not another)
arise. And thus I pass to the seventh reason, to prove the Resurrection; which
is,

Reas. 7. Seventhly, Because Saint Paul says, That the dead in Christ shall
rise first: Now this cannot be meant spiritually; first, because those that be
in Christ cannot be spiritually dead, that is to say, dead in trespasses and
sins; and secondly, if it should be Objected, that there may be dead branches
in the Vine, John. 15. then I answer, that such shall forthwith be cut out, and
have no privilege by Christ; but the dead in Christ spoken of both by Saint
Paul and Saint John, have privilege by being dead in Christ, which means the
death of the body, and the Resurrection of the body from the dead; that is to
say, the godly, even such as live and die in Christ, shall arise a thousand
years before the wicked; as you may see, 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16. compared with
Revel. 20.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And that this is no spiritual
Resurrection, but a Resurrection of the body, is plain; because it is that
which the Apostle is a speaking of in that place, as you may read, 1 These.
4.13, 14, 15, 16. In these words; I would not have you ignorant brethren,
concerning them that are a sleep, that ye sorrow not even at others that have
no hope; For if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, EVEN SO, (mark that)
them also that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him: For this we say unto
you by the word of the Lord, that we that are alive and remain unto the coming
of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are asleep; For the Lord himself
shall descend from Heaven, with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and
with the Trump of God; and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which
are alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the Air; and so shall be ever with the Lord. From whence we
may see clearly, that the Apostle is speaking of the Resurrection of the body;
for says he, If we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again; EVEN SO, them ALSO
that sleep, (the even so) implies, that as Jesus slept and rose again; even so
shall we sleep and rise again; and we may know, that the same body that was
crucified unto death, and was buried, even the same body, rose again; for so
says Christ (to Thomas) after his Resurrection, Come feel the Print of the
nails in my hands, and reach hither thy hand and feel my side, that is piersed;
so that we may see it was the same body, which was crucified, dead and buried,
which also rose again; even so shall our bodies, (even the self-same body)
arise out of the dust of the earth and come to Judgment. And so I pass to the
eight Reason, to prove that those that are now asleep in the dust of the earth,
shall arise from the dead; which is,

Reas. 8. Eighthly, Because Christ has proved it from the Scripture, and the
Spirit of God in his People have caused them earnestly to hope and wait for it;
and first that Christ has proved it, read Mat. 22.31, 32. in these words As
touching the Resurrection, (says Christ) of the dead, have you not read that
which was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God
of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the dead, but of the
living. In these words Christ is proving the Resurrection, in opposition to the
opinion of the Saduces, which held, that there was no Resurrection; but Christ
tells them, that they did err no knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God;
as much as if he should have said, if you had known the Scriptures, you would
have believed and acknowledged the Resurrection; for they bare their Testimony
to the truth thereof; or if you had been well instructed about the power and
omnipotency of God, it would not have seemed to be a thing so incredilous unto
you, that God should raise the dead; for says he, God did tell Moses, that he
was the God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, and God is not the God of
the dead but of the living: but now Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is dead, as if
Christ should say, therefore God is not their God upon your account; O ye
Saduces: but God is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, for they live to him;
that is in his account, for God sees all things, past, present, and to come,
and calls things that shall be, as if they were, Romans 4. And so he sees all
men risen from the dead, and stand before him alive in a Resurrection; and thus
all live to him ( viz. in his account, and this is to be understood in this
text, as I before have said; so then there was a sort of men then, even as
there is now, which did deny the Resurrection, (of the bodies of the dead,
which are in the dust) but Christ opposes them, and proves; That there is to
be a Resurrection.

And Secondly, the Spirit of God in his people have caused them earnestly to
hope and wait for it, as you may read, Heb. 11.35, 36. in these words, Others
had trials of cruel mocking, and scourgings; yea moreover of bands and
imprisonments; and others were tortured, not accepting deliverance, that they
might obtain a better Resurrection. From these things which have been written,
you may see, that both Christ have proved, and the Saints earnestly hoped and
waited for the Resurrection, and indeed (and in truth) it was never questioned
by the godly, for when Christ tells Martha, that her brother Lazarus should rise
again; I know (says she) that my brother shall arise again, in the
Resurrection, at the last day: she never once questioned, but that her brother,
(even the same man Lazarus) should arise again at the last day; which shows,
that both Christ and the Saints does prove and acknowledge, that those that
sleep in the dust of the earth, shall arise, even the same bodies, (only
incorruptible) and come to Judgment. And so I pass to the ninth Reason, to
prove that those which are asleep in the dust of the earth, shall arise; which
is,

Reas. 9. Ninthly, Because otherwise were the Saints in a worse condition then
the wicked, for they bear about in their bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus,
and suffer deeply, and are accounted as sheep for the slaughter; and the wicked
they eat and drink, and take their pleasure: now if there be no Resurrection,
then the wicked were in the best condition; for if there were no Resurrection
then there would be no judgment, and then the word, remember for all this, God
will bring thee to judgment, were of no force; and I never yet read of a day of
judgment (since Adams being cast out of Paradise) to be till after the
Resurrection, and then no Resurrection, no Judgment; then I may say with Saint
Paul; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die; but that there is to be
a Resurrection, and that it will go ill with the wicked, read, John 5.28. Dan.
12.2. (and the like) But if there were no Resurrection, then the righteous were
in the worst condition, as you may read, 1 Cor. 15.16, 17, 18, 19. in these
words. For if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised; and if Christ be
not raised, your faith is vain, and ye are yet in your sins: Then they also
which are fallen asleep in Christ, are perished; if in this life only we have
hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable. From whence we see, were it
not for a Resurrection the wicked were in the best condition, and the Saints of
all men the most miserable because of their sufferings; but it is not so, for
they are in the most happiest condition. And thus I pass to the tenth Reason,
to prove that the dead (as before said) shall arise; which is,

Reas. 10. Because the Scripture says, that our vile bodies shall be fashioned
and made like unto Christ's glorious body; as says the Apostle, Phil. 3.20, 21.
in these words, For our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for
the Savior the Lord Jesus Christ; who will change our vile bodies, (OR RENEW,
OR REFORM, OR PVT IT INTO A BETTER ESTATE; AS THE WORD (...), or, Qui
reformabit corpus, WILL BEAR IT) that it may be fashioned like unto his
glorious body. From whence we may see, that the dead shall arise and have their
vile bodies renewed, or reformed, even changed into another estate and
condition, yet the same body, and made in fashion like to Christ's glorious
body: so then, it is not another body, but these our vile bodies fashioned, and
made like to Christ's glorious body; which proves, that the same body which
dies, the same body shall rise again, only corruption and imperfection taken
away; and this agrees with the whole current of Scripture. And thus I pass to
the Eleventh Reason, to prove, that such as are returned to dust, shall again
awake and come forth out of their graves unto judgment; which is,

Reas. 11. Eleventhly, Because the Scriptures says, That all things even the
whole Creation, shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and restored
into its primitive estate; only those excepted, who have voluntarily made
themselves miserable for ever; yet even they shall arise with such a body as
shall not die any more; (the greater will be their misery) And that there is to
be such a Resurrection, read these Scriptures, Acts. 3.19, 20.21. Rem. 8.20,
21. in these words, Repent ye therefore and be converted, that your sins may
be blotted out: when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of
the Lord; And he will send Jesus which before was preached unto you, whom the
heavens must receive until the times of restitution of all things; which God
has spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the world began; for
the creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him
(viz. Adam) who has subjected the same in hope; for we know that the whole
creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now; because the
creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the children of God: for even we our selves groan
within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our
bodies. From these Scriptures, and more that might be added (of this nature) it
does appear, that the bodies of the sons of men, shall be raised again from the
dead, and he restored into that estate wherein they were created; and also into
the glorious estate that the body of Jesus Christ himself is in; for when he
shall appear, we shall be made like him, and he has a body of flesh and bones,
which proves the Resurrection; for if it be not the same body that goes to the
dust which is raised again, but another body, then it is a new Creation, and
not a Redemption by a Resurrection; and then is not the Scriptures true, which
says, O Death I will be thy Death; and, Death shall deliver up her dead; but
God and the Scriptures is true, and all them that do deny that the dead bodies
shall again live, and arise out of the dust of the earth, are liars. And so I
pass to the Twelfth and last reason, (although I might add many more if time
would permit) to prove, That the dead which sleep in the dust, (both good and
bad) shall arise and come to Judgment; which is,

Reas. 12. Because the Scripture says, that although we must needs die, and be
as water spilt upon the ground, yet God has used a means that those that are
thus banished, should not be for ever expelled from him: for Christ has
destroyed him, that had power over death, which is the Devil; and has
delivered us, (by Resurrection) who by the reason of the fear of death were
kept in slavery all our life long. For nothing would be so troublesome to the
godly, as the thought of death, were it not for a Resurrection; but says the
Lord, I will ransom them from the power of the grave, I will redeem them from
death; O Death I will be thy Plague; O Grave I will be thy destruction: He will
swallow up death in victory, and the Lord will wipe away tears from all faces,
Hosea 13.14. Isa. 25.8. 2 Samuel 14.14. Heb. 2.14.

From these Reasons and Scriptures, (and many more which might be added,) we
may clearly see, That the dead, (namely such, as do (now and shall) sleep in
the dust) shall arise (both good and bad) and come to Judgment. And now
courteous Reader, seeing it is so, that the dead (as before said) must arise
and come to Judgment, be exhorted to take up that good resolution, with (the
holy man) Job 14.14. which says, If a man die shall he live again, then all
the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come, giving thanks
always to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy, has begotten us again unto a lively hope, by the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ from the dead; to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled,
that fades not away. Therefore, gird up the lines of thy mind, waiting for
that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; who will
change our vile bodies, and fashion them like unto his glorious body, according
to his (promise and) mighty working; whereby he is able to subdue all things
unto himself; who has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to
light. To whom be praise and glory, for ever and ever, Amen, 1 Pet. 1.3. Phil.
3.20, 21. 2 Timothy 1.10.

Secondly, take this word of advice by way of Caution; (which is) take heed and
beware of giving heed to such as do deny the Resurrection; of whom there is two
sorts now in our days, as there was in the Apostles days; the one sort is
like unto the Saduces, Mat. 22.23. which deny, that there is any Resurrection,
Angels or Spirits, ( viz. God or Devil) Heaven or Hell, of that sort is the
Ranter and his adherents; and such like Athiestical Spirits. And the other, are
like unto HYMENEVS and PHILETVS, 2 Timothy 2.17, 18. who say, that the
Resurrection is already past; whose words eat as does a canker; and of this
sort is the Quakers, who does affirm, that he is already risen from the dead,
and in the Resurrection, and so the Resurrection is past to him; who denies
iniquity in (words in) the history, and yet heaps up iniquity upon iniquity in
the mystery. And these are the two sorts which may fitly be compared unto the
Sect of the Saduces, and to Hymeneus and Phyletus; and I do not report the
things whereof I write by hearsay, but from their own mouths, (the more is the
pity and to be lamented.) These two sorts differ in manners or conversation,
but very little in Judgment, (in point of doctrine) unless it be in that of
conversation (as before said) the which if they had the conversation of Angels,
and yet so corrupt in principle, the Scripture declares them to be in a cursed
and miserable condition, Gal. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Col. 2.18, 19. Acts. 3.23, 24. And
indeed the conversation of many of them, is bad enough, although they disfigure
their faces, and seem unto men (to fast from sin and) to be more righteous then
others; yet they have been seen to want that special duty of prayer in their
families, and giving thanks in the presence of their Families for their food;
(which God has bestowed on them) although Christ and the Apostle, did not
neglect to do their duty in that case, to lead us an example; but no more as to
this, I shall leave it until the day in the which God will try the ways of the
sons of men, and discover all deceit and falsehood, of what nature soever it be.

But as touching the opinion about Gods holy Ordinances, by which he has
appointed to be worshipped in; is slighted and rejected by them, as
water-Baptisme, and eating of Bread, and drinking of Wine, (solemnly
celebrated) to set forth Christ's death and a participation of the benefit
thereof; with the slightings of forms, as they call them, although God delight
in nothing which is out of form and order: as the host of Heaven and earth does
declare, who when God found them without form, (and void) did by his word put
them in form and order, and gave decrees to the Sea, and ordinances unto the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, and they keep them: so that God delights in form and
order, and also is a God of order in all the Churches of the Saints; hence
Saint Paul commended form, Romans 6.17, 18. in these words, But ye have obeyed
from the heart, that form of Doctrine which was delivered unto you, being
therefore made free from sin, ye became the servants of Righteousness, etc.
From whence you may see, That those men which do slight and deny forms in our
days, have not received that Spirit which was in the Apostle, but another
Spirit, even the Spirit of error; although it strive to transform it self into
an Angel of light, that thereby it may deceive the hearts of the simple; for
men are got to this height of wickedness in the mystery, as to think that they
comprehend all things, and so consequently are Gods; but they shall die like
men, for their breath is in their nostrils: yet talk of what you will, (almost)
it is in them, (as they say) as the first Adam, and the second, and God; and
also the Serpent slain within them, the tree of life, and the tree of knowledge,
the judgment seat, Heaven and Hell, Mount Zion, and the new Jerusalem; the two
witnesses; and what not! they have comprehended all these things, as they say;
but alas, they die, and in the very same time their thoughts perish, and they
are chased and gone, like a vision of the night: Mark one piece of horrible
pride of Spirit which is in them, they will not allow the holy Scriptures to be
called the word of the Lord, neither do they exhort and press men to be
diligent to read and keep the things contained therein; but their fraughty
books, must (some of them) bear the Title of the word of the Lord, to the world
and earthly men, and the like, so that he that sees but very little, may see
them to be the men before spoken of, which shall deny all that is worshipped,
as God, showing themselves that they are God; O horrible pride, and yet
pretended humility, this is ungodliness in a mystery; I shall not enter upon
the particulars of their bottomless opinion; first, because it is not my task
at this time; and secondly, because time also (at present) will not give leave
in reference to other occasions; I only hinted at these few things, to caution
the courteous Reader, to take heed and try well, what doctrine he does receive
before he receives it.

And as touching the Resurrection of the body (even the same body) out of the
dust, thou have heard already proved, but peradventures some may object and say.

Object. That flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven.

Answ. To that and such like Objections I briefly answer and say, That this no
whit contradicts, that men (after they be risen) shall be flesh, blood, and
bones; if we consider that the same Apostle opens the meaning of his words in
the very next verse, by saying, neither does corruption inherit incorruption;
showing, that his meaning is, that that corruption of flesh and blood, or flesh
and blood corrupted, shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, until that
corruption has put on incorruption: so then, while it is corrupted flesh and
blood, it cannot enter into the kingdom of Heaven, for no corrupt thing shall
come there; yet notwithstanding man, which is flesh and bone, is at this time
in Heaven, and so shall many more after the Resurrection inherit that glory,
and yet shall be flesh and bones, for man was created so at the first, before
he was corrupted, and shall be so (namely flesh and bone) after his corruption
is taken away; for when he cease to be flesh and bone, then he will cease
also to be man, unless man can consist and have a being without flesh and bone,
which cannot be: Moreover the text it self may be read (and does well bear it)
thus, For this I say unto you brethren, that the corrupt nature or infirmity
(OF MAN) cannot enter into the kingdom of God. For so the Original will bear
it from the word ((...),) and being so read, it lies without Objection, for I
have ever affirmed, that the corruption or infirmity of man, shall not enter
into the kingdom of God, but shall be taken away before that time.

And where it is said, That that which thou sowest, thou sowest not the same
body that shall be, but God gives it a body as pleases him.

To which I answer and say, that it is true, it is not the same body which is
sown in respect of corruption, for the text says, that it is sown in
corruption, and it is raised in incorruption; and so it is true in that sense,
that the Apostle speaks of, that is, it is not the body of corruption which is
raised, although every seed shall have its own body, only the corruption taken
away; and this is the meaning of the Apostle in this place.

Object. And as touching that objection spoken by Job 7.9. in these words, As
the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, so he that goes down to the grave
shall come up no more.

Answ. To which I answer and say, That these texts of Scripture, are the most
material ones that I know of, whereby the Resurrection may be denied, although
some other seem to show a color unto it; and that we may see that this
Scripture intends no such thing as (some would have it to do even) to deny that
the same body shall arise, and enter into the kingdom of God; read the next
verse, and that will show you that Job means, that men which die shall rise no
more so as to be known as men after the flesh; as men that have taken a great
journey, and be long absent, do return and possess their houses and
habitations, but man shall not so arise as to possess his former house or
habitation; and this appears to be Jobs meaning, as from verse the 10. in these
words, He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him
any more. So then, this 10 verse expounds Jobs meaning in the 9 verse, or
otherwise Job sadly contradicts himself; so that we cannot tell when he speaks
the truth, for he does frequently declare the Resurrection of the body, as in
Chapter 14.12. and 14. Chapter 19.26, 27.

These things considered, I shall only add a Use of Comfort to those that do
believe, that all that are asleep in the dust shall come to a Resurrection; to
receive what they have done in the body, whether good or evil; and being
persuaded thereof, do wait all their days in the right way of the Lord, until
their change come, even to such the Scripture speaks much comfort, for they
shall be exalted to inherit the earth, in the morning of their Resurrection,
they shall have dominion over the wicked, and they shall be as ashes under the
soles of their feet, when those that have walked wisely shall shine as the
Firmament, and they that have turned many to righteousness as stars for ever
and ever; therefore know, that although the wrath of man may (possibly) lay
thee in the dust, yet from thence the Lord will bring thee, and set thee with
Princes, and put a Crown of Righteousness upon thine head, and make thee
inherit the throne of glory, Psalm. 37.34. and Psalm. 49.14, 15, 16. Dan. 12.3,
4. Mal. 4.2, 3. 1 Samuel 2.8. 1 Pet. 5.3, 4, 5. 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8. Revel. 14.12,
13. Chap. 20.5, 6, 7, 8.

And thus I pass from this subject of Discourse* and come to the next, which
is, The love of God to all men, in giving of his Son to bring them to a
Resurrection, and after that to an eternal weight of glory, if they sell it not
for the pleasure and glory of this present world, as Esau sold his
birthright, for a mess of pottage, and so he received not the blessing.

Gods Love to Mankind DISCOVERED.
AS touching Gods universal Love to the Sons of Men, (or the whole lump of
Mankind) I need not spend much time about, for the Scriptures are full, and
the truth thereof is written, (as I may say) in Capital Letters, so that he
that runs may read and see the truth thereof; and therefore I shall be brief as
to this Subject of Discourse: and in order to the clearing of it, I shall lay
down this Position, as the groundwork to the Discourse; which is,

That Gods Love was so great to the Lump of Man kind, ( viz. the whole World)
that he gave his only begotten Son to Death, to bring all men to a
Resurrection, and to an Eternal weight of Glory; (the which glory all men shall
enjoy) if they sell it not by their sins. Or thus, (in short) Jesus Christ
tasted death for every Man and Woman.

And that this is truth, read these few Scriptures, (as first) Heb. 2.9. in
these words, We see Jesus who was made a little lower then Angels for the
suffering of death was crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of
God should taste death for every man.

From whence we may learn, that Jesus Christ did die for all men, or the whole
lump or quantity of man, as it is rendered from the Greek Phrases, (...), and to
this agrees the saying of our blessed Savior, written by Saint John 3.16, 17.
in these words, God so loved the WORLD (mark the word WORLD) that he gave his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting life; for God sent not his Son into the WORLD to condemn the WORLD,
but that the WORLD thorrow him might be saved. To which add that which is
written, 1 John 2.1, 2, 3. in these words, My little children, these things I
write unto you, that ye sin not; but if any man sin, we have an Advocate with
the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation of our sins;
and not for ours only, but also for the sins of the WHOLE WORLD. From these
Scriptures, with many more that might be added, it does evidently appear, that
Jesus Christ did die for every man; and yet further to confirm this truth, I
shall prove it by sircumlocution, or plain reasons drawn from the Scripture;
and the first is,

Reas. 1. First, Because God has sworn by himself, (because he could swear by
no greater) that he desires not the death of such as die, or of the wicked;
but tells them that their destruction is of themselves, as Ezekiel. 33.11. in these
words, Say unto them, as I live says the LORD GOD, I have no pleasure in the
death of the wicked, but that he would turn from his wicked ways and live;
turn ye, turn ye, from your evil ways, for why will ye die O house of Israel;
And woe be to thee Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean, when shall it once
be? Thy destruction is of thy self, thy wickedness has procured it, Jer.
13.22, 27. From whence we may see, that God is so far from decreeing any man's
damnation simply of his own will, unless in reference to their rejecting of
grace tendered, that he has entered into an oath before the sons of men, not to
desire their ruin, unless they resist his spirit in the tenders of grace; which
shows that he gave his Son to die for such as perish; for without blood there
is no remission of sins: so then there cannot be a tender of the Gospel (which
is remission of sins) to such for whom Christ dyed not; but more of that anon,
I pass at present to the second Reason, to prove that God gave Christ to die
for all men to bring them to a Resurrection and glory, as before said; which is,

Reas. 2. Secondly, Because as God has sworn not to take pleasure in the death
of them that die, so he has also said, that it is good and acceptable in his
sight, and well pleasing to him, to have all men have Salvation; and to that
end Christ dyed as you may read, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. in these words, I
exhort therefore first of all, Supplications, Prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for ALL MEN; for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who
would have ALL MEN to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: For
there is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus;
who gave himself a ransom for ALL, to be testified in due time. From whence we
may see, that (first) as God has sworn by himself, that he desires not the
death of the wicked. Secondly, that he also (says he) would have all men
saved; and that they might be saved, he says that he gave Christ to be a
ransom for all men; so that from these two reasons, you may see Gods love to
all men extended; and I pass to the third Reason; which is,

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Because God has commanded the Gospel to be declared to all
men, and condemns such as believe it not; and the Gospel is to be understood
good news, (viz.) remission of sins and salvation by Christ's blood; and
commands men to believe it upon pain of eternal wrath: But if Christ did not
die, for every man, to whom the Gospel is commanded to be preached, then a lie
is commanded to be preached to the greatest part of men, and they damned
because they believe (and receive) it not; the which to say, were ridiculous
and blasphemy: But that you may see, that this is true, consider well, that if
there be a Command given to Christ's Ministers to preach the Gospel to every
man, (that is to say in plain english, that Christ dyed for their sins and rose
again for their Justification) and yet Christ did not die for every man, then
this is to command a lie to be preached, to the greatest part of men, and they
damned for not believing of it, if Christ only dyed for a few as some say, the
which so to say is wickedness; and then also those that are damned for not
believing the Gospel, are damned for not believing a lie; and how wicked such
an opinion is, I shall leave all to Judge who know any thing of God; And that
you may see, that the Gospel is to be preached to every creature, and men to
believe it upon penalty of condemnation, read Mark 16.15, 16. in these words,
And he said unto them, go ye into ALL THE WORLD, (mark that) and preach the
Gospel to EVERY CREATVRE, (mark that) he that believes and is baptized, shall
be saved; but he that believes not, shall be damned. From whence we may see,
that the Gospel, namely, the good news of Salvation through Christ's blood, is to
be preached to every man, and whosoever does not believe it, namely, that there
is life and remission of sins for them, through Christ's blood, are to be damned,
because they make God a liar, John 3. Chap. 8. 1 John 5.10. These well
considered, shows that God did give his Son, (the Lord Jesus) to die for
every man as before said; and so I pass to the fourth Reason; which is,

Reas. 4. Fourthly, Because it is very plain, that so many as were made sinners
by the first Adam, so many were made righteous by the second Adam; and it is
evident, that all were made sinners by the first Adam; Ergo, all are made
righteous (also) by the second Adam; for there is all set in oposition to all;
that is to say, so many (all) as was made sinners by Adam, so many (all) was
made righteous by Christ; and if so then it does follow undenyably, that God
gave Christ to die for every man; and that the premises are true, read the
words of Saint Paul, Romans 5.18, 19. which says; Therefore as by the offense of
one, judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness,
the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life; for as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, many be made
righteous. From these words we may see All set in oposition to All, and Many in
oposition to Many, which proves what has been before said; and thus it is
undeniable, that God did give his Son to die for all men.

Reas. 5. Fifthly, it further appears, that God has given Christ to die for
all, because that God did invite and exhort such to salvation, which upon the
rejecting of grace are appointed to reprobation, as is evident, Prove. 1.22, 23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Mat. 23.37. in these words, How long ye simple ones,
will ye love simplicity, and the scorner delight in scorning, and fools hate
knowledge; turn ye at my reproof, behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, I
will make known my mind unto you: because I called and ye refused, I stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would have none of my reproof: I will also laugh at your calamity, and mock
when your fear comes; Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer,
they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me; for that they have hated
knowledge, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. Jerusalem Jerusalem, thou
that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, as a Hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, but ye would not; Behold I leave unto you your houses
desolate; For the kingdom of heaven is like to a certain King, which made a
marriage for his son, and sent sorth his servants to call them that were bidden
to the wedding, but they would not come; Again he sent forth other servants
saying, tell them that are bidden, behold all things are prepared, come unto
the marriage; but they made light of it, and went their ways one to his farm,
and another to his Merchandise, and the remnant took his servants, and
entreated them spitefully and killed them; And when the King heard thereof, he
said, none of those that were bidden shall taste of my supper, but was wrath
with them, and sent forth his armies and destroyed those murderers, and burnt
up their Cities, Mat. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. compared with Luke 14.24. From
whence we may see, that those that never shall partake of that rich benefit
which is held forth in this Parable, ( viz. glory) because they rejected it;
yet notwithstanding it was once offered unto them and also intended them, if
they had not rejected it; but thankfully received it; for take notice, God
never yet offered that to any man, which he intended him not, if he would
accept of it and receive it, for God offers nothing by way of complement, but
all his words and works are done in truth, faithfulness, and righteousness; and
therefore cannot offer more then he has to give, or more then he does intend
to give, if persons do receive it when he offers it; which proves that
Christ did die for all men, and hence all men have the tenders of grace, and
such only perish who reject grace; and so I pass to the sixth Reason, to prove
that God gave Christ to die for all men, that they might attain a Resurrection
to life and glory, if they (like Adam or Esau) sell it not by sin; which is,

Reas. 6. Sixthly, Because those that are damned are charged with denying the
Lord which bought them; (mark that) and so heap upon themselves swift
destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. and if so, then it is evident, that Christ did
die for all men; to which I add this Argument.

That if Christ dyed for those that are saved, and those that are damned, then
he dyed for all men; But he dyed for those that are saved, and those that are
damned; Ergo, he did die for all men.

That he dyed for those that are saved none will deny, and that he did die for
those that are destroyed or damned, is also proved in these words, But there
was false Prophets amongst the people, even as there shall be false teachers
amongst you; who privily shall bring in DAMNABLE Heresies, even DENYING THE
LORD THAT BOVGHT THEM, and BRING UPON THEMSELVES SWIFT DESTRVCTION. From whence
we may see plainly, that some of them that the Lord has bought or purchased,
shall be found in Damnable ways, so as to deny the Lord that purchased them,
or bought them, and so heap unto themselves swift destruction; and that this
purchase is no other way, then but with Christ's blood, read 1 Pet. 1.18, 19
Heb. 10. And what punishment shall he be thought worthy of, who treads under
foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was
sanctified an unholy thing, and does despite to the Spirit of grace: We ought
to conclude that such are guilty of the body and blood of Christ by crucifiing
him again afresh, and putting him to open shame; so then there be some whom the
Lord has bought which will come to deny him and so perish; which shows that
Christ dyed for all men, for such as are saved, and such as perish, and that
man's destruction is of himself, and Gods love great to all men. And so I pass
to the seventh Reason, to prove that God gave his Son to die for all men, as
before said; which is,

Reas. 7. Seventhly, Because men that perish are charged with the neglect of
their Salvation, but if Christ never dyed for them, then there never was any
means or way of Salvation, and then it is an impossible thing to neglect it,
for it cannot be truly said, that man can neglect the attaining of that by
slothfulness, which was impossible to be attained with all his diligence; but
if Christ did not die for all men, then those whom he dyed not for, could not
either neglect, put away, or reject, their own salvation; but such as perish do
neglect, reject, and put away their own salvation; which shows, that Christ
did die for all men, and that there is sufficient means of Salvation to
accomplish the end thereof, Heb. 2.12, 13. Act. 13.46. And thus briefly, I pass
to the eighth Reason, and also hasten to the conclusion.

Reas. 8. Eighthly, Because God is no respector of persons, Romans 2.8, 9, 10.
Act. 10.34. 1 Pet. 1.17, 18. And therefore it does appear, that God did give
Christ to die for all men, or otherwise God of necessity must be a respector of
persons, for all men were created happy alike in the lines of Adam, or
otherwise grievous obsurdities would follow; and as all men were created alike
happy in Adam, so all men sinned alike in him; and now if God had given Christ
to dye but for a few of them, then was God a respector of persons, and then was
not the free gift and satisfaction as large as the transgression, then was not
the Serpents head broken; and if so, then was Christ an imperfect Savior,
which to say were blasphemy; but Christ is the Savior of all men, and
especially of such as do believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. that is, he has saved all men
from the power of the grave, and brought them under promise of life; and then
afterward those that sin and forfeit their bliss, yet if they believe in him
and humble themselves before him, he takes off that sin also by his
mediator-ship, under the law in types, and now in substance, Levit. 16.8, 9,
10. Heb. 9. Chap. 10. And so Christ is the Savior of all men; but without he
dyed for all men, he cannot be the Savior of all, for without blood there is
no remission of sins; which shows plainly, that God gave Christ to die for
all men. And so I pass to the ninth Reason, to prove that Christ dyed for all
men; which is,

Reas. 9. Ninthly, Because Christ is called the Lamb of God that takes away
the sins of the world; he is also said to give his life for the world, and to
bear the iniquities of all, that all thorrow him might be saved: which shows,
that God the father gave him to die for all men, and also that he did die for
all men; and thus I pass to the tenth and last Reason, to prove that Christ did
die for all men; which is,

Reas. 10. Tenthly, Because God will be clear of the blood of all men, and
prove to the Sons of men in the day of Judgment, that their destruction will be
of themselves; so that every mouth shall be stopped, and all tongues confess
that their not considering in their day the things that did belong to their
peace, is the cause of their eternal ruin; and that God did strive with them,
but they did resist him, and say to God, depart from us for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways, for we will walk every one in our own ways, and after
the immagination of our own heart: So then men perish not for want of the
tenders of grace, but because they reject Gods grace and counsel when it is
tendered, and will not come to him that they may have life; so then God did
send his Son to die for all men, to bring them to a Resurrection, and also to
an eternal weight of glory, if they sell it not by their personal sins; for he
did die for all that were dead, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. Secondly, he was Salvation to
all that did accept of it, to the end of the world, Isa. 42.1, 2. Thirdly, he
was a ransom for all men, 1 Timothy 2. Fourthly, has commanded that this good
news shall be declared unto all men, Mark 16.15. And finally, all preachers do
declare the same (in their preaching at one time or another) although they deny
it in private conference; but let God and his word be true, (and every man a
liar) that he may be just when he Judges; and thus I shall wind up all with
this Use of Encouragement.

Is it so, that Christ did die for all men, to set open a door of Salvation to
every man; then let every one that shall read and hear this news, be encouraged
to come to Christ and learn of him, to walk as he has lead him an example, and
follow his steps, and they shall find rest to their souls, Mat. 11.28. For the
Spirit and the Bride says come, and let him that hears say come, and let him
that is a thirst come, and whoever will, let him take off the water of life
freely, Rev. 22.17.

Peradventure some poor dejected soul may see and peruse these lines, and say
it is true, God is gracious and slow to anger and great in kindness, but it is
to the righteous, and I am a great sinner.

To thee O soul I say, in the name and fear of the Lord, that although God be
of too pure eyes then to behold iniquity, yet if thou now sees thy sins to be
thy burden, and does with purpose of heart turn to the Lord, there is a door
of Salvation set open unto thee, and mercy prepared for thee, and let not the
Devil take an advantage against thee, and make shipwreck of thee against any
of these two Rocks; (as I may say error, in the Sea) namely, that of Election
and Reprobation, by the which many a soul has been destroyed; as first by
persuading some that although they go or in sin, yet if they be elected, God
will have a time to call them out of it, (not knowing the manner of Gods call)
and so have took liberty to sin; and thereby have been lead captive by the
Devil at his pleasure, adding sin unto sin, until their iniquity has been
filled up to the full, and become their ruin.

Secondly, take heed of this rock, that is to say, let not Satan drive thee
into desperation by persuading of thee, that thou being a sinner and often
sinned against God, that thou art not an elect vessel, and then although thou
humble thy self never so much before God, yet there is no means of Salvation
for thee, because Christ has not dyed for thee, and therefore no Salvation; I
say, take heed of this rock, for it is very dangerous, for Satan has driven
some so hard upon it, that in despairing Gods love and mercy have become their
own executioners; but be thou instructed and know, that Christ has dyed for
every man, and that there is a door of Salvation set open to all men that they
may have life; for God desires not their death, but wills their life and
Salvation; therefore let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and turn unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to
our God, for he will abundantly pardon; for if there sins have been as scarlet,
yet he will make them as snow, and if as chrimson, he will make them as wool,
if they be willing and obedient: but if they be obstinate and rebellious they
shall be destroyed, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, Isa. 55.7. Chap.
1.15, 16, 17, 18. So then for sinners that turn to God there is mercy, and
Christ's death is the ground of the hope of mercy; but such as turn aside to
their crooked paths and wicked practices, the Lord will lead them forth with
the workers of iniquity; but peace shall be unto all such as turn to the Lord
in uprightness of heart, Jer. 3.1, 2, 3. Chap. 1.2, 3. Ezekiel. 33.11, 12. Luke.
15.6, 7, 8, 9. Time being precious with me, so as that I cannot enlarge my self
upon this Subject, and Subjects of this nature, by answering objections as
otherwise I would do, if I had time, as God should assist me, I shall in a
brief method, (namely by question and answer) answer the most material
objections, (that I at present mind) as touching this and such like Subjects,
and that briefly; and so to the first.

Question 1. What do you think of the point of Predestination, has not God
fore-appointed some to Salvation, and others to Damnation?

Answ. Yea God of old did appoint righteous men to Salvation, and wicked men,
even such as turn the grace of God into wantonness) for Damnation, John 2.3, 4.
although God never did appoint any man to be wicked; yet he has of old
foreseen wickedness, and also has appointed punishment for it.

Question 2. Has not God Elected one sort of persons to Salvation (before the
world was) from whence they cannot fall, and rejected another sort, which
cannot be recovered?

Answ. Nay, for then all did not fall in Adam, neither were all justified by
Christ; but all did fall by Adams sin, and all were justified by Christ's
righteousness, Romans 5.18. Mistake not, there is a twofold justification, I
shall not explain it at present, but read the text, Romans 5.18. Secondly, there
is no such thing, because that many times those that have been wicked, have
become righteous, and of bad have been made good; and also such as have been
righteous and good, have become wicked and bad, as the Angels which were once
good, are now bad; also Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.19, 20. and those
spoken of, 1 Timothy 5.12, and 15. who had condemnation, or were condemned because
they had forsook their first faith: and Saul had once the spirit of God, and
was beloved, and yet he became wicked by reason of his wickedness about the
business of the Amalekites; and the good spirit of the Lord left him, and he
was rejected; but to pass this and many such instances which might be added if
I had time; consider this, If God have elected one sort of men to Salvation,
from whence they cannot fall, (before the foundation of the world) and
reprobated another sort, that cannot be saved: Then,

First, Is not man's ruin from the Lord, if his decree were thus made before man
was made, which so to affirm, were to affirm that which the Scripture denies,
and so to put the lie upon God.

Secondly, if that Doctrine be true, then to what end is preaching, and the
like, for if the Elect were never preached unto, they cannot miscarry; for
their election stands sure, and their Salvation is certain, and if they have
all the preaching to in the world, it adds nothing unto them, for the end of
all means is Salvation, and that they have, whether they ever hear the sound of
the Gospel yea or nay; and therefore if that opinion be true, preaching is but
of very little use unto the Elect, for they should have had Salvation if they
had never heard of it.

And Secondly, it is no ways beneficial to the reprobate, because if he had
all the preaching unto in the world, it would do him no good, (according to
that opinion) because he could never be recovered out of that estate and
condition by it; so then that opinion is very dangerous; First, because it
makes Gods decree the author of sin, for where God decrees the end, he
decrees the means leading to the end.

Secondly, it makes the preaching of the Word of God of none effect, for the
Elect cannot perish if they be never preached unto, and the reprobate cannot be
recovered by all the preaching to in the world.

Thirdly, it destroys all christian assurance, and builds men upon
qualifications and not upon promises; for this reason,

Because if there be but a very small number elected, and they are not
distinguished by name, but by qualification, then no man can prove his election
but by his qualification, and that is to build up men in themselves, and not
upon free grace in a promise, and so their election is many times questioned,
when they are overtaken in temptation, and have not the fruits of election
appearing in them, especially when they consider how great enjoyments and
spiritual gifts, and heavenly tastes men may attain unto, and yet may not be in
the election.

And Fourthly, That opinion is the very fountain head (as I may say) of
uncleanness, for what is the plea of wicked men when they are reproved for sin;
in short thus, say they, if it had pleased God to have given me grace I should
have done as other men, but nevertheless if I be elected God will have a time
to call me, for it is not in my power to do good of my self; and if I be not
elected, it is not my striving and endeavors will do me any good; and by
reason of this corrupt Judgment, and corrupt mind, men give up themselves up to
walk in such courses, as the flesh and carnal mind lusts after.

Fifthly, If that opinion be true, that God has elected one sort and
reprobated another sort, and that before the world was, then the wicked are
damned for doing the will of God, as will plainly appear, for what God has
decreed to bring to pass, he does decree to do it by means; as first, to save
the elect through holiness, and to damn the wicked for their wickedness; and one
he melts and softeneth that he may yield and be obedient, and the other he
hardens, that he may be glorified in their destruction; and if God do harden
men's hearts to do wickedly, is it not plain, that it is the will of God they
should so do, for God works all things according to the counsel of his own
will; and then if so, that God harden them to do wickedly, and then deny them
because they do wickedly, does not God damn the wicked for doing his will, or
for the doing of what he appointed them to do: Let all Judge, for so say some,
that men are appointed of God unto wickedness and disobedience, from this
scripture, 1 Pet 2.8. But how that can be evil or disobedience, for men to do
what God has appointed them to do, (as yet) I know not.

And Sixthly, and lastly, If this opinion be true, then we may not blame the
wicked for any of their wickedness, but conclude that the fault is in him, (if
it be wickedness that they commit) that did decree it and appoint it to be
done: and thus God by this vain and wicked opinion is made the author of all
the wickedness which is committed; and how dangerous it is, I leave the reader
to judge, this short word premised; and pass to the next thing considerable;
although I would have answered some Objections about this point, but because I
find none material cited by my Antagonist, but that which I have answered in my
former Treatise; and also because my time is very precious at present, and
calls for brevity; and therefore I shall now come to speak to the last
Particular in order, which shall be the conclusion of this first part of my
book, which is about the Kingdom of our blessed Savior, and his Saints upon
earth, finding but little Objections by any urged against the Jews return out
of their captivity, and none cited by my Antagonist worth speaking to; and
therefore I now come to prove, That Christ and the Saints, shall possess a
Kingdom, and reign upon earth.

OF The Personal Reign OF OUR BLESSED SAVIOR AND HIS SAINTS UPON EARTH.
HEre is (comprehended) in this Subject of Discourse, such good news, as will
(doubtless) comfort the heart of every one that waits for the Lord Jesus Christ
to be revealed from Heaven: which is the glorious estate of Christ, and the
Saints upon earth, which has been foretold by the mouths of the Prophets, and
also of the Lord Christ himself, and his holy Apostles, that through their
words, together with the holy Spirit sent down from God into our hearts, (which
bears witness to the same truth) we might have strong consolation, through
laying hold upon the hope set before us, and therein wait for the Son of God to
be revealed from Heaven, who is heir of all things, even the world present, and
that which is to come; through whom (also) we have obtained (by promise) an
inheritance, being predestined to be made Kings and Priests, and to reign
upon the earth; And in order to the clearing of this truth, I shall lay down
this Point or Position; which is,

That Christ and the Saints are to receive and possess a Kingdom, and reign
upon Earth.
This I shall prove, first by plain text of Scripture; and secondly, by reasons
drawn from Scripture; and thirdly, the manner how Christ shall take the
Kingdom; fourthly, a few words as touching the distance of time between the
Resurrection of the just and unjust; fifthly, the place of Christ's Kingly seat;
sixthly, how long Christ shall reign, and the estate and condition of the
wicked in the time of Christ's reign.

And first to prove, That Christ and the Saints are to receive a Kingdom, and
to reign upon earth; which is clear from the Scriptures proved, for so says
the Prophet, Dan. 7.13, 14, 18. in these words, And I saw in the night a
vision, and behold one like the son of man came with (or in) the clouds of
Heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before him;
and there was given him dominion and glory, and a Kingdom, that all People,
Nations and languages, should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, but the Saints of the most high shall
possess the Kingdom for ever. From these words, we may safely conclude, That
Christ and the Saints shall receive and possess a Kingdom, and reign, for so
says the Prophet Isai. 32.1. in these words, Behold a King shall reign in
righteousness, (meaning the Christ,) and Princes, (meaning the Saints) shall
rule in Judgment: To which also agrees the words of the Prophet Obadiah,
(verse. 21.) which says, And Saviors shall come upon Mount Zion, and Judge the
mount of Esau, when the kingdom shall be the Lords. And that this kingdom
shall be upon earth, and the Saints reign with Christ there, you may take
notice of these Scriptures for the proof, and so I shall pass to the reasons
drawn from Scripture: the Scriptures are thus read; He makes war to cease to
the ends of the earth, he breaks the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder: be
still and know that I am God, I will be exalted amongst the heathen, I will be
exalted in the earth; Clap your hands all ye people, shout to God with the
voice of triumph, for the Lord most high is exalted, he is exalted, he is a
great King over all the earth, he shall subdue the people under us, and the
nations under our feet: God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of
a trumpet; sing praise to God, for God is the king of all the earth; God
reigns over the heathen, for the shield of the earth belongs unto the Lord:
for behold he comes to Judge the earth the Lord reigns; and bring those mine
enemies that will not that I shall reign over them, and slay them before me,
Psalm. 98.9. and Psalm. 99.1. Luke. 19.14, 27. From these words we may see, that
Christ and the Saints shall receive and possess a kingdom, and reign upon the
earth; for it is plain from what has been said, that the shield of the earth
belongs unto Christ, and that he shall reign upon earth, the which as yet he
never did, but was as a servant unto all men when he was upon earth, and did
also suffer, which is a vast difference from reigning; but he shall take to
himself his great power, and reign, and so shall his people, as they now suffer
with Christ, or for Christ, so they shall reign with him; and that their reign
shall be upon earth, read the word of the Lord for the proof of it, as you may
find it written by Saint John, Rev. 5.9, 10. in these words, And they sang a
new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals
thereof, for thou wast slain and have redeemed us to God, out of every kindred,
and tongue, and people, and nations; and have made us unto our God, Kings and
Priests, and we shall reign upon earth. From these words, (with the precedent)
we may see, that Christ and the Saints shall receive a kingdom, and reign upon
earth, the which proves the truth of the Point before laid down, (viz.) That
the reign of Christ and his People, etc.

But as touching the reign of Christ and his people, many will consent to, but
withal say, it is to be understood either spiritual here, or otherwise in
Heaven.

To which I answer and say, That the Saints shall not reign while they live in
this mortal body is plain, because the Scripture says, that all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. And also, that
through many tribulations, we must enter into the kingdom of God; and if so,
then it is plain, that the Saints cannot be understood to reign here, because
here they are to fill up the sufferings that are behind of Christ; and persons
cannot be said to suffer and reign at one and the same time.

And secondly, there is not one Scripture that I at present know of, (nor I
believe none else) which says, that Christ and the Saints shall reign in
Heaven; but the Scripture says, that when the Mediator-ship shall be delivered
up into the hands of the Father, then shall the Son himself be in subjection
unto the Father, and then shall God himself be all in all: but it is plain, and
I shall make it yet more plain, that the Scripture says, That Christ and the
Saints shall reign upon earth. And now I shall come to give you the Reasons of
the Position or Point, before mentioned, viz.

That Christ with his Saints shall possess a Kingdom and reign upon earth; and
the first reason is,

Reas. 1. Because the Scripture says, it is a Kingdom under, and not a
kingdom in heaven, as you may read in the Prophecy of Dan. 7.27. in these
words, And the kingdom and dominion, and greatness of the kingdom, UNDER the
whole heaven, (mark that) shall be given into the hands of the people of the
Saints of the most high, whose kingdom is to be an everlasting kingdom, and
all dominions shall serve and obey him; From whence you may see, that there is
a day a coming, that Christ and the Saints shall receive and possess the
kingdom together, and reign under Heaven; and if it be under heaven, then it
does necessarily follow, that it will be upon earth; and this text agrees with
that which is spoken, by Dan. 2.34, 44. in these words; Thou saw till a
stone was cut out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet, that were
of Iron and clay, and brake them in pieces; and in the days of these Kings
shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and
the kingdom shall not be left unto another people, but it shall break in
pieces, and consume all these kingdoms, and shall stand for ever. And the stone
shall become a great mountain, and fill the whole EARTH, (verse. 35.) which
means, Christ and his people; from whence we may see, that the Kingdom that
Daniel speaks of, is to be upon earth, because he says, it was to fill the
whole earth; so then Christ and the Saints are to receive a Kingdom, and to
reign upon earth.

Reas. 2. Secondly, the second reason to prove, that Christ and the Saints
shall receive a Kingdom and reign upon earth; is, Because the Scripture says,
that Christ and the Saints shall rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and bruise
them like a Potters vessel; the which cannot be unless Christ and the Saints
receive a Kingdom and reign upon earth; for if the received opinion be true,
that all shall arise together at the last day, and at a moment, or in a short
time, one go to Heaven and the other to Hell; how then can Christ and the
Saints then rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron, and bruise them like a Potters
vessel; for so long as the Saints live in this world, they must expect to
suffer for Christ and the Gospels sake, as says Saint Paul, and Daniel; and
indeed many Prophets and Apostles, that through many tribulations we shall enter
into the kingdom of God, yea every one that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution: and as Daniel says, The same Horn, ( viz.
Antichrist) made war with the Saints, and overcame them until the Judgment was
set, and the time came that the Saints were to possess the Kingdom, Dan. 7.21,
25. Acts 14.22. 2 Timothy 3.12. And indeed the nigher to the end, there shall be
bating one another, and betraying one another, and the People of God shall be
hated of all men for Christ's name sake; and as Christ says, in this world you
shall have tribulation; for if they have persecuted me, they will also
persecute you; and this was the portion of the primitive Saints, and will be
the portion of the l^st also; therefore in this corrupt body they do not reign,
but the wicked rule them with rigor, but there is a time that Christ and the
Saints shall reign over them, and rule them with a rod of Iron, and bruise them
like a Potters vessel; which shows, that Christ and the Saints are to receive a
Kingdom, and reign upon earth.

Now that they are to rule all Nations, read Psalm. 2.8, 9. compared with Rev.
2.26, 27. (in Psalm 2.) the words are these, Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee, ask of me and I will give thee the heathen for thy inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession; Thou shall break them
with a Rod of Iron, and than shall dash them in pieces like a Potters vessel.
Thus you see the honor and dignity that God has given to his Son, namely, to
rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron; and this very honor has Christ given to
the Saints, as you may read, Rev. 2.26, 27. in these words, He that overcomes
and keeps my works to the end, I will give him power over the Nations, and he
shall rule them with a Rod of Iron, and burse them like a potters vessel, even
as I have received of my Father. Here we see the Scripture says, that Christ
and the Saints, shall rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron; which shows, that
Christ and the Saints, shall receive a Kingdom, and reign upon earth. And so I
pass to the third reason, why Christ and his Saints shall receive a Kingdom,
and reign upon the earth; which is,

Reas. 3. Because the Scripture says, that Christ and the Saints shall inherit
the earth; now to live on the earth, and to have it or possess it (as their own
inheritance) are two things; for Abraham's slaves lived in Canaan, but they had
not the land in possession; so was Abraham a sojourner in the land, that
afterward he was to receive for an inheritance or possession; even so it is
with us, we are strangers and sojourners in the earth, as was our fathers; and
yet shall have it given into our hands for an inheritance, when it is restored
into its glory; (I do not say we shall have no more, mistake not) For otherwise
the first Adam lost some happiness or soverainty that Christ never restores;
but that Christ and the Saints shall inherit the earth, read these Scriptures
diligently, which says, He ( viz. Christ) shall come down as rain upon the new
mown grass, as showers that waters the earth; and in that day shall the
righteous flowrish, and abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures; his
dominion shall be from Sea to Sea, from the rivers unto the ends of the earth;
Thus Christ shall come down and inherit the earth; They that dwell in the
wilderness shall bow before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust; yea all
Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him. Hence we see,
that Christ is to inherit the earth, and the Nations to serve him; and now you
shall see that the Saints shall inherit the earth also, and that Kings shall
bow before them, and they shall bind them in chains and fetters of Iron, for so
says the Scripture, Blessed are the meek for they shall inherit the earth; and
the high praises of God be in their mouths, and a two edged sword in their
hands, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishment upon the people;
to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with fetters of Iron; to
execute upon them the Judgment written; this honor has all the Saints, (mark
that) praise ye the Lord; therefore wait upon God and keep his ways, and he
will exalt thee to inherit the earth, when the wicked are cut off, thou shall
see it; For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be, ( viz. bear rule)
but the meek shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the abundance
of peace; for evil doers shall be cut off, but those that wait upon the Lord
shall inherit the earth. Hence we see, that Christ and the Saints, are to
inherit the earth, and to exercise authority in government over Kings, and this
honor is not peculiar to a few of the Saints only; but it belongs to all of
them, even to the beggar upon the dunghill; for this honor has ALL the Saints,
praise ye the Lord, Psalm. 149.8, 9. Psalm. 72.5.6, 7, 8, 9. Psalm. 37.9, 10, 11.
Mat. 5.5. From which reason and Scriptures appears plainly, that Christ and
the Saints are to receive a Kingdom and reign upon earth. And so I pass to the
fourth reason, to prove that Christ and the Saints shall receive a Kingdom, and
reign upon earth; which is,

Reas. 4. Because God has promised to restore the Kingdom to Israel, and their
Judges as at the first, which were men that judged them in righteousness, even
holy men; and Christ shows us, that he and those that obey him, are to be
Judges over the twelve Tribes of Israel; now this is not to be understood in a
spiritual sense; that is to say, that there were to be some of the twelve
Tribes converted, and Christ to rule over them; for hear we see the Saints
shall judge them, that is meant be governors, as the Judges at the first; which
cannot be taken in such a sense, for the Saints are not to exercise authority
one over another (as considered in one and the same body) as says Christ, The
Lords of the Gentiles exercise authority, and they that are cheef bear rule;
but amongst you it shall not be so; but he that is greatest let him be your
servant; But that the Saints with Christ shall receive a Kingdom and judge the
twelve Tribes, read Luke 22.28, 29, 30. in these words, Ye are they that have
continued with me in my temptations, and I appoint unto you a Kingdom as my
father has appointed unto me; that ye may eat and drink with me at my table in
my Kingdom, and sit upon Thrones Judging the twelve Tribes of Israel: And (as
before said) this honor shall all the Saints have, and therefore says Saint
Paul (to the Corinths,) Know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world, 1
Cor. 6.2, 4. Luke 22.28, 29, 30. Isa. 1.26. These Scriptures with many more
that I could add (only I study brevity) proves; that Christ and the Saints are
to receive a Kingdom upon earth, and reign and Judge the Tribes of Israel. And
so I pass to the fifth reason to prove, that Christ and the Saints are to
receive a Kingdom, and reign upon the earth; which is,

Reas. 5. Because the Scripture says, that the Kingdoms of this world are
(to) become the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ, and he to take his great
power and to reign; and it is a true and a faithful saying, that those that
suffer with Christ, shall reign with him: but to prove that the Kingdoms of
this world, shall become Christ's kingdom, and he to take his great power and
to reign, read Rev. 11.15, 16, 17, 18. in these words, And the seventh Angel
sounded, and there was a great voice in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this
world, are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall
reign for ever and ever; and the four and twenty Elders which sat before God
on their seats, fell upon their face and worshipped God; saying, we give thee
thanks O Lord God almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come; because thou
have taken to thee thy great power, and have reigned; and the Nations were
angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should be
judged; and that thou should give a reward unto thy servants, the Prophets,
and to the Saints, and to them that fear thy name small and great, and should
destroy them which destroyed the earth. From these words, we may see these
particulars laid down: First, that the Kingdoms of this World, are to be the
Kingdoms of Christ at the sound of the seventh trumpet; read my Vindication of
Zions Redemption and Original Sin; where you shall find the effect of the
seventh trumpet, the which at present I shall not speak to in particular; but
know that there is a set time, that the Kingdoms of this World, is to become
the kingdoms of Christ.

But peradventure some will say, was there a time when the Kingdoms of this
World were not Christ's.

I answer, yea, for although Christ was born King of the Jews, and by his
descent (according to the flesh) was to be King (as the Lord showed the wise
men that came from the East to worship him) yet Christ tells Pilate, that his
Kingdom was not (then) of this World, for he was first to suffer, and
afterward to receive a Kingdom and reign; so that there is a set time when
the Kingdoms of this World shall be given into the hands of Christ.

And secondly, the Nations were angry, and his wrath, and fury came up into his
face, and he took his great power and did reign. From whence we may see, that
although Christ never was without power, yet there is a set time for his
exercising of it, which is employed in the word, TOOK his great power and did
reign.

Thirdly, it is the time that the dead shall be judged, (that is the dead in
Christ) and then he shall give the reward to his servants the Prophets, and all
that fear his name small and great.

Fourthly, He will destroy them which destroyed the earth, and make war to
cease from the ends of the earth, and they shall beat their Swords into
Plow-shears, and their Spears into pruning hooks, for there shall be abundance
of peace so long as the Moon endures. So then there is a set time for Christ
to take his great power and to reign, and for the Kingdoms of this world, to
become the Kingdoms of our Lord and his Christ. From whence we may see, that
Christ and the Saints are to receive and possess a Kingdom, and reign upon
earth; and so I pass to the sixth reason, to prove Christ and the Saints to
have a Kingdom, and reign upon earth; which is,

Reas. 6. Sixthly, Because the Tabernacle of God, shall be with men, and he
shall dwell with them; now this very word (the Tabernacle with men, and he
dwell with them) implies, that Christ shall come again, and dwell upon earth,
for so is the comparison that Christ made, while he was upon earth, that the
Son of man was like to a certain Noble man, that went to receive a Kingdom,
and to return, Luke 19. verse 11, 12, 13. From whence we may see, that Christ
is to return again as he also has said, I will come unto you again, and your
hearts shall rejoice, and your joy no man shall take from you; but as for this,
I shall show more at large anon, only that you may see, that the Tabernacle of
God shall be with men, and he dwell with them, read Rev. 21.3. in these words,
And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold, the Tabernacle of God
is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God
himself shall be with them, and be their God. O let the Nations be glad, and
sing for joy, for thou shall Judge the people righteously, and govern the
Nations upon the earth; (Selah.) Then shall the earth yield her increase, and
God even our God, shall bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him;
for the Lord shall be King over all the earth. From these Scriptures we may
see, that the Lord is to dwell with men, even to come down and dwell with them;
it is not said, that man shall dwell with God, implying a removing of their
place, but the Tabernacle of God to be with men, and he to dwell with them;
implying, that God will remove his habitation.

But peradventure some may say, will the Lord come and dwell with us upon a
corrupt carnal earth?

To which I answer, and first, Christ did dwell with his Disciples upon the
earth, and eat with them after his Resurrection, (what will that teach us,
weigh it well.) But secondly, the earth then shall be more pure then the
Heavens are now, for the earth shall be clean in his sight, and very good as he
at first made them; when the restorer shall have restored all things, for then
the curse will be taken away; but as says Eliphaz, Job 15.15. The heavens are
not clean in his sight; I might speak of Gods dislike of it by reason of the
Angels transgression.

But you will say, there shall be a new heaven as well as a new earth.

I answer it is true, where ever Gods seat is, there is Heaven, but Gods seat
shall then be upon earth in Jerusalem, where he was shadowed out of old, and
hence Jerusalem is called (by the Prophet, Isa. 65.17, 18, 19.) the new Heaven,
in these words, Behold. I create a new Heaven, and a new Earth, and the former
shall not be remembered, nor come into mind; but be you glad and rejoice for
ever, in that which I create; for behold I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and
her people a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem and joy in my people; and the
voice of weeping shall be heard no more in her, nor the voice of crying. From
these words we may see, what is to be understood by the new Heaven and new
Earth, spoken of in the 21 Chapter of the Revel. and what is to be understood
of the Tabernacle of God being with men, and he to dwell with them, even the
Lord of Hosts in his holy mountain at Jerusalem; And Saviors shall come upon
mount Zion, ( viz. Saints) to Judge the mount of Esau, when the Kingdom shall
be the Lords: and so I pass to the seventh Reason, to prove that Christ and the
Saints shall receive a Kingdom, and reign upon earth; which is,

Reas. 7. Seventhly, Because Christ has commanded us to pray for it, even that
his Kingdom might come, that his will might be done in Earth as it is in
Heaven; For there is a time coming, that it shall be so, and the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the Lord, as water covers the Sea, when the Law shall
go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; now till that day,
there will be weakness and imperfection amongst the godly, that the will of God
sometimes will be opposed and resisted, but at that time there shall be no sin
or disobedience amongst the godly; for if they seek for sin in Judah, there
shall be none found; for they shall defile themselves no more with any of their
detestable things; for all the ends of the earth shall remember and turn unto
the Lord, and all the kindreds of the Nations, shall worship before thee, for
the Kingdoms is the Lords, he is the governor amonst the Nations, Psalm. 22.27,
28. Ezekiel 37. Matthew. 6.10. Micah 4. From hence we may see, that Christ is to
have a Kingdom, and reign and govern the Nations upon the earth, at which time
his will shall be done upon earth, as the Angels do it in Heaven; and this
Kingdom also is the Saints, it being the good pleasure of the Father, to give
it unto them, as says Christ, Luke, 12.32. So then Christ and the Saints are
to receive a Kingdom and reign upon earth. And so I pass to the eighth reason,
to prove Christ and his Saints to reign upon earth; which is,

Reas. 8. Eighthly, Because the Scripture says, that God will raise up unto
David a righteous branch, ( viz. Christ) who shall have the Government upon his
shoulders, and execute Judgment and Justice in the earth; (mark that) and in
his days Judah shall be saved; (which yet is not) and Israel shall dwell
safely; and the Saints shall shout for joy, and the wicked shall be as ashes
under the soles of their feet; for God will make Zion (as) a threshing of Iron,
having teeth, which shall beat the mountains (of oposition) into dust; and the
little hills into powder. And that there shall be such a righteous branch rise
up to David, who shall give his people rest, and a Kingdom and dominion, that
they may reign with him upon earth, read these Scriptures and peruse them well,
Jer. 23.5, 6. in these words, Behold the day comes says the Lord, that I will
raise up unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute Judgment and Justice in the EARTH; in his day Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby he shall be
called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. From these words we see, that the Son of
David, (namely the Lord Christ our Righteousness) is to be King, and that over
all the earth, to execute Judgment and Justice therein, and at that time (or in
the days of his reign) Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely;
that is, God will restore (as before said) their Judges as at the first, ( viz.
the Saints) who will judge them in righteousness, for the shield of the earth
belongs unto the Lord; for so says the Prophet, Isa. 9.6, 7. in these words,
For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall
be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be called, Wounderful Counselor, the
mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace; of the increase of his
government and peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon
his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with Judgment and with Justice,
from henceforth even for ever. From whence we see, that if David's Kingdom was
upon earth, then Christ will have a Kingdom upon earth, for it is to be upon
the throne of his Father David, and that is the sure mercies of David, that he
was never to want a man to sit upon his throne; meaning that Christ was to sit
there; but more of that anon. Hence you may see, that Christ is to receive a
Kingdom and reign upon earth, and his Saints with him, for they are joint
heirs; that in suffering with him, they may also be glorified together, and
reign with him according to the Scriptures, Romans 8.17. 2 Timothy 2.12. And so I
pass to the ninth Reason, to prove that Christ and the Saints, shall receive a
Kingdom and reign upon earth.

Reas. 9. Ninthly, Because the Scripture says, That God will send Jesus
Christ, whom the Heavens must retain until the times of Restitution of all
things, ( Act. 3.19, 20, 21.) and that he shall take the Kingdom out of the
hands of the wicked, and give it into the hands of the Saints, according to
Daniels words, Chap. 7.14, 18, 22. where he as King, and they as Princes, shall
reign in righteousness, Isa. 32.1. and Kings shall bow before Christ and them,
and lick up the dust of their feet; and Kings shall minister unto them, that
is, serve them, or be servants unto them; peruse these Scriptures well, and so
I shall hasten to the tenth and last Reason, and also to a conclusion as to
this Subject of Discourse, the Scriptures are these, Psalm. 72.10, 11. Psalm.
68.29. Psalm. 110.5. Isa. 49.7, 23. Chap. 60.10, 11, 12. and thus it is written;
Princes shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands to
God, because of thy Temple at Jerusalem; Kings shall bring presents unto thee,
they that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before him, and his enemies shall
lick the dust: The Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents:
the Kings of Sheba, and Seba ( viz. Ethiopia and Arabia) shall offer gifts; Yea
all Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall serve him: The Lord
said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until I make thy enemies thy
footstool: the Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, (mark
that) rule thou in the midst of thine enemies: The Lord at thy right hand
shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, he shall Judge amongst the
heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies, he shall wound the head
over many countries; He has showed his people the power of his works, that he
may give them the Heritage of the Heathen, ( Psalm. 111.6.) For thus says the
Lord, the redeemer of Israel and his holy one, to him whom man despises; to
him whom the nations abhors, to a servant of rulers; Kings shall see and
arise, Princes also shall worship, because of the Lord that is faithful, and
the holy one of Israel, and he shall choose thee; and they shall bow down with
their faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy feet; and thou shall
know that I am the Lord, for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me. For
Kings shall minister unto thee, for the nation or Kingdom that will not serve
thee, shall perish, yea those nations shall be utterly wasted. From these
Scriptures (with many move that I might add if time would give way to it) we
may see, that God will take away the Kingdoms and Dominions out of the hands
of the wicked heathens, and give them into the hands of Christ and the Saints,
that they may possess the heritage of the heathen, (of which the taking the
land of Canaan of old was a type) and so Kings to fall down before them; this
honor shall Christ have, and all the Saints praise ye the Lord. And thus I
come to the tenth and last Reason that I shall give at present, (although many
more might be given) to prove, that Christ and the Saints shall receive a
Kingdom, and reign upon earth; which is,

Reas. 10. Because the Scripture says, that there is a world to come to be put
in subjection to Christ and the Saints, now the word WORLD, presupposes the
estate of things as at present in this world; namely, an inhabitance of men and
beasts, and of all creatures; so as Adam had all things put into subjection, so
(also) shall the whole creation be restored to their former dignity, Romans 8.
only the Serpent excepted, and such men as sell their inheritance by their
sins, as Esau did his: But because I must be brief, I shall now give the
Scriptures to prove, that Christ and the Saints are to have a world to come put
in subjection unto them, which cannot be meant in heaven; for I have already
showed, that they shall not have that subjected to them, but Christ and the
Saints at that time, ( viz. after the Mediator-ship is delivered up to God)
shall be in subjection themselves, as you may see, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27,
28. So then they having the promise of a world to come, to be put in subjection
under them, implies clearly, that Christ and the Saints shall reign upon
earth, or to have a world to come to reign in; or the Kingdoms of this world to
be altered and become the Kingdoms of Christ, and the Saints, as I before have
proved: but to the proof; that Christ and the Saints are to have a world to
come, subjected under them, read and peruse these Scriptures, and the Lord
grant to open thy understanding; the Scriptures are thus read unto thee, For
unto the Angels has he not put into subjection the world to come, whereof we
speak, but one in a certain place testified, saying, what is man that thou art
mindful of him, or the Son of Man that thou should visit him? Thou have put
all things in subjection under his feet; for in that he has put all things in
subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him; but now we see
not yet all things put under him, but he shall subdue the people under us, and
the Nation under our feet; For whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World,
or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours, and you
are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. And the Saints shall take the Kingdom and
possess it for ever, neither shall it be given into the hands of another people
for ever; from whence we may see, that Christ and the Saints are to receive a
Kingdom and Reign upon Earth. And so I pass to the next Particular, saying,
that I have given thee but a dram at present, for what I might give, (as to
this Subject of discourse) if time had not prevented me, but I hope that what
has been said here, being seriously read and weighed, will bring other
Scriptures into thy mind; and so citing the Texts before read unto thee, Heb.
2.5, 6, 8. Psalm. 33.8. 1 Cor. 3.22. Dan. 7.18. Chap. 2.44. I come to the third
particular, which is, the manner of the coming of the Lord, and the great
slaughter at the taking of the Kingdom.

The Battle of the great day.
As touching the Battle of the great day of the God Almighty. We find that the
Prophets (as well as the Apocalepse) do bear their Testimony unto the truth
thereof, so that I need not use much circumlocution or argument to prove it,
yet in order to the clearing of the matter, I shall lay down this point as a
ground of the dicourse; which is,

That there will be such a great slaughter at the coming of Christ (to take and
possess the Kingdom) that the very Fouls of the Heavens, shall be filled with
the flesh and blood of Captains, and great men of the earth.

For thus says the Prophet, Ezekiel. 39.17, 18. And thou son of man, thus says
the Lord God, speak unto every feathered foul, and to every beast of the field,
Assemble your selves, and come gather your selves on every side to my
sacrifice, that I do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the
mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood. Ye shall eat the
flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the Princes of the earth, and ye
shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my
sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you. And all the heathen shall see my
Judgment, that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them. Revel.
19.17. And I saw an Angel standing in the Sun, and he cried with a loud voice,
saying, to all the fouls that fly in the midst of Heaven, come and gather your
selves together unto the Supper of the great God. That ye may eat the flesh of
Kings, and the flesh of Captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of
horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all men small and great,
bond and free. From these Scriptures you may see, that there is to be a very
great slaughter at the time when the Lord Christ shall take his Kingdom to
Reign upon Earth; and several Prophets also bear their testimony to this thing,
as Isa. 34.5, 6. Joel 2.1, 2, 3, 4. But because of the want of time I pass to
the reasons of the point.

Reason 1. Because the Scripture says, that God will give him, ( viz. Christ)
the heathen for his inheritance, and he shall bruise them like a potters
vessel, Psalm. 2. and we also see what the Psalmist says of Christ's victory
over his enemies, Psalm. 110.5. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through
Kings in the day of his wrath, he shall Judge amongst the heathen, he shall
fill the places with the dead bodies, he shall wound the heads over many
Countries; for (says he) I will tread them down in my anger, and trample them
in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my garments, and I will
stain all my raiment, for the day of vengeance is in my heart, and the year of
my redeemed is come: from whence we see, that Christ is not only to take the
Kingdoms of the whole World into his hands, but also to trample the wicked as
ashes under the soles of his feet: and so I pass to the second reason.

Reason 2. Because the Lord has said, that the destruction of the Assyrian, (
viz. the man of sin or Antichrist) shall be like the slaughter of Midian at the
Rock Orib, Isa. 10.24, 25, 26. Therefore thus says the Lord God of Hosts, O my
people that dwell in Zion! be not afraid of the Assyrian, he shall smite thee
with a Rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee after the manner of Egypt;
for yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease, and mine anger in
their destruction, and the Lord of Hosts shall stir up a scourge for him,
according to the slaughter of Midian at the Rock Orib: now that you may
understand, what that slaughter was, you may read, Judge. 7.22. Where we find
that the Lord set every man's hand against his brother, so that they destroyed
each other, with a very great slaughter, and so it will be in the day of the
Lord, for when they see the great unavoydable judgments which shall overtake
them, and that the mountains will be too narrow a covering for them: then will
their indignation be kindled one against another, so as to destroy each other,
as you may see from that type in the days of Gideon, and also from the words
of the Prophet Ezekiel. 38.18, 19, 20, 21, 22. which says, and it shall come to
pass at the same time, when Gogg shall come up against the Land of Israel,
says the Lord God, that my fury shall come up in my face. For in my jealousy,
and in the fire of my wrath have I spoken: Surely in that day shall there be a
great shaking in the Land of Israel. So that the fish of the Sea, and the fouls
of the heaven, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that
creeps upon the earth, and all men that are upon the face of the earth, shall
shake at my presence; and the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep
places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground. And I will call for
a sword against him through all my mountains, says the Lord God; every man's
sword shall be against his brother. And I will plead against him with
pestilence, and with blood, and I will rain upon him, and upon his bands, and
upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain, and great
hailstones, fire and brimstome; Thus will I magnify wy self, (and so forth.)
from these words with the Prophet, Zach. 14.13. We may see that there will be a
very great slaughter upon Gogg and his Army, at the time when the Lord Christ
shall dispossess him of his great power and authority, and it will be like to
that slaughter of Gideon, which was called the sword of the Lord, and the sword
of Gideon, Judge. 7.18.

Reason 3. That there is to be such a great slaughter, is clear, because it is
to be like the great slaughter of Jehoshaphat upon Moab, Ammon, and Mount Seir,
(2 Chronicles. 20.22, 23, 24.) which was a very great slaughter, as you may read in
the fore cited text; and that this slaughter was a type of the slaughter that
shall be at the time when Christ shall take the Kingdom, you may see what Joel
says to this, Joel 3.1, 12, 13. For behold in those days, and in that time
when I shall bring again the Captivity of Judah, and Jerusalem, I will gather
all Nations, and will bring them down unto the valley of Jehoshaphat, and will
plead with them there; let the heathen be awakned, and come up to the valley of
Jehoshaphat; for there will I sit to Judge the heathen round about; proclaim ye
amongst the Gentiles, prepare war, beat your Plowshears into swords, and your
pruning hooks into spears, put you in the sickle for the harvest is ripe; and
the Angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vine of the
earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God, and the
winepress was trodden without the City, and blood came out of the winepress even
to the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six hundred furlongs,
Revel. 14.19, 20. From whence we may see, that there is to be a very great
slaughter in and amongst the Army of Gogg, and Magog; I could cite many such
like texts, only time suffers me not, but I pass to the fourth reason.

Reason 4. Because it is to be the year of vengeance, and recompense for the
controversy of Zion, that as the Church of God, and also the Jews have been
spoiled; so for a reward God will give their enemies into their hands, and they
shall spoil them by whom they were spoiled; so that Zion shall be as a
thrashing instrument of Iron, having teeth that shall beat the mountains into
dust, and the little hills into powder, for God will show his indignation upon
the Nations, and his fury upon the Armies, as says the Lord by the Prophet,
Isa. 34.1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 8. in these words, Come near ye nations to hear, and
hearken ye people: let the earth hear, and all that is therein, the world, and
all things that come forth of it. For the indignation of the Lord is upon all
nations, and his fury upon all their armies: he has utterly destroyed them, he
has delivered them unto the slaughter. For my sword shall be bathed in heaven:
behold, I will come down to Idumea, and upon the people of my curse to
Judgment. The sword of the Lord is filled with blood; it is made fat with
fatness, and with the blood of Lambs and Goats, with the fat of the kidneys of
Ramms: for the Lord has a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the
land of Idumea. For it is the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of
recompense, for the controversy of Zion. From whence we may see, that although
Gods people do suffer at present, and are to suffer until the day of
redemption; yet at that day, even when the Lord shall appear, although it be
the time of Jacobs trouble, yet they shall be delivered, and the wicked shall
come in their stead; that is, they shall then be in very great trouble; and so
I pass to the fifth Reason.

Reason 5. Because Gods determination is to gather the nations, and assemble
the kingdoms, that he may pour upon them the fierceness of his indignation;
and that it is to be at that day, read Isa. 63.1, 2, 3. Zeph. 3.9. Zech. 14.1,
2, 3, 4. Isa. 10.23. Ezekiel. 38.19. Micah 4.12, 13. Isa. 3.27, 28, 29, 30, 31,
32, 33. From these Scriptures, we may see the great slaughter that will be at
the time aforesaid, which indeed the Prophets have spoken fully to; and because
I have given you an account of it in my former Treatise, I shall pass it at
present, and come to the next thing, which is, a few words as touching the
distance of time between the resurrection of the just and unjust.

There is to be a distance of time between the resurrection of the just and
unjust.

As to the the proof of this subject of discourse, I shall be brief, omitting
circumlocution, and only give you plain proof of Scripture, (although I might
give many reasons.) And first we may see that our blessed Savior does affirm
it, (when he speaks of his second coming to raise the dead, and to take up the
quick into the clouds) saying that, Of that day and hour, knows no man, no
not the Angels in Heaven, but my Father only; but as the days of Noah was, so
shall be the coming of the Son of man, for in the days before the flood, they
were eating and drinking, marrying, and giving into marriage, until the day
that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not until the flood came and took them
all away; so also shall the coming of the son of man be. Then shall two be in
the field, the one SHALL BE TAKEN, and the other shall BE LEFT; two women shall
be grinding at the mill, the one SHALL BE TAKEN, and the other LEFT; two shall
be in one bed, the one shall be taken, and the other shall be left, Mat. 24.36,
37, 38, 39, 40, 41. compared with Luke 17.34. And that this speaks of the
taking up of the faithful that are alive, and leaving the unfaithful behind
upon the earth, and raising of the dead that are faithful, and leaving the rest
of dead behind that are unfaithful, is further cleared by the words of Paul, to
the Thessalonions. 4.15, 16, 17. which says, For this we say unto you by the
word of the Lord, that we which are alive, and remain unto the coming of the
Lord, shall not prevent them that are asleep. For the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the Archangel, and with the
trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise FIRST. Then we which are alive,
and remain, shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the
Lord in the air: and shall be for ever with the Lord. From these words we may
see the words of Christ are explained, where he says, two shall be in one bed,
the one taken, the other left, which is (says Paul) at his COMING, that such
as sleep in the Lord, will Christ arise FIRST, to bring with him, and also the
quick that are faithful shall be caught up with them, and the rest to be left
behind, and the rest of the dead also not to live again until a certain
juncture of time appointed of God, as you shall see more anon; but hence you
see without controversy, that the dead in Christ shall rise first, as well as
the faithful that are alive shall be caught away, and the other ( viz. the
wicked) left behind. And now I come to the next thing, which is, the last that
I shall say to this subject, that is, How long the just shall rise before the
unjust; which is the whole time of Christ's holding his Kingdom, which is, the
term of a thousand years; and that you may see the truth of this, read Revel.
20.4, 5, 6. in these words, And I saw thrones, and they that sat upon them,
and Judgment was given unto them, and I saw the souls of them that were
beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and the word of God, and they lived, and
reigned with Christ a thousand years; But the rest of the dead lived not again,
until the thousand years were fulfilled. This is the first resurrection: or
(indeed) as we may (fitly say) the Resurrection of the first, or just: that
both from Christ's words, and Paul's, and also Jesus, we may see that the godly
shall arise a thousand years at the least before the wicked to possess a
Kingdom, and to reign upon earth, the which glory God has prepared for those
that love and obey Christ, and walk in his Ordinances, and keep them to the
end; and thus I briefly pass to the fifth particular, which is the place of
Christ's Kingly Seat.

Fifthly, As to the place of Christ's Kingly Seat, the Scriptures seem to be
very clear in making of it out to be at the (former) beloved place Jerusalem,
which is to be built, and inhabited as of old time, the which in another
Treatise I have fully proved, that Zion and Jerusalem is the beloved place of
the Lord, where Christ's Throne is to be established, in the place where David's
Throne was, for so says the Scriptures as you may read, Isa. 9.6, 7. In these
words, For unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government
shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called Wonderful Counselor,
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace. Of the increase of
his government and peace there shall be no end, upon the THRONE OF DAVID, and
upon HIS KINGDOM to order it, and to establish it with Judgment, and with
Justice, from henceforth even for ever, the zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform it; then shall the Sun be ashamed, and the Moon confounded, when the
Lord of hosts shall reign IN MOUNT ZION, AND IN JERUSALEM, before his ancients
gloriously, Isa. 24.23. From these Scriptures you may see, that Christ's Throne
is to be in Mount Zion in Jerusalem, in the time of his reign; as,

First, because God himself has declared it by the Spirit of prophecy in
David, Psalm. 2.6, 7. Yet will I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion, etc.

Secondly, it is a Doctrine preached by the Angel to the Virgin Mary, Luke
1.30.31, 32. In these words, And the Angel said unto her, fear not Mary, for
thou have found favor with God. And beh(...)ld, thou shall coceive in thy
womb, and bring forth a Son, and shall call his name Jesus, he shall be great,
and be called the Son of the highest, and the Lord shall give unto him the
THRONE OF HIS FATHER DAVID, etc.

Thirdly, Jerusalem is to be called the Throne of the Lord, as faith the
Prophet, Jer. 3.17.

Fourthly, The Lord himself says, that he will dwell there, Zach. 8.3. In
these words, Thus says the Lord, I am returned unto Zion, and will dwell in
the midst of Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be called a City of truth; it is a
Prophecy of the last times as is very clear from the Text.

Fifthly, The Lord says, that Zion and Jerusalem is his rest, and dwelling
place for ever, speaking prophetically also by David, Psalm. 132.13. and Isaiah
says, Cry out, and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the holy one
of Israel in the midst of thee. Isa. 12.6. A clear Prophecy of Christ's
Kingdom. Again,

Lastly, That Christ's Seat is to be in Zion in Jerusalem, is clear, for Micah
prophesying of the last days, and of both the Houses of Isreal's return, (viz.)
Israel and Judahs return out of their last and long captivity, says, I will
make of her that halteth a remnant, and her that mas cast off a strong nation,
and the Lord shall reign over them IN MOUNT ZION, henceforth even for ever, for
the Lord has appeared of old unto thee saying, I have loved thee with an
everlasting love, for there shall be a day that the watchmen upon the Mount
Ephraim, shall cry, arise ye, and let us go up to ZION UNTO THE LORD OUR GOD.
For there shall the glorious Lord be unto thee a place of broad rivers, for he
shall roar out of Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, for the LORD
DWELETH IN ZION, Micah 4.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Jer. 31.6. Amos 1.2. Isa. 31.4. Chap.
33.2. From these and many more Scriptures, and reasons that might be given, we
may see where Christ's Throne shall be in the time of his Kingdom, which is, on
Mount Zion in Jerusalem, that Throne which was his Father David's, which he took
from the Jebusites, and Christ will also take it from the Antichrist, and will
possess it for ever, that the everlasting covenant may be made good in him,
even the sure mercies of David, not to want a man to sit upon his Throne, but
that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he should raise up
Christ to sit upon his Throne, and so shall the word of the Lord be fulfilled
(in its time) which speaks of Christ's Kingdom according to the very letter of
the word, as it was fulfilled (in the letter of the word) about his sufferings;
and thus I pass this particular, and come to the sixth and last, which is, how
long Christ shall reign, and the estate of the wicked in that time.

Sixthly, As it has been already proved, that Christ and the Saints shall
receive a kingdom, and reign upon earth; now I shall proceed to resolve the
matter as touching the time, and that is also foretold in the Scriptures to be
a thousand years, which time will contain ten generations, it being
preconsidered, that persons shall live (in that day) to be an hundred years
old, according to the words of the Prophet, Isa. 65.20. which says, There
shall be no more thence, an infant of days, nor an old man, that has not
filled his days, for the child shall die an hundred years old, and the sinner
being an hundred years old shall be accursed; and that curse shall be the same
spoken by the Prophet, Zech. 14.12. and that the time will be a thousand years,
is plain from the words of the Lord to John, Rev. 20.4, 5, 6, 7. where the Lord
showed John, that the godly were to live again after death, and to reign with
Christ a thousand years, before the rest of the dead men ( viz. the wicked)
were to live again. But if it should be demanded of me, whether Christ and the
Saints, shall reign but one thousand years, I should not say possitively that
they are to reign no longer, as just to limit the time; yet I shall give my
judgment as (a man who have obtained favor of the Lord) and say, its like that
a thousand years may be the set time; first, because we know that Christ is to
give up the Mediator-ship, and kingdom into the hands of the Father, and then
he is to be all in all, (as you may read, 1 Cor. 15.24.) and the Son then must
be in subjection to the Father; so that although Christ be to receive the
Kindom, and greatness of the Kingdom under the whole heaven, and possess it,
and reign, yet he is to leave it again at the time appointed of the Father,
which seems to be the time before mentioned, (viz.) at the end of the thousand
years; but if it should be objected and said.

Object. That that thousand years reign which you speak of, may possibly be but
the very time or day that Christ, and the Saints shall pass sentence upon the
wicked, as Christ to judge, and the righteous to be said to judge, as they
acknowledge Christ's judgment to be just, and so trample down the wicked,
because the Apostle says, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years,
and a thousand years as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8.

Answ. It cannot be so understood, because Christ is to sit upon the Throne of
his father David, and to GOVERN IT; in which time his dominion shall be from
Sea to Sea, and from the rivers unto the end of the world; they that dwell in
the Wilderness shall bow to him, his enemies shall lick the dust; the Kings of
Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring presents; the Kings of Sheba, and Seba,
shall offer gifts, yea all Kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall
serve him, his name shall be for ever, (Name, signifies authority) his name
shall be continued as long as the Sun, and the whole earth shall be filled with
his glory, Amen, Psalm. 62.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. This whole
Psalm with many more speaks fully of this thing; and how can it be imagined
that the Babylonion, and Pertian, and Gretian, and Roman Monarchs, should
continue so long, and Christ's Kingdom (that the Scripture speaks most of
(which is to be the Kingdom under the whole Heavens) should remain so little a
while as some do Imagine; to what end is it for him to take his great power,
and to reign, if it be for such a small time as one day, (according as a day is
in our account) no, doubtless it is to be for a thousand years at the least.

Secondly, We understand the six days vocation (of Gods work) does hold forth,
and teach us, that the continuation of the World is to be for six thousand
years, it being considered that a day with the Lord, is as a thousand years
(only the days to be shortened for the elects sake) and the seventh day which
was Gods rest from his labor (and the year of Jubilee) to be understood to
figure out unto us, the seven thousand years which is to be the time of Christ's
Kingdom, and the glorious rest that we are to labor to enter in to.

Thirdly, It appears to be a large time, because the families of the earth are
to come up to worship this great King, the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 66. Zach. 14.
Mich. 4. and the Lord is to be their teacher, and he is to make war (at that
time) to cease to the ends of the earth, and he is to be one, and his name one
at that time, and to govern the nation upon the earth; all which things
bespeaks more time than a moment, or one (natural) days time.

Fourthly, It further appears that the time will not be short, because in the
time of Christ's Kingdom, his will shall be done in earth as it is done in
heaven, when the Tabernacle of God shall be with men, and he dwell with them,
as the time is at hand when it will be so, and the earth shall be full of the
Knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea; time would fail me to speak
of these things in particular, and therefore I shall omit it at present, and
more especially because there are many in this nation would assist me with
their help in this point of Christ's Kingdom, if it should lie at the stake, for
want of proof, and that makes me the more sparing, for I could through Gods
assistance speak more largely, about the same point, but because of the reasons
before mentioned, I have only given thee what lies before me in my
understanding, and leave the most serious perusal of things until a future and
greater occasion offers it self unto me, and at present shall only speak a
few words to the estate and condition of the wicked in the day of the Lord, and
in the time of his Kingdom; which is,

First, as concerning the coming of Christ, we find that the greatest part of
men shall be gathered together to make up that company of Gogg and Magog, and
we may read what will become of them, when the Vine of the earth is reaped, and
cast into the great Winepress of God, and trod without the gates of Jerusalem,
that blood shall come out to the horse bridle, and Joel, and Ezekiel speaks
largly of that; and more of it, Revel. 19.1. And although time admits not of
writing the words of the several texts, yet peruse them at thy leisure as thou
may find them written, Isa. 63.1, 2, 3, 4. Ezekiel. 39. to the sixteen verse.
Joel. 3.11, 12, 13. Revel. 14.18, 19, 20. Chap. 16.16. ARMAGEDDON, a place of
slaughter, Chap. 19.17, 18, 19, 20. From these and many more which might be
cited (the which elsewhere I have cited) we may see that a very great multitude
will be slain at the very time when Christ shall take his Kingdom, although a
few shall be affrighted and give glory to God: but the next, or that which
remains, is, to speak somewhat of the rest which are not slain: and,

First, we cannot conclude any of them in a state of Salvation, or any grace to
be offered to them that are wicked, and refuse the tender of the Gospel, save
them few above written; because when Christ comes, he that then is holy shall
be holy still, and he that then is filthy, shall then be filthy still, Revel.
22.11, 12.

Secondly, the great Antichrist shall cause all unless the sanctified ones, and
some few elect that shall escape him, to receive a mark in their right hand, or
forehead, and they that escape the sword which received his mark, they shall be
tormented day and night, and they shall have such curses as I spoke of not long
before, concerning the sinner that remained so till he come to be a sinner an
hundred years old: But paradventure some may say.

There is some that have not heard of Christ's fame, shall at that time be sent
to, that they may see his glory, Isa. 66.19.

Answ. There are some that shall escape the Man of sin, and not receive his
mark, as Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the children of Ammon, Dan. 11.41.
And Moab shall be an hiding place to Israel in that day, these shall be sent to
Tarshish, and pull and lug, that they that (by reason of being remote) have not
heard, these shall have a day of grace offered in the time of Christ's reign,
and also the children that are in their nonage, but the Sons of those that
have afflicted Gods people, shall come bending unto them; and in brief thus, as
the wicked shall be broken like a Potters Vessel at the coming of Christ; even
so those that in their generations come not up to worship the Lord Christ in
the time of his Kingdom, shall be bondslaves to Israel, and at last, perish
in the manner before spoken of; so in the time of Christ's Kingdom, there will
be some sinners, though not of the Jews, and their Judgment will be great, and
at last when the Devil is loosed at the end of the thousand years, there will
be such a seed for him to work upon, as in fore time, and then he shall befool
them, and persuade them that they may break off their yoke from off their neck,
and not be captivated, but may (themselves) conquer and reign, and so shall
come up to Jerusalem, thinking to besiege it, and take it, and then fire shall
come down from God out of Heaven, and destroy them, and this brings in the
resurrection of the unjust; namely the last, and general resurrection, and the
eternal Judgment, and then when all Rulers and authority is put down, even the
very last enemy, which is death; then shall Christ deliver up his Kingdom and
authority into the hands of God the Father, and then shall Christ and the
Saints be in subjection to God for ever, and shall remain with him in bliss in
that everlasting station, that heavenly Jerusalem; the which the Lord grant it
to be the portion of every serious Soul that seeks after truth, unto whose
hands these lines may come, and to all others: which is the earnest desire of
him, that would fain have been larger in meditation and writing, but by reason
of several occasions, time suffers him not.

Farewell.

The Good Ancient Laws and Statutes OF KING JESUS VINDICATED.

Wherein is proved by several Scriptures, and several Grounds and Reasons drawn
from Scriptures, That all the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of King Jesus,
given forth in his last Will and Testament, are practicable, and to be
practiced by the Lords People in all Ages, until the Worlds end, or till the
second Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ to Judgment.

Whereunto also is added an Answer to the most material Objections to this
Point or proof, for the Cessation of some of Christ's Ordinances: It being in
Answer to a Book, published by Mr. Simon Henden of Biddenden in Kent,
entitled, A Glass of some new Discoveries.

Together with a brief Review of the Heads of a Conference between him and the
Author, before many witnesses, June 3. 1658.

By GEORGE HAMMON, Pastor to the Church of Christ, meeting in Biddenden in KENT.

I said, days shall speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom. But
there is a spirit in man; and the inspiration of the Almighty gives them
understanding. Great men are not always wise, neither does the aged understand
judgment. Therefore I said, hearken unto me, I also will show thee mine opinion,

Job 32.7, 8, 9, 10. Go ye therefore and Teach all Nations, Baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Teaching them to
observe all things, WHATSOEVER I HAVE COMMANDED YOU, and lo, I am with you
ALWAYS EVEN to the END of the WORLD, Amen,

Mat. 28.19, 20. LONDON Printed by G. Dawson, for the Author, 1660.

The Epistle Dedicatory TO Mr. Simon Henden, and his Son John.
SIRS,
ACcording to my promise, and the desire of many Friends, I have taken in hand
to give some further Account of the Conference that we had at your House, in
June the 3d. 1658. Together with an Examination and Trial of some few
Particulars published by you upon a more mature consideration; But truly I must
be very brief, because the Press has waited a long while for it by reason of
my being so much from home, and taken off upon other occasions, for indeed part
of my Book has been printed long since, the which part was far briefer than it
was intended if time would have admitted; and also if the man to whom I had
Dedicated it (in chief) had been in England, but he being far remote, and also
giving forth speeches, that he would not meddle any more with me, either in
Disputation, nor in the Press, I did only intend to answer that which seemed
most material (unto me) and to remove it from my door, and also to show my
opinion upon some other Subjects, which are material, and worth examination as
at this day; at the end of which, I did promise to speak somewhat in order to
the reviving of our former Discourse, upon which I did also peruse your
Treatise, entitled, The Key of Scripture Prophesies; or, A Glass of some new
Discoveries; to the end that I might the better know your Judgment; when I had
seen it delivered (by you) upon deliberation, with serious and mature thoughts;
and when I had read it and perused it, I was very much astonished at the
consideration thereof, to think how much I was bereaved of my understanding, if
that Piece were worthy to be authorized by a man of your gravity and ingenuity;
but however, I desire not to be too confident, it may be of greater worth, than
it appears to me to be, and therefore I shall reveiw some few particulars, and
in the words of Sobriety and Humility give my judgment of things, as they
appear to me, in the plainness and simplicity thereof, to the end, that I may
inform those who are out of the way, (and yet will ask and enquire for the good
old way) and to leave others (who are wise in their own conceit) to stand and
fall unto their own Master, without casting dirt, or things of that nature upon
them; the which I find to be most profitable (in reference) to Godliness,
although most unpleasing unto the flesh: But to wave these things, and all kind
of circumlocution, my desire is, that these Lines may not be misrepresented
upon your spirits, as though what I write here, be the venting of any thing
from a private prejudice, but those things that I rather aim at, is love and
good will, first to your selves, and then to all those that possibly may be
misled, and be in that Babel that you suppose others are in; therefore let the
Scripture and sound Reason guide you, (I mean Scripture Reason) and the Lord
(if it be his will) give you a right understanding therein; which is the desire
of him which desires your eternal peace; who is

Your Servant, and all men's for Christ and his Bodies sake, (which is the
Church.) GEORGE HAMMON.

THE Epistle to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have here presented thee with (as it were) a Homer in a Nut shell, much
matter of concernment in a little compass, (or volumn) and my desire is, that
as thou tendreth the good of thy eternal peace, to peruse these lines with an
impartial heart, and an unbyassed affection, that thou may thereby find out
the truth in the midst of the varieties of Opinions which are in our days, and
in order thereunto, be very careful to try things well before thou receives it
for a truth, and believe not every spirit, but try them whether they be of God;
for many false Prophets are entered into the world, which endeavor privately to
undermine the truth, and to bring in another Gospel to oppose both the
Ordinances and Kingdom of the Lord Jesus, and to walk in such a way as God
has not cast up for his People to walk in; therefore remember how thou have
heard and received, and hold fast, for the time of account draws near, and
then blessed will such be who are sound doing all things that are written in
the last Will and Testament of Christ Jesus; and if thou find any man so
insolent and bold as to say, that some of the Laws, Statutes or Ordinances of
King Jesus be not to be observed, but are ceased, then examine where it is
written, that Christ has said, that any of his Laws is to cease or fall to the
ground, and not to be observed until he comes and puts an end unto them; and
know that in things of concernment, God has not spoken obscurely and darkly,
but so plain, that he that is godly (and yet of the weakest capacity) may
plainly know it, because it concerns every man in point of his eternal peace
and salvation to know it; for if Christ have put an end to any of his Laws and
Statutes, so as they are not to be practiced in all Ages by the godly, then
those that do practice or set up any thing that Christ has put an end to, are
strivers with their Maker, and fighters against Christ: Even so, whosoever
shall adventure to nullisie or extenuate any of the Laws or Statutes of King
Jesus, which he has appointed to be practiced, and has confirmed by Signs and
Miracles, and with his own blood, and has no where repealed them, nor showed
that they must cease, and come to an end before his second Coming; it had been
good for that man if he had not been born, or that a millstone had been tied
about his neck, and been cast into the depth of the Sea, (in the day of his
birth, rather then have so done, and to stand the hazard of the indignation of
the great King at his appearance and Kingdom) if he with an high hand do
persist in it: Therefore dear friend, and Courteous Reader, take heed and try
well what thou receives, and let not supposed consequences, and men's opinions
(upon sentences of Scripture, which are doubtful and disputable, which neither
thou well understands, nor he that would expound them unto thee) persuade
thee to forsake or transgress against the known Laws of King Jesus, which has
been confirmed, and no where repealed; and in thy so doing, namely, in thy
keeping faithfully that which he has left upon record (uncancelled) and
committed unto thy trust to keep, he also will keep thee in the great time of
temptation and trial, safe under the covert of his wings to everlasting life
and glory; which is the desire of him,

Whose delight is in such, as are zealous for the Laws of King Jesus, and the
Servant of all men for Christ's sake: GEORGE HAMMON.

The Good Ancient Laws and Statutes OF KING JESUS VINDICATED.
SIRS,
THE diversity of Opinions in our times is very great, as you well know, the
which causes much division and strangeness in point of Neighborhood, amongst
men professing Godliness, the which is much to be pitied by all such as have
their hearts awakened from Self-love; but let us as men of Liberty, lay aside
all envyings, evil-speaking, as fruits of the flesh, which must be destroyed,
or otherwise what are we better, (nay, are we not worse) then those that are
open professed enemies to Liberty, for all that they do (at present) is but to
persecute or smite with the tongue, and that is too frequently found amongst
some, (it is well if you be innocent in the matter) to make it their greatest
study to preach that which tends more to Controversy and Division, than
soul-saving Knowledge and Humility, and inward grace, and the like; but let us
in that say, as Ephraim, said as touching his Idols, what have we to do with
such things any more for ever, and cast them a way as filthy rags, and ever
follow that which makes for peace, and the things wherewith we may edify one
another, which is well pleasing to God, and approved of by men: And now because
of time, I shall come to the point in controversy; which is,

Whether all the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ be to be held up, and
practiced by the Lords people, in all ages to the worlds end, yea or nay?

To which I answer, and say, That they are all to be upheld, contended for, and
practiced by the Lords People to the worlds end: and in order to the clearing
of this point, and opening this discourse of yours hinted at above, I shall lay
down a position as a ground for the discourse, and shall prove it by Scripture,
and Scripture reasons; and also in the examination of your words, I shall show
that you in effect confess it, or at the least to my understanding, it appears
so: but shall leave it to be judged of by the serious reader; together with my
answer to your objections to that point; and now the point that I shall lay
down, as a ground of my discourse; is,

That whatsoever Ordinances (or all the Ordinances) that Christ appointed in
his last will and Testament, to be practiced by his Apostles, and Churches in
that age, is to continue, and to be practiced by his Churches in all ages to
the end of the world. The which I prove clearly from the words of Christ in his
last will and Testament, Mat. 28.18.19, 20. in these words, And Jesus came, and
spoke unto them, ( viz. his Disciples) saying, All power is given unto me in
heaven and in earth; Go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, baptizing them, in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you
always, even unto the end of the world: Amen. From whence we may see, that
Christ's Precepts, or Ordinances, are to continue to the worlds end: But give me
leave to paraphrase a little upon the text; as first, from the words, (viz.)
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore, (and so
forth.) From whence we may learn, that Christ did inform his Disciples, that
his command was sufficient to authorize them, and all the godly after them, to
go forth, and preach, and baptize, and gather, costitute (or state) Churches
(as you call it) to the worlds end; as if Christ should have said, you need not
question your authority, in your going forth, and doing what I command you, for
all power in heaven and earth is given unto me, therefore I have sufficient
authority to appoint you to the work, and my commandment and appointment is a
sufficient authority for you to do it, therefore go questioning nothing, for
the Father has made me the great Lawgiver, and also given me power over all
flesh, that whosoever obeys not my Laws, shall be cut off from among the
people; therefore go, question not, but make Disciples, and Baptize them, (they
must be first made Disciples by preaching to them, and instructing them, and
they being thus made Disciples, baptize them;) and also there is a further
thing to be taught them, for as you must teach them to believe in Christ, and
repent of their former sins before ye baptize them; so their is a teaching
(also) after baptizing; and that is, you must teach them to observe all the
Ordinances, and Statutes that I have commanded you, that they may be followers
of your steps, as you are followers of mine, that so it may appear their is but
one Faith, one Baptism, one Lord, one Lawgiver, one Hope of calling, that my
statutes may be unalterable till the worlds end; mind the weight of these
wotds, Teach them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: So
then whatsoever Ordinances, and Statutes Christ commanded the Apostles, and his
Disciples, which was the first Church; the very same must be taught, to the
successive Churches in all ages to the worlds end: the consequence is clear,
which is, that Christ's Ordinances, and Statutes are to be taught, upheld, and
practiced after Christ and the Apostles by their successors, in all ages till
the worlds end. And this further appears, for as Christ promised them that in
their so doing, that he would be with them to the end of the world; even so the
holy Apostle Paul says, (as touching that holy Ordinance of breaking of bread,
and eating of it, and blessing of wine, and drinking of it, in commemoration of
Christ's death; that their doing of it, was to show forth the Lords death, till
he came again. To which I find these two objections, (viz.) as first to that
in, Mat. 28. Lo, I am with you always, to the end of the world. That is says
Mr. Henden, to the end of that age: and this he said to me in that discourse
above mentioned, to which I say now as I said then to him; It seems very
strange to me, that a man that professes Schollar-ship, and godliness should
say so without shame, and blushing; for confident I am, that if Mr. Henden
knows any thing, he knows this, that although the word, (...), may be taken
for age, yet it is to be understood the end of age, or the whole time at least
of Christ's ascension, till his coming to judgment; for if it were to be
understood only, that age or generation (then in being) then the word would
have been rendered thus, (...) which is a word used by the same Evangelist for
generation, Mat. 24.34. and it is frequently used for the present age or
generation; but a few words to observe the sequal or obsurdities of the
consequence: which is,

By Mr. Hendens opinion, preaching and baptizing, and the promise of Christ's
presence with his people, was to continue no longer than that present age, that
the Apostles lived in; for preaching and baptizing, and the promise of Christ's
presence, is the things that Christ speaks of, in Mat. 28.19, 20, 21. And that
is to be understood, but to continue but for that present age, says Mr.
Henden; and yet he says, (in the second page of his book, entitled, A glass
of some new discoveries) That the Ministry, and Baptism, and Communion, was to
remain, and did not fall in all the times of Apostasy. And how these things
agree together, or whether they come not from a Babel understanding, I shall
leave the serious reader to Judge, and pass to the next Objection; which is, in
answer to Saint Paul's words to the Corinths, 1 Epistle 11. Chap. which says,
So often as you eat of that bread, and drink of that cup, show ye the Lords
death till he comes. But say some, (here I do not accuse Mr. Henden) but rather
the generation of men commonly called Quakers) affirming that Christ is already
come, meaning that he is come in spirit, dweling in the hearts of the Godly. To
which I answer and say, that they which had obtained that enjoyment (even the
Church of Thessalonica, which was in God) even they did expect that personal
coming of the same Jesus that was crucified, and raised again form the dead,
which delivered us from the wrath to come: and that the Church of Thessalonica,
was a Chruch in God, read 1 These. 1.1, 8. And that the word of the Lord sounded
out from them, read verse. 8. and yet for all that they waited for Christ's
appearance, verse. 10. chap. 2.19. chap. 3.13. chap. 4.15, 16, 17, 18. 2 These.
1.7. many places of holy Scripture might be brought to prove this, but time is
precious, and also because this Church is a people much spoken of by them: I
only bring this Epistle, although I could bring Peter, and James, and John to
prove this at large: but I leave this objection, and the former, and shall show
you several grounds and reasons, why all the Ordinances of Christ shall
continue practicable, and to be practiced by the Lords people till his second
coming.

Reas. 1. The first ground and reason is, because the Commission does not only
direct and command the Apostles and Ministry to teach men to observe all
things, (viz.) all Christ's Statutes, and Ordinances: but also commands, that it
should be made known to all the World successively, that every creature may
hear of it, for the obedience of faith; and he that believes and is baptized
shall be saved, Mark 16.15, 16. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. In short, I shall observe
only these three things; which is,

First, that it was the will of Christ that the Apostles should teach the
observation of ALL HIS STATVTES.

Secondly, as it was his will to have the observation of all his Statutes
taught, so also it was his will, that the observation of all his Statutes
should be taught to all men, namely, all Nations, or every creature, (that is)
where ever the sound of the Gospel went (which has or shall be preached to all
nations for a witness, Mat. 24.14. Revel. 14.6.

Thirdly, it was also his will, that all men might know, that in their
observing all his Statutes and Ordinances unto the end, that they should not
only obtain salvation at the last, but in the mean time in the observation of
his Statutes and Ordinances, they should have his spiritual presence with them
always to the end of the World; that is, he would as well manifest his
spiritual presence with the successive generations to the end of age, as to the
age or generation then present.

Object. But some will say, that God does not manifest himself in our age as he
did in the primitive age, for they could work mircales, and so cannot we.

To this I briefly say (at present, because I do intend to speak more largely
to it anon) that God has manifested himself very gloriously to many, that
never wrought any miracle, as I think none will deny; for John did no miriacle,
and yet God did manifest himself very excellently to him; but more of that
anon, and at present I pass to the second ground and reason, to prove, that all
the Ordinances that Christ appointed in his last will and testament, are to
continue till his second coming.

Reas. 2. Because when Christ ascended up on high, (as he left his mind and
will what he would have done, even so he gave gifts to men, some to be
Apostles, (viz.) Messengers) and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering (or perfecting) of the Saints for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come
into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the
perfect man; unto the measure of the stature of Christ: that we HENCEFORTH
(mark that) be no more children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of doctrine, by the slights of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they
lie in wait to deceive. From this text we may learn, that it was the wisdom of
Christ, in order to accomplish his last will and testament, that he did give
gifts to men, that they might be enabled in their successive generations to
preach, exhort, reprove, and correct, to the end, that the man of God, or
servants of God, namely, the Church of God, might be furnished with every good
work; that henceforth, (that is from that time forward) they might not be
tossed (that is removed) from that doctrine which Christ left in command, in
his last will and testament, Ephesians. 4.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 3.14, 15, 16.
The consequence is, that what Christ appointed in his last will and testament,
was perpetuated, and to remain from that time and forward, until all the Saints
came to the unity of the faith, and that perfect man, even to the stature and
fullness of Christ: and so I pass to the third ground and reason.

Reas. 3. It further appears, that whatsoever Christ appointed to be practiced,
in his last Will and Testament, is perpetuated, and to remain because it was
before declared, by God to Moses (and good reason there was) that the Laws and
Statutes of Christ, should be perpetuated, and remain as well as Moses Law,
which did remain until a more glorious administration; for when Moses was
dead, yet his Law spoke which showed him to be a Lawgiver of some authority;
but if it were as some would have it, Christ's Law must needs be so weak, as to
die with him, or a non after him, or at least some of them, and so in effect
say, that Christ is a more weaker or an imperfecter lawgiver than Moses: but
that it was foretold by God, and given in charge, that all Christ's Laws and
Statutes, should remain in all Generations, for all men to practice, according
to their several abilities or measures, read Peter's words, Acts 3.22, 23. which
says, For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God
raise up to you of your brethren, like unto me, him shall you hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto you. And it shall come to pass, that every
Soul that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the
people. That which is to be observed from this text, is first, that Christ must
be heard in every thing, whatsoever he says: and secondly, as he must be heard
in every thing, in whatsoever he says, even so he must be heard in every thing
by every soul: and thirdly, that it is so, is clear, because whosoever does not
hear ( viz. obey) shall be destroyed; so then its plain, that all the Statutes
and Ordinances, of the last will and Testament of the Lord Jesus Christ, ought
to be believed and practiced by all those that are the Lords people in all
ages; and so I pass to the fourth ground and reason, to prove the continuation
of all the Statutes and Laws of Kings Jesus.

Reas. 4. Because there must be no adding, nor deminishing from his words, no
putting to nor taking from them, for it is a very great evil to put in or take
out of it; if it be but a man's will, and Testament, as says Saint Paul, Gal.
3.15. in these words, Brethren, I speak after the manner of men, though it be
but a man's Covenant, or Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no man disanulleth
or adds there unto. For as says the Lord (Rev. 22.18.) I testify to every
one that hears the words of the Prophecy, of this book, if any man shall
add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in
this book. And if any man shall take away from the words of this book, God
shall take away his part out of the book of life, and the holy City, and from
the things that are written in this book. For as he is an unalterable Priest,
and has an unchangeable Preist-hood, even so he is an unalterable King, and
Prophet, and has unalterable or unchangeable Laws, Ordinances, and Statutes,
and happy are all those that observe, and keep them unto the end. And to this
end the Apostle Paul, who was faithful to Christ, who did not hide or shun to
declare the whole counsel of God, did direct the successive Ministers, as
Timothy and Titus, what to do after him, both in respect of Doctrine, and
discipline, and shows them how they should behave themselves in the Church of
Christ, and also to commit it to faithful men, that might teach others after
them, and what quallifications ought to be found in Bishops, and Deacons,
namely Pastors, and such as were to take care of the poor; so that it is very
evident, that it was the care of the Apostle, to leave in charge an orderly
provision for both souls and bodies, of the Churches of Christ, as Pastors or
Bishops, to take care of their souls, and Deacons to take care of their bodies,
and the external way of establishing them or appointing them to the work, was
by fasting, and prayer, with laying on of Hands, as he himself, and the rest of
the Ministry were established, as Acts 13.3. and 1 Timothy 4.14. Chap. 5.22. Tit.
1.5, 6, 7, 8. more there might be added, but at present I shall only add a few
sentences, of Scriptures, but not any of them texts last cited, but others; as
first, the charge that Paul gives to the Pastors, or Elders of the Church of
Ephesus at his departure, Acts 20.28. in these words, Take heed unto your
selves and unto all the flock, over which the holy Ghost has made you
overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own
blood. For I know this, that after my departure, shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the flock. Wherefore says he to Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1. in
these words, I charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearance, and Kingdom. Preach the
word, instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. Watch thou in all things, endure affliction, do
the work of an Evangelist, make a full proof of thy Ministry; for their are
many unruly and vain talkers, wherefore rebuke them sharply, that they may be
found in the faith: but a man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition, reject. And the things that thou have heard, and seen in me, the
same commit to faithful men, who also may teach others. Tit. 1.10. Chap. 3.10.
2 Timothy 2.2. So then those Laws that Christ appointed his Disciples to walk in,
they must teach there successors to walk in, and their successors must commit
it to others, that they might teach the Generation to come, to that end, that
Christ's Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, might be as unchangeable as his
Preist-hood; and so the words of the author to the Hebrews may be verified,
Heb. 13.8. Which says, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.
Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines: but do all things
according to the pattern, which the Lord Jesus has showed us in his last Will
and Testament, and as many as walk according to this rule, (as Paul in another
case says) peace be upon them, and mercy upon all such Israelites of God: and
thus I pass to the fifth ground and reason, to prove, that all the Laws,
Statues, and Ordinances appointed by Christ in his last Will and Testament, are
to remain practicable, and to be practiced by the Lords people.

Reas. 5. It further appears, that all the Statutes, and Ordinances of Christ,
are to be practiced by the Lords people till his second coming; because when
the Apostle Jude, speaks (by the holy spirit) of some that would be as wandering
stars, which had turned from the simplicity of the Gospel; he exhorts the
Saints, earnestly to contend for the faith, once delivered unto the Saints,
Jude 3. which agrees well with that prophetical saying of the wise man,
Solomon's Song, or the Cant. 1.7, 8. which says, Tell me (O thou whom my soul
loves) where thou feedest, where thou make thy flock to rest at noon: for
why should I be as one that turns aside by the flocks of thy companions? If
thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by the footsteps of
the flock, and seed thy kidds beside the shepherds tents. The which both
places shows plainly, that the people in after ages, should walk in the same
footsteps, and by the same rule that the primitive Church walked in, for that
text is a prophecy of these times, or that which very much concerns these
times, as we may see from Chap. 2.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. in these words, My
beloved is like a Roe, or a young Heart: he stands behind our wall, he locketh
forth at the window, showing himself through the lattesse. My beloved spoke, and
said unto me, Rise up my fair one and come away, for lo the winter is past,
(mark that) the rain is over and gone. The flowers appear on the earth, the
time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the turtle is heard in
our land. The fig tree puts forth her green figgs, and the vines with her
tender grapes give a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. O
my dove! thou that art in the clefts of the rocks, in the secret places of the
stares: let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy
voice, and thy countenance is comely. Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that
spoil our vines: for our vines have tender grapes. From this text we may learn
or observe these things; first, that Christ does manifest or show himself to
his People now, although not so visibly to be beheld or took notice of by
others, no but as it were out of a window, or through a lattesse: secondly, that
it is a prophecy that concerns us, is clear from these words; for lo the
winter is past, meaning the sharp persecutions of the Romish Whore, which has
made all Nations drunk with the wine of fornication, and the Kings thereof to
commit fornication with her, and so they by her appointment have persecuted the
Saints, in their several dominions, and so have caused the people of God to
creep as it were into the clefts of the rocks, out of the which they are to
come forth; and the next and last deceit of the Devil is to transform himself
like unto a Angel of Light, and so shall destroy more by subtilty then by
violence, and that is his design in the last days, as Christ and his Apostles
have foretold at large, the which we see to be accomplishing a great pace, in
our Nation, which shows, that these are the last days; and also this text
speaking to the same thing, saying, Take us those foxes, those little foxes,
that spoil our vines: for our vines have tender grapes. Which is to be
understood, that when the Church is young, and newly come forth out of those
troublesome times, that many shall be spoiled by the subtilty of the Devil,
putting it into the hearts of the sons of men, to pervert the Scriptures, and
turn men away from the good ancient paths of Christ, which makes the Spouse
inquire in the midst of these varieties of opinions, where Christ would have
his Flock to rest; and his answer is, that they must Go by the footsteps of
the flock; that is, in the very steps, or way that Christ's flock of old walked
in, and contend for that faith, and hold fast the profession of that faith,
without wavering, because Jesus Christ is the same, yesterday, to day, and for
ever; and thus it appears, that all the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, which
are comprehended in the last Will and Testament of the Lord Jesus, are
practicable, and are to be practiced by the Lords people: and thus I pass to
the sixth ground, and reason, to prove, that al Christ's Statutes and
Ordinances, as before mentioned, are perpetuated, and to remain till the Lords
second coming.

Reas. 6. It further appears, that all Christ's Laws and Statutes, are to
remain; because the author to the Hebrews, 10.28. Set the transgressors under
Moses law, as an example to those that despise or observe not Christ's laws; and
if all Christ's Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances, (which are written in the new
Testament and confirmed) are not as perpetual as Moses law, then it cannot be a
more greater transgression, and a more sore punishment to disobey them; for
Moses laws was perpetuated with a, cursed is he, that continues not in all
things, that is written in the book of the law, to do them, and all the people
shall say, Amen; but Christ's Laws which are written, (for many of them) were
not perpetuated but lost their authority and dyed with that age, or generation
(as says Mr. Henden) and some are so bold as to say, that not only some, but
all the Statutes and Ordinances of Christ, which are written in the new
Testament, were only theirs, or belonging to them in that age, and not to us;
and in my understanding, one speaks as true as the other, for he that says
some of the Laws and Statutes of Christ are to cease, and yet cannot prove that
the will of Christ is cancelled, nor show where Christ or his Apostles, have
said, that these Statutes and Ordinances, must cease at such a time; were as
good say, all must cease; one having as good a warrant for what he says, as
the other. But passing this, all that was written in Moses laws was to be
observed, and kept as well when they had lost that gift of Vrim and Thummim,
after their coming forth of Babylon, as before. For we find that the book of
the law was to be read, and the People to observe and do it, according as it
was written therein; and we find that good Josiah, when the book of the law was
found, after it had been lost, rent his clothes when he heard it read, in the
consideration how far the people were revolted from it, and gave commandment
to the people to reform, and observe to do the commandment of the Lord, as it
was found written in the book of the law of Moses, and as it was given in
commandment, to all the godly, or all the Israelites to observe, and keep the
commandment as it was writeen; even so, all that were godly amongst the
Israelites, did accordingly observe and keep them, until Shilo (or the great
lawgiver) came (even Jesus Christ) and in like manner as Jesus Christ did
command his Laws and Statutes, to be tought to every creature, and to be
observed by all the faithful, even so the faithful, have, and will in every age
faithfully keep them; and that Christ's Laws are set in oposition to Moses Laws,
(that is to say, they are as weighty, and as perpetual as Moses were) is
proved, and it is also evident, that they were to remain, as well when they
came out of Babylon, as before they went into Babylon, Nehem. 8.1, 2, 3. Chap.
13.1, 2, 3, 4. and so I pass to the seventh ground and reason, to prove, that
all the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, appointed by Christ in the new
Testament, (which is his last will, are to remain) to be practiced by the Lords
people, until his second coming.

Reas. 7. It further appears, that Christ's Laws are perpetuated, and to remain
as aforesaid; because if it be but a man's Testament, yet if it be confirmed, no
man must disanul, nor add thereunto, as says Saint Paul, Gal. 3 15. but this
is not only the will and Testament of him who has an unchangeable Preist-hood,
and lives for ever, but also it is confirmed, not by the blood of bulls and
goats, but by his own blood; and therefore no man may disanul, or add
thereunto, without being in danger of everlasting wrath, and cuting off from
amonst the people; and that Christ's will and Testament, was confirmed both by
his blood, and with signs and miracles, read these few cited texts in the room
of many that might be cited; see Heb. 9.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22,
23. In these words, For if the blood of bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an
heifer sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh. How
much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, offered
himself without spot to God? purge your conscience from dead works, to serve
the living God: And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were
under the first Testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance. For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be
the death of the Testator. For a Testament is of force after men are dead:
otherwise it is of no strength at all, while the Testator lives. Whereupon,
neither the first Testament was dedicated without blood. For when Moses had
spoken every precept unto the people, according to the Law, he took the blood
of calves and of goats; (and so forth) Saying, This is the blood of the
Testament, which God has enjoined unto you. It was therefore necessary that
the patterns of things in the heavens should be purified with these, but the
heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these. From this text
compared with chap. 2. and verse. 3, 4. with Mark 16.20. we may learn, that the
new Testament is confirmed both with signs, and miracles, and diverse gifts of
the holy Ghost, and also with Christ's blood, for the Testator did die, and is
alive, and therefore unless one greater than Jesus Christ or himself, do cancel
that will and Testament; woe, woe, woe, be to that man or woman, that
disanulleth any one of Christ's Laws and Statutes, they (at the last) will be
found to be transgressors, and guilty of all; for so it was in Moses Law, all
things must be done according to the pattern as it was written, and even so
says Christ, Teach them (after you) to observe all things whatsoever I have
commanded you; And the very same (as has been said already) was given in
charge by St. Paul, to the Ministry after him, as Acts 20 35. Phil. 4.9. Those
things that ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do:
and the God of peace shall be with you. And thus I pass to the eighth ground
and reason, to prove, that all the Laws and Statutes of Christ, given forth in
his last will and Testament, are to remain, and be practiced by the Lords
people.

Reas. 8. It further appears, that Christ's Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, are
perpetuated, and to remain till the second coming of the Lord Jesus Christ;
because St. Paul says, that if I or an Angel should bring another Gospel than
what he had preached, we must hold him accursed; and we well know, that the
Gospel that Saint Paul preached, was a Gospel with all the Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances of Jesus Christ, even Repentance, Acts 17.30. Faith, Acts 16.3.
Baptism, Laying on of Hands, Acts 19.6. 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Timothy 5.22. Heb. 6.2. The
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. Eternal Judgment, 2 Cor. 5. Church fellowship, Phil
1.5. with receiving into communion, Col. 4.10. Romans 15.7. and casting out of
the Church, 1 Cor. 5.4, 5. Tit. 3.10. and to sum up all in short, be did
declare the whole counsel of God; Acts 20.27. and taught the Churches how to
deal with offenders, 2 These. 3.6. 1 Cor. 5.7, 9, 10. and to keep themselves
pure. And now for men to bring a Gospel (as they pretend) without some of these
Ordinances, and to nullify others, and extenuate the strength of many, is to
bring such a Gospel, as Saint Paul never brought, but it is another Gospel, and
such are to be rejected by the servants of Jesus Christ: admit of this short
argument; which is,

If the Gospel which Saint Paul brought and preached, was a Gospel containing
all the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances of King Jesus; then those that bring a
Gospel, with many of them left out, bring not the same but another Gospel and
is to be rejected.

But the Gospel that Paul brought, was a Gospel containing all the Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances of King Jesus.

Therefore he that brings or preaches, a Gospel with manay of them left out,
brings another Gospel, and is to be rejected. Read the words of Paul, Gal.
1.6, 7, 8. which says, I marvail, that you are so soon removed from him that
called you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel: Which is not another:
but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of Christ. But
though we, or an Angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that
which we have alreardy preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said
before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other Gospel unto you than
that ye have received, let him be accursed. From which words we plainly see, it
is of a very dangerous consequence, for any man to bring any other Gospel, save
the very same, which was preached by Saint Paul, and the Apostles; and that
Gospel, was a Gospel containing all the Laws, Statutes and Ordinances of King
Jesus; as has been already proved: therefore let every man take heed of
perverting the Gospel, either by adding or detracting, or wresting any part
thereof, to their vain corrupt ends: and so I pass to the ninth ground or
reason of the point, saying, If it should be objected, that this text speaks of
some that would have brought the believers back again, to be justified by the
law.

I answer breefly, and say, that let it be what particular it will, this we
learn in general, that the very same Gospel, with the very same Laws, Statutes
and Ordinances which Saint Paul, and the rest of the Apostles preached and
practiced, is the very same that we must preach, and practice, or else be
accursed,

Reas. 9. It further appears, that all Christ Laws, Statutes and Ordinances are
perpetuated, and to remain; because when Christ left the world, he put his
house in order, and appointed to every man his work, Mark 13.34. and blessed is
that servant that when his Lord comes, he finds so doing; as he left him in
chrage: and thus Christ goes before leading his people an example, and they
follow his steps, and at last receive that blessed sentence. These are virgins,
these are they that followed the Lamb, whithersoever he goes, here are they
that keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, right blessed are
such dead, that dye in the Lord; for they rest from their labor, and their
works follow them. And again, they only are Christ's friends, that do whatsoever
he commands, such shall never be put to shame, that have a respect to all his
commands; and again, blessed and thrice happy are they, that do all his
commandments, they shall have right to the tree of life; and enter in through
the gates into the City, Amen.

Reas. 10. and lastly, (because I am called upon to hasten and must be very
brief) I lay down this as a ground, and reason, to prove, that all the Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances of Christ, given forth in his last will and Testament,
is practicable, and to be practiced by the Lords People; because (as it is
proved) that they are commanded by Christ, and confirmed, and given out as
Laws, and Statutes to all men, even every creature to the end of the world;
even so, they all stand firm, and undeniable without disanulling, or adding
thereunto, unless the Lord Jesus have repealed, or disanulled any one of them,
for Devils, or men cannot disanul, or repeal any one, nay, not the very least
of them; for he that gave them, and commanded them to be observed, is greater
than all, and has all power both in heaven and earth given unto him, and
therefore no men, nor devils can disanul, or add unto them the least jot or
little, Mat. 21.18, 19. Rev. 22.18. John 17.2. Acts 3.22, 23. This tenth
reason, why all Christ's Ordinances, are to continue practicabe, and to be
practiced by the Lords people, is; because as devils, and men cannot cancel or
disanul any one of them, neither has Christ, either cancelled his will, or
disanulled any of his Laws, Statutes or Ordinances; therefore they are
perpetuated, and to remain practicable, and to be practiced by the Lords people
in all ages, according to their several abilities, until the second, and
glorious coming of Jesus Christ: and thus being in much have, I leave these few
grounds and reasons, to prove, the continuance of all Christ's Ordinances
practicable, and to be practiced by the Lords People in all ages, according to
their several abilities; and in the next place I come to the examination of the
grounds and reasons, which are cited by Mr. Henden, to prove, That some of
Christ's Laws and Statutes were to cease, and are ceased, and shall leave the
serious reader to judge, when I have impartially offered them to thy view
without any lessening, the strength of any one of them; for although I am
neccessitated, to gather up the strength of his reason in as few words as may
be, yet I will not (willingly) miss any one thing, that is material or has
weight in it (cited by him) to prove the cessation of Christ's Ordinances, and
withal shall endeavor as much plainness of speech, as that the weakest
capacity (of them that are Godly) may understand it when they read it, (that I
may not be as a Barbarion unto them) the which I find to be the way most
profitable unto Edification.

And first, I shall begin with the first thing considerable, (which is) that
which he calls, or lays down as a sure Maxim, page 2. which is, says he;

Every thing has its beginning and continuance from the word of God; now
whatsoever in Gospel times is fore declared, and promised in Scripture for
abiding, did not fall but was upheld by the power of the Word, through all the
times of Apostasy, as the Ordinance of Ministry, Prayer, Praises, Baptism, and
the Communion, 1 These. 5.16, 17, 18. Rev. 9.13. Chap. 11.1. Heb. 13.15. Isa.
55.13. Chap. 65.5. Mat. 28.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.26. and also a sealed elect
number, with the spiritual union, Rev. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Chap. 9.4. Chap. 11.1.
Chap. 14.1. Likewise the being and profession of faith, duties of charity, with
all moral precepts, 1 Cor. 13.13. Mat. 16.18. Rev. 11.3. Mat. 5.17.18. Heb.
13.1. with whatsoever else is promised to continue: but that which is not so
perpetuated in the Word, as Confirmation, Ordination, Church censures, with the
primitive order, or Church stating was corrupted, and turned to confusion by
the great Antichrist, it wanting the same word, and promise to uphold its
abiding.

For proof whereof, ( viz. The cessation of these last mentioned Ordinances) we
will begin with Isa. 56.5. Even unto them, ( viz the Eunuch) will I give in my
house, and within my walls, a place and a name, better then of that of sons
and of daughters: I will give them an everlasting name that shall not be cut
off. It was a prophecy of the primitive Gospel Church, and the ingrafting the
Gentiles there into, as appears, verse 2. by the salvation coming, and the
righteousness (the Gospel Ministry) then revealed, also the stranger, then
joining to God, and the Eunuch the dry tree before, then taking hold of the
Covenant must allude to the Gentiles, who in time past was dead, and the place
(within the walls) being interpreted from the Hebrew word, J A D, which
signifies Hand alluding to Church power now. Why should not the place be said
to be everlasting, as well as the name, especially being before both joined
together, if the spirit had not seen the fail, and interruption of the change
thereof?

Answ. In order to the clear answer of these things, I shall branch them out in
particulars; as first, Mr. Henden says, Every thing has its beginning, and
continuance from the Word of God.

Answ. It is very true, hence we conclude that God having commanded in his
Word, that we should hear his Son in every thing, whatsoever he shall say unto
us, and that the Son also has commanded his Apostles to teach others to do
every thing, which he had commanded them to do: which was the observation of
all his Ordinances, always even to the end of the world; Mat. 28.19, 20. Mark
16.15, 16. which shows, (for what I can (yet) see from your fore cited text,
Isa. 56.5.) that all Christ's Ordinances are perpetuated, and to remain.

Secondly, you say, (and cite many texts to prove it) that the Ministry,
Prayer, Praises, Baptism, and the Communion was upheld, and did not fall in
the greatest to Apostasy.

My answer (in brief) to it is this. That if the fore mentioned Ordinances were
upheld by the power of Gods Word, in the greatest times of Apostasy
practicable, and to be practiced (as a duty enjoined to the Godly) then (see
your self that) you condemn your self in the thing that you allow; for you do
allow and believe (as you say) that Baptism and the Lords Supper was upheld by
the power of Gods Word, and did not cease, but was practicable, and tole
practiced by the Lords People thorowout all the times of Apostasy, as in page
2. line the 25. compared page 17. Paragraph the first, and if so, then you are
to be condemned out of your own mouth; for (to my best understanding of your
practice) you neither baptize and, nor practice that Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, and then it is to marvel if that God has given you over to blindness of
understanding, and mind; for it is just with God both to give an enlargement of
understanding, to him that faithfully practices, that which he knows, and
also to take away the Talent from him that improveth it not, and give him up to
blindness of mind; be wise to consider before the decree pass, and there be no
remedy.

Thirdly, The third particular is, That the Ordinance of Ordination, with
Church Censures, and the like, are ceased: Your first cited Text is, Isa. 56.5.
in these words, Even to them will I give in my House, and within my walls, a
place and name, better than that of Sons and of Daughters; I will give unto
them an everlasting Name that shall not be cut off. The Place, (say you) is to
be understood (by interpretation from the Hebrew word, J A D, a Hard, alluding
to Church power: and why should not the word, Place within my House, be
everlasting, as well as the Name; especially they being both joined together,
if the Spirit had not seen the fail and interruption of the change thereof?

Answ. If this Text say, that some of Christ's Ordinances, (as Ordination, or
Church Censures, or the like) are to cease, I have (wholly) lost my
understanding in the Scriptures; but yet give me leave to show my opinion, and
then judge of it, as the Lord shall guide your understanding.

There is these two things in chief, that Mr. Henden gathers from this Text;
the one is, that it is a Prophecy of the primitive Gospel Church, containing
the Gentiles which at that time should turn unto the Lord.

And secondly, That the place within his House, is to be understood a HAND,
alluding to Church power, viz. outward Discipline, as Ordination of Ministry,
and Government, and Church Censure, and the like,

To which I answer and say, though it will be proved to be a Prophecy of the
primitive Gospel Church. I have not yet seen by what Mr. Henden has said, that
there was Gentiles and Eunuchs proselyted and joined unto the Lord under the
Law, is plain; and that they were to keep the Sabbath from polluting, is also
as plain; and that they should have a place, and a name in Gods House, by
laying hold of the Covenant, is plain; hence the Eunuch came from a far Country
to Jerusalem to Worship, (who was after converted by Philip) and this Text
speaks in order both to provoke the Jews to be zealous, to observe the Law of
Moses, and also to encourage the Gentiles, (who were made Proselytes) in their
so doing, that they should have a Place, and a Name in his House, as well as
others, (even the Jews) and that it speaks of that juncture of time, and of
those Ordinances under the Law, (and not of Gospel Ordinances) read verse 7.
where he says, that their burnt Offerings, and their sacrifices should be
acceptable upon his Altar; the which if I well understand, it relates to the
Ordinances under the Law, which were to be observed by the proselyted Gentiles,
as well as the Jews, and not at all to Gospel Ordinances; (mark) I do not deny
but the Prophet Isaiah, does prophecy of the conversion of the Gentiles to
Gospel Ordinances, as in Chap. 42.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and in many other places, but
not at all in that place: And as for the word, My salvation is near; it may be
understood, their being saved from the hands of their enemies; or many other
ways; (and not of Gospel Ordinances) which the word Salvation will bear: And
the word, I will gather others unto him, (which you seem to question) is shown
to be the House of Israel, as well as the House of Judah; to wit, the dispersed
of Samaria; and that this speaks of the other House, (as Judah and Israel are
distinguished into two Houses) namely, the House of Israel, read verse. 8. and
peruse it well, and consider the two Sticks that are to become one in the
Prophets hand, and compare these together, Ezekiel. 37.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
and you may find what is meant by the word, I will gather others unto him: But
I pass this for brevity sake, and come to the fourth and last Particular, as an
answer to the abovementioned Maxim; which is,

The Name and Place, (which says Mr. Henden) are joined together in the Text,
and yet one perpetuated, (viz. the Name) and the other to cease, (viz. the
Place; which by interpretation is a Hand, alluding to Church Power.

To which I answer and say, That although this Text cannot be proved a
prophecy of the primitive Gospel Church, as before said; yet I shall speak to
this to leave it without a cover: And whereas Mr. Henden says, that the Hebrew
Word, J A D, signifying a Hand, alluding to Church Power; it is known, that the
variety of acceptations both in the Hebrew and the Greek, are so great and
many, that if men be of a corrupt opinion, they may wrest and pervert the mind
of the holy Spirit: I could instance some places according to the small
knowledge that I have in it, but I suppose the Assertion will not be denied by
you; take heed of making the Scripture a nose of Wax, to turn (both) this way
and that way, or as men please: bear with my expression and caution without
offense: but admit it were as you say, (which it is not so) that is to say)
what if that should be (as it is not) a prophecy of the primitive Gospel
Church, and that also the word PLACE should signify Hand, alluding to Church
Power; Does that Text imply, that the word Place is not perpetual or
everlasting, as well as the Name; I am sure that the Text does not say, that
the Place, ( viz. Hand as you call it) is not perpetual or everlasting, as well
as the Name; but if it be as you say, (that is,) that by PLACE, is to be
understood a Hand, alluding to Church power, then I will take your own argument
and disprove you; that is, if I can prove the PLACE perpetuated and to remain,
as well as the Name, then all that you have said (here) falls to the ground
without remedy; and that they are to remain in the PLACE, ( viz. the Hand which
is the Church power as you say) see the words of the Prophet Nathan, which is a
prophecy of that House, and Place, and Name, which Isaiah speaks of, that the
Gentiles (as well as the Jews) should have the privilege to have a Place
therein, before ever the Place, or Walls, or House was built; read 2 Samuel 7.10.
1 Chronicles. 17.2. in these words, Moreover I will appoint a PLACE for my people
Israel, and will plant them that they may dwell in a PLACE of their own, and
move NO MORE. And that this Text holds correspendency with the forecited Text,
Isa. 56. see verse. 3. compared with verse. 8. Chap. 57.13. which also agrees
with the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 69.35, 36. which says, For God will save
Zion, and build the Cities of Judah, that they may dwell there and have it in
possession; the seed also of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love
his Name, shall dwell therein; according to that Text, Revel 3.12. which says,
that they shall go no more out, but I will write upon him the Name of my God,
etc. and that is a better Name than of Sons and of Daughters; So then the Place
is as lasting as the Name: But give me leave to speak (a little like your self)
by conjectures and imaginations, and probabilities, and the like, and if I be
admitted I shall thus say; that whereas you say, that the word PLACE is to be
understood Church Power; I say that the word NAME, is that which signifies
Church Power in Scripture, and in reason more properly than the word PLACE; for
it is said, that God gave Jesus a NAME above every NAME, that at the NAME of
Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and
things under the earth: Now if we simply understand it as a NAME, there were
other which were Named Jesus as well as the Lord Jesus: But by NAME, I
understand signifies Power, that Christ had all Power in heaven and earth
resigned up into his hands, and so his NAME signifies his Power, and also it
has been a Proverb (formerly) We charge you in the Kings NAME, meaning by his
Power or Authority: much more I could say, but enough to prove the word NAME to
signify Power, and if so, then the power is to be an everlasting power, and
Throne, (viz. PLACE) and so to remain to all generations: I could
(peradventure) alligorize the Scriptures, and make them serve my own
imaginations, and carry a very fair face that ways, and thereby be like unto
one hopping in the Clouds, and lead other after me, but these things I do
protest against, and endeavor nothing more (if my heart deceive me not) than
to know and declare Christ Jesus and his Laws, in the plainness and simplicity
of them, as they were delivered to (and practiced by) the primitive Churches,
whose footsteps we ought to walk in, agreeing with that Propesie, Psalm. 78.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. in these words, We will not hide them from their
Children, showing to the generations to come, the praise of the Lord, for he
has established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel, which he
commanded our Fathers that they should make them known to their Children, that
the generations to come might know them; walk about Zion, and go round about
her, tell the Towers thereof, mark ye well her bull-works, consider her
Palaces, that ye may tell it to the generations following; FOR I have made a
covenant with my chosen, thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy
Throne to all generations, wherefore, Glory be to God in the Church by Christ
Jesus through all ages, World without end Amen. Ephesians. 3. last. Psalm. 89.3, 4.
Psalm. 48.12, 13. And now I shall only sum up all in a few words, and pass from
this particular. And the first is,

First, That every thing has its beginning, and continuance from the word of
God, says Mr. Henden, and yet did say (in the above mentioned Conference) to
Captain Tucker when he urged a Scripture command for to warrant the practice of
Baptism in our age, said, that a command to warrant the practice of it was not
sufficient, unless it were accompanied with the same power, the which I
conceive agrees not together.

Secondly, Mr. Henden says, that Baptism and the Lords Supper, did not cease
in all the time of Apostasy, BUT DID REMAIN practicable as a duty to be
practiced, it having a word for its continuation; and yet to my best
understanding of his practice (by information) he practices neither of them,
and thereby condemns himself in the thing that he allows, and therefore its
just with God to give him up to blindness.

Again, as for his cited place, Isa, 56.5. to prove some of the Ordinances, to
cease; is answered: as,

First, by showing it was not a prophecy of the primitive Gospel Church,
because the primitive Gospel Church was to offer no burnt offering and
sacrifice upon the Altar, as these were to do, and to be accepted in so doing,
but these things were taken out of the way, and not to be mentioned amongst a
Gospel Church; for so says the Spirit, sacrifice and offering, and burnt
offerings thou would not, neither had thou pleasure in them; but a body
have thou prepared.

Again, the Gentiles were then under those sacrifices joined to God.

Again, its proved that the PLACE is as everlasting as the NAME, and that NAME
in Scripture signifies power more properly than PLACE: And thus I pass to the
next proof, or reason, to prove the cessation of some of Christ's Ordinances,
cited by Mr. Henden, which is; says he,

Turn to, Mat. 16.18. Where you may observe, that to the profession of Peter's
faith, and Christ the rock believed: is fore-spoken that the Gates of Hell
shall not prevail against it; but verse. 19. The keys of binding and loosing,
opening and shutting, are set after ^as having no such promise annexed to them;
and why should this be but to show that these keys in the Churches hand,
should have a sink and be loosed for their efficacy for a time.

Answ. From what you say here, I understand you do believe (or at least admit
of it) that the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against the Church of Christ,
but that there shall be one in all ages, only this Church is to loose her keys
(as you think) so as not to bind and loose, open and shut; that is, (as I
understand) not to receive in, nor to cast out; and how this Church shall come
to loose her keys I know not, (although I have well perused what you say
concerning the star that fell from Heaven to Earth) for God will not take away
the keys (that I can find) from the Church and Devils (or wicked men) cannot
take them away, for the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, how then
shall these keys come to be loost? I am a thinking what you might have said,
from Mat. 25. That while she slumbred and slept, she let them fail out of her
hands; but I suppose, that if she had so done, she would have took them up
again, when she was awake; but you say, that there was a star fell from Heaven
to Earth, that had the key of the bottomless pit, viz. an evil Angel, (or
Minister as I understand you) which had usurped all Church power into his
custody, totally apostated from Heaven to Earth* and becomes a mere earthly
Angel, by which the Church policy that before was a Kingdom of Heaven, is
become a bottomless pit, and instead of the keys of the celestial Kingdom,
was another contrary key of the same bottomless pit, the key being the same
with the Church.

Answ. The particulars (considerable) are these; as first, there was an Angel
that had usurped all Church power into his custody, (say you:) To which I say,
me thinks its very strange, that an Angel should usurp all Church power into
his custody, sure it was not while he was in Heaven, nay, but I remember it was
after he was fallen to Earth; and then it was not the key of the Kingdom of
Heaven (viz. the power of the true Church) corrupted, but it was another key
(viz. another power) ever the key and power of Darkness, and indeed it cannot
be rationally imagined (as I think) that an Angel (that is to say or Minister)
should carry all the power and authority away of all the seven Churches of
Asia, which had seven Angels belonging unto them, and not only those seven
Churches, but also many other Churches, that were then extant upon earth; so
then if the Angel received his key after his fall (the which he did read,
Revel. 9.1, 2, 3, 4.) then it could not be the key of the Kingdom of Heaven
CORRVPTED, but another key given to him, namely the key of the bottemless pit;
and what proof is this to prove that all Church power was lost, when an Angel
(viz. or Minister) fell away from Heavenly mindedness, to earthly mindedness;
let the rational Reader Judge.

Secondly, That the keys spoken of ( Mat. 16.18.) were to remain in the
Churches hands for ever, is very plainly proved in the Scripture; as,

First, From the words of our blessed Saviors own mouth, Mat. 18.18, 19, 20.
in these words, Verily I say unto you, that whatsoever ye, (viz. the Church)
shall blind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven; and whatsoever ye shall loose
on earth, shall be loosed in HEAVEN: from these words we may see, that Christ
has given his Church power to deal with offenders and to bind them, that is,
to exclude them from that Communion of Saints; and that it is to be perpetuated
is plain, because it is annexed to verse. 20. which is perpetuated, as is most
evident: Thus we may see in the first place, that Christ did once give his
Church his power, and never took it away again from them, and the power, and
strength of Hell cannot do it. For the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it; and surely the falling of one Star from Heaven to Earth (namely the fall of
one Minister) could not dispossess the whole body of Christ, (namely, his
Church in all places consisting of many particular Churches, and Stars or
Ministers) of all their power that Christ gave unto his body, the Church; it
being further considered, that the Gates of Hell was not to prevail against it;
take this comparison.

Suppose the Constable of Benenden should lose his power (as an Officer) by
reason of his rebellion, does it therefore follow that all the Constables in
the seven hundreds (or in that division) have lost their power, who have not
rebelled, and the several Parishes thereby lose their power, so as they cannot
execute the Law upon offenders? which if so, it is a Paradox unto me; even so,
if one Minister of the Church, or one Minister and Church should fall away, and
so lose their true power, and in the room thereof, take up the power of
darkness; does it therefore follow that all the other Churches and Ministers
(which did not fall) should lose their power also? surely no, there is no
reason to be given to prove it: but we find there was but one STAR (in the
singular number) and not STARS (in the plural number) that fell, and therefore
to say, because one Minister fell and lost his place, and true power, therefore
there must needs be a sink of all Ministers, and power; is all one, as if I
should say, that because Judas fell and lost his power and Apostle-ship;
therefore there was no Apostle-ship nor power upon Earth, which to say, would
be rediculous, and yet there is as good reason for the one as for the other,
but indeed no reason at all for neither; so then the sum of what can be said
from, Revel. 9.1, 2, 3. Is, that there was a STAR that fell from Heaven to
Earth, and worked wickedness (that is) one Minister fell from Heaven (that is
to say) from the Heavenly Church state, to an Earthly Church state, from the
Oracles of God, to the traditions of men, and so it might be (and was) that one
Minister amongst many might fall, and yet the rest stand fast; as it was with
many in the primitive age, and this is all which can be said from Revelations
9. And,

Secondly, That Church power was perpetuated, and to remain after these
Apostles Death, amongst the Churches, is plain, because the successive
Ministers and Churches were to use the same practice of receiving and
rejecting, as we may read, Tit. 3.10. 2 Timothy 4.2. 2 These. 3.14.

And your own principle allows of it, for you do affirm, that the practice of
the Lords Supper is perpetuated, and to remain in all ages; and suppose you did
do, what you judge is your duty to do, (namely observe) and keep the Lords
Supper, it must also of necessity be your own practice; for suppose that one of
your communicates that appeared to be a civil honest religious man, but last
Lords day, and one which ye much delighted in: but peradventures before the
next Lords day, he appears to be an hypocrite (even a drunkard, or a
fornicator, or the like) now will you admit of that man (although formerly he
had communion with you, to have communion with you now when he appears both to
you and all men (that behold him) to be a scandalous and profane man, I hope
not: and if another man of the great or little Bodies (as you call them) should
proffer to have communion with you, (whom you judge godly) would you not admit
of him? surely yea; and if so, consider at your leisure, how much less this is
than receiving, and rejecting, taking in, and casting out, binding and loosing;
consider well, (if yours were a congregation approved of by Christ) the danger
of such as ye reject, and the benefit of such as ye admit of; and indeed my
opinion is, that the great reason why ye do not practice that Ordinance, is,
because if you did, then you would be necessitated to receive in, and cast out,
or otherwise, you would have such a communion as the very worldlings would
hiss at; but now that you may shuffle a company together of all sorts, and
enlarge your Tents, rather than you would let go some (the which you would be
ashamed of, if yours were a communion of Saints) you let go Christ's Ordinance,
and so condemn your self in the things that you allow; and indeed I do profess
it seems very strange to me, that any man that has but a face of zeal in
Religion and godliness, that they will associate themselves with you in
spiritual things, for I do assure you, that I should be very cautious how I had
any communion with a man that lives in the breach of that which he knows to
be his duty to do, fearing that he that makes but little conscience (or indeed
no conscience) in one duty, will make as little conscience in another, provided
it be inconsistant with his credit or reputation. But to pass these things, I
shall give an argument to prove the continuation of receiving, and rejecting,
binding and loosing: which is,

If there be such a conjunction between keeping the Lords Supper, and
receiving, and rejecting, as that the Lords Supper cannot remain practicable,
and to be practiced, so as to be approved of God, without it; then receiving
in, and casting out, is as perpetual as the Lords Supper.

But there is such a conjunction between the keeping of the Lords Supper, and
receiving, and rejecting; so that the Lords Supper cannot remain practicable,
and to be practiced, so as to be approved of by God without it.

Ergo, the Ordinance of receiving and rejecting, is as perpetual as the Lords
Supper, and one to attend the other. The major is undeniable; that is to say,
(in short thus) if receiving in, and casting out, be an Ordinance of such
consequence, as the Lords Supper cannot remain to be practiced without it; then
it of necessity will follow, that if one remain practicable so does the other,
and Mr. Henden says one does remain, namely, the Lords Supper.

And the minor I shall prove, that one cannot remain practicable without the
other; that is to say, that without receiving into the Church, and casting out
of the Church, the Ordinance of the Lords Supper cannot remain practicable and
practiced, so as the Lord will approve of it: and if so, receiving into
communion and casting out, ( viz. binding and loosing) is perpetuated and to
remain as well as the Lords Supper: but now to prove the minor, namely, that
the Lords Supper cannot remain practiced, so as to be approved of by God,
without receiving in and casting out; is first, persons must have a time to be
received into the visible Church of Christ, one way or other, unless persons
are born members of Christ's Church, the which I think none will affirm, because
Christ says, that unless a man be borne again, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; for that which is born of flesh, is flesh, and that which is
born of Spirit, is Spirit; marvel not that I say unto thee, that thou must be
borne again: And that it was the practice of the primitive Churches to receive
in her members, is clear from these Scriptures, and many more that might be
added, Romans 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 7.2. Gal. 4.13, 14. 3 John 10. So
that if there be not a continual adding to the Church daily such as shall be
saved, then Christ's House will be quickly empty.

Secondly, If there be not also a casting out, the Lords Supper cannot remain
practiced, so as the Lord will accept of it, for the Lord has commanded, that
if any be a fornicator, or covetous, or extortioner, or an idolator, or a
drunkard, or a railor, that the Church should not have communion with him, no
not with such an one to eat; and that there has been such in the Church of
God, and have been cast out when they have been discovered, read 1 Cor. 5. from
the first verse to the 12. and that it is so in our days, is plainly seen,
that there be some that seem to walk a while as Christians, and then who can
deny them the Lords Supper? and not long after do show themselves wicked and
profane, and then who dares to administer it unto them, and who dares to eat
with them, because the Lord has forbid it? And therefore to say, that the
Churches may and ought to break bread ( viz. eat the Lords Supper) at such a
time as she has lost her power to deal with the wicked, and scandalous (so far
as to exclude them) is no less than to say, that Christ is a transgressor in
building the things the which he has destroyed; and will not the Church then
be a cage of all manner of unclean birds, or is it not as frequently seen, that
there be apostates in our days, as in the primitive age? and in short take
this maxim, that take either a Commonwealth without its power in government,
namely power to bind and loose, (in Civils,) and a Family without its power in
government, and a Church of Christ without its power in government, and you
shall see that the best of it will be a lump of confusion; and at the end come
to destruction, or be a desolation: so then the sum of all is this in short,
that if the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, be perpetuated and to ramain in the
greatest times of apostasy, then the power of the Church also did remain,
because it is impossible for persons to eat the Lords Supper, so as for God to
approve of it, if the Church have not power to exclude offenders, because with
such the Church may not eat, nor have no fellowship in Spiritual things, 2 Cor.
6. And that such were and will be found in the visible Church till they be
purged out, the Scriptures and our experience witnesses daily; from whence we
may see, that if the Church have not lost that precious Ordinance of the Lords
Supper, neither has she lost her keys of binding and loosing, namely, of
receiving in, or casting out, although one Star fell, from Heaven to Earth,
Revel. 9. yet he carried not away the heavenly keys, or power, no more than
the evil Angels when they fell could carry away the heavenly power and
authority of the good Angels; no, they were so far from carrying away the power
that the good Angels had, that the power that the evil Angels had was taken
away and given to the good Angels; as the one Talent was taken and given to him
that had ten; so to him that has shall be given, and to him that has not
shall be taken away that which he has: so then the conclusion is, that if one
Star did fall, its nothing in comparison of many Stars which did not fall; and
that fallen Star, did not carry away the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven,
namely, the heavenly power, but God took it away from him, and the Devil gave
him the keys of drakness, so it was not the keys of the Kingdom, for they
still remained with them, that abode in the truth; as has been already proved,
and by your self (in effect) has been granted: and thus I pass to the next
thing considerable; which is,

The four Winds, Revel. 7.1. with its interpretation by Mr. Henden.

But by the way I take notice of what is said in the beginning of his 4. page,
from Zech. 4. which speaks concerning their building of Jerusalem and the
Temple, after the seventy years of captivity in Babylon, the which he applies
to be a Gospel Church; and the Pipes there spoken of, to be understood
Ordinances, and from the seven Pipes spoken of, verse. 2. is to be understood
the practicing of the full number of Ordinances in the Primitive time; and the
two Golden Pipes, in verse. 12. Is to be understood the least of numbers, and
that least of numbers relates to the time of the Churches being in Babylon,
that then the lesser number of Ordinances were practicable, and to be practiced.

This is the sum in short that I gather from that (his) discourse.

To which I answer briefly; and first, that the 4 Chapter of Zech. is a
Prophecy of a Gospel Church, I cannot (as yet) see nor believe; it is clear,
that it was a prophecy of the redifying of Jerusalem; and the Candelstick, the
Lamps and Pipes belonging to it, is the same vessels that God appointed in the
Temple, as you may read Exodus 25. Lev. 24.4. Numb. 4.9. the oil vessels
ministering unto it, is to be understood the Pipes) Chap. 8.2. 2 Kings 4.10. 1 Chronicles. 28.15. from these and many more Scriptures that might be added, we may
see, that the Candlestick, with the Lamps, and Pipes, (viz.) the ministering
vessels unto the Lamps and Candelstick, was the same that God showed unto
Moses, in the pattern, and appointed it to remain in the Temple, and after that
pattern, it was made in Solomon's time, and the very same was to be after the
seventy years of captivity; and it is far more evident, because if we observe
the Prophecy of Haggai, who speaks of one and the same thing, he will tell us,
that Zerubbabel and Joshua, (according to Zechariahs words) that he should lay
the foundation, and also finish it, Hag. 1.14. Zech. 4.9. and that this
prophecy relates to Jerusalem, read Haggai, and Zechariah at large; I do not
say, that it relates only to the rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the Temple at the
end of the seventy years captivity, but in it is a Prophecy of the redifying
of the City and Temple, destroyed since by Titus Vespatian, which is yet to be
built again according to the Word of the Lord, Rev. 11. but more of that anon;
but in a short sentence, I further add this as a reason to prove, that the
Prophecy of Zechariah, Chap. 4. most primely relates to the redifying of
Jerusalem, at their coming out of the seventy years of captivity, because that
both Haggai and Zechariah, have the Word of the Lord coming to them both at
that time, as to Haggai the Word of the Lord came to him in the sixth and
seventh month, in the second year of Darius, Chap. 1.1. Chap. 2.1. and to
Zechariah it came in the eighth month, in the same year, Zech. 1.1. and the
work of both Prophets was to stir up the People to the work of building of the
House of God; for they being hindered (by subtilty) in the days of Cyrus,
because that Zerubbabel and Joshua, and the rest of the chief of the Fathers,
would not let the people of the Land build with them, as you may see at large
in, Ezra. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. that they at last out of custom grew careless,
and was content to live in their sealed houses, and let the house of God lie
waste, Hag. 1.2. and hence the Word of the Lord stirred them up, by the two
fore mentioned Prophets, namely, Haggai and Zechariah, that they might go on to
finish the Work, for Zerubbabel had begun it before, and laid the Foundation in
the days of Cyrus, and being stopped as before said, he was to finish it in
the days of Darius; which agrees with the words of Zechariah, Chap. 4.9. in
these words, The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house,
his hands also shall finish it; compare Haggai with the four first Chapters of
Zechariah, and compare them both with, Ezra 3.8.9, 10. Chap. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
6. and you may clearly see, that what I have said is undeniably true; and that
is the thing that Zechariah speaks of, in Chap. 4. which Mr. Henden would have
to be a Gospel Church; it is clear that men may be carried away very strangely,
in the judgments and understandings, if that they be guided by their own
spirits, or immaginations, without searching the Scriptures, and well comparing
them together, so as they may hold a correspondency together; I am not willing
to be nice in observing obsurdities, the which if I were, and had time I could
observe many; but at present I shall leave this thing, saying, that if the
Pipes signify the Ordinances of the Gospel, and that they were lost from seven
to two; so that there is now but two Ordinances practicable, (and it is a
question to some whether Mr. Henden practice above one of them two) what
Ordinances they be which remain? but you say that the two signify the least of
numbers, and so I think that two is the least of numbers: but that I may take
you in the best sense, I understand you mean, that the Ordinances was divided
in two numbers, and the biggest number was to cease in Babylon (as you call it)
and the lesser number to be perpetuated and remain; the which if so, cast up
your account again, and you will find upon your own account, that the greater
number is perpetuated and to remain: as, 1. Ministry, 2. Prayer, 3. Praises, 4.
Baptism, 5. the Lords Supper, 6. the Sealed elect number, 7. the Spiritual
union, 8. the beginning and profession of faith, 9. the duties of charity; all
these are acknowledged by you to be perpetuated and to remain.

Secondly, the other number; as, 1 Confirmation, 2 Ordination, 3
Church-Censure, 4 Church-stating; these are corrupted, and are ceased as you
say; and which of these is the greatest number I leave the wise to judge: from
whence they may see, that the two Pipes should not parallel with the
perpetuated Ordinances; and therefore shall leave them as excellent in their
proper place and signification, but altogether of an uncertain sound as they
have been applied, not fit for persons to dance after: and thus I leave this
particular, and come to speak somewhat to the four Winds, Revel. 7.1.

The four Winds, (says Mr. Henden) Page 4. Is to be understood, the Winds of
the Spirit, the begetting and preserving cause of these visible keys before
spoken of, where by reason of the falling away, were wholly withheld from
their apparent blast, and the cause failing, the effects must also cease. These
four Angels we conceive to be evil Spirits, working by their principal
Ministers the four capital Patryarchs of the Christian World; to wit, the
Bishop of Alexandria for the South, of Antioch, for the East, of
Constantinople, for the North, and Rome for the West; who usurping all
ecclesiastical government into their hands, did by their contention and pride
gradually detain the four Winds from breathing in the external regement, till
at the last the head-ship fell into Rome, Page 29.

Answ. There is many things laid down, the which I shall speak to in
particular, and that very briefly, because I am much straightened for time; and
also I think there is so little color of truth in it, that few will believe
it, whether I speak any thing to it yea or nay: but because I would not
willingly miss any thing that seems of weight in your eye, I shall examine the
particulars, and first to the first; which is,

The four Winds spoken of, Revel. 7.1. Is the Winds of the Spirit, (says Mr.
Henden.)

In Answer to this, I shall cite the Text, and speak little to it, but leave
the Reader to Judge; see the Text, Revel. 7.1. in these words, And After these
things, I saw four Angels standing on the four corners of the Earth, holding
the four Winds of the EARTH, that the Wind should not blow upon the Earth, nor
on the Sea, nor on any green Tree; From these words we may take notice, that
the four Winds, are called the Winds of the EARTH, (mark that) and wherever the
Spirit of the Lord, or the breathings forth of his Spirit, is called by the
name of the four Winds of the Earth; I never yet read, although I have
examined, Ezekiel. 1.4, 5. chap. 37.9.14. Acts 2.2. The which none of the places
run parallel with Revelations 7.1. They are not called the four Winds of the
Earth; as for Exekiels vision, chap. the first, Ezekiel saw the Heavens opened
(it was not the four Winds of the Earth, no but) a whirlwind and a cloud from
the OPEN HEAVENS (Northward) in the which whirlwind the Lord appeared to
Ezekiel between the sour living creatures, which were Cherubims; and we know it
is usual for the Lord to appear in a whirlwind between the Cherubims, that
those living creatures spoken of in Ezekiel. 1.5. were Cherubims, and that the
Lord dwells between or amongst the Cherubims, is clear from chap. 10.
compared with 1 Samuel 4.4. 2 Kings 19.15. Psalm. 80.1. and 99.1. And that which
is spoken obscurely in the first chap. of Ezekiel, is more plainly expounded in
Chap 10. where the living creatures spoken of in Chap. 1. are called Cherubims,
in Chap. 10.20. in these words, This is the living creature that I saw under
the God of Israel, by the River Chebar, and I knew that they were Cherubims:
Time would fail me to open the matter contained in the vision, and the end of
it, but enough to prove, that it relates not at all to the four Winds spoken
of, in Revel. 7.

Secondly, as to the Winds spoken of, in Ezekiel. 37.9. I say, that its only used
by way of allusion, because our lives are called wind, ( Job 7.7.) and Israel
being in captivity, and so as dead men, the Lord shows the Prophet Ezekiel,
that he would revive them, and recover them out of their captivity, and bring
them again into their own Land, verse. 21. and also we may observe, that they
must first have the breath of life and be brought out of their graves, which
breath of life, to raise them from their graves, was to come from the four
Winds; and then after this they were to be brought into their own Land, and the
Spirit of God was not to be poured out upon them while they were in captivity,
but after they were come into their own Land at a set time, Zech. 12.9, 10, 11.
which shows that Wind spoken of there, was not that Spirit which you aim at,
which if it were, yet it holds no agreement with the text cited by you, Revel.
7.1. because it is not called the Winds of the Earth, for there is the Winds of
the Earth, and there is the Winds of Heaven, Dan. 8.8. Chap. 11.4. Zech. 2.6.
Mat. 24.31. Revel. 7.1.

Thirdly, To the Text cited by you, Acts 2.2. in these words, And suddenly
there came a sound FROM Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, etc. from these
words we may see, that this Wind came from HEAVEN, and so was not that Wind
spoken of, in Revel. 7. Because that was the four Winds of the EARTH, (mark
that.)

Fourthly, it does not say, that there came a Wind from Heaven and sat upon
each of them, but cloven tongues which sat upon each of them, and the sound
was like unto a mighty rushing Wind; it does not say it was a Wind that blew,
but there was heard a sound as it were a mighty rushing Wind; so then the sound
of it was as it were (or) like a Wind, and every likeness is not the same; but
why need I keep such a stir about this Wind, I remember Mr. Henden says in his
28. Page, and line 19, 20. that the withholding the Winds of the Spirit hurt
not the elect, his words are these; all save the elect were hurt thereby and
subverted.

From whence we now learn, from what Mr. Henden says in this place, that it
was from the reprobate that the Winds of the Spirit was withheld from blowing
on them: This is that I understand from his words, if I understand him aright;
unless there be a third sort of men, that is to say, the elect and reprobate,
and another sort which is neither elect nor reprobate; and if this be Mr.
Hendens opinion, (viz.) that the withholding of the Winds of the Spirit, did
not hurt the elect but the reprobate, then one of us have fought (as it were)
with our own shadow, for it was ever my judgment since I knew any thing of God,
that Gods holy Spirit was ever withheld from the reprobate, they having no
part or portion in it; And thus I pass the sour Winds at present, and come to
speak somewhat briefly to the Angels; (which is) says Mr. Henden,

The Angels spoken of Revel. 7.1. we conceive (says he) to be evil Spirits,
working by their principal Ministers, the four capital Patryarchs of the
Christian World; to wit, the Bishop of Alexandria, etc.

Answ. Methinks it is very strange Doctrine to be published, or to be believed,
(namely to say) that evil Spirits should have power to hold the good Spirits,
and so the good Spirit (or the Spirit of God) to become as it were subordinate
to the evil; that God should put his Spirit into the hands of the Devil: I have
read in ( Acts 7.51. 1 These. 5.19.) that wicked MEN may resist the counsel of
God, (or Spirit of God against themselves) and quench the workings of the
Spirit of grace within themselves, whereby they should be Sealed unto the day
of Redemption: But I never yet read, that the Devil or wicked men could hinder
the working of Gods Spirit in or amongst his Church; and to think that God
would give his good Spirit to be holden by and among wicked Spirits, is very
vain and rediculous; for what concord has Christ with Belial? or what
fellowship has light with darkness, or God with the Devil?

But peradventure some will say, we cannot (indeed) readily believe, that ever
God gave his Spirit into the custody of evil Spirits to hold; Therefore what
Angels do you think they were, and what were the Winds?

Answ. The Angels I understand to be the Angels of the Lord, who are Ministering
Spirits, sometimes to administer blessings; but now sent forth by God to
execute his Judgments upon the great Antichrist, after the Man-child was caught
up to God, and to his Throne; for it follows in the nick of time, even when
the Heaven is rolled together like a serouse, Revel. 6.14, 15, 16. (to the
great amazement that will be at the sign of the Son of man coming in the clouds
of Heaven, with power and great glory) and at that time woe be to the
inhabitants of the earth and sea, Revel. 12.12. because of the Devils being
come down, and then shall go forth the seven Angels to pour out their Vials
upon the earth; and at that time also shall the four Angels (that held the four
Winds) execute their office, at which time there shall fall grievous and
noisome sores upon those that have received the mark of the Beast, Revel. 16.1,
2, 3. That both Sea and Land shall be infected, and the Sun scorching (with
heat) every green tree, and the Sons of men also; and by reason of the Winds
being withheld, the earth, Sea and Rivers, and Fountains of water, together
with the Sons of men, shall be so scolded with the heat of the Sun, that they
shall be grievously perplexed, and shall blaspheme the name of God because of
the plagues, Revel. 16.9. and the execution of these things, will be in the
time of the Prophecy of the two witnesses, Revel. 11.6. compared with Zech.
5.1, 2, 3. with Revel. 10.2. verse. 10. chap. 11.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. the which
(if the Lord will) I shall speak to more at large anon, when I come to discover
what the outward Court and holy City is, and of its being trod under foot, and
who the woman is, which travaileth, and what the Man-child is, and of his being
taken up to God, and to his Throne, of the flight of the woman into the
Wilderness, and what Wilderness, and the time how long these things, with
several other are so annexed together, that they are unseperable; and thus I
pass, saying, that the Winds are to be understood according as the Scripture
calls them, namely, the sour Winds of the EARTH: and thus I come to the next
thing considerable; which is,

Of the outward Court and holy City, Revel. 11.1, 2. in these words, And there
was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood saying, arise and
measure the temple of God and the Altar, and them that worship therein, but the
Court which is without the Temple leave out and measure it not, for it is given
unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot forty and two
months; and I will give power to my two witnesses, and they shall Prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore days, clothed in sackcloth.

Before I shall give you the exposition of the Text, or unfold it unto you, I
shall show what Mr. Henden says is the meaning of the Text; which is,

We maintain (says he) the Temple to decypher the mystical union, of the one
hundred and forty four thousand Sealed, or elected ones, whereby they are built
up a spiritual house; and the Court without to be the externity of
ecclesiastical order, which was established by Christ in the primitive times,
page 38. Paragraph 1. Section 4.

Answ. I know not any one Text that seems to bear a face to such a thing, as
the Temple to decypher the mystical union of the one hundred forty and four
thousand Sealed ones, neither do I understand that the Sealed ones are, or can
be applied to the faithful Gentiles, without wresting and abusing the Text, for
the Text tells us plainly, that they that are Sealed are the Tribes of the
Children of Israel, and reckons them according to their several Tribes, as
you may read, Revel. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. in these words, And I heard the number of
them that were Sealed, an hundred and forty and four thousand, of all the
Tribes of the CHILDREN OF ISRAEL, (mark that) of the Tribe of JVDAH were Sealed
twelve thousand, of the Tribe of RVBEN were Sealed twelve thousand, of the
Tribe of GAD were Sealed twelve thousand, of the Tribe of ASER were Sealed
twelve thousand, of the Tribe of NEPTHALY were Sealed twelve thousand, of the
Tribe of MAN ASSES were Sealed twelve thousand, of the Tribe of SIMEON were
Sealed twelve thousand, of the Tribe of LEVI were Sealed twelve thousand, of
the Tribe of ISSACHAR were Sealed twelve thousand, of the Tribe of ZEBVLON were
Sealed twelve thousand, of the Tribe of JOSEPH were Sealed twelve thousand, of
the Tribe of BENJAMIN were Sealed twelve thousand; the which amounts just to
one hundred forty and four thousand, there being twelve thousand of every Tribe
Sealed, for there is twelve Tribes, and twelve times twelve thousand, is one
hundred forty and four thousand, the which were all of the Tribes of the
Children of Israel; so that those that call them Gentiles wresteth the
Scripture, for the Scripture does not only call them the Tribes of the Children
of Israel; verse. 4. but also repeateth every Tribe severally, so plain, that it
cannot without great abuse to the holy Spirit be evaded; time would fail me to
show the particulars relating to this thing, only thus; it is evident by the
Angel out of the East, that these twelve Tribes are to be sealed in their
foreheads, to that end that when the Angels go forth to execute Gods Judgments
upon the Earth, that they may be spared, when the seal of the living God is
seen upon their forehead, for this to be after the Man-child is caught up to
God, and to his Throne, at which time the Gentile Church (which I conceive to
be the Man-child) is to be in the Ark of their safety, being caught up to meet
the Lord in the air, and then the Jews that look for their Messiah, it being
the time that God has promised that all Israel (viz. the natural seed of
Abraham) shall be saved, as it is written, Romans 11. They shall have the Seal of
God, or the name of God written in their foreheads, to distingush them from the
worshippers of the Beast, who are to have the name of the Beast in their right
hand, or forehead, Revel. 13.16. upon whom the seven Angels are to pour out
their vials upon the earth, that the same persons who have received the mark of
the Beast in their foreheads, or hands, may be tormented, and then the
executing Angels will pass by all those that have the Seal of God in their
forehead, so that they shall not be plagued with those Judgments that shall be
executed upon the Beast and his worshippers; and to this end the Angel of the
East forbid the four Angels that had power to hurt the earth, that they might
not go forth to execute their office, till the servants of God were Sealed in
their foreheads, Revel. 7.2. And this agrees with the manner of Gods dealing
with his people, when he executes his Judgments upon the earth, as you may see,
Exodus 12.14. Ezekiel. 9.4, 5, 6. and to that end was these Israelites Sealed; so
that none of the plagues either of the four Angels, or the seven Angels did
them any hurt. And thus much at present of the Sealed number who they are, and
the Cause of their being Sealed, and afterward was seen preserved as a Sealed
number, Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Chap. 15.2, 3, 4. And so I pass to give my
opinion what the Temple and the outward Court, and holy City is.

Only by the way, I thus say, that although I have read Mr. Hendens opinion of
the outward Court, yet I cannot believe it, nor adhere to what he says,
because I do not find that ecclesiastical order, is in any one Text called the
outward Court, neither does it hold parallel with the outward Court, but rather
to the inward Court, even the holy of holies, into which the Priest was to
enter alone, who had the ecclesiastical order put upon him by God; but because
I find not the Scripture warranting such a parable; I leave it, and now come to
speak briefly to that Text, Revel. 11.1, 2. and first I shall cite the Text it
self; which is thus read,

And there was given me a reed like unto a rod, and the Angel stood, saying,
rise and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and them that worship
therein; but the Court which is without the Temple leave out, and measure it
not for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under
foot forty and two months, and I will give power to my two witnesses, and they
shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days cloated in
sackcloth; from this Text with many more we find, that Jerusalem and the Temple
is to be built again, and the Jews are to worship their God according to the
Law of Moses, at which time they shall earnestly look for their King (namely
the Son of God) according to the words of their Prophets, for although they
were blind, and understood not his coming in the day of his poverty, yet they
do believe that they have a King ( viz. Son of God) to come in glory and to
ragin upon the Throne of David, and when God shall give them opportunity to
return out of their long captivity; then shall they sit upon their building to
redifie the City and Temple, as I have formerly proved at large; (read my Zions
redemption) and that Jerusalem is to be built again, (which is called the holy
City, relating to, Revel. 11.1, 2.) read the words of the Prophets; which
says, They shall build the old wast places, they shall raise up the former
desolations, and they shall repair the wast Cities, and THE DESOLATIONS OF MANY
GENERATIONS: behold the day comes says the Lord, that the City shall be built
to the Lord from the Tower of Hanael unto the gate of the corner, and the
measuring line shall yet go forth over again, (compare Revel. 11.1, 2.) upon
the Hill Garib, and shall compass about Goath --, it shall not be plucked up,
nor thrown down any more FOR EVER; in that day will I raise up the Tabernacle
of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up
his ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old, and I will plant them
upon their Land, and they shall be NO MORE plucked out of their Land, which I
have given them, says the Lord God; And Ezekiels vision relates to this very
thing, where he says, In the vision of God brought he me into the Land of
Israel, and set me upon a very high Mountain, by which was as it were the frame
of a City on the South, and he brought me thither, and behold there was a man
whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his
hand, and a measuring reed, so he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits,
and the breadth twenty cubits before the Temple; and he said unto me, this is
the most holy place, this is the Law of the house upon the Mountain, and these
are the measures of the Altar, after the Rubites; and the name of the City from
that day shall be, THE LORD IS THERE; And that the Cities of Jerusalem is
called a holy City, read Isa. 64.10. chap. 61.4. chap. 60.18. Jer. 30.18. chap.
31.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. chap. 33.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Amos
9.14, 15. Ezekiel. 40.3. chap. 3.13. chap. 41.4. chap. 48.35. From all that which
has been said, this is the Sum (in short) that the City Jerusalem, and the
Temple is to be built again, and inhabited, and God there worshipped; only
there will be a stop in the work (by the Antichrist) before the outward Court
is finished, and therefore the measuring line is said not to pass over the
outward Court, (or it not measured;) but that I may be plain and easily
understood, I shall divide the matter in short and brief particulars.

The first is, the building of the City, the which I have spoken already to.

And the second is, of the Temple.

The third is, the outward Court, being given into the hands of the Gentiles,
and the holy City being trod under foot forty and two months.

And fourthly, of the two Witnesses prophesying in Sackcloth, one thousand two
hundred and threescore days.

That the City and Temple is to be built, you have heard somewhat from the
Prophets, (to witness it) but further you may see, that there will be a Temple,
(although not the union of the sealed number, as Mr. Henden supposed, which
has been already answered) but a material Temple, as says St. Paul, 2 These.
2.4. He ( viz. the man of Sin or Antichrist) shall sit in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God: But if the Temple be to be understood, to
discypher the Mistical union of the one hundred forty and four thousand, (as
Mr. Henden says) then it is impossible that the Man of Sin should sit there,
for they are not to be hurt; and that connot be said to be the Temple of God in
a spiritual sense, which is the seat of the Man of Sin; but in a material
Temple it has been so already, and will be so again, for says Christ, It is
written, my House should be a House of Prayer, but ye have made it a den of
thiefs.

And secondly, that there is to be a Temple, is also proved from Revel. 15.8.
in these words, And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God,
from his power, and no MAN was able to enter into the TEMPLE, till the seven
plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled.

From hence we see, that there shall be a material Temple which shall be so
filled with Gods glory, that no MAN shall enter into it, until the plagues of
the seven Vials be executed, and so Christ by the brightness of his coming and
excellent glory, shall dispossess the Man of Sin of his seat: and that the
glory of God did shine so of old in his Temple, read the words of the Prophet,
Isa. 6* 4. Ezekiel. 10.4.

And secondly, that the glory of the Lord is to appear, or fill his House or
material Temple. Again, read Ezekiel. 43.5, 6, 7. in these words, So the Spirit
took me up, and brought me into the inner Court, and behold the glory of the
Lord filled the House; and I heard him speaking unto me out of the House, and
the man stood by me, and he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my Throne,
and the place of the sole of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the
children of Israel for EVER, and my holy Name shall the House of Israel no more
defile. Agreeable to Chap. 37.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. as you may read
at large. I could give many reasons more to prove a material Temple, (and
elsewhere I have done it.)

But if it should be objected, That God does not dwell in Temples made with
hands.

I answer and say, it is very true, that the Temple of Jerusalem they had
defiled with their abominations, and therefore the Lord destroyed it, and for a
while took unto himself the instruments of a foolish Shepherd, Zech. 11.15.
and so was a Gin and a Snare to the House of Israel; and so the litteral Zion
was to be plowed like a field, and Jerusalem to become a heap; but it does nor
say, that Christ will never dwell in Temples, or a Temple made with hands, nor
that he will never dwell in Mount-Zion, (litteral) in Jerusalem, but
contrariwise says in many places, that he will come unto his Temple and dwell
in Mount-Zion in Jerusalem, as I before have proved, (read the place of Christ's
Kingly seat in the time of his Reign, in my Treatise to Mr. Holland annexed to
this) I could prove that the Lord will have his seat there, at large, and that
when his Tabernacle shall be with men, and his seat where his Father David's
was, that then it is to be in material Jerusalem, when the Law shall go forth
of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and this was the City, and
Altar, and Temple, which was to be measured, and the Worshipers which was
therein, namely, the Jews which were to return, and at that time shall be
returned unto their own Land, where they shall worship God according to Moses
Law, waiting for their Messiah.

Thirdly, what is to be understood by the outward Court, not measured or cast
out, or left out (as in reference to measurement) it is, that after the
Israelites be returned, before they have finished their outward Courts, and
walls, and the like; for their great care and first work shall be upon the
chief and principal place, viz. their City and Temple) the Gentiles, namely,
Gogg the Prince of Meshech and Tubal, whose Army shall be of them of Persia,
Ethiopia, and Libia, with Gomer, and the Family of Togarmah, a very great Army
of the North Quarters, shall be gathered together upon the Mountains of Israel,
and shall prevail, and spoil the Jews for a small season; and this shall be
done before the outward Court and walls be finished, which causes the Army of
the Gentiles, to call Jerusalem a Town of unwalled Villages, being without Bars
and Gates, as you may read, Ezekiel. 38.11. in these words, And thou shall say, I
will go up to the Land of UNWALLED VILLAGES, I will go to them that are at
rest, that dwell safely, all of them dwelling without WALLS, having neither BARS
nor GATES, to take a spoil, to take a prey, etc. And to this agrees the words
of the Prophet, Zecha. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 9. which says, I lift up mine eyes again
and looked, and behold a man with a MEASVRING LINE in his hand; Then said I,
whither go thou? and he said unto me, to measure Jerusalem, to see what is
the breaath thereof, and what is the length thereof: And behold the Angel that
talked with me went forth, and another Angel went out to meet him, and said
unto him, run, speak to the young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited, as
a TOWN without WALLS, etc. From these Scriptures, and more that might be added,
we may see, that the Walls and outward Court, shall not be finished till it is
taken, and the holy City trod under foot; but the time of its oppression is so
short, as not worth speaking of in comparison of time, namely, three years and
a half; so that this Prophet speaks little of the oppression of Israel, but
does (as it were) overlook it, because the time of it is so short, and speaks
of that which is of the greatest moment, namely, the Enemies destruction; but
the Prophet Zechariah agreeing with the Revelations shows, that the City
shall for a small time be surprised and taken, and the Jews persecuted,
although the City it self shall not be destroyed, but shall be the place of the
Enemies Randesvouz; and that this is true, read the words of the Prophet
Daniel, compared with Zechariah, which says, He shall enter also into the
glorious Land, and many Countries shall be overthrown, but these shall escape
out of his hands, even EDOM and MOAB, and the CHIEF OF THE CHILDREN OF AMMON;
and he shall plant the Tabernacle of his Palace between the Seas in the
glorious holy mountain, yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him:
And at that time shall Michael stand up, the GREAT PRINCE, which stands for
the Children of THY people; and there shall be a time of trouble, such as never
was since there was a Nation: For Behold the day of the Lord comes, and thy
spoil, (viz. Jerusalems) shall be divided in the midst of thee; and I will
gather all Nations against JERUSALEM to battle, and the CITY shall be taken,
and the Houses riffled, and the Women ravished; and half of the City shall go
forth into Captivity, and the residue of the people shall not be out off from
the City: (this is the Woman that flies into the Wilderness, and the remnant
of her Seed which remains.) Then shall the Lord go forth and fight against
those Nations, as when he fought in the day of battle; and his feet shall
stand in that day upon the Mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem: And I
said to the man clothed in Linen, how long shall it be to the end of these
wonders? (namely, the troublesome time, and the treading down of JERUSALEM
underfoot) And I heard the man clothed in Linen, swear by him that lives for
ever and ever, It shall be for a Time, and Times, and half a Time; and when he
shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy people, all these
things shall be finished.

From whence we may see, that Jerusalem is to be trod under foot, according to
the saying of the Text, Revel. 11. and also the time how long, (which by Daniel
is said to be, a Time, and Times, and half a Time; and in the Revelations,
Chap. 11.2. it is said, to be Forty and two Months, in these words, But the
Court which is without the Temple, leave out and measure it not, for it is
given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they tread under foot, forty
and two months.

All which time the Woman shall be fled into the Wilderness, (for she flies at
the first of Jerusalems being taken, so soon as she is delivered of the
Man-child, and it is the remnant of her seed, which remains in Jerusalem,
over whom the Beast is to have power forty and two Months, Revel. 13.5 Zech.
14.1, 2. Unto whom the two Witnesses is to prophecy; and the time of the
Woman's flight into the Wilderness) is the very same time (in latitude) with the
scattering of the power of the holy people, spoken by Daniel, Chap. 12.7. And
the holy City being trod under foot, spoken of by St. John, Rev. 11.2. And that
you may see, that the time of the Woman's flight into the Wilderness, is the
very time of the scattering of the holy People, (namely the People of the Jews,
which Daniel frequently calls a holy People, for then they shall all be holy
unto the Lord) and also the treading of the holy City underfoot, read Revel.
12.14. in these words, And to the Woman was given two wings of a great Eagle,
that she might flee into the Wilderness, into her place, where she is nourished
for a Time, and Times, and half a Time, from the face of the Serpent. From all
which has been said, I gather this Conclusion, (which materially offers it
self) which is, That the Court without, which is not to be measured, is to be
undestood, that the Jews are to return, and build their City and Temple; and
the Court without not measured, but given unto the Gentiles, is to be
understood, that the Families of the Gentiles (above spoken of) shall come to
Jerusalem, as to a Town of unwalled Villages, before the outward Court and
Walls is finished, and take it and divide the spoil; and the holy City being
trod under foot, is to be understood, the spoil that will be made in Jerusalem,
for the space of forty and two Months, in the which time, the two Prophets (or
Witnesses) shall prophecy unto that party of the Jews, which do not fly into
the Wilderness, Zech. 14.1, 2. Revel. 11.3. Chap. 12.17. the which time of
scattering of the holy People, Dan. 12.7. for a Time, and Times, and half a
Time; and the holy City being trod under foot, forty and two Months, Revel.
11.2. and the two Witnesses prophesying a thousand, two hundred and threescore
days; and the Woman's being nourished in the Wilderness, from the face of the
Serpent, a Time, and Times, and half a Time, agreeing with Daniel (as before
cited) All these times (though in several phrases) is one and the same time for
latitude, in which time the Jews shall be scattered, for as it is called by
John, Revel. 11.2. forty and two Months, and a thousand two hundred and
threescore days; yet to clear up what he means by that Time, he also calls it a
Time, and Times, and half a Time, Revel. 12.14. in the same phrase with Daniel
12.7. where he calls it a Time, Times, and a half, which is just three Years and
a half, for a thousand, two hundred and threescore days, considering according
to the Jews account, thirty days to a Month, is just forty and two Months, and
forty and two Months, is also three Years and a half; and hence it is called by
Daniel, and also by John, a TIME, and TIMES, and half a TIME: And that a Time
is to be understood one Year, and Times in the plural number, is to be
understood Years, read Dan. 4 25. in these words, And they shall drive thee
from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the Beasts of the field, and seven
TIMES shall pass over thee, till thou know that the most High rules in the
Kingdom of men, etc. From this Text we understand, that the seven TIMES, is
understood the seven Years that Nebuchadnezzar was cast out into the open
field, to eat grass with the Oxen, and to be wet with the dews of heaven, until
he had humbled himself, and acknowledged the Lord: So then by TIME in the
singular number, I understand one Year, and by TIMES in the plural number,
(although the least of numbers) I understand two Years; and by half a TIME, I
understand half a Year; so then the TIME, and TIMES, and half a TIME, is just
three Years and a half, which is also a thousand two hundred and threescore
days, or forty and two Months; all which being considered, with the premises,
shows, That although a measuring Line be to pass over Jerusalem yet once
again, yet before it is finished, (to wit the Walls or outward Court) there
will be a stop by the Man of Sin, or the great Army before mentioned, and the
City it self shall be taken, and the Houses riffled, and it trod under foot
three Years and a half, and then shall everlasting righteousness be broubt in,
namely, Jesus Christ, which shall take the Kindome, and Dominion, and greatness
of the Kingdoms under the whole Heaven, Dan. 7. and sit, and reign upon the
Throne of his Father David; and this is that which I understand from, Rev.
11.1, 2, 3, 4. with the fore mentioned Scriptures, and many that I could add if
I had time, the which is plainly signified from the 15 verse. of that fore
mentioned, 11. Chapter of the Revelations, in these words, And the seventh
Angel sounded, and there was a great voice in Heaven, saying, the KINGDOMS of
this WORLD, is BECOME the KINGDOMS OF OUR LORD, AND OF HIS CHRIST, AND HE
SHALL REIGN FOR EVER AND EVER; and thus much briefly to the Measurement of the
Temple, and City, and outward Court being cast out, and the holy City being
trod under foot; and fourthly, the time of the witnesses Prophesying, the which
will be just three years and a half, which is proved in the precedent
discourse, also more of that a non. And as for Mr. Hendens computation of time,
which is; (says he,)

A day being taken for a year, the flight of the woman, and the City being trod
under foot, and the two witnesses Prophesying in Sackcloath, is to be
understood one thousand two hundred and threescore years, in which time the
Church is only a sealed number, dis-robed of the beauty of her exterior Order;
paragraph 4 page 65. And also he further says, that the time of the beginning
of the suffering of the Church, and the City being trod under foot, was in the
year, 390. and to be fully expired in the year, 1650. and applies it to a
little light broke forth in England, about that time; and that you may see the
SVM of this spoken by him, (although in more words at large) read in his book
page 10. compared with paragraph the fourth.

To which I answer briefly in particulars: and,

First, if the forty and two months, and the one thousand two hundred and
threescore days; with the TIME and TIMES, and half a TIME, (all which is
acknowledged to be one and the same Time for the Latitude thereof) be expired
and ended in the year 1950. then upon that account the Woman is come out of the
Wilderness already, and has been almost for ten years since, upon Mr. Hendens
computation, (or calculation) of time; and if so, I hope Mr. Henden will admit,
that the Woman may practice all the Ordinances as they were delivered; or if
not, when shall she? if it be answered, that she is not to practice them till
the Winds of the Spirit breath upon them again, and if this be the time, then
is also as clear, that the spirit is entered into them again (from Mr. Hendens
own opinion;) for these two Prophets (says Mr. Henden) were to Prophecy a
thousand two hundred and threescore years, in Sackcloath; which time was
expired or ended, (as he says) in the year 1650, and we find that when they
had accomplished their Prophesies (which was accomplished at the time
aforesaid) then they were slain and lay dead, but three days and a half; the
which upon Mr. Hendens account is but three years and a half, at the end of
which time the Spirit of life was to enter into them again, Rev. 11.11. which
was above six years since. Sir, look about you, its time for you to up and be
doing, or to cast up your account a new; but more to these things anon, when I
come to show my opinion, upon the traveling Woman and Man-child, and Witness,
as before said, but I fear I shall be much straightened for time.

Secondly, It cannot be (as Mr. Henden says) that the Winds of the Spirit is
to be withheld these forty and two months, or 1260. days, so as that there
shall not be that visible demonstration of the spirit as in the Primitive time;
for it is clear, that the two witnesses in the time of their Prophecy in
Sackcloath, shall have as great power, and visible demonstration as ever was
known upon earth; that they have power, read Rev. 11.5, 6. in these words, If
any wan will hurt them sire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their
enemies; and if any man will hurt them, they must in this manner be killed;
these have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of their
Prophecy; and have power over waters to turn them into blood, Rev. 16.3, 4.
and to smite the Earth, with all plagues as often as they will. For the Angels
that hold the four Winds, and the seven Angels, are employed as ministering
Spirits, both to desend them from the malice of the Beast, so as he cannot
hurt, or interrupt them all the time of their Prophecy, and also to pour out
their Vyals, and withold the Winds, and smite the earth with curses so often
as they please: and that they did also exercise their power in the time of
their prophecy, is clear from verse. 11. where it is said, that They tormented
the Earth; so then they had power, and did also exercise it, which confutes
what Mr. Henden says.

And thirdly, whereas Mr. Henden says, in his page 65. that the true Church is
only a Sealed number, dis-robed of the beauty of her exterior order.

I answer and say, it seems strange to me, that the sealed number which Mr.
Henden (before) said, was not hurt, and yet says now that she were dis-robed
of her beauty, in outward order: and if this be not hurt, I know not what is
hurt, because God did ever delight in outward Order, where there was inward
grace, he being a God of Order, in all the Churches of his Saints.

Fourthly, It yet wants a proof, that ever the Woman lost any one of her robes,
(if she be to be understood a Gentile Church (as Mr. Henden says she is) for
she had them on, when Saint John saw her in his vision; and I do not read of
any ever saw her without them, (after she had put them on) unless Mr. Henden
did; but I suppose he did not; and so I shall leave this particular, and pass
to the next particular, which is from the text, Mat. 24* cited by M. Henden,
and I shall not take notice of every circumstance of things, but the ground of
the matter wherein we differ: which is, says he,

The marks of the false Churches, are four; as first, the visibility in their
stative order, lo here, or lo there.

The second, the phrase here and there, notes a manifest place of rest or
sitting down.

Thirdly, the variety here and there, which must Scatter, whereas the true is
uniform.

Fourthly, The visible, lo, or model, is first; and then Christ is brought
into it, lo here is Christ; as if the Spirit of life, and divine primitive
power were in it; the Wilderness is to be understood a Metaphorical Wilderness;
and secret Chambers, which figures out our lesser stated bodies; and so forth,
page 50, 51, 52.

In order to the answer of these things, I shall not take notice of every
objection or contradiction, but shall plainly and briefly cite the text, and
open it, and then leave the reader to judge, whether it speak of gathered, or
false constituted Churches, (as Mr. Henden says, when it speaks of the
Wilderness, or desert, or secret Chamber) or whether it be to be understood
literally, of a Material face, Christ in a desert, or in a secret Chamber; and
that we may come to understand it, let us observe the text as it is written,
Mat. 24.4, 5, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. in these words, And Jesus said unto them,
( viz. his Disciples) Take heed that no man deceive you. For many shall come in
my name, saying, I AM CHRIST: and deceive many. Then if they shall say unto
you, Lo here is Christ, or there: believe it not. For there shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great Signs and Wonders: insomuch
as if it were possible they should deceive the very elect. Behold, I have told
you before; Wherefore, if they shall say unto you, behold he is in the desert,
go not forth: behold he is in the secret Chamber, believe it not. For as the
lightening comes out of the East, and shines into the West: so shall also the
coming of the Son of man be. For wheresoever the carcass is, there will the
Eagles be gathered together.

In Order to the opening of this Text, I shall devide it into several parts:
and the first is, the Caution that Christ gives to his Disciples, which is,
Take heed (says he) that no man deceive you; and the reason is, because many
shall come in my name, and say I am Christ, and deceive many; the word Take
heed that no man deceive you; is not only to be understood the Disciples in
that Age, but in all Ages successively.

Secondly, Observe the Word, saying, I am Christ.

Which relates to a Person, and not to a Fabric, or a Model; more especially,
because we know that Christ is to come as a single person, as a Glorified man;
and therefore such as would feign him so as to make persons believe that they
are Christ, must come as a single Person, although with attendance as he is to
come.

And secondly, because we know that it has been the practice of some already,
who have given out of themselves, that they were some great one, even the Lord,
or he that is to be King of the Jews, as BENCHOCAB and HACKIT, (as has been
already mentioned) and more that might be mentioned, besides in our days, he
that professed himself to be the great one, or King of the Jews, and drawed
Disciples after him, who lived in a Tent near Rochester, known to be truth,
(together with) the late professed Christ near Bristol, who was adored in the
streets, (as was creditably spoken of such as heard it) with tho name HOSANNA,
BLESSED IS HE THAT COMES IN THE NAME OF THE LORD.

Thirdly, Because that the Scripture shows, that it is to be a person, and
not a fabric, or model, or form of worship; (false in its constitution) as
first; from Dan, 8.23, 24, 25. compared with 2 These. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. for
the Antichrist denies (says St. John) the Father and the Son, and he is an
Antichrist (that so does) and St. Paul says, that HE shall deny all that is
called God, or worshipped as God: And we know that Rome it self does
acknowledge God, and worship him, (although in a false manner) but the
Antichrist shall deny both the Father and Son, and will not admit that any
shall be worshipped as God but himself; showing himself that he is God: and to
bring his design about, he shall cause craft to prosper in his hand, says the
Prophet Daniel, which is a person coming with signs and lying wonders, 2 These.
2.3, 4, 5, 6. compared with Revel. 13.18, 19, 20, 31. agreeing with the Text it
self, Mat. 24.24. (which says) For there shall arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, (not false constituted Churches) and shall show great signs and
wonders, etc. From whence we may see, that the Antichrist or false Christ, is a
person or persons, and not a false worship.

Fourthly, and Lastly, it cannot be understood a form of worship, or a people
set down to worship God in a form, because the Text says, if they say, lo
here is Christ or there, believe it not; implying thus much, that Christ was
not to be found here nor there, that is, no where in any form or worship in no
Church whatsoever; and if this be true, then to be sure Christ is not to be
found in Mr. Hendens form, for Mr. Henden has a form which he pretends he
worships God in, to wit, a form of meeting together, a form of preaching, of
praying, of praising, and a form of Baptism, and the Lords Supper, (if he were
true to his principles) which is either a form of worship or a lump of
confusion; for what is without form (in point of visible worship) is confusion.
And what if Mr. Hendens Judgment were true, that is to say, if the Church were
in the Desert or Wilderness, has Christ left his Church there alone without
his spiritual presense? surely no, he has said (and is faithful) that he will
never leave and forsake his Church, so that wheresoever there be but two or
three gathered together in his name, he will be present with them, and was he
not with the Church in the Wilderness? Acts 7.38. yea, surely; it is not
(rationally) thought that Christ will not be found in his own worship, by such
as worship him in truth and righteousness of heart: so then the Text cannot be
interpreted as Mr. Henden interprets it, because Christ is to be found here and
there, and indeed every where; (in his spiritual presense) where two or three
meet together in his name, if it be in the Desert or Wilderness, he will be
there, for he was with his Church in the Wilderness, and is the same yesterday,
to day and for ever: And therefore it cannot rationally be understood as Mr.
Henden interprets it; and thus I pass what has been said to the Text by Mr.
Henden, and in the next place shall show you my opinion (briefly) upon the
Text; which is,

In this Text I observe many things, which were necessary to be spoken to if I
had time, because it holds correspondency with Daniel, Joel, Zechariah, and the
Revelations, but I shall only meddle with the point in controversy; namely,

First, What may be understood by the false Christ, and false Prophets, and of
their signs and wonders.

Secondly, Of the Desert, or secret chambers,

Thirdly, Of the coming of the Son of man like lightning.

Fourthly, and Lastly, of the carcass, and the Eagles being gathered unto it:
and these in order briefly, and first to the first; which is,

The false Christ's and false Prophets, I understand to be persons who will come
before the coming of the Lord Jesus, (in the Clouds in power and great glory)
and will affirm, that they are the Christ which was to come, the which some
have done already, but that I conceive to be only the working of the mystery of
iniquity, which began in the Apostles days, as St. Paul, and St. John
declares, 2 These. 2.7, 8. 1 John 2.18, 19. chap. 4.3. and that the height of
that iniquity centereth in that Beast, and false Prophet, spoken of, in Revel.
13.4, 5, to the sixteenth, chap. 19.19, 20. compared with Daniel, where he is
called a vile Person, with the Thessalonians, where he is called the Man of
Sin, in Ezekiel where he is called Gogg, and again with Daniel where he is
called the little Horn, and a King of a fierce countenance, understanding dark
sentences, who shall speak miraculous things against the God of Gods, denying
all that is called God, and worshipped, siting in the Temple of God, showing
himself that he is God: and the signs and wonders spoken of in the Text, is
those miracles spoken of in Dan. 8.25. Revel. 13.13, 14, 15, 16. chap. 16.14.
chap. 19.20. and more that might be added; I shall only speak but a little to
it more, because I have spoken of it more at large in my book, entitled, Zions
Redemption and Original Sin; wherein also I have shown the difference between
the Romish Babylon, and the Antichrist; showing them to be two, one different
from the other: But at present I say, that the cause of these false Christ's
working signs and wonders, will be to deceive the elect, ( viz. the Jews who
are commonly called in Scripture the elect) that it is that people, namely the
Jews, which he will endeavor to deceive, read Dan. 11. ult. chap. 12.1, 2, 7.
Zech. 14.1, 2, 3. And his Throne shall be in Jerusalem amongst the Jews, as I
have (before) proved; and the Jews looking for Jesus to come according to
Daniels and Isaiah's Prophecy, which says, ( Dan. 7.10.) Fiery streams
issued, and come forth from before him: thousand thousands ministered unto him,
etc. and the Man of Sin or the false Christ, shall have thousand thousands to
minister unto him: For his Army shall be very great, and that he may also have
fiery streams issue before him, that he may make the Jews believe that he is
the true Christ, and thereby (if it were possible) deceive the Jews, ( viz. the
elect) he causes fire to come down from Heaven in the sight of men, to deceive
them that live upon the face of the earth, Revel. 13.13. at which time the two
Prophets shall begin their Prophecy, that they may establish the Jews in the
Testimony of Jesus, and they shall work miracles indeed, such as shall destroy
all the former ones wrought by the false Christ, like as Moses and Aarons Rod,
eat up the Rods of the Magicians in Egypt, and as the false Christ shall have a
false Prophet, or false Prophets, that shall bear their Testimony, for the
false Christ, (who will practice lying signs and wonders) even so the true
Christ, shall have two witnesses, or Prophets, who in truth and uprightness
shall bear their Testimony for the true Christ, (who not long after will descend
upon the Mount of Olives, Zech. 14.4.) which true Prophets shall as aforesaid,
do such things, and miracles, that shall not only eat up (or destroy) the other
that were false, but shall be a sore punishment to the Beast and false Prophet,
and all that have received his mark in their hand or forehead; that these
Prophets and things shall stand up (and be done) in the very end of time. (as I
may say) is clear, read the fore mentioned Prophets, and compare them together,
and you shall see it to be true; althought I do not deny, but there may have
been some things done in the World already like it in one sense or another, but
the fulfilling of these Prophets, are to be expired very near the second and
glorious coming of the Lord Jesus; and thus I shall pass to the second thing
fore mentioned; which is,

The Desert or secret Chamber I understand, is his ( viz. the false Christ)
confining himself to a private place, to that end that he may be the more
sought after, and adored, for the more privately he contains himself, the more
he will be sought after, for men's fa^cies are set much upon novelties; hence
the certain GREEK sought to see Jesus, John 12.20. And many have a desire to
see great ones, and more especially if they be confined to privacy, but if he
be public, he may pass again and again and not be so sought after, because
they then can see and confer with him when they please.

Secondly, It is a great means to deceive, for those that are admitted to see
his majesty, it is a thousand to one if they be not deceived, partly by doting
upon his majesty, and partly by going contrary to Gods Word, gadding in their
minds after vanity; and to this end he confines himself to secrecy, into
secret places at his first coming; but says Christ, behold I have told you
before, go not after HIM; and this brings me to the third particular, which is
his reason why they shall not go to see a Christ in a Desert, or secret
Chamber; which is,

Thirdly, because (says Christ) as the lightening comes out of the East, and
shines even unto the West, (or from one end of Heaven to the other) so shall
also the coming of the Son of man be.

The lightening I understand to be the Sun which lighteneth the Earth, rising
in the East, and shining even unto the West, or from one end of Heaven to the
other; (as Luke has it) but if so be that some should understand, this
lightening, as comits, or common lightening, which is usual in hot wether, and
in times of thunder, and the like; It cannot be so understood, because that
such lightening comes as often out of the South and West, (and sometimes North)
as out of the East, and also is so far from being seen from the East, even unto
the West; that sometimes it is seen to be tempestuous lightening wether in one
(neighboring) Land, and not in another; and in one County and not in another,
if not in one parish sometimes and not in another; but this lightening shines
from the East, even to the West, from one end of Heaven unto another: the which
is to be understood, the Sun in the Firmament, which lighteneth the earth, even
from the East unto the West: The Scripture discovering her rising in the East,
and shining unto the West, and the glory of the Lord seen like unto the rising
of the Sun, that shines into the West, and fills the earth with her light
and glory, Isa. 45.6. chap. 59.19. But let it be the Sun in the Firmament, or
other lightening; yet the matter lies here, that Jesus Christ's coming is not
in obscurity, but as a light that comes out of the East and shines unto the
West, or shines from one end of Heaven to another; the sequel of the matters
is, that the Christ that is to be seen in a Desert or secret Chamber, namely,
in a private place, is far from being the true Christ; that they need not say,
when the true Christ comes, let us go here or there (namely into a Desert, or
secret Chamber, or Mountain) to see him, but he shall be seen at once as the
Sun that rises in the East, and is seen by all even to the West, without going
into Deserts, or Chambers, or Mountains, or the like; and to this agrees the
Prophets, that says, The glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh
shall see it together, for he shall come in the clouds, and every eye shall see
him, and they that pierced him, and all the kindred shall wail because of him.
So in short I understand, it is the personal coming of the Lord Jesus, which is
spoken of in that Text, Mat 24. and not any spiritual coming, for the same
Jesus (even the same blessed man) which did once ascend, in like manner shall
(again) descend, as I have proved in the former part of this Treatise,
entitled, Truth and Innocence: and thus much briefly of the coming of the Lord
Jesus like lightening, which lightening, is to be seen from one end of Heaven
to the other, even from the East unto the West, which light all men that have
their natural eyesight, do see at once; even so shall the personal appearance
of Jesus Christ be; that all men shall see his glory together, when he shall
appear in the Clouds of Heaven with all his holy Angels with him; and this I am
very confident was the mind of Christ in that place: and thus I pass to speak
somewhat to the Carcass, and Eagles being gathered unto it: which is,

Fourthly, the fourth and last thing, shows the taking up of the Saints to
meet Jesus Christ; the Carcass being understood Christ, and the Eagles the
Saints, its only a simily, showing that as the Eagles suddenly gather
themselves tegether to the place where a Carcass is, even so the Saints shall
suddenly be gathered together, to the place where Christ is; agreeing with, 1
These. 4, 14, 15, 16. and Mat. 24.40. the which I have before spoken of more at
large; and therefore shall leave it at present with the Reader, and pass all
the other things very briefly, because I find the things already spoken to, is
the whole grounds or masterpieces of your Book, and those things that I shall
now speak to, I shall take them as they lie in order in your book; and the
first thing that I observe, and shall speak to; is,

Of the new pouring out of the Spirit, and a new marriage after the former,
Page 5.

Answ. I find there was a Marriage between God and old Israel, which is a
Metaphor, to wit, the enjoyment of the inheritance, and the marriage bed, (as I
may so call it) the presence of the Lord in Types, dwelling amongst them in
that holy Land, or glorious Mountain Jerusalem, which was a Type of the
heavenly Jerusalem, and the Tabernacle of God to be with men, when they shall
enjoy the marriage bed, to wit, being present with Christ; knowing him as we
are known by him; the which while we live in this Body we do not, for we are
absent from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. And that there shall be a marriage, and a
marriage Supper, I grant, but its after Christ is come the second time, read
Luke 12.35, 36, 37. compared with Revel. 19.7, 8, 9. with more that might be
said; but as to the first marriage spoken of by you, which was, say you, in the
primitime times, in the first breathing of the Spirit; I cannot see nor
believe, nor I am certain, you cannot prove it, for the Church of Corinth had
as great breathings of the Spirit as any had, coming behind in no gift, and yet
were in that time but in a Virgin estate and condition, as you may read, 2 Cor.
11.2. in these words, But I am jealous over you, with godly jealousy, for I
have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a chaste VIRGIN to
Christ. From whence we may see, that the primitive Church who lived under the
breathings of the Spirit, and had excellent gifts of working of Miracles, and
yet were but in a Virgin condition; and so shall the Church be at the very
time of the second coming of the Lord Jesus, until he is come, read Mat. 25.1,
to the 11.

And as to your cited text, Mat. 22.1 2, 3. it is a Parrable, and its also
clear, that the whole time of the preaching of the Gospel, is the time of the
inviting the Ghests, and the Parrable holds not, if all the Ghests be not
invited before the day of the marriage supper, and I am sure that all the
Ghests are not yet invited nor born; I could speak at large unto it, but I
study brevity, and so shall pass to the next thing; which is,

The Churches was in Babylon, as appears (says Mr. Henden) by her being called
out, Revel. 18.4. it being a strange Land, from the native Canon of a Gospel
word, where they were strangers under other Lords, page 8.

Answ. I have read that the Israel of old, was in Babel in Chaldea, from whence
they were to depart; but I never yet read, that the Elect Sealed Number were
subject to other Lords in respect of order, that is to say, they submitted not
to the Babylonish order, neither was their order become Babel, read Dan. 3.
It Is true that the Jews had several Ordinances, which were to be performed only
at Jerusalem; and hence it came to pass, that they practiced them not in
Babylon, and therefore they were far from being Babellish; but the Gospel
Ordinances are limited to no one place more than other, insomuch if there were
a Church in Rome, they might practice all Christ's Ordinances, (if they could
enjoy their Liberty so to do) although it be the seat of the Pope, and yet not
be blamed, but commended of by the Lord, as was the Church of PARGAMVS, Rev.
2.12. who lived where Satan's seat was, and yet did hold fast their profession;
even so it is like there may be some in the City called Babylon, Revel. 18.4.
which may own and practice the Truth, although unknown to the Pope, at the very
time when the Lord will destroy it, and so he may call them out, as once he did
call Lot out of Sodom; but to suppose that God owns a People to be his People,
which are Babel in their order, is but vain, when we rightly understand how
zealous God ever was of his order, never admitting of his own people, to mix it
with the confused order of (men or) Babel, for those that are partakers of her
sins, (which they were not which were called out, Revel. 18.4.) shall be
partaker of her plagues; but if Babels order were sin, and the Church order
which was in Babel was established, then the Church must be partakers of her
sins, and so of her plagues, which was not: and so I pass this also, and come
to the next thing; which is,

You may find all your new stated Churches, (says Mr. Henden) of a different
Metal from the true, how near soever to the primitive they seem to be in the
outward shell, and yet in reallity do ground upon another foundation, upon
Believers not possessed with such a power sent down from heaven, page 14.

Answ. They differ not in their Metal; Had the primitive Churches a Command
from Christ to preach and gather Churches? the very same Command have we unto
the worlds end, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Had the primitive Churches gifts of Gods
Spirit? so have the Churches now, even so many as are useful for the
comfortable being of the Church, although others which were more primely
concerned as to Unbelievers, for to confirm the Gospel that it might be a
standing Rule to be observed and practiced to the worlds end, did cease; for so
it was under the Law, the Law of Moses was once confirmed with Signs and
Wonders, but there was no such thing looked for when they came out of Babylon,
it was enough that it was once confirmed: admit of this Argument to prove Signs
and Miracles now out of use; which is:

If Signs and Miracles serve not for Believers, but such as believe not, to
bear testimony to the truth of the New Testement of Jesus Christ; then they are
altogether unuseful to us in these Nations, who do believe the Testament of
Jesus.

But Signs and Miracles was for that end, (viz.) to confirm the Truth of the
New Testament to Unbelievers.

And therefore of no use in these Nations, where all, or the most part, believe
it.

But those things which are useful to Believers, they remain in the same power
and efficacy; as that Ordinance of Prayer with the Sick, and anointing them
with oil, is known to be as powerful and efficatious in our days as ever, and
all others which conduce to the Churches comfortable being: I know many that
can, (and will if they be called unto it) witness the truth of this thing; I
speak with much confidence, it being truth upon my knowledge: and so I shall
leave this at present, supposing that I may have occasion to speak more of it
anon, and now pass to the next thing; which is, the four Reasons annexed to
this, to show the difference between the new stated Churches, (as Mr. Henden
calls them) and the primitive Church; which are,

Faith must foot upon a call, (says Mr. Henden) as done in obedience to the
heavenly voice; but now there is no call for visible Church Marriages.

Answ. By the same word that the primitive Churches practiced Ordinances,
(which was by Christ's word and voice) we also practice them, for his word, even
the same word, was to go into all the world, unto every creature, Mark 16.15,
16. Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. And by the same Word every creature was to believe and
practice the Ordinances, in order to their eternal happiness, and therefore the
same call; and whosoever practices them from the same call with an honest heart,
obeyes the heavenly voice.

And whereas Mr. Henden says, there is no call for visible Church Marriages.

Answ. There is the same call that was in the primitive age, for there was but
only espousing and making fit for the Maariage day, (which is not to be till
the change of the Gentiles) and the same espousing and making fit for the
Marriage, we are now about, as the Apostles in their day was, as I before have
showed; and so I pass to the second Reason cited by Mr. Henden; which is,

God having promised to spirit these again, Faith must rely upon that promise
until it be fulfilled, page 15.

Answ. That Faith must rely upon Gods Promises, as well as to act from the
Command, is granted; but Christ has promised his spiritual presence always,
to the end of the world, in the observation of his Ordinances; therefore they
were never without the Spirit, or their spiritual efficacy; and as for the
pouring out of the Spirit again, its not on the Gentiles, but the Jews, who now
are shut up under unbelief, who at the second coming of Christ, (viz.) his
personal coming, shall have the Spirit poured out upon them, (I mean the whole
House of Israel, and not before) and then they shall be a holy people to the
Lord, read Zech. 12. from the first verse. to the 12. but as for the Gentiles, I
never find that the Spirit is taken from them, viz. the faithful, since the
primitive times; take heed of confounding the Promises made to the Jews, with
them made to the Gentiles, which I find to be your practice, which causes you
to speak, and affirm things you know not where of; but I am sparing to speak
considering your gravity; and so I pass to the third reason; which is,

Thirdly, Profession a lone (says Mr. Henden) can no more give life to
Ordinances, from which the glory of the Lord is departed, then it can infuse a
living soul into a dead Carkas.

Answ. It Is true, if once the Lord have left his Ordinances, Men's profession
cannot make them lively Oracles, but it has been already proved, that Christ
is so far from leaving them, that he has promised his Presence, in the
performance of them, to the Worlds end; and what you can say of the departure
of Gods glory, from any Ordinance, I can say the same of the Ordinance of
Preaching, and Prayer, (which you say you own) but Gods glory is not departed
from his Ordinances: and so I pass to the fourth and last reason, which is;
say you,

This pretended Faith, void of the call, and Promise of God; and the vital
influence of its prims Original cause, is but a mere work, a bare creature
Foundation, by far too week to lay a Gospel fabric upon.

Answ. This reason is comprehended in the former, the which causes me to say
again, that this Faith (in the practicing of all Christ's Ordinances) is neither
void of the call, or promise of God; read my Reasons, to prove their
continuance before cited; moreover we know, that the neglect of the practicing
of the Ordinances, although it may be before a long time, so as that they may
be lost, or unknown, yet if they be found written amongst the Statutes of Jesus
Christ; its enough to warrant the reviving of them into their former practice,
without a new call, witness the Ordinance of living in Booths, being lost for
above four hundred years, even from the days of Joshua Son of Nun, until their
coming out of the Babylonish captivity, as you may see, Nehem. 8.14, 15, 16,
17. and as to the foundation of the Gospel fabric, (you speak of) I say, that
the Foundation of it is already laid, and confirmed, and we only (according to
Gods appointment) do build thereon, and not lay a new Foundation, namely, we
walk not in a new form or Fabric of Order, but in the same good old Ordinances
and Fabric of order, which Christ and the Apostles laid, and the primitive
Churches walked in, (and we commanded to follow their steps) which Foundation
of the Fabric, is not only laid as a platform for us, to build upon, but its
also already confirmed; which was the answer that I gave to Mr. Henden, (in our
conference) saying, our Baptising was no new Baptising, but the old way of
Baptising, (both in respect of the form of it, and subject Baptized) the which
was practiced by the Lord, and the primitive Churches, and left written for us
to follow their examples, and therefore wanted no new signs or miracles to
confirm it, it being already confirmed: and that they only want new Signs and
Miracles for confirmation, that walk in new ways and Ordinances, which have
not as yet been confirmed, but the ways and Ordinances which we walk in, and
contend for, are the same which have been already confirmed, as none can deny,
and therefore warrantable to be practiced by all the Lords People: and thus I
leave this particular, and come to the next thing considerable; which is,

All the Apostles were dead at the end of the first, or beginning of the second
Century, and in a little time after, Evangilists and Prophets; you may from
this place as well argue the constant abiding of Apostles, Prophets, and
Evangelists, as of Pastors and Teachers, seeing the Spirit here speaks of a
complete, and full dispensation of Official Ministers, consisting of all these
together, to bring this noble work to its perfection, page 21.

Answ. Whereas you say, all the Apostles were dead at the end of the first, or
the beginning of the second Century.

It Is a very hard matter for you to prove it, unless by the word ALL, you mean
ALL the twelve Apostles, and if so its very like that all they might be dead by
that time; but that either the Offices of Apostleship dyed then, or that all
the Apostles which were to be to the worlds end, were then dead, that I
possitively deny, because I find, that in the time of the Roman Beast (or
Babylonias) reign, their shall be Apostles and Prophets, who shall rejoice at
her downfall, who have been persecuted by her, Revel. 18.20. in these words,
Rejoice over her, thou Heavens, and ye holy APOSTLES and PROPHETS, for God has
avenged you on her. The word Heaven, is to be understood the Church; and
Apostles and Prophets, is to be understood Messengers, and such as have been
fore-tellers of Babels destruction; for so is the word ((...), Apostolos and
Prophetas) to be understood, for the word Apostolos is to be understood a
Messenger, one sent in the Lords message to carry the good news of salvation
unto the sons of men) and the word Prophetas, men foretelling of things to
come, and such as speak to edification, exhortation, and comfort; for so says
St. Paul, Prophecy is (a speaking) to edification, exhortion, and comfort; and
such Apostles and Prophets they were, that were to rejoice at Babylons
downfall, and such were before the second Century, and since it, and also such
there will be at Babylons downfall, and till the end of the World; so then
Apostles and Prophets are to remain; and as for the word (...), Evangelists,
they are such as set forth, carry, or publish (either with tongue or pen) the
joyful (or sweet news) or glad tidings of great joy, which is to all men; hence
Matthew and John who were (without all dispute) Apostles, yet were called (by
way of emphasis) Evangelists, because they published (by way of writing) the
joyful news, or glad tidings comprehended in the life and death of the Lord
Jesus; and so Paul writing to Timothy, bids him do the work of an Evangelist,
make an full proof of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. So then an Evangelist I
understand to be such an one, that has a great faculty (or more properly a
gift) carrying him on to set forth (both with tongue and pen) the glad tidings
of great joy.

Every one has his proper gift from God, and some have a gift much leading
them to reprove for sin, and exhort from sin; I do not say that such cannot or
do not preach glad tidings at any time, but say they may at some times, and yet
their gift (runs out or) leads them forth most to reproof for sin, and the
like; and so it is on the other hand, some men's gift leads them forth to preach
mostly, upon comfortable things to the godly, as the joys of salvation, and
all such glad tidings, and not reproof and terror, and the like; and I
understand that its not the OFFICE (simply considered) which is from the Lord,
but it is the gift qualifying for the OFFICE which is from the Lord, and the
OFFICE it self, from the Church, and the Text carries the gift (to quallifie
for the Office) to be from God, and not the OFFICE it self, as you may read,
Ephesians. 4.8. Psalm. 68.18, in these words, Wherefore when he ascended up on high
he led captivity captive, and gave GIFTS to men; compared with verse. 11.) And
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors, and some Teachers, ver. 12. For the perfecting of the Saints for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, until we ALL come
in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the
perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

From whence we may learn, that all those gifts spoken before, are for the work
of the Ministry, and if the Ministry did remain in all the times of apostasy,
(as you say it did) then of necessity those gifts and offices did also remain;
for all these are comprehended in the Ministry, and it is for the perfecting of
the Saints, till we all come into the unity of the faith: now the Greek word
((...)) is of a very large acceptance or signification, as from the Lattin
word CONSVMMATIO, a full finishing or atchieving the total sum and ending of
the work; from whence I understand, that from the word which says, for the
PERFECTING of the Saints UNTIL we ALL (that is all the Saints) come into the
unity of the faith, to the measure and stature of Christ.

Is meant, that these gifts and offices, are to remain until all the Saints,
even until the last which is to be born and brought forth gradually into the
World, is converted and united into the faith, and made a perfect man in Christ
Jesus; So then all these official gifts, are to remain, and are unseperable in
the Ministry, for the gathering of the Saints, and perfecting those that are
thereby gathered, until all be both gathered and perfected; and thus I shall
leave this, as having more to say to it, but want time, and therefore pass to
the next thing; which is,

The Sealed number are not the natural seed of Abraham, (says M. Henden) but
Gentile Israelites, proved by these reasons.

First, The Book of the Revelation was not sent to the Jews, but to the
Gentiles.

Secondly, The main body of the vision, was after the days of John.

Thirdly, The four Angels stood upon the quarters of the Earth.

Fourthly, The hurt was chiefly introduced by the Locust, and by the Beast,
which can in no sense be applied to the Jews.

Fifthly, The Nations possessed the Court without, which was the stand of the
common Israelites.

Sixthly, The number Sealed from amongst them, was the same, not hurt by the
Locust, Chap. 9.4. The same standing on Mount-Zion, which duly pondered with
all circumstances, can be reduced to no time or condition, but that of the
elect in Babylon; if the Romish and Antichristian defection be not decyphered
to these figures, and but the Jews only, then it is altogether omitted in this
Book.

Answ. The assertion is denied, and has already been disproved, and all men
that have their eyes in their head, (I mean all those that have not the eyes of
their understanding out may see it,) for as I have already proved, the Spirit
of God does not only call those that are Sealed the Tribes of the children of
Israel, but names every Tribe distinctyl, Revel. 7.4, 5, 6, 7. and when you
write again, I pray you cite one Text written between the Alpha of Genesis, and
the Omega of the Revelations, to prove plainly, that when God speaks of the
TRIBES of the Children of Israel, and names every Tribe distinctly; that he
then means Gentiles, and then I will believe it. As for the Sealed number
spoken of, Revel. 14. are the same number and people; and whereas its said that
they were Virgins, its clear, at that time Israel is to be in a Virgins
condition, and at that time (or straight after it) they shall be married unto
Christ, by their being put into the possession of the covenant, or the thing
covenanted; which is to be made after those days, (says Jeremiah 31.)
relating to the last days even till the appearance of Jesus, when they shall
say, lo this is our God, Isa. 25. Romans 1.1. but that they are called Virgins,
read Jer. 31.4, 21. Isa. 62.5. Hosea, and many Texts might be given to prove
the House of Israel, as it is considered in the latter days, to be in a Virgin
condition, I mean Israel the ten Tribes and not Judah.

Secondly, The Scriptures is very full in showing, that they are called a
people redeemed from among men, where they have been scattered, and made to
serve their enemies, Isa. 35.10. chap. 51.11. chap. 62.12. with many more which
might be added.

Thirdly, as for their following the Lamb, whithersoever he goes it is spoken
in reference to the juncture of time, in which the Beast (or great Antichrist)
is to reign; who striveth to have them believe, and follow him, but they
refuse, and will own none but Christ to be their King; their minds running
after him, they having (before) been informed of his glory by the two Prophets,
and also seen a glimps of it in the glorious signs of his coming in the Clouds
of Heaven, with power and great glory; and so they are said to follow him. And
as for the order of the words following, I could speak largely to it if I had
time; but if I should speak of the things in particular contained in this book,
with their attendance, it would take up a large time, the which necessitates me
but just to mention it, (as it were) and to leave it; and so I pass the
assertion, and come to the reasons to prove the Sealed number Gentiles (cited
by you;) which is,

First, Because the book of the Revelation, was not sent to the Jews to the
Gentiles.

Answ. Suppose it were so, that all the seven Churches of Asia were Gentiles
(which I think Mr. Henden will not affirm, although some of them might be and
were Gentiles) yet this makes not at all as (I humbly conceive) to prove that
the Ministry contained in the vision, seen by John, did not appertain to the
Jews, neither do I say, that it did wholly appertain to the Jews, so as not to
include some things also which related to (or concerned) the Gentile Church,
but if it were only spoken of the glory and goodness of God unto the Jews, yet
it would have spoken much comfort and joy unto the Gentile Churches in their
tribulation, because their blessing and rich promises are bound up (as I may
say) amongst the promises of Isreal's redemption and glory, the which is proved
at large in the Scripture; but at present I shall only cite these two places,
Isa. 60.2. Romans 11.12, 13, 14, 15.

Secondly, I understand that John (to whom the vision was shown unto) was a
Jew, as I think none will deny, and I suppose that the vision was to comfort
him in his persecuted banished condition, and unless John's nature was estranged
from Paul's and the rest of the faithful Jews, it was a thing of no small
comfort to him, (in his tribulation) to be shown the glory of his brethren,
(after the flesh) the Jews, shortly to be conferred upon them. And

Thirdly, it was the way of God of old, to comfort his servants, the Propets in
their persecution and captivity in that way; and indeed nothing will comfort a
godly Prophet or Minister more than that thing, namely, for them to see the
prosperity, and glory of the godly to approach, more especially if they be
related unto them in the flesh, Romans 9.1, 2, 3. and that it was the way of God
to comfort his Prophets that way, see Ezekiel. 40.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Dan. 7.1, 2,
13. And so I pass this, and come to the second; which is,

Reas. 2. The main body of the vision, was after the days of John, Revel. 4.1.
says Mr. Henden.

Answ. In this reason (as I think) you want an interpreter to explain your
mind, that is to say, whether the accomplishing of the body of the vision were
after John's days, or whether the greatest part of the vision, (signified by
your word body) was shown or revealed to some other person after John's days;
and if it was shown unto another person, after John's days, when you write
again cite a Text of Scripture, to signify the person; and Secondly, resolve
by Scripture when John's days ended, because the Text says that he was to
prophecy again before many people and Nations, and Languages, and Kings,
Revel. 10.11. I would not be looked upon, as one that made it his practice to
ask curious questions, because you may as well ask me when the days of some
other of the Apostles ended, and demand me to resolve it by the Scripture,
which could not very well be done, only by good reason drawn from Scripture;
But I desire to hear your judgment about the end of John's days, because it was
a question amongst Christ's own Disciples, John 21.23.

Secondly, because that the Text says, expressly of John, that he should
prophecy again as before said, and the accomplishment of that prophecy, is
yet to be fullfiled; the which I have spoken of before, and shall again if the
Lord will, when I come to speak somewhat of the two Witnesses.

But as in answer of the two Reasons, I say, there is not so much as the color
of a Reason in it, to prove (as I conceive) that those Israelites were to be
understood Gentiles.

The four Angels (says Mr. Henden) stood upon all quarters of the Earth, and
the withholding is universal, the four Winds, and the hurt thereby to all the
unsealed Israelites; which cannot agree with any one Nation.

Answ. That the Angels stood upon the four quarters of the Earth is true, and
the withholding of the Winds is so universal, as to hurt all places and
persons, except the Sealed number, and the places that escape the Antichrist,
which some shall, as is before proved; but what for all this, does it therefore
follow that the Sealed Israelites were Gentiles? its no reason at all to me,
for it is clear, that the Jews are scattered into the four quarters of the
Earth, and it is as clear that God will gather them from thence, and will get
them fame in all places, where they have been put to shame; and also it is as
clear, that it is the family of the Gentiles, which are to be deceived (as has
been already proved, and it may also be further seen to be they that shall be
deceived, first and last. even Gogg and Magog, as Revel. 20.8. He shall deceive
the NATIONS (viz the family of the Gentiles, (...)) which are in the four
quarters of the Earth, Gogg and Magog, etc. but the Elect: ( viz. the Jews)
shall not be deceived. And whereas you say, the hurt is to all the unsealed
Israelites: my answer is,

Show that any of the Israelites (at the fullfiling of this Prophecy) shall be
unsealed, I am sure that the Prophets, and also the Apostles says, that then
they shall all be holy unto the Lord, and all Israel shall be saved, as it is
written; when the Lord shall thoroughly purge away the filth of the Daughter of
Zion, then although they seek for sin in Judah, they shall find none, for they
shall defile themselves no more with any of their detestable things, or
abominations.

So then in short, the answer to the third reason is; that although the Angels
were standing on the four quarters of the Earth, holding the four Winds; and
the withholding the four Winds, were universal, and the hurt to all the
unsealed Israelites, proves not at all to my understanding, that the Sealed
number were Gentiles, they that can receive it let them, for I do asure you I
cannot see not so much as a color of reason in it: and thus I pass to the
examination of the four reasons to prove the sealed number, cited by Mr.
Henden, to be Gentiles: which is says he; because,

This hurt was chiefly introduced by the Locust, Chap. 9.4. and by the Beast,
which cannot be applied to the Jews, but to the Christian Nations.

Answ. I could (if I had time) speak much concerning the Locust and their King,
and the persons tormented, but that which I say at present, in answer to it is,
I think that herein Mr. Headen and I am very near of one opinion in this thing,
for says he, the hurt was chiefly introduced by the Locust and Beast, which
can in no sense be applied to the Jews.

And all that I have been contending about, is, that those that were not hurt
were the Jews, (which were the sealed number) and here Mr. Henden says, the
hurt introduced by the Locust and Beast, was unto the Nations; (I understand
him Gentiles) for he says, it cannot be applied unto the Jews, and if the hurt
cannot be applied unto the Jews, then upon his own argument, the Jews were the
sealed number, for all others were hurt, only they that were sealed were not to
be hurt, Revel. 9.4. But by the way the hurt there, was not at all by the
Beast, and his followers, but to the Beast, and his followers, by the Locust;
and so I pass this and come to the fifth reason; which is,

By comparing the Text with chap. 11.2. we may clearly see, says Mr. Henden,
that the Nations possessed the Court without the Temple.

Answ. It is true the Nations (or Gentiles) did take the outward Court before
it was measured, ( viz. Walled) and did tread the holy City under foot, for
which cause the Lord sent those plagues on the Nations, when he had sealed the
Tribes of the Children of Israel, which were not to be hurt by the plagues of
the Locust, or Angels, although they were troubled, and persecuted by the
Beast, for which cause God sent plagues upon him as he did upon Pharaoh King of
Egypt for the case may be fitly paralleled with Isreal's suffering in Egypt, by
Pharaoh King of Egypt; and as God sent several kinds of plagues on Pharaoh for
his cruelty (exercised) against his people Israel, even so will the Lord send
several kinds of plagues upon the Antichrist and his followers, the Nations,
for their cruelty again the very same people (viz, Jews) for his love unto them
is an everlasting love, and therefore will he have compassion on them, and
gather them, and destroy all their enemies according to his word; and thus I
pass this reason, also saying, that although it be not denied that there be
alligorise in the vision of this book, yet it is meet that we distinguish
between reason and madness, and take heed of making an alligory of that which
is plainly to be understood, that we come not under that reproof of darkning
words without knowledge, and perverting, (and wresting) the Scriptures to our
destruction; and thus I come to the sixth and last reason cited by Mr. Henden,
to prove that the Sealed Number were Gentiles: which is; says he,

The number Sealed (from amongst them) was the same not hurt by the Locust,
chap. 9.4. nor utterly deceived by the Beast, chap. 13.8. Mat. 24.24. The same
standing on Mount-Zion, chap. 14.1. which duly pondered with all the
circumstances, can be reduced to no time or condition, but of that of the elect
in Babylon, if the Roman and Antichristian defection be not decyphered by these
figures, but the Jews only, then it is altogether omitted in this book.

Answ. Whereas it is said the number sealed was not hurt, even so have I said
already, that the Tribes of the Children of Israel were sealed, to the end that
they might be distinguished from the worshippers of the Beast, that they might
not be hurt, when the plagues were to be executed upon the Beast, and his
worshipers.

And Secondly, where you say, ( nor utterly deceived by the Beast.

I understand your Judgment is, that they were deceived, although not utterly
deceived; it seems to be a kind of a curious distinction, (the word nor utterly
deceived by the Beast) such an one as I find not made by Christ, either in Mat.
24. or Revel. 9. for says Christ, they shall deceive if it were possible the
very elect; implying, that it was impossible to decive them. And,

Thirdly, whereas it is said, the same sealed ones, standing upon Mount-Zion,
can be reduced unto no time or condition, but the Elect in Babylon.

Answ. This is a strange alligory indeed to reduce Mount-Zion to Babylon, or
that Babylon is set forth by Mount-Zion, I pray when you write again cite one
text that calls Babylon (by the name) Mount-Zion; Mr. Henden seems to reprove
Mr. Elmestone (in his 33. page.) for calling Babylon (by way of argument) Zion,
and yet in his 29. page he calls Mount-Zion Babylon himself; so that I may take
up St. Paul's words, Romans 2.22. which says, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do
thou commit sacrilege? but I pass to the conclusion, which is; says Mr.
Henden,

If the Romish and Antichristian defection be not decyphered by these figures,
but the Jews only, then it is altogether omitted in this book, then must all
from thence to the end of the Revelations be peculiar to the Jews.

Answ. These figures do not decypher the defection of the Romish Babylon, and
yet both her defection and judgment was shown unto John, as in Revel. 17. and
chap. 18. and also somewhat shown as a consequence of it, chap. 1.5. and chap.
6. but these things would be too large to speak to in particular at present,
considering my time is short, I may have time to open these things more at
large hereafter, but at present I say in a few words, that both the vision of
Daniel, and also of the Revelations, speaks more properly of the change of the
Monarchical Governors and Governments of the World, than the defection of a
Church, to wit the Church of Rome, for the fourth kingdom upon earth, which
was the Roman kingdom, was begun before the vision was shown unto John, yea
before Christ suffered, for he suffered under the Roman power, and therefore he
speaks not much of that; and the defection of a Church or false worshippers,
and the people of God suffering under them, is no strange thing, and therefore
not so observeable, when we consider how frequent apostates and false
worshippers are in this world; and for a Church to change its government into
states policy, is no great thing to be noted in Scripture, but the alteration
of Monarchical Government, and Governors is of great note in the Prophecy of
Daniel, and also in the book of the Revelations, because they are the things
that show forth the government of the great King Jesus upon Earth, whose
Kingdom shall break in pieces all other Kingdoms; when their Kingdom comes
into the hands of the eight, who also is of the seventh, the which I have shown
how it is, (although in differing phrases) before the which time and things
approaches very near, for we doutless live in the latter end of the fourth
Kingdom ( viz. the Roman Kingdom) in the time of the feet and toes which was
partly Iron and partly Clay, which holds not together in its mixture, which is
the Cause of the great stir and strivings in our Nations, and other places in
the World at this day, Dan. 2.31, 32. to the 45. But I leave this and the
reasons cited by Mr. Henden, to prove that the Sealed number were Gentiles, and
leave the serious Reader to peruse, Revel. 7.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. which will better
inform them who the Sealed number is; and thus I pass to the next thing
considerable; which is,

The best of Saints (says Mr. Henden) are not yet come to that height of
righteousness requirable, in a Gospel order, in point of love and mutual
fellowship, page 70.

Answ. I had thought that you had said before (in page 2.) that their spiritual
union and charity, and all moral Precepts did remain according to their
primitive institution, and were not corrupted by the Beast in all the times of
apostasy; and now to say, that the sealed elect number, had lost their
righteousness in point of love, and mutual fellowship; is to say, that the
sealed elect number, that were not hurt (as you say) were so hurt as they had
not only their outward order corrupted, but were also so corrupted within, that
the notable, and theological grace of love, and mutual fellowship, was so
defaced, as they not fit to meddle with outward Ordinances; and if they were
not fit to meddle with them, how were they fit to meddle (as I may say) with
God in that Ordinance of Prayer, and Praying; and how could such eat the Lords
Supper, (which signifies mutual love and fellowship, the which Ordinance you
say was practicable and to be practiced in all the times of apostasy,) and
would not their defection in that point, as well disable them from being an
elect number, as well as from outward Ordinances (when we consider all other
graces, without that grace of love is nothing) when they had lost that grace of
love, or so defaced in it, as not fit for the outside of things (I mean the
outward Ordinances which you speak of) how then could they be fit for God and
spiritual worship? I know not; mend it when you write again, and when you have
done all that you can do to it, there will appear in my judgment more confusion
and contradiction in it than good reason, but I leave it at present, and shall
speak somewhat to your sixth Reason, against constituting (as you call it) of
Churches in our times; which is,

A further reason of the unwarrantableness of Church constitutions in our
times, is the divisions and rents amongst the godly, page 72.

Answ. The divisions amongst the godly, is acknowledged not to be their
strength but weakness, not their virtue but (rather) their vice, yet
notwithstanding it may be, and is a time now for the gathering of Saints, and
constituting them into congregations in the order of the Gospel (for so we
understand the word Church to be a congregation) for there was divisions in the
primitive time amongst the Churches, and also amongst the Apostles, so as that
St. Paul and Barnabas, rent or divided one from another; and also there was
great contentions amongst the Corinthians, and the Philipians, and others, Acts
15.39. 1 Cor. 1. 1. Phil. 1.16. which was not their virtue as before said: and
there are a people in our days, even in our Nation (I may say and speak
safely) consisting of thousands that are one in the faith, fellowship, and
order of the Gospel, and many more are coming onwards, according to their
several abilities in the knowledge of God; and although there be some that are
weak amongst professors, yet that may not hinder those that are strong and
able, to work in their building of a house for the Lord; but I pass these
things, and come to the next and last Objection; which is, to prove a
separation without Church stating, cited by Mr. Henden; which is, says he,

This return from mystical Babylon, is not fully accomplished at one time, but
is traced by distinct steps and degrees.

Answ. You would have done well to have shown the steps, that (is to say) how
many there be, and what time they require to be trod, that we may know when we
be at the journeyes end; surely its a long journey, for you have been almost
ten years already in your journey, for now its almost 1660. and the fullfiling
of the time of the captivity ended (as you say) in the year 1650. was Israel so
long coming out of Babylon in Caldea trow? I think not; but in short take this,
that Israel might not neglect their building, but go on with all speed that
might be, so soon as they were set at liberty from the hands of their enemies;
even so, it is our duty to be employed about the work of God in his Church, so
soon as we be delivered from the hands of our enemies, yea while the enemy is
raging against us, as he was against our brethren before us, who kept steadfast
in the practicing of all Christ's Ordinances; even so ought we to do: finally,
the Lord Jesus Christ, when he went away, did give forth his last will and
Testament in much plainness, the which he commanded to be observed by every
creature unto the Worlds end, and did ascend up on high, and gave gifts [i. e.]
(the gifts of Ministry, containing, Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
and Teachers,) to that end, that his Laws and Statutes might be published, and
Saints gathered and established, until the last Saint which is to be born in
the World, is united into the faith of Jesus, and made perfect therein; to the
end, that God may be glorified in his Church, in or through all ages even to the
Worlds end: and if the breach of Moses Law, was so heinous in the sight of God,
much more will the breach of Christ's Laws be unto him; therefore take heed of
breaking one of the least of Christ's Commands, and teaching men so to do: and
courteous Reader, be well advised what thou do in the neglect or breach of
any of Christ's commands, before thou do it, and let him that persuades thee
to it, give thee as plain Texts of Scripture to prove the cessation of them, as
Christ has given thee for the continuance of the practicing of them; for
remember that when once the Testament is confirmed, no man must add or disanul;
and to suppose that Christ would give forth his mind in plain words at length,
and forbid the continuance of them in a figure, which may be changed from
(1-1-0-0-0.) one to ten, or to a hundred, or a thousand, or seven thousand, or
what men please, yea any thing that men will have it to be; my meaning in
plainness is this, as for those figures (brought by Mr. Henden) to prove the
cessation of some of Christ Ordinances, have been spoken to or opened by many,
and some have applied them one way, and some another, they are so dark and
mysterious, as beyond the reach of every godly soul to understand, insomuch
that if they do neglect the practicing of Christ's Ordinances, from those dark
places, it must not be from their own understanding, but because Mr. Henden
opens it, and applies it so; and if this be a good ground for persons to
make void the statutes of Christ, which he has confirmed with his own blood,
together with mighty deeds of the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven; I shall
leave the serious Reader to Judge, and shall wind up all with these words of
our blessed Savior, which said to his Apostles, Teach them ( viz. every
creature or all Nations) to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you,
and lo I am with you always even unto the end of the World, Amen. Mat. 28.20.
Mark 16.15, 16: And having thus done, in the next place I shall speak somewhat
briefly, as touching the conference before mentioned; but the main things have
been spoken to already, they being the same in substance with the things in his
book, the which I have already answered, and therefore shall speak very little
to it, the first thing in order was,

The Ordinances (says Mr. Henden) were footed or founded upon an unerring
spirit, and show the man that has the same spirit to prove his succession.

The answer was given, that the Ordinances now practiced was no new Ordinances,
but the same which was footed upon the unerring spirit, and to remain by the
same old appointment of Christ, until the worlds end; this was the substance,
although I gave it in more words, which time fails me to speak of in particular
at present.

Secondly, This man (says Mr. Henden) would lead you all in the dark about
Baptism, by what authority he takes up his Baptism, is from Mat. 28. the
which being truly read according to the Original, is, Go teach all Nations, and
baptize them, etc. And lo I am with you to the end of the world; that is, to
the end of that age; which further appears, that there was to be a sink, or
cessation for a time, Revel. 10.8. The words again denotes a new work of
Prophecy; so Baptism does denote to a particular time.

The time of speaking at both hands, was so long, that as I have said, I cannot
give you an account of the particulars of things, because as there was speaking
long, even so the answer was long; the answer in short, is the same in
substance with the former, that I could not lead men in the dark, in the
business of Baptism, because it was the same that Christ practiced and
appointed, and left in his last will and testament to be practiced to the
worlds end.

But the worlds end (says Mr. Henden) is to be understood the end of that age.

Which then was opposed, because upon that consequence, preaching was as well
to cease in the end of that age, as Baptism: But however Mr. Hendens judgment
was altered, he contends in his Book for the continuance of Baptism, in all
the times of Apostasy, and as to the Text, Revel. 10.8. from the word AGAIN,
thou must prophecy AGAIN, the meaning of it was, that although John was then
banished into the vail of Patmose, from the faces of men, yet he was to
prophecy again before Kings, Rulers, and so forth; not alluding at all to a
sink of the Ministry or Ordinances for a time, as Mr. Henden said: he also
pleaded for Infant Baptism, urging some old thredbare Arguments, which is not
worth speaking to, and railed at me for denying the Covenant, although I spoke
nothing of the Covenant to move him thereunto; but my answer in short was, that
I was so far from denying the Covenant, that I did believe that there was two
Covenants made with Abraham, as I long before that time had published in print.

But said Mr. John Henden, Your power is not derived from the primitive,
because you do not make the same manifestations, Mark 16.17. These Signs shall
follow them that believe.

It was answered, that if these Signs must follow in his sense, or else the
thing it self false, for want of that visible demonstration, then Mr. Henden
was a false Minister; and also by the same consequence, there is never a true
Believer upon earth, and then no salvation; for the Signs were to follow such
as did believe: But as I have before proved, Signs were for confirmation, and
the Gospel being once confirmed, there is no such use of them: as the Law of
old being once confirmed with Miracles, need no new Sign to confirm it again,
when Israel came out of Babylon, nor after the Book of the Law was lost, and
found again, in the days of Josia; no more need we any Sign to confirm that
which is already confirmed; and also we know, that John did no Miracle, and yet
was an approved Administrator.

Again, whereas Mr. Henden said, that he was a legal Minister, and a Minister
of condemnation, which had no visible demonstration from the spirit, (viz.
Miracle.)

The answer was then, Mr. Henden was a legal one, and a Minister of
condemnation, because he professes himself to be a Minister and yet never work
a Miracle, that ever I heard of; there was much time spent upon a kind of
running discourse, to little edification; for that which I would have had done
in order to the legal managing of the discourse, was that there should have
been one question stated at a time, and that managed; but when one began, he
spoke of several things, and so confounded one with another, and cleared it not
as it should be; I could repeat what was said about the four Winds, and what
was said by Captain Tucker, as to the grounding of faith upon the obscure and
dark Prophesies, which was well minded, although not well weighed by our
Antagonist, and as I think as little understood; I have found it a sure maxim
that the greatest confidence amongst men, has the least reason to warrant it;
which is sad.

And whereas Hebrews 12. was brought together with Galatians 4. to prove the
Church to be called Mount-Zion, neither of the places proves it; the Apostle
to the Galatians tells us, that it is the Covenant which is called Jerusalem,
which is from above, and from the Hebrews we learn also, that it is the
Covenant, or the thing Covenanted: and whereas he says, that we are come to
Mount-Zion, he also says, that we are come to an innumerable company of
Angels; and to God the Judge of all things, and the Spirits of just men made
perfect; so that we are come to one as well as to another, and to neither of
them but by faith in the Covenant, for while we are at home in the body, we are
absent from the Lord; for we walk by faith and not by sight. And Paul does not
say to the Galatians, that ye are Mount-Zion or Jerusalem, but Jerusalem which
is from above, is the Mother of us all; so then, it was the Church which was
called Jerusalem, but Jerusalem from above, was the Churches Mother; (mark a
difference between the Children and the Mother) and secondly, the Author to the
Hebrews does not call the Church of the Hebrews Mount-Zion, but tells them that
they were come to Mount-Zion, ( viz. the Covenant of Mount-Zion, and the
Heavenly Jerusalem;) but I shall leave these things at present and pass to the
Answer of some Objections usually urged against the perpetuation of Christ's
Ordinances, or the constant practicing of them; and the first that I shall
speak to is,

Object. 1. There was a time when God did appear in his Ordinances, which
showed there was the power of the Spirit went along with them, as Peter in his
Ministry, in converting three thousand souls at one Sermon (says Mr. John
Henden) but now we see not the same effects, therefore the cause cease, God
has left them, and they are become as a dead carcass without a soul.

Answ. It is very true, there was a time when there was such need of a visible
demonstration of Gods Spirit to go along with his Ordinances, to bear witness
to the sons of men, that they were the Ordinances that were approved of by the
Lord; that they might be a pattern, or platform for all men to walk in to the
Worlds end: and hence it was, that when God gave to Moses and the rest of the
Children of Israel, the pattern of the administration of the Law, he gave it
with the visible demonstration of his own presence, with thundrings and
lightenings, and the Mountain smoking with a visible maifestation of Gods
glory, with and upon Moses; so that his face did so shine with the Glory of God
(when he came from the Mount) that the Children of Israel could not steadfastly
behold him, by reason of the brightness of the Glory of God shining upon him;
and this was his appearance when he came down with the Tables of the Law,
written by God, so gloriously did God appear in the giving forth of it; but
afterward, all that the Children of Israel were to do, was to have the words
of the Law read to them, and they to do it, (or keep it) and not to say, who
shall ascend up into Heaven, for some visible demonstration? but the Law is
nigh thee in thy mouth and in thy heart, that thou may do it, says Moses,
Deuteronomy. 30.10, 11, 12. even so says St. Paul, Romans 10.6, 7. The righteousness of
faith speaks on this wise say not in thy heart, who shall ascend up into
Heaven, to fetch Christ down from above, etc. but what says it? the word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart. So that true faith gives heed
to Gods word, and looks not for miracles; for so says Christ, blessed is he
that has not seen and yet believed, for a sinful, and an adulterous generation
seek a sign, but none shall be given unto them, etc.

Secondly, If no Ordinance may be an approved Ordinance of God, but such an one
as has a visible manifestation, according to Mr. Hendens sense, (as aforesaid)
then he himself never met together; so as God did approve of it, because we
find that when the Disciples met together, the house spoke where they were
assembled.

Thirdly, his Ordinance of preaching has not the Spirit with it, because
instead of converting three thousand at one Sermon (I suppose) he never
converted three hundred in his life, nor scarce half half so many; and as for
the Ordinance of Prayer, I never heard any (of those that usually hear Mr.
Henden) say that he has prayed till the place has spoke where he was praying,
as it did when the Disciples were a Praying, Acts 4.31. and as for the
Ordinance of Preaching and praying, and the like, Mr. Henden says, he owns to
continue in all ages uncorrupted, and they had once as great a visible
manifestation as any Ordinance that I know of, and yet there is no more
appearance in a visible manifestation in them now, than there is in any other
Ordinance which Mr. Henden cries down; and I may fitly say, to Mr. Henden, as
Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees, which did much dote upon signs and
miracles, that the Kingdom of Heaven comes not with Observations, as gadding
after miracles, saying, lo here or lo there, for the Kingdom of God is
within you; that is as if he should have said, it consists more in inward
glory, than outward glory or manifestation, for the Kings daughter is all
glorious within; and the proper work of the Spirit is within, as Christ tells
Nichodemus, so then the glory of Christ's Church consists more in inward gifts
and graces, than in outward show, but for the truth sake that it might remain
undeniable in all ages; God (in the first of their being divulged) granted
signs and miracles to bear witness to the truth of them, and to confirm them
that they might remain unquestionably practicable to the Worlds end, by all the
Lords people; and so I pass unto the second Objection; which is,

Object. 2. We find that the people of God laid aside their Ministering Vessels,
and many of their Ordinances, all the while they remained in Babylon.

Answ. There are two things considerable by way of answer, and the weakest
strong enough to give satisfaction to any reasonable man; the first is, God in
the old Covenant tied his people to a place of worship, ( viz. Jerusalem, Deuteronomy.
12.5. 2 Chronicles. 7.12. John 4.20.) and therefore they ought not to meddle with
some of their Ordinances at any other place whatsoever, the which if they had,
it would have been an abomination unto the Lord; but it is not so with us, as I
have before proved, that if we be in Babylon, or Rome, or any place else, even
where Satan's seat is, we may and ought to hold fast the Ordinances and practice
them, they being limited unto no one place, for says Christ, Wheresoever two
or three are gathered together in my name, there will I be present; but if
Israel did but pray in Babylon, it must be with their face toward Jerusalem,
implying that Gods presence was only there; therefore our condition and theirs,
is not to be compared together.

Secondly, we are not in Babylon, but in our native country, and have liberty
as at this day through grace, and therefore we may and ought to practice all
Christ's Ordinances; and as for the Babel ( viz. confusion you speak of) they
only are in, and their eyes put out with the smoke of it, or at the least sadly
darkened, that cannot see all Christ's Ordinances which he left (in order to the
well being of his Church) practicable and to be practiced by Gods people in our
days; and so I pass to the next Objection; which is,

Object. 3. Although it be so, that Israel might not practice some of their
Ordinances at any other place save at Jerusalem, and therefore (you say) they
practiced them not in Babylon; but what say you to that Ordinance of
Circumcision which was not limited to one place, and yet we know that the
Ordinance of Circumcision was not practiced for forty years together in the
Wilderness, and where were they reproved for their neglect?

Answ. That the Israelites neglected the Ordinance of Circumcision in the
Wilderness, is true, but whether it were approved of by God, or their sin,
their lies the question; that they might and should have circumcised them in
the Wilderness, is clear; and secondly, that it was their sin (rebelling
against Gods commandment) is as clear, for as God sought to slay Moses for the
neglect of the circumcision of his Son, (which caused Zipporah to take a sharp
stone and do it, Ezod. 4.24, 25.) even so God did destroy the Israelites in the
Wilderness for their rebellion against his commands, (that and others) that
they never came into the promised Land; and thirdly, it is as clear, that the
Lord took not away the reproach of Egypt from off the Children of Israel all
the while they were in the Wilderness, until they fell again into the practice
of Circumcision; as you may read, Josh. 5.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. which says, All the
people that were born in the Wilderness by the way as they came forth out of
Egypt, them they had not circumcised, for the Children of Israel, walked forty
years in the Wilderness, till all the men of war were consumed, because they
obeyed not the voice of the Lord; and their Children whom he ( i. e. God)
raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised; for they were uncircumcised
because they had not circumcised them by the way: and it came to pass that when
they had done circumcising all the people that they abode in their places in
the Camp, till they were whole, and the Lord said unto Joshua, THIS DAY HAVE I
ROVLED AWAY THE REPROACH OF EGYPT FROM YOU, wherefore the name of the place is
called GILGAL; ( viz. the rouling) until this day; so then such as will neglect
the Ordinances of Christ, may expect Isreal's reward, yea a far sorer
punishment; for who so hears and obeys not Christ in all things whatsoever
he has left to be practiced, shall be cut off from among his people, Acts 3.
And so I pass to the next Objection; which is,

Object. 4. Fourthly and Lastly, If Ordinances were practicable in all ages,
yet there must be a line of succession; but you cannot prove your succession,
for your pracise is but a new practice in this Nation, therefore show your
admistrator, and the line from whence it successively runs, and you will say
somewhat to the purpose.

Answ. Suppose that the person which Baptized me, had been a person not
Baptized himself, it being a case of necessity, if he had been one which owned
the truth, and found none enlightened, and in the practice of the same truth,
would that have nullified the Ordinance, if it had been done by an unbaptized
person; if so, who Baptized John the Baptist, who was a great Baptizer approved
of by God, who did no miracle, neither was he Baptized first himself, and yet
he made and Baptized many Disciples, yea he Baptized Christ himself? they are
the only true successors to Baptism, both to receive it and administer it, who
have faith toward God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; as John who was not
Baptized, and yet was appointed to Baptize by the Lord, as I think none will
deny; and if so, all Scripture is given for our learning, and we may learn from
that, that God did own the Baptism performed by a person unbaptized; we have
also read what David did upon case of necessity, that he entered into the House
of God, and did eat shewbread, which was unlawful for any man to do save the
Priests only; and also we have read, that when the Ordinance of Circumcision
was neglected by Moses, who should have circumcised his Son, that Zipporah did
it, and yet she not blamed; and also although the feast of Booths had been
neglected four hundred years (as I have before showed) yet when it was found
written in the Law, they never questioned the succession of it, or some
miraculous man to raise it (or set it on foot) again, but practiced it as they
^ound it written in the Law of Moses, Nehem. 8. But in short thus; I neither
find that God has tied us up to a line of succession in the receiving of our
Baptism, nor rejecting that Baptism that is performed by an unbaptized
person, if he be a holy faithful man, if it be a case of necessity; the which
if God has either tied us up as aforesaid, or rejected a Baptism so
performed, show it, if it cannot be shown to the contrary, then the practice
before mentioned is warrantable: and as for a succession in your sense, I have
formerly shown in conference; that the succession of my Baptism, as it came
from beyond Sea, dispensed by one Doctor Cassol, even so if reports be true,
there has been a succession from the primitive Church; I think the Church of
Smarnah if I be not mistaken, it was a considerable time since I was informed
of it, and had no thoughts then to make use of it, neither is it in my
understanding material, but as to that, its like that the ancient Churches in
the low Countries, can give a better account of it; but what I have before said
is sufficient to set a foot Christ's Ordinances if they had been totally lost;
namely, a call from Christ in his word, and from his Spirit in the heart and
conscience, saying, Go preach and make Disciples, and Baptize them, (that are
made Disciples) and lo, I am with you always to the end of the World; so that
I should conclude, that if God had called me, and appointed me to do the
greater work, namely, to preach so as to convert souls, he had as well approved
of me to have done the lesser work, namely to Baptize, considering that they
are knit together, so that he that may do one, may also do the other; admit of
this argument, (its the very same that I gave to Mr. Henden at my first time of
conference with him, and was never yet answered) which; is,

If Christ have joined Preaching and Baptizing together as unseperable
companions unto the Worlds end, then that person is not of God that seperates
it; (Which practices one and not the other*)

But Christ has joined Preaching and Baptizing together as unseperable
companions unto the Worlds end.

Ergo, Those persons that separate them, be not of God.

And secondly I further argue thus.

If those whom Christ has gifted and authorized to preach, he has also
authorized to Baptize, then Baptizing depends upon the gifts and authority of
Christ given forth, and not upon a line of succession.

But those that Christ ha^^ gifted, and authorized to Preach, he has also
authorized to Baptize.

Ergo, Baptizing depends upon the gifts and authority of Christ given forth,
and not upon a line of succession. The which is undenyably true, both in the
Major and Minor. I further argue thus.

If the lesser is blessed of the greater, then he that is approved of to do the
greater, may also do the lesser: But the lesser is blessed of the greater:
Ergo, such as are approved of to do greater, may also do the lesser: my meaning
in plainness is thus, whomsoever God approves of to preach (which is a far
greater work than Baptizing) he also approves of to Baptize, considering also
that they are joined together to be practiced, as unseperable companions to the
Worlds end; read the Last Will and Testament of Jesus Christ, Mat. 28.18, 19,
20. So then here lies the authority for Baptizing in our age, and all ages;
and in this runs the line of succession; namely, the faithful believer
gifted from God to Preach and convert souls, is the true blood, (as by way of
allusion I may call it) unto whom the line of succession runs, or the line of
succession runs in (or to) that race; and so I shall leave this Objection, and
its particular attendances, and come to show my opinion of the travailing
Woman, and the Man-child, and of his being caught up to God, and to his Throne,
and of the Woman's flight into the Wilderness, and into what Wilderness, and how
long she shall abide there; and of the remnant of her seed persecuted, and by
who, and of the two Witnesses prophesying, who they be, and the place, and time
how long; and such like things that are its attendance, I shall speak to in
their particular order, as God shall assist me; and so come to speak to the
first thing considerable; which is,

As touching this travailing Woman, many have given their opinion, but the most
part have built upon the Judgment of ancient Expositors, I do not speak by way
of comtempt of them, but do conclude that they were industrious in their day,
in the which time the vision of the Book spoke more darkly, but toward the
end, it is to speak more plainly; and that which has begot the monster
(brought forth in our times) is the turning those Scriptures into alligories,
which are none, which has been the practice of the National Minister, and also
others, to make up their matter have confounded Law and Gospel together, and
prophesies which peculiarly belong unto the natural seed of Abraham, (as such)
and applied them to the Gentiles, that it is come to such a monster (in birth)
in our days, that persons make an alligory of God, and have said that he is
the fire and candle, and every thing which has any light in it, because the
Scripture says, God is light (I speak this of those that I know my self by my
own knowledge) and others have affirmed, that Mount-Zion, and the new Jerusalem,
and Adam, and Christ, and all is within them; and in a few words I say, that
the alligorising of the Scriptures, has been a means to make so many opinions
as there is amongst us: I am a thinking how strangely our generation would have
alligorized the words of the Prophets, concerning Christ's riding to Jerusalem
upon a Coult, the foal of an Ass; and of the smiting the Judge of Israel, and
of the thirty pieces of silver, and giving him vinegar to drink; and many such
like things, which the Prophets prophesied concerning Christ, and his
sufferings, which was fulfilled according to the letter of the word; the which
the generation of men in our days, would have made strange stories upon it, as
they do upon things which is as litteral and plain, and to be fulfilled
according to the letter of the word; I speak these things to that end that we
may believe that King Jesus shall come and reign upon the Throne of David in
Zion, according to the letter of the word; and that the Prophets that speak
concerning Judah and Jerusalem, their words shall be fulfilled; but I pass this
interposed discourse, and come to speak to the travailing Woman, who she is,
and who is the man-child, etc. and these things briefly.

First, The Woman I understand to be Zion, namely, the two Tribes, Judah and
Benjamin.

Secondly, The Man-child, I understand to be the Gentile Church.

Thirdly, I understand the remnant of her seed was a small part that were left
of the other ten Tribes, when Samariah was surprised and taken in the days of
Hosea, by Salmonazer.

Fourthly, The taking up the Man-child to God, and to his Throne, is the taking
up of the Gentile Church, which shall be first taken, and the other left behind.

Fifthly, The Wilderness spoken of, into which the Woman is to fly, I
understand to be the Wilderness of Moab.

Sixthly, The time of her abode in the Wilderness, is three years and a half.

Seventhly, The people to whom the two Witnesses shall prophecy, is the small
number of the ten Tribes, then in Jerusalem.

Eighthly, The two witnesses I understand to be John (who saw the vision in the
vayl of Patmose) and Elijah; these things I shall speak to in particular, and
give my reason why I thus believe; and leave the Reader to judge, hoping that
if any judge me to be deceived in the matter, they will rather make me an
Object of their pity, rather than an Object of their scorn, and show me their
judgment upon the thing in particular, and their reason why they so believe;
and I hope that I shall not slight it but peruse it, and weigh it in the
balance of the Sanctuary, and if it hold weight, to own it, and receive it;
but passing this I come to the matter, and first to the first; which is,

First, The Woman that travaileth, spoken of in, Revel. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. I
understand to be Zion, and Zion I understand to be the two Tribes which was
called the Church of Judah; and first, that Zion is to be understood the two
Tribes, even Judah and Benjamin, which Jeremiah prophesied unto, (which was
carried into Babylon) spoken of in his Lamentations, chap. 1.17. in these
words, Zion spread forth her hands, and there was none to comfort her: she is
called Zion more than ten times over, and she, (to wit, Judah and Benjamin)
bears the name Zion in respect of her place and City, that God had placed her
in, which is called Zion the City of David at large in the Scripture, and I
think none will deny it, which makes me forbear citing the Scripture: And that
this also in the Lamentations, is so plainly spoken of Judah and Benjamin,
called by the name Zion, that I think none can deny it; and that they which
went into captivity, and are called Zion, (read Lam. 1.3, 4, 6, 8, 17. Chap.
2.10.) are to be understood Judah and Benjamin, read Ezra 4.1. compared with
Lam. 1.3. is also as plain; so then where the Prophets speaks of Zion, they
mean either the City Zion, which was a Moun^ in Jerusalem, which David made his
seat, (which was so called) or otherwise it is to be understood the worshippers
of God, (or people in that place) namely, Judah and Benjamin, as aforesaid: and
now having premised these things, I come to prove, that this traveling Woman,
is this Zion or Jerusalem, ( viz. Judah and Benjamin, the two Tribes, for so I
would be understood when I speak of Zion) and that she is the Woman which is to
travail, and afterward to fly into the Wilderness, read Micah 4.7, 8, 9, 10.
in these words, I will make HER that HALTETH a Remnant, and HER that WAS CAST
OFF a strong Nation, and the Lord shall reign over them in MOUNT ZION, from
henceforth and for ever. And thou, O Tower of the flock, the strong hold of the
Daughter of ZION, unto thee shall it come, even the first dominion, the
KINGDOM SHALL COME TO THE DAVGHTER OF JERUSALEM. Now why do thou cry out
aloud? is there no King in thee? is thy Counselors perished? for pangs have
taken thee as a Woman in travail. Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, O
daughter of Zion, like a Woman in travail; for now thou shall go forth out of
the City, and thou shall dwell in the field, and thou shall go even unto
Babylon, there shall thou be delivered, there the Lord shall redeem thee from
the hands of thy enemies. From these words we may understand, that the Woman
spoken of, which was to travail and bring forth, was the two Tribes, as from
these words, for pains have taken hold on THEE as on a Woman in travail: (Who
THEE?) even THEE Judah, (which halted) pains has taken hold of THEE: Why so?
Because there is no King in Thee, and thy Counselors are perished; yet shall
the first dominions come unto the daughter JERUSALEM: so then that these people
which are called Zion and Jerusalem in this Text, is clearly to be understood
the two Tribes; for these Reasons:

First, Because she is called, her that halted, and her that was cast off;
which is usually to be understood the Jews, and not the Gentiles, which is not
called a People halting or cast off.

Secondly, Because it is called (by name) ZION and JERUSALEM, which the
Gentiles were not, it is a name proper to the Jews, even the two Tribes, and not
to the Gentiles.

Thirdly, Because the Text says, that then shall the Law go forth of ZION, and
the word of the Lord from JERUSALEM, relating to the time of the fulfilling of
the Prophets, when the Lord Jesus shall reign upon the Throne of his Father
David, over the House of Jacob, namely, the Jews, to establish, order, and
govern it in Jerusalem, from henceforth and for ever.

Fourthly, It further appears, that the traveling Woman is the Jews, read Jer.
30.3, 4, 5, 6. in these words, For lo the day comes says the Lord, that I
will bring again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says the Lord;
and I will cause them to return to the Land that I gave their Fathers, and they
shall possess it: And these were the words that the Lord spoke concerning
Israel, and concerning Judah; for thus says the Lord, we have heard a voice of
trembling, of fear, and not of peace; wherefore do I see every man with his
hands upon his loins, as a woman in travel? it is even the time of Jacobs
trouble, but he shall be saved out of it. From hence also we may see, that the
natural seed of Abraham ( viz. the Jews as a foresaid) is the Woman that is to
travel, spoken of Revel. 12.

Fifthly, It further appears, that the traveling Woman, is Zion, ( viz. the
Jews) from the words of the Prophet, Isa. 66.6, 7, 8, 9.10. which says, A
voice of noise from the City, a voice from the Temple, a voice of the Lord that
renders recompense to his enemies; before she TRAVELED she brought forth,
before her pains came she was delivered of a MAN CHILD; who has heard of such
a thing? who has seen such a thing? shall the earth be made to bring forth in
one day? or shall a Nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion traveled she
brought forth her Children; shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring
forth, says the Lord? shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb, says
thy God: Rejoice ye with JERUSALEM, and be glad with her all ye that love her;
so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in JERUSALEM. From this Text
we may also clearly see, that the traveling Woman, is Zion, namely, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, even the Jews, as is above expressed; for here is the
very Woman and the Man-child mentioned, which John spoke of in Revel. 12. and I
do not find, that the Scripture in any place else speaks of a Woman and a
Man-child, agreeing with the Text, Revel. 12. save this Text, Isa. 66.6, 7, 8,
9, 10. which speaks (as it were) the very same; there is in many places spoken
of Zions travel, but not the word MAN-CHILD used, so that we are to understand,
that this is the Text which gives us light to understand who is the Woman, and
who is her Son or Child, and we see that it is clearly applied to the Jews, the
Mother, and the Gentiles, the Man-child; for there is the word Zion and
Jerusalem mentioned in the Text, and the Gentiles sucking of her breast, a
metaphor of a Woman and her Child; but more of this anon, but from what is
already said, it appears, that the traveling Woman is Zion, and also Zion is
to be understood the two Tribes: and so I shall pass this, and come to the
second thing, namely, to show who is this Man-child spoken of Revel. 12. which
is:

Secondly, The Man-child I understand to be the Gentile Church, even all the
faithful in the primitive times, and downwards, amongst whom there was a few
Jews, but not a number worth speaking of, in consideration of the whole House
of Judah, nor in comparison of the Gentiles, but as it were a tenth, according
to the words of the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 6.10, 11, 12, 13. and that the
converted Gentiles (or Gospel Church) is to be understood the Man-child, spoken
of by John, Revel. 12. I shall give these Scriptures and Scripture Reasons
following to prove it.

And in the first place, I shall show, that the Prophet Isaiah, who clearly
prophesied of the same thing that John saw, even the Woman and Man-child,
shows us, that the Woman is to be understood Zion or Jerusalem, namely, the
People called by that name, which were the Jews, and her Man-child to be the
Gentile Church, as you may read, Isaiah 66.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. in these
words, Before she traveled she brought forth, before her pain came she was
delivered of a MAN-CHILD. From this verse we see, that there is a Man-child
spoken of, which was to be brought forth, agreeing with the Text, Revel. 12.
only this Text says, that before she traveled she brought forth; and the
Text, Revel 12.2. says, she being with child, cried, traveling in birth,
pained to be delivered. These two Texts of Scripture speak of one and the same
thing, and yet seems to contradict one another, the which I shall reconcile;
the word Travel, I understand to be meant this, that Judah being forsaken of
her God, and given up to be made a Wanderer amongst the Nations, was to be
sorrowful as in a pained traveling condition, until the fullness of the
Gentiles; and this is that which is to be understood from the Text, Revel. 12.
where it says, she cried traveling in birth, and pained to be delivered; and
then at that time shall the Lord take away the vail of unbelief, and then shall
they see Jesus, and acknowledge him to be their God, which they have waited
for, Isa. 25.9. and yet her persecution after that time will be great, although
it shall endure but for a short time, for in the very time of the Gentiles
being taken up, until the Lord shall descend upon the Mount of Olives, it is
called the time of Jacobs trouble, and such a day of trouble as never was since
there was a Nation upon the earth, Dan. 12.1, 2, 3. Zech. 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Jer.
30. So then although the Church of Judah was given up for her unbelief, and
made a wanderer among the Nations, yet nevertheless her trouble will be greater
in that nick of time, (through Moabs treachery, and the great Antichrists
violence, although the time of her trouble will be very short) than even it was
before time; and that caused the Prophet Isaiah to say, BEFORE she traveled she
brought forth, BEFORE her pains came she was d^vered of a MAN-CHILD; implying,
that she was to travel and be pained afterward, for so says the Text, BEFORE
she traveled, and BEFORE her pains came; implying, that she was to travel and
be in pain, but she was to bring forth first; so that she was to have pain and
travail after her bringing forth the Man-child, and yet notwithstanding this
very Text that says, Before she traveled she brought forth, also says, that
as soon as Zion traveled she brough forth her Children: The sum of all is
this, that Zion or the Church of Judah, was given up unto unbelief, and to be
scattered amongst the Nation, until she brought forth the Man-child, namely,
until the fullness of the Gentiles, and so to be in a suffering condition; and
also after she was delivered of the Man-Child, she must fly into the
Wilderness, and there to be in a sorrowful condition, and in pain and travail
as it were, until all her children be brought forth, even the ten Tribes also
which were carried away by Salmonazar in the days of Hosea, be brought back,
and made one Sheep-fould, so as not to be divided into two Nations any more at
all; that the first dominions may come to the daughter of Zion; and that they
are called the Woman's seed, is clear, for we may see, that the small number of
the ten Tribes which were not of Judah, and yet lived amongst them since the
days of Hosea, are called the remnant of her seed, Revel. 12. which cannot
(rationally) be understood any other people, but a small number of the ten
Tribes, as I could show from the Prophets at large; but because of the want of
time, I pass from this Objection, (or the reconciliation of the Text, Isa. 66.
with Revel. 12.) and come to give you Reasons drawn from the Scriptures, to
prove the Gentile Church to be the Man-child spoken of in Revel. 12. and so to
the first; which is,

First, Because the Text Isa. 66. imports so much, in these words, Then shall
ye suck, ye shall be born upon her sides, and dandled upon her knees, as one
whom HIS Mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in
Jerusalem: and that this is spoken of the Gentiles that shall flow in or be
converted, is clear from the first clause of the verse, in these words, Isa.
66.12. For thus says the Lord, behold I will extend peace to her like a river,
and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream. Then shall thou see and
flow together, and thine heart shall fear and be enlarged, because the
abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles
shall come unto thee, Chap. 60.6. So that Judah is to be trodden under foot (in
a sorrowful pained and traveling condition) till the fullness of the Gentiles
be come in, and then there shall be a participation of each others glory; as
the Gentiles shall suck of her breast and milk out, and rejoice in the
abundance of her glory, even so shall she afterward when her child, ( viz. the
Gentile Church) is come to full age, (namely, when it shall descend with
Christ, and take its Government with him, to rule the Nations with a rod of
Iron then shall the Jews suck their breast, namely, partake of their glory, who
shall judge the world in righteousness: So then the first Reason to prove the
Man-child to be the faithful Gentiles is, because the Jews are mentioned in the
Text as the Mother, and the converted Gentiles as the Man-child, sucking her
breast; and also because she is to be trodden under foot until the fullness of
the Gentiles: So then her traveling in pain to be delivered of a Man-child, to
rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, is to be the bringing in the fullness of
the Gentiles; so that the Gentile Gospel Church being completed, and risen
from the dead (which shall be at the time of the appearing of Christ in the
clouds at the same time, when the Jews shall see him and believe in him)
because that Man-child that shall rule all Nations with a rod of Iron. And,

Secondly, That the faithful Gentile Church, is the Man-child which is to rule
all Nations with a rod of Iron, is clear, because they are the people that have
the promise made to them, to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, even the very
same thing which is spoken of the Man-child, for says the Text, Revel. 12. He
was to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron: and that this is to be understood
the faithful Gentile Church, who are to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron,
read the words of the Lord Jesus spoken by St. John, Revel. 2.26, 27. which
says, He that overcomes, and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I
give power over the Nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of Iron; even as
I have received of my Father, etc. From whence we see, that the very same
honor that God gave the Lord Jesus, (spoken of in Psalm. 2. which was to rule
all Nations with a rod of Iron) even the very same honor he has given unto
his Church, which follows him in the regeneration, as it was promised to the
Church of Thyatira.

And I call the Gospel Church, the Church of the Gentiles, because that there
was but a very few Jews converted, it being the Gentiles day, and the Jews shut
up under unbelief; yet I would not be understood to exclude the converted Jews
of the same privileges that the converted Gentiles shall have, for they are
all one in Christ, and to have all one privilege: And as for the Man-child
which is to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, we see plainly, that it is the
Gentile or Gospel Church, as is promised to the Church of Thyatira; and they
are also called joint heirs with Christ, that as Christ had that honor put
upon him, even so did Christ put it upon his Church, which is his Body; and
thus I pass this second Reason, saying, that it is plain, that the Man-child
was to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron; and I find none have that honor
put upon them but Christ, and the Gospel or Gentile Church; for the whole House
of Israel have not that honor, because the Scripture says, that the converted
Gospel Church shall judge the twelve Tribes of Israel; so then the Man-child
spoken of Revel. 12. is either Christ or the Gospel Gentile Church, because
none else have the promise of ruling all Nations with a rod of Iron: and that
the Man-child is not meant Christ, I could give many Reasons, if I did find any
that did affirm it, but because I find none assert it, I shall spare my pains.

And secondly, if it be not Christ which is called the Man-child, which was to
rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, then it must needs be the Gentile Church,
because none else have the honor promised them to rule all Nations with a rod
of Iron, but Christ and the Gospel Church: and thus I pass to the third and
last Reason to prove, that the Man-child spoken of in Revel. 12. is to be
understood the Gospel Church; which is,

Thirdly and lastly, Because the Man-child spoken of in Revel. 12. is to be
caught up unto God, and to his Throne, before the Woman takes her flight into
the Wilderness; the which agrees not (as I understand to any thing else, save
that of the Gentile-Church, who are to arise first from the dead, and be caught
up to meet the Lord in the air, 1 These. 4.14, 15, 16. Revel 20.5, 6, 7. Mat.
24.40, 41. Luke 17.35, 36. And from the time of the Signs of Christ's coming,
until he shall descend upon the Mount of Olives, the Jews shall be in
perplexity, and every Family shall mourn apart, and there shall be a great
mourning in Jerusalem, as in HADADRIMMON in the valley of MEGIDDON, Zech.
12.10, 11, 12. And that the Jews shall then be living upon the earth in their
bodies, before their change, at the very time when the Lord Jesus shall come,
is so plain, that I think that none can deny it, for the Scripture says, it is
the time of Jacobs trouble, and also says, that in that day when Jerusalem
shall be spoiled, that then shall the Lord come and his feet stand upon the
Mount of Olives: The two things which is observable to clear the truth of this
Reason, and to show the parrallel between the Man-child being caught up before
the Woman's flight, and the Resurrection of the faithful Gentiles, and their
being caught up to meet the Lord in the air; is, first, to show that when the
Lord Jesus comes to reign upon the earth, that then there will be some living
in the flesh unchanged (or not changed) into an immortal state: And secondly,
to prove, that all the faithful shall be changed before he descends upon earth,
and that they are to come with him, being before caught up to meet him: these
things proved and well considered, will show us, that the Man-child is no other
but the Christian Gentiles. And,

First, That there will be some, (namely, both Jews and Gentiles, although not
such Gentiles as were converted by a Gospel preaching) living upon earth at the
Lord Jesus his coming upon the earth, to take his Kingdom and to reign, is
plain; for when the Lord shall have descended upon the Mount of Olives, and
shall have made Jerusalem the praise of the whole earth, when the voice of
weeping shall be heard no more at all in her, (which will not be till after the
very coming of Christ) and yet when all this shall be fulfilled, that Christ
shall be in Jerusalem, and rejoice over his people there; even in that time of
Christ's reign, there shall be death and dying in Jerusalem, for death is the
last enemy that shall be conquered; and that there shall be dying after Christ's
reigning in Jerusalem, is clear from the words of the Prophet Isaiah, which
says, That the child shall die an hundred years old, and the sinner being an
hundred years old, shall be accursed, Isa. 65.19, 20. in these words, I will
rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people; and the voice of weeping shall be
heard no more in her, nor the voice of crying; there shall be no more thence an
infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days; for the child
shall die an hundred years old, and the sinner being an hundred years old shall
be accursed, etc. From whence we may see, that there will be some (even the
Jews) who shall live in the flesh before their change, and yet Christ shall be
with them in Jerusalem: And where it is said in Revel. 21. That there shall be
no more death; that relates to the time when Christ shall have given up his
Mediatorship into the hands of God the Father, after the last Judgment, spoken
of in Revel. 20. and I think it cannot be rationally imagined, that Christ
should reign over the House of David in Jerusalem a thousand years, and no
Generations to come into the world and pass out of it again; yea it is certain
that Christ shall dwell in Zion in Jerusalem, and Jerusalem shall be safely
inhabited and abide for ever, even from Generation to Generation; so that there
shall be coming into the world and going out of it again, which is understood
by the word, from GENERATION TO GENERATION, Isa. 60.15. Joel. 3.20. So then it
is certain, that some shall live in the flesh, in the Kingdom of Christ, yea
even all the Jews that live to his coming, and are not before converted unto
Gospel obedience, shall live in their flesh and not be changed at the present,
but shall be judged by the Gospel Saints, and so pass in their Generations
gradually; as the Scripture declares, the which I before have spoken of; and
thus I pass the first thing, although more might be said to it, but enough to
prove, that there shall be some living in the flesh, even the Jews, when Christ
comes, and also in the time of his Kingdom. And,

Secondly, all the Gentile Saints shall be with Christ before he shall descend
upon the Earth, for they shall be caught up into the Clouds to meet him, and
shall come with him, and descend with him that they shall all be caught up to
meet him in the air, and come with him, is clear if we compare the words of
Paul, and the words of the Apostle Jude together, which says, the dead in
Christ shall rise first, and we that are alive and remain, shall be caught up
together with them in the Clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we
be for ever with the Lord; For behold the Lord shall come with ten thousand of
his Saints, 1 These. 4.17. Jude 14. yea says, Zech. 14.5. The Lord thy God
shall come and ALL SAINTS with him: from whence we may see, that the Saints,
yea all the faithful Gentiles are to be caught up to God and to his Throne to
meet Christ, and yet the Jews to live and remain in their flesh, and to have
Christ their King reigning over them in Jerusalem, from generation to
generation, which being truly weighed it amounts to this, that the Woman flying
into the Wilderness is the Jews, and that the Man-child which before is caught
up to God, is the Christian Gentiles; and thus much as to the third reason, to
prove that the Gentile Church is the Man-child spoken of in Revel. 12. although
I could speak more unto it if time would admit of it, but time would fail me
to speak to these things in particular because they be very large, and as the
thing it self is not so pleain and easy to be understood as some other
subjects are; even so the proof of Scriptures relating to it, is more dubious,
and wants a larger explication than other Scriptures (to other subjects want)
for there is to the proof of this thing, much in Mich. 5. from the 3. verse to
the end of the Chapter, and many other places speak to this thing, but what
has been said is sufficient to prove the Woman to be Zion (namely Judah) and
the Man-child to be the Christian Gentiles, for as the Woman is to travail, and
be in pain, even so it is until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, Romans
11. to bring forth the fullness of the Gentiles, and also the restoring the
other ten Tribes, the remnant of his brethren into their former capacity, and
to a better estate than that of the first, when the envy of Ephraim shall
depart, so as that Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim any
more at all: and the Man-child is clearly seen to be the faithful Gentiles,
because they are to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron, as is promised to the
Church of Thyatirah, and as they are to rule all Nations with a rod of Iron,
even so they are to be caught or taken up to meet the Lord in the air, and the
other to be left behind, for as they are to be Christ's glorious (army and seen
in Heaven) even so they shall descend with him, and are called Prince decreeing
judgment, Isa. 32. and Saviors coming on Mount-Zion judging the Mount of Esau,
when the Kingdoms shall be the Lords, and they judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel; but I shall leave this and come to the opening of the other things
before mentioned, in the which I shall be very brief at present, yet full
enough to show the truth of it; and so I pass to the third thing in order,
which is the remnant of her seed.

Thirdly, as touching the remnant of her seed, we may observe the words as they
lie, which is thus read, Revel. 12.17. And the Dragon was wrath with the Woman,
and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which kept the Commandments
of God, and have the Testimony of Jesus; from whence we may take notice, that
there is not only a Man-child brought forth by the Woman (that is to rule all
Nations with a rod of Iron, which is caught up unto God and to his Throne
before the Woman flies into the Wilderness) but also there remains a remnant
of her seed, that the Dragon makes war withal, when he sees he cannot devour
the Man-child, nor carry away the Woman with the flood, which he cast forth out
of his mouth; now the remnant of her seed is as well mentioned in Isa. 66. as
in Revel. 12 17. for there is mention made of the Man-child, saying, Before she
travailed she brought forth, before her pains came she was delivered of a
Man-child; and with all says, Who has heard of such a thing, shall the earth
be made to bring forth at one day, or a Nation be born at once? for as soon at
Zion travailed she brought forth her Children. Isa. 66 8. So then as here is
spoken of a Man-child, even so here is spoken of Children, which agrees with
Revel. 12.17. where there is mention made of the remnant of her seed, so then
as the Christian Gentiles are the Man-child, even so there is a remnant of the
twelve Tribes, which may fitly be called the remnant of her seed.

First, That there is a remnant left in Jerusalem which shall be persecuted and
worn out by the Antichrist for the three years and a half, is clear, the which
I shall speak unto in its distinct order, and first to the first; that is, that
there is a remnant left in Jerusalem when the woman flies into the Wilderness,
or into captivity, as it is called captivity as well as the Wilderness, for to
be banished from our native country, and to be cast amongst our enemies, may
fitly be called captivity; and that there is a remnant to be left in Jerusalem,
which do not thus flee, or be thus persecuted from their houses and
habitations, when the City shall be taken and trod under foot, is clear from,
Zech. 14.2. in these words, For I will gather all Nations against Jerusalem to
battle, and the City shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women
ravished, and HALF of the City shall go into captivity, and the residue of the
people shall not be cut off from the City. From whence we may see, that some
shall go forth unto captivity, and the others shall remain in the City, which
is called in, Revel. 12.17. the remnant of her seed; so then in the first place
you see, that some shall go forth of the City at the time when the Gentiles
shall take it and spoil it, and a remnant shall not be cut off from the City
but shall remain in it, and that remnant shall be worn out as it were, by that
wicked person: and that it is not Zion, namely the two Tribes is clear (for she
is then out of his reach) but that they are of the Tribes of the Children of
Israel, is as clear, for they are the people that he shall make war with, and
wear them out, they are called the children of Daniels people, Dan. 12.2. chap.
7.25. So then, first there is a remnant left which fly not, Zech. 14.2. And
secondly, they are the people that are to be worn out, Dan. 7.25. and 12.7.
Zeph. 3.19. And that they may be called the remnant of her seed, the Prophet
Isaiah (alluding to the very same thing) says, It shall come to pass in that
day, that the REMNANT of Israel, (viz. the remnant of Zions seed) and such as
escape of the house of Jacob, shall no more again stay upon them that smote
them, but shall stay upon the Lord the holy one of Israel in truth; the remnant
shall return, even the remnant of Jacob unto the mighty God, therefore thus
says the Lord God of Host, O my people that dwell in Zion be not afraid of
the Assyrian! (viz. the Antichrist) he shall smite thee with a rod, and shall
lift up his staff against thee, after the manner of Egypt, for yet A VERY
LITTLE WHILE (1260 days) and the indignation shall cease, and my anger in
their destruction, and the Lord shall stir up a scourge for him; according to
the slaughter of Midian at the rock Orib, and it shall come to pass in that
day, that his burden shall be taken away from off thy shoulders, and his yoke
from off thy neck, etc. Isa. 10 20, 21, 24, 25, 26, 27. this agrees with Ezekiel.
38. and 39. Chapters, and with Mich. 5. and many places that might be added,
but I shall leave this, saying, that you may see that there is a people or a
woman to fly into the Wilderness, and a remnant to remain in the City, which
the Assyrian ( viz. the Antichrist) shall lift up his staff against, and make
war with them, agreeing with Revel. 12.27. and this remnant we see to be part
of the house of Israel, Isa. 10.20. and so I pass to the next thing, which is
the fourth thing, of the taking up of the Man-child to God, and to his Throne.

Fourthly, as to this fourth particular I have already spoken to, and therefore
at present I shall be very brief; saying, that by taking of the Man-child to
God and to his Throne, I understand to be meant that at the time of the Lords
first coming into the Clouds of Heaven, even into the air with his holy Angels,
that then the war shall be in Heaven, between Michael and his Angels, and the
Devil and his Angels, and the Devil shall be cast down, and with him his
Angels, that the air may be cleared and made fit for Christ and his Saints to
meet there, for in very deed I do understand, that God did confine the evil
Angels unto (or into) the air for their residence until the resurrection of
the Saints, and the taking up of the living, which I understand to be the
Man-child; and just at (or a little before) the time that they are taken up,
the Devil shall be cast down into the earth, at which time he shall give the
Beast his seat, and power and great authority, and in that time there will be
lying signs and miracles wrought, at which time it shall be said Woe, woe, woe,
be to the inhabitants of the Earth and Sea, for the Devil is come down with
great wrath, because he knows that his time is short; and seeing himself cast
down, he shall persecute the Woman, and God shall give her the wings of an
Eagle that she may fly from his face, and that will cause him to make war with
the remnant of her seed, in which time the Lord shall abate his wrath and
cruelty, (which he would exercise in and by the Beast, upon the remnant of the
Woman's seed) by pouring out his Vials on the Beast, and by giving power to his
two witnesses, not only to Prophecy and establish the remnant of the Woman's
seed left in Jerusalem) but also to smite the Beast and his followers with
plagues so often as they please, Revel. 11. And in short thus, the taking up of
the Man-child, I understand is, when the Lord shall first appear in the Clouds
(as before said) that then he shall with a voice, and with the sound of a
Trumpet, awake the dead and gather all the living Saints together, both the
raised dead, and changed living, and forthwith they shall be caught up to meet
Christ, but the rest of the dead men shall not live again until a thousand
years after, Revel. 20.6, 7, 8. neither shall the living which have not before
prepared themselves to meet the Bridegroom (by walking in his ways and
keeping his Ordinances) be taken up, but shall be left upon earth; there is
none but those that are accounted as Eagles, that shall be with Christ; for
where the carkas is there shall the Eagles be gathered together* that is, where
Christ is, thither will his body, namely the Gospel Church (or his bride) be,
and this is clear from many Scriptures that the Saints shall be first raised,
and caught up before the rest of the dead or living; as I before (in this Book)
have proved at large; and thus I pass this fourth particular, and come to the
fifth; which is,

Fifthly, The fifth thing is, the place into which the Woman is to fly, and
that I understand is into the Wilderness of Moab; that she is to fly into a
Wilderness, is clear, where she is to be hid from the face of the Serpent, and
to be nourished by the Lord (that is by the Lords appointment) and that he has
appointed her to fly from the Serpent, that she may be hid from his face; is
clear from the words of the Text, Revel. 12.14. And secondly, we may as plainly
know what place she was to hide in, or what place was to be her hiding place;
if we peruse the Scriptures; as first, that we may see that Moab, or the
Wilderness of Moab, was to be her hiding place, read Isa. 16.1,, 3, 4, 5. in
these words, Send ye the Lamb to the ruler of the Land, from Sela to the
Wilderness, unto the Mount of the Daughter of Zion; take counsel, execute
judgment, make thy shadows as the night in the midst of the noon day, hide the
outcasts, bewray not him that wandreth. Let my outcast dwell with thee, Moab,
be thou a cover for them from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is
at an end, the spoiler cease, the oppressors are consumed out of the Land.
And in mercy shall the Throne be established, and he shall sit upon it in
truth, in the Tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking judgment, and hastening
righteousness, etc. From these words we may see, that as God has appointed the
Woman to fly from the face of the spoiler, even so he has showed us the place
where, even in the Wilderness of Moab, there is the Lamb, or the Present to be
sent, even to the Wilderness unto the Mount of the Daughter of Zion; and that
we may know also what Wilderness it is that the Lord sends the Woman into, that
she may hide her self from the face of the spoiler; he tells us it is the
Wilderness of Moab, saying, hide the outcast, bewray not him that wandreth, let
my outcast dwell with thee, Moab, be thou a cover for them from the face of the
spoiler: From whence we may plainly see, that the place that God had prepared
for the Woman to fly into from the face of the Serpent, was the Wilderness of
Moab; I could show (if time would admit) how the Lord brought them thither (it
being as it were a type of things to come) when they came out of Egypt, when
Ed^m gave them not leave to pass through their country, it being the place where
Balaam was sent for, to curse them by Balick King of Moab, and what deceit
Balick used as a means to destroy them by the counsel of Balaam; all which was
types of that which will be done to them in the latter day by Moab; which
causes the Lord to complain in the very next verse, ( Isa. 16.6.) against Moab
saying, we have heard of the pride and wrath of Moab; and indeed there be many
places, as the foregoing chapter, and many prophesies more speak of Moabs
destruction, because of his pride and cruelty against Israel; so that the Lord
will cause a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter out of Israel to destroy them at
last according to Balaams Prophecy, Number. 24.17. or at least to smite the
corners of Moab, and bring them down; and this wrath of Moab to Israel is
prophesied in several places, as in Zeph. 2.8, 9, 10, 11. and in many more; but
I leave this particular, saying according to the text, Revel. 12. and Mich. 4
the woman was to go or fly out of the City into the field, or Wilderness of
Moab, and to dwell there, and Moab to be a hiding place to her from the face of
the spoiler, where she shall dwell in the field, the time before spoken of, and
then go to Babylon, and there be delivered, according to the word of the Lord,
by Mich. 4. and thus we see that the Woman is to fly into the Wilderness, yea
God has provided the place for her, and allured her thither, and will nourish
her there, Revel. 12.17. Hosea 2.14. there is many Scriptures that proves her
being in the Wilderness, and also it shows what Wilderness it is; and that it
relates to the very time of the end of Jacobs troubles, is very clear, I shall
cite the Scriptures relating to this thing, and so enter upon the sixth
particular, Isa. 32.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. chap. 43.19.20. Hosea 2.14. Psalm.
55.5.6. and 74.9.14. and 120.5. Ezekiel. 20.34, 35, 36. chap. 34.25.26. Mich.
4.10. Isa. 16.1 compared with the 4. chap. 35.1.6. Cant. 8.5. thus desiring
thee to search into those Scriptures, wherein thou may see that the Woman
before spoken of, shall have a place prepared of the Lord in the Wilderness of
Moab, he having (as it were) bespoke (or took up) her quarters before hand,
saying, Moab be thou a hiding place, or let my outcast dwell with thee, be thou
a cover for them from the face of the spoiler; and there he speaks comfortably
to them, and takes away all imperfection from them, (there) that the lame man
may leap as an Heart, and the feeble amongst them as the Angels of God, for
there will the Lord speak with them face to face, and they shall lay their
hands upon Edod, and Moab, and the children of Ammon shall then obey them; So
shall he get them fame in all places where they have been put to shame Zeph.
3.19, 20. And thus I come to the sixth particular, which is the time of her
abode in the Wilderness.

Sixthly, As for the time of the Woman's abode in the Wilderness, and the
trouble of the remnant of her seed which remain in Jerusalem, I understand to
be three years and an half, in which time the two witnesses shall prophecy in
sackcloath; and that it is so, read, Revel. 11.2, 3. compared with chap.
12.6.14. and Dan. 7.25. chap. 12.7. in these words, And to the Woman was given
two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the Wilderness into her
place, where she is nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the
face of the Serpent; Hide my outcast, let my outcast dwell with thee, Moab, be
thou a cover for them from the face of the spoilers: and the Woman fled into
the Wilderness where she has a place prepared of God, that they should feed
her there, a thousand two hundred and threescore days; Send ye the Lamb to the
Rulers of the Land, from Sela to the Wilderness, to the Mount of the Daughter
of Zion, for the Wilderness and Solitary plac^ shall be glad for them; for in
the Wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the Desert, no Lion shall
be there, nor ravenous Beast, but the redeemed shall walk there, etc. Isa.
6.1.3.4. chap. 35.1, 6, 9. From these Scriptures we may see, that Moab is the
Wilderness or hiding place for Zion, into which she is to flee to be hid from
the face of the spoiler, or Serpent, and the time we also see, to be a time,
and times, and half a time, or a thousand two hundred and threescore days, or
as it is in chap. 11.2, 3. called forty and two months, which being accounted
(according to the Jews account) thirty days, for a month, it amounts just unto
three years and an half, for a thousand two hundred and threescore days, makes
forty and two months, and forty and two months, makes just three years and a
half; so then the time of Jerusalems being trod under foot, and of the wearing
out of the Saints of the most high (namely the remnant of the Woman's seed which
abode in Jerusalem) and of the Woman's abode in the Wilderness, is just three
years and a half, and not a thousand two hundred and threescore years, as Mr.
Henden (and some other expositers) says: and further to prove that it is but
three years and a half, according to the litteral account, both in Daniel and
the Revelation, (and not so long a time as before mentioned) I shall give a few
reasons (drawn from the Scriptures) to prove it; and the first is,

First, Because the scripture says, that the seventh head (which is the
eighth, and to go to perdition, which is the man of sin, or the Assyrian, or
vile person, or the spoiler) that when he comes forth (to reign) that his time
is but short, that is, he shall continue but for a short space, as a seventh,
but is to be the eighth (and is the same that) is to wear out the Saints of the
most high, and it shall be gien into his hands for a time, and times, and the
dividing of time, read Revel. 17.10, 11, 12, 13. compared with Dan. 7.23, 24,
25, 26, 27. so that the seventh head, is to have but a short space, or time to
reign, and also the eighth spoken by St. John, is to continue but a short
space, even a Time, and Times, and half a Time; spoken of by Daniel, which is
just three years and a half, as I before (in this Treatise) have proved, by
showing what is to be understood by TIME, and TIMES, and half a TIME; comparing
the word TIME, and TIMES, with the seven TIMES, which was the seven years of
Nebuchadnezzars being cast out into the open field, and eating grass with the
Oxen until he did acknowledge the Lord only, to rule in the Kingdoms of men,
and gives it to whom soever he will, Dan. 4.25. So then the TIME is to be
understood one year, and TIMES (in the plural number) is to be understood two
years, and the half TIME (or dividing of TIME) is to be understood half a year,
according to the true account of Daniel, from the word TIME, or TIMES) the
which amounts to no longer Time than just three years and an half, which is
that short space that St. John speaks of the Beasts continuance in troubling
the Saints, or the sealed number.

Secondly, The Time further appears to be but three years and an half, because
as it is called, one thousand two hundred and threescore days, even so it is
also called; FORTY AND TWO MONTHS, which is just three years and a half; and
also a Time and Times, and half a Time, being compared with Forty and two
Months, shows clearly what Time is to be understood by the one thousand two
hundred and threescore days, that it is just three years and a half.

Thirdly, It further appears to be but three years and a half, and not so long
as a thousand two hundred and threescore years, (that Jerusalem shall be taken
and trodden under foot, and the people persecuted) because this taking of the
City, and treading of it under foot, is to be after the measuring line has
passed over the City in the latter days, (as I before have showed) that when
Judah comes out of her long captivity, then shall she sit upon the repairing
of her breaches, and before she has finished her Walls and outward Court,
there shall be a stop put to it by the Antichrist, as it was in the days of
Judah coming out of Babylon, that there was a stop in their building, in the
days of Syrias until the days of Darias, which was a type of this stop and
hinderance in the work (as I before have showed) so then if we consider this
interruption of Israel, and the time when) even when they be newly brought out
of captivity, according to the Prophet Ezekiels words, Chap. 38.) it clearly
shows us, that the time must be very short, agreeing with the Prophet
Zechariahs words, Chap. 14.1, 2, 3. which says, Behold the day of the Lord
comes, and the spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee, and I will gather
all Nations against Jerusalem to battle, and the City shall be taken, agreeing
with Revel. 11. which says, The holy City shall they tread under foot forty
and two months; then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those Nations,
as he fought in the day of battle; and his feet shall stand in that day upon
the Mount of Olives. This being well observed, may clearly be seen to be a
thing falling upon Israel in the latter days; and that the time of their
trouble THEN, (after their great and long time of being scattered amongst the
Nations) shall be very short, and not exceed the time of three years and a half.

Fourthly and lastly, It appears to be but a very short time (namely, the time
before mentioned) because the two Prophets are to prophecy all the time of the
Woman's flight, to establish the remnant of the Woman's seed, and to smite the
Antichrist and his followers with plagues, as Moses and Aaron did smite Pharaoh
(King of Egypt) for his wickedness against the Children of Israel; and that the
two Prophets (or Witnesses) are to Prophecy all the time of the Woman's flight
and abode in the Wilderness, and of the holy Cities being trod under foot; is
clear from the words of St. John, Revel. 11.2, 3. in these words, The holy City
shall they tread under foot forty and two months; and I will give power unto my
two Witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore
days, clothed in sackloth. From whence we may see, that the time of the
Woman's flight and abode in the Wilderness, and the persecution of the Remnant
of her seed which remain in Jerusalem, is but for the space of three years and
a half; because as it is called, but for a short space, and forty and two
Months, Time, and Times, and half a Time; even so it is but to endure for the
time of the prophesying of the two Prophets in Sackcloth, which cannot be long,
much less one thousand two hundred and threescore years, nay, it is but the
just time that the Scripture calls it, take it either way, namely, a thousand
two hundred and threescore days, or forty and two Months, or Time, and Times,
and dividing of Time, which is just three years and an half, as before said:
And thus I come to the next particular, which is the seventh and eighth thing,
which I shall put together, and make the seventh complete (with it) to show who
are the two Prophets (or Witnesses) and where they are to prophecy, and to
whom.

Seventhly, The two Prophets, I understand to be two men appointed and set
apart by the Lord for that work, to prophecy before Nations and Kings, to turn
the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the hearts of the Children to
the Fathers; that the Lord may be one, and his Name one upon the Mountains of
Israel; and these two persons (or men as I understand them to be) the one I
understand to be Elijah, (or Elias which is one) and the other John the
Apostle; and that Elijah is one, read Mal. 4.5. which says, Behold I will send
you Elijah the Prophet before the coming of the Great and DREADFVL DAY of the
Lord, and he shall turn the hearts of the Fathers unto the Children, and the
hearts of the Children unto their Fathers; left I come and smite the earth with
a Curse. From this Text we find that Elijah (or Elias) is to come before the
GREAT and DREADFVL DAY of the Lord, and Christ's coming in the flesh, when he
was born of the Virgin, was not the Great and Dreadful Day of the Lord, for he
came in such a mean way in that day, that he was not dreadful to his enemies,
but they were bitter unto him, as to whip him, and smite him with their hands,
and crucify him; and indeed that day of his coming was so far from being the
dreadful day (or the notable day) of the Lord, that his coming in that day was
prophesied on this wise, Who has believed our report? or to whom has the arm
of the Lord been revealed? for he is despised and rejected of men, he was
numbered with the transgressors, and bare the sins of many, and made
intercession for the transgessors, Isa. 53.1, 3, 12. even so says the Prophet
Zachariah, Chap. 9.9. Rejoice greatly O daughter of Zion, shout O daughter of
Jerusalem, the King comes unto thee, he is just and having salvation, lowly
and riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the foal of an Ass. All which
shows, (with many more that might be added) that the coming of the Lord in
the day when he was born of the Virgin, was not that notable or dreadful day of
the Lord, but a day little noted, so as but few to believe his report. And,

Secondly, where it is said, that the hearts of the Fathers (in that day)
should be turned to the Children, and the hearts of the Children unto the
Fathers, is clearly seen not to be meant the coming of the Lord in his first
day, of whom John the Baptist was a forerunner, to prepare his way; for in that
day, (as was prophesied of him) he came to set a man at variance against his
Father, Micah 7.6. Mat. 10.34, 35, 36. Luke 12.49, 50, 51, 52. in these words,
Think not that I am come to send peace on earth, I came not to send peace but a
sword; for I am come to set a man at variance against his Father, and the
daughter against her Mother; and the daughter in law aguinst her Mother in law,
and a man's foes shall be they of his own household; compared with Luke 12.53.
which says, That the Father shall be divided against the Son, and the Son
against the Father, the Mother against the Daughter, and the Daughter against
the Mother. All which clearly shows, that the coming of the Lord Jesus in his
first day, when hew was born of the Virgin) was not that notable or dreadful
day of the Lord, of which Elias was to be a forerunner of; but relates to
another day, in order to the reconciling of that great difference between the
Parents and Children, which difference and division was begat (between the
Parents and their Children) by Christ's first coming, who came not (as he says
himself to send peace upon the earth, but a sword, namely, a house divided, the
Father against the Son, the Son against the Father, etc. but because, I shall
hasten to the Conclusion, I shall wave all long circumlocutions, and in short
say (as beforesaid) that Elijah (or Elias) is yet to come before the great and
dreadful day of the Lord, to turn the hearts of the Fathers to the Children,
who is to be one of the two Prophets (or Witnesses) to establish the remnant of
the Woman's seed, namely, the Children of Israel which remain in the City after
the Woman's flight into the Wilderness.

Object. But against this is objected (from the words of Christ) that Elias is
already come, which was John the Baptist, Mat. 11.14. Mark 9.11, 12, 13. Luke
1.16, 17.

Answ. That John the Baptist was a forerunner of Christ in his first day, is
not denied, and that he came in the power and spirit of Elias is as clear; for
as Elias shall, and did bear witness, to (and for) the Lord, even so did John
the Baptist, and so was a lively type of the Elias which is to come; for the
type or figure of the thing is often called by the name of the thing it self,
and so we must understand Christ's words here, where he says, That Elias is
already come, meaning John the Baptist; or otherwise we set Christ's words and
John's words one to contradict another; for the Scripture says, That John did
no Miracle, and yet all that he spoke of him was true, John 10.41. and John
himself (when the Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem to him, saying,
Who art thou? art thou Elias?) he said I am not Elias, John 1.19, 20, 21, 22.
But him of whom the Prophet Isaiah spoke of, saying, I am the voice of one
crying in the Wilderness, etc. So then from hence we may see, that John was a
true Prophet, and spoke the truth; and yet when it was demanded of him, whether
he was the Elias which was to come; he said, I am not Elias: From whence I
conclude, that although John came in the spirit of Elias, and was a type or
figure of him, and so might be called by the Lord Elias, (he calling the figure
of the thing by the name of the thing figured) yet no more the Elias which was
to come before the great and dreadful day of the Lord, than the Bread and the
Cup of the holy Supper of the Lord, is the real Body and Blood of Jesus Christ;
and yet Christ himself says, Take, EAT, THIS IS MY BODY, which is broken for
you; and yet it was but a figure of his Body, to show forth his death, to keep
us in remembrance thereof; and also we see, that there was pictures made with
Gold out of the Mercy seat, with wings to cover the Mercy seat, and they were
called Cherubims, and yet were not real Cherubims, but were a figure of the
Cherubims, or did only represent them: So that we may see, that the thing
representing, is called by the name of the thing represented, or the figure of
the thing, called by the name of the thing figured; and hence we may see
(although I could say much more of things of this nature) that both Christ's
words, and also John's were true; Christ calling John Elias, its to be
understood John was a figure of Elias, or represented Elias, not only coming in
the power and spirit of Elias, but he being a forerunner of Christ, in his
first day, to persuade the Jews to obedience to Christ, as Elias is to be a
forerunner of Christ in his second day; namely, the Great and Dreadful day of
the Lord, and to persuade and establish the Jews in their waiting for their
King Jesus, and their obedience unto him: And secondly, John's words are true
also, where he says, I am not Elias, (that is, he was not that Elias really or
simply understood) that they looked for, although he was a type of him, and
might by Christ be called by his name, as well as the bread which Christ brake
might be called his body; or the pictures of Cherubims called Cherubims, and
Christ called David; and many such like things that borrow their name from the
things which they represent: and thus much briefly by way of Answer to the
Objection, and the reconciliation of the words of Christ, and the words of
John, which seemingly contradicts each other; but being understood accordingly
as they were spoken they agree together; so then still it remains that Elias is
to come before the GREAT AND DREADFVL DAY of the Lord; and that it is to be
Elias really so understood; I give these reasons (which before have been
mentioned in general) in a short and brief method.

First, John the Baptist was not the real Elias, as I think all will confess,
for he was the Son of Zacharias, and Zacharias had a commandment from the
Lord, to call the name of his Son (not Elias but) John, Luke 1.13. But ELIAS is
to come (as has been proved) before the great and dreadful day of the Lord.

Secondly, John the Baptist was not the forerunner (simply so considered) of
the great and dreadful day of the Lord, for that day that John was a forerunner
of, was the day of Christ's sufferings, and not the day of dread unto his
enemies, so as it will be in that day that the chief Captains, and great and
mighty men of the earth, shall call to the Mountains to fall upon them, and
hide them from the presence of the Lamb, for the great day of his wrath is come
(say they) and who can stand; but Elias is to be the forerunner of the great
and dreadful day of the Lord.

Thirdly, The hearts of the Fathers shall be turned unto the Children, and the
hearts of the Children to their Fathers in that day, which yet are at a
distance, for Christ sake, so that the parents hate their Children, and
Children shall betray their parents to death for Christ's sake; although it be
not denied that John (in a measure) was a type of Elias in that thing,
according to the saying of the Angel to Zacharias, Luke 1.13, 18. For all men
did account John a Prophet, and he preparing the way of the Lord, all Judah and
Jerusalem came out to him, to be Baptized of him in Jordan, and yet
notwithstanding afterward were at great variance about Christ, some saying
that he was a good man, and others saying nay, he has a Devil and is mad, and
after that laid violent hands on him, and crucified him; and the distance was
so great that many families, (even Parents and their Children) have been and
are at a distance about him, and so will be until that day of the coming of
Elias, and then the hearts of the Fathers shall (thoroughly) be turned unto their
Children; and the hearts of the Children unto their Fathers; and envy shall
depart from Ephraim, as before said, which brings me to the fourth and last
reason, to prove Elias one of the two Witnesses; which is,

Fourthly, Because the same judgments which was brought upon the earth by Elias
when he was upon earth, shall be again brought upon the earth by the two
Prophets (or witnesses) Revel. 11.6. compared with James 5.17. 1 King 17.1.
which bespeaks such a thing, as though Elijah should be one of those two
Witnesses, if we also consider that these Witnesses must be slain, and
therefore must be such as never yet have tasted of death, because it cannot be
(rationally) imagined that those Prophets which are so to die, are any of the
Prophets which are dead, and shall be raised from the dead, and then be slain
again, (I speak this because some have supposed Moses to be one of these two
Prophets, which in reason cannot be so; neither do I find any Scripture
warranting any such thing) neither do I find any where (in my most serious
search of the Scriptures) of any extraordinary Prophets (namely such Prophets
as is mentioned in, Revel. 11.) to be borne in the last days when this
prophecy is to be accomplished; but Elijah never yet was slain but was caught
up to Heaven in a whirlwind; and so at present I shall leave this, and pass
to the next thing, which is to show my opinion who it is that is the other
Prophet, because the Text says, that there is to be two Prophets, or two
Witnesses, which are to prophecy in sackcloth; and as to the other Prophet, I
shall be very brief, because I do not find any such Objection as I meet with
against the fore mentioned Prophet, namely against Elias; and therefore I shall
briefly show my opinion and leave it.

Secondly, As for the other Prophet, which is to be a fellow companion with
Elias, I understand to be John, that holy Apostle, the beloved Disciple of
Jesus, which leaned upon his breast at Supper; for as Elias was a man highly in
the love and favor of God, (although hated by men, and persecuted, and
banished) even so was John dearly beloved of God, although hated, and banished
from men; yet the Lord Jesus dealt with him, (by manifesting of himself to him)
as God did to Elijah, when he fled from the face of Ahab and Jessibel, 1 Kings
17. and Chap. 18. but being in have I pass many things which otherwise were
necessary, to be spoke by way of parallel; and come to show the reasons why I
understand John to be one of the two Witnesses spoken of, in Revelations the
11. which are these.

First, because when John writ the Gospel of Christ, (which was supposed to be
thirty years after the ascension of Christ) it was then reported amongst the
Disciples that John was not to die, John 21.23. and yet at that time they had
the spirit of the Lord to teach them. But if it should be objected, and said,
that John says, not that Christ said he should not die, but what if I will
that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee fellow thou me; (signifying
Peter's death.)

To which I answer and say, that it is true that Christ did not say in so many
words, that John should not die, for if he had it might have begat some
dislike, and murmuring amongst his Disciples, but he spoke so plain that his
Disciples that had the holy Spirit did so understand him, and John himself who
writ these things does not contradict their opinion, but only says, over the
words that Christ had said, which is; But if I will that he tarry till I come,
what is that to thee? and (indeed) their was great reason that John (who wrote
these things) should be very sparing in the delivering of it, seeing Christ was
sparing, and because the matter concerned himself, that he might not gain any
dislike, or hatred from any of the Disciples, because of that thing: and as
touching John's death, I say it cannot be proved that he did ever die, neither
do I believe that he did till I see better reason then I yet see to prove it,
and if it be an error, it is no other thing then what was received and
believed of the Disciples of Christ in that day, and they no where reproved for
so believing; but because I am a speaking of John's death, I shall show you the
opinion of some (or what they have written) as touching his death (although I
would not be understood to believe all what is written concerning him) Jerome
says (alleging it out of Tertullian) that in the time of Nero (though others
say in the reign of Domitian) he was thrown (at Rome) into a tun of boiling
oil, and thereby he took no harm, but came forth after this trial, purer than
he went in; (and so says Abdias) Augustine calls him a Martyr by will, and
that which he writes of his end, is strangest of all (which is) that John at
Ephesus, caused his grave to be made, and in the presence of diverse went in
alive, and being no sooner in, but there seeming he was dead, they covered him,
which kind of rest (says he) was rather to be termed a sleep than death, for
that the earth of the grave bubleth or boileth up after the manner of a well,
by reason of John's resting therein, and breathing, a sign of his slumbering
therein; as you may see, (August.) in John, Tract. 124. and also repeated by
the translator in his discourse of the Apostles, and seventy Disciples in
Eusebius, 533 and Eusebius Pamphilius (himself) says, that he dyed at Ephesus,
Eusebius, lib. 3. cap. 28. and indeed there is division amongst ancient
writers, as touching John; but I shall leave these things and come to the
second Reason; which is,

Secondly, Because the Angel told John, that he must Prophecy again (not
preach again) before many people and nations, and tongues, and kings; which
relates to the time of the Nations being gathered together against Jerusalem in
the time of the Antichrist, and the ten Kings that shall give their power unto
the Beast, until the word of God be fulfilled, Zech. 14.1, 2. Dan. 7.24. Revel,
17.12, 13, 14. In this time, and unto these people, or Nations, was John to
Prophecy, Revel. 10.11.

Thirdly, John says, There was given to ME a reed like unto a rod, and the
Angel stood, saying, rise, and measure the Temple of God, and the Altar, and
them that worship therein. But the Court without the Temple, leave out, and
measure it not: for it is given unto the Gentiles, and the holy City shall they
tread under foot forty and two months. And I will give power unto my two
Witnesses, and they shall Prophecy a thousand two hundred and threescore days
clothed in sackcloth. Revel. 11.1, 2, 3. From whence we may see, that John had
not only (as it were) a new gift of Prophecy to be given unto him, that he
might Prophecy again before Nations, tongues, and Kings, and the like; but
also he was the man that was to measure Jerusalem at the time of its last
building, when the holy City was to be taken by the Gentiles, and trodden under
foot, as I before have proved; and he is the other Prophet with Elias, which
the Jews look for before the great day of the Lord, and demanded of John the
Baptist if he was either of them, and he said no, and they demanded of him why
he then Baptized, (to prepare a people for the Lord) saying, Why Baptiseth thou
then, if thou be not that Christ nor Elias, neither that Prophet; from whence
we may see, that the Jews look for Elias and another Prophet, whose name is not
mentioned, and therefore he is called that Prophet, (or a Prophet) not naming
him, John 1.21, 25. As the Disciple who was to tarry until Christ come, is not
plainly mentioned, but called the Disciple whom Christ loved, who leaned upon
his Breast at Supper, and the like; but we understand him to be John, because
the Text says, this is the Disciple that testifies of these things, and wrote
these things, and we know that his testimony is true; so then the Jews look for
Elias and his companion another Prophet (even John) to be forerunners of
Christ, and such are the two Prophets, which are called the two Witnesses to
be, and doubtless are the same persons; for they are such as shall be slain,
implying that they are such men as yet have not tasted of death; and although
some suppose that Enoch or Moses shall be Elija's companion, to be one of the
two Prophets, yet it is not my Judgment, for there is no reason for Moses to be
one who has tasted of Death already, neither is there any mention made of him
as to such a work, and as for Enoch there is nothing spoken of him (neither) in
reference to that work, but of Elias there is, and also of John, for he is to
measure the City, and to prophecy again before Kings, and there is great
reason that one of these two Prophets should be of the new Testament, a witness
to Jesus, as well as Elias of the old Testament, and yet both to be of the seed
of Abraham, as Elias and John was; and finally, the people that the two
Witnesses were to Prophecy unto, is the remnant of the Woman's seed which
remain in Jerusalem; and the place where they prophecy is in Jerusalem (in the
presence or) before Kings and Nations, and the like, gathered together into
Jerusalem, in which place the two Witnesses shall be slain when they have
finished their Testimony, by the Beast, namely, the Antichrist; and at the end
of three days and an half, the Spirit of life shall enter into them again, and
they shall ascend into Heaven to meet the Lord and his glorious army, just at
the nick of time when he is ready to descend upon the Mount of Olives; and the
next thing which shall immediately fall out upon the City and the people, (
viz. the wicked Gentiles, Gogg and his company) shall be the great Earthquake,
which shall slay seven thousand men; and the next, the Kingdoms of this World,
shall become the Kindomes of our Lord, and his Christ; and he shall reign for
ever and ever, Revel. 11.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. But if it should be
doubted, whether the two witnesses should be slain in Jerusalem, because it is
said that their dead bodies shall lie in the streets of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

Answ. It is clearly seen to be Jerusalem, because it is said, where our Lord
was crucified, and it is called Sodom, because of their uncleanness for as the
men of Sodom gave themselves up to fornication, and to follow strange flesh,
even so shall it then be in Jerusalem, that the wicked and ungodly Gentiles (
viz. Goggs Army) shall ravish the women in the streets, Zech. 14.2. and give
themselves up to uncleanness; and hence it is called Sodom: and secondly, it is
called Egypt because of the slavery of the Jews, and their hardships which they
suffer in that time under the Antichrist, of which there bondage, and
captivity, under Pharaoh King of Egypt was a type; and so in respect of
cruelty, slavery, and bondage it might fitly be called Egypt, and so it is
called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, and yet it was where our Lord was
crucified; if it should be supposed to be Rome, because our Lord suffered under
the Roman power, it is denied upon these two reasons, the first is, because it
is not the power under which our Lord was crucified, but the place where our
Lord was crucified that the two Witnesses were slain: and secondly, Rome is to
be destroyed before by the same ten Horns that are upon the Beast; and have
given their power unto him, even they shall hate the Whore ( viz. Rome) and
make her desolate, and burn her with fire, Revel. 17.16, 17, 18. And thus I
shall leave these things to thy serious perusal, desiring thee (courteous
Reader) to enlarge it in thy meditations; for although I have been necessitated
to be very brief, yet by this little which has been said thou may understand
the scope of it more at large, because when thou read the Prophets, they
will further instruct thee in these things, when once thou have the knowledge of
it in thy mind, (if it be but in a small measure) and thou may see in short
who the Woman is, which is to fly into the Wilderness, and what her Man-child
is, and who are the remnant of her seed, and what Wilderness she is to fly
into, and how long she shall abide there, and who the two Witnesses are, and of
their Prophesying, and to whom, and how long, and of their being slain, and the
place where: And thus desiring the Lord to enlarge thy understanding in the
knowledge of the Mysteries of Christ, and to guide thy feet into the way of
peace, and to bring thee into his everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, to
whom be ascribed (as is due) all Power, Might, Majesty, Dominion, and Praise,
now and for ever, Amen.

EIGHTEEN QUERIES ANSWERED. Being desired by a Letter (from a Friend and
Brother in London) to answer some Queries propounded therein; I shall in a
brief way give my Answer unto them, showing my opinion concerning them.
Christian Friend, and my dearly beloved Brother in the Lord,
I Shall answer thy desire in Answering of thy Queries, although I know, that
all the Queries propounded, are not such things as thou wants satisfaction in;
but I understand (as thou in a measure has signified to me by Letter) that in
some of them thou (rather) aimest at the satisfaction of some other person or
persons; but however it be, whether thy self or others, yet I shall at all
times according to the measure of the gift of God unto me, be willing to impart
it unto others; that I may be a good Steward of God, not hiding my Talent in a
Napkin: And thus I come to the first Query; which is,

Query 1. Whether the Man of Sin, or the Antichrist, shall arise before the
Children of Israel return to build their City and Temple?

Answ. The Mystery of Iniquity did work in the Apostles days, and also does in
our days, the which fits a People for that work, 2 These. 2.7. But it appears
that he shall not be risen unto his height, or Congregated together into a
Body, until the Jews are returned and have builded, although not finished their
Walls, or outward Court, Zech. 38.7, 8, 17. Dan. 7.8, 23, 24, 25. Chap. 8.22,
23. Revel. 17.8, 11, 12, 13. Joel 3.1, 2, 3, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Time would
much fail me to open these Scriptures, and compare them together with others
which relates to this thing; but remember the little Horn, or the eighth is of
the seventh, and to appear in the very latter days, at the end of the fourth
Kingdom, and the fifth Kindome is the Kingdom of Christ: and thus I pass to
the second; which is,

Quer. 2. Whether the Man of Sin shall be of the Assyrians?

Answ. Yea, it does appear, that the Man of Sin shall be an Assyrian, from
these Scriptures, Isa. 10.24, 25. Chap. 14.24, 25, 26. Chap. 30.30, 31. Micah
5.5, 6. Time also would fail me to show you how Salmonazer King of Assyria,
took the ten Tribes out of Samaria in the days of Hosea; and of Senacharibs
coming up against Judah, in the fourteenth year of the reign of Hezekiah King
of Judah; and of the Angel of the Lord smiting the Camp of they Assyrians, a
type of their destruction in the latter days, upon the Mountains of Israel:
and further observe, that Ezekiel calls Gogg and his company, (which is to be
understood the Man of Sin) those of the North Quarters, Ezekiel. 38.6. And that
these are considered of and relating to Assyria, it being called the North, is
clear from Zeph. 2.13. And thus I pass to the third; which is,

Quer. 3. Whether the Jews shall return and build anew that City and Temple
that Titus Vespatian demolished?

Answ. That there is to be a City and Temple built, I have before proved; but
thy Query lies in these words (as I understand) Whether it be the same that
Titus demolished, yea, or nay? To which I say, that it appears to be the same
(that is to say, the same) both in respect of the form and place, for it is to
be built upon the old Basis; and that it is to be understood the building or
repairing of it demolished by Titus, is clear, because it is said, They shall
build the old WASTES, they shall raise up the former desolations, and they
shall repair the waste Cities, the desolations of MANY GENERATIONS, Isa. 61.4.
Chap. 58.12. Jer. 30.18, 19, 20. And the Temple is to be built according to the
old pattern, Ezekiel. 40. to Chap. the last.

But if it should be objected, that this Prophecy is already fulfilled; I
should desire to know when, for here is mention of the ten Tribes to have their
place in this City then, as well as the two Tribes; and that was not fulfilled
when Judah came out of their captivity in Babylon; but this Prophecy relates
to the time when Ephraim and Judah shall be one, after Isreal's return out of
Assyria, as you may read in the foregoing Chapters, as chap. 36. and 37. And
they shall never be divided into two Nations any more, but as yet they are.

Quer. 4. Whether shall the Jews be succored in the time of the Man of Sins
reign, by any Nation that shall be unsubdued by the Antichrist?

Answ. Yea, Moab is appointed of the Lord to be a hiding place to Israel, and
Moab shall not be subdued by the Antichrist, but shall escape him: that Moab
shall escape him, read Dan. 11.41. and that Moab is appointed to be a harbor
or place of safety to Israel from the spoiler; read Isa. 16.4. I could cite
many Scriptures more, but I pass.

Quer. 5. Whether shall the Jews be changed at the coming of Christ and made
immortal, as the believing Gentiles? or whether shall nature have more years
accompanying it?

Answ. I do not find in Scripture, that any shall-be raised from the dead (at
the coming of the Lord) but as have dyed in the Lord; neither do I find that
any shall be changed amongst the living at that day, but such as have (before
that day) believed in Christ, and waited for him; for at his coming, two shall
be in one bed, the one taken and the other left behind; and the Saints are to
judge the twelve Tribes of Israel, not when the twelve Tribes are changed into
an immortal state, but before; for I do not find that one immortal Saint shall
judge (or govern) another, who himself (when so judged) is immortal, Mat.
24.40. 1 These. 4 15, 16. Revel. 20.6, 7, 8. Luke 22.30. But if it should be
Objected and said, what correspondency can there be between bodies mortal, and
bodies immortal? I Answer and say, in what may they not correspond in their
commerce one with another? Was there not correspondency between Christ (after
his resurrection) and his Disciples which were in their mortal bodies? did they
not walk together and discourse? yea, did they not eat together after his
resurrection? surely they had society and communion one with another, although
Christ was raised from the dead, and his Disciples lived in their mortal
bodies, Luke 24.38, 39, to the 48. And that nature shall have more years is
clear, from the Text cited, Isa. 65.19.20. and also, Zech. 8.4. and more which
might be added; but I pass saying, that I have spoke more or less to the
chifest part of thy Queries already, as thou may read at thy leisure in my
Book elsewhere.

Quer. 6. Whether shall Christ give the Jews a Law to keep (in obedience to
him) differing from the Law of Moses? or the new Testament?

Answ. I do not find in Scripture, mention made but of two Testaments, one
given from God by Moses as a mediator, and the other by Christ; and as for the
second or new Testament which is by Christ, the Jews did reject, and therefore
it was taken from them, and they shut up under unbelief until the fullness of
the Gentiles; and I do not find that the gospel administrations are to remain
any longer than until the fullness of the Gentiles, which will be at the
appearance of the Lord Jesus: and as touching the Gospel, the Jews are to be
enemies unto it, and (as I before have said) I never find that the preaching of
the Gospel, is the way to turn the whole house of Israel from their sins, but
God has appointed another way of convertion to the house of Israel, namely,
the glorious appearing of Christ in the Clouds of Heaven, at which time the
spirit of grace and supplication, shall be poured out upon them, when they look
upon him whom they pierced; then shall they mourn and say, this is our God, we
have waited for him, Zech. 12.10. Isa. 25.9. Mat. 23.38, 39 Romans 11 26, 27, 28.
Isa. 59.18, 19, 20. And as touching the two places of Scripture cited, Isa.
2.3. Mich. 4.2. to prove that the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of
the Lord from Jerusalem; it appears that as the Jews shall be waiting for their
King in the Laws of Moses, even so those Laws shall remain with the Jews in
that day, read Isa. 66.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Zech. 14.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21.
There is many Scriptures speaks to this purpose, but I study brevity, only
giving those Scriptures which lie before me in my mind at present, and so pass
to the seventh Query; which is,

Quer. 7. How it may appear that Christ shall reign in Mount-Zion in Jerusalem,
and judge in the valley of Jehoshaphat.

Answ. This also I have before showed, that although the Winepress shall be
trod without the gates at the valley of Iehoshaphat, so as blood to come out
even to the horses bridle, when the Man of Sin shall go forth with fury to
destroy the Jews at the Woman's return, and the ten Tribes with her, yet
afterward Jerusalem shall be cleansed, and Christ shall have his Seat there,
as I have fully proved in this Book, Dan. 11.44, 45. Ezekiel. 39.11, 12, 13, 14.
Revel. 14.20. So then the great slaughter shall be without Jerusalem in the
valley of Iehoshaphat, where he will judge or plead with the heathen with fire
and the sword, yet he shall afterward possess Jerusalem or Zion his holy
Mountain, and his Throne shall be in the place where his Father David's was,
where he shall reign in Mount-Zion in Jerusalem, thenceforth even for ever,
Isa. 24.23. chap. 9.7. Luke 1.32, 33.

Quer. 8. Whether the new Jerusalem that shall come down from Heaven, be the
place for Christ and the Saints to reign in?

Answ. The Scripture says that they that are saved, shall walk in the light of
it, and shall go no more out, and there shall in no wise enter into it that
which is unclean, but such as are written in the Lambs Book of life, Revel.
21.24, 27. cap. 3.12. Isa. 36.1, 2, 3. So then that is the place for Christ,
and the Saints where they shall be glorified, and there they shall remain for
ever; for it is the City which Abraham looked for, whose maker and builder is
the Lord, and it is Gods Tabernacle which shall be with men when he shall dwell
with them.

Quer. 9. What shall be the condition of the wicked, and also of such as shall
believe in Christ, and own him, in the time of Christ's reign?

Answ. As for the wicked, they shall have great Judgments in this life, as I
before have showed, their eyes shall consume in their holes, and their flesh
shall consume from their bones while they stand upon their feet, and afterward
have their due deserts at the time when all shall arise at the general
Judgment, Zech. 14.12, 18. Revel. 20.12. And as for those that do believe and
obey Christ, so as to come up to worship the King the Lord of Hosts, even such
Gentiles shall have privileges, although inferior to the Jews, and see his
glory, Isa. 60.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. chap. 61.1. chap. 66.23.

Quer. 10. Whether shall the desolation of the Heavens, spoken by Peter, be at
the time of his coming to reign, or at the time when the thousand years shall
be expired, at the bringing in of the general judgment?

Answ. It appears clearly from the Scriptures, that Jesus Christ at his first
coming, to receive the Kingdom and to reign upon earth, that then he is to
come in flaming fire, so as fiery streams shall issue forth from before him;
and that many of the ungodly shall perish by the flame, and some by the bail,
and the like; and also that he is to abide in the Heavens until the times (or
years) of the restoration of all things, spoken by the mouth af all the holy
Prophets since the World began; and yet also we find, that at the end of the
thousand years, that when the ungodly (that shall spring up in the time of
Christ's reign) shall come up against Jerusalem by the counsel of the Devil,
that then fire shall come down from God out of Heaven and devour them; so that
(in short) I understand that the corruptions of the Heaven and earth, shall be
burnt up, or destroyed, or the Heavens and earth refined at Christ's first
coming, and yet the work to be totally finished at the end, because it is
called TIMES (in the plural number) of restitution, and TIMES of refreshing,
Dan. 7.10. 2 These. 1.7, 8. Ezekiel. 38.22. Isa. 66.15, 16. Acts 3.19.20, 21. 2
Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Revel. 20.9.

Quer. 11. What is the new Heaven and new Earth, and how shall they become new?

Answ. The Heaven and the Earth is understood to be a new Heaven and a new
Earth, when the imperfection and corruption is taken away; and so all things
are to become new: and that the corruption of both the Heavens and Earth shall
be taken away, so as that the Earth shall bring forth in abundance, and the
Heavens also far excel their brightness which they have now; so that the light
of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the Sun shall be seven
degrees better than what now she is; read my Zions Redemption and you may see
it proved to be glorious in the time of Christ's reign, in which time the
Heavens and Earth shall be glorious, Isa. 30.24, 25, 26. cap. 65.17, 18. cap
66.22.

Quer. 12. Whether the new Heavens and new Earth and restoration, shall be at
Christ's coming to reign upon Earth?

Answ. The Heavens are to retain Christ, until the times of restoration, (as I
before have said) so that the beginning of the work is immediately so soon as
Christ comes, and so to increase and grow more stronger and excellenter, as now
the Earth and the things therein, grow older and older, and weaker and weaker,
Isa. 9.7. chap. 29.19. Ezekiel. 36.27, 28, 29, 30.

Quer. 13. Whether or no shall Christ and the Saints reign for ever upon the
Earth or not?

Answ. It appears that Christ and the Saints shall not reign for ever, because
there is a time when the mediatour-ship shall be given up into the hands of the
Father, when the Son shall be in subjection unto him, so as to lay down his
government unto him; and yet it shall be for ever in one sense, that is for
ever, so long as there shall be a Nation upon earth to reign over; but as for
their situation and abode, I understand it shall be for ever in the new
Jerusalem that comes down from Heaven, which is, and for ever will be the
Tabernacle of God, which then shall remain in the Land of Canaan, and so the
Tabernacle of God to be with man, and he for ever dwell with them; for I do not
find that the new Jerusalem shall be again removed, 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26, 27,
28. Revel. 21.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Chap. 3.12.

Quer. 14. If Christ and the Saints shall remain for ever (in the new
Jerusalem) upon the earth, where shall the Devil and man of sin with the wicked
(of the World) be punished?

Answ. It appears from the Scripture, as though that the Land of Canaan were to
remain for ever as the new Heaven and new Earth, Isa 65.17, 18, 19. and that
the punishment of the wicked should be without the gates or diases of the Land,
even in Babylon, Caldea and Idumea, and the like, read Isa. 34.4, 5, to the 10.
Ezekiel. 35.14, 15. Isa. 47.14. chap. 51.19. Revel. 18.2.

Quer. 15. Whether will Christ render vengeance to all the ungodly besides the
perpetual torments that he will cast them into at the end of the thousand years?

Answ. It appears that there are some that shall have only their power taken
from them, and their lives to be prolonged for a season, Dan. 7.12. and also
although great judgments shall fall upon the wicked, yet there will a seed
remain of them, which shall be reserved to be destroyed at the end of the
thousand years, Isa. 14.29, 30. Revel. 20 9.

Quer. 16. Whether the punishment of the wicked be everlasting, after the
sentence is past, at the general judgment?

Answ. It appears to be everlasting, although I know there be some that suppose
a redemption out of Hell, from the words of Christ, Mat. 5.26. which says,
Thou shall by no means come from thence, till thou have paid the utmost
farthing. This place intends no such thing, but is rather literally to be
understood; but if by prison there spoken of, we may understand Hell; yet it
will not follow there is to be a redemption out of Hell, as some suppose; for
the word until, sometimes is never to be, as it is said, that Samuel came no
more to see Saul until the day of his death. 1 Samuel 15.35. And he cannot then
but suppose the word until, should prefix a set time, yet the Text says, that
thou shall not come from thence, until thou have paid the utmost farthing; and
suppose a man were cast into prison for five hundred pounds, and had not five
hundred pence, nor in a capacity to gain while he lay in prison, if he should
not come from thence till he had paid the utmost farthing, he could never come
out; and such is the condition of the wicked, that as their debt is very great,
even so they are in an incapacity to gain when they are in Hell, whereby to pay
their debt, and none can pay it for them, Psalm. 49.7, 8. And so if they must
pay the utmost farthing it will never be paid; no, the punishment of the wicked
is everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, where the worm shall
not die, nor the fire be quenched, 2 These. 1.8. Isa. 66, 24.

Quer 17. When can it be truly said, (according to 1 Cor. 15.22.) That in Adam
all dyed; when it is plain that Enoch was translated so as not to taft of
death, with Elijah, and John, chap. 21.23.

Answ. Whereas the Text, 1 Cor. 15.22. says, that as in Adam all dyed, even so
in Christ shall all be made alive.

All in Scripture is often taken for the Major part, and not every individual
person, for we know that many shall be changed at the coming of Christ, and be
caught up to meet him, and so was Enoch changed or translated, which is all one
as death; but that which is spoken by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15.22. saying, As in
Adam all dyed, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. It is to be thus
understood, that so many as did die by Adams sin, was made alive by Christ's
obedience, and raised from the dust; finally every particular person must die,
or be changed, for this corruptable body cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
but must first put on incorruption and immortality; and this change had Enoch:
and as for Elijah and John, I have before showed what will befall them, when
they have accomplished their prophecy; and thus leaving this Query, I shall
pass to the next and last; which is,

Quer. 18. If Christ be the first fruits of them that sleep (that is to say,
the first that is to arise from the dead) how is it then that some Saints did
arise at the time of Christ's sufferings?

Answ. Those Saints that were seen to come out of their graves and enter into
the holy City, was after the resur^ction of Christ, and not at his sufferings,
Mat. 27 53. So then Christ was the first which was raised from the dead. I
could have spoken somewhat more to this and other things, but time fails me;
and as for the other particulars mentioned in thy letter, I have spoken unto
them in my Book as Objections, (and such occasions) have offered themselves,
and therefore have no more at present to say unto thee, only exhorting thee to
stand fast in the faith, and profession of the Gospel; for dear Brother, (as
thou well know) the portion of the godly is to suffer tribulation for Christ
(and the Gospel) sake, because through many tribulations we must enter into the
Kingdom of God, for they that are born after the flesh, will persecute such as
are born after the spirit; for so it was, and is, and will be unto the end, and
it shall come to pass, that those that kill the godly, shall think that they do
God service, but however, let us know that all things shall work together for
good to those that love God, and that the end is a crown of life to such as are
faithful unto the death, and then it will be the time that God will recompense
tribulation to them that trouble his people, that it had been good for them
that they had never been born, or that a millstone hanged about their neck, and
they cast into the depth of the Sea, than to offend the friends of Jesus Christ
finally, he that sows in tears shall reap in joy, and he that goes forth
weeping bearing precious seed, shall doubtless return rejoicing with
everlasting joy upon his head, and all sighing and sorrow shall flee away; and
for their shame they shall have double, and for their confusion they shall
rejoice in their portion; for in their land double everlasting joy shall be
their portion.

FINIS

