JSRAELS Just JVDGE; OR, THE Maiestrats Breast Plate, AGAINST THE Darts of
Pride, Envy, and Hypocrisy: being enemies to Justice, Mercy, and Humility.
Presented to the Impartial Maiestrats of this Nation, Especialy in the Western
parts, from whence the Author (by Gods providence) drew his first breath;
wishing them health here, and all happiness hereafter.

Written by CHARLES HAMMOND.

Bring you men of wisdom and of understanding, and known amongst your tribes,
and I will make them rulers over you: and I charged your Judges that same time,
saying: hear the controversies between your Brethren, and Judge Righteously
between every Man and his Brother, and the stranger that is with him, ye shall
have no respect of Persons in Judgment but shall hear the small as well as the
great: ye shall not fear the face of Man for the Judgment is Gods.

Deuteronomy. 13.16, 17. blindfolded figure of justice with scales and sword Justice.



London; Printed by: E. Crowch, in Hosier-lane, for the Author.

Seen and allowed of, and Entered according to Order.

MY Book being past the Press, may freely go,
To serve his Country, I would have it so;
Truth being his leader, what Foe needs he fear,
His cause being good, besides his Conscience clear:
Jle take thy part, if any thee appose?
To Justice, and to Truth, they must be Foes.
I will not blaze thy Arms, but this Jle say,
Truths Banner on thy Crest thou do display:
A Friend to none, but those that be,
Lovers, of Justice, Mercy, and Humility.
To his much Respected Friends in Somerset-shiere; especially in the town of
Taunton. the Author wishes all Truth, Peace, and Unity, to flourish amongst you.
Courteous Reader
I Know not into whose hands this my small Book may light into, but I have so
much a cofindence in Truth, that heel never shame his Master, nor for my part I
will never be ashamed to own him, if there be any thing disliking to the palet
of any Man in my Book, let him not unload his stomach openly to the Author,
for that will but show he has a foul inside, though he carries a fair
outside, this is but a Cordial gathered from Truths Garden, the Scripture of
such herbs that is relishing to all that loves the Garden or the Gardener,
the Physician of Souls will tell you so, nor do I give it you out of malice to
do you harm, but hoping it may work with you for the good of you and yours in
this life, and that to come: if you take it any otherwise; the Garters Motto
Jle present you with, evil to them that evil thinks: I wish you better then you
wish your selves, that is that you would know your selves what you have been,
what you may be, and what you must be, The first you know, the second God
knows, the last all Men knows you must be brought to Judgment, when we all
shall hear but two Sentences: come or depart. And whatsoever you owe me (being
the Author of this little Book) if it be ill will, I will return you by bill
of Exchange, this wish from the botom of my heart, that you may both deserve
and have the first sentence of come you Blessed, deserve it through Christ's
merits, and receive it from his mouth, which shall be the Prayer of him which
desires Mercy and Truth to meet together, and Righteousness and Peace to kiss
each other.

Charles Hammond.

ISREAL'S Just JUDGE; OR The Maiestrats Breast Plate, AGAINST The Darts of Pride,
Envy, and Hypocrisy; being Enemies to Justice, Mercy, and Humility.
He has showed the O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee
but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to wallk; humbly with thy God.

Micah. 6.8. MAjestracy, and Minestry, are the two main Pillars that upholds a
Nation, ordained of God himself ever since the Isralites bondage in Egypt, to
justify the truth of it, if you please to begin from Moses and Aron, which
were the first that God gave the Law to, and end with the Revelation, you shall
find God owning and maintaing it in the Law. Christ and his Apostles both
admonishing others, and submitting to it themselves in the Gospel; the taking
away of those Pillars from any Nation or People, you shall find it was a
forerunner of Gods judgments, as you may read in several places, but
especially in the book of Judges; Idolatry, Adultery, Opression, Murder,
disdaining one another, was the common sins of the Children of Jsrael, for then
did every Man do what seemed good in his own eyes. But the subject of my
discourse is bent upon another current, and with my best endeavors and Gods
permission to up hold those Pillars, so far forth as they be not like gilded
Sepulchers, make a fair show when there is nothing but rottenness within, such
upholders either of City, Borough, or Corporation, or any other place that
has not a wall of hearts to defend them; which is the Majestrats Fort-Royall;
the judgments of God will soon lay their honor in the dust, if he find once
they have gone beyond their Commission: if he summons not them here with his
Court Marshall which is death, let them look for disgrace and infamy to cease
on them, and pull them from their Chair of Justice, and leave them to the
censure of envy and malice.

Well let us see then what is required of Majestrates, alas, an easy charge
that God gives them, his commission may very well be kept, he requires of them
to do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly before him; and will they not
perform it? yes: they will tell you they do well, their own eyes shall be
witnesses, and their own consciences the Juries, and in this book shall they
be found guilty or not guilty, of breaking his Commission, when they shall
appear before the Judge of all the Earth, who shall render every Man according
to his works. Well the first the Lord requires is to do justice. Deuteronomy. 10. v.
17, 18. the Lord shows the people of Israel what justice he requires? The Lord
your God is God of Gods and Lord of Lords, great mighty and terrible, which
accepts no Persons, nor takes reward, who does right to the Fatherless and
Widow, and loves the Stranger, giving him food and raiment, love you
therefore the Stranger, for ye were strangers in the Land of Egypt, again
Exodus 23. Thou shall not recieve a false tale, neither shall thou put thy hand
with the wicked to be a false witness; thou shall not follow a multitude to do
evil, neither agree in a controversy to decline after many to overthrow the
truth. Thou shall not esteem a poor Man in his cause, nor thou shall not
overthrow the right of the Poor in his Suit, thou shall keep thee far from a
false matter, thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds the wise, and
perverteth the words of the Righteous, thou shall not oppress at stranger. Man
may wonder why the Lord does take so much care, and gives such great charge in
his Law to Moses concerning the Poor, and strangers: we must needs conjecture
that when he delivered the Law to Moses, it should stand for a memorial to all
ages, for at that time there was no poor, for they were all going toward
Canaan, and till they came there they all fared alike, they had Manna to eat,
and the Wilderness for their possession for 40 years together, and when they
came to Canaan it was a Land that flowed with Milk and Honey: Truly the Lord
know their hearts; great Men would be puffed up so with Pride, Ambition, and
Envy, that the Poor shall go to wrack in after Ages: as you shall find in the
Prophets times. I wonder where we shall hear or read in any ages, the Poor
and Strangers so little rewarded, and less regarded then in our times, the
poor cries, the rich says let them work, will not they work, (cries the
Majestrate) let them be whipped; which some perhaps are not able to work, or if
they can, their work is not able to maintain their charge; they not giving
themselves and stopping the charity of those that would gives? Reflect upon
your selves you great ones of the Earth; you that fare deliciously every day
and think not of the afliction of Joseph; you that lays out all on your backs
and bellies, or hoards up all in your coffers and chests, and knows not who
shall enjoy it: But why shall I, or how dare I tell you of these things? yes, I
must; if I should not speak, I think ere long the stones would speak to some
of you: I speak no more but what I have the word of God for my warrant, He
that gives to the Poor lends to the Lord, says our Savior: Christ owneth
the poor, and strangers too, you will find it so at the day of Judgment; the
25 of Matthew will show it you? strangers cries some of you, why they are
vagrants; they hinder us of our Trading, cries the Shopkeeper, does he come
further then he can go home at night, our Majestrates and we will hold
together, right or wrong let him not speak for himself, no nor suffer no
other to speak for him, our wills shall be our Law; and though we can find
neither the Law of God, nor the Laws of the Land to justify our actions, our
lips are our own, and who is Lord over us. Psalm, 12.4 Now for the oppression
of the needy, and the sighs of the Poor: I will up says the Lord and will set
at liberty whom the wicked has snared. verse 5. Solomon says when the
Righteous are in authority the People rejoice, but when the wicked bear rule
the People sigh, Peov. 29.2, Thou shall do no injury to a stranger, nor
oppress him, ye shall not trouble the Widow nor Fatherless child, if thou vex
or trouble such, and so he call and cry unto me, I will surely hear his cry:
then shall my wrath be kindled, and I will kill you with the Sword, and your
Wives shall be Widows, and your Children Fatherless: Exodus 22. v. 21, 22, 23,
24. The Lord is just in all his Judgments, he tells Man, do as thou would be
done by, the same measure you meat, shall be measured to you or yours again.
Rob not the Poor because he is poor, neither oppress the aflicted in
Judgment, for the Lord will defend their cause, and spoil the soul of them that
spoil them. Prove. 22, 22. Open thy mouth for the dumb, in the cause of all the
Children of destruction, open thy mouth, judge Righteously, and judge the
aflicted and the Poor. Prove. 30.8. The Lord would have Men in authority speak
for those that either dare not or cannot speak for themselves: many a good
cause is overthrown of the poor man's, for want of Men of power and knowledge to
speak for them: it has been an old Proverb, might overcomes right? either his
purse or his place overcomes the poor man: how dare you go to Law with a
Majestrate cries some, one Majestrate will take another part; if they do, let
them have a care it be in a just cause, if not; the poor man's cause will be
pleaded before that Judge that has no respect of persons, he will pannell your
own consciences for a Jury to condemn you, if you do not justice? hear you
Judges and Majestrates, God stands in the assembly of Gods, he judgeeh
amongst Gods: how long will you judge unjustly, and accept the Persons of the
wicked, do right to the poor and fatherless, do justice to the poor and
needy, deliver the poor and needy, save them from the hand of the wicked, I
have said you are Gods, and you are all Children of the most high, but ye shall
dye as Men, and ye Princes shall fall as others. Psalm. 82. This may strike a
terror both to Majestrate and People; does God term them Gods? it will confute
those that would cry down that authority whom God gives such a Title to on
Earth. Let every man be subject to the higher powers, for their is no power but
of Gods, and the powers that be, are ordained of God; give to all Men therefore
their dues, tribute to whom you owe tribute, custom to whom you owe custom,
^se are to whom you owe fear, honor te whom you owe honor: Romans 13. O you
Jndges and Majestrates are you Gods? then let the Law of God be your guide: he
that turns away his ear from hearing the Law, even his Prayer shall be
abominable. Pro. 28 9. Hear ye O Kings, and learn you that are Judges of the
ends of the Earth, for the rule is given you of the Lord, and power from the
most high which wi I try your works and search out your imaginations, because
you being Officers of his Kingdom have not judged aright, nor kept the Law, nor
walked after the will of God, horibly and suddenly will he appear unto you,
for a hard judgment shall they have that bear rule: for he that is low is
worthy of mercy, but the mighty shall be mightily tormented, for he that is
Lord over all shall spare no Person, neither shall he fear any greatness, for
he has made the small and the great and cares for all alike, but for the
mighty abides the sorer trial. you may read it in the 6 chap. of the Wisdom
of Solomon, though it be in the Apocraphy, yet St. Paul makes it good in the
Gospel, Acts, 10. v. 3, 4. Romans 2.11. Gal. 2.6. Epbe. 6.9, Col. 3, 25. What
Men ost Majestrats to be then, in whose hand God gives the Sword of Justice,
who should represent that invisible God in the visible seat of justice, we find
in the 18 of Exodus Iethro the Priest of Midian, Moses Father in law admonishes
his Son what Men he should choose; provide thou Men among all the People, Men of
courage, fearing God, Men dealing truly, hating covetousness. O! that is a sin
I am afraid too much used both by Majestrats and others to in this Narion; now
in these times covetousness is the root of all evil, and it is no marvel so
much wickedness springs up in most plaecs, where such great roots of
covetousness is planted: Moses though chief ruler of the Children of Israel,
yet followed the counsel of his Father-in-law Iethero, he did not despise him
for his age, age is honorable, if they be not gray before they are good: age is
a crown of Glory, where it is found in the way of Righteousness. Prove. 16.
Happy is that gray head that is crowned with Righteousness, but unhappy is that
gray head that is environed with envy and covetousness. Justice is the Mistress
of all virtues, and the truest trial of a good Man; but the covetous heart is
a very mint of fraud, it can readily coin falsehood upon all occasions.
Covetousness is the mother of all sins whatsoever: There is no evil that a
covetous man will not put in practice, so goods may come of it: You cannot name
that sin but he will swallow it in the sweet broth of commodi^y. He that is
greedy of gain, will sell the truth, sell his friend, his father, his master, his
conscience; nay more, with Ahab, sell himself for money. When once men are
bewitched with the love of money, as Judas was, a small matter would make them
sell Christ himself, were he now on the earth to be sold. All vices rule where
geld reigns. He that is inslaved to that sin, may be wrought by Satan to any
thing. Covetousness is the grave of all goodness; it eatt out the very heart of
grace, by eating graces out of the heart. When Avarice gets possession, it
turns grace onto doors: No such impedim nt to conversion and salvation as it
isf Ministers may well wonder their Sermons take no better; but. God tells us the
reason, Ezekiel. 33. They sis before thee, and hear thy word, but their hearts go
after covetousness. It destroys more souls than all other sins put together,
as the Apostle intimates, 1 Timothy 6, 10. You shall sooner hear of a hundred
malefactors contrition at the gallows, than of one covetous misers in his bed.
Our Savior expressly affirms, that is easier for a Camel to go through the
eye of a needle, than for a rich man (that is, a covetous Rich man) to enter
into the kingdom of heaven, Luke 18.25. And the Apostle that, no covetous man
can look for any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God, Ephesians 5:5, 1
Cor. 6, 9, Well may it be accounted good counsel of Iethro to cause Moses to
choose those men for Officers that hated that sin of Covetousness: for how can
he do Justice to others, that is so unjust to himself? Or what cares he what
affliction he lays upon his neighbors body when he has so little mercy on
his own soul? There are few Rich men that will not rather offend the divine
majesty than the temporal authority: nor do they go to Chuych to serve God
but the state, which they use not to save their souls, but charges. There is
no Religion in them but the love of money, A covetous man goes more to the
assemblies for fear of the Law than love of the Gospel, and more out of custom
than conscience, as Cain offered his sacrifice, and so will God accept of it.
He sits down at table, but has no stomach to eat his ears are at Church, but
his heart is at home; and as his hearing is, such is his praying: He may afford
God his voice, but his heart is rooted and riveted to the earth. They have not
cried to me, says God, with their hearts when they howled upon their beds; it
was but for corn and wine, Hosea 7.14. O that God had the same place in men's
affections that riches, honor, and pleasure has. Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they are not high minded and that they trust not in uncertain
riches, but in the living God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy.
1 Timothy 6.17. And well does that man deserve to perish, that so loves the
Creature, as that he leaves the Creator. If a covetous man should hear me,
all is one with him, an ounce of Gold with him will weigh down whatsoever can be
alleged from the Word: He can like Canan well enough, so he may enjoy his
fleshpots of Egypt also; and can love the blessing, with Esau, but he will not
lose the potage: And in case he cannot gain by being Religious, his care shall
be not to lose by it, and that Religion shall serve him best that is best
cheap, and will cost him least. Any doctrine is welcome to him but that that
beats upon good works: Nor will he stick with the Sages to fall down and worshiy
Christ, but he cannot abide to present him with his gold. The love of money,
and coming in of gain, is dearer and sweeter to the muckworm than the saving of
his soul. The Scribes and Pharisees, who were covetous men, shut their eyes
stopped their ears against all our Savior did, and said; yea they scoft at his
preaching, Luke 16.14. Of all sorts of sinners that Christ preached unto, he
was never scorned and mocked but by them when he preached against Covetousness,
and what is the reason but this; Rich worldlings think the nselves so much the
wiser as they are the richer, therefore we may all pray that Iethro's counsel
which he gave to Moses may be considered by those that sit at the helm of
Justice to steer this nation in this troublesome sea of these times, that they
would provide men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating
covetousness. See what Jehoshaphat did when he brought the people to the Lord
God of their fathers, and he set Judges in the land, in all the strong cities
of Judah city by city, and be sa^d to the Judges, take heed what ye do, for
you execute not the judgment of man but of the Lord, and he will be with you in
the cause and judgment wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
take heed and do it, for there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, neither
respect of Persons, receiving of reward, 2 Cron. 19.5, 6, 7. He has showed
thee O Man what is good, and what the Lord does require of thee but to do
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

Must Mercy be joined with justice, yes, Government founded on Justice, and
Mercy, does knit and unite the Commonwealth in love and unity, which is the
true upholder of Peace and Plenty: whereas injustice and cruelty brings war,
ruin and misery; injustice and cruel oppression was Isreal's destruction;
shall any think that are guilty of the same to go unpun shed? no; Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Gods mercy is above all his works, for it
is of the Lords Mercy we are not consumed, nay;, it is Gods mercy we do not
consume one another, for we seek the ruin and destruction of one another; may
it not be said to England as it was said to Jsrael, hear ye the word of the
Lord ye Children of Israel, (or England you may say) for the Lord has a
controversy with the inhabitants of the Land, because there is no Truth, nor
Mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land, by swearing, and lying, and killing,
and stealing, and committing Adultery; they break out, and blood toubeth blood;
I referr it to any rationable Christian if this Prophecy be not fulfilled in
England.

But stay, the subject of my pen calls so much for Justice, that shall forget
Mercy: and my desire is to have them go hand in hand together, and always do
in those Towns where Pride and Covetousness steps not in to part them; but you
may ask what this Mercy is that God requires of Man; of Mercy there is ^wo
sorts, there is mercy to the Poor, and mercy to thy Neighbor, or stranger; and
all ends in Charity. I was a hungrey and ye ^ave me meat, thirsty and ye gave
me drink, I was a stranger and ^e lodged me, I was naked and ye clothed me, I
was sick and ye visi^ed me, I was in Prison and ye came unto me. Mat. 25.35,
36, 37.

But what may we say now, what will many in these times do to fulfill Christ's
word in doing this to the Poor for his sake; for the hungry I have r course
Proverb, but it is finely observed by too many, you may break your neck before
you break your fast at their houses: or you thirsty, they will make you bleed
more then you shall drink; or you a stranger, theyl lodge you but it shall be
in the Cage or Bridewell, and there you shall pay for it too; or you naked;
theyl cloth you, but it shall be with stripes? or you sick, they will visit you if
you have any thing to give them, or theyl cry God help you, and so leave you
(small help or comfort from them) or you in Prison, they will come to ye or send
to ye, but it shall be to entrap you, to keep you there the longer, for there
you shall stay till you have satisfied their malice, or paid the uttermost
farthing: nay; though you owe them nothing, yet if they owe you ill will: in
Prison you shall stay till they have paid you what they owe you, without Bail
or main-prize, and if they be great ones if you tell them there is Law for
them, as well as for others they will bind you over to that they perhaps want
themselves; for threatening of them.

It Is true as Solomon says, The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel. How
can that Man look for any mercy from God, that is so merciless to his
Brother? do not disdain me for telling thee thy faults whosoevers you be, for
taking the poor and strangers parts; or you rich, you have but an uncertain
lease of it, it is neither for years nor life, neither for you nor your heirs,
no longer then your Lord pleases, when you have exhausted all your Bowels with
the spider to contrive a slender webb of an uncertain inheritance here on
Earth, one puff of wind blown from the Almighty, carries all away? for
riches takes her self to her wings and flies away, Prove, 23, 45, All riches
are uncertain, but those that are ill gotten are most uncertain; as examples of
all ages witnesses; Persis Son and heir was feign to learn the Black-smiths
trade to relieve his necessiitie. And Henry the fourth that victorious Emperor
after he had fought fifty two pitch Battles, became a petitioner for a
prepentary to maintain him in his old age, and Geliner that potent King of the
Vandals, was brought so low, that he entreated his friend to send him a Harp,
a sponge, and a Loaf of bread; a Harp to consort with his misery, a sponge to
dry up his tears, and a loaf of bread to satisfy his hunger there is
inumerable ways to become poor, Fire, a Thief, a falce Servant, Suirtyship,
Trusting, of bad Customers, and many the like has brought many rich men to
poverty, and this is the only wind that blows up the bladder of these times:
Riches are like Snow-bals scrapt up together til the Sun shines, and God
breaths upon it; and then it consumes to nothing: hear this O ye that
swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the Land to fail; tell me now
why you will not do as you would be done by; are you rich? you may be poor,
have you Houses to live in, your Fathers were strangers in the Land of Egypt,
your Children may be strangers in the Land of their nativity, for ought you
know, the Lord takes care for the poor, Christ takes care for the poor, and
will you profess your selves followers of Christ, and will you grow careless
of them, and instead of feeding them, eat up the poor, as the Lord says; it is
no wonder the Lord takes so much care for them in the Scriptures: and so little
for the rich, for they will take care for themselves; he knows so long as he
lets them alone, Soul take thy ease, there is treasure laid up for many a day,
But O fool this night thy soul shall be taken from thee, and whose shall alt
that be then? thou had better say as David did, keep me O Lord from those
that has their portions in this life. Then conclude with me, be you merciful
as your heaverly Father is mercefull, Luke. 36. Blessed are the merciful for
they shall obtain mercy, it was never known that God suffered a bountiful and
merciful Man to want, if the cruelty of times or other affictions brought him
low, he wanted not a contenied mind to bear it out. He that gives to the
Poor shall never lack. Prove. 28, 27. A rare privilege never to want, yet a
bargain of Gods own making; Plenty shall furnish the Table where Charity takes
away and gives to the Poor. He that has pitey on the Poor lends unto the
Lord and that which he has given will he repay him again. Prove. 16.17. The
Lord is content to acknowledge himself the charitable man's debtor, our gracious
Redeemer does acknowledge himself gratified and engaged, as himself does
acknowledge, Mat. 25. The poor man's hand is Christ's treasury; so a man becomes
a creditour to his Savior ^ and he will pay him a hundred to one in this
world, and a kingdom hereafter. Heaven and earth shall be empty before he
shall be empty before he shall want a royal payment. Charity is an act of
Christian policy; for we shall receive our own with great interest, as it fared
with the widow of Sarepta, whose handful of meal, and cruse of oil that she
relieved the Prophet with, the more she spent, the more she had, so shall that
precious oil bestowed on the poor for Gods sake be returned upon our heads in
great measure, which makes Saint Augustine say, the charitable man is the
greatest usurer in the world: This will be strange thinks some, that to give
away our goods is the way to increase them; it is, if faith be joined with your
works. But admit God should not answer thy greedy desire in multiplying thy
Estate, he will do that which is better, give thee a competency with a more
contented mind; therefore trust God with Abraham, who above hope believed under
hope. Romans 4 18. For faith is to God as Bathsheba was to Solomon, so in favor,
that the King will deny her nothing that good is. Thus you see, if the old test
or new test be true, not getting, but giving is the ready way to abundance. And
if you will not believe Gods word, no man ought to believe you.

So much for Justice and Mercy, Humility comes after, as willing to wait upon
Justice and Mercy, as we would desire truth joined with peace and plenty. He
has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord does require of thee,
to do justly, love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

The fear of the Lord is the instruction of wisdom, and before honor goes
humility. Prove. 15.53. The more God advances thee to honor, the more thou
ought to humble thy self: Thankfulness and humility are the only means to
enrich us with Gods blessings, but pride and unthankfulness is the only way
to make God withdraw from us, and take away from us both himself and his
choicest blessings too. Aesops Crow not content with her own likeness, borrowed
a feather of every bird, and she became so proud that she scorned them all,
which the birds observing, came and plucked each one their feather back, and so
left her naked? even so God deals with all proud ungrateful Persons: I think I
may say in these times wherein Pride does so abound, if every bird had his own
feathers, they would be left as bare as Aesops crow, and then like owls they
may walk about by night, for by day they would be despised by all that sees
them: but I desire the Peacocks of these times to look down to their feet,
for they must needs be very foul when they are treading the paths of
destruction, Pride goes before destruction, and a haughty mind before a fall;
better it is to be of an humble Spirit with the lowly, then to divide the spoil
with the proud. Prove. 16, 18, 19 When Sanl was little in his own eyes, God
made him head over all the twelve Tribes of Jsrael, and gave him abundance, but
when out of his greatness, he abused his place and gifts, God took them all
away; but most remarkable is the example of Nebucadnezzar who ascribing all to
himself; said, is not this great Babell which I have built by the might of my
power and the Glory of my Majesty? was presently deprived of his Kingdom and
all that he had, and sent to graze with the Beasts: and so likewise of Herod
when he sat on the Judgment seat and made an orration in royal Apparel,
the People cried the voice of God and not of Man; and he never rebukt them, but
took that honor upon him, but imediately the Augell smote him because he gave
not Glory to God, so that he was eaten with worms? he must know and all that
sit on judgment seats, though God calls them Gods they must not be deified by
Man like the true God: I have said ye are Gods but ye shall dye like Men? they
are no more in Gods eyes then those that stands before them for justice, nor
shall have no more favor showed them at the tribunal feat at the last day?
take heed you that sit at the bench of Justice, if Humility leads you not up,
at last Pride will throw you down: what man is he that out of the height of
pride or envy will term true honest poor Men the scums of the World: He that
mocketh the poor reprocheth him that made him, and be that rejoyeth at
destruction shall not be unpunished. Prove. 17.5, Before destructions the heart
of a Man is haughty, and before Glory goes Holiness: Prove. 18, 12. if there be
a hollow in a valley lower then another, thither the water gathers, and the more
lowly we are in our own eyes, the more lowly we are in Gods; Unto him will I
look says the Lord, even to him that is of a nutrit Spirit, and that
trembles at my words. Esaias. 57 15. There can nothing make us more accptable to
God, then the conscience of our unworthiness, when with Jacob we can say. O
Lord I am not worthy of the least of all thy ways which thou have showed unto
thy Servant, for with my staff I passed over Jordan. and now I am become thy
bonds man. Man should consider from whence he came, and whether he must, what
he is, and what he must be: there is as much respect of souls before God, as
there is difference in souls in the grave, no; it is the heart that God
requires, and it must be a humble heart, to Samuel when he was sent to Iesse
by the appointment of God to anoint a King amongst his sons: Samuel looked on
Liab being a Man; it seemed in his eyes fit for a Crown, by his Person, his
deportment and outward behavior. But the Lord said to Samuel, look not on his
countenance, nor on the height of his stature, because I have refused him. 1
Samuel, 16. For God sees not as Man sees, for Man looks one the outward
appearance, but the Lord beholds the heart, when all his Sons was called that
were there, says Samuel: is there no more Children but these? and Jesse said;
there is vet a little one that keeps sheep, and David was sent for, And the
Lord said arise and anoint him for this is he. There is a great deal of
difference between Gods choosing and Man's choosing: Man looks upon the outward
bravery, God looks upon the inward humility, it is not means but manners that
makes a Gentleman; some will take acception if they be not writ Esquires or
Gentlemen, in any business that comes to them: indeed there be many by their
place may write Esquires, but being turned out perhaps not find a coat of Arms
to write Gentleman. Afterward Collonell Morgan in the low Countries having
occasion to send to the Prince of Orange a letter, sent it by an Ensign of his
Regiment, delivering his Letter and message, the Prince asked him how long he
had been a Soldier under Collonell Morgan? he answered he was no Soldier, he
was an Ensign: the Prince returned a Letter to the Collonell, he thought he had
been so much a Soldier that he would not make Officers that were no Soldiers
and wished him to take from him his colors and give him a pike, and let him
first learn to be a Soldier, and then he is the fitter to be an Officer, he
that has first been commanded, knows the better how to command, a Man that is
proud in his office, is like a fool in a Morice-dance, more looked upon, and
laughed at, then respected or regarded. Gentility if it be not flampt in the
heart by Humility, it can never be knocked into their head by force or polecy,
for example; meet you with a true borne Gentleman, his hat in his hand as soon
as yours? he will be as ready to give age the way, as he shall give him: be he
poor or rich, and so they bring up their Children: take a new upstart
Gentleman which may give for a motto in his scutchin, of Arms these verses.

Means I have got: though breeding I lack,
You may blaze my Arms by the coat on my back:
This man, Sir, if you meet him either a horsback, or foot, you quickly know
him, if on horsback, pride whips on his horse a gallop, and bids him keep his
way, though your horse be scarceable to go out, as if he will over you, or else
pride throws his master headlong in the dirt, as many times it falls out to
fulfill the Proverb, Pride will have a fall. Meet him in the street, if you fear
his great looks, and worship his fools painted coat, he will look a squint upon
you, and russels up his coat or cloak like a Peacocks tail, and think you have
done but your due to worship this golden Calf. But if you take no notice of
him, he will take no notice of you, and pick a hole in your coat for not
idolizing his rich coat. But give me leave to stay my pen, and not bestow ink
and paper on times painted babies, which if they were to be sold for their
virtues, would not yield eight shillings a gross; for some of them have not the
wit to act a part in a popet-play, but what must come from another mouth: But
my subject is Justice, Mercy, and Humility, which affords matter enough to
treat on for the paper: I intend to write on Mercy, and Humility cannot be hid
in honor or gentility. As their hearts by humility opens their eyes of mercy
upon the poor, the oppressed, and the needy; they seeing your good works may
glorify your father which is in heaven; and their prayers, hearts, and hands
shall be a wall of defense for you in the time of trouble. Pray give me leave,
as I began let me make an end, which was with Justice, which is all I desire
for man; and Mercy from God, him have I offended both in thought, word, and
deed, from him, and through the merits of my Savior I look for mercy. My
conscience tells me I have broke the laws of God, and so we must all cry guilty:
Mercy nor favor look I not from man, but truth; equity, and justice, which I
hope that just God shall so guide their hearts that hear my cause, that
without respect of persons I shall have Justice shown me. Justice in ancient
times was pictured blind, representing the unpartialness of her heart: She Will
hear all, but sees none; her eyes shall not corrupt her heart with the habit or
love either of plaintiff or defendant, but in her left hand, which is next her
heart, she holds the balance of Justice weighing rightly the cruse; then gives
she judgment by her two Judges, Truth and Equity, then has she her sword
ready drawn in her right hand to execute Judgment upon the offender, so makes
she the Law of God perfect with this motto.

I hear and see not, yet I understand,
And judge aright the cause I take in hand.
So I Will conclude with the words that the Lord spoke to the Children of Jsrael
by Zack. 7.9. In the time of their Captivity execute true judgment, and show
mercy and compassion every Man to his Brother, and oppress not the Widow and
the Fatherless, the stranger nor the poor, and let none of you imagine evil
against his Brother in his heart, for this is all the Lord does require of thee
O man; to do justly, love mercy: and walk humbly with thy God: and this thou
must perform: be thou high or low, rich or poor, judge or jury, it is a short
lesson to read, a heard lesson to learn, and a easy lesson to be forgot, thou
must have God for thy schoolmaster, judge or Lawgiver, thou must have Christ
for thy merciful tutor, and by thy humility thou shall have the holy spirit
that proceeds from both, repeating this lesson always to thee Every man do
seek the face of the Ruler, but every man's judgment comes from the Lord.
Prove. 29.26,

FINIS.

