THE SPEECH AND CONFESSION OF Mr. RICHARD HANNAM ON Tuesday last in the Rounds
of Smithfield, [being the 17. of this instant June] immediately before his great
and fatal Leap from off the Ladder

Together with a true and perfect Description of his Life and Death; his
several Rambles, Figaries, Exploits, and Designs, performed in most parts of
Europe; especially upon the King of Scots, the Queen of Sweden, the Kings of
France, Spain, and Denmark, the High and Mighty States of Holland, the great
Turk, and the Pope o^ Rome.

This is Licensed and Entered, according to special Order and Command.



LONDON, Printed for G. HORTON, 1656.

THE SPEECH AND CONFESSION Of Mr. Richard Hannam, on Tuesday last in the Rounds
of Smithfield, immediately before his fatal Leap from off the Ladder, etc.
IN the days of William the Conqueror, we read of one Simon Lupus, a notable
Carver, so called by the Saxons, who in one half year, had purchased above 3000
l. as the Ganters term it; but not long after, lost both that, and life and
all; for being sentenced at Chester to be hanged, he vowed that no man should
never do it; and accordingly being upon the Ladder, he desperately leaped off:
In like manner, Mr. Hannam, [the subject of this Discourse] far exceeding
cutting Dick, bold Peacock, valiant Cheyny, and famous Hind, has desperately
acted the like Theater; for note, that upon his first breaking out of Newgate,
he crossed the sea to Amsterdam, and robbed the Bank of abundance of rich
Treasure: from thence he went to the Hague, where he robbed the Qu. of Bohemia
also of many rich Jewels, Rings, and Plate: He robbed the Queen of Sweden, he
robbed the K. of Scots; he robbed the Kings of Spain and France, and likewise the
Prince of Turks: insomuch, that in one years space, he got above 17000 l. in
Gold, Silver, Plate, and Jewels All which Treasure, was not formidable enough
to preserve him from the hand of Justice; but upon his return from his Europian
Rambles, he lodged in Bear-binder Lane at one Mr. Chamberlains, and on Saturday
June 14. toward evening, he, with his Father Rud, another, and Mrs. Dale, (a
Fiddlers wife) came to Mr. Laughorns, a Victuallinghouse, went up stairs, called
for a cup of Beer, picked open a Chest, stole out 8 l. 19 s. in money, which the
woman carried away: but being suspected, two of them was apprehended, Hannam
escaped out of the house top, and returning about 4 hours after, was taken,
carried to Newgate, and from thence to execution, where he made this ensuing
Speech, viz.

Mr. Sheriffs,
ALthough I am a Prisoner, and condemned to die; yet I cannot but retain a
favorable Construction of your Proceedings (this day) toward me; presuming,
that you will not deny me that Liberty, due to all Christians, from Christian
Magistrates, which is, that I may be permitted the freedom of speech, to clear
the Innocent (at this my hour of death) that now lie accused, as being privy to
my Designs, and Confederates with me in my late actions: As for my part,
resolved I am to accuse no man: no, no, Gentlemen, I abhor the thought, much
more detest the Action of so horrid and foul a Crime; and on the contrary, am
as willing and free, to clear those that are ac cused for me; which it seems is
my poor Landlord and Landlady, Mr. Chamberlain and his Wife, whose hard Fate,
and cruel Destiny from my soul I pity, as much as my own, and do protest their
Innocence in all respects [towards me] whatsoever. However, seeing it is my
unhappy fortune, to end my days upon this Gibbet, I humbly submit to the Divine
Hand of Justice, and desire the Prayers of all good Christians, to Almighty
God, earnestly to implore a remission of all my sins, which are many; and
enable me to sail through this violent Storm and Tempest, that so at the last I
may arrive at the Haven of Happiness, there to cast my Anchor of Faith and to
lay hold on my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: And so farewell, farewell unto
you all.

Then turning himself about, Mr. Clerk the Minister of Newgate spoke unto him
by way of Exhortation; and after him, one Mr. Cudson; unto whom he was very
attentive, and seemed to have a very relenting spirit, etc. But the hour
drawing near, he was commanded up the Ladder, where the Executioner sat ready
to do his Office; and having put the Rope about his Neck, Mr. Hannam pulled out
a white Cap out of his Pocket, and giving it to the Executioner, he put it on
the said Hannams head, and after that, his mourning Ribbon that he wore about
his Hat, and so lifting up his hands to Heaven, and the Executioner laying his
hand upon his shoulder, [which was the sign] asking if he was ready, he
immediately leaped off on the left side, uttering these words: Lord have mercy
upon me.

FINIS.

