portrait of King Charles CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.


THE Clergies Lamentation: DEPLORING The sad Condition of the Kingdom of
Jreland, by reason of the unparalled cruelties and murders exercised by the
inhumane Popish Rebels upon many thousand Protestants in the Province of
Ulster, and especially the Ministers, there, since the beginning of this bloody
Rebellion.

In which is also particularly expressed the names, and manner of the
murdering, imprisoning and famishing of such Ministers and others, by those
barbarous and blood-thirsty Rebels.

Published as an encouragement to all true-borne Englishmen, to rise up as one
man to, resist those Rebels, who are (by Command from His Majesty) shortly to
be brought over into England.

BY DANIEL HARCOURT, One of the Commissioners for the Examination of the
Protestants Grievances in that Province.

Published by Order.

Printed for Henry Shepherd, and are be sold at his Shop over against the
Royal Exchange. 1644.

To the Clergy of England.
THe Lord not only gave his People the Land of promise, but cities of refuge,
to which those sled pursued, not so fast by an ill conscience, as the avenger
of blood, though a corrupt conscience be the only vulturean a venger. The
Ministers of the Gospel were not tipified (as I conceive) in the silver
trumpets only, but in those burning tapers, whose lights ought to be seen as
well as their voices heard, therefore Christ gives a charage they should not
only preach, but shine. Surely they were meant also in those sheltring Cities,
whether the Souls of men should not barely repaired for spiritual succor,
(being chased by that roaring Lion) but also for other kind of releife who ought
not only to be spiritual, but temporal granaries, in whom should be found
both corporal, and mental comforts.

The first bread I find David eraveng, is at the hands of Ahimlech 1 Samuel: the
21. and 3. onr messiah made it his first querie to his Desipels: after his
resurrection Luk the 24.41. Have ye any moat. it was not without on occult
reason that God appointed them little under the law: but what was edible which
was not so fit for any thing as imparting, for in those hot Counteries a salt
hoord was but a thirsty provision though I imagine their charity had no
policicall ground, but rather had a relation to the paschall solemnity in which
remains was prohibited indeed that which is holiest ought to be most
communicable that miracle of feeding many with little was documentall
instructing us that even out of our slender provision there should be
aparticipation to you then of the holy calling do I commend the british
protestants of Ireland, and chiefly the despencers with you of the same Gospel,
as to their cities of refuge, trumpets and lamps. They may like Elisha travail
far to find a Shunamite, a a Sarepthan an O badioh. To you repair these
feeble ones for repair in these their sufferings, and their approaching days
of calamity, (which God of his mercy prevent) but I will content my self to
lie at the foot of Jacobs ladder, and behold your charity, and pray like those
angels ascending, and descending, not daring to adventvre to climb to
instruct or inform contenting me with fight, till I obtain fruition.

This bleeding Pamphlet expresses the miseries of some part of my brethren,
though I am assured, I have omitted the fifth man, some of which will be
constrained to desire your brotherly assistance, who come not without letters
of commendation, your Master sends them as Paul his Onesimus to Philemon, not
as delinquents (but sufferers) which Epistle if you peruse, you find his
affectionate mandate, and find there Paul desiring to become his creditour, in
the behal of him as Christ for us, thus commending them to your compassion, as
his bowels, and you to the bowels of his compassion.

I am yours and the Benjamin of your, Tribe in whose sack will be found neither
Plate, nor Corn. Daniell Harcourt.

To the honorable the Committee for Contribution of moneys to the distressed
Paotestants of Ireland.
RIght Honorable, Necessity has as many tongues and pens as Briarius hands,
Argus eyes, or sin advocates, and those dictators of our miseries, never had a
juster cause than now to supplicate for their own silence, and by a divine
proportion, Charity has not only large bowels but many and open ears, so that
the speakers and auditors have an equality in number. No Nation has had larger
tastes of the first, than the English in Ireland, nor any Nation ever produced
a larger crop of the last (to furnish the first) than England): The train oil
of our calamities has made the lamps of their Charities to shine the world
over, whilst the oil from their cruses and meal from their barrels has not
failed to furnish, us and as they are to be honored for this crop, we are also
to honor you for the careful storing and distributing thereof. Me thinks I
find no year of Jehoash so famous as that in the 2 of Kings, 4, 5. and 15. v.
in which was the care to repair that holy fabric dedicated to God, and in that
work nothing more glorious than the performance of that trust by them that were
to effect this repair; for it seems the general contribution was not so rich
or great, as the honesty of those entrusted. The calamitous Protestants are the
temples of the holy Ghost, which like that ruined structure, want repair, that
a supply of the former cares and zeal were requisite, and as thousands cannot
but praise God for the indefatigable pains and labors in your pious
distributions, yet diverse that have staid longest and ventured, suffered, and
effected most, have not had so much as a taste of this honey, with Jonathan on
the tip of their rod to cheer their feeble and fainting souls spent in the
pursuit, and slaughter of those Irish Philistims, who thirst after some of the
honey comb of Charity, pine for It, and most famish without it. I repine at no
man's success, but it appears to me that those wyich brought their clothes
and means away before the rebellion, had warmed a house, should find Clothes,
means and warm'th here, when as such as stayed to spend and venture their
lives, and blou should find neither, so that I must conclude our desires to do
service there, detained us so, that now our desires cannot be served. I am not
ignorant what just cause of suspense may be given your honors from those that
usurped the name of ruined Protestants, and of some which I could produce that
have gone by their own virgin Sirnames, their first husbands, and their
husbands by two names, which cheating of the public charity, might justly
incense your honors to explode the truly deplorable Petitioners which are as
worthy of relief, as the others of punishment, were it the only labor of some
known man, to examine the petitions, and subscriptions, certificates, and
persons, this abuse might be reformed, if not cured; but I hope some
particulars will nor eclipse, thoug it a darken a while a public good, and
with Charity, which warmed these impostures will heat, such as truly want her
beams: the Sun alters not his course, because the earth is full of lay-stals.
No Act of the Apostles wins more upon me, than their public charity
transferred into Judea to the distressed brethren, by the hands of Saul, and
Barnabas in those days of emptiness, Acts 11.29.30. The same your honors are
to us the sons of consolation, in which act of theirs, thete was not only a
good purpose, but a prosecution. The care of Joseph in proviping is not to be
preferred before that of his distributing, by which he not only sustained the
subject, but enrich the King, you have the same power for what relief you
offered to the members, Crowns the head (Christ Jesus) who signs acquaintances
to charitable works with his own hand (insomuch as you have done it unto one of
these little ones, you have done it unto me.)

I more like the peace and charity of Constantine the first Christian Emperor
procured to the poor Christians, then his erecting or repairing their
Churches, and I more applaud that Centurion, for loving the Jewish nation, then
for building them a Sinagogue, because the templls made with hands (which I
honur as public places appointed for Gods worship, may become dens of
thieves, cages of uncleanness, or as amongst the Irish (Jews in some
traditions) publik market places, or what is more terrible as I have known the
two most famous Cathedralls in Dublin made a meeting place for uncleanness,
though all this while that holy pile is innocent, though abused, or which is
yet worse, may become Popish Sanctuaries, refuges for the most impious or
lastly be made the storehouses, or supporters to such profane, and Idolatrous
images, as the purer Temples of the Holy Ghost (which Temples we are) shall not
only abhor, but demolish, as Moses the Calfe.

The Apostles were not styled oratores, and vinatores, for their heavenly
tilling, or pruning the Church, but for sowing their bread upon the waters, and
relieving the living vines, the distressed Saints, O heavenly Charity the last
companion of the soul, thou immortal virtue, how many naked have thou to
cloth, hurt to heal, hungry to feed, imprisoned to visit, captived to
ransom, fatherless to protect, harbourlesse to lodge, widows to defend, many
of which thy lengthened arm has reached, even as far as Argier, Germany, and
that disconsolate neighbor of thine, the most disconsolate of all Islands
groaning grieving, pernning Ireland, who according to her ancient custom, has
sent thee, knowing yet O Englands charity, thy breasts full of milk, and bones
of marrow,) thousands of her children to softer, for there she fears like
Tekoahs widow, The bestiall family is risen upto destroy the heir, and quench
his sparckle which is left, and shall not leave to her husband either name, or
posterity upon the earth, your honors being the pious agents to the English
charity, may comfort this just necessary, and considerable complaint, saying
with that heavenly hymnist, go to thine house, and I will give a charge for
thee, amongst the rest of the unrelieved, I come like Esau from the Irish woods
to your honors, to whom I speak, as hero Isaac, in the same words and
bitterness, have thou but one blessing my Father, bless me, even me also my
Father, and the God of compassion bless your Honors, that you as a cloud by
day, and a pillar of fire by night, may help to lead us that lately came from
that land, now the house of bondage, in our poor and weary pilgrimage, to the
land of promise, where God shall return your sheaves with a harvest these are
the prayers of your devoted serv^.

Daniell Harcourt.

The Levites Lamentation.
IF ever Persecution merited a remembrancer, Protestant blood a condoler, or
cruel Rebellion a reprover, this Irish cruelty, and English calamity (both
which exceed the belief of any but the Actors and Sufferers) might justly
awake the pens of Eusebius, Fox, or the most famous Martirologers to record,
Jeremy to be wail, or the sharpest Satyrist to reprove.

Even now my heart bleeds for the blood I saw, and my ink seems not black,
but sanguine; the horrid cries afresh awake, affright, astonish, whilst I see
the purple robe and hat wreaking in the blood of the Lamb offered, but Christ
crucified; to see the Popes Bull goring, and men borne blind, cruelly massacre
the sons of illumination; the big-bond sinewy, and grifly tyrant trampling on
the feeble woman, and unborne Embrie. It drew tears from holy Elisha, to see
cruelty charactered in the face of Hazael, 2 Kings 8.12. which makes him break
out, Because I know the evil that thou shall do unto the children of Israel,
for their strong Cities shall thou set on fire, and their young men shall thou
say with the sword, and shall dash their infants against the stones, and rent
in pieces their women with child's. This day by the Romish Aramite was this
Prophecy fulfilled. Now is the greatest murderer held the most valiant, as if
valor consisted, in a belluine horidnesse, and fortitude were the eldest son
of fury.

Me thinks Nero (the depraver of the Cesarian Monarchy) at fight of this bloody
banquet should appeal to all Historians no more to list him for the Monster of
men, nay the bloudiest of Moristers; for indeed the sight of other crimes,
makes us often to lessen, but not leave our own. The common stature exults at
the fight of a Dwarf, as a Dwarf would do at pigmies. Satan having infused
this poisonous axiom into the souls of men that our ills are extenuated by the
ills of others This I call pharisaicall frenzy. You shall see the Popes
doctrine as dangerous as the Devils. Religion must now be the Irish mantle for
Rebellion. A pretended plot of ours of their conversion or correction, is by
this counterplot of theirs made both our subversion and destruction. This was
the cursed pretense of those more accursed pretenders, to stick the Ravens
plumes in the wings of the Dove. To make the mournings of that harmless
olive-bringer, the croaking omens of the Aike-deserting-Raven. For such is the
deformity of sin that none desires to be (...) ill he seems. Saul at the
threshold of his accursednesse begins with a blessing, (...) 15.13. by a
Jesuiticall policy do they wear piety like a perriwig trimly curld and combd
on the deformed head of Rebellion, and murder. It Is true that once (...) desired
to seem Esau, but ever since sin like Rebecca has taught the Esaus to see^
Jacobs. Judas learnt this not from so many, as he has taught it. Our Savior
(...) that under a pretense of long prayers we swallow widows houses. O God,
(...) I cannot be what I would, give me grace not to varnish my ills, or cheat
my salvation with a seeming sanctity. How hardly is my pen drawn to this (...)
blood? I find in my eyes the same stoppage that Basil the Great did, who (...)
had read his text could not proceed for weeping, my mind would gladly (...)
from my intentions, and they digress from a more peaceable subject. 1641.
(...) Climatericall year of the English Nation in Ireland, some well affected
(...) sent diverse abroad with Petitions for subscriptions to supplicate from
the ^^^^rable Houses of Parliament (which are the refiners of Religion and
Laws) a ^^^^rall Reformation, which was an Apostolical act. This net was not
cast out by (...), save those that were truly Piscatores hominum. Satan and
Antichrist his firstborn as maliciously suggest that this arrow was shot not
only at their spiritual good, (...) temporal goods. The man of sin employing
his Sodomiticall Seminaries, (...) call Prelates, and Jesuiticall Incendiaries
to fow these tares, firebrands in the womb of their Hecuba, borne for the
destruction or disquiet of their natural ^^^^rents, and native Country. Men
borne in antipathy to Prometheus, for as he (...) fained to have stolen fire
from heaven to restore life into dead bodies, they (...) fire from hell to
bring death to the living, not only by murdering the Religious (...) Religion;
as if the death of the spiritual life, as well as the temporal were in (...)
balance or line with them that observe neither weight nor measure. The (...)
mish Salamander lives not but in fire, nor can less flames then a Kingdom
(...) him surviving. Now was it that God for our sins determined the English
prosperity, should be like Ja^shua's Sun be a day permanent, but retrograde
like Fle^chiahs, it being the miraculous expression of his Justice in ruining
either the forgetters, or contemners of his blessings. Then began the despised
blasts of (...) Rams-hornes to demolish the walls of British Jericho's, when
by a judgment a terrible as their cruelty; armed forts were surprised by
unarmed men; then ran the Lion from the Hare; the shaking lease and trembling
Partridge now terrifio the Oak, and hawke the thistle, and beards the cedar;
the base Lackey not running by, but away with his mistress, whilst innocence
and chastity become the reprovers of that life they would lose but cannot.
Judge of that great contestation between honor and life, beauty and deformity,
and resolve me in this blanke list (...) for thy opinion if God ever showed, or
Nation ever suffered a greater judgment.

(...) ruined, and ravined by his pack of pleasures, for indeed we had too much
^ied the Diana of Ephesus (not the piety but the pomp of a church) the silver
shrines ^ad toe many Advocates most men exclayming, but few besides profitable
respects either desired a reformation, or knew what a one to desire. Thus was
the golden Calfe preferred to Moses, Barrabas to Christ, Garlic to Manna.
Nature a prompt master having taught us to advance politic ends, before pious.
As a period to out ^^rill distructions fell these public, and whilst many
were distasting the present government, God took away all: the rejection of
Samuel that made his public vindication cannot prejudice the election of Saul
whom God deserted. Thus God makes our curiosity our scourge. Mid^^ his wish
shall be his famine. Phaeton^ desire his death, and Jupiters diety the consumer
of his concubine. Them that would not quietly enjoy what they had, shall
unquietly dispose of what they (...), or would enjoy. Civil diffentions, and
dislikes being terminated by a martial (or shall I say an impartial sword.)

The Church like Dianah is ravished by lustful Shechem as a punishment of her
ro^^^, had she kept the tents of Jacob, she had been free from his rage, had we
not like her erred from our paternall protection, we had not endured their
rapines. The just with God to expose them to all malediction, that out of
wandering fancy (...) the ^anges of the sanctuary. Athaliah was there slain
for destroying the (...) royal, which I spiritually conceive to be the
integrity of a Church, born and continued without the milk, or meat of
Canaanltish, and adulterous traditions, which being spurious slips cannot
floursh, nor have a longer prosperity then the g^^^d of Jonahs, or the
unfortunate, and earthy womb that gave them conception.

Sin ripened like the pride of Gath, desies the Host of the Lord of Hosts,
bathing, the monstrous spearhead of his rage, in the blood of the chosen: how
feeble has the fall of Adam made his haplesle posterity? the glorious English
long clad in the victorious spoils of that barbarous people, become the
rebaters of their ^keins, but not of their rage; finding now how dearly the
Israelites paid for their cruel mercy in not exti^pating the Idolatrous
Canaanites, those that policy left, for he wers of wood, and draw ^^s of water,
hew the flesh, and draw the blood of their masters: thus humane policy is
punished by in humane impiety, teaching us that all the purposes of flesh and
blood, having not godliness for their basis, have sandy foundations, and that
policy without piety is a damnable discretion. The Dove and the Serpent should
like those two kine of Bethshemesh at once be yoked to draw the Ark^ of God,
from the possession of the heathens, to the people of God; or like Clea^^s and
Biton to draw their mother to the Temple: where observe the kins, and brethren
were rewarded by death; the kine sacrificed to the true God, the brethren to
the false. O God, so bless my pilgrimage that at my termination my last act
may be best, that so I may like M^^^hs sacrifice ascend up unto thee by an
Angelical convoy.

Those that sacrificed up the calves of their lips, are now like beasts
sacrificed. The rude reed runs through the hand that sustained it, whilst the
hoofes of untamed and untaught monsters trample on those heads that shod them;
all (...) turning rebel either to civil, or legal contracts. Those National
ties held sacred, and Gordian, of gossip, or fosterer are denied by the
brutish, to the British. Hazael and Zimri murdering their Masters, the act
not disavowed, but countena^^^^ pardoned, and applauded by depicted Jezabel
that Romish harlot. (...) sacrifice at the Temples dedication was here outvied
in number, but not (...) Beast was not offered, but preserved; for here the
Minister was the chief sacrifice, the Beast the sacrificer. The Ram was not
offered for Isaac, but he for the Ram, as if the gold had been more holy then
the Temple, or sacrifice then (...) Eliahs once flew the priests of Baal, but
now Baals priests slaughter the somes of the Prophets; nor place, nor person is
regarded, but the Protestants are murdered in the very Churches, as if
Protestant blood were only the hallowed water to sanctify those places for
their Idolatrous, profane, damned, and accursed Masses. Certainly it may be
feared that we did something that displeased God, which (...) called for his
exploding.

Now are the fountains of living waters, the balm of Gilead, the holy (...)
of the Covenant, the sacred columns of Gods word made the derision of the
^^^^ly, whilst they are rent in pieces and dashed about the heads of the owners,
till (...) drew blood on their heads and faces; with these, and the like
opprobrious and (...) pious speeches, here you English dogs and heretics, you
shall have Bibles (...) Surely had not those holy legacies of the blessed
Spirit, been first by our selve ^^^^der valued, it had not been in the power of
those reprobates, thus to have profaned the holy food, or the feeders thereon.

Their first expressions began in the ruin of our estates, having first
published (...) correspondence with the Scottish our brethren, whether out of an
intent (...) awaken their dislikes of these new insolences, or perchance
conceiving they had not forgot our hostil preparations against them the
foregoing years, and therefore might hope to make them Newters: at all which
conceits I admire had they but conceived the irreconciliable distance between
their Religions; yet their (...) pretense and disguised affection, too much
wrought in those dismal days (in which every head wa s perplexed, if not
darkened with distractions) on that valiant Nation; insomuch, that one Barhome
by title, but by name John Mac. Culloh, Captain of a foot company, with
others, advised me (when I had kept my house seven weeks after the Rebellion
began) to fly for my life, adding they were reasonably well secured by a
Proclamation published by the Rebels by direction of their chief, for the
Scottish protection, in return of a favor done him in his infancy by a
Scottish Gentle woman, who either saved his life, or liberty in his swathing
bands. And but that God determined they should mingle with us in that great
confusion, and effusion of estates, and blood: I admire so wise a people, and
perspicuous in the darkest aenigm^s, should be so deluded: but where God
intends an inf^mation all humane wisdom is emerged. The deepest reaches of
earthly knowledge, have had as deep precipices; none had a fearfuller fall then
him the Scripture styles as an oracle of God, we the defeats of those great
projects of Pharaoh and Herod, that neither of their designs, or wise
intendments could suffocate the type or substance, the penner of the Law, or
publisher of the Gospel, the Scribe of the sacrifices, or him sacrificed by the
Scribes. But this Romish Machiavilian plot took effect, so the prevention of
bloody and helborne projects are seldom prevented, nay nor suspected by those
of a holy and an upright conversation. It Is for the sons of darkness to bring
those things to light. But our brethren paid dearly for the cruel mercy of the
Irish, for they staying after the English, of which some were slain, some
stripped, and sent away, were most of them, man, woman, and child cruelly
massacred.

The English are now left, as God left his, when they had first left him; some
^^ying when none pursued, sin adds to the stature of our fears, for nothing
makes men terrible even to themselves but their transgressions, whilst the
greedy pursuers seem like Mercury with winged feet to fly with a devouring
sword to kill them already near death, with the expectation of death, whilst
the enemies swords are as drunk with our blood, as they with our drink, of
both which they seem insatiable: the thirsty earth not more greedily receives
the early, and latter rain then they of both liquors, insomuch that one (...)
O Mallon was heard, to boast inhumanely that he with his own hands had
murdered six and twenty English and Scotch in two days, whereof there were
twenty five Scottish: O unheard of cruelty, it is a wonder to me that this man
should be borne by the common course of generation, for certainly his sire or
dam must needs be an Irish wolf, in whose bosom was harbored, so little
humanity.

Now do these like those Philistims, inflamed with rage, and drink^, their
souls intoxicated more then their bodies with the cup of the Whores
Fornications Revelat. 17.2. draw out the poor Captives to death, as if the
best banquet were the bloudiest. The son of Hagar now abuses the heir of the
Promise, now is disoculated Sampson that grindes his abused soul more then
their meal brought forth to make pastime to the Philistims.

I knew one Bell of Muckamore near Antrim, whose eyes they stubbed out to make
him confess his money, then abused him, and lastly murdered him, tha^ death
which is terrible to our selves, afford us delight if inflicted on others. With
what delight and pleasure can we read those cruel persecutions of Nero,
Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Marcus Aurelius, Severus, and the rest; ^^may, the
bloudiest of our murdering Mary, who drew the blood instead of milk from the
paps of her Nurse, having such a Catholic Spanish (...) in het veins, that
the blood of many English Martyrs could not allay.

The cruelties exercised at Merindol, and Cabriers, when the craggy (...)
expressed more mercy to the hunted martyrs, then the flinty souls of their
per^^^ters.

That damned massacre of Charles the ninth anno 1572. whose blood issuing from
several parts of his body (at his death) fully expressed his belluine
disposition. Not King themselves profusely wasting, or unmercifull exhausting
the blood of their Subjects, shall find exemption at that great and just Audit
kept by Jehovah. The highest deputations have the heaviest cares. How soon is
Saul lost in his new Monarchy? These I say could we peruse with patience, and
pleasure.

The Spanish cruelty more heathenish then those on whom it was exercised in the
Indies, which were till now the grand patterns of abused hostility, invasion
and victory are so far unfit to parallel with the Irish inhumanity, as they
have lost our wonder.

The horse-leeches of Rome bloudily conceiving that Protestant blood (...)
marle of their Religion, and that nothing produces so rathe a spring to the
Catholic cause as the carcasses of purer professors: when as it is the
general (...) that the blood of martyrs is the seed of the Church. Sacks of
wool are held the best foundations for bridges in the strongest currents, as on
those were built upon the martyred carcasses of our predecessors (the
Protestant Religion so (...) that all those great inundations from the
Apostolical, or rather diabolical (...) could never overwhelme, yet then was
our profession but like to (...)) who though he was of the seed royal, had
Saul's possessions, and eat bread at (...) Kings table, yet was he lame in his
feet, 2 Samuel 9.3. and I suppose his cure would have been more needful, and
acceptable to him (could it have been effected) then either his possessions or
honor.

God always preserved his Church, of which the Arc was a type which shall
float over the world-drowned-shores to preserve a holy remnant; and the earth
swallow up those streams of poisonous malice, vomited by the serpent against
his love, his dove, his fair one; all these persecutions could not so much as
startle the English lethargy; the evils that we expect are lessened, if not
prevented, when as sudden alarms not only awake, but astonish.

The great battles of Canna, Marathon, and those two daughter of Epaminondus,
Mantinea, and Leuctra, with those more famous where the Stars fought in their
order, and Kishon like a besome swept them away: (even so let thine enemies
perish, O Lord) those great defeats given and recieved by the Turk, and
Christian, the sword, fire, famine, pestilence, and desolation of the Jews,
with what other horrors have eradicated the Roman and Gretian Empires, were by
us perused with pleasure, and yet now that a destructive insurrecton, draws
his daggar at our throats death walking over our own thresholds, famine having
entered to cling up our bowels, fire to dissolve our beings, and unkind exile
to shoulder us from our abodes, poverty rushing like an armed man, meager and
pined visages meeting us at every pace, wounded and mangled carcasses peeping
out of bushes like ghosts from the grave, Christians exposed naked to
unmercifull cold, and mountainous ways, with not a fig leaf to hide their
nakedness, poor women with child brought a bed, and dead in woods, and
caves, in that unchristian manner that my pen dares not express: but leaves
their miserable condition to the consideration and commiseration of those that
expect a happy deliverance: heaps of slaughtered Christians, to part of which
the dogs had given sepulcher, many hanged upon trees and boughs, part of which
we could perceive had been burnt before: at these sights, and many more horrid,
how are our resolves amated? our courages queld? our resolutions daunted? now
does poor Germany, and our right neglect of their calamities deeply possese
us, the afflictions of Joseph are afresh bemoaned, and the martyrdomes of the
Apostles are now lamented, and what is more the poverty of our Messiah, his
tears, pilgrimages, stripes, spittings, contempt, revilings, agony, and bloody
passion, which before was read over as an ordinary story of Scripture, and if
read, not remembered, if remembered, not lamented, if lamented, it was but a qualme
of sorrow, now are we sufferers in his sufferings: On bitter misery, how sweet
are thy lectures? teaching sorrows are cordial griefs, and it is a blessed maim
that heals the soul; give me those wounds, O God, through which as a glorious
mirror, I may behold the mirror of glory.

Now began the famine of some to conclude that the violentest death was the
best, and the lengthned life the only miserable, that the shortest way to the
grave was the sweetest, and that the last gasp was most comfortable, many
searching for the pangs of death as the only Elixar to cure all diseases, the
feared winding sheet, and insatiable grave proving now desired, which was
before horrid.

That heaven the seat of God under which we regardlessely walked is all the
canopy is left the English, the humble earth the footstool of God, and mother
of us all, on which we proudly trampled, lets her woeful children lie on her
bosom, that fain would lie within it; the woods and bogs becoming either our
shelter or sepulcher, the contemned food of the Irish, sorrel, watergrasse,
three leaved grass, weeds, and water is now made our delicates. The tender and
loving wife repines at the nourishment eaten by the husband of her bosom,
whilst the infants complaints begets fresh throws in that breast which used,
but could not nourish it, the mothers tears showing a compassion, but not a
redress, happy were the infant could it have been cherished with tears, as
before with milk, for the eye was wet to see the breast so dry; fruitfulness
is now held a greater curse to the forlorn English, then sterility was to the
Jews. Jeremy thou mourning turtle of Sions sorrows, I wish not a double portion
of thy spirit, but thy sorrow, that I might be that silver trumpet that should
publish to all posterity the calamities of those our brethren, that did, and do
want those succors our luxury devours. She is no Nube that cannot find one
tear to cast into our Ocean of brine, and lend a sigh to those broken, hearts
that sorrow has rather made statues, then men, Suffer not the afflicted of the
Lord to tread the winepresse alone, lest when thy aloes are given thee to
drink thou find none of Elishas salt to cure the brackishnesse. Partnership
in sorrow has the power of mitigation, and thou shall have the praise if not
to have relieved, to have eased our pangs.

But whither am I transported? Summons to grief find but deaf ears, and a
dead welcome; every man desiring rather to go to a theater, then a tribunal,
(...) having as many assistants too many, as tribulation too few. Solomon is as
little followed in these two Proverbs, as in any, better is the house of
mourning then the house of mirth, and the day of death then the day of ones
birth; but when he comes with an inviting exultation Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O
young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine e^es,
he shall have more followers then Darius or Xerxes: th^^ gripe or pleasure has
gotten Rome so many Proselites, when Religion complies with Nature, our
corruptions are wooed, and wedded to a glowe wormy happiness.

The great Belshazzers in their greatest elevations, find their knees
knocking, and discern the handwriting of death on their walls, and those
Nebuchadnezzars that prided themselves in their spacious structures (as many
there were that built with marble which contemned the corner stone) are now
sent amongst the beasts of the field, not only for their abode, but sustenance.
Those holy duties before neglected are now with a compulsive trepidation
observed. It Is a miserable thing for a soul inured to sin, to be hurried into
his devotions, death at the heels, and hell in the eyes, seldom produce any
but distracted supplications: when as he that dies daily has wrested the iron
scepters out of the power of death and hell; having an infallible interest in
him, that not only got the conquest, but sung the comfortable soule-cheering
insultation over both these, till then indomitable tyrants. Oh deah, where is
thy sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? Therefore, Quid retrihnam! but
thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,
1. Cor. 15.55, 57.

Now would those that had consumed a patrimony, rejoice to find those h^^ks
that none shall give them. How gladly would the gripple hand receive that alms
it has de^ayned? finding a sad return of his uncharitable repulses. That
Dives that would not give a crumme demanded, shall find a drop denied. O God so
enlarge my heart, that I may give what I can, and so enlarge thy mercies, I may
receive what I would.

It was no single arrow God shot in that Nation, or us poor English: for as if
the sword had been too blunt a sith, or sickle, to mow both the wheat and
darnell, and a single punishment too favorable a scourge, God sent the fire,
and lest that should be too sparing in consuming our sins that made us so
combustible, and not fully refine the oar from the dross: God sent the famine
to devour those that had nothing to eat; and left that should leave any
gleanings in this Irish Aceldama, the Lord sent a pestilent Fever, that swept
away innumerable people: insomuch that in Colerane there died in four months
by computation six thousand, in Carickfergus two thousand and five hundred, in
Belfast and Melone above two thousand, in Lisnygarvi eight hundred, and in
Antrym and other places a proportionable number. So that here the chariot of
Gods justice was drawn by those four horses Rev. 6. a white, a red, a black,
and a pale horse; this disease augmented our miseries, the Fevers being so
contagious, that the living durst not see them sick, nor bury them dead; that
I have scene the husband carry his dead wife to the Churchyard, and borrowing
a spade, dig a grave for her that living was his life: and the same man have
I seen the next day die in the same Churchyard: the like affection have I
seen the wife express toward her departed husband, the son to the father,
father to the son, and the like. Here were the words of our Savior, not only
metaphorically, but verbally true: for the dead did not only bury the dead, but
the dying buried the dead also. Not any that escaped this Fever but lost all
their hair: I had it in the Newry seven weeks, where not only without, but
contrary to means, my God preserved me, to whom on my bended knees I give all
possible thanks. This sickness beyond the power of persuasive Divinity,
showed me God thwarting Nature, preserving in the grave, quenching the flames
of my sickness, even with what Physicians say it is inflamed; my cordialls and
julips, were running water, in stead of barley, and sometimes a little milk,
salt beef, or porke, oaten bread and cheese, the allayes to my heat and
hunger. Thus from the jaws of death and brims of the grave has God delivered
me, to lament and publish the death of those of my own Tribe. For on them fell
the brunt of this martyrdom: they were those appointed to slaughter at the
birth of this design: they could expect no quarter; others might ransom their
lives with their hidden goods: but this profession was sure to cope with death
in the horridst shape, as if Iaacobs curse were renovated, for they met with a
wrath more fierce, a rage more cruel then they used to Shechem, and found a
division in Iaacob, and a scattering in Israel Genesis 49.7.

Which I the rather undertake, because some ill affected to the condolements of
the Irish Clergy here distressed, and by some harsh tongues depraved have
lightly run over the miseries of that despised, and dispersed Ministry, to whom
I owe that little I have left, as being of the same ^esse with those sons of
the Prophets, that find Mors in olla.

I shall but in two passages digress from the Martyrology of the Ministry in
the Province of Ulster, and the one is my engagement that I ought to Mr. Morgan
Aubry Esquire, my honored friend, and his Man, to this I am drawn by my love,
the other is the unmanly and unchristian usage showed to Mrs. Smithson, a
Ministers wife, and her maid, that lived within sour miles of Dublin, to this
I am drawn by my won^^^, and these two I shall transfer to the last.

The first on whom their unsanctified hands were fastened, was Master M^^^^, of
Donnamoore, Rector, who in a most cruel and bloody m^^^^, they cut in pieces,
and left unburied.

Secondly, Mr. Blithe, Minister of Dungannon, whom they hanged, whole Wife with
3 small children, after 8 months miserable captivity, I saw in the Newry, great
with child, stripped naked, and ready to perish for want of relief.

Then Mr. Fullerton of Loughgall, Rector, to whom Sir Phelomy o Neale, owed at
least six hundred pounds, upon mortgages, who though he and Mr. Aubry
abovesaid, had his Pasle and Convoy for their safe conduct, was paid that debt,
by his paying his debt to Nature: for he at a ^oggesside was stripped, murdered,
and left unburied. With this coin has that slaming firebrand paid his debts,
such cancelling of bonds must they all expect that trasfique with the progeny
of the Babilonish whore.

Mrs. Fullerton with two children, and great with child, came to the Newry
after eight months imprisonment, with sevenscore women and children in her
company, her self having not to hide her nakedness, nor no thing to keep her
feet from the ground,' but two pieces of a raw cow hide tied upon her feet with
pieces; of packthred, and what was more miserable, she was constrained to leave
two of her children upon the mountains, to the mercy of their Fathers
murderers: judge now, you that tie your lives upon the prosperity of your
infants, of the agonies of this distressed Gentlewoman, which made me call to
mind that mination of God, Deuteronomy. 28, 56.57. The tender and delicate woman
amongst you, which never would venture to set the sole of her foot on the ground
(for the softness and tenderness) shall be grieved at her husband, that lies
in her bosom, and at her son, and at her daughter, and at her after birth
(that shall come out between her feet) and at her children which she shall
bear: for when all things lack, she shall eat the them secretly, during the
siege and straitnes where with thine enemies shall besiege thee in thy strong
Cities.

Mr. Matchett Minister of Maharafelt, was after long imprisonment and extreme
hard usage, the Lord having given him the bread of tears, and ashes to drink,
he being an aged and reverend Gentleman, was most cruelly murdered at
Lieutenant Thursbies in the County of Londonderry, the Lieutenant and his
wife being both Recusants, could not by any means or entreaties, either save
or respite him from death, such favor found the English Papifts amongst the
Irish, and such find the English revolters with the Spaniard, between whom is
as great correspondence, as between the Scotch and French Nations.

Mr. Hudson, Minister or Desert Martin, after many troubles, and calamities,
was taken from between two fetherbeds, out of Mr. Chapels house, where that
virtuous Gentlewoman had long fed, and concealed him, but at length the Rebels
gave a date to her charity to him, and to his life, for the Rebels in a most
cruel and most barbarous manner murdered him.

Mr. Campion of Kilowen, being at the battle of Ballemony, which the English
in regard of the fatability of the day, call Black Friday, having received a
great overthrow, which in all possibility had been the loss of Colerane, and
a dismal day to all the poor Protestants within it, had not God infatuated
either the wisdom, or daunted the courage of those Rebels, under the command
of Colkittoes sons, there did this Gentleman seal his love to the Gospel
with his blood, like Zuinglius in the head of his Company, honorably expiring
amongst his slaughtered Brethren.

In the same cause and manner was slain a Scottish Minister, (whose name I
cannot remember, though I was then in the same County) who took his leave, and
showed his love to the cause, (in which to their honors, that Nation is
forwardly zealous) under the command of Colonel Archibald Steward, late Agent
to the Earl of Antrym.

Mr. Tudge Minister of the Newry, after long imprisonment, and many perfidious
promises from the Lord Magenis, Sir Con Magenis, Governor of the Newry, and
the rest, was with thirteen more, under a pretense to be exchanged for other
prisoners at Downe-Patricke cruelly put to death, of which none but one Green,
a Tapster to Mr. Butterfield of the Newry escaped, ransoming his life for forty
shillings: this Green brought me this Relation in May 1642. and as they were
leading to their slaughter, the poor Gentleman called upon Sir Con Magenis for
mercy, and performance of his promise; but the perfidious tyrant stopped his
ears, to his and their complaint; upon which Mr. Tudge, in the bitterness of
his soul desired God to require his blood at their hands, with these words of
the psalmist; (Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord) then he with his fellow
Martyrs, taking the Communion in a little running water, in stead of the blood,
and a piece of an oaten strowen, in stead of the body of their Savior,
commending themselves, and their vile bodies into his hands that was able to
translate them into glory, yielded their lives to the stroke of the bloody
executioners, by whom he was hanged: but Lieutenant Trever and his wife with
some of the rest, which were diverse were cut to pieces.

Soon after, as all the English Inhabitants of that place often affirmed, Sir
Con Magenis was by the strange judgment of God, stricken with a strong frenzy,
running home to his own house on foot, the Lord taught him by the way, as
Gideon taught the men of Succoth and Penuel, his clothes and skin being justly
torn by the bushes and briers, in those uncouth ways his madness made choice
of, raving on his death bed, Take away Tudge, take away Tudge, do you not see
how he pursues me for his blood? in which desperate condition he died.

Thus God made this Rebel and merciless beast, by the lash of his Divine
Justice, acknowledge his transgression in taking away the lives of the
innocent. The same Sir Con having besides innumerable other murders, at one
time between Green Castle, and Carlingford, drowned sixty and eight
Protestants, to which he had promised quarter, affirmed by Mr. Holland, who
with some others, in a boat miraculously escaped to Dublin at that time, by
which means he and the rest escaped from tasting Sir Cons holy water.

Mr. Hastings Minister, endowed into a living of Mr. Fairfax being School
master in Ballis^gart a house belonging to my honored friend the virtuous Mrs.
Clotwo^thy, for which deliverance after a grievous thraldom, my heart
^^^^yceth. Him they caused to swim in the Lough till he was drowned.

Mr. Dor^h, my Lord Canifield: Chaplain killed.

Mr. Fleming Ministero. Clanseekle, murdered.

Mr. Mercer inster of Mulijr^^^, murdered.

Mr. Burns Curate of L^ughgilly, murdered.

Mr. Bradleyes Curate of Artray, Mr. New killed.

Mr. Wilkingson of Clovins, killed at the Cavan, he cemming to the Crosse-keyes
lnne, desired a lodging, to whom an Irish man tendered himstlfe, telling if he
walked into the garden, he would provide him one, the innocent Gentleman was no
sooner in the garden, but the Serpent betrayed him, asking him do you want a
lodging? yes, replied he, I have faies Judas provided you one, and with that
drew his Skeane, and stroke him so violently on the head that his brains fell
out: this lodging was intended for the whole Clergy, had not God miraculously
defeated the purposes of these bloody hel-hounds; children whose mothers have
sore breasts, do sometimes draw blood as well as milk, which makes me believe
that the breasts of the Church of Rome, are sore, and full of corruption, that
her children draw so much blood amongst their milk (if any) that they
generally during their whole time thirst after it.

Mr. Thomas Traford killed by the Rebels after quarter was promised.

Mr. Mongomm^ry hanged by the Rebels, he was of Du^amain Parish.

Mr. Paulmaster that once lived at Carickfergus Minister there, (was as his
wife informed me) hanged at his Church door.

Mr. Flack of Fermannah, a Minister of special note, was with two of his sons
taken out of Castle Crevenish, and also offered up to God as a sacrisice.

Mr. Michart Berket of Salters Town flying for safety with his wife, and seven
small children to Carickfergus, where his wife and all his poor children died
most miserably for want of ordinary nourishment, himselse being famished to the
point of death, finding the pangs strong upon him, got leave to go into the
Church of Carickfergus, where he had not long stayed, sitting himself for the
reward promised to them that made their long robes white in the blood of the
Lamb, to that land of Goshen, where they shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat, Rev. 7.16. did
there depart this life.

Mr. Griffin, All of Ardnah, and murdered by those blood suckers on the sixth of
May.

Mr. Bartly, All of Ardnah, and murdered by those blood suckers on the sixth of
May.

Mr. Starkey Curat, All of Ardnah, and murdered by those blood suckers on the
sixth of May.

For about the fourth of May, as I take it, we put near forty of them to death
upon the bridge of the Newry, amongst which, were two of the Popes Pedlers, two
Seminary Priests, in return of which, they slaughtered many prisoners in their
custody, where of these three were part, Mr. Bev^^rage a of Ki^laman, Ministers
of the same County, were sufferrs in this massacre.

Mr. Robinson of Kilmoore, Ministers of the same County, were sufferes in this
massacre.

Mr. Lutfoot oof Castle Blany, tasted of the same mercy, being cruelly murdered.

Romulus the first founder of that City, is faind to be fosterd by a Wolf, and
was the murderer of his brother Rhemus, a presage of the cruelties should
procecd from that foundation, certainly there was some blood (which is a great
cementer) mingled in the mortar, for I am assured both the Empire, and
Hierarchy, the temporal and anti-spirituall dignity, have been supported by
cruel massacres, or bloody machinations, no act of hostility, conspiracy,
treachery, murder, symony, or what ever is accounted detestable amongst mere
moralists, but has been columns to uphold that grand bawdy house, wherein not
only corporal whoredoms, but spiritual are tolerated, from thence was
fined, and on the grindstone of Rome was this sacrificing knife ground that
cruelly cut off these Martyrs. Thus have I showed the unhappiness of the Irish,
who perchance are yet living, the happiness of them that are slain, but yet
alive. Well did the Jews call the grave domus viventia, from thence did arise
that life that assures us of the resurrection to life, whereas the wicked man
is accursed in his grave, Esaias 14.19.

These are but a remnant of them that could not escape the Rebels tyranny or
my intelligence: many more must needs suffer that never came my care, for the
Inland Countries of whose passages I am not informed so credibly, I dare report
it, must needs afford great slaughters being remote from those garrison Towns
upon the coast, where many (God be praised) spared their lives.

Besides these that were thus massacred, there dyed of the pestilent fever,
who chiefly miscarried through poverty, famine, and succors in their sickness.

The reverend, learned and famous Martyr Bedle Bishop of Kilmore, who supported
many distrested English, and was kept in restraint at Clowater, and died at Mr.
Scrednies house after some five months imprisonment, where like paul; he spent
his time in converting his jailors, making his prison his pulpit; wicked
tyrants may bar Gods people from the congregation of the righteous, but not
God from the habitations of his people.

M. Pierce Minister of the Lurgan at Carickfargus.

Mr. Simon Chichester Minister of Belfast.

Mr. Ducket Curate of Lisnigarvy.

Mr. Redshaw Minister of Colerane.

Mr. Collins Minister of Kilrac

And three Ministers more, whose names I cannot learn, but was informed of
their deaths by Anne Jackson, Francis Barnaby, and Wentworth Moulsworth that
came from thence, and are now all in this City. All these dyed in Colerane.

Mr. Tailor of Carlingford.

Mr. Chesman of Moninmoore Minister.

Mr. Winter of Astra Minister.

Mr. Luke Astrie Minister of Ballekelly.

Mr. Farwood Deane of Drummoore.

Mr. Edward Stanhop Archdeacon.

Mr. Backster of Kildallon dyed in Castle Crag.

Mr. Edward Livesly.

Mr. Erskin of Fermanah who took his sickness in Derry, but dyed in Scotland
at Antrim.

Captain John Kilner of Jaughen-vale, having a Commission from His Majesty's
Commissioners for a foot Company, issued out in December. 1641. as also a
Commission from the Lords Justices, to be Provost Marshall of the City and
County of Londonderry, in both which, his son being a Minister, became his
Lieutenant and Deputy, being a preaching Soldier, and a military Minister, who
preached to his Soldiers when they were not in fight, and fought when he could
not preach, showing at once his love to Christ, and hate to Antichrist, who
having done exceeding good service, he being a forward and well qualified
Gentleman, but striving above nature to show his zeal in that holy war, by
many heats, colds, and other sufferings contracted that sickness which ended
his days, having time to apply that Swan-like song of Paul, the second of
Timothy, the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, Which a legacy to his brethren, and
cordial to himself, was his last antheme, But watch thou in all things*
suffer advers^^y: (...) the work of an Evangelist: make thy Ministry fully
known. For now I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at
hand. I have fought a good sight, I have finished my course I have kept the
faith. For henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to
all them that love his appearing: I have seen a large certificate of his
fathers unparalled services, in which he ought to be a partner, as being an
assistant, all which is subscribed under the hands of Sir Jahn Vanghan, Knight,
governor of the City of Londonderry, and one of the Privy Council of that
Kingdom, Robert Thornton Major of that City, Henry Vaughan, Simon Pits, Henry
Finch, Henry Osborne Aldermen.

Mr. Newcomen Minister of Fawn, at Fawn.

Mr. Richard Walker Minister of Lifford, at Lifford.

Now you have seen Steven stoned, you shall see Peter and John, Paul and Silas
in interiorem carcerem, you shall see Jeremiah in the stocks, Jer. 20.2. You
shall behold Pashur putting him down into the dungeon with cords, where the
poor Prophet is not only fast in prison, but in mire, Jer. 38.6. for as they
held the Ministers the basest of men, so they provided for them the basest of
prisons: should we return their cruelties, we should put their Priests and
Jesuits into our common shoares. Dignum pattella operculum, those not marked
with the letter(T)for destruction, or on the lintells of whose doors the Angel
had sprinkled the marks of deliverance, found the protraction of life a death;
the taskmasters of Ireland, being more cruel then those of Egypt, and
enjoining more cruel conditions; for what can be more horrid then for an
Apostle, to be urged to be an Apostate, to be constrained to leave the way, the
truth, and the life, to walk in the labyrinths of falsehood, and death? I shall
show you some of the Lords captives in that Province.

Mr. Archdeacon Price of Drumlane, Mr. Adam Watson of Kilshanar both of the
County of Cavan, besieged in Castle Crag eight months, getting off by quarter.

Mr. Creighton of Virginia kept in misery eleven months.

Mr. Fitzgarret Minister, in hard and cruel restraint till the fixed of May
1642. who though a native, and next to the Primate of Armagh, a man of the
greatest splendour for Urim and Thummim of that Nation.

Mr. Boil of Carickmaharosse Minister, in bondage five months.

Mr. Gil Minister of Killally of the County of Monahan imprisoned five months.

Mr. Edward How Curate of Dartrie in bonds six weeks.

Mr. Ferchar Parson of Cl^unish County Fermanah two months.

Mr. Francis Sympson of Kilmore, County Monahan imprisoned eight months.

Mr. James Fathie Minister, kept in restraint eight months having been
preserved from famine by M. Fitzgarrets goodness, who for his County take
found a little more cruel favor then other of his brethren.

Mr. Bradly Minister of Artra, imprisoned eight months, being often brought out
to be hanged, but next unto God preserved by the unmatchable goodness of Mrs.
Chapel now in the City finding save from one friend raised up for her by
Almighty God, a small return of that talent of charity, which she in those
days of blood and famine extended to many, especially the Ministry, which
sometimes brought her own life in hazard.

Mr. Archdeacon Maxfield of Glaslough, or if you will Buchamon junior for his
elegant, and smooth expressions in divine posies, kept in restraint by the
Ovendens, half bothers to Nero junior. Sir Philomy o Neal nine months.

A Scotch Minister, that after long imprisonment made a miraculous escape, with
Lieutenant Smith, Lieutenant to Captain George Blunt of Montjoy, and some
others in a small boat and oars, hackled out with their knives, over Lough
Neaugh to Antrym, it being above twenty miles by water, in the Winter season, a
dangerous passage: whose name I have forgotten, yet I heard him preach in
Belfast, upon this portion of Scripture, Jer. 4.4. Thus we see as Antichrist
strives to drowned, kill, and famish the elect, even so Christ by a Divine
providence, sowes up the mouths of these ravening elements, and preserves his
own paul in spite of the whistling Euroclydon, and angry Adriaticke, he shall
have his Angel aboard, to bring him blessed tidings of his life and his
companions, Act. 27.23. That passage of Esaias 43.2. Fear not: for I have
redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine, when thou passest
through the waters: I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do
not overflow thee, was fulfilled on these distressed escapers.

Mr. George Cottingham Rector of Monahan was put into a close dungeon, where
his frankiseense was the excrements of men in heaps, it being the dungeon
belonging to the goal, where five days he was detained, obscured, living
himself unrelieved with any kind of nourishment having his wife and four
children in the same misery.

Mr. Beale prisoner at Clowater, and in restraint nine months.

Mr. Dennis Serreduie an Irish man, but a minister, still in restraint.

Mr. Henry Steel minister of Clautubeit was the space of nine weeks sometimes
in the dungeon, and sometimes in the jail, having a young child to keep, not
above a quarter old, which he cherisht sometimes with milk, and sometimes with
water out of a sucking bottle, that now those that wanted tongues or language
to call for gengeance on these homicides, make their blood louder orators to
implore justice, he was at last deprived of his child, himself being
stripped, escaped to Dublin where, and here he has endured by the flux and
other sickness extreme misery.

Mr. Dennison minister of Tedawnet, was stripped naked, and beaten worse the a
Turkish gallyslave, lying naked in a ditch all night, and brought from thence
to Monahan Castle, where he lay long half dead, and benumed. Thus is poor
Joseph because he will not lie with Potiphars wife unjustly condemned to a
miserable bondage, because we were betrothed to the Spouse of Christ, and would
not mingle our selves with the harlot of Rome, therefore is the lapof our
garment (our profession) made our destruction. But these resolved martyrs
though tempted with the beauty of that Romish Thais, upon a holy consideration,
ponder Joseph's consultation, and with that armed themselves against their
temptations, and their own persecutions, saying with him, Genesis 39.89. Behold
my master knows not what he has in the house with me, but has committed
that he has to mine hand, there is no man greater in this house then I:
neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because thou art his
wife, how then can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God?
mistake me not, I intend not to have that application hold in all the
particulars, for I dare not derogate from Gods presence, so will I not arrogate
to our Ministry giving them any thing that may more honor them, then that
which will be onerous to them (the weightinesse of their charge) so great, that
he is like unto Issacar, or so made. Thus far of the slaughters, deaths by the
fever, and cruel thraldomes of the Ministry. I come now to render an account
of such as I left in Carickfergus, Belfast, Newry, Lisnygarvy, and the
neighboring parts, in so unf^thomed a misery as my plum and line is to light
and short to express their indigencies.

Mr. Cloggir of Dean Parish, Co. Cavan.

Mr. Doctor Tate of Ballihaire, In Cavan.

Mr. White of Kilmore In Cavan.

Mr. Moss of Newtowene in Fermanah.

Mr. Commin of Clankee in the Co. of Cavan.

Mr. Jenton senior Cou. Down.

Mr. Jenton junior Coun. Antrim.

Mr. Slack of Callee hill Cou. Cavan.

Mr. Hudson of Belturbutt Co. Cavan.

Mr. Henry Fethy, mr. James Fethy, mr. Lutefoot of Strangford, mr. Patrick Gar,
thee three Watsons, the father, son and nephew, mr. Massy, mr. James, mr. Jues,
and mr. Paul Read of Blackstaffe, both which were compelled to lead a horse and
a carre with either hay or wood, for a groat or six pence a day to keep
themselves from famishing, mr. Wilson of Enver, mr. John Dunbar, mr. George
Lesly, mr. Andrew Law, mr. Craford, mr. Ogleby, mr. Laurence Tompson, mr. Durry
of Ballimenah, mr. James Tracy, mr. Hardir, mr. Walter Lamont, mr. Jorrest of
Dumagur, mr. Robert mc. Neal, mr. mc. Neale, mr. Dr. O Neale, mr. Veazy, mr.
Major, mr. Backster, mr. Charles Vaughan; mr. Cade, mr. Holland, mr. Dean
Rhodes, mr. James Stewart of Garvahir, mr. David Roven of Redbay, mr. Nicholas
Todd, mr. John Michel of Ana Clowen, mr. Hugh mc. Lecinan late of L^akin-larke,
mr. James Creighton, mr. James Melvin of Down-Patrick, mr. Johnson mr.
F^^^erton, for distinction sake called red Fullerton, mr. Monopeny, mr. James
Port^^s, mr. Downs, mr. James Downham, mr. Lambert, mr. Brooks, mr. Patrick
Doncan, mr. Dr. Blare, mr. Joster, mr. Hamilton, mr. Travis, mr. Thomas
Stewart, mr. Bell, mr. Wa^et, mr. Woodridge. These with some others that escaped
like Jobs messengers to bring sad tidings of their brethrens deaths, but not
intermits, and are now on the dunghills of calamity with holy Job, finding as
ill comfort as comforters, and still hangs at the bloody and dry paps of the
Church in Ireland, whence they can draw nothing but wind, and that may be
heard from their full souls (though empty bellies) in their sighs and
groans, the silent interpreters speaking sorrows, so that there needs no wind
but that to overthrow their houses of clay.

Now if you please survey with a commiserating eye those whose wearied steps,
fainting bodies, and wounded souls, have repaired to the Bethesda of England
for cure of their heart-rending sorrows, where in all acknowledgements of
grateful humility, some of them have found the Angel stirring the sovereigne
balm water of your charities to their relief, which many of the feebler sort,
either through weakness of friends, abilities of expressions, or a
selfe-killing modesty lie at the brinke unremied to them, divine Charity open
the doors of thy Physic, and Chy^urgery, and into their bleeding wounds
pour thy oil and thy wine, Samaritan-like eye the robbed and bleeding Levite,
pay thy penny for his present harbor, and promise for a slender remainder
these undertakings, Angelical virtue shall make thee be translated with Enoch
or ^liahs in a fiery chariot, thy own immortality will guide thee to the
preservation of us mortallmen.

Mr. Mors of Fermanah, and Parish of Rammullie after he had been robbed, and
stripped, was constrained being stark naked to carry his two children twelve
miles upon his back, by which time she grew so su^bated that his uxoriousnesse
prevailed beyond his paternall love to his children, so in that a great agony
of spirit, he was forced to leave the fruit to the mercy of the enemies, and to
preserve the tree carried his wife above eight miles upon his back, they being
both naked, En^as could not out pattern this affection to aged Anchises.

From that Province are here under thy wings, as chickings s^ar^ng famine that
predatory Kite, Mr. Richard Buerowes, Mr. Baker, Mr. George Walker Mr. Bedle,
Mr. Dr. Bailey of the Cou. Cavan, the two Sings of A haderick, the other of
Dundalke; mr. John Freeman, mr. Hammond, mr, Bunburie, and as I hear his
brother, mr. Boil, mr. Cottingham, mr. Nathaniel Draiton, mr. william Green,
mr. Francis Sympson, mr. Gabreath, mr. Coh^^, mr. Henry Steel, mr. Edward
Carter, mr. Clearke mr. Sempil, mr. Anthony, mr. Harrocks, mr. Philip Tandy,
mr. Tinly, mr. Richard Head, mr. Kean. mr. Bradley, my unworthy self, mr.
James Reynolds, mr. Steer, mr. Leigh, mr. Diggery Holman, mr. Water house.
These stars show in the lower or be, of the higher, is that famous, learned,
and studious in grosser of learning, the late Lord Primate of Ardmagh Usher,
the fluent and elegant Seneca of Rapho, the solid and grave Buchworth of
Deunmoore, quick and Eagle eyed Singe of Cloyne. The learned, prompt,
politic, and engine headed Bramhal of Derry. Lastly, one Clergy man more I
find whose names sake promises a sudden termination of all our sorrows
(without speedy succors) and that is Mr. Death, Minister of Seapatrick. Thus
you find amongst the distressed Clergy, an Usher and a Voyder, but no meat on
their tables;these with their charges are sit objects for Dorcus to cloth, the
Sarepthan widow, or good Obadiahs to feed, and the Shunnamite to lodge, the
prayers of which will revive thy dying or dead hopes, increase thy decaying
store, being rain to thine inberitance, and restore thy hurt, mained or dead
issue. Lastly, as thou have opened thy bowels of compassion, they shall open
to thee the gate called beautiful, that leads in to onrelder Brothers Fathers,
where are many mansions, for the poor for Christ, and of Christ's are janitores
Coeli. And now I come to the two digressions specified before.

The first digression is form the subject. With mr. Fullerion was murdered Mr.
Morgan Aubrey Esquire, and his man (who though no Minister) I have thought good
to mention in regard of those many dear ties of love and friendship between
us, to whose disastrous death I dedicate this tragic remembrance as a monument
of his sufferings, and my sorrow, a Gentleman of an active, brave, and Roman
spirit, whose breast was not only filled with pleasing flames of learned
Poetry, but the more heroic fire of resolution, sweetly allayed with a modest
and well tempored disposition; a man that had merited as much from that laethe
drinker Sir Phelomy O Neal, as a Gentleman could, having effectually negotiated
for him in many particulars of consequence with the late Lord Strafford, to
whose Countess he had been Gentleman usher, yet was he all engagements waved,
betrayed by letters of safe conduct to a cruel and merciless butchery, first
stripping him, then killing him at a bogs side. But on his servant Henry
Lawrence (whom I have heard to be of a mighty stature and valor) a
Warwickshire man, who by surprising one of the Rebels swords, having slain
four or five before he was seized on, was showed that cruelty which was
forborne to ravilliac the parricide of Henry the fourth, that Coelor of the the
Flower du liz and was only exercised by Cambises upon one of his unjust judges
whose skin he slaied off, and nailed it to the tribunal, as a terror to his
son that succeeded him, had but some of ours been made so exemplar, unjust
votes had not laden our Kingdom with these bloody contestations. The Judges of
Israel rid on their white Asses, to show I think as well their purity and
innocence, as their patient undergoing the insupportable weight of their
callings; but it is feared some of them have not only cast off that integrity,
but purity and constancy also, this Laurence after many wonnds received, they
slead some part of him, and so lest him cruelly murdered.

The second digression is from the Province, but something adhering to the
Subject. But above all barbarous, inhumane, hethenish, and unheard of murders,
was that of Mrs. Smithson a ministers wife living at the Kilne of the Grange
within four miles of Dublin, who being persuaded to return to her house, in
hope to have the Communion cup, and a barrel of wheat given her, all which was
promised by her satanicall seducer, her poverty having made her too credulous,
she went along with her maid servant, no sooner had they gotten this
unfortunate Gentlewoman in their power, but they stripped her of her apparel,
setting her naked a stride upon a lean jade, tying heavy weights at her
heels, then with stripes forced they the horse to run through waters, and
leap over ditches, and to travel in the most uneasy passages till they
brought her into their army, that so they might not seek for any other then
Papisticall evidence of this their bestiality; this usage she had until her
body was torn in a unheard of manner, feeding her with bread and water, which
was rather affoarded to protract the miseries they intended her then to
preserve or reprive a life, and when that her body could not any more be made a
spectacle of their shame, she was restrained, where first they cut off one
care, boyld it, and rubbed it about her mouth, then the other, after that her
nose, using them in the same manner, had Zopieus been here to have seen this
picture in her face, he would have declined his notable resolution; at last
they put out her eyes, and when they saw nature willing to ease her torments by
dissolution, and that merciful death would set a period to their butcheries,
they h^nged her and her maid upon one bough, Her husband as before she went
having used all possible persuasions to keep her from going, so used all manner
of diligence to procure her return, after he perceived she had curstaied her
intentions, bomplained to the State that she was gone to Justice Wolverstons,
whose brother was then in Dublin (being both obstinate Papists) who being sent
for to the State, and admonished of their jealousies of the woman's miscarriage,
prevailed to be sent thither for her delivery and restoration, but finding her
past recover, dese^ted Dublin, his estate which was great, and obedience which
was little, and turned Rebel, which was no marvel; thus these cruel
Benjamites for doubtless they were so in that other act of unseemlinesse, did
not abuse the Concubine, but the virtuous wife of a Levite, the story of whose
mangled and macerated carcass I transfer to the eleven Tribes of our English
Israel, knowing they will conclude, having seen this sad and dismal spectacle,
as they did, Judges 19.30. And all that saw it, said, there was no such thing
done nor leen since the time that the children of Israel came up from the land
of Egypt unto this day.

Consider the matter, and consult and give sentence, then shall we all
domestic intestines laid apart, join with Israel, to punish this damnable,
and other facts of unpattern'd cruelty like them in the 20. of Judges 48. then
ye men of Israel returned unto the children of Benjamin, and smote them with
the edge of the sword, from the men of the City unto the beasts and all that
came to hand: also they set on fire all the Cities that they could come by,
moreover the men of Israel swear in Mi^peh, saying, none of us shall give his
daughter to the Benjamite, to wife: thus fa^re have I floated in the blood and
brine, of the tribe of Levy, a subject so terrible that I could not but mingle
my incke with tears for whom I close up to the tragical discourse with that
lamentation of holy David for his friend Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.25, 26. How were
the mightly slain in the midst of the battle? O Jonathan thou wast slain in
thine high places. Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan: very kind have thou
been unto me; thy love to in was wonderful, passing the love of women: how are
the mighty men overthrown, and the weapons of war destroyed.

This martireloger of part of that Ministry, I was the rather induced to
publish, inregard some calumnious tongues have charged the Irish English Clergy
to adhere to the Romish faction and fictions, which had they done they had
saved their lives and estates, with the loss of their souls, but they with
holy Philpot have sealed their zeal to the Gospel, by the effusion of their
bloods, confusion of estates, taking a miserable exile with John to Pathmos,
where I hope God will reveal himself to them in their straightness to their
comfort, and his glory, to whom be ascribed all honor, and glory, now and for
evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

