THE DIFFICVLTY OF SIONS DELIVERANCE AND REFORMATION. Toge^^er With the
Activitie which her friends (...) during the time that (...).

Delivered in a Sermon at Margarets Westminster before the Honorable House of
COMMONS (...) Wednesday morning, the twenty sixth day of June. 1644.

BY Humphrey Hardwick, Minister of the Word at (...) in the County of He^^ford,
and one of the Assembly of Divines.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Christopher Meredith, at the sign of the Crane in
Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

Die Mercurii 26 Iunii. 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That Master
Rout, Master (...) Master Nicols, do from this House give thanks unto Master
Hardwick, and Master Hicks, for the great pains they took (...) the Serm^^^ the
(...) ched this day at the (...) this (...) at St. Margarets Westminster, (it
being the day of public (...).) and (...) ^^sire them to print (...) Sermons.
And it is Ordered that none shall presume to Print their Sermons, but whom they
shall license under their hand writing.

H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. ^. C^^

I Appoint CHRISTOPHER MERIDITH to print my Sermon.

HUMPHRHY HARDVVICK.

TO THE HONORABLE House of Commons assembled in the Parliament of England.
I Could not have such high thoughts of my shallow ^^cogitations, as to deem
them worthy to be produced before such an Auditory, or presented to the public
view: Had not therefore consciousnesse of duty constrained, I had become an
earnest suitor to have been excused: but of actual obedience I had many, of
excuse-pleading I found no president. Your Injunction then made me to aspire to
the work which now humble craves your Patronage; and whither should the labors
of this kind run, but to that honorable Society, which (under Heaven) is
the fountain of these gracious opportunities?

If willing, no man, I suppose, has more cause to be large in Apology then I,
having long since had my poor Library totally plundered, and my self not able,
usque hunc diem, to buy one book of considerable value. Besides, from the
beginning of this war, until the last month, inter armaubi silent literae
versatus. But these things I account part of my chief happiness on earth, to
have suffered much, and done a little good in the cause of Christ, and service
of the State: only I desire, that ^^nce it may not be thought strange, that I
tender a plain unpolished Sermon, quite naked in it is Margent, and in which
nothing is cited but the holy Text; nor any author Ecclesiastical or Moral
heard speak. Seldom, if ever, has there been offered to your hands such a
rude piece of all home-spunne thoughts; nevertheless, they breathing the force
of the Divine Spirit, I trust shall find acceptance with your (...) and being
stamped on with your approbation, they (...) abroad in the world current with
all, not malignant or censorious.

To encourage the progress of your abundant virtue, I need say nothing in my
Epistle, since I speak much (...) that purpose in the Pulpit: the smallest hint
is sufficient to provoke such zeal and willingness as ever resideth in your
breasts. Go on therefore in pious and honorable undertakings: the hearts, the
tongues, the Pe^^^ of all good me^ bless you; how can it then be, but the God
of heaven, who has set you apart, as chosen instruments also (...), so
universal good to his Churches, should in due time crown our endeavor: with
success; and infinitely recompente your labors in a better world? so prays

Yours to be commanded in all true observance and duty HUM: HARDVVICK.

A SERMON PREACHED at the late Fast, before the Honorable House of Commons.
June 26. 1644.
PSALM. 126.5, 6. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. He that goes
forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed, shall come again with rejoicing:
bringing his sheaves with him.


IF we consult the beginning of this Psalm, we may deem these words a strange
conclusion. Joy and sorrow, seldom make one tune. How is it then that such
high expressions of joyfulnesse, lofty strains of exultation should end with
item of tears and weeping. Is Sions captivity turned? Was their mouth filled
with laughter and their tongue with singing? Did the heathensay among
themselves, The Lord has done great things for them, and they reply, saying,
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are glad? Can the same
matter be the object of former praise and future supplication* Might they
bless God for turning their captivity, and seek again the same mercy? Could
their hearts break into joy, and burst into tears, whilst they meditate the
same things? This ambiguitie is quickly cleared; for we know that ever since
Adams unhappy fall, all humane occurrences are subject to mixture and
composition: there is no pure joy to be found under heaven. The greatest
rejoycings have sorrows blended with them. It is no marvel then to meet with a
vicissitude of these things in one Psalm. And true it was, that Sions joys
were inter-woven with fears and grief.

Their captivity was indeed turned, in the grant of liberty or license to
depart by Cyrus; there were also some fair beginnings in the departure of
many, and the forwardlinesse and activitie of some already gone to Jerusalem:
Yea, they beheld a full deliverance by faith in the promises; now all this
happening suddenly and unexpectedly whilst the Hebrews were by the waters of
Babylon, caused them in an holy ravishment to break forth and say, When the
Lord turned again the captivity of Sion, we were like unto them that dream.
But alas, the case was not so with all. Many sons and daughters of Sion were
willing to continue in bondage, quite senseless of their own evil condition.
Now to see this stupidnesse of their fathers children, and behold them frozen
in an uncharitable carelesnes of their own or Sions welfare, was no small
sorrow to the departed Israelites. Those also that were loosed from Babylon
were not free from troubles; their way was hedged with thorns, beset with
difficulties: few friends they had, but many enemies, very malicious very mad
against them, and they not able in any measure to equal their number, match
their power, or vie their policy.

Besides all this, the work they were to undertake seemed insuperable, beyond
their strength, above their hopes: the very journey considered with the
probable encumbrances and oppositions, might sufficiently dishearten: but the
business to be performed appeared infinite; to build again the city, to
reedifie the temple, to repair the walls, to settle the nation, to distinguish
the tribes, to establish the throne, to reform the priesthood, to restore
discipline, and laws, to constitute rightly the whole kingdom, with a
multitude of other things which I cannot mention, was employment of unspeakable
hardship. The poor remnant daughter of Sion, but newly freed from the yoke of
the proud insulting Chaldees, being to undertake this task, contra gentes, had
need to repair to their God, saying, Turn our captivity oh Lord! nor is it
marvel, that the holy Prophet seeing all these and much more then I can
possibly conceive, does in this Psalm, point them as well to grief as to mirth:
show them joyful things whereof they might be glad, as intimate heavy
pressures and oppositions, which they must strive and struggle with, even do
tears, tears I say, not like those of the Thessalonians for their dead,
without hope; but such as should be put into Gods bottle, and wiped away in the
end with comfort and rejoicing, So says my Text: They that sow in tears, etc.

The words you see are metaphorical, alluding to the business of the field:
we must a little dive into the metaphor to find out their meaning. Now this
presents the husbandmans case, in times of great scarcity and dearth, when he
has not enough to satisfy his want and sow his land. His hungry family craves
for bread to the full, which if he give, his land will be unsowed, to their
further prejudice, and therefore he has thoughts of denial, but then the
present want speaks much; sad countenances, lean cheeks, lanke bellies, become
powerful orators to the relenting heart of the father of the family. Full
feign would he supply their present need, but the apprehension of probable
approaching famine does deter; it would be but small comfort to eat now to the
full and the very next year, to sacrifice their lives to hunger. After the
revolutions of many thoughts on both sides, the wary seedsman resolves to deny
himself and family for the present, to commit his precious seed to the breeding
womb of the thankful earth. But being now on his way to the field, the echo
of childrens necessity sounds in his ear, the sense of their great want
afflicts his soul: Besides, it is a long time to harvest, and many casualties:
these thoughts renew sorrow in his breast; which breaks forth into weeping by
the way, and whilst he sows his seed, he drops his tears. But observe what
follows, he reaps in joy; he comes again rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him. In my little reading and small experience, I have found that corn sown in
dear years and times of scarcity, has yielded much more increase then at
other times so that presently after much want, there has fallowed great
plenty of grain even beyond expectation. Now since I have considered this
Psalm, me thinks, I apprehend one special reason more then formerly. Besides
the improvement of men's pains and circumspection usual in such times, I note
that they then sow in prayers and tears, and this does surely increase their
store: thus for certain was the case in my Text.

Now the spirit of God applies this to the encouragement of those that labor
in the work of turning Sions captivity: they that sweat in this business must
take notice that their condition is like the case of such an husbandman, first
in the act, then in the issue. And of these there is intimated a fourefold
counter-change in my Text. First, sowing and reaping. Secondly, tears and joy.
Thirdly, mourning on and returning back. Fourthly, bearing precious seed,
weeping, and bringing sheaves with gladness. See here, my Brethren, manifold
labor indeed: yet none in vain, each has an answerable recompense of reward
attending it: sowing with reaping; tears with joy; sad traveling with sweet
returning; bearing away precious seed, with bringing of sheaves is seconded and
rewarded. Who can choose to note a much ravishing elegancy in this language of
the Spirit, in comparison whereof the highest strains of profane rhetoricians
are pure barbarism. I have read a learned Writer admiring why the world for
the most part is so much taken with the fabulous Histories and allusions of
heathen Poets, whilst their minds are no whit affected with these sacred songs:
but the reason is apparent, men's minds mostly are ca^nall, and these Psalms
are spiritual: no wonder then that they cannot see the worth, nor set the true
value on the sense and phrase of the Scripture. Truly, Christians might grieve
and shame at this; but no more of such observation, I only hint it by the way
and proceed.

The Spirit in penning down this part of the Psalm, does call the Israelites to
a serious consideration of their state in the time of turning their captivity.
It would not for the present be better then before; yea it might seem to be
much worse. Jacobs seed in Egypt under-went more heavy endurances after the
Deliverer was come then before. In the act and time of restoration, it should
be like to the man that ploughs; sowes, sweats, trudges, travels, parts with
his dear grain, and patiently waits for what will follow: Gods people in their
return from Babylon, shall not presently or easily be restored and reformed;
but with much difficulty and hazard, many hard enterprises must be attempted:
through much trouble, danger, and opposition must they run; part they must with
their ease and safety, with their comforts and worldly contentments. These all
as precious seed must be laid in the dust and die, in hope of future spring.

In the issue also Sions deliverance and restoration is suitable with the
metaphor, for when the weeks of harvest, the due and appointed time is come,
the laborers in Sions husbandry shall reap according as they have sowed, or
sparingly, or plentifully: yea they shall all reap with joy, and their joy
shall be as the joy of harvest. When others shall perish and come to a fearful
end: when their name shall vanish and go out in nastinesse, when their place
shall know them no more: then shall the just return, with credit and comfort
shall they return to their own land, for the meek shall inherit the earth,
says Christ: yet more, their cup shall overflow, for they shall come again
with joy, and bring their sheaves with them.

The meaning of the Text thus manifested, we may observe a treble virtue in the
words; 1. The force of instruction, giving the Israelites and all Gods people
to understand how painful and sorrowful the work and times will be, when the
Church is in travail of deliverance. 2. The words have the force of
exhortation, calling the sons and daughters, all the friends of Sion to be up
and doing, to be active to their uttermost in her behalf. 3 They have the
force of motive or inducement to (...) still active and waiting until Sions
deliverance be effected.

The first sentence then of holy doctrine which I propound, is from the words
as they declare the condition of Gods people in the times of restoration and
deliverance, and so they clearly intimate this;

Very hard and extremely difficult is the work, Doct.
and sad will the times be, when the Church is in travail of deliverance.

Husbandry is the hardest restless kind of labor, and that I speak of is
like ploughing and sowing in tears. Does not Scripture in express terms call
the restoring of Israel Gods great, Gods strange work? now that proves it to
be difficult in an high degree.

In the time of the Judges, when the sin of corrupt and luxurious priests was
grown to the height, and made the services of the Lord a reproach; anger
kindled in the breast of the Almighty, and he will avenge himself on them, and
on the Nation the rather for their fakes: this you know he did in so sharp, so
terrible a manner, as might cause the ears of him that heard to tingle. Israel
was discomfired before the Philistines, the Ark of God was taken; the news
strikes old Eli dead, brings his poor daughter in law (good woman) to untimely
travail, and her apprehension of the glories departing from Israel, breaks her
heart. Lo now were those people fallen into the depths of misery, as they were
sunk into degrees of sin: and what a work was it to restore and reform their
lapsed condition? Albeit the Lord had vouchsafed pious in stead of profane
Priests, sacrifices to be rightly ordered, and justice to be executed in the
land: yet for a ^^ng while both superstition and Idolatry continued in the
land, troubles and calamities in the State: it was well stepped into David's
reign before the Ark was, or could be settled in its own place. Another
instance we have in the second of Chronicles; after Solomon, in, and before
Asa's time, the people were fallen to many superstitions, and much corruption
did abound in Church and State: they were for a long time without a teaching
Priest, and without the Law, and in those days there was no peace to him that
went out, or to him that came in, but the Lord did vex them with all
adversities, 2 Chronicles. 15.3. Now when we read and ponder the story, we find
what a work it was to reform that State; a Prophet is extraordinarily raised,
and wonderfully endowed to call the people to Reformation. Further, they make a
Covenant, and oblige all upon pain of death, man, woman and child to take the
Covenant; yet after all this the work sticks, and goes not on, till Maacah the
Kings mother be put down from being Queen, because she had made an Idol in a
grove, verse. 16. I might show you likewise how much ado Iehoshaphat had to
amend the errors which crept into Judah by his neglect and connivence, whilst
he associated himself with Ahab, but you may read it at leisure, 2 Chronicles. 19.
The book of Ezra and Nehemiah do also hold forth lively clear examples setting
out more fully the hardship of this work. And as testimonies and examples, so
metaphors in holy Writ may illustrate this truth; the Lord in Esaias calls the
restoring of the peoples captivity, the reformation of their lapsed State, The
making of new heavens and a new earth; then which nothing can possibly, or
conceivably be thought more difficult and impossible, Esa. 62. Ezekiel is
pointed to this in a metaphor of dry bones, and demanded whether those bones
can live; hereby did the Spirit signify it as difficult a thing to restore
Israel and Judah, as to make those dry bones to live, Ezekiel. 37.3. In the
Apocalypse we find the deliverance of the Christian Churches from the cursed
power and pollutions of Antichrist, to be set out by the rescuing of a woman,
newly delivered of a man-child, from the cruel red Dragon; by which it is
easy to read an extremity of difficulty and apparent danger in such an
undertaking.

More evident yet will this appear by argument: First, from the nature of this
work: the way to restore and reform a lapsed nation, is all ^p-hil: virtue,
purity, piety lodge in the height of the crags of the Rock; it is hard to
climb, when it is easy to descend: besides, a Nation is a vaste body, and it
is most difficult to move such things that way: the maine bent and stream of
nations runs downward to vice and profaneness: the general desires and
endeavors of men are tending to loosnesse: nor unstained worship in the
Church, nor impartial justice in commo^wealth, would they have; those therefore
that attempt reformation, do work against the grain, row against the stream,
and shall find the work tedious and difficult.

Israel talk of going out of Egypt to serve God better, Pharaoh will be stir,
himself and his instruments, to sink them into a deeper degree of bondage. That
Pharaoh lives still in the Prince of darkness, and when ever there is any
speech of weakening his Kingdom, by reducing a people from superstitions
vanities, corrupt and polluted courses, he plays the Devil indeed, summons
all the Furies musters his black Forces, sets on his Instruments quickens their
activitie, sharpens their wi^, whets their inventions, ^edgeth their malice,
heighthens their anger, blows up their rage, brows the impudency makes
infinite their cruelty. Hence all the bloody Cains, the scoffing stomachs, the
profane Esau's, the politic Achitophels, the railing Rabshakebs, the world of
ungodly persons become enemies and opposers The kings of the earth standing and
up, and the Rulers take (...) together. (...), and (...), and Amalek, etc.
conplot and conspire to root out Israel. Add to these, all false religions,
all Idolatrous and superstitious Worships, ancient Ceremonies, beloved Customs
and Traditions of our Fathers stand up and make much adoe^ Yea more, many false
friends are always inter-woven with the true seekers of Sions good, which
cry, We will build with you; and these oft-times unbuild and destroy more then
the open adversary: yet more opposition and hinderance, the Prince of
darkness makes advantage of the infirmities, and inconsideration of
well-intending men: hereby raises he jealousies, makes divisions, put strange
remora's in the progress of the Churches cause: now from all these we may note
a second reason of difficulty and sadness.

Egypt did truly believe that ever they should be brought to Canaan, a land
flowing with milk and honey? Witness their continual expressions of mistrust;
This Moses has brought us out to slay us in the wilderness, they should die
for want of bread, perish for thi^st, and the like: After all, how feared were
they to be eaten up of the Giants? You remember also a man that when
deliverance and promise of plenty was made, would not believe though windows
should be opened in heaven; doubtless many were then as unfaithful in heart,
although they spoke not so plain in words. There is always a prejudice in the
hearts of men against any great matter to be done for the Church and people of
God: the world sees them to (...) but few cordial active friends, especially
amongst the great ones, and therefore disbelief does use^^ly possess their
hearts; Now this does dragge the business, trash down proceedings more than
one would imagine. Christ himself could not doe^^^ at woks because of men's
unbelief, much more (...) men do their endeavor, yet bring on the work but
slowly, if at all, because of unbelief.

Cyr^^ to return (...) Babylon, there were many of them so (...) gone, and
change their station, as the Church after praises for deliverance, was forced
to solicit the Lord of mercy afresh, to turn their captivity. Men are
naturally wedded to what they have had; and albeit they know things were not so
well as they ought and might be, yet Issachar-like, they had rather stoop to
the burden, then to be at pains to put it off; slavishly they think it was
well enough, it may serve turn, and what will come of change is uncertain --.
So in Egypt at the Brick Kilnes they had flesh pots and garden commodities,
they eat to the full, they slept well, and had straw enough, till Moses came;
and if therefore they could make any accommodation with Pharaoh, they would
trouble themselves no further: This unwillingnesse made them stick so long in
Egypt, and most certainly this retarded their journey in the wilderness forty
years; yea more, made the Lord to swear in his wrath that they should not
enter into his rest. The Lord is justly slow to help an unwilling people: and
hence see another reason why the work is so extremely difficult.

brethren, they put him away, saying, Who made thee a Judge? and why was this?
because they were not yet sensible of their own want, found not themselves to
need a deliverer; by which it was evident they were not sit, nor as yet capable
of such a mercy; but after some more years, when another King arose which knew
not Joseph, and began to make heavier their bondage, then the Hebrews grow
fully sensible, and God says, The cry of the Children of Israel is come up to
me; come now therefore and I will send thee, that thou may bring them out,
Exodus 3.9, 10. and we may see by this when a people is fit for deliverance.

The Prophet Hosea likewise acquiants us, that when Ephraim first saw his
wound, he went to the Assyrians, and sent to King Iareb, Hos. 5.13. and whilst
thus it was with them, they were unsit, incapable of Gods cure, and so continue
until they see their error, return to the Lord, and take with them words,
saying, We will not ride upon horses, Ashur shall not save us, Hos. 14.1, 2, 3,
4.

Another property is, for a people to be willing to do what they can to help
themselves, to carry on the work to the uttermost. If the Children of Israel
begin to be afraid of the Giants; and declare themselves unwilling, and loath
to fight with the supposed terrible mastie inhabitants of the land of Canaan,
they do thereby clearly discover themselves to be unsit or incapable of such a
mercy as seemed in probability to be near unto them: God hereupon continued
their Pilgrimage in the wilderness forty years, until all were dead that were
thus loath to do what they could to help themselves. After this the people grow
to a fit temper, and become capable of entering the Land of promise, and see
what their disposition was, Josh. 1.16. All that thou command us we will
do, and whithersoever thou sendest us we will (...) The people being thus
ready to do what they could, are now capable of mercy.

A third property requisite is, a willingness to remove and part with all
things which may hinder perfect reformation. In the tenth of la^^ges we find
that the philistines and the Amorites did grievously oppress Israel, who in
their misery repair unto God for succor, acknowledging their sins,
imploring his help; but the Lord returns answer, I will deliver you no more: A
strange repulse by a merciful Father given! And if you skan the business, you
shall find, it was for that Israel kept still amongst them the things which
did and might hinder Gods helping and delivering of them; to wit, their strange
gods. But when they had considered and found out that to be the cause, they put
them away, and presently they were helped; yea more, the Text faith, Gods (...)
was grieved for the miseries of Israel: lo how removing the things which may
hinder did alter the case, verse. 13, and 16.

Ephraim is an empty vine to God, sparing, niggardly in his service, ruin,
not reformation is like to succeed, Hosea 10. And consult the Story of the
Kings of ludah, you shall sinde but one thorowout Reformation, and this was in
the days of l^siah; and how liberal were the hands of the people in those
days? they brought in money to the work, sans weight and measure. The value of
the gold and silver of the molten Images was not regarded, nor saved out of an
husbandly thriftinesse, but they stamped it and all other costly utensils,
which were superstitiously employed, into pieces, and made dust of them. And
gave in of their own more then sufficient: this bounty and freeness of
spirit, argued them to be truly fit and capable of greater Reformation then any
was wrought before them. Now consider my Brethren by these notes, how hard a
thing, how much ado it will be before a nation or people will be brought to
such qualifications, there must be ploughing, sowing, planting and supplanting
in a nation or kingdom, ere a work of full Reformation will be brough about.

My fixed Reason of this point, is from the providence of God, who will have the
business I speak of to be thus, for the discovery of unfound and unsincere
instruments, and to take away the glory of his Churches deliverance from them.
It is the most noble and greatest honor that ever can come to mortal men on
earth, to be instruments of public good to a nation: especially to Gods
Church and people, mostly in the cause of restoration and Reformation. Now
this being so specious and desirable a thing, all forts, good and bad, pious
and profane, are ambitions of the happiness of it. If therefore the business
should go on with a fair gale and a flowing tide, accompanied still with
likelihood of success, and evidence of credibilitie; how many Iehu-like would
say, Come see my zeal? How many of the old Israelites, which came out of Egypt,
approved the golden calfe, and hankered after superstitions vanities, had
carried away the honor of bringing the children of Israel into Canaan, had not
the news of the Spies rendered the work difficult and dangerous, improbable
and impossible? The Lord in his secret wisdom saw only Caleb and Joshua fit
to carry away that same: and therefore suffered the business to appear so
unlikely and hazardous, for the discovery of unsincere Israelites, and
preventing them of undue honor. Now the same reason of providence continues
still, the Lord therefore does usually observe the same way of proceedings; the
turning of Sions captivity must then be very hard and unlikely to come to
pass, that unsound men may be discovered to their shame.

The reflex of this truth upon our selves, does blame the harboring of evil
surmises, the entertainment of hard thoughts, the despising of the proceedings
and despairing of success in the business of Reformation and establishment of
our Church, now (by the blessing of God) in agitation: the enormities of this
kind are secret, but sore evils under the Sun. The Lord our God is doing us
good, he has raised instruments, and is acting his great work: why should men
think evil in their hearts, or entertain hard thoughts of God and his
instruments; give out evil omens or vent despairing speeches? Suppose the
proceedings go not on smoothly, or so prosperously as men expect, out meet with
many rubs, be often at a loss. Admit there be crookedness and stumbling in
the progress of affairs, shall we presently surmise that neither God nor man
intend us peace and deliverance? shall we say with the grumbling Israelites, It
had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, and would we had died in Egypt
when we did eat to the full? Think my Brethren, what an heinous sin that was in
them, how extremely did it provoke the Lord to anger Search the Scripture
through, if ever you can find the holy One of Israel speak with more
indignation against any offense that ever was committed by his people: yet this
sin I suppose is committed abundantly by many in these times, and that
without fear, and without feeling. Because men want that peace and security,
that ease and plenty: because they meet with charges and troubles more then
formerly, they give themselves to think evil in their hearts; and oh the hard
thoughts which they surmise of the work and instruments of Reformation! Many
whet their tongues, make ready their bows, and shoot out their arrows, even
bitter words; seeing the war continues, the work is slowed little done, (as
they say) men's expectations frustrated, things fall out cross, no likelihood
of a speedy end, nor any certainty what will come of it: people for the most
part take liberty to despise all that bither to has been acted as the day of
small things, and are ready to cry out with the wicked in the Psalm, Who will
show us any good? What has the Parliament? What have the Armies? What have the
Assembly done? Vilde and ungrateful queres are these: I may say of such
persons, as once Moses in like case, they have corrupted themselves, their spot
is not the spot of Gods children, they are a perverse and crooked generation:
Do ye thus requite the Lord, oh ye foolish people and unwise? Has the God of
heaven more visibly appeared for his little flock, then ever here to fore in
this land? Has he stopped the overflowings and breakings in of Popery and
tyranny? Has he with his own blessed hand laid the foundation of a glorious
Reformation? Has he found out fit instruments, when we the poor silenced
Ministers, as Elijah of old, thought there were none left which had not bowed
the knee? have these instruments with singular freeness of mind set upon the
service of God and the Kingdom? have they now for diverse years spent their own
means, their time more precious then their means? Their health, their strength,
their life they have wasted: tied themselves to tedious attendance day and
night. They have labored and strove continually with almost insuperable
difficulties, and heavy loads of insupportable inconveniences. Deprived they
have been of the comforts of their proper habitations and cloystred as it were
in hired chambers or borrowed rooms. Wife, children, friends, and gainful
employments have many of them left, and surrendered themselves wholly to the
service of the Public. By Gods blessing also they have wrought happy
beginnings, and made an hopeful progress, much conducing to the common
benefit and public good. Who can tell the gleanings, or number the fourth
part of the glory which has redounded to God in his Churches, and the good
which has and is like to accrue to this kingdom by their endeavors? It were
too long but to recapitulate the happy freedoms, and the positive advantages
which they have wrought for Church and Commonwealth. As for the Armies, I may
justly say they have been generally faithful, and have done and suffered so
much as that few Stories yield like precedents in so short a time, in so
plentiful a country. For the Assembly, their labors, travelings, watchings;
their zeal to the cause of God and work of Reformation, is not unknown to
considering men. But alas, nothing is more easy, then to detract from public
performances. No doctrine is sooner believed then that which acquaints the
people, public affairs are not so well ordered, as they should and might be.
Who is ignorant how much a few fair speeches of oyl-mouthed Absolon to that
effect prevailed against David and his Worthies? But should the people of
England thus requite the Lord and his instruments of Reformation? Or is it a
small matter thus to cast soul of unthankfulness as it were into the face of
God, whilst he is turning to us in love? Consider my Brethren, has the fair
morning of our hopes been clouded? Have our enemies prevailed, to put a long
day to our troubles? Does the business yet go on slowly and untowardly? Sure
we may thank our own grumbling, our thinking evil in our hearts, our rash
ungrateful censuring, our despising the day of small things, our despairing
thoughts, words, actions, all justly met with, and much to be blamed from the
consideration of the truth in hand.

From hence is ministered shame and rebuke to all such as obstruct the work,
hinder and make more difficult the progress of Sions delivery. It is a
grievous thing to add to the heavy burden or an hard task; in such case how
bitterly and justly will the oppressed coplain? Much more heinous is it to add
to the afflictions of whole Kingdoms and Churches. To make Sion sow in tears
one year, one month, one day longer for us, is a sin that no Christian
would have his soul guilty of, who rightly ponders the true nature and heavy
consequence of this sin; yet I fear there are many Sanballats and Tobiahs
amongst us, very guilty of this horrible crime.

Iehu, and strive to bend the public Cause to their bow. What strange
allegations, glosses and pretenses do they frame to make show of serving the
State, when indeed they serve themselves? Think what a nefarious crime it is in
men, that are trusted with the administration of public affairs, to carry
private spirits in their bosoms, seeking to serve themselves, not the State?
How ill does it beseem a Christian to follow National employments, with
ambitious longing after their own honor and advancement; or with an
unconscionable, unquencheable thirst after gain? These men make heavy the
common yoke, add to the pressures of the times, and should suffer a word of
rebuke; for not with standing what themselves and others may think, God knows
they deserve ill.

ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? was once the speech of an holy
Prophet to an eminent person, 2 Chronicles. 19.2. and he pressed his repro of home,
saying, Therefore is wrath upon thee from the Lord.

A third sort of men which I shall rebuke hence, persons willing to thwart and
cross proceedings; so when any business generally adjudged hopeful, is
propounded, they have still doubts to (...) delays to make, inconveniences to
allege; and deem it a great commendation to their wit, if they can by arguing
puzzle the matter, and divert the business. Saint Paul told the Corinth that
he did hear there were divisions among them, and did partly believe it; shall
praise you in this? (says he) I praise you not. And give me leave to press
you with the words of our Saviors Necessory (...) that assences should come,
but woe be to him by whom the offense comes.

THe third inference with which I will conclude this point is, matter of
admonition. Since it does so clearly appear, that throughout Reformation, and
the well establishment of Sion is a work so extremely hard, and brought about
with so much difficulty, we should be all persuaded to wait for the
accomplishment of it with patience and cheerfulness Put we all our trust in
the Lord, and be doing good, and he will bring it to pass. Our extreme
longings to have an end this month, this year, that Summer, I believe, has
neither pleased God, nor done us goes. The Disciples out of such a mood did
ask the Lord Christ, Will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel? but
note our Saviors answer, It is not for you to know the times and seasons,
which the Father has shut up in his own (...): Such inquisitive desires, and
forecasting (...) of Gods times, do much trench on the privileges of heaven:
The Prophet tells us, That he which believes will not make haste: and truly it
is a symptom of much weakness in our faith, to be thus incessant in desires
of a forthwith dispatch of Gods work. Nothing becomes Christians better then a
patient waiting on Christ their King, whose Office it is to bring down the
proud enemies of his Church, and in due time to trample them under his feet. We
will allow a servant much time to effect a tedious business, we will give a
friend more time to work our preferment, and shall we not allow our God time to
work the deliverance and advanceme^t of his Church? Oh! my brethren, let our
souls say with Job, All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my
change come. And in such our patient waiting of the Lords leisure, take we heed
of prescribing to God time, or means, or what instruments he shall use; it was
the sin of Israel, to limit the holy One of Israel. For Christ's sake, let not
us be guilty of it, say we not so much as in our hearts, that the work shall
be done by such a^ time, or by such men, or such means, for this would be
presumptuous prescribing to God. Let me also in our waiting entreat you to take
heed of ascribing to men. Note well what the Apostle writes, 1 Cor. 3.20, 21.
The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise, that they are but vain; therefore
let no man glory in men. We should not expect our deliverance from such
instruments, and naught from others; but we should trust God with all the
instruments which his good providence has employed in his work, and wait on
him alone for success in due time. This is our duty, and can we want
inducements to such a well-pleasing, sweet, Christian-like waiting upon God?
Only two considerations will I propound; the former; is that of the Psalmist,
The patient abiding of the meek shall not always be forgotten; our fathers
hoped and trusted in God, and were not ashamed. You cannot produce a man in all
the Scripture Story, who was not answered in what he faithfully depended on God
for. We may therefore well be encouraged in our present dependence. The other
consideration is, that of all the blessings which ever God bestowed on men,
those were the best blessings which have been longest prayed and waited for.
Abraham had diverse sons, but none so good as that he waited so long for: and
what an happy Child did Hannah obtain by prayer, and long waiting? How
fruitful was the promised Land, which came after so many ages expectance? It Is
most certain, that the more we pray, and the longer we wait for our deliverance
and establishment, the more joyous and excellent will it be when it comes; so
it ever has, so it ever will be with Gods people; for they that sow in tears,
shall reap in joy, etc.

A second virtue which this portion of Scripture holds out, is a giving us to
understand what the people of God ought to do in times of Reformation, when
the Church travelleth with deliverance. In this case they must not be idle
spectatours, sit still and only wish well to the business in hand, but as the
husbandman in times of dearth and scarcity is much more diligent and
plentiful in manuring his land, careful to provide precious seed, and
incessant for the repelling of famine, and procuring of plenty; so must Gods
people, they must be up and doing, put their shoulder to the work, their hand
to the plough, think nothing too much that they are able to do; they must
labor plough, sow part with all as precious feed, lay it down in the dust. Let
then hence the sentence of holy doctrine be:

All the friends of Sion should be much and active in pious and precious
endeavors, when her cause is in agitation.

The Scripture does learn us this truth, by a memorable passage, Exodus 17. when
the brood of profane Esau strove with Jacobs Seed, Joshua being a man of war,
must choose out fit men for battle; Moses, Aaron and H^^, being no swordmen,
they must to the Mount, where Moses hands must be held up all the while, and
when they were let down, Amalek prevailed, but when they were held up, Israel
prevailed. This my brethren, signified, that every man should act even to
intention, to the highest degree of his activity, when Sions business is in
hand, or otherwise the Cause may be at a loss. How are Zebulun and Napthali
commended for jeoparding their lives in such a case? Judge. 5.18. Mordecai could
tell Est (...), If thou hold thy peace at this time, thou and thy fathers
house shall be destroyed, Est. 4.14. I might now produce the vow of David,
Psalm, 132. the zeal of Vriah, 2 Samuel 11.11 Daniels devotions, Dan. 9.18. speak
of Ezra and Nehemiahs, incessant, endeavors, and the peoples building the wall
with swords in their hand, all witnessing this truth, and leading us to the
duty. But see we two special injunctions require this; when the worship of
God, and the justice of the Kingdom was carried well on toward the point of
establishment in the days of David, then are all the friends of the Church
called upon to be active, Psalm. 122.6. The prophet Esaias likewise foreseeing by
faith the deliverande of the Church, and flourishing condition of Christ's
Kingdom ready to ensue, does not only testify for himself, that he will not
hold his peace for Sions sake, but also calls upon others; yea, all that be
mindful of the Lord, let him have no rest until he has made Jerusalem a
praise in the earth, Esa. 62.6, 7.

The first Argument to illustrate this Doctrine, is from the high and precious
nature of Sions cause. It will be easily granted, that as all intelligent
agents act for some end, so they act according to the nature of the thing they
are employed about. This calls for more or less carfulness and regard, more
or less activity and intention, as the matter under hand is more or less of
value. Will not the Refiner be ten times so circumspect and industrious, when
his gold is in the furnace, as when lead is on the fire? How curious and wary
is he, that is to cut rich jewels and pearls? Now can there be any, thing in
the world more precious, or of such importance, as the cause of the Church
standing for pure Religion, and unstained worship of God, and justice? Me
thinks in these is the very quintessence of all excellencies and substantials.
The whole world is subordinate to the Church her good, that men might know and
serve God aright was the very end of Creation. Yea more, did not the Lord
Christ die in the cause of his Church? Note then how transcendent and
incomparable, excellent and precious is that, to which in some respect the
Creation and Redemption of the world is subordinate: great reason then is it,
that all who would be thought the friends of Sion, should be very active when
her cause is in agitation.

was but one Peter in prison, how incessant was the Church on his behalf? If a
number of Gods dear ones had their cause transacting, it behoved all well
willers which knew it, to be helping in it, if they could. How desirable is it
to do good to a City, or a Nation? What have not mere moral men done and
undertaken for their country upon this only ground, that the business
concerned the whole nation? Now the Churches cause concerns not a nation only,
but nations: Her cause is like her self, Catholic. Has not the whole body
benefit by the free dome and happiness which comes to any part? Yea posterity
and ages to come are sharers in Sions deliverance. Have not we been much the
better for Deliverance and Reformation vouchsafed in the days of King Edward,
and Queen Elizabeth? Thus many, and many are parties concerned; yea more, God
himself, his blessed Son, and holy Spirit are interessed in it; or much
honored or dishonored by it. If any will object, that if it be Gods
business, he will look to it himself, and we need not then be so careful, not
active. I answer, that the Lord has committed his cause in part to his people
to manage; For he is that Lord that put forth his vineyard to husband men, and
so he puts his cause into the hands of Sions friends to solicit and prosecute
it. And therefore in should not take off, but quicken their activitie; since
God and men, nations and people, present and after ages, are concerned in it.

our transgressions, and cancel the handwriting which is against ourselves
and the land. Love indeed is said to cover a multitude of sins, and there must
be much expression of great zeal and love which will do this work. Second to
this, the justly provoked ire of the Almighty is to be pacified, that is full
displeasure fall not upon us; his countenance, his joyful countenance is to be
sought. Many mercies, many kinds of great mercies are to be obtained; Men are
in such times to make the Lord amends (as I may so speak with holy reverence)
for former failings and neglects. And to all this consider that Sions friends
expect that God in such times should do great things for them; make bare his
Arm, appear in the Mount, avenge his Elect, make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth; should not they then be active, when so much is to be done and expected?

Balaam was to curse Israel, when they were ready to enter the land of Canaan.
Consider likewise; how Gebal, Ammon, and Amalek. with the rest did conspire,
combine, complot, and consult to cut off Gods people from being any more a
nation, and to put the name of Israel out of remembrance. As thus it ever was,
so it ever will be, with the profane of the world, the serpent seed. Is it not
reason then, that the woman's seed should be active in their zeal? otherwise it
might be just with God, to permit the instruments of his cause to fail, in
regard they suffer themselves to be outdone, and out acted by the devils
instruments.

This doctine thus cleared, does in the reflex of it, first justify all those
good Zerubbabels of our time, who have put themselves forth in our cause, been
much and active in faithful endeavors for the preservation and reformation of
this Church and Kingdom. It likewise also justifies all our humiliations,
public and private, all our days of thankful memorial, Laws, Ordinances,
and Injunctions, truly intended to procure the full deliverance and
establishment of our religion and just liberties. If all the friends of Sion
ought in such cases to do as you have heard, then our Worthies have done no
more then did become them, no more then was their duty to do. Search through
the holy Book, and tell me whether any men are so precious in the eyes of
heaven, and the account of God himself, as those that have been zealous for
the reformation of his Church, the carrying on of his Cause, the help of his
people against the wicked and profane opposers of them: How highly were Caleb
and Joshua esteemed of God for being courageous, when others flagg'd in the
business, and shrunk at evil tidings? Had not Phinih^m the son of Eleazar a
Covenant of peace made to him and his posterity for being zealous in Gods
Cause among the people? Why should I tell you of Gideon, and Barak, and Samson,
and the rest? In a word, men of this spirit are the only men in Gods Books.
But one thing which is recorded of a zealous woman I cannot omit; Blessed above
women shall Jael the wise of Heber the Kenitebe; blessed shall she be above
women in her tent; she put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the work
man's hammer: she smote Si^era she smote off his head, Judge. 5.24, 26. Lo, my
brethren, what an high transcendent applause is given to this woman by the
mouth of the Spirit of God. The like phrase is but in one place more to be
found in Holy Writ, and there it is given to the blessed Virgin, here it is
iterated of this woman; by which with the former instances we may clearly see
how much true zeal in such kind of actions does please the God of glory. And
all this I mention, not to flatter or proud up any heart, but by way of just
vindication and approbation of all that have been forward for God in our just
cause, for their future encouragement; and have not I good reason so to do in
these times, when men of zeal meet with so many disheartenings and
discouragements? Truly it is some unhappiness to be good amongst us, especially
to be zealous in it: for besides the trouble, and many inconveniences which
accompany such undertakings the persons of men truly zealous for Gods Cause
among the people, are obvious to soul censure, often do they gain reproach,
and find unthankful dealing from many of our own side. How apt are we to
bedew our best friends, and to requite ill to those who strive most for the
public good? Did not consciousnesse of duty to God, and the true worth and
excellency of the employment bear up Christian hearts and public spirits, many
good instruments in this Cause had long ago been suitors to God and man, to have
quit them of their employments. I have cause therefore lighting on this
subject, to speak thus much in season, for their justification and
encouragement. Hereby also our pious actions fore mentioned, are to be
approved; for why, there are a generation who mussicate against them, whisper
and say, By what authority do we these things? some are ready to say, as
Indas of the Alabaster Box of Ointment, Whereto is this waste? Now I could
quickly say enough to these men, but blessed be God, experience has
sufficiently taught us, that these pious endeavors have not been in wast: for
in no age I think were fastings, prayers, and the duties of this kind, so
often, so visibly answered. And this will, or may stop such mouths with shame.
Moreover, the doctrine which I have proved shows divine authority, the Lord
requiring, expecting, and in effect calling for the frequent exercise of these
duties, in such times, being a chiese part of the precious seed which should be
sown. Yea more by this we may conclude, that it were much sin and wickedness
to refuse or neglect: see how irreconcileably angry the Lord is with his people
for neglecting such duties in such times, Esa. 22. consult that place, and I
shall need say no more to justify our sowing in tears.

A second Use of this point does minister matter of just and sharp reprofe;
First, to neuters, a sort of men wise in their own conceit, secretly condemning
all others, and justly to be condemned of all. I may truly say, that neither
God nor man loves them, it is only the devil and themselves that they please:
And were not these a kind of unteachable creatures, I should speak much to
their reproof, but I refer them to two places of Scripture; one in the old
Testament; Indg. 5.23. the other, Rev. 3.15, 16.

This truth may discover to us, how little those men deserve of the Church and
kingdom, who stand in their places like ciphers to supply a room and multiply
the number, but neither act, nor in good earnest desire to act any thing to
purpose. I confess if men were to make themselves their own end, they took a
course seemingly wise. For public grievances, though easily seen and
complained on; yet are very hard to be dealt with. To search into the true
causes of them, to find out the right method of euring them, is a work so full
of toil, and so beset with difficulties, as that selfish and wary men may well
judge it better to sit quiet, and enjoy their own case, then to entangle and
trouble themselves to seek the common good. Now of this temper, I fear me,
there are many, too many, who do bless and applaud themselves in not acting
and judging others for their forwardnes. But I beseech you to consider
earnestly; that our Parliament, our Kingdom, our Cause has no need of men of
Gallio's temper, which care for none of these things: and what anignoble
property it is for men called of God, and entrusted with so weighty
employment, to spend their time in doing nothing, or nothing to the purpose,
and leave Gods Business to God himself and others to care for. I am not
ignorant, that men of this make, have many excuses to plead: but, alas, they
are fig leaves which will not cover their nakedness; and though the World and
themselves were so deluded, as not to see their guiltines, yet such men will
dearly answer it before God, for doing nothing, or as good as nothing, in the
Cause of God and the kingdom.

It remains now only, that I call upon every one that would not be counted an
enemy, but a friend of Sion, to be up and doing, to be much and active in pious
and precious endeavor for the perfecting our Sions deliverance, and the
establishing of our Jerusalem in peace and truth. Now is time for Nobles, and
Senators, and every one in his place and station, to few precious seed. What
considering man then would suffer sloth or negligence, ease or self respects,
to hinder him from being an instrument of so great good, as may come to the
Church and State. Many of you are, all of you may be, under God, the cause of
much good to many generations: Be therefore of S. Paul's mind, suffer nothing
to deprive you of the glory of such rejoicing, and the testimony of a good
conscience. And now in special manner, I desire to commend four things, as
part of the pious endeavors, which should chiefly be laid down as precious
seed, to bring on the happy work in hand.

The first of these, is an holy, conscionable, sincere observance of these
days of humiliation. By Moses law, the man who did not humble and afflict his
soul in such a day, was to be cut off from Israel, Levit. 25.29. to be only
customary and formal in these, which should be our most pure devotions, is a
sin of more grievous consequence then we are aware of; to dissemble with our
God in Fasting and Prayer, is a kind of horrible impiety: for Gods sake
therefore be you careful and conscionable in preparing your souls to meet the
Lord in the days of atonement; be ye holy, heavenly, faithful, sincere and
entire with God in these extraordinary services. Let it be your work on these
days to strive to mortifies your sins and sanctify your souls, to bewail the
iniquities of the land, and for the divisions of Reuben let there be great
thoughts of heart. These, my Brethren, are the highest services that we can do,
for God, our selves, or the kingdom, and you being our Worthies, should go
before and exceed others in them; if therefore you will not do so, but refuse
and fleight, or be superficial in the performance of them; behold, ye have
sinned against the Lord, and be ye sure your sin shall find you out.

The next thing I commend is the speedy impartial execution of justice. You
know that by standing up quickly, and executing justice, Phin^ha^ Presem by
said the plague: when asas the slowing and neglecting of it continued the
plague hereafter here in David's time. It was doubtless neglect and corruption
of justice, next to pollutions of Gods worship, irreligiousnesse and
profaneness, that has brought our kingdom to its misery: the speedy
therefore and impartial ministration of it, is a proper medicine for our
malady. And it is somewhat a sad thing to note little justice, has been done
on bloody traitorous, deliequent, enemies of God and man, more then what is the
Lord himself has done by the hand of war: it may be that fearful way of
execution has and will continue till the more desirable swords of justice be
drawn to purpose, in the cutting off when (...) of our combustions, the sons
of Be;lial; who in God has put into your hand to punish.

The third thing I desire may be specially cared for, is the (...) pre^^^grand
prosecution of the national convenant a (...) plensing to God, profitable to
the kingdoms, by which (...) is, and through God's blessing may be, the (...)
blow given to the whore of Babylon and (...), impes; that ever yet was. Now to
have this (...), ^^ngst us, or laid aside, whilst malignants and (...) live in
our bosom, blessing, and in feered applauding themselves, that they have
neither taken this, nor any of your for (...) prove (...); many months have
passed over and no account made, nor any questionned or dealt with for
refusing. This is our case, and I appeal to wiser judgments, whether this may
not be the way to lessen the honor and authority of the High Court of
Parliament, and their Ordinances. May not this likewise cause the common sort
to deem themselves little bound in conscience to keep the Covenant, when they
see others not bound to take it? Will not this render all zealous advocates for
the Covenant as temporizers, and give the refusers occasion to triumph over us,
as men of large consciences to do any thing that shall be required, like
Bishops creatures, and the superstitious and conformists of late? These are but
a few of many, a glimpse, a hint of the inconveniences which may happen, pardon
me then in being bold to point out the pressing and prosecution of the
Covenant, as one kind of precious seed to be sown amongst others in Sions
be^^f.

The last thing which I shall commend to your s^^ous consideration, whom it
does concern, is special care to seek and preserve the mutual love, honor,
and esteem each of other. Oh! that Saint Paul's Lesson might be learned of our
worthy. Nobles and Senators, one to esteem of another ^^lter then himself. Oh!
that were a delight in bre^^^ and follow-instruments, and specially in those
who excel in virtue, zeal, and faith (...) ^ring for the public good. Sure
it is (...) honorable for any to mind solely, (...) ^own same and esteem and
not care how to the rep^^te of others lie. From hence I fear come things that
arennseemly, and by which the public proceeding may suffer obstruction. My
earnest desire therefore and praye^^, that the God of peace and consolation
would make you like minded one toward another, and each willing to deny
himself; to seek the esteem of others in love; and above all to forward and
advance the National and common Cause.

Lo these are the four things which out of duty to God, true zeal to Sion, and
due reverence to the Worthies, to whom I speak, I humbly desire may be thought
upon and practiced to the glory of our God, and emolument of his Church. And
the better to prevail in this my suit; I shall apply the third virtue or force,
which lies in the words of my Text, as special arguments of inducement to
persuade there unto.

Consider then first I beseech you, that those endeavors with that activity I
speak of, are by the Spirit of God in my Text, signified to be as fruitful
precious seed, which dies not in the earth, but lives to yield increase. And
this, me thinks, is abundantly sufficient to incite every man to act his
uttermost! If I could assure any husbandman that every grain of such kind of
seed should live, and not one corn perish; I need say no more to move him to
industry; how plentiful would be the in sowing a how free in cost and
pains-taking. But now, past all peradventure, I may assure the seeds-man of
Sions Cause, that his endeavors are such pre^^ous seed, as that no one grain
shall be lost, but (...) again to yield him increase. It is like a ca(...) down
for joy, which shall certainly be paid: You may ve act therefore hence much
encouraged.

Secondly I note, that hardness and difficulty in sowing is no way comparable to
the sweetness and comfort in reaping. There Is no compare, me thinks, between
the tears, and the joy in the Text; these far surmount and exceed them, as
the metaphor and words of expression seem to import. Rational and considering
men therefore should be justly provoked with this consideration. Did not Moses
make the best choice upon this ground? Does not Saint (...) encourage to
sufferings upon like reason? Ram. (...) And certainly this well weighed, may
prevail with us.

Thirdly, mind we the undoubted certainty of our harvest verified by diverse
absolute positive ass^ver^^tion in the Text; he shall reap, he shall come again
he shall bring his sheaves with him; here is no Item of continge neylor
possibility, but all absolute ^^^^tions; anto (...) know he (...) to die arti^
shall (...) away, but a lot of Gods Word shall not fail (...) shall prevent the
harvest of a labourer in Sions (...).

^^^^tly, Consider (...) multiplicitie of the (...) shall be reaped by such
endeavor (...) not be a reddition of grain for grains, or moni^^^ (...) not
yet of care for grains: but of sheaven for (...). This shall be full measure
(...) over, (...) blessings be on the head of eve^^^ where is (...) and
faithful in carrying (...) of Sions cause. And may not (...) take any fou^
(...) with every sprit to set it self (...) and (...) it selfing all hopeful
end (...) to the glory of (...) the good of the Church and Kingdom, and the
great Joy and blessing of the undertakers? (...) God will, and let us now (...)
all pray God it (...).

FINIS.

