Colonel Hammond's LETTER SENT To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of
the Honorable House of Commons, Wherein he desires, That Mr. Osborns Charge
against Major ROLPH, may be brought to a speedy Examination.

ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter be forthwith
printed and published.

H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

WITH A LETTER Sent to the Honorable Committee at Derby-house, Concerning the
taking of the Earl of Holland, and many Officers of quality, Two hundred Horse,
much Gold and Silver, with other good Booty.

ORdered by the said Committee, That this Letter be forthwith Printed and
Published.

GUALTHER FROST Secr'

London, Printed for Edward Husband, Printer to the Honorable House of Commons,
July 12. 1648.

To the Honorable William Lenthal Esquire Speaker of the Honorable House of COMMONS.
Mr. Speaker,
BEing deeply sensible of the reflection upon me and diverse other innocent
persons by Mr. Osborns proceedings in excuse of his odious Treachery, I am bold
to beg of you, That this Charge against Major Rolph may be brought to a speedy
Examination, who, I am confident, will appear a man exceedingly injured, and
this only a Design to work greater disturbances in these distracted times. As
this horrid scandal relates to the Army, I must say, That neither directly nor
indirectly, from any Member of it, or from any other persons or person
whatever, did I ever receive a word or tittle tending in the least to such a
wicked purpose; much less as it relates to my self, could I, or did I, speak
any such thing to Major Rolph. But this is not the first fruit of this kind I
have received for my faithful Service to you, nor is it more then what I have
expected; yet herein I am satisfied, That in faithfulness and integrity I have
served your Commands, with all possible care of, and respect to the Person of
the King; so that come what will come, I can say from a good Conscience, The
will of God be done: And in this I Appeal to His Majesty, who of any man best
knows it, and who does (and I doubt not will still do) upon every occasion as
opportunity serves, sufficiently clear me. Sir, if through Mr. Osborns Malice,
or rather the wicked Design of those who have set him a work, you have received
the least prejudice of me, be pleased to send down some other, whom you may
judge more worthy your Trust, to receive my Charge, and I shall immediately,
with all possible speed, present my self to you to receive your pleasure: In
the mean time, it shall be the business of my best endeavors, to preserve His
Majesty's Person from Danger, as well as in Security in this place, according
to your Commands, until I receive Instructions for His removal, which I hope
and expect will be sudden. Sir, when I am thoroughly considered, you will find
none more faithful to you, and more observant to your Commands, then, Sir,

Your most humble Servant, TO: HAMMOND.
Carisbrook Castle, July 4. 1648.
To the Right Honorable, The Committee of Lords and Commons at Derby-house.
Right Honorable,
WE are bold to dispatch this Messenger with the good News which we have
received from Col: Scroops party: Upon the Lords day between two and three of
the clock, one of this Committee of the Militia went himself with Colonel
Scroop to Hitchin, and procured him six good Guides, two of which were Captains
in our Militia, these directed our party the nearest way to St. Needs, whither
the Enemy was gone: These Captains being still with the party, sent to us by
some of the other Guides this Intelligence, That yesterday about the
Sunrising, Col: Scroop sent a Forlorn of 100 horse into St. Needs, who
immediately secured those Horse which were in the town, many having received the
Alarm from their Scouts, and being got away; there was taken in the Town the
Earl of Holland, with many other Officers of quality, and about two hundred
Horse, with much gold and silver, and other good booty: Col: Dalbeir slain, and
about twelve more; their Body is much broken hereby, and Col: Scroop in the
pursuit of them; the Prisoners which are many, are secured in St. Needs Church,
and are expected to be sent this day to Hitchin: We are

Your Honors humble Servants, ISAAC PULLER, WILLIAM PLOMER,

Hartford, July, 11 past five in the Morning 1648.
FINIS.

