Written by Wm London a bookseller in Newcastle upon Tyne.

Local Cases.
Houghton le Spring p 42 Carlisle pp 44, 45, 77 Stanhope p 76 Dalston etc. p
44, 78 Cockermouth p 44 Callerton p 85


GODS JUDGMENTS Upon DRUNKARDS, SWEARERS, And SABBATH BREAKERS. In a
collection of the most remarkable Examples of Gods revealed wrath upon these
sins: with their Aggravations, as well from Scripture, as Reason. And a Caution
to Authority, lest the Impunity of these evils bring a scourge upon the whole
Nation.

By W. L.

1 Cor. 10.11. Now all these things happened unto them for Examples, and they
are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Luke 13.3. Jesus said, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all
Galileans, because they suffered such things? I tell you, Nay, etc.

Printed for William London, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful, The Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, Sheriff, and
Common Council; TOGETHER With the most Ingenuous Inhabitants of the Famous and
Flourishing Town of New Castle upon TINE:
THe Author in Testimony of his sincere desires for the Peace and Prosperity
of the Town in general, and every person in particular, Dedicates this his
labor to their kind acceptance.

Christian Reader,
WHen I consider how the great Moderator of the World, the holy and just God is
concerned in the Regular or Irregular conversations of men, and how much he
has interested himself in the providential notice he has taken of them, I
cannot but judge that the brandishing of his sword, the recording of the signal
Judgments of God; may be both acceptable to the Lord, and useful to many an
habituated rebellious sinner, for the allaruming his drowsy conscience.

Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the people not be afraid? Amos 3.6.
the Lord is known by his judgment which he executes. Psalm. 9.16.
God will not suffer the worst part of the world to sink into Atheism: the
wretched Emperor shall have claps of Thunder to fright him into suspicions of
a deity. Julian the Apostate shall be made to throw his blood into the air
with a (...). Judgments have been one of the usual ways of Gods asserting his
Authority in the world: and that the usefulness of the following Treatise may
be the more discovered, I have a few things to intimate about the number of the
judgments of God.

1. That Gods judgments are not not like arrows shot into the Air at random,
he does not (...), God has blessed ends, either to reclaim the party smitten,
i^ judgments short of death seize on them, or to be ^ Pillar of salt to
others, that they may hear, fear, and do n^ more so: those Jews that
exemplarily fell in the wilderness; they are said 1 Cor. 10.6. to be (...),
types to future generations; they are engraven characters of divine vengeance,
that we should read their punishment, and avoid their sin.

2. Consider the principles that judgments have to work upon. Bondage, Fear,
and Self-love; the one like the Spaniel, forbearing to offend for the Cudgel
over it, the other from a principle of self-preservation, had rather want the
bait, then swallow the hook; God having left some relics of these in the most
debaucht consciences, that he might have somewhat to treat with in the vilest
sinners, when his judgments were abroad.

3. Weigh the convictions they leave of an overruling Deity; Atheism is one of
the natural fruits of the first Apostasy, and as it is heightened by
impenitency, so it is strengthened by impunity; now God by his judgments gives
some evidences of his Being and Sovereignty; he has, his coecum in mente
flagellum, he has his fulmen in orb, and fulgur in animo Pharaohs bold
challenge of Who is the Lord, shall shrink into a, Moses, pray for me when the
Lord is in the way of his judgments.

4. He will convince the world that Scripture-threatnings are not only a voice
of words, but when and where the Lord pleases, they are (...), they are fiery
darts, the breakings forth of fiery indignation against impenitent sinners,
especially when they meet with sins that do devastate conscience, such as the
sins here witnessed against; Sins that provoke the eyes of Gods glory, which in
no Nation, if reigning, he will suffer to go unpunished: he is a jealous God,
and where his honor is so eminently concerned, he will unsheath his wrath, the
first of these in a bestial Metamorphosis, strives to raze out his Image, the
second to tear his Name, the third to deprive him of his Worship; and I cannot
but approve and encourage the design of the ingenuous Author; who, whilst these
crying sins dare with an open and brazen face, so frequently show themselves,
will set a brand upon their foreheads, of the notable Judgments of God against
them* and for my own part, I would not be wanting to countenance such public
designs for God, for the discovering of the eminent judgments of God against
these sins, may like the Angel to Balaam, stop the Career of some sinner,
provoke the zeal of those Magistrates, and under officers, upon whom God and
man, so loudly call for a severe proceeding against these sins, and draw forth
from the people of God that glorious confession, Psalm. 58.11. Verily he is a
God that judges in the earth. Books of this nature may do much good, where
Sermons cannot reach through the profane absence of many of those that are
most guilty of these sins.

I shall say no more, but recommend the ensuing Treatise to thy serious
perusal, and subscribe my self one willing to be

A Servant to any design for God, J. HAMMOND.

TO THE JVSTICES of PEACE In the NATION; Especially these Northern Parts.
Gentlemen,
THe chief Pillars of a Nation, are the Magistracy and Ministry; the one for
punishing Sin, the other for advancement of Righteousness. These are the
Officers of State, which, like the two great Luminaries of Heaven, give Law to
all the rest; and amongst the Wisest, and Best of men, are accounted as useful
to a Commonwealth, as Castor and Polux, to the Mariners in a tempestuous
night: So that as the flux and reflux of Nile, portends plenty, or dearth; so
these Sword-bearers of God, are pledges of his favor, to that Nation, or
Place, where they are Honored and Respected; and great care ought to be had in
the due election of such as may be for the promotion of the great end of such
Places: for, as one lately said well, They should not be like brambles, which
tear the wool off the poor sheeps backs that come to shelter, for protection,
under them. The Lacedaemonians chose none into the Senate as Magistrates, but
only upon account of Honesty and Virtue; forgeting the bare consideration of
Riches, Friends, etc. where piety was a stranger. And Cicero tells us, A good
Magistrate is the Commonwealths Physician, Badge of Virtue, Staff of Peace,
and Pillar of Honor. I would only beg leave to break my thoughts to the first
of these: and though to some this may seem boldness to be free; yet
considering that A good cause teaches confidence. I think in this case I
should offend if I presumed not; and I have taken care so to order my flight,
as not to soar above the Region of Duty and Civility.

Gentlemen, I set before you three Grand Impieties, viz Drunkenness, Swearing,
and Sabbath-breaking, sins that are opera tenebrarum; It Is your work to look to
them, they are Rageing, Reigning, Polluting sins; sins for which a Land mourns,
and the Nation puts on the Sable garments of sorrow and heaviness: these sins
beget a controversy betwixt a people, a place, a person, and God, and who is
able to abide his indignation? for if once his wrath be but a little kindled,
blessed are all they that put their trust in him. These therefore are sins that
ought not to go unpunished, and that without the strictest severity in a
Christian commonwealth.

Magistrates are not to bear the Sword in vain; if you do not quarrel with
sin, God will with you; you are, or should ^e, the Banks of the Commonwealth,
to keep us from a Land-flood, and Torrent of confusion; you are the Hed^es to
profaneness: The life of the Law is executions; Its a principle in Moral
Policy, That not to execute the Laws, is worse than to break them, Acts and
Ordinances will not beat down profaneness, unless the first be thoroughly
acted, and the last set on fire by authority: many take encouragement by the
slack execution of Justice, which otherwise might with care prove a hinderance,
not only from sin, but punishment, nay, it may be, from Eternal flames. I am
much afraid that many are guilty of others sins, more than they dream of, by
suffering their understandings to be darkened in the sense of their duties,
thorough the sight of their Honors; not seriously weighing what trust God has
committed to them: They cannot deny presentiments, but think it a work below
them to search and find out debaucht houses, or persons, or examine who idly
stays from the Word; or take care in public resorts, to find out Blasphemers,
Cursers, and Swearers, and punish them in the Act. How sad would it be to us,
if we heard the sad cries in Torment? it may be some saying, O that the
Magistrate had hedged up my way with thorns! had he set bounds to my drunken
meetings, cursed oaths, and profane Sabbath-breaking; then had I not been now
roaring in anguish, under the fury of a Revengful God! The mild punishment of
obstinate transgressors, makes sin grown to an excrescency: It festers a body
Politic, as well as Natural, to have the wounds not thoroughly dressed; it
forces to a relapse, where the causes are not diverted or rooted out.

Seeing Drunkenness has so great confidence, as if Authority led it by the
hand, let me strike at the bowels of it, that has so many thousands crawling
out of it; Oh that we might see this sin reel with the Drunkard! that there
were a frequent visiting of Alehouses, and none suffered, under the greatest
engagements, Not to suffer any to be drunk, or drink to excess! and methinks,
as I travel these Northern parts, especially about (I had almost said in) the
Metropolis of these Counties, its scarce possible to pass without infection,
the streets are lined with these Pest-houses; the greatest wonder is, that they
are under the roof of Authority, and yet suffered to breath. Oh down with
disordered Alehouses, that ^rove the Hell and Damnation ^f many a poor soul!
where many poor wretches sit securely, and there drown their families bread in
Drunkenness! where many a person of respect, buys the ruin of his families
honor, together with his own* at a vast expense! One said, If it were not for
secret Drunkenness, they might bar up their doors; Oh, set a Barica^ do to the
entrance of such impieties and villainies, which flow hither as the humors to
the stomach! Banish these fire ships from the Coasts of ^ Christian
Commonwealth, o^ we shall be set on fire from hell^ then your Towns, Counties
Cities, and the whole Nation will move in a Regular Orb, and Congregations be
well filled We may say, it would be a wonder in England if it were in any great
Town, as it was in Rome, where there was a street called Vicus Sobrius, because
there was not an Alehouse in it. What if some have no other living? the
question is, can they live no otherwise, than by making men drunk? I admire the
neglect of this foundation of Reformation in this place, which so often by the
faithful Servants of God has been reiterated in our Congregations! If these
corners of Hell were blown down with the breath of Authority, all the train of
Attendants, like a great Courtiers, would fall with himself; as Cursing,
Swearing, Blaspheming, the Holy Name of God, Murders, Adulteries, and all
other such wickednesses, for which the hand of the Lord is ready with his
judgments to reach us: till this be done, till we see the Sword of Justice
make sin stagger, and like that mighty wind that came from the Wilderness upon
Jobs children, blow down the four corners of these places of iniquity; I say,
till this come to pass, every moment will thrive toward a dismal no one, the
minutes of time will swell into ages, and those into eternity of punishments,
if not prevented.

If Gods wrath and anger be the evils that compass these sins about, like
sparks of our own kindling, and if the reformation of sin, be the removing of
Judgment? what need then to strike at the root of iniquity? If Ahabs
Humiliation, and the Ninevites Sackcloth and Ashes, caused God to let the
resolution of his Judgments run backwards; If Phineas Zeal stayed the plague,
and saved many thousands; I say, if outward reformation ties Gods hands from
outward plagues, what need then to look about and reform? lest we that are left
of so many thousands lately swept away by sickness, diseasses etc. be made
examples because we learn not to beware.

I could instance many Examples of Gods severity, to such as were slack in
their Duties; as Eli, whose impunity to his sons impiety, shrunk him under the
heavy stroke of Justice; but I had rather lead you by examples of Piety and
Justice, than drive you by those of Judgments. Look to Nehemiah, he sets
servants at the Gates of the City, and laid hands on such as profaned the
Lords Day. Its worthy Observation, what Ambrose says to Theodosius; That he
was more earnest and careful, to observe the things of God as a Magistrate,
than himself as a man. The Lacedaemonians had their Ephori; Magistrates that
took care to all manner of intemperance and excess in the City, and if any
were found, they were beaten publicly. The Carthaginians made a Law, That no
Magistrate should drink wine; such was their care to avoid this beastly sin of
Drunkenness: Solons Law was death to a Prince that was drunk. In Carthage,
Lacedemon, and Creet, this sin was so abominable, that all which were found
guilty of it, were thrust out of the Senate, and dismantled of all manner of
liberty to bear any office in their Cities. What zeal was here in Heathens
against this odious sin? And this may not unfitly be accounted as the reason
why a woman reflected upon King Philips unrighteous sentence of Judgment, by
desiring to have her cause removed from Drunken Philip, to King Philip Sober:
and it may be, this sin of his, was the cause of his death, which by a
Lacedemonian Gentleman was executed by a thrust in his body, because he refused
to do Justice. We read of Lewis King of France, upon reading Psalm. 106.3.
Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that does righteousness at all
times; was so wrought upon, that he presently said; He that does not punish
sin, is the patron of it. These sins I speak of, are grown now so bold by
impunity, as if Justice were afraid to look them in the face; like the Snake in
the Fable, rise up against the greatest and most noble Ingenuity possible; Its
severity must subdue them. When true zeal bends the bow, and draws the arrow of
Justice to the head, then it strikes sin to the heart; it flies home to the
life of the Law, and death of the offense. A Modern example we have of an Irish
Lord, Epistle to Mr. Murcots Woe.
who lodged at West-Kirby waiting for his passage, and being a prodigious
Swearer, the Officers serve a warrant upon him, at which he rages with Curses
and Oaths; but they seize upon his horses, and forced him to pay 20 pound to
the use of the poor of the Parish; and all the while he stayed there, his
tongue was held as with a bit and bridle. This is the true effect of Justice,
which looks not asquint upon any man; like Aristides, who without an eye of
favor to father, or friend, or malice to his enemies, distributed alike to
all, so that he purchased the deserved name of Aristides the Just. In the
Areopagite Judicature, they only heard the Cause, and never saw the persons,
giving judgment in the night, that all might have equal Justice.

I cannot omit the example of one Mayor of Exceter.
Mr. Jourdain, of whom it might be said as of David, That the zeal of Gods
house had eaten him up! Mr. Mantons Epist. to his life and death.
for when the Book of Sports came forth, he sent an expostulatory Letter to the
King, enclosed to the Bishop of Exceter, who carefully conveyed it to his
Majesty, who reading, said in a rage, He should be hanged that wrote it: The
Bishop fell on his knees, and begged pardon, saying, That God had not a better
servant, nor his Majesty a better subject. The Bishop after being visited by
Mr. Jourdain, said; Ah! Mr. Jourdain, would you put me upon so hot service,
knowing how many eyes Suspected to favor Puritans.
are upon me! who replied, Yea my Lord, the eyes of God, and his holy Angels,
are upon you, to see how you discharge your office and duty. By his justice
upon Swearers, he brought such an awe and dread upon men adicted to that sin,
that many Citizens observed, that in places of Public resort, they heard not
an oath sworn for many years together. I Will end with one pretty passage recorded
of King James, VVilsons. K. James.
who being upon Removal to Theobalds, his Majesty's Carriages went out of the
City upon the Lords Day, which the Lord Mayor hearing of, commanded them to be
stopped; which affront, was represented to the King, with as great asperity, as
men in Authority crossed in their humors, could express. The King swears, He
thought there had been no more Kings in England but himself; but when it may be
he thought there was a King in Heaven; he sent a warrant to the Lord Mayor,
whom with these words he obeyed. While it was in my power, I did my duty; but
being taken away by a higher power, it is my duty to obey; which afterward it is
said, the King took well, and thanked him for.

But least I be taken for one* transported with an over-hea^ of Zeal, without a
regular and proportioned mixture of Knowledge, give me liberty to clear my
self, and leav^ my thoughts behind me, th^^ I may not be found guil^ of that
asperse, (which some men pressed with a fiery zeal, vented more in passion than
discretion) which fixes a scandal to Justice, more than it promotes Gods Honor
or Reformation of men: were to consult with the prudent part of our duties,
mannaging punishment to such as are drawn aside by temptation, etc. with
reproof, and that secretly: But to incorrigible transgressors, such as are so
accustomed to do evil, as if they professed debauched courses, let the severity
of the Law proceed; for to such only, the Law strikes, to such as will not be
warned: who can they blame but themselves, if they smart? And if I should here
plead for respect to be had to persons, it may by some be thought, to be out of
the way; but however, I am much for it, and do account it no less than a Grand
Masterpiece of Prudence; for if such as seem to lead others by their example,
be won from profaneness, the fruits cannot be bad.

If therefore there be any of the better rank which digress from the good
orders of Government, either of the Nation, or themselves, we are to use such
with all the winning respect imaginable; and if the Law be satisfied, not to
provoke their displeasure: the Law aims more at Reformation than punishment;
and to persons of Quality, whose reputations in the beam of Honor weighs down
the rate of their punishment: we ought to deal with candid behavior, and to
extend meekness and respect, as far as the greatest Civility, and favor of
Law will reach. Upon this ground, no Question, was that prudent Piece of
Administration of Justice; performed by a chief Magistrate, upon a Person of
Quality, not long ago; by sending a Letter, begging his excuse, and hoping as
^e was a Gentleman, he would not be angry at the Administration of Justice,
which was his honor; demanding satisfaction which was due by Law for so many
oaths, which in such a place he had sworn; The Gentleman with a High
acknowledgment of civility, freely submitted. I would not be thought a favourer
of debauchedness in any, much less in the Gentry, in whom, if such vice^ be
set, they have a bad foil; Ye^ I must needs say, they ough^ to have more
allowance that common persons; especially if they be ingenious (as alas many
that are most ingenious most often fall into the snar^ of temptations!) A
little liberty they expect more than others, and as much as is not an affront
to the Law, let them have; because, its fit to win such by civility, which the
Law cannot by force do, without a Rape upon their honors and reputations; and
one great reason is, because many times inferior persons are the inflictors of
punishment, which cannot have over good a relish, unless sweetened with a kind
of submission; and therefore when drink or passion is departed, then to write
or send to them: Yet where civillity and meekness will not allure, to that
just decency and order, which holds conformity to the wholesome Laws of the
Nation, then Currat lex. All which I could wish were done without Malice,
Prejudice, Revenge, a spirit of domineering, or to be accounted some petty some
body; but with a principle, that may not only approve the integrity of a man's
soul to act for the glory of God, but also a not expecting your reward from
popularity, or any other secret advantage below the truth and intent of the
action; guided by the best principles both Divine and Moral.

Now, Gentlemen, to you that are guilty, or may be found in these disorders; If
Laws were not, we had as good live amongst Salvages; you could not say your
lives were your own, if another through fear of the Laws, were not kept from
murdering you; if we had none to punish transgressors, we had as good be
without Laws: for your own honors therefore, beware you involve not your
reputations to the punishment of every mean officer; be not angry at Justice
which is more the Honor of the Gentry, then any; because they are looked upon
as patrons of it: be rather like King Henry the fourth, who thanked God, that
Justice was executed, though it lighted upon one of his own loins. To conclude,
Are not these sins fitter (if for any in any sense) for Brutes, Beasts,
Beggars, and the scum of a Nation, than for Gentlemen or Christians? for shame
then, you that are in any degree guilty of such foul spots of dishonor, to the
Nation, to Christianity, to your Families, good Names, and your own Souls, let
these wicked, debauched, beastly, profane sins, be abandoned from your
thoughts and actions, and hate it in others, that the Nation (the Gentry first
leading the van) may make iniquity and sin blush, and even shame these vild
courses to the eternal Honor of England.

And now Gentlemen, to whom I have been bold to Dedicate my pains, I beg you
to look upon the Work, in that which you see it does drive at, and not at the
unworthiness of the Author, whose desire in it is nothing less, than may be
concluded in this wish: That by your Good Government, they that are to come,
may bless your remembrance, and we present, may together with your selves,
live a comfortable, peaceable, and quiet life, and that in all godliness and
honesty.

So prays Your humble servant W. L.

TO THE READER.
WHen I weigh my own unworthiness in the balance with any thing that may be
called a work for God, I am extremely discouraged to adventure; wondering more
that the Lord should not rather make me a warning to others, by his Judgments
upon me for my own sin, then to write examples of others; In the deep sense
whereof, I cannot say that I was constrained to this work, purely from those
noble and divine principles, which should move in the wheels of all
undertakings for the glory of God* and good of others, lest I deceive my own
spirit; though ^ desire a heart for both; For upon a strict scrutiny, it will
be found a difficult, and more then common attainment^ though most men are
loath* but in all their designs to plume themselves with these fair feathers;
so that in modesty I choose to be rather jealous it is not so, then boast it as
a reason that it is, I can indeed say and that truly, that I am an honourer,
and lover of Order, Decency, and good Government in a Nation, City, or Town;
and from a natural and moral principle, do detest these three sins of
Drunkenness, Swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, as they strike at the Honor of
Order, Government: and the Reputation of a Nation, place or person: and I wish
this principle were wrought in such ingenuous persons, as otherwise are not
persuaded of a greater evil in these sins; they are evils that wound the
glory of God, honor of a Christian state, and the good of a civil Government;
yet have I been wound up to more then a common hatred of these notorious
sins, since I have seen the face of them in the glass of Gods Judgments.

I have observed Drunkenness, Swearing, and the slight observance of the Lords
day, with the profanation of it, to grow the more by opposition, which I think
is, because but slenderly punnished, like the Seas, where but bounded with weak
banks, rages and roares the more, when they are broken down; I have likewise
observed, that that which should be our greatest honor, is turned into sin, in
that they which are under the strictest tie to Christianity by profession,
should so profane the Lords day, and keep it with less exactness, then the
Heathens do their days of worshipping the Devil, whilst we in troops run to
the profanation of God and his holy Ordinances, by more then the one half of
most Parishes absenting themselves from the Congregation, and either profane
the day by drinking, or, which is as sad, by a more then Heathenish idleness
and sloathfull contempt of their own salvation; nay, and this is so common,
that it seems not otherwise, then if it were turned into a Law to contemn the
means of salvatien, and slight, and abuse such as would turn them aside from
hell and eternal damnation; and by this means they slight the faithful
Ministers of the Gospel, that labor night and day for the good of our souls,
which I account the first step to Apostasy from the ways of God.

I have likewise observed the slack execution of laws, by Justices not
performeing their duties, discourageing under Officers, and leaving them a
scorn and a reproach to wicked and ungodly men; and if it please not the Lord
to stir up the hearts of Justices of the Peace themselves, to search
diligently, to go about and find out disordered houses, (the plagues of the
Nation) and hunt men out of their houses to the congregation, sin will grow
impudent, and bold; If I say they do not show their faces, to encourage and set
a rate upon others under them; men will be hardened in their ways, and be
taught to grow worse by the faintness of justice; and this I account a duty,
which a good conscience rightly principled cannot shift, nor excuse before God
or their own consciences.

The consideration of these things, with the tendency of all to ruin, where
these evils are not redressed, put me upon this, (I hope useful, and may I not
say necessary?) work; especially considering the use of Judgments; their
Energy if pondered in a sober and deliberate mind; they walk not alone, the
causes and ends are to be examined; nor are they only limited to the persons or
sins they punish, but for warning others from the like sins, or any other
sins whatsoever. And we see how God loves to warn before he strike, so he
did to Nineve and Belshazar, and used very much of long-suffering and patience
to Pharaoh, whose heart at last not taking warning, he ^ardened; what are
examples of Gods Judgments upon others for, if not to keep us from being the
examples our selves?

And though Precepts in^eed are very binding, yet they never shine so much, as
when set in examples. We are all acquainted how little hold reproofs,
admonitions, and exhortations from the Pulpit take of men: therefore it is,
that I have great hopes, that these examples may do good; for as one in another
case says, A Verse may find him whom a Sermon flies,
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
So such as come not to hea^ their sins ripped open in a Soul^ searching Sermon,
may by reading, or hearing these examples, be frightened at the voice of Gods
Judgments. To consider the severity of God to those that fell, may well make
us think with our selves, shall I that am guilty as much as others, be yet in
the land of the living? will not the Patience, Goodness, and Long-suffering of
God, lead us to repentance? I say examples are of more force to move, nay to
instruct, then the Arguments and proofs of Reason, or their precise Precepts;
for they show things not only ^n the Theory, but in the practice and
execution. It Is reported of one Waldus in France, that at the sight of Gods
Judgment upon on^ that was suddenly struck dead; went home, and admonished his
friends to repent, and turn from their evil ways, and wa^ himself a famous
Christian^ from whom also sprang the name of the Waldenses. Examples mix so
with the Apprehensions, as they force the mind to a deeper understanding, and
search, of the ends and causes of them.

What I have collected are not of common examples, which daily present
themselves before our eye^ but such as are the most notorious and remarkable,
and I question not but authentic; those of modern and more late experience, I
have taken from such Authors as are living, and who from their own knowledge
have given testimony to the truth of them.

Now what am I, that should undertake to direct others in that, wherein I am to
seek my self by walking below the strictness of what I prescribe to others,
and short of my own duty, having, it may be, that found upon my trencher, which
I dissuade others from as pernicious? yet I consider the advantages of the
undertaking, and, it may be, this may be one to my self, that these strict
limits to others, will girt me more straightly within the compass of my own
duty; and though this has been struggling for a Birth a long time yet now the
truth and integrity of my intentions have prevailed to launch into a Sea of
censures, and if I aim at the good of others in the reformation of their minds
and manners; I am sure it cannot be any hurt to them or my self: and this is
the Rock on which I hope to stand against the proud assaults of envy or
detraction; for if any thing in the aim or intention be good, it is made of
more value by the diffusive Quality of it, in disaffecting that humor of
Aspendius, who delighted to play on his Harp, so that none should hear but
himself.

I shall conclude in the words of the Apostle, and pray: Tit. 2.11, a 2.
That the love of God which has appeared unto all men, may teach us to deny
all ungodliness, and worldly lusts; and to live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world.

W. L.

THE CONTENTS of the whole.
THe Character of Drunkards. Page 1.2.3. Drunkenness a sin against the laws
of Temperance and Sobriety, and the practice of Heathens against it. 4.5. The
strict laws of Heathens against Drunnkennesse. 6. The spiritual evils of
Drunkenness. 7. Drunkenness the fountain of other sins. 8.9. The outward
evils which accompany this sin of Drunkenness, consumption of estate, ruin of
relations, loss of health, a shame to friends, scorn to servants, derision to
boys, loss of senses, etc. 10.11.12. etc. A friendly exhortation to such
Gentlemen as are tempted to this sin; especially to the most learned, and
ingenuous persons. 16.17. etc. Gods threatenings aginst Drunkenness. 21.22.
Gods righteous and terrible Judgments upon such as take not warning; in a
collection of the most choice examples, such only as bear the strongest remark
of Gods displeasure. 23.24. to 45. Some few disswasives from this sin of
drunkenness. 46.47. Of profane taking the Lords name in vain by cursed oaths,
etc. 51. The several aggravations of this sin of cursing and swearing. 52.
Swearing a sin directly against God himself. ibid. It Is a sin of high
ingratitude. 53 The sin of the Devils in Hell. 54 No profit by it. ibid
Heathens detest it. 55 Dissuasives from it. 56.57 The severity of former laws,
and time against wicked swearing. 57. Gods threatenings against it. 58. Gods
severity in his just Judgments upon such as practiced it, in a few sad and
doleful examples. 59, 60. to 59. The sin of profaningg the Sabbath day, a great
sin. 83.84. The strict command of God himself to observe it. 85. Gods own
practice for our example, to keep one day in seven from labor, etc. 84. Gods
end in commanding us to observe it, is for our own good. 88. The
reasonableness of Gods command, for one in seven. 89. The breach of this day a
great sin by many high aggravations of it, etc. 90. A sin against Gods daily
blessings and mercy to us. 91. A word to such as sit idly at home on the Lords
day. 92. A word to such as profane it, by playing, drinking, etc. 91.
Persuasions to hear the Word, and attend Ordinances, as the greatest advantages
to our souls. 93.94. Objections answered. 95. Gods threatenings against
Sabbath Breakers. 96.97. Gods severe examples of Judgment and Justice upon the
profaners of the Sabbath day. 98.99. to 125. Conclusion. 125.126.127.128.
OF DRUNKENNESS, AND GODS JUDGMENTS UPON DRUNKARDS:
THe sin of Drunkenesse being the womb of all others, I choose first to speak
of; by showing, What a loathsome creature a Drunkard is; how it is condemned by
the laws of Nature, as well as Nations; the sad consequences of it, to soul,
to body; by setting a full point to his life, when nature has not yet made a
Comma: Ruining his family and relations, leaving himself at last a prey to
necessity, and scorn to fools. The Aggravation of this sin to the Gentry, who
by their Birth, Estates, Parts, etc. are seated above the reach of such vulgar
rudeness; and therefore should soar so high with a Noble mind, as to scorn
to prey upon such garbage, as is only fit to feed swine with. The threatenings
of God against this sin, with his Judgments for it. First then,

A Drunkard may be called a Monster; such as entered not into the Ark; unless
you account Noah one, who fell through temptation; he made no practice of it,
yet smarted for his pregnant curiosity, to make an assay upon the unruly spirit
of wine; but let us more strictly visit him, it is charity to visit the sick. I
take him to be no man; God indeed made him one, but that stamp and
superscription of God set upon him to distinguish him from other creatures is
so defaced, that if all other of Gods creatures had done the like, who could
have traced in the search of the knowledge o^ God in his creatures? If then he
be n^ man, he is no beast; for in this sense they are sober, content with the
liberty of Natures choice; if neither Man, nor Beast, then sure God never made
him; his soul is drowned, so n^ man; his sense is lost, so no beast; If we
grant he have a rational being, it is like those Idols mentioned, that have
eyes and see not, ears and hear not, neither do they perceive any thing* the
man is turned out of possession; here lies the Cabinet, the jewel's lost. He is
Antipode to all other creatures, nay to God himself; if you will have him a
Beast, he must be a beast of Prey, whose belly is the very Sepulcher of Gods
Creatures, as if his life were but potestas vivendi ut velis; Like him that
mourned, because his senses were not incorporated into that one of tasting;
which pleasure he wished had been spread over all his body, whereby he might
have ranged over all the sweets of nature, with a prolonged delight. Hannah
gives the fittest name to him, in her Answer to Eli, Count not thine handmaid a
daughter of BELIAL. In a word, he is a poor dead creature, a Lazarus, whom God
in mercy raise to life again; that out of this Chaos of insensible bestiality,
God would please to speak a word of power, another Fiat, even a voice saying;
Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ will give thee
light.

Let Us now see how much this sin contributes to the breach of Natures Laws,
and how much condemned and rooted out by Heathens. Temperance and Sobriety,
those just Stewards are dismantled of their Authority, whilst this sin with
Scholars, shut the door against their Master when they rebel; it forces
Nature to run the Gant-lope, which without violence would best provide for her
self, if she could but spread her own table; Go to the Crib you that are given
up to Ebriety, who cares for no more than what justly relieves the urgency of
Nature: I am too much afraid that it may justly be said of us, as it was once
of Philosophy; That it was taught at Athens, but practiced in Sparta.
Temperance and sobriety is taught in England, but practiced in Turkey;
Alphonsus King of Aragon, always tempered his wine with water, least it should
fly above his understanding, and betray his reason. It was a Christian reply
of Alcamen to his frugal reprovers; saying, That Gods blessings should prompt
us to live up unto reason, and moderation, not of ^ust, by turning Gods mercies
to a wanton liberty of excess: The wicked man, says Plutarch, lives to eat
and drink, but the good man, eats and drinks to live: And Salust said,
Nothing can be more abject and hurtful than to be a slave to thy mouth and
belly: Gorgius being demanded how he came to live in health, to so great an
Age; Answered, By forbearing to eat or drink through pleasure.

There is a breach of this temperance, A power to drink to a greater excess in
measure, and abuse of Gods creatures, than many a weaker constitution can
endure, without being drunk with the fourth part of other's riot: to drown and
force Nature beyond her due proportion, is a drunkenness before God, though
thou be never overtaken with the power of it to the sight of the Law. If a
Heathen could say, It becomes not a King to extinguish that by excess of
drink, which suports the name of an Emperor: How much ought a Christian to
value his profession at a higher rate? How sweet and comely a thing is it for
men to live soberly, wisely, and temperately, by mixing our enjoyments with an
equal proportion and measure of sobriety? The opposite was that which stained
the glory of Great Alexander.

The Laws of Heathens and former Nations, condemn our impunity and cheapnesse
of this sin: we do as it were sell drunkenness; for where forfeitures bite not
above the pleasure of it, men will be content to pay for it.

The Ancient Romans banished all Epicures out of their Cities, accounting them
the plagues of youth. Romulus made a Law to punish drunkenness in women with
death. Minos King of Creet, suffered none to drink one to another unto
drunkenness, without the censure of the Law. Severer Laws are not in the
World against this sin, than in Turkey; A story whereof I remember of one, that
at a Festival time, had been too liberal with his cups, Turkish Hist.
and being carried before the Grand Vizier, had lead poured into his mouth and
ears, and so died: not that one act needed such severity, so much as to
suppress the growth and progress of sin: The Law rather intends Reformation
than Punishment, if the one might be without the other; for Lex non Irascitur.

Let Us see the spiritual evils of this sin; A Drunkard wounds his own soul, his
heart is like mare mortuum, where no grace can live, he drowns the voice of
Nature, and Conscience, the two great lights which God sets up in every man; He
sells himself with Ahab, to work wickedness: Tell him of God, he replies as
the Cyclops in the Tragedy to Ulysses; I know no other God but my belly: Or
like that Monk mentioned, who upon the news that all Abbeys were voted down,
and yet his maintenance continued for life, stroaked his belly with these
words, Modo hic, sit been; his care was past, so long as his camp was
victualled: with Solomon's fool, Come let us drinks, for to morrow we shall die;
but Remember, Post mortem nulla voluptas.

Is it not a sad thing, to see men drown body and soul together? men may play
with their eternal estates, and dance about the flames, and never see their
danger till irrecoverable. How many like Amnon, die drunk, carry their own
condemnation with them; Wilson. K. Ja.
That as Sir Gervise Elloway said; His own hand which he took such a pride in,
appeared to his condemnation, when nothing else could have wrought it: and such
judgments are heavy, seeming as if the execution were alike intended against
the soul, as well as the body; They spend their days in Mirth, and suddenly
they go down to Hell, Job 31.13.

What art thou guilty of that occasions this sin? which is accompanied with so
great tokens of Gods sore displeasure? thou that in company forcest down drink,
or take pleasure in thy sad profit, by suffering them in thy house: read the
Prophet, Woe to him that gives his neighbor drink, that puts the bottle to
him, and makes him drunken also.

It swells greater yet, as its the fountain of other sins; As Nero wished the
people of Rome had but one neck, that with one stroke, he might cut it off: so
the Devil, makes up all his compounds of this one sin; this he makes the only
rode to the breach of all Gods Commandments at once: as one well said; Prove a
man ungrateful, and he is every thing that is evil: So let a man be a Drunkard,
and I Will secure, he shall not stick at the vilest Murder, Rape, or whatever
mischief come in his way. This sin is without a guard, and though it be the
King of other sins, yet it has not so much as a lifeguard: for some kill
their dearest friend, who when sober, account him according to that wise
standard of Solomon's, friendship; better than a Brother: others their Father,
Sister, and the Wife of their bosom. Cyrillus was slain by his drunken son,
who not content with his Fathers blood, sends his Mother with child to another
world, in a bloody winding sheet; wounds one of his Sisters, and deflowers
another. Uncleanness escapes not this beastly sin, any more than Murder, an
example whereof is recorded of one, that tempted to Adultery, Murder, or
Drunkenness, chose the last, as the least, but proved the greatest; it was all
of them: for now drunk, he commits Adultery with one, whose Husband at the same
time coming in, he murders: the sin of uncleanness is the channel wherein
Drunkenness runs: Nunquam ego ebrium castum putabo, says one: I will never
believe that chastity lodges in the Drunkards bed: As its said of
Pumming-stones amongst the Mediterranean Islands, that they are produced of the
scum of those Seas; so I may say of uncleanness, that it is the froth of
drunkenness. Wine is to most men the milk of Venus; he can never have a pure
soul in a chaste body, that sucks at these breasts, that frequents the society
of this Baude of lust. It is the furnace of lust, the forge on which the devil
frames all other sins upon.

As in Nature all things spring from the Root, so all sins are incorporated
into this one of drunkenness; As our natures contain the seeds of all impiety,
and there lie for mintage: so when once a man is drunk, he is ready to coin
any mischief, and set the devils stamp on every action. I pray God keep every
man from this sin.

The outward evils are not few* thy Estate, Family, Relations, smart for thy
drunken excess; and when thou art under the extremity, what think thou is
the greatest smart, but to consider, that thy distraction is of thy self? If a
severer judgment prevent not, this misery of want and need ^n old age, will be
the inseparable ghost of this sin.

A Drunkard makes himself the living tomb of his Ancestors, traveling from
luxury to necessity, never till now writes an omnia vanit as upon his
extravagancies. This sin, says one, is like gunpowder, which blows up many a
fair fortune. And, no doubt, that which cuts sore, is, To consider, not only
my own misery and poverty, but that my poor and innocent relations, should come
to misery, thorough the road of my sin; that thorough want, they should be put
upon such rocks of sin and temptation, as post them out of the World with
lamentation and woes, against such courses, the guilt whereof lies at my door.
This is the vinegar, and gall.

The next evil is, the miserable estate of their bodies; some men's sins run
before to judgment, and some come after: This sin, I think, is foremost in
every thing; for whereas God says, I will destroy both the meat, and the
belly; he cries, No, no, I will not stay so long, I Will destroy my self by
Rhumes, Dropsies, Gouts, Inflammations, Apoplexies; who sees no^ complexions
altered, countenanc^ changed? how many destroyed by ^ violent death? infinite
numbers drowned, some broken in pieces by falling into pits, fall off
horseback dead^ fareing with them as it is said of tha^ Pope whom the Devil
carried away with him in the very act of Adultery Intemperance is a root proper
to every disease; says Plato: and sickness is the chastisement of
Intemperance. Seneca Who has woe? Who has sorrow^ who has contention? who
wound without cure? Prove. 23.29.
those that stay long a^ the wine, says the Royal Philosopher. He is next a
shame to his relations, his servants scorn and slight him so cheaply does he
part with his honor, and authority, that his groom i^ his Master; Is any thing
in the world so much the subject of folly and laughter, to the meanest persons,
even to the boys in the street? As once at a meeting, R. Junius.
a company of persons having a tempest in their heads, by reason of a Sea o^
drink, verily thought the house a Pinnace at Sea, and the storm so vehement,
that they unladed the vessel, throwing all they could get hold of, out of the
windows, instead of overboard, cal^^ng the Constable Neptune; some got under
the Tables, as under the Hatches, Another holds a great pot for the Mast,
^hinking that that which once threw him down, might now hold him up; all of
them crying out, what pity it was ^o many brave Gentleman should be ^^st, and
founderd at Sea! that could not find the way home by land; not ^uch unlike a
Gentleman of no mean ^rts, attending a funeral in the church, pulled out his
keys, and ^hockt at the pue door, calling of the ^^awer for a reckoning: or
him that ^ught his horse in every Inn, when he ^me on foot to the Town. The
most remarkable story I find recorded, is of one whom the Duke of Burgundy
found dead ^unk, and carried to the Palace; dis^^bed of his own apparel, and
equiped ^ the Court mode; as soon as he a^aked, the Dukes attendants wait upon
^^m, persuade him he is some great ^ince: They serve up dinner with ^e same
state as to the Duke himself, ^t a word spoke, all in silence, to the ^eat
astonishment of the poor man, and ^ small recreation of the Duke and ^dies:
after supper they began to revell it in his presence, the music play and
dances begin, with a great show ^ much splendour, according to the custo^ of the
Court; which done, they fill b^ belly as full of drink, as his head w^ empty of
wit and reason, so convey^ him to the place where he was foun^ putting on his
own apparel; The m^ when recovered, when invested wi^ reason, made better
sport with his ow^ imagination; the jest being all the ear^est of his confused
conceptions, w^ now had his understanding as farre^ seek in pursuit of his own
information as when he was drunk; hardly believin^ but that now he was drunk,
if ^ thought it any thing above a pleasa^^ and delightful dream; this he
resolve^ that a vision he had seen, and could n^ by any means be dissuaded from
i^ Thus are the senses besotted, the m^mory that Noble Recorder lost, an^
reason it self more stupefied, then ^ any capacity to use it. This is the
evi^^ of it, that let him do the greatest evil^ he remembers it not.

He knows not what a secret i^ though it concern his own life or ^ state; and
this is the reason that i^ some Courts they tempt Embassado^ to ebriety,
knowing that he will then be as leaky at the mouth, as an old ship at Sea; all
he knows, comes up with as much ease, as his drink went down; It is just with
a Drunkard, as it is said of a Spaniard, and a Frenchman; That all the drugges
in Egypt, is not able to purge a secret out of the former, which is a sickness
and punishment for the latter to retain.

I could have said much more of the evil effects of this sin, but I affect
brevity, though I fear to be tedious. We see it is a woeful, doleful sin;
damnes the soul without repentance, destroys Body, Estate, Reputation of a
good name; In a word, undoes in this life, and that which is eternal. Me
thinks I see the whole Nation reel under the depression of this sin, as in that
though often cut, yet like quick hedges grow again; Hydra-like, increases by
his wounds; but if once cut at the Root the Cedars as well as the Shrubs would
fall to the ground; So long as the tall Oaks stand to shelter the storms of
Authority from the Brambles; lets never expect a hopeful Reformation of this
Abuse. For as Gondamar said at a Council at Madrid, Never let us expect good
from the Netherlands, so long as England feeds the Humors; let us begin at the
cause, and the effects will follow; so I say if exhortations, threatenings, nor
civility, will serve to find out common ingenuity from the great ones, let a
handle be cut out of the Bowels of greatness it self, to lop of these
exuberant branches of wickedness, which hinder the buddings o^ virtue, and
promote the worst of vices; but because I account my self strictly related to
wish them well, give m^ leave to treat civilly with the Gentry.

And oh that I could persuade some Gentlemen from this foolish sordid and
unmanly trade of Drinking! some few there are, and I hope but few, tha^ think
it an honor to be drunk, swear and roar with debaucht company; Many there are
in these Counties as wel^ as other, which bear the remarks of exemplary piety;
persons, who for their virtues, are the Honor of their country, whose
conversations alone set a brand upon debauchedness; of such I be^ the honor to
honor them: but such as are addicted to this sin, I would distill better
persuasions into their minds* especially to such as in all points save this,
are extremely ingenuous; and such as through their too much ingenuity cannot
resist temptations, I pity their easy natures, and wish their temperatures had
been more steril and morose! Oh that I could reach the most inward part, and
there plant the force of persuasion if it were but to a Moral and Philosophical
kind of life! that in the sight of this debauched and beastly custom of
excess, and riot, they might live like sober and discreet men, rather glorying
in their sobriety like Christians, than ^mpiety like beasts. Mirth,
cheerfulness, and sobriety, may be nourished without the foolish custom of
Drinking healths, on purpose to be drunk. As Lord Bacon in his Speech in
Star Chamber, upon the consideration of that cruelty acted against Sir Tho.
^verbury, by imprisonment said; Its ^are in the Island of Britain, its neither
of our Country, nor Church; In ^ome and Italy there is a Religion for (...); if
it should come amongst us, it were ^tter living in a Wilderness, than a
court. May I not wish, that Drunken^esse were a sin rare in the Island of
Britain? This, I say, Let other Nations have a Religion to be debauched and
drunk, let it be to other Nations as their natures; but let England account it
self a Wilderness o^ wild beasts, when this sin reigns: le^ us say, Its better
to live amongst Salvages, than such beasts as Adam never found, nor God never
created.

This sin formerly was practice only by Tinkers, Beggars, etc. it wa^ a shame
to a Gentleman to be drunk but alas! how many now glory i^ their shame, instead
of being (b^ their moderation, knowledge, and sobriety) a glory to their
Country* Would but shame attend this sin, ^ would soon be left, but this
boastin^ of such a days meeting, wipes off ^ shame; so that men grow hardened ^
their iniquity. He that tempts me ^ pass the bounds of moderation, a ^
sobriety, does but civilly invite ^ to a fever, or some ruinous distemp^ I Will
Drink my own health, L. Bacon.
says a w^ man, D. Tailor.
and pray for the Kings. Wh^ intolerable madnesse^ says a Learn^^ Divine,
has seized upon great porti^^ of mankind, that this folly should poss^^ the
greatest spirits, the wittiest men! ^ best company! the most sensible of the
word Honor! the most jealous of loosing the shadow, but throw away the thing!
Thou had better give away thy estate, than say thy belly was the grave of thy
Patrimony. Is it not a horrid thing, that a Wise, Learned, or Noble Person,
should lose his honors, become an Apellative of scorn, a Scene of abuses, a
dishonor to that party for which he with others have suffered? That which I
^eplore, says he, is, that most men pre^er a cause before their life, and by
one Drunken meeting, set it further backward in its hopes, and blessings, than
a whole year of counsels and arms can ^epair.

Indeed the Nation would hardly ^lush, if only the scum and froth of ^t were
tainted; but for this disease ^o fall upon the vitals, its a dye in ^rain, a
ruin to honor without a ^emedy. I hope there are sparks of ^ngenuity yet
remaining in some, as well as this sin, which if once they take ^re, from the
consideration, either of ^hreatnings, judgments, reason, honor, ^eputation,
or a good name, this de^auchednesse would soon be blown unto the air; and if
once the Gentry left it, then it would become a shame indeed in the very
Nation: But I fear the habit and custom of this sin, will force us at last to
the sordid practice of some Nations, where its not accounted friendly
entertainment, if men be not drunk before they part; I wish it may not be found
a practice in some Gentlemen's houses in this Nation!

Let me conclude with lamenting, and persuading; Is it not a great pity, that
men of the greatest Honor, and expectations of the Nation for Gentility,
Breeding, Learning, etc. should suffer the shipwreck of every thing that can be
called good! That such should be so sadly ruined in this se^ of drunkenness!
which like a Hericane, spares none, but such as feel a less punishment than
ruin it self. A^ one said, he could willingly lose half his learning, to
redeem his health; so many may lament and wish half their knowledge and
learning which once they had! May I persuade you, let me tell you, its as much
below Gentility, as a Gentleman is above other by birth, and that which should
distinguish him from other more peasantly deportments. Can there be no medium
in your mirth and cheerful repasts, below this sin of Dishonor, Beastly,
and Debaucht behavior? Let me beg you to hate it, and remember that nothing
more ennobles a Gentleman's name, or blazons forth his Honor and Reputation,
but studying an Aptitude for his Countries service, purchased not by
drunkenness, and beastliness; but by Learning, Parts, Knowledge, Wisdom,
Sobriety, Temperance, Vrbanity, and all which, this sin destroys, if you
escape with the shipwreck of a good conscience: Let Solomon's instruction be
remembered; My son, be not among the wine bibbers, for the Drunkard and the
Glutton shall come to poverty.

If persuasions built upon the prin^iples of Reason, the sad fruits of it,
^ame, dishonor, etc. Gods threatening must nextly have place, which indeed are
not small, and yet will but ^ake way for his more severe dispensations in his
Judgments.

Woe to the Drunkards of Ephraim; Esaias 28.1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 19.
^he Lord as a mighty and strong one, which as a tempest of hail, and a
detroying storm, as a flood of mighty waters and overflowing, shall pull down
the pride of the Drunkard; for with wine they have erred, and with strong drink
have gone out of the way: thy are swallowed up of wine; for all Tables are full
of vomit, and filthiness: for which the overflowing scourge is threatened, as a
just reward for so great a sin; together with famine, which says the Prophet
in the last verse, comes forth from the Lord of Hosts. Chap. 22.12, 13, 14.
And again, the Lord calls for weeping, howling, and lamentation, which shall
come upon Gluttony and Drunkenness; and the Lord of Hosts, says the Prophet,
has revealed it in mine ear, that this iniquity shall not be purged from you,
Chap. 5.22.
till y^ die.

In another place. VVo to them tha^ are mighty to drink wine, and men o^
strength to mingle strong drink; for ^ the fire devoureth the stubble, and the
flame consumes the chaff, so their root shall be rottenness, and the blossom
shall go ^ as dust; therefore is the anger of the Lord kindled, and has
smitten them and the Hills did tremble, and their carcases torn in the midst of
the streets If these denunciations were deliberately weighed, how would the
ver^ joints of sinners tremble, and smite one against another, as Beltshazars,
when he saw the handwriting upon the wall. Hear the Prophet Joel. Joel 1.5.
Awake ye Drunkards, and weep and howl all ye Drinkers of wine. God often comes
when we are asleep, and many poor souls have never awakened from their
Drunkenness, till in Hell with Dives; this is a sad awakening. Go to, weep and
howl, says St. James, ye have lived in pleasure and wantonness, and nourished
your hearts as in a day of slaughter.

If yet all will not warn, what must Gods appearances then be when he comes in
terror and wrath, by his visible examples of judgment, which I have collected
from Scripture, History, and Modern experience.

Elah, King of Israel, was murdered by Zimri, in the midst of his cups, 1 King.
16.9, 10.
as a judgment of God upon his excess. Ammon, when his heart was merry with
wine, was murdered by Absoloms servants. Righteous Lot, 2 Samuel 13.28.
by this sin commits incest with his own daughters; and as one well observes,
Genesis 9.21.
made a Sodom of his own Family.

The heavy curse, that to this day lies upon Noah's son, Cham's Posterity, was
through this sin, whereby he discovered his own shame. Holofernes, having too
much exceeded in wine, lost both wit and head at once.

Alexanders sorrow after his sin, will tell us the sad fruits of it; for seldom
some or other of his dear friends escaped his fury when he was drunk.

Cleomena, King of Lacedemonia, at a time being drunk, was never sober after;
Peards. Theater.
but as a judgment of the Lord, he lost his senses for not having judgment to
keep them. Another is as justly rewarded with the fruit of the vine, Anacreon,
that grand engulpher of wine, was choked with an empty grape.

The Earl of Aspermont drained his estate so dry by his excess in this sin, as
he justly died in misery; for at a meeting, he drunk so deep, as he could never
rise again; for he died with it.

Non ut vivat fed ut bibat.
The Emperor Bonosius, through his custom in this sin, was said, not to be born
so much to live, as to drink. This was he that would force drink into
Ambassadors, the better to pump up their secrets: He was shamefully hanged
with this Epitaph. This is a Tun, and no man.

Zeno, Emperor of the East, became so hateful by his intemperance, that none
could endure to see him; his wife Ariadne one day when he lay senseless (as he
often did) cast him into a Tomb, and buried him alive, as a just reward of his
drunkenness.

August 18. 1629. Mr. Nealson, Minister, his Letter to Mr. Tailor in Theater of
Gods Judgments.
Tho. Wilson labourer, a known Blasphemer, and Curser, by oaths, etc. was
also given up to this beastly sin of Drunkenness; who through the justice of
God, against both sins, in an angry passion stabbed himself with his own knife,
and so died in the midst of many neighbors.

May 10. 1629. John Bone of Ely, Coachman to Mr. Balnum of Beenham, was a very
vild Swearer, and Drunkard; who on a Sabbath day, in Sermon-time, being drunk,
and not able to sit in the Coach-box, fell under the horses feet, and was
trodden to death. You Sabbath Breakers, and Swearers, hearken to this doleful
example of Gods immediate hand.

Nov. 16. 1618. one Tho. Alred of Godmanchester Butcher, being very profane,
and given to this sin, was desired by a neighbor to unpitch a load of hay, and
being drunk, let his pitchfork fall, and stooping to reach it, standing with
the forks upwards, fell upon it, that it run into his body, and so fell down
dead, as a warning to others.

July 16. 1628. One John Vintner of Godmanchester, being a known drunkard, and
given (especially in his drink) to scoff at Religion and godly people, fell
from the top of a Peare-tree, and broke his neck, and so died under the hand of
justice: an example for all profane drunkards, and scoffers of God and his
people.

A Gentleman of good reputation, and demeanor, being not addicted to this sin,
was through temptation overtaken with this snare; Mr. Ward, his Woe to Drunkards.
but lo, justice will be satisfied on some, to be an example and terror to
others; for riding home, his horse threw him, and beat out his brains: He being
void of reason, and so not capable of advice, would follow no way but his own,
which led to destruction; for without fear or sense, he spurred his horse over
all sorts of cross and desperate ways, till he thus fell under the stroke of
Divine wrath.

About the year 1630. nigh Maldon, five or six notorious Drunkards had plotted
a meeting, and laid in beer for their profane drinking healths: But (Divine
Justice that can with his breath blast all our undertakings) did so justly give
them up to excess in this sin and meeting, as they never met more, but all
yielded up their spirits to the Justice of that God, whom they abused by his
creatures.

A man coming home drunk, would needs swim in a Mill dam, which his servants
and wife dissuaded him from, because he could not swim, and once got him out
after he was in, but he gets in again, and by the just hand of God there
perished. I was, says my Author, at the house to enquire of the truth thereof,
and found it too sadly true. And one of Alisham in Norfolk, a notorious
drunkard, was drowned in a shallow brook, with his horse standing by him.

A Butcher in Haslingfield, scoffing at the Preacher for his reproving of this
sin, was in the instant of his railing, choked by somewhat that stuck in his
throat, which could by no means be got up or down; but strangled him. Oh the
Divine Justice! how Righteous and Just is the Lord in all his ways! how are
his judgments past finding out!

At Tillingham in Essex, 3 young men meeting to drink, one fell down dead, and
never rose again; the other two escaped through mercy (by the gates of much
sickness) that they might repent, and if not, to be the less excusable, if
God followed them by the like severity.

At Bungey in Norforlk, three drunken companions coming out of an Ale-hous in a
dark evening, swore they thought hell was not darker; but observe the end of
Justice; one fell over a Bridge, and was drowned; the second slain with a fall
from his horse: a third sleeping by the River side, was found frozen to death.

At Hedly, a Bayliffe being drunk, got upon his Mare, saying, she would carry
him to the Devil; she indeed casts him off, and broke his neck. This Justice
was the more remarkable, being upon the Lords day.

A company meeting in an Alehouse in Harwich at night, over against Mr.
Russels house, was once or twice desired to depart and avoid such wickedness;
but they would not: he comes to the place himself, and apprehends one of them,
and offering to carry him to prison, he draws his knife, and made his escape;
But oh the Justice of the Lord! the strange and wonderful ways of his
Providence! this man was not heard of for three days, and at last was taken
out of the Sea with his knife in his hand, justified by Mr. Russell himself,
who was the Mayor of the place.

At Tenby in Pembrokeshire, A common and frequent Drunkard, in the midst of
this sin, fell from a high Rock, and was broke in pieces; and four other
instances, my Author says he could relate wallowing and tumbling in their
drink, slain by Carts, etc. But being the common ways of Gods Justice, he
forbeares them in the midst of so many extraordinary and remarkable passages of
Gods Justice and power, and indeed innumerable might be such instances, which
the experience of every place prevents in this. A Glasier in Chancery Lane
London, having some sparks of profession, but falling from them, fell into this
sin; who being often reproved by his Christian friends, and no better: God
hardened his heart against them, and once being drunk, by the violence of
vomiting, broke a vein, continued two days in extremity of Anguish and
torment, not without great conflicts and distress of mind, his conscience
being awakened, and God in much mercy breathing some comfort to his distressed
soul, he yielded up his soul to God, as he had done his body to Satan,
attested by a kinsman of his own to my Author. O that, if it had been Gods
will, all examples of justice were accompanied with such sweetness and mercy,
as to give any hope of the safety of the soul, when the body in the act of sin
is destroyed.

A Knight given to this wicked sin of Drunkenness, did sometimes order pailes
of drink into the fields to make people drunk. On a time drinking with company,
a certain woman comes in, and gives him a Ring with this posie; Drink and die;
which he accepted of and wore; and in six days died through excess of drink,
justified by a Minister dwelling within a mile of the place.

Two children my Author says, he has known to murder their Mother in drink;
and another that attempted to kill his Father, of which being frustrated, he
set fire of his barn, and afterward came to the Gallows.

In Broad-street London, Many Gentlemen drinking healths to their sole Lords on
whom they depended, one wicked wretch takes up a Pottle pot of Sack, swears a
deep oath, saying, will none drink a health to my Noble Lord and Master? and
without any more words he begun himself, and drank up the pot full to the
bottom, and suddenly fell as if dead, snorting, but not speaking; he is laid
by as one overcome, and covered with clothes, till they drink as large a
proportion, as their insatiate appetites would take in; when done, expecting
their friend should rise, they found him dead indeed. Oh sad to go to Eternity
swearing and drunk! who would not dread the Issue?

At Barnwell nigh Cambridge, a young man and a woman, with a hundred more in
company, met at the sign of the Plough, agreeing to drink off a Barrel of
Beer, which they did; but will not examples of others warn us? then let us
expect to be monuments to others; three of them died in twenty four hours, the
fourth escaped with great sickness, and by the gates of death had life given
him, witnessed by a Justice of Peace of the County near by.

D.T. Tailor.
Two servants of a Brewers in Ipswich, whilst I was Minister there, said my
Author, drinking for a Rump of a Turkey, in their drink they strugled for it,
and both fell into a scalding Caldron, the one died presently, the other in
Torment and Anguish pined away.

Mr. Beadles Diary.
At a Tavern in Essex, a Constable was threatened by a drunken Serving-man, to be
forced out of the house by his oaths and curses, if he would not be gone, and
in his drink pursuing one of his company to force him to drink off a pint of
Sack, he fell down stairs, and immediately fell under the stroke of divine
vengeance; oh! you swearers and cursers, remember these examples of God! let
them be examples to you; will not the wrath of God revealed stand in our way,
and encompasse us about with terror and fear? Oh be not proud of your
strength, to devour and engrosse the creatures of God to satisfy your lusts! It
is recorded of a Nobleman coming to Ipswich to visit his Kinsman in that
University, that demanded how he profited in his studies, to whom they reply
very well, and that amongst one thousand five hundred, he had the garland given
him for the ablest drinker. Gods Judgments will find us sooner or later.

In Salisbury, Mr. Clerks Examples
one in the midst of his drink began a health to the devil, saying, if he
would not pledge him, he would not believe there was either God or devil, his
associates being terrified at his words, with fear run away; the Vintner
hearing a hideous noise, and smelling, and unusual and noysom savor, ran up to
the chamber, but his guest was gone, and the windows broken, the Iron bars of
the windows bended and bloody; and the poor wretch never more heard of. These
are sad instances of Gods displeasure, if he would please in mercy to set them
home upon some poor sinners.

In the year 1551. in Bohemia, five drunkards were met together to drink, who
seeing a picture painted upon the wall, for the devil, drank healths to him;
the next night they were all found dead with their necks broken, and their
bodies crushed in pieces, blood running out of their mouths, nostrils, ears,
etc.

In the County of Cavan in Ireland, a Gentleman of Castle-terra, was much given
to delight in drunken company, wherein healths went down swiftly, and glasses
broke against the walls at every health; by this sin he was so much addicted to
wickedness and impenitency, as his sport was to repeat the Ministers Sermons
in scorn, and derision, especially at one time having heard a Sermon upon
faith, demanded of the Minister if he could remove mountains, else he would
not believe he had faith. This Gentleman is by Gods hand struck with the small
pox, which gets into his throat, in such extremity, that he could not swallow
any meat or drink to cool and refresh the violence of his internal heat; that
throat that had been the gutter and channel of many a pounds worth of drink,
could not now, in torment like Dives, suffer one drop to refresh him. In this
sad and bitter conflict, he breaks out into these expressions to an honest man
standing by. Oh Thomas, would I could now receive one of those glasses of
drink, which formerly I profusely and profanely have thrown against the walls!
And growing worse and worse, without hopes of life, perceiving no remedy but
death for all his soars, he breaks out again in his agony and torment; oh that
now I had but as much faith as a grain of Mustard Seed, and so expired the 57.
year of his Age. I pray, and cordially desire, that such sinners as parallel
this example, may not be reached with the like Justice! Many there are in this
Nation grown up to a height of Malice, and Rage against Gods Ministers, and
some in this place boiled up to a proportion of envy, ready to break; The Lord
break their hearts, and humble their souls, under that two-edged sword of his
word, that they may be saved in the day of the Lord.

Mr. Young.
A Gentleman of Quality being drunk, and rising to urine, evacuating that into
the fire, that prepared fuel for himself, he fell into the fire, and not being
able to rise again, his belly was gathered together like a piece of Lether, the
chamberlain coming in, helped in, that could not pity or help himself, and
though in great torture and pain, through the piercing anguish of Gods
Judgment, yet he called for, and drank off two and twenty double Jugs of Beer,
and so in this sad and lamentable estate, died; Roaring, and Crying, that he
was damned for breaking his vow of Reformation, Oh that the Lord would work a
Reformation indeed! that poor creatures may not thus fall under divine Justice,
too much to be feared, as well to soul as body.

Mr. Stubs Anatomy of abuses
Remarkable is the example of that tragical story of two Drunkards, who the
fourth of July, 1580. at Nekershofew in Almain, came into an Inn, called for
bread and wine, and drinking to an infinite excess; at last, one of them
drinks a health to God, demanding what wine God would pledge him in? and
reaching forth his arm with a cup full says, God I know not what wine thou
likest best, but this I think is too good for thee, unless thou had sent
better; but such as it is I give thee, take it, pledge me presently, and
carouse it off every drop, as I have done to thee, or thou do me wrong.

Here Is a piece of blasphemy, which I am confident the most wretched creature
in the world, durst not speak sober; Oh this sad sin! we little know what the
fruits of one drunken hour may produce. This vile wretch, no sooner ended his
hellish courtesy, but that just and wise God (who must be provoked before he
will execute his severe Judgments) whom he had blasphemed, pledged him with a
witness, for he left him as a pledge to the world of his wrath, and
displeasure against this sin. His arm which he stretched out, was never able
to be pulled in again; his body stupefied as well as his senses, not able to
stir from the place, continuing a long time, in this sad condition, his eyes
rolling to and fro in a terrible manner, his breath and speech lost, yet seemed
to all alive; The people flock in droves to see this sad spectacle of fury and
vengeance, some offer to remove him, but could not; horses are tied to him, but
could not stir him: they put fire to him, which would not take hold: so
persuaded God had set him there as a warning to Drunkards, they left him so,
and to this day, says my Author, he stands as a Pillar and Mark, to bid others
avoid the like wickedness, least they participate of Gods wrath, which though
it moves a slow pace, will in the end light heavier, in as much as Gods
patience provoked, turns to the most irresistible punishment.

His companion who had escaped the imediate hand of God, fell into the hands of
Justice also; for as the other died a terrible, so this a shameful death,
being hanged by the common people before the door of the house where the sin
was committed. O that you would consider this, ye that forget God, least he
tear you in pieces, and there be none to help!

Mr. Young.
At one of Alexanders great meetings, appointed for his Officers and Favorites,
no less died with excess of drink, than 41. and after many a health,
Promachus, at the bottom of four gallons of wine found the prize and jewel
appointed for the Conqueror.

Another time he ended his own health and life, by drinking a health out of
Hercules Cup, which to effect, 35. drunk their last also. These are direful and
pregnant testimonies of Gods Judgments upon this impious custom of drinking
healths. Against that good law of the Spartans: Vt bibat abitrio pocula quisque
suo. Every man to his own liberty: Or that of the Goths, where it was death to
drink or force a health.

Its placed in the Records of time, that Popelus, second King of Poland,
doubting the fruits of his male-government to be the peoples deposing him; by
his Queens counsel, faines himself sick, sends for twenty of the Elective
Princes out of Pomerania, entreating their visit, (who as well now as at other
times) came, and for their just reward and punishment of their great excess in
drink, and custom of healths, they now drunk their last, without being drunk at
all. The King makes a Speech, intreates his Son may be elected Heir to the
Crown, after his departure, which they promise, if the Nobility consented to
their resolves; The Queen to seal the bargain, brings a cup of poisoned
liquor, entreating to drink his Majesty's recovery: they had been so often used
to this sinful custom, as it would have seemed ridiculous to refuse it; but the
Kings health cost them all theirs, to the utter ruin of the Polonian Race. But
this Justice of God upon Health-drinkers, ceases not in their deaths; but after
also, for (to admiring of Justice) from these poisoned bodies, such infinite
troops and swarms of Rats and Mice proceed, as pursued the King, Queen, and
Family, from place to place, from land to sea, and from sea to the strong
Castle of Cracovia, where they were forced to fly, and nevertheless al^ arts
were used, all opposition made, by Guards and Garrisons, Waterworks and
Fireworks, yet were they eaten up, and destroyed by these Rats and Mice. The
Lord I hope will awaken some to see the evil of sin, by that o^ punishment.

Doctor Beards Theater.
At Kesgrave nigh Ipswich, three Serving-men taking their leave, the woman of
the house would needs persuade them to drink wit, money, and her Ale out; but
oh! that this wonderful example of Gods Judgment upon her, may warn all
people, not to suffer, much less to provoke, any to this sin under their
roof; for this woman stands with Lots Wife, a Pillar and Statue of Gods wrath:
she no sooner approaches with the pot in her hand, but was suddenly deprived of
her speech; her tongue (that smooth orator of the Devil to persuade to sin and
wickedness) swells in her mouth, and without a word more died. Sir Anthony
Felton Justice, and others, says my Author, related it to me, as a thing they
were eyewitnesses of:

And within these few years, says he, upon mine own knowledge, three being
drunk nigh Huntington, were all undone and destroyed by a water, which passing,
they were forced into the stream and drowned; leaving behind them the remarks
of Gods Righteous Judgments.

On November 14. 1650. says a Divine of this Nation, Mr. Trapp.
a company of odious drunkards met at a house, and one coming home was drowned
in a shallow ditch, his body not yet buried; concluding, oh! those Alehouses
the pest of the Nation!

M. L.
Another as sad, from a Reverend Divine also, of the same County, who at my
request, gave it me under his hand, which he could have done many others of
falling off Horseback; into Rivers, etc. but I only aim at such as are most
remarkable, knowing that the sad experience of most places, gives intelligence
sufficient of such examples, which indeed are sad enough though the commonnesse
take away the sense of them.

The example thus. About the year 1621. There dwelt in Houghton on the Spring,
in the County of Durham, one Christopher Hull, a Tailor who kept an Alehouse
in the said Town, and at West Herrington in the same Parish, lived one Mr.
Punshon, a most infamous and notorious Drunkard, and every way most wretchedly
profane; He being a frequent haunter of Hulls house, did one day fall out with
him, and coming out of the door said, If ever I come within these doors, the
Devil shall bring me in: some few days after, Punshon, going up the street of
Houghton, Hull stood at the door, and said to him, Will you not come in? No,
said he, for I have sworn the Devil, etc. Then said Hull, I will be the Devil
for this time; so taking Punshon on his back, carried him in, where they drank
one another drunk, and quareling, Hull stabbed Punshon in the throat, who
immediately died: Hull was cleared at Durham Assizes by the favor of his
Clergy, but soon after died, and, as its reported, very penitent.

In the year 1624. a Blacksmith in Oxford, being a very frequent drunkard,
after he had continued so some days together, did in a desperate manner, cut
his own throat, yet lived some days, during which time, some Scholars and
others, came to visit him; he often thrust his hand into the wound, and pulling
out handfuls of blood, did spread it before the company, crying out, See here
Gentlemen the fruits of Drunkenness. This was affirmed by a Gentleman of the
County of Durham, who saw and heard it.

In the year 1649. James Fairburne, in the Town of Mellerston, nigh the River
Tweed, died in a most miserable, and roaring condition, through excess of
drink.

On Easter Monday, 1656. One Tho. Foster, Carrier of Carlisle, being drunk,
rode out of Town, and had not rode above a quarter of a mile from the Town, but
in the very High road, fell off his horse, and in a water, not above a quarter
of a yard deep, he miserably perished.

In the year 1651. James Bouch of Cockermouth, being a most notorious Drunkard
and Swearer, being drunk at Rosley Fair, did quarrel with two Troopers, who
there killed him, as a judgment of God upon his former and present
drunkenness and swearing.

Robert Copeland, a Butcher in Carlisle, being a common Drunkard, and prophaner
of Gods Name, by cursed oaths, being drunk, did in the year 1651. break his
neck in a stable hard by the Castle.

1632. John Emerston of Dalston, in Cumberland, was a very notorious Drunkard
for many years, and one time in an Alehouse, died suddenly with a cup of drink
in his hand.

In the year 1656. One Mr. Herridge, who formerly was a Linnen-Draper in
Colchester, now living in this place, being too often found in the sin of
drunkenness, was at last overtaken with Justice; for coming on horseback from
Sunderland, full of drink, he fell off his horse; and there died, without
speaking one word. God will be glorified in his Judgments, where mercy and
patience will not persuade and allure.

Anno 1654. One John Coultred of Orton Parish nigh Carlisle, coming drunk out
of an Alehouse from Thursby, fell from his horse, not far from the Alehouse,
and died immediately.

1650. William How, who kept an Alehouse in Carlisle, one time was drunk
with two of his guests that were borderers, and going to convey them over the
bridge, did all three fall into the River Caud; the two guests were drowned,
How escaped by means of some bushes, and was taken up alive: which may be as a
warning to such as keep drink, to beware of other men's blood; I would be loath
to be so guilty, though I might escape with my life: its a sad thing to be a
means of any man's outward ruin, but to have a hand in men's dying in their
sins, its much more to be accounted for.

These are sad examples of Gods Severity and Justice, Who can stand before a
consuming fire? when once his anger is but a little kindled, blessed are all
they that trust in him. Our Judges find in their Circuit, few that are
arraigned, which are not brought to it by this sin, like slaves to the
Judgment Seat; and are sent quick, from their sins to judgment, forcing
charity it self to censure their eternal estates; the echo of whose sins,
resounds in their punishments with vengeance from heaven.

Were I to prescribe prophilacticks, I would entreat thee to bless thy self
from this sin: none knows whither the wind of a distempered brain will hurry
thee, or whither this spirit of Bacchus will drive thee: if once thou put thy
foot into the stirrup to mount his saddle, when thou art up, thou must needs
run when the Devil drives thee. Play not with healths; if thou love thy own,
drink not other men's: fly evil society; they are the Devils Trapanners: be
afraid with the Fuller in the Fable, who for fear of infection, durst not
entertain the Collier, lest he should make that black, which he made white. Be
in this like the River Danube, that will not mix it self with the muddy
streams of Sava. Evil fruit grows in bad company; they have no Autumn:
wickedness withers not; the mischiefs attending them are like the Spanish
Indies, which the Ambassador told the Venetian, had no bottom.

Ephesians. 5.16. Be not drunk with wine wherein is excess.

OF BLASPHEMING THE NAME of GOD, By Cursed OATHS. With the Judgments of God
upon ^VRSERS and SWEARERS.

OF BLASPHEMING THE NAME of GOD, By Cursed OATHS: With the Judgments of God
upon CVRSERS and SWEARERS.
THis cursed and crying sin of taking the Lords Name in vain by wicked Oaths,
has like the River Nile, so overflowed the banks of Authority, that many who
should restrain the fury and rage of so horrid an Impiety, are too sadly guilty
of it. This sin, to the sad experience of this Nation, does swarm in all
corners of it; A man can hardly negotiate in the World, unless he resolve it
no sin to hear the holy Name of God, that God that made us, blasphemed by all
sorts of people; Amongst poor people its common, and for Gentlemen its sadly
accounted Generous and Valorous.

That it is a sin against God, I hope so few doubt it, as I may be spared to
prove it; the most forcible argument against it, lies open in the possitive
Command of God Almighty, which made Heaven and Earth.

Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain; and the reason is a
terrible one, by way of threatening; For the Lord will not hold him guiltless:
Which Commandment is seconded by Christ in his Sermon upon the Mount; Swear not
at all, neither by heaven nor earth, Math. 5.34.
but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay.

The aggravations of this sin are great, if paralleled with the little reason
for it, or profit by it: It must needs be a horrid sin that can propound
nothing as the object, but God himself: we may in this sin confess with David,
Against thee only have I sinned, and done wickedly. All the creatures he has
made bow to him, and to the remembrance of him: Shall that mouth that sucks
breath from God that made and daily preserves thee, breath out oaths and
curses against him? Oh impiety in the greatest dimensions! wickedness with an
Emphasis! Would not such ingratitude look odious in vulgar friendship? to sit
at thy friends Table, and there receive daily food at his care and cost for
thee, and for thee to make him the subject of thy malice and rage, and that to
manifest it against his good name; Is not this ^ say, monstrous ingratitude?
would not this swell provocation to the greatest latitude of revenge? Is not
the Lords Name as the Apple of his ^e? A thing he is jealous of: Prove. 6.34.
If ^alousie be the rage of a man, which he ^ill not spare in the day of
venge^^ce, nor will regard any ransom; What ^nst thou expect from the Eternal
^od, with whom is terrible Majesty?

It must be presumed, thou know ^ to be a sin; How inexcusable then ^st it
be unto thee, whose consci^^ce is convinced thereof? It is a ^ therefore with
the full consent of ^ will, and for want of due care over thy heart and lips.
Oh man, what is it can provoke thee, unless the height of a Reprobate mind by
blaspheming the blessed Name of God! How can thou expect that blood to
expiate thy sins, and to wash away thy iniquities, that has so often spit his
blood and wounds out of thy mouth? I think I should not be guilty of over-rash
censure, if I say to such as are given up to this horrid impiety; that its but
as an earnest of that cursed condition in torment, and that the Devil teaches
thee in this world, that thou may be the more ready to blaspheme God in the
world to come; else what can be the meaning of men's giving up themselves to
this wickedness? Considering

The little profit got by it, A fa^ advantage God knows! no more than to rob
out of sport, not need^ and be punished for it. What profit have you of those
things wherein one day you shall be ashamed? Is it because God forbids, that we
will swear like that man of Venice, who for nine years, never stepped out of the
City, b^ when on occasion he was commanded upon forfeiture of his life not to
sti^ then he was seen abroad: Much like that of the Apostle, Sin took occasion
by the Commandment. How can thou call on the Name of that God in the time of
calamity and distress, which thou have so often cursed and blasphemed? He that
will mention the Name of God, must depart from iniquity. Shall I, says
Polycarpus, that have served God to such an old age, profane his sacred and
blessed name, that so lovingly has preserved my life unto this day? And being
urged by the Proconsul to save his life, only replied, Know I am a Christian.
It is indeed a sin that makes men less believed. A Heathen could say, He was
unwise that put trust in the words of a common swearer. And another Philosopher
says, Virtue is never in that heart, which breaths out curses and oaths. He
is accounted by all sober men, to be a profane, wicked, and ungodly man, and
its the greatest height of prophannesse that can be; Its the only sin and
practice of devils in hell, to curse, swear, and blaspheme God. The godly have
this Character given them, That they fear an oath; but the wicked are not
afraid of a world of oaths. The common excuse of this sin is the custom of it,
which is so slender, that it strengthens it, and indeed aggravates it; for
custom in sin by degrees hardens the heart from the fear of God.

This sin indeed is hatched in the bowels of passion, which boiling to a height,
vomiteth up all the corrupt filth and scum of the soul, casting it in the face
of God. Beware therefore of passion, which through the depravednesse of our
natures make us like mad dogs, that run at every thing in their way, they bark
at the Moon: To see a man rage against God because his neighbor hurts him,
is a perfect madness in reason. Strive against the custom of this sin, thou will lose thy senses else, and the sense of it, which is the height of sin; Its
Gods giving up a soul to sin, when it loses the sense that it is a sin. Beware
of little ones, they are the spawn of greater, Faith and Troth, are the livery
of Gods Wounds and Blood, and God damn thee. We damn our souls by this sin at a
low rate, if we consider the little, either pleasure or profit of it.

Avoid evil society, cursers, and swearers, are not to be associated with, lest
partaking of their sin, thou taste of their punishment. If a Master of a
Family; or Schoolmaster; destroy it there, nip it in the bud, and resolve with
David, that none such shall be under thy roof. I conclude with Psalm. 25. Let
them be confounded that sin without a cause.

If reason prevail not, remember the penalties of the Laws, which though
severe at this day, yet short both in the greatness and execution of former
times. Philip King of France, made a Law; That whosoever blasphemously swore
should be drowned: And Max. the Emperor; That every vain swearer should pay 13
shillings 4 pence, or if he refused, to be executed. In Hen. the fifth's time,
A Law was made against profane and vain swearing; The forfeiture for a Duke
40 shillings, a Barron 20 shillings, a Knight or Esquire 10 shilling, a Yeoman
3 shillings 4 pence, and a servant, to be whipped; and this Law was so well
executed, that all the Nation over, very few were heard to swear an oath. These
were times of less light, than we pretend unto, yet a spirit of Reformation
for God, was much more above our Age we live in.

If still we will not forbear, see Gods threatenings against this sin. In the
Law stoning to death was the lowest punishment: Levit. 24.14.
Bring him forth, that all the people may stone him.

In that black and forlorn band of sinners, Hosea 2.4.
the Swearer leads the Van, which together with other sins, makes blood to
touch blood, and the land to mourn. In Zachariah 5.3. The thief and the swearer
are linked together, against whom the flying Roll, with the curse of God is
threatened to the consumeing of their House, Timber, Posts, and Stones. As he
clothed himself with cursing, Psalm. 109.13.
says the Psalmist; So let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil
into his bones. There is nothing more usual and certain, then for the arrows of
this cursed Quiver, to reverberate and fly back upon a man's own face. God will
be a swift witness against such as dishonor his holy name by profane
swearing. Neh. 13, 2. Mal 3 4.


Now those that will not be warned by the nature of this sin, nor danger to
soul and body, nor be diverted from it by Gods threatenings; let such harken to
his just Judgments in these following examples, which are not only as a cloud
of witnesses against profaneness, hut also stand as a Pillar of Salt to warn
thee from disobedience, and wilful running in a carreer, of sin to thy eternal
ruin.

Earl Goodwin having slain Alfred, wished at the Kings Table, if it were so,
that the bread he was eating might choke him, which God in Justice suffered,
ere he stirred.

A Fisherman (known to the Author) coming with a Boat of Mackarell to a Town
in Suffolk, Mr. Beadles Diary
and being the first that came that year, the people pressed hard to be first
served; one steps into his Boat, he presently takes up a stone, swearing by
God he would make them stand farther off; which was no sooner said, but he fell
down and died presently: How many have I heard swear by God as commonly as
speak? Oh take heed of Gods judgment! consider what a mercy it is to thy soul,
that thou art not thus judged.

A Gentleman in Edward the sixths time riding with other Gentlemen, Mr. Ridsley
Sermon.
being reproved for swearing, opened his mouth wider, and raged worse and
worse; Mr, Haines Minister, tells him mildly the danger of it, and that at the
great day an account must be rendered; he with Solomon's fool refuses
instruction, bids him prepare, and take care for his own estate. Mr. H.
replies, repent and amend, for death is as sure as uncertain. But raging and
roaring with cursed oaths, he says; Gods wounds, take no care for me; and and
coming to a Bridge, his horse leapt over with him; who like an impenitent
wretch ended his days. As he had lived, crying, Horse, and man, and all to the
Devil.

R. Junius.
In Lincolnshire, there lived a Servingman, who was so accustomed to swear, as
at every small occasion he used Gods blood in his mouth, his friends mildly
warn him from the evil of those ways, lest vengeance follow at the heels of
his impiety; but he takes no notice of friendly admonition, being visited by
the hand of God, his friends again advise him to repent of his wickedness, but
God intended not that affliction to have so sanctifying a virtue in it, as to
soften his obdurate heart; who by his accustomed oaths had forfeited the
patience and long-suffering of God, and turned his mercy into fury; He grows
worse, and nigher to the chambers of death; and hearing the Bell toll for him,
starts up; and under the pains and violence of death, cries, Gods wounds the
Bell tolls for me, but he shall not have me yet. Suddenly the blood from his
Nose, Mouth, Wrists, Knees, and all the joints of his body flows out in
abundance, that he became a spectacle of Gods wrath, and died. O the
dreadfulnesse of Gods Judgments.

There was a man in Germany so much accustomed to use the Devil in his mouth;
that if he did but stumble, Theater of Gods Judgments.
the devil was uppermost; he was often reprehended for it, to no purpose,
except to make his sin the less excusable; which he continuing in, coming to a
Bridge, stumbled and fell down; saying, Hoyst up with a hundred Devils,
instantly the Devil appears, and carried him quite away, that he was never
heard of after.

One who was given much to cursing and ^wearing, being on his deathbed, Mr.
Bolton.
most wickedly desired those that stood by, to help him with oaths: and to
swear for him and himself, swearing so fast, as one would think there was
little need of any other then himself in the world, that could so quickly find
out a way for to blaspheme God, and damn his own soul.

Theater of Gods Judgments.
In the City of Savoy, There lived one, who after much exhortation and reproof,
hardened his neek against all admonition; the plague breaking out light upon
him, he with his family retires to a garden, the words of reproof by the mouth
of Gods Ministers follow him, that if possible the plague of his heart might
not at the same instance, together with Gods outward hand, contribute to the
eternal ruin of his soul, with that of his body, but all in vain; as good turn
the course of the Sun, as his soul accustomed to sin, at last swearing and
cursing, with the Devil in his mouth, the Devil suddenly hurries him away
into the air, in sight of his wife and Kinswoman, who saw the Devil flying
with him over their heads; his cap fell off his head, and was found at Kosne,
but himself was never heard of to this day. The Magistrate at the noise of
this exemplary piece of Gods just Judgment, repaires to the witnesses of it,
who testify, with a sad relation; their woeful experience, no less horrid then
true.

Three soldiers traveling through a wood in the Country of Samurtia, Mr.
Clerks examples.
A tempest of thunder and lightening arose, one of them breaks into his usual
oaths, and in the instant of swearing, the violence of the wind (no doubt
directed by God) throws a tree upon him, whereof he presently was crushed to
pieces.

Another that was very much habituated to swear by Gods Arms, had his own arm
hurt with a knife, and could find no remedy, but it festered daily, till it
rotted and mouldred away gradually, and he through Anguish and Torment died,

And one Michael a Jewish Rabbin, as he was swearing by the Name of Jesus, fell
down and broke his neck.

A boy at Tubing in Germany, invented strange and unusual oaths, but God sent
a Canker, that eat out his tongue; these are signal tokens of Gods anger; they
are so immediate from himself, that none can see less then a wonderful hatred
in God of them.

At Benevides, a village in Spain, a whirlwind arose; two young men being in a
field, apprehending the approaching danger, fall down upon the ground, lest the
violence of it might carry them into the air; when it was past, the one arises
in great amazement; the other being a very notorious curser, and swearer, lies
dead; his bones so crushed, that his joints turned every way, his tongue rooted
out, and could not be found.

In June 1649. A soldier at War, goes with others to wash in a shallow
river, asked whether there was a deeper to swim in, and they answered there was
one nigh hand, but dangerous, by reason it was a deep pit, who replies, God
damn me, if it be as deep as hell I will in; he was no sooner in, but sunk to
the bottom, and never rose again; which, says Mr. Clark, was attested by good
witnesses.

And God met with that swearer and curser in France, a Citizen of Paris, whom
Lewis 9. ordered to have his lips seared together with a hot Iron, saying; I
would to God that with sear^ng my own lips, with a hot Iron, I could ^anish out
of my Realm all abuse of ^athes!

A soldier falling sick in his jour^ey through Marchia, in Almain, Theater of
Gods Judgments.
stay^d in his Inn; and when recovered, ^emanded of his Landlady the money ^e
gave her to secure for him, but con^ulting with her husband; resolved ^ot to
confess any; so denied it: the ^ontroversie arose to a contention, till ^he
Landlord interposed, and justifi^d his wife, and thrust him out of his ^ouse;
the soldier draws, and ^rusting at the door, the Landlord ^ries, thieves! the
soldier is impri^oned, and ready for Judgment: The ^ay of pronunciation of
death, the devil ^^ters into prison, tells him, he is con^emned, but if he will
resign up soul and ^^dy to him, he would free him; he like a ^hristian, repells
those fiery darts ^ith a strong denial; which the de^^ll seeing, persuades him
when called ^ the Bar, to entreat the Judge to ^^ant him the man in a blew cap
to ^ead his cause, for he was, (and that ^ was) innocent of the crime brought
^^ainst him. The poor soldier being arraigned, had this blew-cap't Attorney
allowed him for his Advocate, who affirmed this poor man to be much abused,
relating all the circumstances of the money, with the place where it was laid,
the Landlord denied all with an imprecation, wishing the devil might take him,
if it were true! The devil looking for this advantage, took this poor man, and
carried him up into the air; who was never more heard of: Oh that the Lord
would open some men's eyes to see Gods mercy to them, that though they have
often been guilty, yet God in mercy spared them! tremble at the justice of God,
and let these warning^ be so to us.

A certain Priest in Ruthnerwall wished if Luthers doctrine were true a
thunderbolt might destroy him! after three days a Tempest, with lightning and
thunder, so terrified him that he run to Church, and at his devotion was struck
down; who recovering, and led homewards, a flash o^ lightening burnt him to
death, a^ black as hell it self.

One in France, of some knowledge and profession in Religion, in passion wished
the Devil to take one of his children! the child immediately was possessed,
and, though the prayers of the Church prevailed with God for the release from
this evil spirit, yet, dyed of it.

A man in anger, wishing his wife to the Devil! she was forthwith possessed,
and never recovered it.

A young Courtier at Mansfield, whose customary asseveration was, the Devil
take me. The Devil when he was asleep, took him indeed, and threw him out of a
window, where though he was not slain, Luthers Colloquia.
yet he learnt to curb that unruly member of the tongue, by escaping the danger
of a severer punishment.

At a Horse-race, where diverse Noblemen were present, some cries, the Devil
take the last, which happened ^o be a Horse that broke loose, which the Devil
carriad away, and was never seen more. These examples may ^artle us, and not
only to warn us, ^ut also as a Lanthorn of the Lord to direct our feet from
these paths of sin and Ruin. Theater of Gods Judgments.


At S. Gallus in Helvetia 1556. A man that made foul linen clean, and coming
out of a Tavern drunk, wished the Devil to take him if ever he followed his
Trade more! next day being sober, he regards not his oaths, the devil appears
to him in the likeness of a tall man, and told him of his promise, presently
smiting him upon the shoulders, so that his feet and hands presently were dried
up, and he trembling with horror; yet God gave the devil no farther power,
that it might be an example both to himself and others.

Mr. Terry's East India voyage.
Relates of a Tailor, that whilst the Fleet was engaged in fight with a Portugal
Galleass, he comes running out of the Cabin with his Goose in his hand,
swearing, he would never follow his Trade more, throwing the Goose into the
Canon mouth; suddenly came a Bullet from the enemy, and shot him to pieces.

Theater of Gods Judgments.
Henry Earl of Schwartburg, by frequent and wicked wishes, was at last answered
in his own coin, for at every common occasion, he desired he might be drowned
in a Privy, if such a thing were not so or so! which God in Justice answered;
for he died that filthy death.

A very remarkable story is recorded of a woman in the Duchy Megalopole,
Theater of histor^.
at a village called Oster, who gave her self to the devil by her frequent
cursings, and wicked oaths; and at a wedding she was publicly reproved, and
dehorted from her sins; but taking no warning, the Devil, when they were all
merry, came in person, and with horrid cries and roarings, mounted her into the
air, before the face of all the company, and hovering over the Town, the
people that saw it were extremely perplexed with fear; she is torn into four
parts, which are let fall into as many high ways; as directions to avoid the
road to hell. The Devil returns to the Feast, and before the Mayor, and all
the company, threw her intralls upon the Table, saying. Behold these dishes of
meat belong to thee, whom the like destruction ^wayteth, if thou do not amend
thy wicked life. This is testified by Mr. Herman Minister of Oster; the Mayor
and all the Town; who desired it to ^e communicated to posterity for an
example, and landmark to avoid eternal destruction.

Theatr. Gods Judgments.
A Gentleman of Gorlitz, having invited many friends to supper, who failed him;
in a rage, wished, That all the Devils in Hell would come: presently his Table
is furnished as well with guests as meat, whom he welcomed, but perceiving
claws instead of hands, it was not time to bid him be gone; his Wife follows
him, leaving in the house only a child and a fool, by the fire side, who
through mercy were not hurt. We are by these, bid to beware of rash
imprecations to our selves or others.

Stow. Cron.
Its fresh, the story of Hacket o^ Oundle in Northamptonshire, who (159^ in the
Reign of Queen Eliz. the 3^ year) in his common discourse use^ to say: If it be
not true, then let a v^sible confusion come upon me: and h^ had his desire; for
being delivered u^ of God to Satan, he fell foul off ^ many errors, that at
last he arrive^ to the height, and called himself Christ: with himself he
seduced to Gent. Coppinger, and Arthington, w^ believed all Hacket said; and
wh^ he bid them proclaim, That Christ u^ come with his fan in his hand, to Ju^^
the Earth; they did, through (...) City; and in Cheapside, got upon two Carts,
Crying Repent, repent! for Christ Jesus is come to judge the World; they
affirmed also, that Hacket presented Christ, by taking his Glorified body, etc.
Hacket hereupon is apprehended, brought before the Lord Mayor of London, and at
last, hanged on a Gibbet in Cheapside, uttering to the last horrid blasphemies
against God. This was a visible confusion indeed.

Before Mr. Luther and others: Theater of God, Judgments.
A woman at VVeteburg, whose Daughter was possessed, did confess; that she in
fury wished the Devil to take her! who instantly possessed her, with an evil
spirit, to their great terror and fear.

John Peter, son to the cruel Keeper of Newgate London, Fox Acts.
was a horrid swearer and curser, usually saying, If it be not so, I pray God I
may rot ere I die? and so he did with great misery.

In Misina, Sep. 11. 1552. Theater Histo.
A child not quick enough to dispatch his fathers will as he ought, provoked
the fathers rage into this imprecation; That he might never stir from that
place! its presently granted, his son sticks immovable, for his body could not
be moved or bent: Some godly people meet and pray for him, whereby his anguish
is assuaged: yet he continued three years standing with a post at his back; and
four years he continued sitting, and then ended his life; yet this was a mercy
to him, For that he doubted not of the mercy of Jesus Christ to save him: and
being demanded how he did? frequently replied: That he was there fastened of
God, and his mercy only could release him. Here was a living example of rash
oaths.

At Neoburg in Germany, a cursed mother, wishing she might never see her son
alive again, was answered; for the child was drowned the same day.

Theatr. of Gods Judgments.
In Astorga, A woman cursed her son, wishing the Devils of Hell to take him from
her presence! with many horrible execrations: it being late at night, the child
was afraid of her anger, retiring to a little court behind the house, to whom
appeared men of grim aspects, and large composures, who carried him into the
air with such swiftness, as was not possible to believe, and alighting
amongst some bushes, trailed him, to the great torturing of his body, and
tearing of sundry parts thereof. The boys thoughts being better fixed than his
mothers, craved aid of God, and so was delivered. The devils bringing him back
through the air, put him in at a little window in a chamber, and there he was
found almost out of his wits, and sadly tortured and mangled, in his face,
hands, legs, etc.

That penitent Gentleman, Wilson K. James.
Sir Gervise Ellowis, being drawn in to be a partaker in the sad death of that
poor Gent. Sir Tho. Overbury, in the Tower; was at last brought as a sufferer
to Tower Hill, acknowledging the just hand of God against his rash and
unpreserved vow, which a great loss at Cards one time occasioned; in the sense
whereof, clapping his hands upon his breast, he vowed seriously betwixt God and
his own soul; That if ever he played again, he wished he were hanged! and being
upon the ladder, Now, says he, God in Justice has made me keep my
imprecation, and paid my vow, by this just, though violent, death; and so
wished all to take warning by his sad example!

Sin stigmatized.
Mr. Young reports of Nichanor, who for his blasphemous cursing and swearing,
had his tongue cut out, and in small pieces thrown to the fowls.

Sword against Swearers.
A young Couple in love together, solemnize their private promises alone, the
maid being rich, and the young man poor, she to assure him of her love,
promises that unlikenesse of fortunes shall not disoblige her engagements, nor
disinherit her of that loyalty which she hoped grace as well as good nature,
had planted in her; which he, though before earnestly fearful, that she might
be as changeable as others; did now nevertheless content himself in the
strength of this assurance, and so at the giving their faith one to another,
she with many more imprecations tied her self most strongly with this, That the
Devil would take her away that day she married to another. She marries another,
and on the Wedding Day two guests uninvited, come well mounted to the door, and
dine with them, and were made welcome; after dinner, one of them complements
the Bride, and borrows her hand to lead the Dance, and after a turn or two,
lead a Dance which none could follow; for in presence of all her friends, he
carries her out of doors, and notwithstanding her crying for help, she is
mounted into the air, and with his companion and horses, was never seen more.
See the fruits of rash vows, oaths, and imprecations, they are not to be
slightly dealt withal; for God takes notice of our own desires, when we never
think of our words, how we must give an account of them.

Two profane young men striving who should be most exquisite in oaths, Dr.
Williams true Church.
were met with by Gods Judgment in Justice; for he that out-vied the other in
swearing was immediately distracted.

Also he relates of two young men, delighting themselves in swearing; sporting
with oaths, as the fly with the flame, are overtaken with Gods Judgment, the
one is struck dumb, and never spoke word more, the other was distracted: both
of them standing to the example of all young men, that do not remember their
Creator in the days of their youth, unless by blaspheming and cursing it.

Mr. Nowel.
A Noble person of the City of Eflinghen, at a loss by gaming, began to swear
and curse bitterly, in which rage and madness, he mounts his horse for home,
the Devil meets him, pulls him off, who with his servants was misguided all the
night by evil spirits; and in the morning finding themselves not lost, they get
their Master safe to Bethen-Hansen, where in great torment for three days, he
yielded Justice victor.

A woman in Marchia, being a profane curser and swearer, was justly left by
God to Satan; for in sight of many people she is snatched into the air, and
thrown down again, which brake her neck. God we see can break us from our sins
and lives together, if we do not from the first, break off by repentance.

These two I have from a reverend Divine of this County.
One Margret VVood, of Allercleugh, in the Parish of Stanhop, in the County of
Durham, was notoriously known for many years, upon every slight occasion, to
use this imprecation, I wish I may sink into the earth. Upon the last day of
August 1655. she with one Elinor Mason of the same Parish, being both washing
of lead oar, to fit it for the Lead-mill, and standing upon the same spot of
ground, where many horses laden with Lead had passed the immediate day before;
the earth suddenly failed under them, and swallowed them both up; next day,
when their dead bodies were dug out, Elinor Mason was found with her body
erect, but Margeret VVood was many yards deeper within ground, and her head
direct downwards.

One Elinor Short, of the same Parish, did frequently use this imprecation; I
wish my feet may rot off, if this or that be not so or so: It pleased the Just
God about 20 years ago, to visit her with a pain in her feet, which by degrees
did rot quite off, as afterward did her legs also; and she is yet alive at
this day, as a Monument of Gods signal Judgment: she creepes upon her hands
and thighs, and does often acknowledge Gods just dealing with her. The Relation
from his Brothers own mouth now alive.


Robert Durance, Butcher in Carlisle, was a known Swearer and Drunkard, who
about 30 years ago, being playing at Cards with some of his companions, and
having lost all his money, except 30 s began fearfully to swear he would be
revenged upon himself, whereupon he run out at the gates of the City toward
the River Eden, and though he was followed by diverse, some on Horseback, yet
did he destroy himself by leaping into the River; in which River, hard by the
place where he leapt in, he lay for the space of four years; at the end of
which, a Fisherman found the lower parts of his body, only the other parts
being consumed. 1645.
William Knot of Dalston in Cumberland being a common swearer, when he was a
servant to Alderman Gray of York, he fell into a lead full of boiling liquor,
by which means in ten days he dyed.

1627.
John Prestman of Weighton in Cumberland, A Sheriffs Bayliffe, being accounted
a common swearer, one night when he was drunk at Carlisle, went out in the
night; and notwithstanding the persuasion of his Landlord, leapt over the
Bridge with his horse, and was drowned in the River Caude.

One Hudson of Dalston in Cumberland, did wager with another man, who should
swear more oaths by God; the other man was by the just judgment of God struck
dead ere he parted, and Hudston was struck dumb to his dying day; and though he
lived many years after, yet could speak nothing, but swear by God, which he did
upon every occasion. Oh the justice of God to some, and the patience and
forbearance to others, waiting to be gracious: let such as swear by the name of
God, look upon this example, this sad example.

On May Eve, Mr. Burtons Tragedy, etc.
1634. one Troe of Gloce^ter a Carpenter, in the Parish of St. Michael, being
demanded by some, whether he would go with them and fetch the May Pole, swore
by the Lords wounds he would go, though he never went more. But mark the
justice of God; on May day morning, as he was working on the May Pole, before
it was finished, he was by a Divine stroke of Justice smote with such a
lamenesse, and swelling in all his limbs, that he could neither go, nor lift
his hand to his mouth, to feed himself, but was forced to keep his bed for
half a year together, and to this day goes lame, May 4. 1636.

OF THE SABBATH DAY, WITH GODS JUDGMENTS UPON THE PROFANERS thereof.

OF THE SABBATH DAY, With GODS JUDGMENTS upon the profaners thereof.
I Am now to treat with the Sabbath-breaker, who for many reasons will appear
to be less excusable before God for this sin, then either the Drunkard or
Swearer. Here is a double sin, profaneing it and neglecting that which is
ordained by God for the eternal good of our soul; besides, it is a
premeditated act, and goes along with a great aggravation, as we shall see in a
word presently. It is now become so great a custom to profane the Lords day,
that he almost becomes a scoff to others, that offers to reform or punish it;
and that men may not so much slight it, I have collected a few reasons to
persuade men to observe it, and dissuade from the profanation of it, for God
will not be mocked.

That we may know this day is no mock-day, The Lord that made heaven and earth,
Mat. 12.8.
That great Jehovah styles himself Lord of the Sabbath; and the Lord has in a
more special manner singled out this Commandment with a memento. Remember, by
no means forget the Sabbath, for the Lord rested that day, Exodus 20.
and he blessed the Sabbath day, and hallowed it. It Is a great consideration to
make us weigh the duty of keeping it, for six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, and when the seventh day came, he rested on it. The Lord, as it were,
hasted to finish the world in six days, that he might himself be an example to
lead us to the understanding of the great weight which God himself put upon
this day,

And that we may see it is no ordinary nor common thing to break this day, see
how strictly God in his holy Word commands it. This is that which the Lord has
said, Exodus 16.23. and 31.15. and 35.3.
To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord, six days may work be
done, but the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, Holy to the Lord; he that works
shall be put to death; that soul shall be cut off from amongst the people,
Ezech. 22.26.
it shall be observed throughout their Generations for a perpetual Covenant.
The Lord threatens sore Judgments, and why. Because they have hid their eyes
from my Sabbaths, Isay 56.2. and 58.13.
and I am profaned amongst them! Blessed is the man that keeps the Sabbath
from polluting it; It Is called by the Prophet the Holy of the Lord, Honorable;
there might be many more places quoted, but these few are enough to let people
see that it is not a trifling matter to profane the day, and that we ought to
give all diligence and respect to this day, as a day greatly valued, prised,
and esteemed of by God himself.

Anno 1647. there was a deplorable accident, a tremendous instance of the
justice of God upon a person, a ^armer in a Village called Little-^allerton in
the County of Northumberland, about six miles distant from New Castle. The
Relation is thus.

The Minister teaching upon that Scripture, 1 Epist. Pet. 2. cap. 2. latter
part; Who has called you out of darkness, into his mavelous light, and in
the fore-noon Sermon insisting upon the spiritual darkness and blindness of
unregenerate men, and aggravating the many evils attending upon that condition
in this life, and asserting the woeful condition, period state, and conditon of
such as should die in that estate of spiritual darkness; how that to such is
resreve^ the blackness of darkness, which was occasionally improved to
discove^ the miserable condition of the damned in hell, by reason of their
separation from God, called utter darkness. Mat. 22.13. and 8.42 and 25.1^

At the ending of the first Sermon this miserable man accompanied others of his
neighbors to the Al^ house for refreshment: the time of r^paire to the second
Sermon being come, some of them moved him to return with them, to whom he
replye^ that the Minister was preaching upon darkness, and he would not hear
hi^ till he should treat upon the light; and so continued drinking in the
Alehouse with some other profane soldiers, and by having immoderately taken
Ale and Hot Waters, was in the height of his drunkenness, carried to bed in
the Alehouse, where after a short time, he ended his miserable life, dying in
the very act of sin, without any visible act of Repentance.

This Relation is inserted verbatim, as I have it from a godly Minister of the
Gospel, in the same County, and not far from the same place, and is indeed a
sad example of Gods Judgment; not only against the sin of profaning the Lords
day, but also of drunkenness, and contempt of the Gospel.

Now because I observe this day so greatly neglected by the generality of the
Nation, not only neglecting to hear the Word preached, which is able to save
their souls, but also violating of it by profanation; give me a word, and that
only to such as profess the observance of it as lawful; for if such a
slighting of this day grow, we shall from it, run to Atheism, by contempt of
Gods holy Ordinances, and Commandments.

Let us first consider the end of God in the Sabbath, which is chiefly for
sanctification of his name; and what creature dare say he is not strictly tied
by all the obligations expressable; It is a day of liberty, not of bondage, God
can be sanctified without us; he shines not with borrowed lights, these tapers
that burn from mortal breach, can add no glory to God, but as in his great
mercy and condescension, he is pleased to accept of us.

Then the intent of this day as to our advantages, it is for the eternal good
of our souls, that the Lord may by this occasion reach our slow understanding,
and with his Word preached, that he may dwell with the humble and and contrite
spirit. We are not only to avoid profaning it, by not Working, Drinking,
Playing, Idleness, Traveling, etc but we ought to frequent the public
worship of God in the Assemblies of his people, and there to hear his word with
Godly reverence and fear.

The reasonableness of one day in seven for God and our own souls, may
convince us in a great measure of this day, and that is a sin less excusable
that is so reasonable, and that we may have the less to say for our excuse, he
gives us 6 for our outward affairs, oh then who can grudge the 7th! especially
when God links in our immortal happiness together with his own glory. It was
the custom of Christians in Trajan the Emperors time, to meet on the Lords Day
morning, sing a Psalm, receive the Sacrament, and covenant to fly sin on that
day: and when Christians were summoned before the Heathen Governors, and
demanded; Do thou believe the Lords Day? the answer was, I am a Christian.
Take away the Sabbath, says a Reverend Divine, and Religion will soon wither
and decay. The Indians might as well have been chosen the subjects of this
profitable Obedience, and we in their conditions, keeping, instead of a Sabbath
to God, every day to the Devil. It will be more tolerable, I am afraid, for
them at that Great day, than for us.

If we had been left to our own choice, What squarer division of time could
have been thought upon, than one day for our souls, and another for our bodies,
one for the World, another for Heaven? This had been the reasonable rule of
proportion; its more grace than reason, that God should desire but one day in
seven, and that day also to be for our eternal good. Oh how inexcusable will it
be for us that profane it, or neglect the advantages of it! Is refraining from
labor a toil to us? Is to be eased of sin a burden? Lord then let me be
burdened? for Lord, thy yoke is easy, and thy burden is light. What is a more
unspeakable mercy, than for souls to have communion with God, as well as our
own hearts? And, as Divines say, glory is but grace perfected: So that eternal
Sabbath of rest, is but, as I may say, this perfected.

This sin is accompanied with many aggravations, and this is none of the least,
that we have a will given us to refuse to profane it; Besides its a deliberate
act of the mind, its not sudden, as an oath, or murder; but in the very act it
self, thou can not but know thou art sinning against the light of thy
conscience: its the greatest sin, that is accompanied with time to consider, an
enlightened mind to understand the evil: to purpose to evil, is an aggravation
as high as the sin.

If aggravations face not this sin with a dreadful countenance, consider, and
in reason think; Is it not just with God to suffer thy frail composure of
corruption to shrink under his heavy judgments? that at night Gods protection
should leave us, as in our graves, when we are in our beds? Or can thou
expect any blessing upon thy outward estate, when it is in the power of God to
dispose of life, being, health, estate, and all? Is it not just; if we travel
on this day, that God should judge us with sudden death in the like severity,
as he has made others examples of to all Ages? Yet if God do suffer thy corn,
wine, and oil, to increase, fear a curse under the Strawberry leaves of thy
enjoyments; for a blessing is not the shadow of sin, it will not follow thee in
the ways of wickedness; rather fear some judgment will overtake thy swift
motion to impiety.

A word to two sorts.

First those that profane it, contemning not only Gods Laws, but the Laws
of the Nation; know that what is lawful on other days, are sins on this day;
and such of you as need not (by Gods blessings in a full estate) toil all the
week, whereby you cannot plead a weariness to wait on God upon his own day,
you turn his blessings into a curse, if you profane it: you play all the six
days, its a sin with a witness if you play away the seventh also. You that
cannot close this Holy Day without an evening sacrifice to Bacchus, instead of
prayers to the Lord that made Heaven and Earth, Gods Judgments sleep not, you
are preparing your selves as fuel for the fire of Gods vengeance and
displeasure.

Nextly, to you that sit idly at home, never dreaming how to escape that wrath
to come; methinks I read your sad conditions in your conversations; That never
think of God all the week; you cannot for your callings, you will not for your
pleasures on the Lords Day: if there be any difference betwixt you and
Heathens, it is, that you know your condemnation before it come: you will be at
the Great Day, witnesses for God against your selves.

To see so many idly sit at home, and never mind to hear the Word, methinks I
am amongst the Indians; Its a very heavy thing to consider in some places, half
the Parish at home in idleness, or walking abroad in Sermon-time; nay, I have
heard it credibly affirmed from the mouth of a Minister in this County, that of
some thousands in a Parish, there has not been, sometimes, a hundred at a
Sermon, nay, not fifty, nay not twenty, shall I say not ten? Is not this a sad
case to be in a Christian Commonwealth? Nay its the sad experience of this
place where I live, and I may speak it to my own knowledge, that three quarters
of the people able to come, of this populous place, do idly stay at home, or
walk abroad, not a family of ten, but the most of them are at home in
idleness, if not at play or drinking.

Upon this account I would conclude with one word; Good people, let me persuade
you to serve God, rather than gratify the Devil with your own damnation: Is
your labor less to sit at home, than in the Congregation? Do you think you
have no souls to save, nor to lose? you had better be working than idle, for
that is a sin in it self, and is made greater on this day. You live more like
the brute beasts that are fed by the senses only. How can you be saved if you
will not come unto him that you may have life? Are you Christians or Infidels?
Do you profess to worship God, Romans 10, 14, 17.
or Mahomet? How shall you believe on him of whom you have not heard? how can
you hear without a Preacher? not to hear that Blessed Gospel which Christ has
sent into our Coasts, our Houses, is to do as the Gadereans did, drive Christ
from our Habitations. Such as followed Christ and his Apostles, were converted,
I read of few else; and such only as lay at the Pool, were healed: To see
people flocking to hear the Word, like Doves to the windows, it is a blessed
sight; But instead hereof, we have some that entertain Quakers meetings in
their houses on the Lords Day; They have a sad account to give.

I hear some excusing their staying at home sometimes, by their going other
times; these are common excuses: But thou know not but that day thou stayest
from the Ministry of the Word, God may have intended thy eternal salvation,
and that with Zacheus, God might have said, This day salvation is come into thy
house.

But I read good books; That thou may do when thou can not hear good
Sermons: and though it be good to read, yet here its a sin, and a temptation,
because thou neglect'sta greater good. The Word stirs the soul under it, and
commonly comes with power and demonstration of the Spirit; and I know there is
great difference between hearing and reading; and the later is no less an evil
thus used, than the ejection of different thoughts in prayer from the subject
and nature of the duty, is an evil by consequence.

But I do no body hurt, I am not playing, nor drinking, nor swearing, so that I
need not fear Gods judgments: What judgment do thou think a hard heart is,
which commonly is the fruit of the neglect of Gods Ordinances? is it not the
worst of judgments? for thou may be destroyed with bodily punishment, as Eli
and others were, and yet thy soul be saved: but thou can not have a judicial
hardness of heart upon thee, and be saved: therefore take heed of this sin,
and fear lest a worse judgment befall thee than an outward destruction; for how
can thou escape, if thou neglect so great salvation?

My design is not to direct others to the keeping this day, so much as to keep
from profaning it; yet if any be persuaded to look to the keeping of it, Mr.
Goodwin. Mr. Cawdry.
by way of sanctifying it, I refer them to such Learned Divines as have spent
their labor in it.

To those that are not moved by reason, nor persuaded by their own advantages,
from polluting this Holy day by their wickedness, debauchednesse, idleness,
or playing at Cards, etc. Read Gods threatenings, that his judgments may appear
to be more just, by his forewarning us from the sin, Jer. 17, 27.
as well as the punishment. If you will not hearken to me, to hallow the
Sabbath, then will I kindle a fire in the gates of Jerusalem, and it shall
devour the Palaces thereof, and shall not be quenched. Fire in the Palace,
says a Divine, is meant, fire in the seats of Justice, and the ornaments of a
City: fire in the Palace, no going in, fire in the Gates, no going out; because
Justice was not executed upon Sabbath-breakes, therefore the place of Justice
shall be destroyed; those gates that suffered any co come in to profane the
Lords day, must be now on fire, that none shall escape his Judgments: If we
should see our Towns flaming with the wrath of God, and the fire of his
indignation taking hold of our habitations, it is then in vain to offer to
quench it; it has been thus in our Nation, as in the examples following. If
such a judgment be threatened against such as keep not this day; what must be
the fearful looking for of Judgment by the profaners of it? Neh. 13.18.
Did not God bring all this upon us in this City, yet bring you more wrath upon
Judah by profaning the Sabbath, says the Prophet. Ezekiel. 22.26. and 31.
Ezekiel mentions the sin of the Sabbath, and therefore have I powered my
indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath, and in
the 23. Chapter is threatened Plagues and Judgments, and v. 18. the Reason; for
they have profaned my Sabbaths.

If these serve not the end intended, take a prospect of Gods terrible
examples, which stand as Beacons to warn us from the like sins.

The poor man that did but gather sticks on the Sabbath day, may stand as a
monument of Gods severity.

Theatr^ of History.
A Nobleman that used to hunt on the Lords day, had a child born unto him with
a head like a Dog, with ears and mouth crying like a Hound, which was a very
remarkable judgment of God,

Theater of Gods Judgments.
Reports of an Husbandman, that went to plough on the Lords day, and cleansing
his plough with an Iron, it stuck so fast in his hand for two years, that he
carried it about with him as a signal tostimony of the Lords just displeasure
against him.

Another that gathered corn into his barn upon the Lords day, had it all with
fire from heaven consumed, together with the house.

At Kimstat in France, 1559. there lived a woman that neither would go nor
suffer others of her family to go to Church on the Lords day; as she was drying
flax, fire issued out of it^ but burnt it not: she taking no notice, next
Sabbath day as she was busy with it, miraculously again fire proceeds out of
it, and burnt it; but was put out, this poor creature was ^ blind, as not to
see or take warning by these footsteps of Gods merciful providence, but the
third Sabbath day, when she was busied about her flax, as before, it fires of
it self, and could not be quenched, till she, and two of her children were
burnt to death.

And in the year 1126. One grinding corn upon the Lords days it took fire, and
gave him timely warning not to break the Sabbath day, by the works of his
calling.

In Helvetia, nigh Belessina, Mr. Clarks examples.
three men were playing at Dice on the Lords day, one called Vlrick
Schraeterus, having hopes of a good cast, because being crossed to the loss of
much money before; he now expected fortune, or rather the Devil to favor his
desire; and therefore he uttered these horrid words. If fortune do dececeive me
now, I will thrust my dagger into the Body of God as far as I can; O the
cursed frames of our natural tempers, if once God cast the reins into our own
wills, the Dice favors him not, and presently he draws his dagger, and with a
powerful force throws it up toward heaven, which never was seen more; and
immediately five drops of blood falls before them all upon the Table, and as
suddenly comes the Devil amongst them, carries away this vile wretch, with
such a terrible and hideous noise, as the whole City was astonished at it.
Those two remaining alive, endeavored to wipe off the blood, but to so little
purpose, that the more they rubbed, the more the drops of blood were
perspicuous. Report carries it all over the City, multitudes flock to see this
wonder, who found only the Sabbath profaners rubbing the blood to get it out;
these two by decree of the Senate of the City, were bound in Chains, and as
they were led to the prison; one of them was suddenly struck dead; from out of
whose body, a wonderful number of worms and vermin was seen to crawle. The
City thus terrified with Gods judgments, and to the intent that God might be
glorified, and a future vengeance averted from the place; caused the third to
be forthwith put to death: And the Table with the drops of blood on it,
preserved as a monument of Gods wrath upon this sin, not only of
Sabbath-breaking, but swearing, and wicked gameing: O the depth of the
knowledge of God, How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out, Romans 11.33.


January 13. 1583. At the Bear-garden in Southwark on a Sabbath day afternoon,
many people pressing on the Scaffolds to see the sport, forced it suddenly
down, with which fall eight were killed, and many spoiled in their bodies, who
lived not long after.

Much like to it was that at Risley in Bedfordshire, Theater of Gods Judgments.
1607. where many people, rather then resort to hear the the word of the Lord
by the mouth of his Minister, came in great numbers to see a Stage Play on the
Lords day; the Chamber floor fell down, and as a judgment of God upon this sad
and wilful sin, many were killed and wounded, thus we see, when the works of
piety and mercy are neglected, to prosecute sin and wickedness, Gods
judgments are swift to overtake us; thereby endeavoring to hedge up our way
with thorns, which examples may push us back from the like impiety and
vengeance of an angry God.

A sad example of Gods severity, in ^is hot and sore displeasure against
^abbath-breakers, is recorded of Feverton in Devonshire; which place, says
he,, was frequently admonished of the profanation of the Lords day, by a Market
kept the day following; which without reformation, would inevitably pluck down
divine vengeance: A little after the Ministers death, upon the third of April
1598. A sudden fire from heaven consumes the whole Town in less than half an
hour; excepting only the Church, Courthouse, and Almes-house, where was
consumed in this fire of Gods wrath, four hundred dwelling houses, and fifty
souls destroyed. Who will not say this was a sad and immediate hand of the
Lord? but alas; what will not poor creatures do, that follow sin with
greediness! The same Town fourteen years after, on the fifth of August, 1612.
for the same sin, was wholly consumed, except some thirty poor peoples houses,
School-house, Almes-houses: these Judgments are not recorded for Historical
Perusal, Luke 13.4
but to consider of, and remember those on whom the Tower of Shilo fell.

Mr. Clarks Examples
At Alcester in Warwickshire where the Author lived, there were of his own
knowledge, four remarkable Judgments of God. One that upon the publishing of
the Declaration for sports and pastimes upon the Lords day; A young woman on
this day comes to the Green, and says, She would dance as long as she could
stand, and dancing, in the midst of her sin, God struck her with such a violent
disease, that in two or three days she died in misery; as an example to all
that delight more in serving their own pleasures, and sinful desires, then to
wait upon God, and delight in his ways.

The other of a young man of the same place, and not long after the other; who
on the Lords day, immediately after the evening exercise was finished, brings
into the street a pair of Cudgells, lays them down nigh unto the Ministers
house, and invited diverse to play with him; who refusing, at length comes one,
and taking up the Cudgels says, Though I never played in my life, yet I will
play one bout now. A little after, sporting with a young woman, he takes up a
Birding-piece charged, saying, Have at thee; the piece goes off, and murders
her immdiately; for which, as a deserved judgment, he suffered the Law.

Another of a Miller at Wootton in the same County, who going forth to a Wake,
and coming home at night, found his House, Mill, and all that he had, burnt
down to the ground.

A fourth upon Mr. Clarks own knowledge, is of many wicked and profane
persons, at Woolston in the same County; who on the Lords day met at a
Whitsun-Ale, in a Smiths Barn, and though it grieved the holy man of God, who
was Minister of the place, as the Sodomites did Lot, yet he could not help it;
but in their profaneness they proceeded; not long after, a fire kindles in the
place of this impiety, and burns down not only his House, Shop, and Barn, but
rages so vehemently, as it reaches many other houses with ruin, all being chief
actors in this horrid profaneness.

In the year 1634. upon a Lords day, when the River Trent was frozen over,
fourteen young men were at football upon the Ice near Gainsborough, and meeting
all in a cluster together, the wrath of God met with them, and suddenly the Ice
broke, and they were immediately drowned. Oh the justice of the Lord, upon the
prophaners of his Holy day.

The same painful and useful Author of Gods examples, relates a sad one, of
Gods Judgments upon two fellows in Essex near Brinkely, that were working in a
Chalk-pit; one of them boasting that he had vexed his Mistress, by coming so
late in from his Sabbath-dayes Sports and Recreations ^ but says he, I will
anger her worse next Sabbath day: which words were no sooner out, but Justice
seizes upon him; for the Earth falls upon him, and he never stirred more to his
Sabbath profaneness; his fellows limbs were broken; both being sharers in the
sin of the Sabbath, are made also to be so in their sufferings and punishments.
The Lord will be known in the paths and ways of his Judgments, to such as
will not be led and allured by his tender mercies.

And of one Mr. Ameredith, a Gentleman of Devonshire, being recovered from a
pain which he had suffered in his feet, one of his friends saying he was glad
to see him so nimble: the Gentleman replies; He hoped his hopes should not be
frustrated of the great expectations he had to dance about the May Pole the
next Sunday: But behold the Lord in a just punishment (for such impious and
wicked resolutions, and no doubt also for his former profaneness on that day)
smites him suddenly with feebleness and faintness of heart ere he stirred
from the place, and with such a strange dizzinesse in the head, that he was
forced to be led home, and from thence to his last home, before the Lords Day
shined upon him. Now tell me, any that can, what little hopes the poor souls
thus ushered to the chambers of death, have to keep an eternal Sabbath with
God, that will not keep his Sabbath from profaning on earth? Truly, these are
sad symptoms of Gods heavy displeasure against soul as well as body: his mercy
(if any be in such dismal dispensations) are occult and hidden; the Lord in
mercy warn poor sinners to avoid the wrath of such an Infinite God, that such
as will not be entreated to keep the Lords day, as they ought, may be terrified
from profaning of it.

Another as severe he relates, which together with the three former, are
attested by sufficient witnesses.

At Walton upon Thames, in Survey, upon a great frost, in the year 1634. three
young men having in the forenoon heard a Sermon, from 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, etc. they went over the Ice into an
house of disorder, and gaming, where they profanely spent away the rest of the
Lords day, and night also, in revelling, and drinking; the one of them next day
boasting merrily of his pleasure upon the Sabbath day, and his adventure over
the Ice. All three on Tuesday return the way they went, and upon the Ice
suddenly sunk to the bottom like stones, one of them only miraculously
preserved. These judgments may be mercies to some that are yet prophaners of
the Lords day, if God please.

At Burton upon Trent, Mr. Abberly a godly Minister, often took occasion to
reprove and threaten such as make no conscience of the Lords day, by profaning
it: in a more peculiar manner, such as bought and sold meat upon this day;
which it seems was a sin as great, and as commonly practiced in this place, as
it was lately at Buntingford, 1657.
where in my journey, some Gentlemen of Newcastle being my fellow-travellers,
we took occasion after Sermon to acquaint the Minister withal: I pray God it
may not be so still, lest such a judgment befall the place, as did this
profane wretch: which was thus. A Tailor being a nimble and active man,
dwelling at the upper end of the Town, must needs in a bravado go to the
further end to buy some meat before morning-prayer, but coming home with both
his hands full, in the midst of the street he fell down stark dead. I was,
says Doctor Teate, an eyewitness both of his fall, and burial* and that it
wrought a reformation in the place, both among the Butchers and others. It was
a remarkable Providence, and I wish, I say, that other places may be reformed
of this bold and impudent sin; or truly they may repent of it when its too late.

A Pious Divine: says he, The Lord has spoken so loud from heaven against
Sabbath-sinners, Mr. P. Goodwin. Dies dominicus redivivus. 117.
that I cannot be silent; We hereabout, have had in a short time, terrible
tokens of God severe vengeance, upon such as mind not the service of his Day:
amongst our selves a sad example; A Townsman going to gather Cherries on the
Lords Day, fell from the tree, and in the fall was so battered, and bruised,
that he never spoke more, but lay groaning in his blood, until the next day,
and then died.

Another man, not far from this place, in Cherry-time, as he was gathering
fruit, fell from the tree, and with the fall was so hurt, that he lay in
anguish and dreadful dolor, all the week, till Sabbath day, and then ended his
miserable life.

And of a young man, that on the Lords Day, in a place nigh unto Mr. Goodwins,
scrambling with others for Pears, thrown out in the Churchyard, broke his main
thigh bone, and the bone of his leg, on the same side, which was so miserably
and strangely broken, as that the Bone-setter (who was a godly man) told Mr.
Goodwin, though he had seen many, yet he never saw the like. God here dealt in
mercy, as well as in judgememt, in that he (...) him space to repent, and see
his sin. The Lord warn us all by these examples.

Mr, Clarks Examples.
A company of profane young men in 1635. near Salisbury, upon the Lords Day
morning, went to Clarington Park, to cut down a May Pole, and having laden the
Cart with the tree, and themselves with the bitter fruits of sin, they are
severely punished by the hand of God: For entering into the City of Salisbury,
through a place called Milners Bars, unawares the Cart gives a turn, and the
end of the tree, struck one of the Sabbath Breakers such a mortal blow that his
brains flew out, and there on the place, he yielded himself a conquered sinner
by the Just hand of the Lord, lying there, as a sad spectacle of Gods
indignation: and says Mr Clark, I enquired of the truth of this at my first
coming to Sarum, and very many godly persons in my hearing, attested it to be
true, upon their own sight and knowledge.

And further, Doctor Teate, he gives a second example upon his knowledge thus.

To my knowledge, at Compton-Chamberlin in Wilsthire, at the house of Sir J.
Penruddock, a dancing match was held on the Lords Day, where a stranger ushers
in, to act his part, and after a few turns about, and a few capers, he in the
midst of the sin, falls dead to the ground, before all the company. Here was a
sad dispensation of Providence from Gods immediate hand, as many else besides
are; here was no instrument to take off any of the most severe vengeance of
God; and such examples in my mind, should be taken as pregnant testimonies, to
let all men know this day ought to be kept as Holy. Oh take heed of slighting
this day, that God so severely punishes in his sore displeasure.

And Mr. Clark upon his own testimony, brings in a sad relation thus. When I
lived in Cheshire, there was one Sir T. S. a Papist, and at that time a
Favorite at Court, who at his appearance in the Country was very much feasted
and entertained by the Gentry: once amongst the rest, he was invited to a
Knights house on the Lords day, where many accompanied him: toward evening,
the proper time for the deeds of darkness, they fell to dancing: but look to
the finger of God, and see what fell upon their sinful profaneness; In the
midst of their sport, there was one Sir J.D. had a blow given him on his leg by
some invisible hand; for none was seen to touch him, as was attested by all the
company: and thus he went lame for a good while after. It may be it set him
upright in his practice and conversation ever after; if it did, it was a good
providence that saved him from a more severe Judgment.

Dr. Twiss on Sabb.
One Sabbath day in the afternoon, a match at Football was made in Bedfordshire:
as two of the company was tolling a Bell to summon the rest together, some that
sat in the Porch of the Church suddenly hear a terrible clap of Thunder, and
saw a flash of Lightning, coming through an obscure lane; which flasht in their
faces, to their great terror and fear, so passing on to these that were
tolling, it trips up the heels of the one, and leaves him stark dead: the other
so blasted, that he died also in few days. These are the swift Messengers of
God, which overtake poor sinners in the way of their sins, before resolution
can be proud of any actions; God will be seen in his wrath and terror, to all
wilful and impenitent sinners.

At Tidworth on the Lords day, many were met in the Churchyard to play at
football, where one of this wicked company had his leg broken, which by a
secret judgment of the Lord so fester'd, that it turned to a Gangrene in
despite of all means; whereof he speedily died.

Stratford upon Sluon, Dr. Beards Theater.
was no less then twice consumed, by the fire of Gods wrath for this sin of
Sabbath-breaking, and on one and the same day twelve-moneth: besides, they were
great contemners and slighters of the Word of God by his Minister; A sin that
is commonly followed with hardness of heart, if no visible judgment get
before it.

It is recorded of Pompey, C. Tacitus,
that he shrunk under the depression of Gods sore displeasure, for profaning
Gods Sabbath, and Sanctuary. That which God consecrates, must be kept holy, or
woe to the profaners of it.

Josephus.
And of Herod who profaned Gods name by his wickedness, and that, when for some
treasure which he supposed to be hid, he caused the Sepulcher of Gods Saints to
be plucked up; The Lord in Judgment caused a fire to break forth of the earth,
and destroyed those that he employed, which when he saw he desisted, and durst
go no further.

Mr. Nelson Minister, his letter to Mr. Tailor in Theater of Judgments.
Nov. 26. 1621. One Richard Bourn servant to Gasper Burch of Ely, was so
accustomed to travel on the Lords day, that he made no conscience of it,
seldom or never coming to the Assembly to hear the Word of God on that day, but
went to St. Ives Market, where he stayed and spent the day; where being drunk,
he was overtaken by Gods Justice; for coming home fraught with commodities, he
fell into the River, and was drowned; a just reward of other sins in the
punishment of one.

In the year 1635. A Miller at Church-down nigh Gloucester, would needs make a
Whitsun-Ale; notwithstanding the private and public admonitions of the
Ministers, and of his Christian friends, large provision was made, and music
was set out, as the Minister and people in the afternoon went to Church; when
prayer and Sermon was ended, the Drum beat up, Music played, and the people
fell a dancing till evening; at which time, they all resorted to the Mill: but
O the Justice of God! before they had supped, at 9 of the clock, a sudden fire
seized on the house which was so sharp, that it burned down his House and Mill,
and the most of all his other provision, and household stuff.

At Baunton in Dorcetshire, 1634.
some being at Bowls on the Lords day, one threw his Bowl at his fellow, and
hit him on the ear, whereupon blood issuing out at the other ear, he died; he
that threw it fled.

At Simsburg in Dorsetshire, 1634.
one rejoicing at the erection of a Summer-pole on the Lords day, said, He
would go see it, though he went through a quickset hedge; A Proverb here Going
with wood in his arms to cast into the Bonfire, profanely uttered these words;
Heaven and earth are full of thy glory O Lord: He was immediately smitten by
the stroke of God, and in two or three days died, and his wife also.

1635.
At Dover, the same day that the Book of sports was read in St. James Parish,
one profanely went to play upon a Kit, which drew a rude multitude of the
younger sort together. But oh the terror of the Lord! He was struck with a
divine hand, and in two days died.

July, 19. 1635.
Two Boys of St. Albans, going into Verolans pond to swim upon the Lords day,
one of them was drowned, the other narrowly escaped, as a warning to others.

Two young men of St, Dunstans in the West London, going to swim on the Lords
day, in September, 1635, were both drowned.

A fellow in Sommerset-shire, being to make a Tent on the Lords day, for a
Fair, which was to be on the day following, said on the Satterday, that he
would make it on the morrow; which was the Lords day, and being drunk, he died
the same day roaring.

July, 1654.
One Mr. Prince Chyrurgion of the of the Tower of London, did on the Lords day
ride upon his horse to pace him for a Chapman, but see the justice, yet mercy
of God, he broke his leg, and lay in great pain and anguish eight weeks; His
son had dissuaded him from so great a sin, which now he acknowledged as a
judgment of God upon him for profanation of his day: and ever after he became
a more frequent resorter to the congregation, and hearing Gods word.

At Thornton nigh Worcester, 1634.
upon the publishing of the book of sports on the Lords day, the people
prepared for a solemn profanation, by ordering purveyors on purpose, to
provide things fit for it; A proper maid went to the Mill on Satterday, to
fetch home the meal on the Lords day, the maid passing by a hedge with the meal
upon her head, was overtaken with a sudden and sad stroke of Divine Justice,
for she fell down dead into a ditch, there she lay all Sabbath day; on Monday
she was carried to her grave, where all their intended mirth was buried with
her, etc. such a terror it wrought in the people, and such Reformation in the
place, that no more Summer-Ales were kept; they took down the May Pole, and
none durst set it up again, or have to do with the public profanation of that
day.

One at Ham nigh Kingstone, a scoffer of goodness, and a common prophaner of
the Lords day, did on that holy day presume to visit his grounds, where finding
some cattle grazing, which were not his own, and running to drive them out, he
fell down, and suddenly died upon the place.

Upon May day, being the Lords day, a maid in Cripple-gate London, being
married to one that had three children, one of them being at nurse in the
Country, they did on the Lords day spend the whole afternoon in feasting and
dancing; but God is just, and will be seen in his judgments to warn others;
for a week after the plague began in the Parish, and the first house it entered
into, is this new married couples, with which, both himself, wife, and two
children were swept away by death. These things are not to be scoffed at, they
are not things of chance or blind fortune; no, no, they are providence; and
though they are judgments in themselves, yet in the issue, I hope they will be
merciful warnings to others.

July, 1634.
Not far from Dorchester, lived one widow Jones, whose Son Richard upon the
Lords day (notwithstanding her admonitions, and persuasions did with his
companions go to Stoak to play; where after they had done, and drank somewhat
freely, they return home; and by the way fell out, whereupon John Edwards one
of his consorts stabbed him under the left side, whereof at seven a clock the
next night, he died.

One David Price, Octoct. 1633.
a servant to T. Hill, a Grasier, offering to drive his cattle from Banbury,
was dissvvaded by his Landlord, and told him he would be stopped, and forced
to satisfy the Law, to which he replied, let me see who will hinder. In the
morning he set out, and not yet out of the Towns end, one met him, and said,
What David, to day, to day? he ansvvered not, but passed on; and although he
never complained, nor any other saw any signs of the least sickness, yet in a
stones cast of the Town, he fell down dead suddenly, and was buried in Banbury
Churchyard, the next day after.

At Wicks, 1634.
betwixt Colchester and Harwich, upon Whitsunday last in the afternoon, two
fellows meeting at the Football, the one killed the other.

1634.
At Oxford, one Lords day, one Hawks a Butcher would needs mend his ditch, his
wife dissuaded him from it on that day; but he would, and did go, but behold
the remarkable justice of God! he is struck dead in the ditch: a sad example,
amongst other of Gods terrible Judgments,

January 1634.
One Mr. Powel upon the Lords day did at Lemster serve a Writ of Sub poena upon
one, Mr. Shuit a Gentleman, (which he did on purpose upon that day, as is
credibly reported) as soon as he came out of the Church into the Churchyard;
to whom Mr. Shuit said, I thought you had been an honester man, than to do so
upon this day; who replied, I hope I am never a whit the more dishonest; which
he had no sooner spoke, but suddenly he fell down dead, and never spoke word
more; his wife seeing it, was immediately struck with sickness.

May 31. 1635. being the Lords day, one Rich. Clark Apprentice to Timothy
Donorell of Sherston in Wiltshire, was drunk in company with one H. Parrum, to
whom he said he would hang or drown himself; desiring to know which was the
best, who replied, that he hoped he would do neither: But oh the judgments of
the Lord upon the prophaners of this day, and upon the sin of Drunkennsse! for
on Monday morning, he was seen going thorough the Town, as if he were going
about his Masters business, and having got up upon the midst of a Tree without
the Town, he there did hang himself.

At Billericay in Essex, March, 1634.
one Theo. Pease the Ministers son, would needs ring the Bells on the Sabbath
day, but was hindered by the Officers; the next Lords day, he had gathered many
together, and in despite of any, would ring, and whilst he was ringing, a
giddiness surprised him like one drunk, of which he fell sick, and in three
days died.

The Tapster and Chamberlain of Queens Head Southwark, June 1635
rode upon the Lords day to be merry, and having been too bold with drink, one
of them riding homewards, fell off his horse, and broke his neck.

Being the Lords day, an Apothecaries man in Lime-street London, Feb. 9. 1634.
rid with another to Barnet, to be merry, and being drunk, upon their return
they met with a man traveling, to whom offering some abuse, the man strikes
one of their horses, one of them bid the other run him through, which with his
Rapier he did through the left breast, so that he fell down dead; and being
both apprehended, they confessed, and were sent to Newgate.

At Baildon in Yorkshire, two men sitting drinking at a Wake, they quarrelled
with one another; but being parted, and one of them sitting by the fire side,
the other presently falls upon him with a Hatchet and cleaves him down the
back, insomuch as his bowels fell forth; the murderer being hotly pursued leapt
into a River, and drowned himself.

April 18. 1635.
Four traveling from London to Maidenhead, one of them would needs travel on
the Lords day, the rest refused, spending the Sabbath there; this man rode in
the morning to Henly, and there heard a Sermon, after that traveled again in
the afternoon, and on his way, leading his horse down a smooth descent, his
horse suddenly fell, and broke both his fore legs; He was suddenly amazed at so
strange and unexpected a Providence, and could not but attribute it to the
immediate hand of God: whereupon seeing him past recovery, he knocked his horse
on the head, and so left him. The next day, being overtaken at Abington by his
fellow-travellers, they wondering, demanded the reason how it came to pass, he
was no further on his way? He smote his breast, and related the strange
Providence of God, toward him, saying, He had heard many a good Sermon, but
none of them ever wrought so much upon his conscience, as this Providence of
God did: and since it was no worse, it should be an example and a warning to
him for ever after. Oh that it might be so to others, that may hear of it or
read it.

In the year 1644. was a Beer-Brewer (dwelling in Giles-Criplegate London, nigh
unto the white Horse) that usually followed the sinful practice of Brewing upon
the Lords Day, for which he was warned, and told of the greatness of the sin,
and how severe God was to such sinful practices, but he reformed not: Once upon
a Lords day at noon, the Reverend M. T. VVeld, Lecturer of the said place (from
whom I had the Relation) went into the house, and taking them at work,
lovingly, yet sharply, admonished them, to whom they promised to do so no
more: within a Sabbath or two after, the same servant of the house, which
before was taken in the act, was now again found guilty of the same sin; but
mark the Justice of the Lord; for setting fire to the Copper, when it was
scalding hot, he fell over into it, and was immediately scalded to death.

Mr. Weld.
Another, which I had from the same hand. A Cook in the same Parish, using to
make it his trade, on the Lords day, to heat Ovens, and bake meat, whereby all
the family was employed as on other days, without regard to the Lords day,
unless to his own profit; never, or seldom, frequenting the Word preached; was
often admonished, yet went on in his sin: One Christmas day, which fell upon
the Lords day, as he was working, and laboring (as if no time were unlawful to
gain the world, though he neglected his eternal soul) he was consumed to death
by fire.

A Vintner, that was a great swearer and drunkard, Mr. Clark.
as he was standing at his own door upon the Lords day, with a pot in his hand
to invite his guests, was by the wonderful justice and power of God, carried
into the air with a whirlwind, and never seen nor heard of more.

Much might be said; but my Work swells upon the Loome, yet have I left many
example, to have the choice. I shall conclude with one word, and that is to
pray us to consider, that God blessed (that is, say Divines, with intention of
bestowing favors and benefits) this day: O let us then labor for Gods blessing
above all things! Read those Promises in Esaias, 56.4, 5, 6, 7. Jer. 17.24, 25.
let us labor for hearts to attend with delight to his Laws and Ordinances;
when once we leave off Ordinances, I durst almost say, we are in a more sure
way to ruin, than the most outward profane. They are mercies not so much
prized as they would, if we wanted them; A confluence brings a glut, and that a
disgust of the most relishing mercies. A ten or five mile Sermon formerly,
tasted sweeter than now greater opportunities of grace and mercy nigher hand,
and within our reach: I say, let us set a high value upon the favor and means
of conveyances: let us love and honor the faithful Ministers of the Word: to
love them, is to love to hear them; Hate thy Minister, and then follows
contempt of the Word, and so hardness of heart: this is commonly the sad
effect of this sin. Scoffers of Religion, 2 King. 1. 2 King. 2:
the Ministers of his precious Gospel and people, have been made spectacles of
Gods anger; Judgments are prepared for scorners, Prove. 19.29. They are blessed
that sit not in their seat, Psalm. 1.1.

One present in this Congregation, (says a Reverend Divine) was an
eyewitness of a woman scoffing at another for piety, Mr. Greenhill, on
Ezekiel.
immediately she had her rongue stricken with a palsy, and in two days died
thereof. Value therefore, I say, thy Minister, for he is set over thee for to
watch for the good of thy soul; the love of the Minister, and the Word, is no
small help to the keeping of the Lords day.

I conclude with the Psalmist. Psalm. 50.22
Consider this all ye that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there
be none to deliver you.

Reader, These following sad Examples came to my hand, since the Printing of
the former part of the Treatise; which I thought good to insert here.

On Thursday, in the last week save one, of June 1620. A house was burnt down
at Hither set in Norfolk: there being a jar in the morning between the man and
his wife (as is said*) The woman wished that her husband going out, might never
return to his house; which was burnt down e're he came home.

On the 22 th of July 1627. at Barnham-broom, some would needs draw up a Bell
(it being the Lords day) into his place, that it might be ready against the
Bell-founder came on Friday, that so they might not hinder their business.
Some went unwillingly to it, but others went forewarned, and did it: when it
was up, he that was one of the readiest W. Baynes, setting his foot on a board
that brake or slipped, fell and beat out his brains, and miserably ended his
days.

Aug. 6. 1627. At Scolebridge, a man drunken being fastened on a Cart, the horse
turning suddenly, overthrew the Cart into the River, laden with lime upon the
drunken man, where he was drowned, and fearfully burnt with lime.

In the former part of Summer, a man being drunk at VVimondham, fell into a
watery, miry place, and was drowned.

Another Drunkard vomiting, a Sow followed him, and eat up his vomit, at last
falling from his horse, the Sow pulled out his throat, and so he miserably
died: reported by the Judge at the Assizes.

FINIS.

