FIVE PROPOSITIONS TO THE Kings Majesty And the ARMY, concerning
Church Government, in the ordering of the Discipline thereof toward
Communicants.

By H. Hammond Doctor in Divinity, and one Of the Kings Chaplains, now with his
Majesty in the Army.

C. R.
Tudor rose surmounted by a crown

Aug: 6th CAMBRIDGE, Printed for Nathaniel Smith, Anno Dom. 1647.

Five Propositions to the Kings Majesty and the Army, concerning
Church Government, in the ordering of the Discipline thereof toward
Communicants.
1. THat the power may be, To provoke to goodness, putting them in mind of
every occasion, wherein any Christian virtue of mercifulness, Almes-giving,
meekness, purity, peacemaking, is more then ordinarily seasonable; and by our
example, and the examples of other pious men, (present, or read of in Story,
especially sacred) encouraging to abundance in well doing, and upon all
occasions remembering them of the various dispensations of the love and mercy of
God through Christ, wherein they have had their peculiar portion, and the
infinite immarcessible Crown, that super-abundant weight of glory, which is
not in the same degree powered out to all, but dispensed according to works,
according to the proportion of that labor of Love, and work of Faith, that
shall be observable in every Combatant of Christ's, when the great Leader and
Crowner of our Faith shall come out to his day of retributions; and each of
these is an excellent way to provoke all to well doing, the duty prescribed,
Heb. 10.24. Let us observe one another, to sharpen or provoke (in one another)
Charity and good or laudable works.

2. To give the Brother a sight, not only of his sins (the not doing of which
is an argument of a most mortal enmity, a hating the Brother in the heart,
whom we do not in that case rebuke, Lev. 19.17. and no man must be ever
accounted otherwise then a treacherous contriver of his brothers destruction,
that is guilty of it) but even of his passions, his inclinations, the
weaknesses and peculiar distempers of his nature, things, of which no man is a
competent judge to discern them in himself, and wherein a man may live and
dye ignorant, if he be not taught by another more impartial observation, and
of which there is far more reason to expect to be admonisht by a friend that
takes notice of them, then of a jaundice-looke, or earthly breath, which being
but symptoms of bodily diseases, and yet by all rules of friendship to be
revealed to him who is concerned to know and seek out for cure of them, are
not near so dangerous to be concealed, or unlikely to be discerned by the
patient, as the more subtle secret diseases of the Soul. Thus, if the
interpretation of learned men will stand good; Saint Paul received benefit by
the admonition of the bystanders, Act. 23.4. without which he had not
considered what was his duty to the High Priest. And thus did Christ befriend
Saint Peter with the knowledge of his passionate temper (transported with zeal
at the present, though he should dye with Christ, he will not deny him, and
afterward, when danger was instant, transported as much with a contrary
passion) and foretold him, that he peculiarly should deny him, which it seems,
he never would have discerned in himself: And if any thing had been armor
sufficient against sear, this of all others would most probably have secured
him.

3. The third is, (in case of falling into, but especially continuing in sin)
frequent, repeated, importunate calling and rouzing to awake, and get out of
it. That title of the friend among the heathens, to be the other or second
self, being far from being lessened or superseded by Christ, (but improved
indeed, and applied to the divinest and most sacred offices of friendship, and
the rescuing from sin, as from the most formidable danger) lays an obligation
upon every friend, every brother, i. e. Christian (toward every other, that
comes wit hin the reach of his warmth or influence) to supply all those
offices, that every ones self, i. e. his soul, his conscience, is concerned
and obliged to do. Thus when the conscience, beside the directive office, has
another of punishing and disciplining too, of playing the Erinnys with the
torch within us, to scorch and light us out of our road of darkness, the
Brother, the Christian, the second soul, and conscience within the
Fellow Christians breast, received thus into his most venerable secrets, the
knowledge of the deformities and sins of his very soul, when either he has
neglected to perform the duty of the Domestic divine guardian, the assiduous
watch to keep off the hostile approaches or mines of sins, or has not been
obeyed in his warnings, he has now this only last part of duty behind, that
of becoming the Angel to Lot, calling him, leading him, forcing him out of
Sodom, setting him without the Port with an escape, fly for thy life, neither
stay thou in all the plain; and again re-inforcing the admonition and
warning, with an escape to the mountains lest thou be consumed. And he that
has no heart to be thus importunate upon his perishing brother, may by that
guess how little he has of that Angelical temper in him.

4 The fourth degree of this duty is, (in case any or all the former, though
conscientiously and diligently used, have yet been without success, then
watching of seasons and opportunities, calling in prudence to assist Charity,
the brain to aid the heart, either coming as God to Adam, in the cool of
the day, when the tempter of the wax may probably make it more capable of
impression, or (as the fathers say of Gods dealing with the Elect, whom he
does, as it is thought, by that means infallibly work on) calling him, tempore
congruo, at a fit chosen time, when in all probability a seasonable admonition
may be hearkened to; great variety there is of these opportunities, not
defineable particularly, but only observable by him, that not only in his
duty toward God, and toward himself, but also toward his weak or sick brother
does walk circumspectly, and observingly, not as an unwise, but wise watchman,
and that is the meaning of Ephesians. 5.16. parallel to Dan. 2.8. rendered in the
former place redeeming, in the latter gaining the time, i. e. delaying in time
of the rage, or fury of the Prince, in Dan. or of the evil times, in St. Paul;
and so in the heat of a violent sin, when admonition is out of its place,
until the present tempest be over, and then there be more hope, or possibility
for reason to be hearkened to. And as a branch of this comes in at last

5 A fifth degree of this duty (when nothing else will, and that may probably or
possibly do some good, but never else, never upon weariness, or wrath, or any
thing, but grounds of deepest Charity) the breaking of familiar converse with
him, to whom all other methods of kindness have proved succeslesse. For as in
the authoritative process, when the censures of the Church are found
necessary, to which only Christ designed them to the saving that which is
lost, the course is to deny him the most intimate society, that of the
communion of the faithful, and neither join with him in the Prayers and
Lessons, nor in the participation of the Lords Supper: so in the image of that,
the society of single friends or Christians (especially where there is no place
for the public censures either for want of government in a new planted Church,
or where Schism has driven it out, or where the crime is not of that nature,
as to be capable of that public audience) when all the former offices of the
Angelus custos have been performed improsperously, then that of the Angel with
Jacob, a wrestling to get from him, to deny him the blessing of his company and
familiarity, may prove seasonable, not out of a fastidious passionate
displeasure to the sinner, (O, he is then the most natural proper object of
pity and kindness, the incorrigible sinner is fit for any thing rather then
our anger or impatience) nor again, lest I be polluted by his company, (in
this case it is with the friend as with the believing Husband, if the
unbeleeving Wife is willing to live with him, let him not depart, how know
thou but that by thy Christian contrary example thou may yet save thy
impenitent heathen brother?) but I say only on that great principle of saving
Charity, that by seeing himself avoided, withdrawn from, left to converse
with none (beside his sin) but fiends and flatterers, he may possibly be
ashamed, and by that confusion of spirit awakened out of that snare, whence the
calm, less sensible admonitions were not able to rouse him, and this perhaps
was the kind that belonged to the disorderly obedient, 1 These. 5.14. which the
Thessalonions are so earnestly entreated (peculiarly under the notion as
brethren) to use in this case; and an opportunity sometime may be wisely chosen
when it may prove proper and seasonable.

FINIS.

