THE First general EPISTLE OF St. JOHN THE APOSTLE, Unfolded and Applied.

The Second PART, In Thirty and seven Lectures on the Second Chapter, from the
third to the last Verse.

Delivered in St. Dionys. BACK-CHURCH, By NATH: HARDY Minister of the Gospel*
and Preacher to that Parish.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Cranford, and are to be sold at his shop at the
Castle and Lion, in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1659.

To the Right Honorable Lady, Christian, Countess Dowager of Devonshire.
Madam,
I Find this Holy Apostle directing his Second Epistle to an Elect Lady; Ep.
2. v. 1
whereby he conferred no small Honor upon her; I am bold to dedicate this
Second Part of my weak Labors on his first Epistle to your Ladyship, as
esteeming it (and that justly) a great Honor to me.

St. John dignifieth the Person to whom he wrote, with the Title of a Lady; it
seems he was of another spirit than our Levelling Quakers, who denying a
Civil difference of Superior and Inferior, refuse to give those Respects,
both in Gestures and Titles, which are due to some above others. And as he
calls her a Lady, in reference to her external Quality, so an Elect Lady, in
regard of her choice internal qualifications, as being, Hieron. Ep. ad Demetri.
to use St. Hieromes Language, concerning a prime Lady in Rome, Non minus
sanctitate quam genere Nobilis) no less good, than great*

An Amiable sight it is when these two entwine each other; Piety in a mean one,
is like a Mine of Gold in the earth; Nobility in a bad one, is like a blazing
Comet in the Air: But Piety in a Noble person, is like a bright star in the
Heavens. Honor without Virtue, is as a Cloud without water; Virtue without
Honor, is as a Room without Hangings: But Virtue and Honor is as a Golden
Apple in a Silver Picture; or rather, as a Precious Diamond in a Golden Ring.
Both these were conspicuous in St. John's Elect Lady, and I may no less truly
say, are met together in you.

Should I give the World a true account of those Intellectual, Moral, and
Spiritual endowments, which God has conferred upon your Honor, I easily
believe (what St. Hierome says in reference to a Noble Lady, Si quacunque
virtutibus Id. ibid.
ejus congrua dixero, adulari putabor) I shall be censured as a Flatterer.
Besides (to speak St. Ambrose his phrase in an Epistle to the same Lady) I
Ambros. Ep. ad De^etri.
am justly fearful, N^ verecundiae tuae onerosa foret etiam vera laudatio, lest
I should offend your Ladyships Modesty, by expressing a Character of your
worth, though never so consonant to truth. I foresee also, how needless any
Enconium will be of your Merit: The Lives of great persons, being, as Cities
built upon an Hill, generally obvious. I am withal sufficiently sensible what
an arrogance it is, ut tuis praedicationibus ingenium meum par esse Id. ibid.
praesumam (as the same Father in the same Epistle elegantly) that I should
think my rude pensil fit to draw the Lineaments of your better part; upon all
which considerations I have resolved against that common custom of a
Panaegyrick.

Only (after St. John's pattern) I beseech you Ep. 2. v. 5.
(Madam) that you would abound yet more in all virtue, so as the light of your
good works may shine more and more to the perfect day. To this end, Let those
excellent counsels which are given by him in this Chapter, and though I cannot
say fully, yet I dare say faithfully expounded by me in this Book, be firmly
engraven upon your Noble Breast.

Account it your Highest Honor (with Mary) Verse. 3 6
to sit (as it wete) at Christ's feet, not only that you may hear, but keep his
Commandments, and to make good your Christian profession by treading in his
footsteps, and walking as he walked.

By employing (as you do) this Worlds goods, for Pious, Hospitable, and
charitable uses, let it appear that you have learned to Love your Brother, and
not 10* 16*
to love this world.

Go not forth to those Antichristian Lying Teachers, who by Heresy and Schism
are gone out of the Church of England, that (according to the 19, 2^.
Motto of your Honors Arms, Cavendo tutus) your precious soul may be still
safe from error, by bewaring them, and their poisonous doctrins.

Finally, As you know, so abide in him, whom 24*
you have believed, and let those truths, which you have heard from the
beginning, and hitherto embraced, abide in you to the end of your life.

I must not (Right Honorable) conclude this Epistle, without fulfilling the
chief End of its Dedication, namely, to confess my Obligation, and profess my
gratitude to your Ladyship, for those kind aspects, and benign influences,
which in these black and cloudy days, the bright beams of your goodness have
vouchsafed (as to many of my Reverend Brethren, so) in particular to my self,
the unworthiest of them all.

I have nothing more to add but my Devotions* That the great God would
accumulate upon your own person, with all that are descended from, and related
to, you, the blessings of Life, Health, and Wealth, of Love, Grace, and Peace,
of Joy, bliss, and Glory, is, and shall be the uncessant Prayer of

Madam, Your Honors greatly Obliged, and Humbly devoted Servant, NATHANAEL
HARDY.

To the Reader.
THis Epistle, which I have undertaken by divine assistance to unfold, is as it
were a goodly Fabric, consisting of five Rooms, being divided into so many
Chapters. Among those, this Second is the most spacious and specious, by reason
of which this Volume is swelled far bigger than the former. I need not tell
thee how well worthy this Room is of thy most serious view; Thus much I dare
assure thee, the more often thou look into it, the better thou will like it.

At the entrance into it, is as it were the Effigies of Christ, as an Advocate
for thy Consolation, and a pattern for thy Imitation. Toward the further end
is the portraiture of Antichrist, with all his cursed crew, spitting fire out
of their mouths against the Holy Jesus, denying him to be the Christ, against
whom the Apostle gives a seasonable Caveat.

On the right hand hang the lovely Pictures of those Virgin graces, Knowledge,
Obedience, Love of God, and of our Neighbor, and perseverance in the faith.

On the left hand are represented those misshapen Monsters, of Malice, and
Envy, in hating our brother, of worldly love, with all her Brats, the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the Pride of Life.

Finally, there are in it several partitions ( one for Fathers, another for
young men, and a third for Children) for Men, for Christians, of all ages and
sorts.

These following discourses, are as so many windows to let in light to this
Room, whereby thou may the better view it, and whatever is contained in it.
I have not made use of painted glass, which (though it may adorn) obscureth,
but rather that which is plain and clear, as affecting, not the ostentation of
my own wit, in high language, but thy edification, by significant expressions.
I have used my utmost care, that the several windows might be well leaded, by
a methodical and rational connection. Many flaws thou will meet with (some
whereof are already observed) which I hope thy can did ingenuity will pardon.
That it may please the Father of Lights, to transmit through these discourses,
some beams of heavenly knowledge into thy soul, is, and shall be the earnest
Prayer of him, who desires to live no longer, than he may be serviceable to
God and the Church in his Generation.

Nath. Hardy.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 3, 4, 5, 6. 3. And hereby we do know that we know him, if we
keep his Commandments. 4. He that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a lier, and the truth is not in him. 5. But who so keeps
his Word, in him verily is the love of God perfected; hereby know we that we
are in him. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, as
he walked.
AMong the many excellencies of this Epistle, this is one, that it is a Sacred
and Spiritual Touchststone; For as a Touchstone discovers metals, so does
this, both Doctrines and Persons. By a Touchstone, the Goldsmith discerns
what is right, and what is counterfeit; and by this Epistle, we may know Truth
from Error, and sincerity from hypocrisy. Would we be informed concerning
Positions, what are Orthodox, and what Heterodox; concerning Professors, who
are sound, and who are rotten, we need go no further then this Book. If you
cast your eyes on the latter end of this, and the beginning of the fourth and
fifth Chapters, you may learn what is the true Christian Religion, namely to
believe Jesus to be the Christ; that Christ is come in the flesh, and that he
is the Son of God. If you peruse every Chapter throughout the Epistle, you
shall find those marks, whereby you may know who are true Christians* This is
that which more especially is observable in this Scripture, the chief scope
whereof, is to describe a true and sincere Christian, by his conformity to
Christ in his Command and Example. Hereby we know, etc.

It is not unfitly taken notice of by the Greek Scholiast, that these words
have a reference to those in the Oecum. in loc.
seventh verse. of the former Chapter, If we walk in the light, we have
fellowship with one another. And indeed, if we view these Verses well, you
shall find them a further and fuller explication of that Proposition, and that
both in the Predicate and Subject.

The Predicate of that assertion, We have fellowship with one another, is here
explained by two Phrases; the one in the third verse, We know him; and the
other in the fifth and sixth verses, We are, and abide in him. These being (as
it were) the Springs of that fellowship, since our Communion is founded in our
Union; and all fellowship is between those, who know each other.

The Subject of that Assertion, If we walk in the light as he is in the light,
is here characterized by two eminent steps of this walk, namely obedience to,
and imitation of Christ; Keeping his Commandments, and walking as he walked.
By which we see that verified in this part which I have formerly told you, is
the chief design of the whole Epistle, to wit, an explication of that
Proposition, as being the Message which he heard, and was sent to declare to
them to whom he wrote.

In these four verses, there are four Propositions considerable; two whereof
are Principal, and two Collateral.

The two Principal Assertions set forth the Characters of sincere Christians.
The two Collateral refer to the knowledge we have of our Christianity by those
Characters.
The first of the Principal Doctrines is asserted, amplified, proved. Asserted
as a Thesis in the close of the third verse, We know him, if we keep his
Commandments. Amplified by an Antithesis in the fourth verse, He that says I
know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in
him. Proved by a strong Reason in the beginning of the fifth, Who so keeps
his Word, in him verily is the love of God perfected. The second Principal
Doctrine is only propounded by way of position in the sixth verse, yet with a
tacit intimation of an opposition, and withal of a probation, as will appear
in the handling; He that says he abides in him, ought himself so to walk as
he walked.
Besides these, there are two other Propositions, which I call Collateral, as
being Appendixes to the former.

The one, That a knowledge of our knowledge of, and interest in Christ, is to be
endeavored. The other, That an especial means of attaining this knowledge, is
hereby; to wit, by keeping his Commandments, and walking after his footsteps.
And these are couched in the beginning of the third, Hereby by we know that we
know him; and the end of the fifth verse, Hereby we know that we are in him.
The first Assertion, as it is propounded in the end of the (...).
third verse, We know, or according to the Greek, We have known him, if we keep
his Commandments, is that which will take up our present Discourse.

It is a Proposition which is true both ways, saving knowledge being both the
cause and the effect, the root and the fruit of obedience, on the one hand.
Keeping the Commandments, is a means whereby we come to know him that is to
increase our knowledge: And on the other, the saving knowledge of him, is a means
inabling us to keep his Commandments. That of St Paul to the Collossians, is
very full to this purpose, where he prays for them, that they might be filled
with the knowledge of Gods will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding; that
they might walk worthy of him, and please him in all things, being fruitful in
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge Coloss. 1. 9, 10.
of God: Intending thereby, to teach us that we cannot walk worthy of the Lord,
unless we be filled with the knowledge of his will: and withal, that by being
fruitful in every good work, we should increase in the Theoph. ibid.
knowledge of God. (...), says Theophilact aptly; one of these being, as it
were constitutive and productive of the other: that as water engendereth I^^,
and Ice water; so does knowledge beget obedience, and obedience augment knowledge.

1. Would we then know him, let us keep his Commandments. Psalm. 119. 100.
By thy Precepts (says David) that is, by the observance of thy Precepts, I
get understanding. Joh. 7. 19.
If any man do my will (says our blessed Savior) he shall know my Dostrine.
(...), Greg. Naz. Orat. 29. Audiendo praecepta Dei illuminati non sunt faciendo
illu^ati sunt.
says Nazianzen; Would thou be a Divine? do the Commandments. For action is
(as it were) the Basis of* contemplation. It is St Gregory's observation
concerning the two Disciples, who, whilst Christ talked with them knew him not,
but in performing an Act of Hospitality toward him, to wit, breaking bread
with him they knew him, that they were enlightened, not by hearing but by doing
Divine Precepts. Quisquis ergo vult audita intelligere; festinet ea quae jam
audire Greg. Hom. in Evang. 23.
potuit, opere implere. Whosoever therefore will understand, let him first make
have to do what he hears.

2. Again, Would we keep his Commandments* let us know him. These two,
Knowledge, and Practice are necessary attendants the one upon the other. Those
two Sisters, Leah and Rachell are fit Emblems of id. ibid.
Contemplation and Action; Contemplation like Rachell is Beautiful; Action
like Leah is Fruitful. And as those two sisters were Married to Jacob, so are
these two Graces concomitant in every Christian. Those Cherubims which the
Prophet Ezekiel speaks of, are described to have hands under their Wings. The
Wings (says St Gregory,) are an Emblem of Knowledge, Ezekiel. ^. 8. Quid per
manus nisi activa vita; and quid per pennas nisi contemplativa signatur. Greg.
in Ezekiel. Hom. 3.
whereby we fly in our thoughts to Heaven, the hands, of Practice whereby we
do good on Earth, and all true Christians like these Cherubims have hands under
their Wings; That is, Operation attending Meditation. This that Father looks
upon as resembled by those two sisters (of whom we read in the Gospel,) Martha
and Mary, whereof Vna intenta oper^, altera contemplatio^^, the one was intent
upon doing, the other upon hearing. Indeed these two are not only as two
sisters, but as the Mother and the Daughter, Divine Knowledge both engaging and
inabling to Obedience, so as it does not only follow upon, but flow from it.
The true Knowledge of Divine things is not otiosa, but officiosa, a loyterer,
but a labourer. As her principal Object Christ is Incarnate, so is She;
having Eyes of Charity, Bowels of Mercy, Hands of Bounty, and Feet of
Obedience. Indeed you may as well sever id. ibid.
the Beams from the Sun, heat from the fire, motion from life, as practice from
a right Knowledge: to which purpose is that note of Calvin upon the Text. He
admonishes Ad monet non ^tiosam esse Dei notitiam, etc. Calv. in Loc.
us that Christian Knowledge is not idle but active by its efficacious virtue
producing Obedience. So that they who know him really, will, nay cannot but
keep his Commandments.

To illustrate this Truth the more clearly, I shall briefly resolve these two
Queries? what it is to know him? and what it is to keep his Commandments?
whereby we shall learn both why a right Knowledge of Christ enableth to keep the
Commandments? and what keeping the Commandments flows from this Knowledge.

1. The full Explication of this Knowledge and its Influence upon keeping the
Commandments, will best appear, by considering both the Object whereabout it
is conversant, and the Acts which it puts forth.

1. The Object of this Knowledge is insinuated in that Pronoune Him; and if you
ask whom, the answer is to be given from the first Verse, where we read of the
Father and Jesus Christ the Advocate. According to this it is, that our blessed
Savior makes the Object of saving Knowledge to be the only true God, and John
17. 3.
Jesus Christ whom he has sent. It is not then that Knowledge we have of God by
his Works, by his Law, but by his Gospel, whereof St John here speaks. So
Beza upon the Text. Agitur hic de cognitione Dei in Beza in Loc.
Evangelio. The Apostle here speaks of Evangelicall Knowledge, which must
needs engage to Obedience. Inasmuch as it is a Knowledge of the Love of God and
Christ toward us, and those choice benefits he has wrought for us; and
certainly he that knows how much Christ has done for his Salvation, cannot
but be ready to do whatever Christ requires for his Service. Indeed that
natural knowledge we have of him, as a Creator, carries in it an Argument of
Obedience. It is the acknowledgment of the Elders, Worthy art thou, O Lord, to
receive glory and honor, for thou have created all things. It being most
equal that to him Rev. 4. 11.
we should return service, from whom we receive our being. Yet further, that
legal knowledge we have of him as our Lawgiver and Judge, is an enducement to
obedience: Inasmuch, as the breach of his Law, cannot but provoke him to
inflict the curs, but still the knowledge we have of God as a Father, of Christ
as an Advocate and propitiation, is both the sweetest and the strongest
Obligation, nothing being more rational then that our Father, our Redeemer
should be our Lord, and that we should be wholly devoted to him, who is so
dearly affected to us: Especially considering this, is the very end of his
delivering us out of the hands of our enemies, that we should serve before him
without fear, in righteousness Luke 1. 75.
and holiness all the days of our lives.

2. The Acts of this knowledge will the better appear by observing that various
acceptance of this word know, which may fitly be accomodated to our present
purpose. Among others, there are three constructions of this word.

1. To know, is sometimes as much as to acknowledge. Exodus 1. 8. Hos, 2. 8.
When we read of a Pharaoh risen in Egypt, which knew not Joseph: Of God
complaining concerning Israel, that she did not know he gave her Corn, and Wine
and Oil: And again, of Christ's answer to many at the last day, I know you not.
It is plainly manifest, Mat. 7. 23.
that to know, is as much as to own, acknowledge: And in this sense, that Latin
word is used by the Poet, Cognoscere for Agnoscere.

-- Dominum cognoscite vestrum. Ovid.
This acceptance is here made use of by Tirinus, and not unfitly: If we know
him, that is, acknowledge him Agnoscendo eum. Tirin.
as our Lord and Jesus, and own him as our Prince and Savior. And thus knowing
him, we cannot but account our selves obliged to keep his Commandments. It is
very observeable to this purpose what Christ says in St John's Gospel
concerning his Sheep, They know my voice, Joh. 10. 4.
and they follow me. True Believers acknowledging Christ to be their Shepherd,
and owning it to be his voice which they hear in the Scriptures, follow him by
an active conformity to his Precepts. It is Gods own reasoning in the Prophecy
of Malachy, If I be a Father, Mal. 1. 6.
where is my honor: If I be a Master, where is my fear. And therefore
Christians acknowledging him to be their Father, their Master, cannot but give
up themselves to the honor, fear, and service of him.

2. (...) is sometimes as much as (...), to know, the same with to believe. It
were easy to multiply Instances of this kind, but one may suffice instead of
all, where God says concerning Christ, By his knowledge, Isa. 53. 11.
shall my righteous servant justify many: Which is no doubt to be construed,
by Faith in him, he shall justify, according to that of St Paul; being
justified by Romans 5. 1.
Faith. And believing is called knowing upon a double account.

1. Partly, Because Knowledge is a necessary ingredient of Faith. It is the
Apostles assertion concerning himself, I know whom I have believed; and his
question concerning the Heathen, How shall they believe on him, of 2 Timothy 1.
12. Romans 10. 14.
whom they have not heard? thereby asserting it impossible; and the reason is,
because they cannot believe on him, whom they have not known. Indeed, Faith
formally considered, is an assent, or if you will, consent. But fundamentally
it is knowledge: Faith is not a brutish captivity, but a voluntary assent,
which cannot be without some measure of knowledge praeceding. It is true, the
knowledge required in Faith, is not (...), of the cause, such as in Science, but
only, (...), that it is so, upon Divine Revelation: But whilst it bridleth
curiosity, it also abhors igorance. In which respect St Hierom Hier. contra.
Lucifer.
says excellently, Quae simplicitas est nescire, quae credas? What a fally is
it not to know what thou pretendest to believe? And Fulgentius, Fides vera quod
credit non nescit Fulgent. contr. Arrian.
etiamsi non potest videre quod sperat and credit; True Faith, though it cannot
see, yet knows what it believes.

2. Partly, Because Faith carries in it as much certainty as knowledge. It is
the difference between opinion and knowledge, that the one is built only upon
probabilities, but the other upon certainties; the one argues topically, but
the other demonstratively. Now Faith is not an opinionative but a scientifical
assent: For doubtless, since Faith is founded upon Divine Revelation, which is
infallible, there must needs be as much certainty and clearness in Faith, as
there can be in any knowledge, though founded upon never so strong
Demonstration. Upon this account it is, that Faith is defined by the Author to
the Hebrews, to be an evidence: And the Heb. 11. 1. Joh. 6. 69.
Evangelists expression is, We believe, and are sure; to intimate that our
believing is not a thinking, but a knowing.

According to this notion of Knowledge St Gregory occasionally speaking of
these words Expounds them, and gives this as his Reason, Notitia quippe Dei ad
fidem pertinet, because the Knowledge of God is an Appendix of Greg. M. in
Evang. hom. 22. l. 2. Isa. 53. 1. Romans 10. 16. 16. 26.
Faith; and in this sense, if we know him, we will keep his Commandments. It
is observable that in Scripture Obeying is sometimes put for Believing, so St
Paul quoting that of the Prophet, who has believed, reads it, who has obeyed
our Report; and that Obedience is called sometimes, the Obedience of Faith, Why
this? But to teach us that true Faith cannot be severed from, yea puts upon
Obedience. Works without Faith are not good works, in which respect Faith is
wittily called the nest of good works in which they must be hatched; But
withal, Faith without works is as good as no Faith, and therefore is affirmed
by St James to be a dead James 2 25*
Faith, and good Works are not unfitly styled the Pulse ^f Faith, by which the
state and temper of it is discovered. Believing is sometimes called in
Scripture ^ receiving of Christ, and this receiving is of whole Christ, Christ
John 1. 10.
not only as a Priest, to propitiate for our sins, but as a King to govern us
by his Laws, In vain does he Col. 2. 6.
trust for Salvation by, who yields not Subjection to Christ: and therefore
says St Paul, as you have received the Lord Jesus (by Faith) so walk in him
(by Obedience.)

3. To know sometimes is as much as to have a Sciendi seu cognoscendi sermo in
Scriptura divina praecipue, non semper notitiam manifestat, nisi experimentum
alicujus rei habere, etc. Didym. in loc. Eccl. 8. 5.
personal Experience, who so knows the Commandment says the Wiseman, shall
know no evil, so the Hebrew, feel no evil, so our Translation appositely,
Know, being the same there with Feel. When St Paul says of Christ, he knew no
sin, he is to be understood in this sense, that he did not experience any sin
in himself. In this acception Beza construeth that of St Paul, where he
professes to account all things loss, that he might know Christ, that is,
reipsa sentire, in very deed to feel a savor and relish of Christ. And
according to 1 Cor. 5. 21.
this notion Oecumenius understands this Knowledge of him in my Text, to be as
it were a Commixion and Communion Phil. 3. 10.
with him. Eliphaz has a Phrase very proper to this purpose, acquaint thy self
with him. Those with whom we are acquainted, are such of whom we have had trial
and experience, and thus to know Christ is to Oecumen in loc.
have a sweet intimacy between Christ and our Souls, to Job 22. 22.
know him not only as revealed to us, but in us, as Preached to our Ears, but
as dwelling in our hearts. And now whosoever thus knows him, cannot but keep
his Commandments. The Reason whereof appears in the forementioned Text,
where the Knowledge of Christ and the Virtue of Christ are joined together. As
the Woman that touched Christ received Virtue from him to cure her Disease, so
whosoever has an Experimental Knowledge of Christ cannot but Experience the
Virtue of Christ, to wit, of his Death for Mortification, of his Rising for
Vivification, both which make up Sanctification, whereby we keep the
Commandments. And further, look as they who are inwardly acquainted each with
other, are joined together in a firm League of Amity; whereby it is that they
Will and Nill the same things: So is it with those who are acquainted with
Christ, they Will what he Wills, and Nill, what he Nills, and endeavor wholly
to conform themselves to his Precepts. To sum it up then, if you would know
what this means to know him, I answer, it is to know God and Christ as
revealed in the Gospel, and that so as to own him, to believe in him, and to
have an experimental acquaintance with him, and thus knowing him, we cannot
but keep his Commandments.

2. You have beheld the Mother Knowledge, be pleased now to take a view of the
Daughter Obedience, as it is expressed in those words, if we keep his
Commandments, wherein each word is Emphaticall and deserves our due
consideration; here are three words, Commandment, his, and keep, accordingly
here are three Particulars, the Object, the Subject, the Act; of each briefly.

1. Commandments,] That is the Object, Aretius upon the Romans critically
observes, that (...) and (...) Aret. in Romans 7. 12.
differ as the Genus and the Species, Law taking in all sorts of precepts, but
commands specially respecting those which are Affirmative, and it is that which
we may not unfitly here take notice of, so much the rather considering what is
said at the first Verse of this Chapter, there it is that you sin not, avoid
what is forbidden, here it is keep his Commandments, do what is required. It
is not enough to avoid sin, but we must do our duty, as we cease to do evil,
so we must Isai. 1. 16.
learn to do well; as we die to sin, so we must live to 1 Pet. 2. 24.
Righteousness. Finally, as we abhor that which is evil, so we must cleave
to that which is good. Pharisaicall Religion lies chiefly in Negatives, God I
thank Romans 12. 7.
thee I am no Extortioner, but Christian Religion obliges to Affirmatives as
well as Negatives. As well the Matthew. 25. 30. Luke 16. 3.
idle and unprofitable Servant, as the wastefull Prodigal Steward is
condemned, and the barren vine is in danger of being plucked up, as well as the
wild. Indeed he that abstaineth from sinful actions is not far from the
Kingdom, but it is he that does well shall obtain Vide Chrisost. hom. de
virtut. and vit.
the Kingdom, the first step is not to sin, to leave off those evils we have
done, but the next is, to do the good we have left undone, and so keep his
Commandments.

2. His,] Jesus Christ the righteous has not only published promises but given
Precepts, and as he proposes comforts to stablish our confidence, so he
imposes duties which require our performance; in which regard Gal. 6. 2.
it is that we read elsewhere of the Law of Christ, and here of his
Commandments. If it be further enquired what these Commandments are? I
answer, they are no other for substance then those which are contained in those
Ten words, which are usually called the Moral Law. And therefore we find our
blessed Savior in that Sermon of his upon the Mount, Expounding the Mat. 5. 6,
7.
Precepts, and pressing the Practice of the Law upon his Disciples and the
People. Thus as the Law, in respect of our inability of exact observance, and
the rigidity of its curse upon non-observance, drives us to Christ for comfort
in the Promises, so Christ sends us back to the Law, as a rule still to guide
us in the course of our Conversations, by a sincere endeavor to observe its
Precepts, and these are here called his Commandments.

3. Keep,] The Act which every Christian is to perform, and which this
Knowldeg whereof my Text speaks, inableth to, is Keeping. It is a word of a
large extent, and may have a double reference, the one to the heart, the other
to the life: when Solomon Prove. 3. 1.
gives it in charge to his Son, let thine heart keep my Commandments, he
means no doubt a due pondering, and a steadfast remembering of those precepts
he gave him; thus David kept, when he says he hid Gods Word in his heart; and
the Metaphors both of keeping Psalm. 119. 11.
and hiding refer to a treasure, it being our duty as carefully to keep in
mind the Commandments of God and Christ, as a covetuous Mammonist is to keep
his Gold and Silver in his Chest. But that which we are here to understand is
the keeping of Christ Commandments in our life. Apposite to this purpose is
that Note of St Austin upon those words of our Savior, He that has my
Commandments and keeps them, Qui habet in Joh. 14. 21. Vide Aug. ibid.
memoria and servat in vita, qui habet in Sermonibu^ and servat in moribus, qui
habet audiendo and servat* faciendo, He that has them in mind and keeps them
in life, he that has them at his tongues end, and keeps them at his fingers
end, he that has them by hearing and keeps them by doing; So that in this
construction, this Metaphor of keeping, referrs to a way which he is said to
keep, who constantly walks in it. And so keeping is the same with obeying,
and the import of these words, We know him if we keep his Commandments, is,
where there is a true Faith in Christ, there will be a sincere Obedience to his
Precepts.

And that you may see wherein the sincerity of this Obedience consists, which
is the fruit of this Knowledge, be pleased to observe it briefly, and yet fully
in these two Particulars.

1. The sincere keeping his Commandments, is, a keeping them because they are
his; It is one thing to do what Christ commands, and another to do it because
he commands it. Pagans that have no knowledge of, do many things which are
required by Christ, but they cannot do them because he requires them,
Hyppocrites that have no saving Knowledge of Christ perform many things which
he prescribes, but it is only out of self-respects, and if a man do that which
Christ Commands, and yet know not that he commands it, or if he knows it to be
his Command and do it not, because it is Commanded by him, it is not such an
Obedience as arises from a right knowledge of him. It is very observable
concerning David, that when he prays so earnestly, Oh that my ways were so
directed that I might keep thy Statutes, he premiseth this as the Reason, Thou
have commanded us to keep thy Precepts diligently, Psalm. 119. 4, 5.
thereby intimating that the ground of his Obedience Verse. 94.
to Gods Precepts, was the Stamp of divine authority in joining him; to this
purpose it is that he says in that same Psalm, I have sought thy Precepts,
thereby implying, that that which he sought in his Obedience was the fulfilling
of Gods Will; indeed that only and properly is Obedience which is done intuitu
voluntatis divinae, with a respect to, and eye upon divine* Will. As that is
only a divine Faith which believes a truth, not because of humane Reason but
divine Revelation, so that only is a true Obedience which conformeth to the
command, not because it may consist with any selfends, but because it carries
in it an impression of Christ's authority.

2. And further, This sincere keeping of the Commandment, is a keeping not
some but many, nay all: So as whatsoever appears to be required by him, is
conformed to by us. Indeed this necessarily follows upon the former; For
Quicquid propter Deum fit aequaliter fit, he that does any thing at another
prescript, upon this account, that it is prescribed by him, will not neglect to
do whatsoever he prescribes, there being the same reason of obeying him in all
as in any; hence it is that as our Faith eying divine Revelation, believes
whatsoever is revealed, how cross soever it may be to our Reason. So Obedience
eying divine Prescription fulfilleth whatsoever is required though never so
contrary to our affections. And thus this keeping the Commandments is an
Universal Obedience.

1. In respect of the extent which is ad totum preceptum to every command.

1. As well duties of the first as of the second, and the second as of the
first Table; Piety without equity is but hypocrisy, and equity without piety
is but morality, both together is Christianity. A Pharisee may be zealous for
devotion, and yet a devourer of Widows Houses. An Heathen may be exact in his
dealings toward Man, whilst yet he is no worshipper of God, but a true
Christian keeps a good conscience both toward God and Man.

2. As well the spiritual as the external part of commands; In our keeping
the Commandments it is not enough to approve our selves to men, who only
observe our actions, but to God and Christ, who searches the hearts, and
vieweth our dispositions; hence it is that true Obedience is a keeping of all
the Commandments, not only as to the matter, but the manner and the end* a
performing those duties which are required with suitable affections and a single
intention.

2. In respect of the Duration which is per totam vitam, to the end of our
days; It is said of Christ that he was Phil. 2. 8. Vide Beza ib.
Obedient to the death, and one interpretation of that is to his dying day: So
must they who know Christ, be Obedient to him throughout the whole course of
their lives. St Austin explaineth the phrase of keeping, Aug. in Joh. 14.
not only by doing but persevering, and indeed that is sometimes the notion of
the phrase; so when St Paul 2 Timothy 4. 5. Rev. 3. 10.
says, I have kept the Faith, he means no doubt his constancy in the
profession of the Faith: and where Christ says, Because thou have kept the
Word of my patience, he intends a perseverance in their Obedience to Christ's
Word, notwithstanding persecution. And thus to keep Christ's Commandments, as
well by suffering as doing, to lose any thing rather then not keep them, and
patiently to continue in well doing though we may suffer ill, is that Obedience
which* a right Knowledge of Christ produces.

I cannot leave this without annexing one Caution, that this Universal
Obedience is not to be understood in respect of an exact execution, but a
cordial endeavor. Indeed the punctual observation of the Commandments is in
this life impossible, not absolutely and in it self, for God does not command
such things* as are in themselves impossible to be done; but respectively and
accidentally, because we are by the fall disinabled, and that ability we once
had is not for the present perfectly restored. The truth is in the best there
is both defectus privans and affectus obstans, a defect of that measure of
grace which should strengthen to full Obedience, and besides a continual
lusting of the flesh against the spirit, conflict between sin and grace,
whereby it is that grace cannot perfectly produce its acts: Hence it is that as
we cannot keep them collectively, so neither distributively; we cannot observe
all, no, nor any so perfectly in every title as that there should be no
deviation. But still there may be a sincere purpose of heart inclining us to
observe all; whereby it is that as Hypocrites may be said to break the
Commandments when they keep them, because with the observance of the outward
act, there is no concurrence of the minds delight, so that the good they do
they would not do: So true Christians may (in a qualified sense) be said to
keep the Commandments when they break them; because when they fail in the
outward act, they have an habitual purpose in their regenerate part to
perform, and so the evil they do they would not. Nor is this kind of
Obedience unfitly called universal, because it has respect to every Command,
nor does it suffer a man willingly to allow himself in the breach of any of the
Precepts.

To sum it up, there is a knowledge of God and Christ, which is true and
perfect, and there is a knowledge which is true but imperfect: the perfect
knowledge is that which we shall have in that other life, which is said to be
perfect, not in respect Vide Zanch. in Loc.
of Comprehension, since it is impossible that our finite understandings should
fully comprehend an infinite Object; but in regard of apprehension, because it
shall be the fullest degree of apprehensive knowledge, which humane nature is
capable of. But the knowledge which we have in this life is imperfect, according
to 1 Cor. 13. 6.
that of the Apostle, we know in part: and according to this different
knowledge, so is our keeping the Commandments, since the effect cannot exceed
the energy of the cause: when therefore our knowledge shall be perfect, our
obedience shall be complete. But in the mean time as our knowing Christ, so
our keeping his Commandments is defective, though withal it is sincere, and
as to the intention illimited; the soul that rightly knows Christ being ready
to observe, and resolved to do whatsoever Christ reveals, as his Will, and
imposes as a command.

What now remains, but that every one of us endeavor to express the truth
of our knowledge of Christ by our Obedience? We have all of us (my brethren)
heard much and often of Christ, but have we yet learned to know him? We, many
of us are able to speak much of; but have we any spiritual acquaintance with
Christ? If so, where is our Obedience to his Commands? True knowledge is such as
may not only be heard, but seen. Sheep (says the moral Philosopher) do not
bring their fodder to their shepherds and show them how much they have eaten,
but they inwardly digest and outwardly show it by the goodness and quantity of
the fleece upon their backs; if we will show the reality of knowledge in our
hearts, it must be by the fleece of holiness in our lives. Indeed how can it be
otherwise, but that he who knows Christ, the authority he has over him, the
mercy he has wrought for him, and accordingly experienceth any Communion with
him, and depends for salvation on him, should account himself infinitely
obleiged to the observance of whatsoever is enjoined by him, Lord what will thou have me to do? is the voice* of Saul when Christ is pleased to discover
himself to him. They that know thy Name (says Act. 9. 5, 6.
the Psalmist, of God,) will put their trust in thee. They that know thy Nature
(oh blessed Jesus) will Psalm. 9. 9. 11.
yield obedience to thee. Indeed we many of us so know Christ, as that we are
willing to trust in him, but yet not to serve him, believe his promises of
mercy we do, observe his Commands of Duty we will not, but in vain is that
confidence which is not attended with obedience, and therefore let our
conscientious keeping the Precepts, give evidence of our Faith in, our knowledge
of Christ, so shall we be found real Christians; and if our knowledge of Christ
here enable us to keep his Commandments, our keeping the Commandments shall
bring us to the knowledge of Christ hereafter when we shall behold him face to
face in glory for ever.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 4, and part of the 5. 4. He that says I know him, and keeps
not his Commandments, is a lier, and the truth is not in him. 5. But who so
keeps his Word, in him verily is the love of God perfected.
Knowledge is very amiable in the eyes of all rational Men, since as the
Understanding is that faculty which ennobleth Man, so Knowledge is that
excellency which ennobleth the Understanding. Of all Knowledge none more
precious then that of God, and of Christ. Other Knowledge may ennoble, but this
spiritualizeth the mind. Other knowledge is needful for us as Men, but this
concerns us as Christians. Indeed to use Lactantius his expression, Quem qui
non cognoscit, licet viderit caecus, audiat surdus, loquatur elinquis, Lact. de
vero cultu, l. 6. c. 9. John 17. 3.
this is that Knowledge without which he that sees is blind, hears is deaf,
speaks is dumb, and I add, lives is dead. So much our blessed Savior
implies when he says. This is life eternal to know thee the only true God,
and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.

But as all shining glass is not Crystal, nor all lightsome apparitions
Stars; so neither is all Knowledge of God and Christ, that which intituleth to
life eternal. And therefore our Apostle is here pleased to prevent deceit, by
giving us its most genuine Character drawn from its inseparable attendent, yea,
necessary effect, to wit, Obedience to the Commandments; the wilful neglect
whereof argues the absence of this Knowledge: for he that says I know him, and
keeps not, etc.

The first principal Proposition, as it is asserted, has been already
discussed. That which next follows in order, is the Antithesis, by which it
is illustrated; a Sentence equivalently the same with the former: and as Ferus
has observed, that we may see it did not fall Fer. in loc. Gualt. ibid.
from him rashly; yea, withal vehementiae gratia, as Gualter notes, that it
might make the deeper impression on us, he expresses it again by its contrary.

In which words there are two things to be considered; an implicit Accusation,
an explicit Aggravation. The one in these words; He that says I know him, and
keeps not his Commandments: the other in these, is a liar, and the truth is
not in him. According to which Zanchy lays down two Positions* the one, That
there Zanch. in loc.
were many in St John's time, yea, always would be in the Church, who say, they
know Christ and keep not his Commandments; and the other, that all such do
most impudently lie.

1. These words, He that says I know him and keeps not his Commandments,
plainly intimate that there are some who keep not Christ's Commandments, and
yet say they know him. Parallel to this is that of St Paul to Titus, where he
speaks of some who profess they Tit. 1. 16.
know God, and in works deny him, being abominable disobedient, and to every
Good work reprobate. They whom both these Apostles may most probably be
supposed to intend, were the Gnostics; this phrase of knowing so fitly
answering that name; which out of an arrogant self-conceit they gave to
themselves, whilst they were men of flagitious lives, and licentious
Conversations, calling themselves Gnostics, and accounting themselves the only
knowing men in the matters of Religion.

Nor is it only true of these Heretics, but is likewise verified of all
Hypocrites, who whilst they indulge to their lusts, and live in wilful
violation of the Precepts, pretend to great measure of illumination with divine
knowledge. In which respect Aretius Aret. in loc.
says, this is vera nota simulatorum filiorum Dei, a true mark of bastard
Children and false Saints. The sins of the people of Israel were so great, and
their transgressions heinous, that God bids his Prophet to lift up Isai. 58. 1,
2.
his voice like a Trumpet, and cry aloud against them, and yet they seek God
daily, and delight to know his way. The same people are charged by God for
transgressing his Covenant, and trespassing against his laws: and yet the
Prophet says of them presently after, they cry Hos. 8. 1, 2.
to the Lord my God, we know thee; as if they were familiar with, and had an
especial interest in him. Our blessed Savior in the Gospel speaks not of a
few, but many who shall at the last day take acquaintance of him, as if they
had long known him: for they shall say, Lord, Lord, have not we prophesied in
thy name, and in Mat. 7. 22, 23.
thy name cast out Devils, and done many wonderful works, whom yet he calls
workers of iniquity? Whence it appears that wicked men may not only say it to
others by profession, but within themselves by their opinion, yea may not only
live but die in this self-delusion, that they know Christ, and so have an
interest in him whilst yet they work iniquity. It was the observation of Calvin
in his time, that many hypocrites men of loose lives, did fidei titulo
superbire, pride u^ themselves Calvin in loc.
in the title of believer, and made large profession of Christianity, nor is it
less observable in the seeming Saints of this age; on the one hand their
actions are manifestly contrary to those commands of self-denial, and
humility, loyalty, and equity, meekness, and patience, mercy and charity, in
giving and forgiving, which Christ has imposed on all those that will come
after him: and yet on the other hand, whilst their hands are leaden, their
tongues are gilded; they say, they know God, yea, they are intimate with him,
they talk much of the new birth, the work of grace, having an interest in
Christ, and the like.

2. You see the truth of the charge, now view the hainoufness of the fault. He
that says this is a liar and the truth is not in him. Indeed both ways it is
an untruth, and he that says it, deserves to be branded for a liar. To say we
keep his Commandments, when we do not know him is a lie, since if the eye be
blind it is impossible the foot should make strait steps. God never turns any
from the power of Satan to himself, whom Acts 26. 18.
he does not first turn from darkness to light. Knowledge is the souls rudder
according to which its course is steered; the Christian travelers Mercury
pointing him the right way; nor can we give up our selves in obedience to his
precepts, whom we know not, as our Lord, and of whose command we are ignorant.
And as it is true on the one, so on the other hand. To say we know him, and not
to keep his Commandments is a lie, nor can there be truth in those who say it:
it was well spoken by the Philosopher, (...), without virtue God is but an
empty name; and it is as true, without Obedience, all knowledge of God and
Christ is but an empty notion, a lying vanity.

For the further illustrating of this it will not be amiss to take notice of a
threefold lie, to wit, verbal, doctrinall, practical; told, taught, acted. A
verbal lie is, when we tell a false tale, raise an untrue report, and so
become lying witnesses, and our lips lying lips. A doctrinall lie is, when men
assert that to be Gods Word, which is their own fancy, and vent their false
opinions under the notion of sublime verities: to believe these 2 These. 2. 12.
lies God threatens to give up those, who receive not the truth in the love of
it. Finally a practical lie is when a man's actions do not correspond to his
profession, in which respect he is justly called a liar, whose actions are
breaches of the Precepts, and yet his pretenses are large of knowing Christ,
since as Lorinus well notes Lor. in loc.
such an one, Non praestat quod scit, quod profitetur, quod dicit, quod
promittit, he performs not according to what he knows, professes, says,
nay promises, and so there is no truth, not only of veracity but fidelity in
him, (as that Author observes) whilst he fulfilleth not that, which in his
Baptism he promised, and by his profession he is obliged to, the keeping the
Commandments.

But it may be here objected, that there are many who do know Christ, and that
not only in a weak but great measure, since they are able to discourse
excellently of the mysteries of Salvation, the things of God and Christ, whose
lives are yet dissonant to the rule of Christianity, and if so, surely when
such say they know Christ, they do not lie, though they do not keep his
Commandments.

The answer to which objection will be easily made by distinguishing of a
double knowledge of Christ, to wit, informis and formata, literal and
spiritual, notionall and practical, speculative and active. Look as there is
in a man caro and spiritus, flesh and spirit, a body and a soul; in a tree
cortex and succus, the rind or bark and the sap or juice: so is there in
Christian knowledge. He whose knowledge is only litterall, has but the flesh,
the body, the bark, the rind of knowledge; only he whose knowledge is
spiritual, has the spirit, the soul, the sap, the juice of knowledge.

These two knowledges though they agree in the Object, whereabout they are
conversant, yet are they very much different.

1. In their efficient. For whereas a speculative knowledge of Christ may be in
a great measure acquired by industry in reading, and is at most, but a fruit of
common illumination: the active knowledge is only obtained by Prayer, and is a
fruit of special Sanctification.

2. In their Subject. For whereas that is only seated in the understanding,
this has an impression upon the will, and is sapida scientia, a knowledge with
a savor and relish of the sweetness of Christ; that only floateth in the
brain, but this sinketh down into the heart; that spins fine Cobwebs in the
head, this makes the heart beat with a true pulse toward Heaven.

Finally in their effect, that puffs up with selfconceit, this abaseth a man
in his own apprehension; that only sits upon the lip, but this is to be felt at
the fingers end; that indeed may be, nay many times is alone; but this is ever
attended with obedience. Now of this Knowledge it is, that St John here
speaks; and he that says he thus knows Christ, not keeping his
commandments, is a liar.

The truth is, whereas this knowledge is, licet vera tamen imperfecta, though
true yet defective, that is, nec vera nec perfecta, not perfect nor yet true
according Romans 2. 20.
to a Theological notion: it is only (...), as the Apostles expression is, a
form of knowledge, not the power; a shadow, not the substance; Vide Menoch. in
loc. Vide Zanch. in loc.
and is not the true, because not the good knowledge of God: since as the
Psalmist says, A good understanding have they that do his Commandments.
Indeed as works without knowledge are no good works, so knowledge without Psalm.
119. 66, 111, 10.
works is no good knowledge. He that says he believes in Christ and lives not
accordingly, believe him not, he shows his Hypocrisy not his Faith, who
makes show of Faith without Obedience. And as it is vain glory to boast of our
keeping the Commandments, so it is in vain to boast of knowledge without
keeping the Commandments. In which respect that of St Gregory Greg. in Ezekiel.
hom. 22. l. 2.
is very apposite when there is time and place and ability of doing good,
Tantum quis operatur, quantum Deum noverit; tantum se nosse Deum indicat,
quantum pro Deo bona operatur. Look how much knowledge, so much doing; and so
much as a man does, for so much he knows of God, and no more.

This will yet the more fully appear, if we observe the Scripture Language,
which as it were defines that knowledge of God by Obedience, and denies it to
them who (though they be not ignorant) are disobedient.

That expression which the Prophet Jeremy brings in God speaking to Shallum
concerning his Father, is very observable to this purpose; He judged the Jer.
22. 16.
poor and the needy: was not this to know me says the Lord? and why is
righteous judgment a knowing the Lord, but because it was a fulfilling of his
command? Upon this account it is, that these words of the same Prophet, they
shall not teach one another, saying, know the Lord, are read by the Caldee,
saying, fear the Lord, which the wise man joyneth with keeping his
Commandments: and those of the Prophet Hosea, there is no knowledge of God in
the land, are rendered by the Caldee, there is none that walks in the fear of
the Lord. Hence it is that the Sons of Eli, though Priests are said to be sons
of Hos. 4. 2.
Belial, which know not the Lord God, where the one phrase is expounded by the
other, because Sons of Belial that 1 Samuel 2. 12.
would not stoop to the yoke of Obedience, therefore branded as guilty of
ignorance. Yet more clearly God says by his Prophet Jeremy, they that handle
the Law Jer. 2. 8, 4, 22.
know me not. And this is annexed as the reason because they transgress his
Law: a strange expression. Handling the Law, supposes knowing it and yet not
keeping: they are said not to know even the Law which they handle: and in the
same prophecy God complaining of his people of Israel, says, my people are
foolish, they have not known me, they have no understanding: and why thus? but
because to do good they have no knowledge. Some know that they may know, this is
curiosity: some know, that they may be known; this is vain glory: but some
know, that they may do; this is piety. And because the Jews had not knowledge to
do good, they are said to have no knowledge; by all which it appears an
undeniable truth, that for them who break this Commandment, to say they know
God and Christ is an odious lie.

To wind up this, David acknowledges I said in mine haste, all men are liars;
but St John was not guilty of any such rashness, in saying all Hypocrites are
liars: and therefore Credamus and cedamus veritati, Lor. in loc. Ne quaquam
men's fallat and se existimet Deum cognoscere, etc. Aug. de fide and oper. c. 12.
nosque fateamu^ esse mendaces: in a sense of our Hypocrisy, let us assent to
this verity, acknowledging our selves to be liars; nor let us any longer
believe a lie, and so cheat our selves into Hell. Do not think a few barren
notions, dry sapless opinions, airy frothy speculations to be a saving
knowledge: let not (says St Austin) thy foolish heart deceive thee, by
imagining thy self to know God, whilst thy Faith is a dead Faith without works.
Who would fraught his ship with such drossie Oar, or stay for that gale which
cannot waft him to Heaven? Nay, know thou not (oh man) that all such
knowledge will only serve to make thy mittimus to Hell, and aggravate as thy
sin, so thy torment, in that day, when all naked empty Knowledge shall vanish
away? Where will be the Scribes? Where the Disputers? Where the Wise? Shall
thou not then have cause to cry out with the Poet, Cur aliquid vidi? or with
Job, Quare misero lux data est? Woe is me that ever I knew any thing of God or
Christ. Oh that I had been born a Pagan, an Idiot, and never so much as heard
the sound of the Gospel! for then would my Condemnation have been less. In a
word, what shame will at that day sit upon thy face, when thou shall be found
before God, Angels, and Men a liar; and he whom thou say thou know shall
say to thee, I know thee not?

Be wise therefore in time, and learn what it is to know Christ, take heed
there be not a worm of disobedience in the tree of thy Knowledge; let it not
suffice thee to have a great, but labor for a good understanding; ever
remember that knowledge is as the means, and Obedience as the end; and therefore
all knowledge is vain, which does not tend to, and end in Obedience. And so much
for the Antithesis, by which the Thesis is illustrated. Proceed we to the

Last particular in this first proposition, Namely, The Argument, by which it
is proved, laid down in these words, Who so keeps his word, in him verily is
the love of God perfected. Calvin indeed conceives these Calv. in loc.
words to be annexed, as a description of Obedience, so that if we would know,
what it is to keep the Commandments, the answer is; It is to have the Love of
God perfected in us, to this purpose is it that Moses says, What Deuteronomy. 14. 12*
does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to love him? And Christ summeth up
all the Commandments in those two Matthew. 22. 38, 39. Vide Voss. Pelag. Histor.
S. 2.
precepts, of love toward God, and our Neighbor; yea St Paul says expressly,
That love is the fulfilling of the Law, not only effective, because it inableth
us to keep it, but reductive, because the whole Law is reducible to that of
love.

But though this Construction be true, yet I conceive it is not so genuine and
congruous to the Apostles scope. And therefore I rather look upon these words
as a confirmation of the preceding clause, he that knows God will keep his
Commandments, because he that knows him loves him, and he that loves him
cannot but keep his Commandments. The strength of this Argument will the
better appear, if we put it into a Syllogism which we may take briefly thus,

The Love of God is perfected in all, and only those who keep his Word. In
whomsoever there is a right knowledge of God, the Love of God is perfected,
Therefore Whosoever knows God aright, will keep his Word.
And now acording to this Interpretation, here are two positions to be insisted
on. The one whereof is the Minor, the other the Major in the Syllogism; the one
tacitly intimated, and the other positively expressed.

1. That which is here employed is, that where there is a Knowledge, there is
also the Love of God and Christ. Joh. 14. 21.
The Love of God may admit of a double reference; either Charitas qua amat, or
qua amatur, actively, the love whereby God does love; or passively, the love
whereby he is beloved. Illyricus understands the former; and Illyr. in loc.
no doubt it is a truth, that Gods love is fixed on him, who keeps his Word.
He that has my Commandments and keeps them, says Christ, my Father will
love him. Yea, whereas God vouchsafes a general love to all men, he has a
more special favor to obedient persons; but if we thus understand the Love of
God in this place, the phrase of perfected will sound very harsh, since there
is nothing in God, but it is absolutely and infinitely perfect, and therefore I
reject it.

More generally and probably Expositors here understand, that love which we
have to God, and so it is an undoubted truth, they who know him, cannot but
love him. The truth is, therefore is divine knowledge effective, because it is
affective; it commands our actions, because it commands our affections; and if
we know him, we keep his Commandments; because if we know him, we love him. It
is a rule among the Hebrews, that verba notitiae connotant affectus, the phrase
of knowing notes such an act of the understanding, as carries the affections
along with it. And indeed it is impossible but the affections should be carried
on toward the Object, when it is rightly known. It is a saying of St Austin,
Qui vult habere notitiam De^, amet: he that Aug. man. c. 20.
will know God must love him, since love causes acquaintance: and it is as
true, Qui vult habere amorem Dei noscat, he that will love God let him know
him. The necessary connection between these two appears upon a double ground.

1. The one in respect of Gods Nature, which is good and goodness it self. The
proper Object of love is good, Fer. in loc.
and it is impossible, Vt quis bonum cognitum non amaret, that good known
should not be beloved. Be a thing never so good, if the goodness of it be not
known to us, it cannot be loved by us; and if our understandings are fully and
clearly convinced of its goodness, it cannot but draw our love toward it: now
God is good, the chief good, a full Universal Original good. There is no
goodness in any Creature, which is not from him, and after a more eminent way
in him; and therefore he that knows him apprehending him infinitely good,
cannot but be enamored with him. Indeed he that rightly knows God, knows
him to be justice it self, and therefore cannot but fear him. Truth it self,
and therefore cannot but trust him. Goodness it self, and therefore cannot but
love him.

2. The other in respect of the Spirits efficacy and operation. Idem spiritus
qui illuminat, inspirat conformem affectum, the same spirit is both a spirit of
Knowledge and Love. Like the fire which gives both light and heat, and
wheresoever the spirit works savingly, there is not only an illumination of
the mind, but a sanctification throughout, whereby the will is inclined to the
love as well as the judgment enlightened with the knowledge of God. Content not
thy self then with a sapless, heartless Knowledge. Though Christ as God knows
all persons and things, yet he knows not them whom he loves not; and
therefore he says himself to the workers of iniquity, I know you not; and
though Mat. 7. 19.
a man (as St Paul specifieth in his own person) have all knowledge, yet if he
have not Charity it is nothing, to 1 Cor. 13. 2.
wit, in Gods account; and though it may be profitable to others, yet it can
neither be acceptable to God, nor beneficial to himself.

2. But further that which is here expressed, and therefore chiefly to be
insisted on is, that whosoever keeps his Word, in him ver^ly is the love of God
perfected.

The Subject of this clause, whosoever keeps his Word, is the same for substance
with that in the third verse, If we keep his Commandments, and therefore need
not be again handled, only the different term of ( Word) would not be passed
by. The word (...) has especially a double signification, both of which may be
here made use of, to wit, ratio and sermo, reason and speech. According to the
former acception Christ's Commandments are so called, because in them, is set
before, us ratio vivendi, the way to order our Conversation aright. And there
is nothing in them but what is rectae rationi consonum, most agreeable to right
reason. According to this Notion, it is that (...) in St Peter, is rendered by
the Vulgar Latin, Lac rationale, and that for this reason, quia rationem tradit
credendi and recte vivendi, because the word set down a just rule, but of a
right belief, and a good life, and this (by the way) may be a strong Obligation
to the keeping of what Christ requires, because he requires nothing, but what
is just and reasonable. According to the latter construction Christ's
Commandments, are so called, because 1 Pet. 2. 2. Lor. ibid.
they were first uttered by himself, viva voce with his own lips, in those
Sermons which he preached to the people, that especially upon the Mount, and it
is that which does both advance the dignity of the Commandment, and engage our
duty in keeping them. When a King shall not send his Herald to proclaim his
pleasure, but declare his will himself, and give his Commands with his own
mouth to the people; ought this not to be received with the greater reverence,
and performed with a more ready Obedience? These Commandments they were first
Gods Words, for so runs the Preface of the Moral Law. God spoke these words
and said, they were afterward Exodus 20. 1.
Christ's Words, for so begins the Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5. 2.
he spened his mouth and spoke; so that whereas all the Scripture is Christ's
Word, because dictated by his spirit, the Commandments are his Word, because
immediately Ideo verbum quia respicit legem dilectionis. Aug. Sermon. 39. de Trin.
spoken by him. And in that it is not (...) but (...) words but word, perhaps
our Apostle might have respect to a particular command given by Christ, namely
the Law of love, of which he chiefly treats in this Epistle.

To let this go, pass we on to the predicate of the Clause as being that which
here is eminently considerable. In him who keeps his word, verily the love of
God is perfected.

It is that which is true both ways, and so may very well admit of an
Inversion.

1. On the one hand in him who loves God the keeping of his word is verily
perfected. It is the excellency and perfection of Obedience when it springs
from Love. There is a threefold Obedience, to wit, Necessitatis, Cupiditatis,
Charitatis. Of Compulsion, when a man obeys no further then he is forced;
that is the Slaves, whom nothing but fear enduceth to the performance of his
Masters Command. Out of expectation, when a man obeys for the hope of reward,
that is, the servants who serves his Master for his Wages. Out of affection,
when a man obeys because he loves him, who commands; that is the Sons, whom
dear respect to his Father, engages to serve him: and this last is the most
ingenuous and perfect Obedience. Indeed it is love that enlarges the heart not
only to creep but go, nor go but run, nor run but fly at Gods call. It
teaches us to obey, not (...) but (...), grudgingly, but cheerfully; nor is
any Obedience more free then that, to which the Love of Christ constrains.
The truth is, Malus miles qui imperatorem gemens sequitur, Sen. Ep. 107. Plin.
l. 18. c. 5.
he is a base Soldier that follows his General with tears. Malus est ager,
cum quo Dominus luctatur, that is bad ground which brings forth nothing
unless it be forced; that Obedience is not worthy the name which is only
extorted from us; and such is all service where love is absent. In this
respect, it is that St Ambrose Ambros. in Psalm. 118. Sermon. 21.
says, Plus est diligere quam custodire, it is more to love God then keep his
Word, since this may spring from force and fear, but that only from Charity.
Indeed this Charity is that which perfects all graces and duties, nudae sine
Charitate omnes virtutes, said Leo, Leo Quinquages. Sermon. 10.
truly all even our best actions are naked if not done in love.

2. And as thus it is our love that perfects our Obedience, so withal it is
our Obedience that perfects our love; I will Ps. 119. 167.
lift up my hands (says David) to thy Commandments which I have loved. It is
not the lifting up our eyes to the reading, no nor of our ears to the hearing,
but of our hands to the doing of the Commandments, which argues our love.
Hearing may be a means to perfect our knowledge: the Ear being the Bucket,
whereby we draw the water of spiritual knowledge out of the Well of Gods Word.
Hearing Romans 10. 17.
may be a means to perfect our Faith; and therefore the Apostle says, Faith
comes by Hearing; both the inchoation and the perfection, the rise and growth
of it; but still the keeping of Gods Word, is that which perfects our love,
whosoever keeps his Word, in him verily is the love of God perfect.

But it may be here objected, What means our Apostle to use this phrase of
perfecting: nay, to use it in the Preterperfectence? For so the word
Grammatically is to be rendered; in him the Love of God has been perfected. Can
any grace, which we have in this life be perfect? The measure of the Arc was
an imperfect measure, two Cubit and an half was the length, a Cubit Exodus 37. 1.
and an half the breadth, and a Cubit and an half the height of it. Such is the
measure of all our graces in this life. One qualification of Christ's blessed
men, is, that they hunger and thirst after Righteousness, always in Matthew. 5.
6.
desiring, because never in full fruition.

This then being true of all graces, is in particular verified of love to God,
which shall never be perfected, till we come to Heaven, and therefore whilst we
are here is perfecting, but not perfected.

For the solution then of this doubt, be pleased

1. In general, To distinguish with the Fathers of a double perfection, Alia
absoluta, alia quae competit fragilituti Hiereme adv. Pelag.
nostrae: so St Hierom; Alia media, alia plenos numeros habens, So St Ambrose;
the one absolute and complete, the other limited and comparative; Ambrose de
offic. l. 3. c. 2.
in which sense, he that attaineth to great measures of grace, yea, far above
others, is said to have grace perfected in him, to wit, such a perfection as
man in this life can attain unto: or again, we may distinguish of a perfection
of parts, and of degrees; the one whereof refers to the sincerity, the other to
the exactness of grace* We call a child which has all the essentials and
integrals of a man, a perfect man, though he is not grown up to the strength,
and stature, and wisdom of a man. It were easy to instance in many
Scriptures, where perfect is put for upright; and according to this notion,
grace may be said to be perfected in them, in whom it is found to be sincere.

2. In particular, Concerning this grace of love, it will not be amiss to
distinguish with Lorinus of four degrees Lor. in loc.
of perfection.

1. To love God, is to love him, quantum ipse est diligibilis, as much as he is
worthy to be loved, and so he only loves himself; neither in via, nor yet in
patria; here, nor hereafter, can we attain such a degree of love: and the
reason is plain, because the love which is worthy of himself, must be like
himself infinite.

2. To love God, Quantum Creatura diligere potest, as much as any Creature can
possibly love him; and this we shall have in Heaven, where we shall know, and
knowing love God, to the utmost that a finite nature is capable of.

3. To love God, Quantum mortalis potest Creatura, so much as a Creature
clothed with frailty and mortality can; and this is that which all ought to
aspire after, yea some do attain to, and may be called a perfection of
proficiency.

4. Lastly, To love God, Quantum nulla alia res diligitur, so much as no other
thing besides is loved by us; to love God above all, and all in and for God.
This is that to which every true Christian attaineth even in this life, and is
called a perfection of sincerity.

In this last notion, Interpreters generally and rationally expound it here. So
among others, Beda and Beza, Vide Bed. in loc. Vide Beza in loc.
Charitatem perfectam videtur Apostolus eam intelligere quae est vera and
sincera, says the one; the Apostle understands by perfect sincere love.
(...), hoc in loco non declarat aliquid perfect consummare, sed mendacio and
simulationi inani opponitur, says the other: perfected does not here signify
to make a thing complete, but is opposed to lying and hypocrisy. In this
respect (...), seems to be a corrective of (...), he does not say, in him the
love of God is fully, but verily or truly perfected.

In this sense he that keeps Gods Word, is said to have the love of God
perfected in him, upon a double account.

1. Because he that keeps Gods Word, does reipsa praestare, really perform
love to him. Look as a tree is then said to be perfected, when it has not only
buds and leaves, but fruit; so is the love of God perfected, when it is not
only in desire and profession, but practice. Indeed love begins at the
judgment, by a surpassing estimation of God, as the chiefest good: from thence
it acts in the will by ardent desires after, and frequent delight in the
enjoyment of him; but still the real part of love is that, by which the
integrality of it is as it were consummated, is obedience in doing what he
requires from us.

2. Because he that keeps Gods Word does hereby plene manifestare, fully
declare and manifest that his love to God is sincere; in this respect the Greek
Scholiast renders (...) by (...), and gives this as the Oecumen in loc.
reason, because by our good works our love appears to be perfect; nor is
this an unusual acceptance of the phrase. When Gods strength is said to be
made perfect by weakness, it no doubt intends no more but that it is discovered
to be perfect; and when Abraham's Faith is 2 Cor. 12. 9.
said to be made perfect by works; Aquinas gives this Jam. 2. 22. Aquin. ibid.
as the reason, because these were the Operations, and so the manifestations of
his Faith. Thus the keeping of Gods Word perfects our love, because it does
discover the perfection of it. By this it appears to be true and not fained,
since though fained love may show it self by words, it is only sincere love
that expresses it self by works: and were not love deeply rooted in the heart,
it would not bring forth good fruits in the life. Nay, indeed by this it
appears to be strong as well as true; look as it argues nature to be strong
in a man when he can perform with vivacity the operations of nature; so it
manifests grace to be strong, when a man does readily perform gracious
actions. The fire which flameth forth, is not only kindled, but is fervent; and
our love manifests it self, not only sincere, but strong, when it breaks
forth in our observance of Gods Word, throughout the course of our Conversation.

And now what remains, but that every one of us approve our love to God by
keeping his Word. Love to God is that, which we all pretend, and which is the
riddle: even profane wretches are ready to say, He that loves not God, is not
worthy to live; but in vain is love to God professed by us in our words, whilst
it is not perfected in us, by our deeds. How can thou say thou love me
(said Dalilah to Sampson) since thy heart is not with me? It may no less truly
be objected, how can we say we love God, whilst our hands are not lift up to
his Precepts? The truth is amori cedunt omnes affectus, all the affections
attend on love: it is full of fear, of grief, of joy, of desire. He that loves
God cannot but be grieved when he offends him, glad when he pleases him;
fearful to do anything which may provoke; desirous and careful to do
whatsoever may delight him; and no wonder if where these affections are active,
there be an endeavor to avoid what he forbids, and perform what he requires.
I end all: let every one of us conceive that Christ says to us in those words,
which he is pleased to ingemminate to his Disciples; If you love me, keep my
Commandments; and again, If any Joh. 14. 13. 15.
man love me, he will keep my word; and therefore let us at once both testify
and justisie, the truth of our love by the reality of our service, ever
remembering what this blessed Disciple asserts in conformity to his Masters
lesson, Who so keeps his Word, in him verily (and none but him) is the love
of God perfected.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. the lat. part of the 5, and the 6. Verse. 5. Hereby know we that we
are in him. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk,
as Christ walked.
IT is an amiable excellency in any superior, to become a precedent of that
whereof he gives a Precept, and show himself an Acter in that whereof he is an
Exacter from others. It was the praise of Caesar, that his Word to his
Soldiers was not Ite, but Venite; go, but come. Nor much unlike was that of
Gideon to the people; Jud. 7. 17.
Look on me, and do likewise. Indeed by this means a Governor lays a double,
and so a strong obligation upon the Inferiors, whilst he does at once both
enjoyne by his commands, and invite by his pattern. For this reason no doubt it
is, that the Captain of our Salvation as he has prescribed us Laws, so he has
given us an Example; not imposing that on us, to which he did not some way or
other expose himself.

To this purpose are those phrases which are used by Matthew. 16, 24. 16* 24.
him in the Gospel, of coming after him, and learning of him; and for this
reason his beloved Disciple here enjoyneth these two together: and as in the
former verses, he calls upon us to keep his Commandments, so here to walk as
he walked. Hereby we know, etc.

The second principal position is that, which comes now to be handled;
wherein we have two things observable:

The Christians being and his operation; his state and his work, his dignity
and his duty.

The being, state, and dignity of a Christian is expressed in those phrases, We
are in him, and he abides in him.

The Operation, Work, and Duty of a Christian is signified in those; ought
himself so to walk, as he walked; both which we shall consider apart in
themselves; and then jointly in the dependence they have one upon another.

Consider, 1. In handling them severally, begin we with

1. The Being of a Christian, It is that which is Characterized by two phrases,
to wit, being in, and abiding in Christ; both of which are the same in
substance, and yet each of which has its proper Emphasis.

That which is intended by both is, the spiritual and mystical Union, which
is between Christ, and a Christian, that which is peculiar in either is, that
by being in, is noted the neerness; and by abiding in is intimated the firmness
of this Union.

1. Every true Christian is in Christ, Accident is esse est inesse, says the
Philosopher, the being of an accident is to be in his Subject. Christiani esse
est inesse, says the Divine, the Being of a Christian is to be in Christ.
Indeed all Creatures have their Being in God, and are Act. 17. 28. Col. 1. 17.
said to consist in Christ, in a general notion, because of their necessary
dependence upon him, as their Preserver ^ but all Christians are in Christ
after a more peculiar notion: because of that near and close Union which they
have with him, as their Redeemer. The intimacy of this Union cannot be
expressed by a fuller phrase then this of being in; it is one thing adhaerere,
and an other inhaerere: it is more to be in, then to be with, by, or about a
thing. We do not only belong to, but we are in Christ; not that there is any
confusion or transfusion of the substance or person of a Christian, into the
Substance or Person of Christ; but that there is a solid, substantial, and
personal Conjunction between them. Indeed it may seem strange, how Christ
being in Heaven, and we on Earth, we should be in him; but it will be easily
understood, if we consider that it is not a local or corporal, but a
Spiritual Union, which no distance of place can hinder. We have an Emblem of
this, in that of Marriage, the knot whereof is indissoluble though the Husband
be in the Western, and the Wife in the Eastern part of the World. No wonder if
this spiritual contract unite Heaven, and Earth, Christ and a Christian
together. The nature and quality of this Union, is that which the holy Ghost
has been pleased to represent in Scripture by various similitudes. When St
Paul speaks of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ; he implies, that a
Christian is in Christ, as the Body is in the Garment, which covers and
incompasseth it, but this is the most remote allusion, the same Apostle uses a
fitter metaphor, when he Romans 13. 13. Ephesians. 1. 22. 1 Cor. 12. 12. Orig. Aug.
de verb. dom. Sermon. 61.
compares Christ to the Head, and Christians to the Members; for as the Head
and Members are so nearly united, that they make but one Body; so is it with
Christ and the Church, in which respect the very Name of Christ is given to the
Church, in those words of the Apostle, so also is Christ. For which cause
Origin says, Per unum Christum, multi Christi; by one Christ, many Christ's are
made: and St Austin, Caput and Corpus unus est Christus, the head and the body,
Christ and the Church, make but one Christ. Parallel to this is that comparison
our Savior himself makes use of, when he says, I am the Vine, you are the
Branches; look as the Branch is in the Vine, so as that its very being depends
upon its being in the Vine, without which it Joh. 15. 1, 5.
dies and withers; so is a Christian in Christ. And therefore he tells his
Disciples a little after, without me you can do nothing. Not to multiply
similitudes, of Ephesians. 5. 32.
all carnal Unions, that between a Man and Wife is nearest, and by that is
this Union shadowed; in which respect St Paul calls Marriage a Mystery: and let
us see that even this resemblance comes short of expressing this Union; for
whereas the Man and Wife are but 1 Cor. 6. 17.
one flesh, He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit.

To end this: See hence both the excellency of Faith, and the felicity of a
Believer.

1. The excellency of Faith, Inasmuch as it is by Vt doceret ar^^iorem esse
communiorem Christi nobiscum, quam viri cum (...). Calv ibid. 1 John 3. 14.
Faith, we come to be in Christ: sometimes we read that Christ is in us, and
sometimes that we are in Christ. If we would know how Christ is in us, the
answer is by his Spirit which he conferreth upon us; and therefore says our
Apostle, Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has
given us.

Again, If we would know how we are in Christ, the answer is, by believing: so
much our Apostle intimates here; for these two clauses, Hereby we know that we
know him; and hereby we know that we are in him, Verse 3.
seem to be Synonymous, and plainly intimate that we are in him by knowing
(which is believing him:) indeed both the graces of knowing and loving him
before mentioned, concur to our Union with Christ. Inasmuch as the moral
union of hearts is by love, and the mystical of persons by Faith; Oh how
efficacious is this grace which tyeth the knot between a Christian and Christ,
and makes them one.

2. The felicity of Believers, A Christian besides his natural, has another
more noble being, to wit, in Christ, it is that which is both magnum
privilegium, and magnum solatium. A great privilege it is to have so near a
relation to Christ: As it is the honor of Christ as God, that he is Ens
independens, has his being of himself. So it is the honor of a Christian,
that he has his immediate dependence on, and being in Christ; nor is there
only honor but comfort in it: Since we being in Christ, have thereby a
participation, as of his person so of his merits and benefits. That fellowship
with Chap. 1. ver. 3.
Christ whereof the Apostle speaks in the former Chapter, and all the
comforts attending on it, whence flow they but from this spring? Our Union with
Christ, by being in, we have a title to, Communion with, and so Wisdom,
Righteousness, Redemption, Sanctification, yea all through him.

That grand Objection against the comfortable Doctrine of the imputation of
Christ's Righteousness; How can a man be made righteous by another man's
Righteousness? is hereby answered, and the riddle of it unfolded; we are in
him, and one with him, by whose Righteousness we are made Righteous. And as the
husband marrying the wife endoweth her with all his worldly goods, so Christ
uniting the Christian to himself, invests him with his spiritual goods. Look
as^ all men being naturally in Adam, have the guilt o sin., so all Christians
spiritually in Christ have the merit of his righteousness imputed to them, so
much the rather, because that whereas we were but virtually in Adam, we are
actually in Christ. Adam was only a public person, representing; Christ was
not only our representative, but surety, by whose payment we must needs be
discharged, yea, indeed it were Blasphemy to imagine there should be more
demerit in Adams sin to condemn, then merit in Christ's Obedience, to justify
those who are in him. Hence that mellifluous Aphorism of St Paul. There is now
no con^^mnation Romans 8. 1.
to them that are in Christ Jesus. How happy is that person who is free from
condemnation, and he that is in Christ, having the merit of his satisfactory
Righteousness, by imputation communicated to him, must needs be free from the
guilt of his sins, and so out of all fear of Condemnation. He that dwells in
the secret of the most high, shall be quiet from fear of evil, says the
Psalmist. He that lies in the Bosom of Christ, is safe from fear of danger.
Oh who can sufficiently prize this amiable privilege, this choice comfort of
being in him! And so much for that phrase.

2. Every true Christian abides in Christ. The Philosophers Psalm 91. 1.
distinguish of two sorts of accidents, the one Separable, the other
Inseparable. Those may both adesse, and abesse, be present, or absent, but
these cannot be severed from the Subject wherein they are; Such is the being of
a Christian in Christ: and this is intimated in the phrase of abiding, which to
inherency adds permanency; in this all those forementioned resemblances are
discrepant, the body is in the garments; I but they may be put off, the
branches are in the Tree, and the Members knit to the Head, but they may be cut
of; The Man and the Wife are joined together, but they may be parted, whereas
this Union is indissolvable, inseparable, and they who are truly grafted into
abide in Christ; nor yet does this truth altogether want its resemblances. That
phrase of dwelling which this Apostle else where uses, is very significant to
this purpose, it is one thing for a man to lodge as a guest, Ephesians. 3. 17.
to sojourn as an inmate, and another thing to dwell as an inhabitant, where a
man dwells it is the place of his settled and fixed residence. The true Believer
dwells in Christ, as in his house, surely united to him. Suitable hereunto is
that which learned Bp Davenant has observed upon those words, Roote^ Col. 2.
12. Daven. ibid.
and built up in him, a Tree that is rooted in the ground stands fast against
the feircest blasts, an house that is built upon a good foundation endures
wind and weather; thus Believers being rooted and built up in Christ, are able
to withstand temptations, corruptions, afflictions.

How greatly does this Meditation advance the comfort of a Christian? Indeed in
this respect man's renewed estate is better then his created, and a Christian in
Christ, happier then Adam in innocence: Adam might eat of the Tree of Life; but
we are branches of him, who is truly the Tree of Life. Adam might and did lose
his right to the Tree, we cannot our interest in Christ. Adams standing was as
it were by himself, so that he became Subject to a miserable fall, our being is
in Christ, by whom we are preserved from such falling. Oh let Believers rejoice
in this holy and stable comfort, it was far more easy for David, to pull the
prey out of the Bears mouth, then it is for Satan to pluck us out of Christ's
Arms. If we be in him we are his Members, and can we imagine that Christ will
suffer one of his Members to be rent from him, indeed (be it spoken with an
holy reverence) Christ himself would be imperfect if any of his Members should
be defective, a thing inconsistent with the Glory and Honor of Christ: no
wonder if as we are in him, we are said to abide in him; and surely such a
privilege carries with it an engagement, and that is it which next follows:

Pt. 2. The operation of a Christian, and that is to walk as Christ walked.

The phrase of walking is such, as the holy Ghost delights See chapter 1. v. 7.
frequently to use, we have already met with it in this Epistle; and therefore
shall not here need to enlarge. Know in brief that we are all in this World
travelers, and Heaven is our Country, so long then as we are here, we must not
sit down, but go forward. One Sect among the Philosophers was called the
Peripateticks; such must all Christians be, keeping as it were an holy
preambulation in this walk. The Word of God is our light; The Angels are our
guarde; The spirit is our strength; and Christ is Dux itineris the guide to go
before us, and therefore we are here called upon to walk as he walked.

That which would be chiefly inquired into, is wherein the practice of this
duty consists, and how far it extends. To which end know,

1. In general, that this Imitation which is required has a limitation
annexed, we must walk as Christ walked, but not in all respects. There is via
solitaria, and via socia; some paths Christ walked in alone, and others, we are
to go in after him, look as the Schools distinguish of Gods attributes, that
some are Incommunicable, and others Communicable, so may we of Christ's walks.
Some are beaten, others untroden paths; some are such wherein we may, nay must;
others such wherein we neither can nor dare to follow him.

2. In special, We are to consider Christ's walking, according to a threefold
reference. Tria sunt operum Zanch. in loc.
genera quae inter homines praestitit Christus, says Zanchy, there are three
sorts of works which Christ wrought among men; to wit, as God, as God-Man, as
Man.

1. Christ as God walked in a double way, to wit, imperij and miraculi.

1. Imperij, of authority and sovereignty, by virtue of which he sent his
Disciples for the Colt, without asking leave of the owner; for so God himself
says, Every beast of the forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a Psalm. 50. 10.
thousand hills; and therefore he may command them when he pleases, but this is
not imitable by us, in whom it would be no other then theft. Indeed superior
Magistrates may give command in some cases for the ablation of men's goods
without their leave; but this not in imitation of Christ's practice, but by the
deputation of his power, he having given that authority to his Vicegerents on
earth, for the better administration of Justice and Judgment.

2. Miraculi, of might and omnipotency, doing things which were not only
besides but above, nay, against the course of nature: These we are to admire
but must not attempt to imitate; and though they are the supporters of our
Faith, yet no rules for our practice. To this purpose is that of St Austin upon
this place, Forte Aug. in loc.
hoc nos monet ut ambulemus in mari, some may imagine that we are required to
walk on the Sea a^ Christ walked; but far be this from our thoughts, which as
it is impossible to perform, so it is presumptuous to attempt. Upon the same
account it is that that holy Father in Aug. de sancta virgin. c. 35.
another place thus paraphraseth upon those words of Christ, Learn of me; what
should we learn of him, to make a World, to tread upon the Water, to raise the
Dead? noe; but to be meek and lowly: it was the itch of our first Parents, they
would have been as God in knowledge, and we their unhappy Progeny, are troubled
with the same distemper; we would trace the footsteps of divine Power, and
Knowledge, and Wisdom, but alas all such endeavors will prove vain and cursed,
fruitless, and sinful. Indeed we find Christ's Apostles working miracles, but
not in imitation of Christ; rather Christ wrought signs and wonders by them,
for the propagation of his Gospel, and this was only a personal, and that a
temporary privilege.

2. Christ as God-Man, Mediator undertook many Offices, in the exercise of
which he was pleased to walk; as a Prophet, he walked up the Mount, and from
thence gave Laws and Precepts to the People; as a Priest, he walked to Mount
Calvary, whereby suffering Death upon the Cross he merited our Redemption. He
walked from the Grave to Heaven, where he makes Intercession, as King and Head
of his Church; he walks in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, defending
and governing his People, conquering his enemies, giving Laws, conferring
gifts: And in these walks we are not directed to follow him, it is an horrid
presumption in the Romanists, who make a mere man head of the Church, who
attribute to Saints and Angels a power of interceding in our behalf; and
therefore we justly assert with the Apostle Paul, he has given him (to wit,
exclusively) to be head. And again, There is one Mediator (namely both of
Redemption and Intercession,) between God and Man, he who is God and man the
Man Christ Jesus. Indeed an Analogicall imitation may here be allowed as Christ
is Head of his Church, so the King Ephesians. 1. 22. 1 Timothy 2. 5.
is Head of his Kingdom, the Master head of his Family. As Christ walks in
the midst of his Church, so the King in the midst of his Kingdom, and the
Master in the midst of his house: Christ as a Prophet does give Laws, so his
Ministers are Prophets to interpret his Laws to the People, and all Superiors
must be Prophets, to instruct those who are under them; as Christ intercedeth
in Heaven for us, so we must pray one for another on earth. As Christ offered a
propitiatory real Sacrifice, so we must by him offer gratulatory spiritual
Sacrifices. Finally, to perform the Office of a Mediator he `dying on the
Cross, rose again from the Grave, ascended into Heaven; so we must dye to
sin, live to righteousness, and seek the things which are Above. Thus we are
allowed, nay obliged indirectly and allusively to follow Christ in his walks as
Mediator but not directly.

3. Consider, Christ's walks as he was Man, and so we shall find the actions he
performed, reducible to three heads, Ceremonial, Circumstantiall, and Moral.

1. Christ walked in a way of Conformity to the Ceremonial Gal. 4. 4.
Law, and therefore he is said to be made under the Law: On the eight day he
was Circumcised, and thereby became obedient to the whole Law of Moses, but in
those walks we must not trace him. Though he was pleased to fulfill the Law in
himself, that it might have an honorable Burial; yet he has abolished it as
to us; it is not, ought not to be observed, and thereby as it were revived by
us.

2. Many things which Christ did were Circumstantiall, in some of which it is
unlawful, in others possibly, it may be inconvenient, and in neither of both
it is needful to imitate him. The Duration of time in which Christ fasted, to
wit, forty days, and forty nights, is such as being miraculous, we ought not
to follow; we are indeed to fast as he did, but not so long, since thereby we
should be guilty of self-murder; though withal it was not imprudently but
piously appointed by the Church, that so long time as Christ fasted a toto
wholly from food, we should a tali and a tanto, from some kind of food, and from
our usual measure of eating. Christ's choosing of such persons as Publicans and
Sinners, to eat and drink and converse familiarly with, inasmuch as he came to
call them to Repentance, and was not capable of pollution by them, is no
warrant for us to be familiar with wicked men, from whom the best may more
easily receive evil, then do good to them; though yet withal it gives
Ministers leave to Converse with those under their charge, (though wicked) that
if by any means they may bring them to God. Those circumstances of place and
time which Christ observed in Prayer, when as one time we read he withdrew
himself into the Wilderness to Pray, and at another time he Prayed all night,
though the one direct to choice of private places for private Prayer, and the
other intimate long Prayer in some cases not to be unlawful; yet nether does
the one oblige us to leave our houses and run into a Wilderness, nor the other
to debar our selves of a whole nights sleep, for the exercise of our
devotion. That gesture of sitting which Christ was pleased to use when he
Preached to the People, would be though not unlawful, yet inconvenient for us
his Ministers to follow; since whereas he taught Magisterially, we but
Ministerially, and so a more humble posture (except in case of necessity,) best
befits us. Finally, The time at which our Lord Administered the holy Communion,
Namely, in the night after supper: The posture in which (as it is imagined) he
participated it: to wit, That of lying, which he used (after the common
custom) at his other meals are no patterns necessarily oblieging us to follow
them: for as to both the time and gesture it appears they were only
occasional, it being most suitable that the time of the first Administration
of that which was to come in the Room of, should be immediately after the
Passover, and if he did use (which yet no Evangelist ex^resly affirms) that
gesture, the probable reason is, because he had used it before at the Pasover,
and so being nearly inoidentall was not intended for our imitation. The truth
is this, on the one hand if it at all oblige, it binds not only to a, but the
table gesture (since the custom of a country is no dispensation, for what is
of religions and necessary concernment) and so even they, who pretend in this
to imitate Christ, are defective. But on the other hand in reallity, it does no
more bind Ministers and People to conform to it in that holy Administration,
then that gesture he used in his Sermons does bind the Ministers in their
Preaching; and if (as by the practice of all sorts it seems to be granted) it
be more decent for the Minister to stand Preaching though Christ sat; I see no
reason why it may not be more decent for the Ministers and People to receive
kneeling, notwithstanding Christ did it in the usual posture of his meals:
though to all this it might be added, that since the posture there used, was
humi discumbere, to lie down upon the ground, this of kneeling comes nearer to
it, then either that of sitting, or standing. In fine the Sum amounts to thus
much; Christ's ceremonial actions being in conformity to a law abolished, are
not; and his circumstantiall actions being not commanded nor forbidden by any
law, need not be imitated by us: nor does this walking as he walked extend to
them.

3. But lastly, Christ walked in a way of Obedience to the Moral Law, humbling
himself, and becoming obedient even to the Death, and these footsteps of his
Moral Actions, we are to tread in. For the fuller Explication of this be
pleased to know, that

1. Our Lord Christ is (to speak in Ennodius his phrase) Clara Epitome
virtutum, an exact Epitome of Ennod.
graces, in St Bernards language, Cardinalium virtutum exemplum, a spotless
example of the Cardinal virtues; Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 12. Tertul. in Marc. l.
4. c. 18. Cres^de Virtut.
or if you will in Tertullians style, cumulata perfectionis massalis summa, an
accumulated heap of spiritual perfections. Suitable hereunto it is, that
Cresolius calls him, a Seminary of graces, Temple of Religion, Tabernacle of
goodness, and Habitation of Virtue. Indeed there is no grace nor duty, either
toward God, or our selves, or others, whereof Christ has not set us a copy.
Those graces of trust, fear, love and obedience, which we are to exercise
toward God; those Virtues of loyalty to Kings, Subjection to Parents, equity
and Charity, which are due to man. Finally, those Ornaments of Humility,
Temperance, Patience, by which we possess our selves, were all eminent in him,
as it were easy to demonstrate, would the time permit, or did the Text require
it. What he in Lucian said concerning Lucian Dialig.
Solon, (...), In seeing Solon you see all that is good, may more truly be
affirmed of Christ, in whom are all treasures of graces, as well as knowledge.
That of the Apostle concerning himself and the rest of the Saints, our
Conversation is in Heaven; may not unfitly be applied to this duty of the
imitation of Christ: he has his Conversation in Heaven, who leads it according
to Christ's example, and good reason, since as Athanasius excellently, Christ
whilst Athanas. orat. contra gent.
on earth did (...), carry Heaven about with him. This Sun of Righteousness
went through the Libra of justice, Leo of fortitude, Virgo of chastity, Taurus
of industry, Gemini of love to God and man. Indeed the Firmament is not more
full of Stars, then he is of Graces. It is a rule in Philosophy, Primum in
unoquoque genere est mensura reliquorum, that which is the first in any kind is
to be the measure of the rest, and Christ being the first, the grand exemplar
of virtue, no wonder if we are required to walk as he walked.

2. One singular end of Christ's coming into the world was, that he might
become a pattern of duty. Indeed the chief and primary end of his advent was to
be a Savior, but a Secondary was to be an example. Upon this account is it
that St Basil says, one end of Bas. ascet.
Christ's coming was, that in him (...), as in a picture we might behold the
lineaments of all virtues, and Joh. 13. 15.
accordingly learn to order our Conversation aright. When Christ had washed his
Disciples feet he says to them, I have given you an example: and truly for
this 1 Pet. 2. 21.
cause he lived that he might give; yea, according to St Peter, for this end he
dyed, that he might leave us an example that we should follow his steps.

3. To endeavor as far as we can that all those graces which Christ practiced
may shine forth in our Conversations, is to walk as Christ walked, so that this
( as) here specified admits both of an extent, and a restraint.

1. Of an Extent, As, that is in all those moral steps wherein he walked: thus
Tertullian says, To Tert. de Resur. l. 2. c. 44.
walk as Christ walked, is to observe the Discipline of that Piety, and
Patience, Justice, and Wisdom, which flourished Prosp. Sent.
in Christ's life. And Prosper putting this Question, What is it to walk as
Christ walked? returns this Answer, it is Contemnere omnia prospera quae
contemp^it, non timere adversa quae pertulit, libenter facere quae fecit, etc.
To contemn what he contemned, suffer what he suffered, and do what he did.
Indeed to imitate Christ but in some things, is only to step as he stepped, but
to walk as he walked is to imitate him in all; not only to be lowly, but holy,
just, but charitable as he was; go about doing good, but suffering evil as he
did; it is to imitate him in his active, and in his passive Obedience; to
follow him in his Life, yea in his Death. For as St Austin observes, when
Christ was fixus in Aug. in Ep.
cruce, fast nailed to the Cross, he walked in the ways of constancy, courage,
patience, charity toward his enemies, which we must practice when at any time
we are called to suffer; we cannot have a better Expositour of the Disciple
then the Master; and Christ says to follow him, is to deny our selves, and
take up our Cross.

2. Of a restraint, It being an ( as) not of equality but quality, nor does it
require an exactness of performance but only a sincerity of purpose. Christ's
phrase is following, and coming after him, which we may do though non passibus
aequis, we come far behind him: Excellent to this purpose are those Expressions
of an Ancient, Proderit imitari et si nemo valeat adaequare, Arnulph. Ep.
persequi, debemus, et si consequi non possimus, non eisdem passibus, sed eodem
tramite, eisdem vestigijs insistendum: Made equal we cannot, conformable we
may be to him; to attain to his measure is impossible, to press hard toward it
is necessary, to go with the same speed and evenness is not expected, but to go
in the same path, tread in the same steps is required: In one word, those
graces which did flame forth in Christ's life, must at least sparkle in ours,
which did shine bright in his, must twinkle in ours, which were perfectly in
him, must be sincerely in us; so shall we fulfill this Apostolical dictate, to
walk as he walked.

I end this, Natural homini alium imitari, Man is naturally a Mimicke, and
loves to follow; and what fuller, fitter, better pattern can be made choice of
then this here set before us? Oh then as Moses did all things in making the
Tabernacle according to the pattern which God showed him in the Mount, so let
us order all our actions according to the pattern Christ taught in the Mount;
and as he taught, so did in the course of his life. I^^s the command of God to
Abraham in the Old Testament, walk before me, it is the voice of Christ to his
Disciples, in the New, come after me, and both very useful; we must walk
before Jer. 17. 1. Matthew. 16. 24.
God, by a continued remembrance of his eye, we must come after Christ, by a
due observance of his steps, and so walking as having God to be our Spectatour,
and Christ to be our guide we cannot wander. This is that Ephesians. 6. 1. Paulin.
Ep. 12.
which has still been the practice of holy men, to set Christ before them as
their example; this did St Paul who advises others to follow him as he did
Christ; thus did Martianus of whom Paulinus says, Caelestis hominis imaginem
perfecta Christi portavit imitatione, he bare the Image of the Heavenly Man, by
a perfect (that is, sincere) imitation of Christ. Oh let it be so with us in
every thing we go about! let us consider with our selves what Christ did, or
what we have reason to believe he would do in the like case: in case of injury,
Christ would forgive; of contention, Christ would be a Peacemaker; of miseries,
Christ would show mercy; of reproaches persecutions, Christ would suffer
patiently: let us do likewise; Christ is the Sun, and then only does the
Watches of our lives move right, when they are set by the Dial of his motion:
Christ is the Book of life, and then only is the Book of our Conscience fair,
when it is written according to that Copy.

To this end, learn we according to the counsel of the Author to the Hebrews,
to look unto Jesus. We (says Heae. 12. 2.
St Paul) beholding the glory of the Lord are changed into the same Image; and
we beholding the graces of Christ 2 Cor. 3. ult.
are transformed into the Image of them. Look as a Painter (to use Macarius his
similitude) can draw a Mac. hom. 30.
man's Picture to the life if he sit before him, and steadfastly look upon him,
but if he turn away his face, the Painter can do nothing: So then does Christ
draw the Lineaments of his Virt^^s upon our Souls, when we diligently look upon
him: Indeed who can seriously view Christ, and the ways wherein he walked, and
not be in love with them, and desire to walk in them? All his ways (as Solomon
^aith of Wisdom) are ways of pleasantness and peace. No cleanness or purity,
no safety or security, no peace or tranquillity, no delight or pleasure, like to
that which is to be found in Christ's ways. True indeed they are narrow ways
in regard of their difficulty to flesh and blood; they are sl^bby ways in
regard of the afflictions which accompany those that love godly in Christ
Jesus; but they are clean ways without the mine of filthiness; for they are
safe ways fenced with the hedge of divine Protection, they are pleasant ways
in which we have always the Sun of Gods favor shining on us; yea they are
blessed ways, for they lead to life and and glory; who can behold them and not
be allured to go in them?

Look we therefore with a serious and spiritual eye upon Christ and his ways,
and that so long till, according to St Paul's advice, the same mind be in us
that was in Christ Jesus; and then having the same mind, we Phil. 2. 5.
shall do the same works; so easily is the life con^ormed, where the heart is
inclined: In one word, if our eye be fixed, and our heart willing, the foot
will be ready to run the race that is s^t before us. I shut up with Leo de
Resur. l. 2. c. 3.
that of Leo, Imitamini quod operatus est, diligite quod dilexit; love what he
loved, so will you do what he did: to which we should be so much the rather
induced, considering the necessity which our profession lays upon us of so
doing, and that will appear if you,

Join both parts of the Text together which is the Consid. 2.
other Consideration, and comes now to be handled. He that says, ought; it is
not only (as Zanchy well observes) utile but debitum, that which he may do,
or that which is best for him to do, but that which he ought to do.

This will the better appear, if you consider both the relations which they who
are in Christ have to him, and the influence they have from him.

1. The Relations, which they that are in Christ have to him, are many and
near, all which oblige to walk as he walked. He that says he is in Christ,
says he is the friend of Christ, and friends go hand in hand, have the same
affections and inclinations; he that says he is in Christ, says he is so in,
that he is under him; Christ is his Lord, and he his servant, and probum servum
pro ingenio domini conversari videmus, says Tertullian; Tert. de patient.
we see good servants conform themselves to their Masters will, and frame
themselves to their temper. He that says he is in Christ, says that Christ is
his King, and he his Subject, and Regis ad exemplum; all men love to imitate
their Prince; if Nero like music, all Rome will turn fiddlers; let the King be
lame, and his Subjects will halt for company; nay more then all this, in saying
we are in Christ, we say we are his Seed, his offspring: and hominibus laetum
and gloriosum filios Cypr. de zelo and livor.
habere consimiles, it is a joy to Parents when their Children are like them,
and the care of good Children to follow their Parents: so that since in all
these relations there is an Obligation, He that says he abides in Christ,
ought.

2. There is a singular influence which Christ has upon all those who are in
him, enabling them to walk as he walked. It is true our blessed Savior
speaks of branches in him that bear not fruit: but there he means those
who are in him, (...) not (...) only in appearance, not in reality; who in
respect of their Christian profession seem to be, and in others, perhaps their
own opinion are in him, not of those who are in him by a real, substantial,
and spiritual Union with him; since all that are so in him, cannot but receive
grace from him, to become fruitful in good Works. They that are in Christ are
his Members, and as the Members whilst united to the head have sense and motion
derived from it, so is it with those who abide in Christ, to whom he impartes
that motion whereby they are able to walk as he walked. They that are in Christ
are his branches, and as the living branches receive Joh. 15. 3.
sap from the root, yea, the sap that is communicated to the branches, is of
the same nature with that in the root, and the fruit according; so does every
one that is in Christ partake of grace from Christ, yea, that grace which is in
Christ is infused into the Christian. Finally, He that is joined to the Lord is
one Spirit; if any man be in Christ, he has the Spirit of Christ, and look as
when the Spirit of Eliah came upon Elisha; he was enabled to do the same
miracles which he did: So in whomsoever Christ's Spirit dwells, it strengthens
them to do the Works of Christ, and become like to him. Very observable to this
purpose is that phrase of sealing with the spirit of promise; for as the Seal
makes the impression of Ephesians. 1. 13.
its own stamp upon the Wax, whereby it is that the Characters upon the Seal
are to be discerned in the Wax; so does Christ's Spirit stamp his own Image upon
the soul: whereby it is that the graces of Christ appear in the life of a
Christian. Hence it follows that whosoever says he is in Christ, ought to
walk as he walked, or else he is a liar, and says he is, what he is not: In
which respect Leo excellently, Falsae professionis Leo Sermon. 5. de jejun. 7mi
mensis.
imagine utimur si cujus nomine gloriamur, ejus instituta non sequamur, If we
conform not to his precepts and pattern, in whose name we glory, and of whose
relation we boast, all our profession is in vain, nay a mere lie.

To end therefore, Explora teipsum infaelix qui baptisatus es in Christum,
whosoever thou art that being Baptized into Christ, professest to put him on,
and calling thy self a Christian, faist thou art in him, try thy self by this
mark? do thou walk as he walked? nay, rather do thou not walk contrary to
him? He was holy, thou art profane; he was humble, thou art proud; he was meek,
thou art contentious; he was charitable, thou art malicious: thou say thou
art in Christ, and yet thou live like a beast in sensuality, nay, like a
Devil, in hatred and envy, but let no man deceive himself with such a vain
profession. Nec Aug. de vita Christiana tr. 8. c. 14.
quisquam se Christianum judicet nisi qui Christi doctrinam sequitur and
imitatur exemplum, nor let any man esteem himself a Christian who does not
resolve to follow Christ's Commands and Example. Indeed what Alexander said to
one of his name who was a Coward, Aut depone nomen, aut fortiter pugna; either
show thy self valorous, or do not call thy self Alexander; that Christ says to
all loose Christians; either live according to my pattern, or renounce my name:
let then every one that names the name of Christ express the nature and do
the works of Christ. Pythagoras instructing the women in Jamblien. Pythag. l.
1. c. 11.
a grave Oration told them, that many of the Names which were given to them in
their conditions both before and after Marriage, were the Names of Goddesses;
and thence exhorted them to imitation of those Goddesses. The Name (beloved)
which we all have taken upon us is the Name of Christ, and therefore let us
account our selves engaged to conform to him. This, This is that which will
both justify the truth of our present profession, and make good our future
expectation. There are many as St Bernard observes, who Bern in Cant. Sermon. 21.
would Christum consequi, and yet not sequi, be where Christ is, sit down in
his Throne, as he is in his Fathers, and yet will not go where he went, and
walk as he walked; but alas it cannot be: There is no coming to the same place
but by the same path, sequi servatorem Iren. l. 4. c. 28.
est participare salutem, says Ireneus elegantly: The way to partake of
Salvation, is to follow our Savior; and therefore he that says he is now in
Christ, and hops hereafter to be with him, must so walk as he walked: In a
word, live as Christ lived, holily, justly, soberly, dye as Christ dyed,
believingly, charitably, patiently, so shall you reign as Christ reigns,
gloriously, triumphantly, eternally.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. Verse 3. part former. Hereby we know that we know him. Verse 5. part
latter. Hereby we know that we are in him.
THat rule of Divines concerning Precepts, Tota lex est copulativa, the whole
Law is copulative, may no less truly be applied to graces, which as so many
links in a Chain of Gold are knit one to the other. The mother and root grace
of all is Faith (here called Knowledge) as being that which ingrafts us into
Christ, of whose fullness (says Joh. 1. 16.
the Evangelist) we receive grace for grace This Faith wherever it is, is
attended with Charity, ^or Faith (says St Paul,) works by love. This love
cannot reside Gal. 5. 6.
in any soul, but it will manifest it self by Obedience. So much our blessed
Savior expresses, If any man Joh. 14. 13.
love me, he will keep my Commandments. This Obedience is then best performed
when we are conformed to Christ in our lives, and therefore calling upon us to
take his yoke he bids us learn of him. Finally, by this Obedience to, and
imitation of Christ, we Mat. 11. 29, 30.
gain our assurance of our interest in him: whence the Apostle Peter requiring
us to give diligence to make our calling and election sure; presently adds,
if you do these 2 Pet. 1. 10.
things that is practice those graces whereof Christ has given us a pattern.
Thus there is not only a concomitancy, but an efficiency of graces, a connection
of one with, but a dependence of one upon the other; whilst Knowledge begets
Love, and Love keeping the Commandments, and keeping the Commandments we walk ^
Christ walked, and by all these we come to know that we know him, and are in
him; all of which are succinctly and distinctly laid down in these four Verses,
Hereby we know, etc.

In these Verses there are two clauses yet remaining to be discussed, the one
in the beginning of the third, and the other in the end of the fifth; the
former of which referrs to the keeping of the Commandments, and the other
though it may look backward, yet most rationally is conceived to look forward,
to walking as Christ walked; both for substance the same, and contain in them
two collateral propositions; the one whereof asserts the attaining a
comfortable knowledge of our knowledge of, and interest in Christ: We know that
we know him, we know we are in him; and the other an especial means whereby
that knowledge is attained; Namely hereby, that is, by keeping his Commandments;
and again, hereby, that is, by walking as he walked; of both which in their
order.

1. St John here affirms of himself and other Saints, We know that we know
him, We know that we are in him. It is that indeed which not only here, but
elsewhere he asserts, in the next Chapter, We know that we are 3. 14. 4. 13. 5.
19.
translated; and again in the fourth Chapter, We know that we dwell in him; and
in the fifth, We know that we dwell in God. For the better opening of it, take
notice of these ensuing Considerations.

1. There is a threefold Object, whereabout this knowledge is conversant;
Namely, what was before all time, what shall be after all time, and what is in
this present time. This knowledge looks backward, and that as far as eternity
to the decree of election, which was before the foundation of the World; in
this respect it is St Peter's advice, make your election sure. This knowledge
looks forward at the future estate 2 Pet. 1. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
of felicity; upon which account St Paul in the name of himself, and others
says, We know that we have a building in the Heaven. Finally, This knowledge
looks upon our present estate of Vocation, Justification and Sanctification,
our Union with, and faith in Christ, and of this our Apostle here speaks, to
which I shall therefore confine my discourse.

2. There is a double knowledge attainable by a Christian, to wit, direct, and
reflexe; The direct knowledge is terminated in Christ who is its Object; The
reflexe in the knowledge itself which is the act, both these kinds of knowledge
our Apostle here expressly speaks of when he says we know that we know him;
where the latter, we know, is that scientia knowledge which immediately looks on
Christ, and the former is that conscientia knowledge which immediately looks
upon the act of knowing. Indeed it is the choice privilege of the rational
soul, that it can reflect upon its own acts, whereby it is that a man not only
understands and wills, but knows that his soul does exercise those
functions: this is that which accordingly a Christian improveth in respect of
his spiritual actings, so that he does not only put forth the operations of
his graces, but is in some measure assured that he does put them forth; for as
when I look in a glass, I look upon my self looking in it, when I touch my body
I feel my feeling of it; In like manner the soul by reflex knowledge apprehends
her own apprehension, judges of her own judgment, and believes her belief.
Suitable to which is that of devout Anselm, Qui fidei sensum in cord habet,
hic scit Christum Jesum in se esse, A Christian having an experimental Anselm
in Corinth.
sense of Faith in his soul, knows himself to be in Christ.

3. This Knowledge of Knowing Christ, and being in him, is only i^ respect of
our selves, not others; we know him says the Apostle, not that you know him,
or that you are in him, but that we, every one attaineth this knowledge in
respect of himself. Congruous to this purpose is that of St Austin, Fides est
in intimis nostris; Aug. de Trin. l. 13. c. 2.
nec enim quisquam hominum videt in alio sed unus quisque in semitipso. Faith
is inwardly seated in the heart which one man cannot discern in another, but
only in himself. Indeed Negatively we may conclude concerning those whom we see
wallowing in prophanness, living in wickedness; that for the present they are
not in Christ, nor have any saving Knowledge of him. Positively, we cannot
concerning any though never so holy in appearance, that they are in Christ.
Since whereas men may give undoubted signs of their badness, they cannot of
their goodness; Indeed this new name is such as no man knows but he who
receives it; and that only in himself who does receive it; and as to know it
in our selves is very difficult, so to know it in another is impossible. True,
we must here distinguish of a double knowledge, to wit, of Charity, and
Certainty* the former is only a probable opinion (improperly called knowledge)
and is that which we may have of others being in Christ by their external
conversation. Thus the Author to the Hebrews was Heb. 6. 9.
persuaded better things of them to whom he wrote; and St Peter calling
Sylvanus a faithful brother, adds, as 1 Pet. 5. 12.
I suppose: nor are we to understand any more by St Paul's phrase concerning the
Thessalonians, knowing your 1 These. 1. 4.
election of God, since not the Apostles themselves (except by special
revelation) could infallibly know any particular persons to be the chosen of
God, and members of Christ.

4. Lastly, This knowledge of our own interest in Christ, on the one hand is
not barely conjectural but infallible; and yet on the other hand it is not
perfect and complete.

1. This knowledge is not, cannot be perfect; for by the same reason that one,
and every grace may be perfect in this life: whereas full perfection of grace
is the privilege of that other life. Indeed one of the names by which this
grace is called in Scripture is (...), full assurance, but that is only in a
comparative notion, since none ever had an absolutely full assurance. There are
indeed several degrees and measures as of others, so of this grace; and the
higher degree may be said to be full in comparison of the lower, but the
highest is not altogether perfect: True it is sometimes, and in some persons
this knowledge may be so clear and firm, that there may not be any sensible
stirrings of infidelity, the conclusion which such an one makes of his union
with Christ, may be peremptory without actual haesitation; but still there are
some remainders of unbelief in the heart, whence it is that their knowledge is
not always in an equal height, but has its ebbings as well as flowings.

2. But though it be not perfect so as altogether to expel doubting; yet it is
infallible so as to exclude deceit; it is not only we think, or we hope, but
we know. It is true, as all other graces, so this has its counterfeite; there
is a presumption which looks like this persuasion, whence it is that a man
may be deceived about it, but still the knowledge it self is such as does not
deceive. To this purpose are those similitudes which the learned Daven. determ.
4.
Davenant makes use of; a man that is drunk, may think himself sober; a man
that is in a dream may imagine himself to be awake, and both are cheated in
their opinions; yet this hinders not but that a sober man may know that he is
not drunk, a man that is awake may know that he is not asleep, and this
knowledge of theirs is infallible. Thus whilst Hypocrites have a deceitful
presumption of their union with, it hinders not but that regenerate persons
may and do attain an infallible knowledge of their knowledge of, and interest
in Christ.

To apply this: What remains but that every one of us labor to be among the
number of this We, to know that we do know and are in Christ? Indeed they who
take upon them the profession of Christianity may in this respect be fitly
ranked into three sorts

1. Some there are who are in Christ, but know it not, like children who live
in their mothers belly, but are not themselves sensible of it. As Jacob said of
Bethel, God was in this place and I knew it not; so may it Genesis 28. 16.
be said of many Christians, Christ is in them, and they in him, and they are
not aware of it; of whom we may pronounce in Virgils words, O fortunatos nimium
bona si sua norint Virgil.
Agricolas! -- How happy were they did they but know their happiness, for want
of which their jealous minds pass unrighteous censures upon themselves, as if
they were miserable.

2. Others there are who pretend to know, and be assured of their interest in
Christ, when yet they have no tru^ right or title to him; their self-flattery
fills them with this vain self-conceit, and their blind ignorance causes them
to presume that they know Christ; and whereas the condition of the former sort
is in their apprehension only, the estate of this sort is really miserable.
Indeed as one says excellently, they are eo magis desperati, quo minus
desperantes, their case is so much the more desperate, because they are so
far from despairing, that they presume; since by this presumptuous opinion of
having already attained, they are hindered from laboring after an interest in
Christ: and as the Philosopher said of one who had been ill taught, that his
task was double, both dedocere and docere, to unteach and then teach such an
one; so may we say of such persons, they must first be taken off from their
sandy foundation, and then fixed upon the true rock, whereby it is that they
are brought with more difficulty into the state of salvation.

3. But lastly, Others there are who both truly know Christ, and know that they
know him; are by faith ingrafted into Christ, and have an inward sense of that
faith, and so of their being ingrafted in him. Among this number was St John,
and not he only but many others, as well Christians as Apostles; in which
respect he uses the plural number, and indeed an endeavor after this reflex
knowledge, is that, to which every Christian is bound. It is St Peter's
counsel, giving all diligence to make your calling and election sure; 2 Pet.
1. 1. 10.
and if you please to view the beginning of his Epistle, you shall find those
whom he puts upon this work, to be all that had obtained like precious faith
with the Apostles, (to wit for quality though not quantity) that is all
believers who being chosen and called, must strive for an assurance that they
are so.

Among others, there are two Considerations which may serve as spurs to
quicken our endeavors, and wings to accelerate our pursuit after this
knowledge; namely the possibility of attaining it, and the utility of it when
attained.

1. If we strive after it, we shall not labor in vain. Indeed God has
appointed to every Christian his measure of spiritual stature; yet so as that
no Christian who is not awanting to himself, but may attain so far as to have
some degree of this knowledge; where St Peter in the forementioned Scripture
requires all believers to give all diligence to gain this assurance, what does
he but imply at once both a difficulty and a possibility of gaining it? since,
were it not difficult, there were no need of all, and if it be 2 Cor. 13. 5.
not possible, it will be in vain to use any diligence. When St Paul calls
upon the Corinthians to examine themselves whether they be in the faith, what
is his design but (as the following words [ know you not that Jesus Christ ^s
in you) intimate] that they might come to know their interest in Christ? And
surely it were in vain to bid us search for that which cannot be found; examine
whether we be in the faith, if we cannot know whether we have faith, or no.

2. Possible then it is, and not only so, but profitable, as conducing very
much to the exercise of many duties, and the participation of many comforts.

1. Christians are called upon in Scripture to cry Phil. 3. 1. Tit. 2. 12.
Abba Father, to rejoice in the Lord, to be thankful, to love the appearing,
and look for the coming of Christ. Now these are such duties as are to be
performed by none but them who know that they know Christ, and are in him. How
can we call God Father, unless we know him to be so? nor can we be assured that
he is our Father, except we know our selves to be in Christ, through whom alone
he becomes a Father. Gerson Gers. par. 2. comp. Theol. de delect.
has well observed, that to joy there must three things concur, objectum
delectabile, applicatio ad appetentem, and cognitio applicationis: a
delightful object, an application of this object to him who desires it, and a
knowledge of that application; it is so in spiritual joy, Christ is the
delectable object, our knowing him, and being in him is the application of this
object; and though these two be present; yet if there be not a knowledge of
this application, there can be no rejoyceing. How full of tears and despair is
Hagar, when yet a well was by Cen. 21. 16.
her? How sad, and pensive are those two Disciples whilst yet Christ draws
near to them, and walks with them? How bitterly does Mary weep at the Luke
24. 15. 17.
Sepulcher, whenas he for whom she weepeth, is risen from the grave, and
stands by her? and why all this? Alas Hagar sees not the well, the Disciples
and Mary knew him not to be Jesus! Thus as it is impossible Joh. 20. 14, 15.
to desire that we know not to be good, so to delight in that good whereof we
know not our selves possessed. And as we cannot be joyful in, so neither
thankful for those benefits, whereof we have not a sensible fruition; he only
that can say, God of his abundant mercy has begotten me again, can say,
Blessed be the God and 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Finally, Christ's coming at the last day shall
be in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on them that know him not; only to them
that are in him, he will arise a Sun of righteousness with healing in his
wings; so that whilst we are uncertain of our being in Christ, we cannot with
comfort expect or with desire long for his coming.

2. And as this knowledge enableth us to these duties, so it is that which
enlarges our comforts; true it is, he is an holy man who has grace without
peace, but he is the happy man who has grace and peace. The knowledge of our
interest in Christ is not necessary to the end it self, as if there were no
Salvation without it, but it is needful to Solace us in the way to the end,
since there is no Consolation without it. What is it that heighteneth our
Fellowship and Communion with God, that gives us boldness of access to the
Throne of Grace; that causes the soul to converse with God as a Favorite with
his Prince, a Son with his Father, a Bride with her Bridegroom, but this
knowledge? How amiable is the Meditation of Christ, in his Person, Natures,
Offices, Merits, to him who knowing himself to be in Christ, knows all these
to be his? Every thing of Christ is sweet to such a Soul, it does him good to
view his Wounds; nay with Thomas to put his hands in the hole of Christ's side,
whilst he can say, my Lord* and my God. With what gladness does he receive the
Word of God in every part of it; since the very threatenings do not affright
him, because he knows they belong not to him? This Knowledge of our interest
in Christ is that which multiplyeth the sweetness of all temporal enjoyments,
inasmuch as by this means we look upon our selves as having not only a civil,
but a spiritual right to them, we look upon them as the fruits and pledges of
special love; yea, the earnest of a better inheritance* Indeed mercy looks
like mercy, and every blessing is doubly beautiful in the eye of such a
Christian. One being asked what was the best Prospect? returned this Answer, To
see a greatway in his own land? He who knows he is in Christ may look both on
Earth and Heaven as his: according to that of St Paul, All 1 Cor. 3. 22.
things are yours.

Finally, This is that which contents us in all estates, supports us under all
afflictions, and armeth us against the fears of death. He must needs be willing
to want any thing else, who knows he has Christ, who is All in All, he need
not, cannnot be troubled at any evils, who knowing that he is in Christ,
knows all things shall work for his good; nor can the separation which death
makes be terrible to him, who is assured of that Union with Christ, which
admits of no separation, Romans 8. 28, 38.
no, not by death it self; yea, which death is so far from hindering, that it
hasteneth to a fuller perfection.

To end this therefore, Let our first care be to kn^w Christ, and by knowing to
get into him; and then let our next endeavor be, to know that we do know him
and are in him. The former will give us a right to, but it is the latter will
give us the comfort of all those glorious privileges, and benefits which
Christ has purchased; and if we would know how to attain this reflexive
knowledge, pass we on to the

2. Next and last Proposition, which discovers the means of attaining it;
Namely, hereby by keeping the Commandments, we know that we know him, and by
walking as Christ walked, we know that we are in him. Look as if the question
be put, how we shall know the true Church, the answer is, by its essential
marks; so if you ask how shall we know that we are true Christians, our Apostle
answers hereby, by the Characteristicall properties.

To elucidate this Assertion, observe these following Particulars,

1. That knowledge which we have of our being in Christ, and knowing him by
these Characters is, not a priori, but a posteriori, not by the causes, but by
the effects; our Obedience is not the root, but the fruit of Faith, and we are
not in Christ, because we walk in him, but we walk in him because we are in
him. To this purpose is that note of Beza upon the Text. Bona opera Beza in loc.
nos non inserunt Christo, sed insitos consequuntur, good works do not ingraft
us into Christ, but our being ingrafted into Christ enableth us to perform
good works. As therefore the Tree is known by its fruit, and life is known by
breathing and motion, which are the effects of it; So we know our Faith in, and
Union with Christ by our Obedience to, and imitation of him.

2. That knowledge we have by these Characters is safe and sure, yea such as
cannot deceive us. For

1. Inasmuch as the commands which Christ requires us to keep, and the ways
wherein he walked which we must follow, are clearly set down in the Word; if we
faithfully compare our actions with the rule, we may know whither we keep the
Commandments, and walk as Christ walked or not. True it is, many are cheated
with Alchymie instead of Gold; think themselves to have those graces, which
Christ did show forth, whenas they are counterfeit; but this is not for want of
an exact rule discovering, but because of a deceitful heart misapplying; so
that were men but faithful to themselves, they might be able to pass a right
censure in this Particular. Hence it is, that whilst the Hypocrite deludeth
himself with a partial Obedience and a counterfeit imitation, the regenerate
Christian being in some measure enlightened, discovers what is sincere, and
what is fained, and so judges righteous judgment: To this purpose is that of
St Austin, Qui diligit fratrem magis novit dilectionem Aug. de Trin. l. 13. c.
2. id. in Ps. 149.
qua diligit, quam fratrem quem diligit; He who loves his Brother, more surely
knows the love whereby he loves him, then his Brother whom he loves: and
hence it is that the same Father says, Est modus gloriandi in conscientia ut
noveris fidem tuam esse sinceram, ut noveris spem tuam esse certam, ut noveris
charitatem tuam esse sine simulatione; this is the rejoicing, yea, glorying of
a Christian whilst his conscience regulated by the word, and illuminated by
grace gives in evidence that his Faith is sincere, his hope firm, and his
love unfeigned.

2. Inasmuch as this Obedience to, and imitation of Christ, are the necessary
and particular effects of our Knowledge of, and being in Christ: he who finds
the one, may undoubtedly infer the other.

To unfold this briefly, know, That the effects of a lively Faith are of three
sorts.

Some which so flow from a true Faith, that they are likewise the effects of
other causes; such are all acts of moral Virtue, and extenall duties of
Religion: Hence it is, that Heathen who have no Faith at all, have performed
the former, and Hypocrites who have no true faith the latter. So that though
from hence we may conclude Negatively, he that does not these things has no
Faith, yet we cannot Affirmatively, because we do such things, therefore we are
in Christ and believe in him.

Others which are only the effects of a right faith, but yet such as faith
produces not but when in strength; of this sort are the sense of Gods Love,
peace of Conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, magnanimity in afflictions, and
desires of dissolution. From these we may conclude Affirmatively, but not
Negatively, he that can act these duties does know Christ, but every one that
knows Christ cannot act these duties.

Finally, Other effects there are which flow from Faith only, and always,
which it is as natural for Faith to produce, as for the Sun to shine, or the
Fire to burn; such are these my Text speaks of, a sincere Obedience, and a
conscientious imitation of Christ: from whence we may infer both ways, and so
the proposition will be recipocrally true, Every one who keeps the
Commandments knows Christ, who walks as Christ walked, is in him; and every
one who knows Christ keeps the Commandments, is in Christ, and walks as
he walked.

Put then both these Considerations together, we may know that we keep the
Commandments, and if we keep the Commandments, we may assure our selves that we
know Christ; no wonder if our Apostle say, Hereby we know we know him. We may
perceive whether we walk as Christ walked or no; and if we walk as Christ
walked, we may be confident we are in him; no marvel if our Apostle say,
Hereby we know that we are in him. The strength of this Argumentation will the
better appear if we reduce it to a Syllogism, which may be thus framed;

Whosoever keeps the Commandments knows Christ, Who so walks as Christ
walked, is in him; But I keep the Commandments, and walk as Christ walked,
Therefore I know Christ, and am in him.
The first of these, which is the Major we know by a certainty of faith, as
being expressly asserted in this and other Scriptures. The second, which is the
Minor we know by a certainty of experience, finding these qualifications
wrought in us; and thus knowing the premises we infer the Conclusion, and so
by a certainty of Faith joined with experience, we are able to assert our
interest in Christ.

3. This Knowledge which we have hereby does not exclude the Testimony of the
Spirit. It is St Paul's assertion, That the Spirit bears witness with our
Spirits, that we are the Children of God: Yea, St John in Romans 8. 16. 5. 7.
the last Chapter of this Epistle plainly ascribes this Office of bearing
witness to the Spirit, and yet it is no less true, that these graces and
qualifications do bear the same witness; these two witnesses being the one
subservient to the other, whilst the spirit is the principal, and these
qualifications are the Spirits instrument in this work. Whether there be an
immediate Testimony given by the spirit to the Soul of a Believer, assuring him
o^ his interest in Christ I will not now dispute. That the spirit can thus
testify is not to be questioned, and that at some times to some eminent Saints
he has been and may still be pleased to vouchsafe it, will not be denied: but
doubtless the usual way of the Spirits witnessing is by the grace of
Sanctification imprinted on the heart, and expressed in the life.

To this Testimony the Spirit concurreth especially Gal. 5. 22.
two ways, partly by implanting his graces in us, in which respect they are
called the fruits of the Spirit; and partly by discovering them to us, in which
regard St Paul says, We have received the Spirit which is of 1 Cor. 2. 12.
God, that we might know the things which are freely given us of God. The truth
is, as we cannot have grace without the Spirits operation, so neither can we
discern it but by the Spirits irradiation; and as the beauty of all colors is
manifested by the light of the Sun, so is the truth of all graces in the heart
by the Spirits light.

By all which it appears, that the Spirit is the chief in this work, so that
as if you ask how we know that we know Christ, and are in him? the answer is,
by keeping the Commandments, and walking as Christ walked; so if you ask, how
we are enabled to keep the Commandments? and walk as Christ walked? and how we
are to know that we do thus walk and keep the Commandments? the answer is by
the Spirit.

To close up this with a double consectary.

1. That assurance of an interest in Christ which many pretend to, who walk
contrary to him and his Precepts in their lives, is not a Christian Knowledge,
but a vain confidence, a carnal security, a lying delusion, and a damned
presumption. To all such therefore who hug sin in their Bosoms, and yet
suppose they are folded in Christ's arms, who sail with full speed to Hell, and
yet think to cast Anchor at Heaven Gates, who live in Rebellion against, and
yet promise to themselves Salvation by Christ, we say not rejoice with
trembling, but tremble without rejoicing; not work out your Salvation with
fear, but fear without any hope of Salvation in this condition. And whereas
such persons may perhaps plead an immediate Testimony of Gods spirit, assuring
them that they are in Christ; we are bold to tell them, it is an hissing of the
old Serpent, not a whispering of the good Spirit, it is the voice of the
Devil, not of God. Ah my Brethren, we sometimes pity mad Persons whom we
seelying in the straw, clad in rags, and yet hear them boasting themselves to
be Kings and Queens: Have we not as great, nay far more reason to pity our own
madness, in fancying to our selves we are in Christ, washed by his Blood, and
made Kings and Priests to God, when as we transgress his Laws and cast both his
Precepts and Pattern behind our back. Me thinks when men who live in
Adultery, Fornication, Covetousness, Envy, Rebellion, or any work of the Flesh,
promise to themselves an interest in Christ, their sins should presently look
them in the face and tell them, that they are none of Christ's.

2. It nearly concerns us all to search our hearts and try our ways, to
enquire into the Obedience and Conformity of our Conversations, that hereby we
may know we are in Christ. It is an excellent saying of St Bernard, Quantum
creseis in gratiam, tantum dilataris Bern. Sermon. 3. in Cant.
in fiduciam, according to the measure of our Obedience, so is the measure of
our Confidence; if therefore we would strengthen the latter, we must by due
inquiry assure our selves of the former. Ah my Brethren, it is an easy matter
for a man to say I know I am in Christ, but it is no easy matter to say,
Hereby I know I am in him; what is it for a man to brag that such and such
Lands and Lordships are his, unless he can show his evidences? These
qualifications are the evidences of our title to Christ; and what will it avail
to lay a claim to Christ, if we have not these to show? Oh then what need is
there of a diligent search, that we may find these qualifications in us, and
because in nihilo facilius, and periculosius erratur, there is nothing wherein
we may more easily, and yet more dangerously be mistaken, then in this enquiry?
Oh what need is there of a due care, that there be no flaw in our evidence,
that our qualification be of a right stamp.

To this end, Study carefully the directions of the word, Pray* fervently for
the illumination of the Spirit, consult not with flesh and blood, hearken not
to the suggestions of Satan, but deal impartially with thy own Soul, as knowing
of how great concernment the right managing of this work is.

And now upon serious and deliberate search.

1. On the one hand, Can thou not find these qualifications in thee? Be not
too hasty in passing a determinate sentence against thy self, since though
these graces be necessary effects, yet they are no^ necessary signs of Faith;
and therefore they may be in us, and so we truly in Christ, and yet not appear,
so as we to know either that they are in us, or we in Christ. Perhaps thou art
at that time clouded with some violent passion, assaulted with some virulent
temptation, under spiritual desertion; and no wonder if in such a case thou be
not able to see those graces which yet thou have; since though there be fire,
yet so long as it is hid in the Embers it cannot flame forth, nor does it
appear to be there. Besides the operating, there must be (as you have heard) a
discovering work of the spirit. By the former, Faith brings these graces
forth as effects, by the latter, a Believer makes use of them as signs, and
these two do not always go together. Indeed if thou manifestly find the
contrary vices reigning in thee, thou may and ought to conclude thy self
as yet to be without Christ; but though thou can not clearly apprehend the
inbeing of these graces, thou must not peremptorily conclude against thy being
in Christ, but rather hanging as it were between hope and fear, wait and pray,
and search for further discovery.

2. On the other hand do thou find the truth of these qualifications in thee?
Bless thy God, know thy bliss, own thy privilege; and labor after greater
measures of this apprehension; since as he that only hopes he keeps the
Commandments, can only hope that he knows Christ, so he that knows and is
assured he keeps them, may know and be assured that he knows Christ.

I shut up all with one Caution; In your endeavors after the reflex, forget
not the direct acts of Faith. Look upon Christ, as he who is your righteousness
to justify you; and then look upon your Obedience as that which may testify
to you that you are justified by him; even then, when you cannot clearly
discover inherent qualifications, cast not away wholly your confidence in
Christ's Merits, and when you do discover them, rest not in them but only in
Christ's Merits, ever remembering that it is the being in Christ by Faith, which
intitleth you to justification and salvation, and your keeping the
Commandments, and walking as Christ walked, is that which manifests the truth
of your Faith, by which you are in Christ; by whom you are justified; and shall
at last be saved.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 7. Brethren I write no new Commandment unto
you, but an old Commandment, which you had from the beginning; the old
Commandment, is the Word which ye have heard from the beginning. 8. Again a new
Commandment I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you, because
the darkness is past, and the true light now shines. 9. He that says he is in
the light and hates his Brother, is in darkness, even until now. 10. He that
loves his Brother abides in the light, and there is none occasion of
stumbling in him. 11. But he that hates his Brother is in darkness, and
walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that darkness
has blinded his eyes.
IT was St Paul's sage and sacred advice to Timothy, Hold fast the form of sound
1 Timothy 2. 13.
words which thou have heard of me in Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus.
Where these words Faith and Love are by some, and not unfitly referred to the
manner of holding, these being the two hands by which we hold fast the truth;
but by others and no less probably they are refered to the form of sound words
which he heard of him, the matter of the form, the substance of those words
being reducible to those two heads: suitable hereunto is that Paraphrase of
Theophilact, in Faith and Love, (...), Theoph. in loc.
that is, My words and discourses are conversant about Faith and Love: what he
says concerning St Paul's we may concerning St John's words in this Epistle, all
of which tend either to the enlightening of our Faith, or inflaming of our Love;
the latter of which our Apostle begins with at these Verses, Brethren I
write no new Commandment, etc.

Which words consist of two general Parts.
A Preamble inviting, in the 7, and 8, Verses.
A Doctrine instructing, in the 9, 10, and 11, Verses.
Our Apostle intending to spend a great part of this Genesis 1.
Epistle in a discourse of Love, does not unfitly begin it with a Preface;
especially considering that the end of an Exordium is captare benevolentiam, to
gain love both to the Orator and his matter.

In this Preamble there are two things considerable.

The kind Appellation our Apostle gives those to whom he wrote in the first
word Brethren.

The large Commendation he gives of the Doctrine about which he was to write
in the rest of the words.

That which first occureth to be handled is the kind Part 1.
Appellation Brethren. The vulgar Latin following the Syriack read it
Charissimi, dearly Beloved: and Grotius finds (...), in one Greek Manuscript.
Indeed either is very suitable, To show that he himself was not a stranger to
that love he would teach them, he might fitly call them dearly Beloved, and
being to treat of Brotherly Love, he no less aptly uses the style of Brethren,
so that it is not much material which way we read it; but because the other
phrase of dearly Beloved is used afterward, and the most Greek Copies here
read, (...), I shall handle that reading (which Qui de charitate praecepta
traditurus erat a charitate non alienus. Justin. in Ep.
our Translation following renders) Brethren.

It is a title that is very considerable upon several accounts, especially
these four. Inasmuch as it is a word of Verity, of Humility, of Charity, of
Dignity. There was really such a relation between St John, and those to whom he
wrote. The mentioning it by the Apostle argues in him a Spirit of love, and
lowliness, and much advances the honor of those to whom he wrote.

1. It is a word of verity; indeed it is somewhat strange how this should be
true. If you cast your eyes on the first verse of this Chapter, you find him
calling them children, and how is it possible they should at once be his
brethren, and his children? If they were his brethren, he and they must be
children of one Father; if they were his children, he must be their Father, and
these two cannot consist together. The truth is, these relations in a natural
way and a proper notion are altogether incompatible between the same persons;
and yet this hinders not but that in a spiritual and Scripture-sence both these
are verified of St John, in reference to those to whom he wrote. Know then that
the sacred penman of this Epistle may be considered under a threefold
latitude; as an Apostle, as a Christian, as a Man.

1. Consider him as an Apostle, invested by Christ with authority to publish
the Gospel, whereby they were converted to the Faith, so he was their Father,
and might therefore call them his Children. But

2. Consider him as a Christian embracing the same Faith with them, which he
Preached to them, so he and they were Brethren. They who have the same Father
and Mother, are undoubtedly Brethren; now the Apostles as Christians had God to
their Father and the Catholic Church to their Mother: and therefore Brethren
to all even ordinary Christians. In this respect it is that St Peter, giving
thanks to God 1 Pet. 1. 3.
for this mercy of Regeneration, uses a Pronoune of the first person Plural;
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten not
me or you, or me and you, but us again to a lively Hope; thereby intimating
that he and they were all the Children of God, and that by the same means of
the new Birth: and St Paul writing to the Corinthians, makes himself one of
the number, when he says, We being many are one body; and again, By one Spirit
we are all Baptized into one Body, thereby implying, 1 Cor. 10. 17, (...) 3.
that he and they stand in the same relation to the Church.

This Relation is that which is not between every Minister and his People. On
the one hand sometimes the Minister himself is not a Brother, because a
profane wicked Person; yea, in this respect he may be able to say my Children,
and yet not my Brethren: for since the Spiritual Birth depends upon the
energie of the Seed, which is the Word accompanied with the Spirit, not at all
upon the goodness of him that dispenses it; it is not impossible for an
unregenerate person to beget others to the Faith, and so the Minister may be a
Father and not a Brother. On the other hand ofttimes a great part of the people
remain in a state of sin, and imenitency, in which regard good Ministers have
too often just reason to complain, that when they have many Auditors, they have
but few Brethren. Indeed whereas these two relations in a carnal alliance are
inconsistent, in this spiritual kindred, they one make way for the other;
Auditors by becoming the Children are also the Brethren of their faithful
Pastors. Thus when we our selves are begotten again to God, and we are
Instruments to beget you again; you and we are Brethren. Happy the People who
have such a Minister; happy the Minister who has such a People; then is there
the sweetest* Harmony when there is this spiritual Affinity between them.

3. And Lastly, Consider him as a man sprouting from the same root, and made of
the same mould with them, so in a natural way according to a large notion, he
and they were Brethren. It was Moses Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
his prediction to the Jews concerning Christ. The Lord thy God will raise up
unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren like unto me, him
shall you hear; and as Christ himself, so his Apostles whom he raised up to
publish his Gospel, and their Successors, who are sent about this work have
still been the Peoples Brethren. Moschus relates a story of an Abbot, Mosch.
de vit. patr. l 10. c. 149.
who was checked by a Deacon for some error in holy Administrations, whilst he
saw Angels standing by: he supposing the Angels would have rebuked him if he
had done any thing amiss, slighted the Deacons admonition. The Deacon
continuing his reproof; the Abbot addresseth himself to the Angels, Quare vos
non dixistis mihi? Why have not you checked me? to whom they returned this
Answer, Deus ita disp^suit ut Homines ab Hominibus corrigantur, God has so
ordered it that Men should be convicted and instructed by Men, who are their
Brethren.

We have a great deal of reason herein to take notice of Gods merciful
condescension in teaching us by men like to our selves. When God was pleased to
speak by himself, it was so terrible that the people could not endure it: when
God was at any time pleased to send Angels of his errand, it caused amazement
in the minds of them to whom they were sent, but speaking to us by our Brethren
Men as we are, we are comforted and encouraged. Doubtless it had been more
congruous to the majesty of God and Sublimity of his message, that those
glorious Angels should have been the dispensers of it; but surely it was more
correspondent to our weakness, and thereby to his goodness, that men should be
the Conduits to convey this water of life to us. And now Beloved let not this
goodness of God be to us an occasion of contempt; far be it, oh far be it from
us, to regard the message the less because they are men, our Brethren who bring
it: he wanted not other ways of making himself known to the Children of men,
but this was most expedient for us, and therefore let it be matter of
gratulation to us; and if at any time our corrupt hearts shall prompt mean
thoughts of the word, because of the meanness of the Ambassadors, let us
remember that it is verbum patris, though in ore fratris; the Gospel of God,
though spoken by man, the word of our Father, though in the mouth of a Brother.

2. It is a word of Humility, Brotherhood is a relation of equality; all
Brethren (except the elder Brother) are alike, Christ is the Elder Brother, so
that the Apostle in calling the Christians his Brethren, makes them as it were
equal to himself. Oh what humility lodged in the hearts* of those holy
Apostles! No doubt as Apostles, they were above the rest in Place, and Power,
Office, and Dignity: in which respect St John before calls them Children, a
relation, that argues a superiority in him over them, and yet such was the
lowliness of their minds that they looked upon themselves as but equal: and
therefore this Apostle here, and the re^t frequently in their Epistles use this
term Brethren; nay, as if this were not low enough, St Paul mentions 2 Cor.
4. 5.
a relation that argues an inferiority in the Apostles to the people, where he
uses that religious Complement to the Corinthians; our selves, your servants
for Jesus sake. This lowliness of mind was that which according to Christ's
command they learned of him. It is very observable, that though Christ was
their Lord and Master, yet he calls them not servants but friends, a word of
Parity; yea, he intitles them to this very relation, when he said to Mary
Magdalen, go to my Brethren: and if Christ was pleased to call them, well might
they call those, who were their Disciples, Brethren.

Oh let the same mind be in all the Ministers of the Gospel! Pride is odious
in any, but especially in Christ's Ambassadors. As St Paul says, though I
might enjoyne, Phil. v. 8, 9.
I rather beseech; so though we may challenge superiority and authority, yet
let us rather condescend to a way of equality; yea, if need be, inferiority. We
must keep up the honor of our office, but still express the humility of our
minds: in respect of Heavenly mindedness, we must be as the hills; of lowly
mindedness as the valleys: let us not think much to sit in the hinder part of
the Ship, so we may steer the course of it to Heaven. How willingly should we
bespeak the people as our Brethren, nay Masters, so we can but gain them to be
Christ's Servants? Only let me add one Caution, the humility of the Minister
must not be an occasion of contempt from the People; yea give me leave to tell
you, whilst we are ready to be commanded by you, you ought readily to obey us,
and it becomes you to reverence us as Fathers, whilst we call you Brethren.

3. It is a word of Amity, It is not unworthy our observation, that the holy
Apostles are of all others most frequent in this style of Brethren, and that no
doubt for this reason, because it is a term at once both free from pride and
full of love. Great is the love which has been between Brethren; nor can any
relation afford higher examples then this; Brotherly Love has exceeded
parentall. A Persian that wept not for his Child's, did for his Brothers death,
saying, I may have more Children, but not Brethren. So that our Apostle here
calling them Brethren, no doubt intends to let them see how kindly affectioned
he was toward them; such is the affection which the Ministers of Christ have
ever had toward their People. Thus did St Paul love 2 Cor. 6. 11.
the Corinthians when he says, Oh ye Corinthians our mouth is open unto you,
our heart is enlarged; and the Thessalonians when he says, Being
affectionately 1. These. 2. 8.
desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you not the Gospel of
God only, but also our own souls, because Ambr. Sermon. 1. de Temp.
ye were dear unto us. Thus did St Ambrose love his charge, when he declares
how much he was troubled at his absence from them though upon just occasion. It
were easy to multiply instances of this nature. Oh let all Pastors take fire
at these flames, and learn by these examples: indeed there is no relation in
which Ministers stand to their people, but it calls for this duty, if they look
on them as their Sheep, their Scholars, their Children, their Brethren; all
engage them to Love.

And surely, Magnes amoris amor, Love is the Loadstone of Love; if we love you,
you must love us as Brethren, so did those converts who bespake the Apostles
with this very title, Men and Brethren. Tell me I beseech Act. 2. 37.
you why should we be accounted as your enemies who watch for your souls? If
you think scorn to honor us as Fathers, yet however own us as Brethren.

In a word, Since we are Brethren let us sweetly live and love as Brethren. Oh
how pleasant a thing it is for Ministers and People like Brethren to dwell
together in Unity! Oh that both Priest and People when any contentions arise
between them, or when their love to each other, begins to fail in them would
remember this relation, so should the meditation hereof be both as water and
fire, as water to cool the heat of contention, as fire to kindle and cherish
the heat of affection.

4. It is a word of dignity, That he who was in the highest office belonging to
the Christian Church should call the despised Christians, to whom he wrote his
Brethren; as it is a dignation in him, so it must needs be an exaltation to
them. The greater the Persons to whom we are related, and the nearer the
relation is, the greater is the honor. To be a Servant, a Kinsman, but much
more to be a Brother of a Lord, or Earl, but much more of a King is a very
great Dignity; such honor have Christians; they may claim Brotherhood to the
goodly fellowship of the Prophets, the Noble army of Martyrs, the sacred
Hierarchy of the Apostles, yea the head of the Church, Christ himself: for so
says the Author to the Hebrews concerning him, He Heb. 2. 11.
is not ashamed to call us Brethren.

Oh let us walk worthy of these high relations which Christianity confereth
upon us, and so much the rather, because by our unanswerable behavior to these
relations, we shall not only dishonor our selves, but them to whom we are
related. If one that is Brother to a King should make himself a companion of
Thieves, does it not redown to the dishonor of the King to whom he is so
nearly allied? And if we who by our Christian profession pretend at least
alliance to the Apostles; yea, Christ himself, shall live no better, nay worse
then Turks, Pagans, Infidels, how must they suffer to whom we pretend so near a
relation? And therefore (to imitate the Apostles exhortation) Let our
Conversation be such as becomes the Brethren of those holy Apostles, who were
the first Publishers of the Gospel of Christ. And so much be spoken of the
Compellation given to the Persons.

Pass we on to the commendation which our Apostle Genesis 2.
here gives the matter whereabout he was now to write, which is drawn from
three heads.

The Authority of it, as being a Precept both old and new in those words; I
write no new but an old Commandment, etc. and Again a new Commandment I write
to you. The Conformity of it to the Pattern which Christ has set, in those
words, A thing which is true in him. The Congruity of it to the state of the
Gospel, the truth of Christianity, in those words, And in you, because the
darkness is past, and the true light now shines.
The Authority of that which our Apostle here commends Part 1.
is that which we are to begin with. And that inasmuch as it is

1. An old Commandment, This is that which is both propounded and proved: the
former in those words, I write not a new but an old Commandment to you; the
latter in those, Which you heard from the beginning, the old Commandment is the
word which you heard from the beginning.

1. The proposition is set down with a great deal of Emphasis, not only
Positively but Oppositively; Affirmatively, but Negatively. The Apostle does
not content himself to say, I write to you an old Commandment, but knowing (as
Calvin well notes) how suspected Didym. in loc Calv. in loc
novelty is and deservedly hateful, and because as Didymus observes, the
brand of novelty, both by Jews and Pagans was cast on Christianity; and
withal, because many things are old which yet in truth are but old
Innovations, (as I shall hereafter discover) he does expressly vindicate his
Doctrine from any such aspersion by this addition, not a new but an old
Commandment.

It is somewhat debated by Interpreters what our Apostle intends by this old
Commandment, whilst Some understand it generally of the whole Evangelicall
Doctrine. Others refer it to the preceding Verse, where is a special command
of walking as Christ walked. Others to that particular command of Love, which
immediately follows. This last I incline to, and so much the rather, because
I find St John himself so expounding it in the Eleventh Verse of the next
Chapter, Chapter 3. Ver. 11. Ep. 2. Ver. 5.
wherein he calls loving one another, the message from the beginning, and at the
Fifth Verse of the next Epistle, where he says, Not as though I wrote a new
Commandment, and this concerning the precept of loving one another.

That I may the better dispatch this clause, be pleased to proceed with me by
these steps,

^. The Doctrine which our Apostle was now about ^.
to propose, is called a Commandment, whence observe

1. Generally, That as the Law had Gospel, so the Gospel has Law in it; and
as it publishes promises, so it obliges by Precepts. It is the difference
between promises and commands, that the one imports some good to be done for
us; and the other, some good to be done by us; the one informs us what God
will do; and the other, what we should do. Now though the principal end of the
Gospel be to declare the one, yet so, as that it teaches the other. For this
reason it is no doubt Romans 3. 27, 8, 2. Gal. 6. 3. Jam. 1. 25. Gal. 6. 16* 2
Pet. 2. 21.
that the Gospel is sometimes called by the name of Law, as where we read of
the Law of Faith, and the Law of Christ, and the Law of Liberty, and the Law of
the Spirit of Life: and upon the same account the Apostle Paul calls it a Canon,
or a rule to which our lives must be conformed, and by which our ways are to
be directed: and St Peter styles it the holy Commandment, from which Apostates
turn, and the grace of God which many interpret (by a Metonymy of the Object)
to be the Gospel; is said to teach, being as Tit. 2. 11. 1 Pet. 4. 17. 2 These.
1. 8.
well a Schoolmaster as a Comforter. Finally, In this respect it is that we
read not only of believing the Gospel which lays hold on the promises, but
obeying which conformeth to the Precepts of Christ, the non performance of
which is threatened with a miserable end by St Peter, and with vengance to be
rendered in flaming fire by St Paul.

True it is, That whereas the Law did only command, the Gospel enableth as
well as commands; nor does it only jubere quod placet, but dare quod jubet;
prescribe what we are to do, but strengthens us to do what is prescribed; yet
still the Evangelicall Doctrine consists of commands as well as comforts; let
not then carnal Gospellers deceive themselves by fancying a Gospel,
altogether made up of mercy: since such an one must needs be (...), another
Gospel then Christ or his Apostles taught, and so must needs prove (...), a
lying Gospel, such as will fail those that trust in it.

2. Particularly, that the Doctrine of love is a Commandment. There is a great
deal of difference between allowing and commanding; that only implies a may,
but this a must, that a licet it is lawful, this an oportet it is needful to
be done: of this latter sort is l^ve; as being that which all Christians are
not only warranted but enjoined to practice: when therefore at any time our
corrupt natures, or Satannicall suggestions put us upon any thing which is
contrary to love, let us refell it with this consideration. It is a command
which I dare not violate, and (as St Paul says in another case) a necessity is
laid upon me for the observance of it.

Our Apostle having before called upon those whom 2.
he wrote to keep the Commandments, proceeds to show them what the command was,
he would have them especially to keep; no doubt hereby intending to prevent an
Objection which might otherwise be made. St John having set down keeping the
Commandments as the only mark of knowing Christ, it might be inquired. Oh holy
Apostle what are those Commandments which thou would have us to keep? for
prevention of which he lets them know what was the old and new Commandment,
which they were chiefly to keep, namely, Love.

A practice deservedly imitable by all Ministers, who must not content
themselves with generalities, but descend to particulars, as we call upon the
people to do their duty, so we must inform them in the duties which they are to
do. Thus the Prophet Micah does Micah 6. 8.
not only exhort the people to Obedience, but shows them what the Lord
required of them; Namely, to do justice, love mercy, and walk humbly with their
God. Thus our blessed Savior not only requires his Disciples Mat. 16. 24.
to come after him, but instructs them in what it consists; Namely, the denying
of themselves, taking up the Cross and following his pattern: and else where
inciting them to learn of him, specifyeth in what, to wit, meekness and
lowliness. The truth is, whilst we only in general terms stir up men to
believe and repent, and serve God and do the Commandments, but instruct them
not wherein the practice of those duties consists, they will be very apt to
deceive themselves, and the Devil will help to persuade them that they do them
whenas they are far short of them. That Preaching is likely to be most
effectual which is most punctual, in describing as well as prescribing: as
here St John does in his writing.

Whereas the Apostle before uses the Plural Number 3.
the Commandments; here he changes it into the Singular and says, I write a
Commandment; and perhaps for this reason to imtitate that in this one, which he
was now to write about, all the Commandments are contained, so as in keeping
this one we keep all? Indeed what else are the Commandments, but Love enlarged?
and what is Love but the Commandments contracted? St Paul writing to Timothy
says, The end of the Commandment is Charity; this being the final cause to
which every command tends, and the practice of this as it were the formal
cause the impletion and perfection of every command: to this purpose is that of
St Gregory Greg. hom. in Evang. 27.
when he asserteth, Omne mandatum de sola dilectione est, and omnia unum
praeceptum sunt, quia quicquid praecipitur in sola charitate solidatur, All the
Commandments are but one and that the command of Love, Love being as it were
the one root, out of which all other duties as so many Branches sprout forth.
And surely we have great cause to take notice of Gods goodness herein, who
having absolute power to command what he pleases, is pleased to command
nothing but Love. And as Naamans servant said in another case to him, If the
Prophet had commanded thee a greater thing, 1 Timothy 1. 5. 2 King. 5. 13.
would thou not have done it? how much more when he says wash and be clean?
so (my Brethren) if God had imposed more or harder Precepts upon us, would we
not have obeyed them? how much more when he only obliges us to Love?

This Commandment of Love about which our Apostle 4.
was to write is commended from this, that it is not a new but an old
Commandment, where observe

1. In General, The Commandment which the Apostle enjoyneth by writing to
these Christians, is not Tert. de praescript. adv. haer.
new but old: it is Tertullians observation concerning all the Apostles, Nec
ipsi quicquam ex arbitrio suo quod inducerent elegerunt, how that they did not
prescribe any Commandment of their own invention to the Church; and surely then
it is a fit item both for us Ministers what Doctrines to deliver, and you the
People what Commandments to receive, such as are not new but old. The newest
Philosophy may excel as having the advantage of new experiments, but the
eldest Divinity is the best: that of Solomon, an hoary head is a Crown of
Glory, Prove. 16. 31.
if it be found in the way of righteousness, may in this case be inverted, it
is a Crown of Glory to the way of truth, that it is always found with an h^ary
head, (...) and (...), are near of sound, and they agree in sense, new
Doctrines are vain at best, yea, too often dangerous: and therefore says
Zanchy well, Nihil Zanch. in loc.
novum in religione admittendum, nothing of novelty is to Vincent. Lyrin. adv.
haer. c. 30.
be admitted in Religion: and to the same purpose Lyrinensis, Vitanda est
novitas, tenenda antiquitas, Shun new paths, and keep the beaten track: The
Christian Faith Jude 3.
is not quotidie inventa, still to be newly invented, but semel tradita, once
delivered to the Saints which we must earnestly contend for. Indeed new
illustrations id. ibid.
of old Doctrines are attainable. Fas est ut prisca caelestis Philosophiae
dogmat a limentur, poliantur, non ut commutentur, says the forementioned
Author, it is lawful for us to put new trimmings upon those old Garments, to
handle the old Doctrines in a new method, illustrate them by new similitudes,
but still the same truth for substance, must be retained and maintained by us.

By this which has been said, We may see what id. c. 26.
reason there is to exclaim against the madness of this Generation. Mirari
satis nequeo (said Lyrenensis of the men in his days we may no less truly of
those in ours) I cannot enough wonder at the impiety of those blind minds which
not being contented with anciently received truths, are always either adding,
or detracting, or changing, some way or other introducing somewhat that is new:
that which here St John sets down as a commendation, is now become an
accusation; he preaches nothing but what is old: the voice of those in the
Psalms is, Quis Psalm. 4. 6.
ostendet bonum? who will show us any good? the cry of this age, Quis ostendet
novum? who will show us any thing that is new: our proud Women are not more for
new fashinos, then both Men and Women for new fancies. But surely if that which
our Apostle wrote was not new but old; they who vent not old but new are false
Apostles: upon this account it was that Ireneus inveighing Iren. l. 1. c. 18.
against Heretics, makes this one Character of them, Affectant per singulos
dies novum quicquam ad invenire quod nunquam qu^squam excogitavit, they affect
to broach somewhat new which was not heard of before: and to the same purpose
St Austin gives Aug. opusc. de util. ^^ed c. 1.
a Definition of a Heretic; He is one Qui alicujus temporalis commodi and
vanae gloria causa novas opiniones vel gignit vel sequitur, Who for secular
advantage or vainglories sake, does either invent or uphold some new Doctrine:
and to name no more Origin observes concerning Orig hom. 22. in Matthew.
Heretics that they Marry themselves extraneo verbo to a Foreign and so some
new word, altogether alyene from that which is contained in the holy Scriptures.

And therefore (my Brethrer) take ye heed of Tertul. adv. Mar^.
them who publish according to Tertullians phrase concerning Marcion, hesternum
Evangelium, a G^spell that is of yesterday, who change their Faith and
Doctrine, with the Moon every Month, and are as it were Skepticks in Divinity.
Remember, (I beseech you) who it is that sows the new Tares among the good
Corn? Even Mat. 13. 25.
the envious man: observe I pray you whither those men wander who (as
Ghislerius his phrase is) Antiquadimissa Ghisler. in Cant.
per novam gradiuntur viam, Leaving the ancient path, seek new ways: it is
seldom that he who is taken of his old and sure basis, s^tleth any where, but
is tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, falling away from truth to
e^ror, from error to heresy, from that to Blasphemy, and at last to Atheism.
Remove n^^ Prove. 22. 28, 23, 10.
then the ancient Landmarks: it is Solomon's ingeminated counsel, no doubt to
be understood literally, but yet such as is applied allusively, by the ancients
to this present matter, Terminos antiquos dicit terminos veritatis and fidei
quos statuerunt ab initio Catholici Doctores, he calls the old Doctrines
embraced by the Chatholick Doctors, the ancient Landmarks says Salazar, let
us not Salazar. ibid.
dare to remove them; yea, if an Angel from Heaven, (as St Paul speaks) shall
Preach any other Gospel let him Gal. 1. 8.
be accursed: In one word, let the obedience which we yield to the Commandments
be a new Obedience; but the Commandments to which we yield Obedience must be
not new but old, such was this concerning which the holy Apostle here writes.

2. In Special, Yet further and lastly take notice that the Commandment of
Love is not a new, but an old Commandment: many indeed are the Topics whence
this Commandment of Love might justly be commended; and among others this is
not the least that it is grayheaded and of ancient institution. There are some
things to which oldness is a disparagement, an old Garment past mending, an old
house past repairing, an old ship past rigging: but then there are other things
of which oldness is a praise, old Coins, Manuscripts, Monuments, Buildings
have a face of honor upon them; it is a great dignity for a man to be
descended of an ancient house, no wonder if this command of love be therefore
honorable, because it is an old Commandment.

The truth of this which is here attributed to Love will best appear by the
proof which is annexed and is next to be handled. For the present we will take
it for granted, and let the improvement of it be to render this command of Love
the more amiable and acceptable to us.

Indeed were it a new Precept, and the imposition of it but of Yesterday, we
might have some reluctance against it, Haud facile insuetum jugum suscipimus
says Calvin well: men do not easily undertake a yoke to which they are not
accustomed, but this yoke Calvin in l^^.
is no other then what was of old imposed. It is well observed by an Historian,
the Laws which at first were exceeding harsh and heavy, by force of custom
become not only tolerable but light and easy. Hereupon one compares customs
to a King, and Edicts to a Tyrant; because we are subject voluntarily to the
one, but upon necessity to the other. To this purpose Herodotus Herodot.
Chrysostom, orat. 76. Suid, in dicti. (...).
reports that Darius having under his dominion, certain Grecians of Asia, who
had a custom of burning their dead friends, and certain Indians who used to
eat them, he called the Grecians and would have them to conform to the
Indians, afterward he called the Indians and would have them to conform to the
Grecians, but found both very unwilling to leave the usage of their country,
so tenacious are men of old customs. Oh then my Brethren, since this command
is such as has always been a custom among the Saints, and has upon it the
stamp of antiquity, let it be embraced and practiced by us with the more
readiness and alacrity. And so much for the Point it self; It remains, I now
proceed to the proof it is from the beginning. But the time being past,
commands me to end, and reserve that to the next opportunity.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. V^RS. 7, 8. 7. Brethren I write no new Commandment unto you, but an
old Commandment, which ye had from the beginning, the old Commandment is the
word which ye have heard from the beginning. 8. Again a new Commandment I write
unto you, which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is past,
and the true light now shines.
EVery Scribe instructed for the Kingdom Mat. 13. 52.
of Heaven (says our blessed Savior) is like unto a man that is an Householder
which brings forth out of his treasury things new and old; an excellent
similitude representing to us the properties of a good Preacher. The Householder
has his Treasury where provision is laid up: The Preacher his storehouse of
divine knowledge. The Householder does not hoard up, but bring forth what he has
in his Treasury for the use of his Family: The Preacher being furnished with
abilities employeth them for the Churches good. The things which the Householder
brings ^orth out of his Treasury are both new and old, all sorts of provision
both of the present and former years growth: The Doctrines which the Preacher
delivers are either (according to Brugensis) the new and glorious mysteries
of the Gospel, in old and Brug. in Mat. Hilar. in Mat.
common resemblances; or (according to St Hilary, and the Ancients) Nova and
vetera in Evangeliis and in lege, the Legal and Evangelicall verities:
according to this is that occasional note of St Ambrose upon Cant. 7. 13.
Ambros. in Ps. 118. Oct. 22.
those words of the Spouse, At our gates are all manner of pleasant fruits new
and old which I have laid up for thee, oh my Beloved, Teneo mandata omnia novi
and veteri Testamenti, I keep the Commandments both of the old and new
Testament: for whereas the Jewish Synagogue neither keep the new in the letter,
nor the old in the Spirit: the Christian Church observes both, and instructs
her Children in both. Suiteble hereunto it is that this great Apostle of the
Christian Church and well instructed Scribe for the Kingdom of Heaven, brought
forth in his Preaching, and here lays up a writing both old and new, chiefly
pressing upon us the observance of a command, both Legal and Evangelicall,
Brethren I wait no new but an old, etc. Again a new Commandment I write unto
you.

2. Having dispatched the Compellation Brethren, we have entered upon the first
branch of the commendation drawn from its divine authority, and therein the
consideration of it as an old Commandment, which having been already handled in
the Assertion; we are now to proceed to the Probation, as it is implicitly
couched in these words, which we had from the beginning, and explicitly set
forth in those, The old Commandment is the word which ye have heard from the
beginning.

That you may see the strength of the Argument. I shall form it into a
Syllogism thus;

That which you heard and had from the beginning is the old Commandment. But
This Commandment about which I write unto you, is that you heard and had from
the beginning. Therefore. It is not a new but an old Commandment.
The Conclusion is the Assertion and has been already handled, the Major and
Minor contain the Probation, and remain now to be dispatched.

1. Begin we with the Major, The old Commandment is the word which was heard
from the beginning. To clear this, Be pleased to know, That a thing may be said
to be old, either (...), in some respects only, or absolutely. That which is
not from the beginning and therefore is new in respect of preceding times, may
yet in respect of following ages be said to be old, but only what is from the
beginning, is absolutely old. Antiquity properly refers to time, so that
what has the priority carries it in point of antiquity, Tert. contr. Marc. l.
4. c. 4.
and Id prius quod ab initio (says Tertullian) That is first which is from the
beginning, principium, a beginning being Id quo nihill prius, that before which
nothing is, else it could not be the beginning. In this sense it is we most
justly say that which is true is old, for id. ibid.
though error may be old, truth cannot be new: Yea, Since as that forementioned
Father excellently argues, Falsum est corruption very, Falsehood is nothing else
but an adulteration of truth, Truth must needs be before Falsehood, and so the
terms are convertible, that which is true is old, and that which is old is
true, for no error but is new in respect of that which is from the beginning,
though it be old in regard of that which follows. Upon this account it is
that the same Father disputing with Marcion put it to this issue, I say my
Gospel is true, Marcion says his is. I say Marcions Vide Tert. contr Marc. l.
1 c. 13.
Gospel is false; he says mine is, Quis inter nos determinabit nisi temporis
ratio ei praescribens authoritatem quod antiquius reperiretur? let antiquity
end the controversy: that which can show largest prescription of time, and so
the eldest let it be accounted truest. Indeed Christianity stands upon holy
antiquity, and there is no better way of discovering what is false, and
reforming what is amiss, then by looking back to the beginning.

Upon this ground it is, that we contest both with the Papists on the one, and
all Sectaries on the other hand, as being ready to justify against both, that
what we teach is truly old, because the word from the beginning.

1. As the Gibeonites cheated Joshuah with their old Shoes clouted upon their
feet, old Garments, dry and moldy Bread. So do the Papists delude many poor
souls with pretense of the old Commandment, and the old Religion. It is the
calumny they cast upon us Where was your Religion before Luther? we are
Novelists and but of Yesterday; yea that we daily broach new Doctrines. That
some (who are among us, but not of us) do so we cannot deny; but still we are
ready to justify the Doctrine of our Church to be the old Doctrine; nor do we
desire a better Medium of proving it then this in the Text, The old Commandment
is the word which was from the beginning. Take any or all of those opinions
wherein we differ, and for which we separate from them, such as are
Transubstantiation, half Communion, adoration of Images, invocation of Saints
and Angels, the supremacy and infabillity of the Pope, and the like: And we
shall find even by their own confessions that they were not from the beginning:
Scotus acknowledges that till the Counsel of Laterrane See Bp Vshers Answer
to the Jesuits challenge.
(which was almost 1200 Years since Christ) Transubstantiation was no Article
of Faith: Cassander confesses that for a thousand years, the holy Sacrament
was administered in both kinds; it were easy to instance in the rest, but that
learned Prelate has already done it to the full: and now let any rational man
judge whether we or they are to be charged with Novelty, when as those things
wherein they and we disagree, have no primitive antiquity to establish them.

2. As in this Particular we vie with the Papists, so are we ready to put the
differences between Us and the Sectaries upon this trial. Do we contend for a
Lyturgy in the Church? is it not because all Churches, Greek and Latin have
had their Lyturgies from the first Plantation of Christianity? Yea, Christ
himself has left a Prayer upon record, to be not only a Platform after which
manner he would have his Disciples pray, but a Set form which they were to say
when they did Pray. Do we contest for our Hierarchy in the Church, is it not
because it was so from the beginning? 1 Timothy 5. 19, 20, 21, 22. Tit. 1. 5. Rev.
chapter 2. and 3.
St Paul gave Timothy and Titus single persons, Episcopal power of ordaining,
and governing Presbyters. Those Angels of the Seven Churches manifestly appear
by the Ecclesiastical History to be Bishops: Yea, No Church since the Apostles
(till Calvin's time) has been without Episcopal Government. Do we oppose the
office of a Lay ruling Elder in the Church? is it not because it was not from
the beginning? We can trace no footsteps of it in antiquity; nor yet any such
Officer or Office described in holy writ. Finally, To name no more, do we plead
for the Baptizing of Infants? Is it not because as ( Origin and Austin assure
us) it is a practice Vide Eusob. Eccles. Hist.
which the Church received from the Apostles? and so an Apostolical tradition
which the more plainly appears, because in St Cyprians time though there
Ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit parvulis dare Baptismum. Origin. in
Romans
was a Controversy about Baptizing Infants upon the Eight day, yet the thing
it self is supposed as a practice then in use; and though we do not read (
totidem verbis) in the Scripture that the Apostle Baptized Infants, yet it is
very probable; when as St Paul called the Children of a believing Parent holy, if
he do not by the very phrase intend, (as the Learned Dr Hammond not improbably
Consuetudo matris Ecclesiae non spernenda nec omnino credenda. nisi apostolica
esset traditio, Aug. de Genesis ad lit. c. 23.
conceives) yet that he did allow Baptism to those Children: and where we read
that whole Families were Baptized, the Children might be among the number. In
one word, It is the glory of the Church of England, that her Doctrines are
exactly consonant to Universal and Primitive antiquity; nor do we desire any
other rule to examine them by then this, which here is laid down by our
Apostle, The old Commandment is the word which we have heard from the beginning.

2. To let this go, That which is chiefly to be Cypr. ad Fid. Ep. 60. Vorst. in
loc.
considered, is the Minor of the Syllogism; That the Commandment of love was
from the beginning. Now that which would here be enquired into is, whence this
beginning takes its date? Indeed haec vox pro materia substrata vary accipi
potest; this word beginning may admit of a several reference, and I find no
less then four several expositions of it here; all of which are not repugnant
to, but consistent with each other, from the beginning of their conversion, of
Christian Religion, of the Mosaical administration, and of the Creation.

1. Some Interpreters render the sense of the Ab exordio quum Christiani estis
effecti. Carthus.
words thus; from the beginning, that is from the time you became Christians,
and first gave up your names to Christ, and were called to the faith; according
to which sense our Apostle seems to assert, that one of the first lessons of
Christianity is love. St Paul speaks of milk for babes, and meat for strong
men; intimating that there are some Commandments and Doctrines Cum primum
nomina Christo dedistis Justin.
which are only fit for grown Christians; but this Commandment of love, as it
is meat for the strongest, so it is milk for babes. Heb. 4. 16.


2. Others give this construction of the words; from the beginning: that is,
From the beginning of the Gospels Publication, ever since the Faith of Christ
was made known to the world. Soon after Christian Religion was revealed, there
were many who endeavored to bring in other Gospels, but this Commandment
which St John Ab mitio Evangelij Est.
wrote of, was as old as Christianity; and what he delivered to them, he
received from Christ himself. In A primo Religionis ingressu, Calvin. Mat. 5.
6, 7. Joh. 13. 14, 15.
that Sermon of Christ which is first mentioned by the first of the Evangelists
St Matthew, this Precept of love is expressed; and in the last Sermon that ever
he preached, this lesson of love is commended to them; and being taught by
Christ himself, it must needs be from the beginning of Christianity.

3. Many take the date of this beginning a great deal higher, even as high as
Moses: That which you Israelites had of old in the writings of Moses delivered
to you. So that we now give no other Commandment in charge to you, then that
which Oecu. in loc. Aret. in loc. Fer. in loc. Grot. in loc. Heins. in loc.
God cmmanded Moses and the Prophets to preach. It is the exposition which I
most incline to. For since it is not improbable (as has been already
suggested) that those to whom this Apostle wrote, were (if not only, yet
principally) the Jews; and the design of St John by these words, being to prove
that what he wrote was no new but an old Commandment, it is improbable that he
would prove it by a date of not much above sixty years, nor would it
(especially to the Jews) have been any conviction of the antiquity of his
Doctrine, that it was from the beginning of Christian Religion; when as in
their opinion Christ's Religion was a new Doctrine. Upon this ground it seems
a more rational construction to refer this beginning to Moses: and our
Apostle could not use a more prevailing Argument to the Jews, then by letting
them know that the command he gave them was as old as Moses, and before
enjoined by him. There is only one Objection to be Answered, that if this from
the beginning be taken so far of; how does the Apostle say, not only which you
had, but which you heard, whereas this beginning was many hundred years before
they were. But the learned Grotius has framed a fit Answer Grot. ibid.
to my hand, interpreting vos by majores vestri, you, that is, your Ancestors,
according as it is to be Mat. 23. 35.
taken, where it is said whom you slew, and did not Moses give you the Law.

That then which according to this construction is here asserted is, that the
Commandment of Love was from the beginning of Moses, and required in the Law as
well as in the Gospel. This is that which in some sense is granted by all,
even the Socinians, but so as that they assert something to be added to it by
Christ: and that upon that account it is called in the next Verse, a new
Comandment. In what sense this Epithete of new belongs to it, shall be by and
by discovered: In the mean time that which the Orthodox assert, and I shall
endeavor to make good is, That the Evangelicall command of Love was from the
beginning of the Law, and so nothing new enjoined by Christ which was not
before by Moses.

To this end, Be pleased to know that the command of Love may be considred
either Extensive or Intensive; Extensively in regare of the Object; or
Intensively in respect of the Act. In both these respects say the Socinians,
Christ has added to the Law; for whereas say they, the Law requires the Jews
only to love their Countrymen, their Friends; the Gospel requires us to love
our enemies, and so the extent of the Object is larger. And whereas the Law
required only of the Jews an Active Love; the Gospel requires a Passive, so
far as to lay down our lives for the Brethren. The chief ground on which they
build the former is that of our Savior, You have heard that it has been said,
thou Mat. 5. 43, 44.
shall love thy Neighbor, and hate thine Enemy; but I say to you, love your
Enemies: and the foundation which they lay of the latter is, that the Law
commanded only to love their Neighbors as themselves; Lev. 19. 18. Joh. 13. 34.
but the Gospel, To love one another as Christ loved us, which is in effect,
to love others better then our selves by laying down our lives for them, which
is more then the Law required.

To enervate both these Arguments, and establish the truth of the Orthodox
Assertion: Be pleased to know,

1. That Neighbor which is set down as the Object of Love in Moses his Law,
includes Enemy as well as Friend.

To clear this, I shall propose a double demand,

1. Whither is not Neigbour to be taken in the same latitude, when it is said,
Thou shall love thy Neighbor, as when it is said, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy Neighbor; and again, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
Wife, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor any thing that is thy Neighbors. If this be
denied, that will be enough to evince it, that the particular commands of the
second Table are but several Explications of the general command, Thou shall
love thy Neighbor: and therefore it is the same Neighbor to whom we must
express our Love, by not bearing false witness against him and the like; and if
it be granted, then certainly Neighbor must include Stranger, nay, Enemy.
Since the Jews were not to bear false witness against their Enemies, or to
covet unjustly what belonged to them: To this purpose is the note of a Rabbin
upon these words of the Psalmist, He Psalm 15. 3. R. Kimchi.
that does no evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a reproach against his
Neighbor, understanding it of enemies as well as friends.

2. When our blessed Savior repeateth this Law of Mat. 22. 59.
Moses, whither did not Christ understand it in the same sense with Moses? If
he did no^, then he affixed another sense to Moses his words then what he
intended, which is not to be imagined; if he did, then either Moses meant them
universally, or else Christ did not; and so Christ has added nothing in this
particular to Moses.

As for that passage in our Saviors Sermon, Thou Mat. 5. 43.
shall love thy neighbor and hate thine enemy; it is Quantum ad traditionem
scribarum. Tostat. in Matthew. 9. 343. Aug. l. 1 de Ser. dom. in mont. ^. 41.
Hilar. in Mat. Oecumen in loc. Spanhem pars ult. dub. 128.
doubtless to be understood, (as Abulensis has well noted) only as a Tradition
of the Scribes and Pharisees. Indeed St Austin, and St Hilary seem to be of
opinion, that hatred was allowed in the Old Testament: Yea, Oecumenius in this
place harpeth upon the same string: but (by the leave of those Reverend
Fathers) upon what ground it does not appear; since it is no where written in
the whole Body of the Law, Thou shall hate thy Enemies: and therefore it is
well observed, that our blessed Savior does not say, You have heard that it
has been said by Moses, or in the Law; but You have heard that it has been
said, to wit, by the Scribes and Pharisees, those corrupt Interpreters of the
Law.

To all this for the further Confirmation, I may add, That Solomon expressly
requires in his Proverbs, and St Paul from him enjoyneth in his Epistle. If
thine Enomy ^e hungry give him Bread to Eat, And if he be thirsty give him
water to drink, so shall thou heap coals Pro. 25. 21, 22.
of fire on his head, and the Lord will reward thee. That Romans 12. 20.
God in the Law gave strict charge concerning the beast even of our Enemy. If
thou meet thine Enemies Ox or his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it
back to him. Again, If thou see the Ass of him that hates Exodus 23. 4, 5.
thee, lying under his burden, and would forbear to help him, thou shall
surely help him. And certainly he that required them to assist their Enemy, in
rescuing his beast, did not allow them hatred and malice to his Person: Nay,
yet once more in the forementioned place where Moses says, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor, is prefixed, Thou shall not avenge nor bear grudge, which refers to
an Enemy that has done one an injury. As for that lex talionis, Law of
retaliation (though (as Matthew. 5. 38.
appears by our Savior) it was otherwise construed by the Pharisees) yet
doubtless it was only intended by God, as a rule for the public Magistrate in
his Administrations of justice, and is no less in this sense allowable now: And
though they were to exercise acts of Hostility toward the Nations about them
in making no peace with the Ammonites, casting out the Cananites, and cutting
off the Amalekites; yet this was by a special command from God, which both
then and now may dispense with a general Precept; and withal, their being the
Instruments of Gods vengance upon the Heathen, did not hinder, but that they
might be free from any private revenge, and so fulfill the general Precept, as
well as any Headsman; who notwithstanding he is the Executor of Justice, may
yet love that Person, whom he does execute.

2. That Love which the Law requires may very well in some cases be raised up
to that height of suffering death. Briefly to clear which, know, That laying
down our life in reference to our neighbor is only required in one of these
two cases; the one when the public, the other when the spirtuall good of
others necessitateth to it.

To lay down a man's life for the public good, is so far from being purely
Christian; that even Heathens have done it: and therefore is no doubt included
in the Mosaicall Precept; which we may the rather believe, because we find
himself willing to be blotted Exodus 32. 32.
out of the Book of Life for the preservation of the People: and if it be said
that this is to love our Neighbor more then our selves. I answer, It is not,
if we take Neighbor Distributively; and if we take it Collectively, for the
Generality, even nature teaches us: and surely then Moses his Law did require
to prefer the puhlique, before the private Welfare, a General before a
Particular good.

3. But that dying which is especially an act of Love, is when we are willing
to lose our own temporal life for the eternal good of others. An example of
this we have in the Old Testament. What else meant David's wish in regard of his
Son Absalom when he said, Would God I had died for thee? Desiring no doubt to 2 Samuel 18. 33.
prevent that eternal death, into which he had reason to think his Son dying
in Rebellion against his King, his Father; was now plunged by the loss of his
temporary life. And in truth, though this be to love our Neighbors Souls
better then our Body, yet it is not to love our Neighbor better then our
selves, and therefore exceeds not the Mosaicall Precept. Cae^eris paribus, let
there be an equality every way, and a Christian is as much bound now to prefer
himself before his Neighbor as a Jew was, and in way of inequality a Jew was
bound to damage himself for his Neghbours good as well as a Christian. I am
not to love my Neighbors Soul more then my own Soul, nor his Body more then my
Body, nor his Estate more then my own. Christian charity in this respect, as
well as Jewish, begins at home; only when it is my Estate, or Body, and my
Neighbors Soul, which come in Competicion, this must be valued above those;
and this is required by Moses, as well as Christ. In one word, That addition
(as thy self) was certainly intended, not as a Limitation or Restriction, but
rather as an Amplification and Inlargment of this duty of love: that look how
dear and entire, and cordial that love is, which men bear to themselves, the
same they ought to have toward their Neighbors. And therefore I shut up this
with that of Cassian, Quid diutius Evangelicis atque Apostolicis praeceptis
Cass. l. 8. c. 14.
immoramur, cum etiam vetus lex haec eadem praecepit? This Precept of Love is
not only Apostolical but Prophetical; Evangelicall, but Legal: and in that
respect, truly said to be from the beginning.

4. Lastly, There is one Interpretation more which Oecum. in loc. Justin. in
loc. Aret. in loc.
looks backward as far as Adam; and so this command of Love is from the
beginning, not only because commanded by Mos^s, but Imprinted in nature. The
Law of Love was written at first in the mind of man; and though it be much
obliterated, yet some Characters still remain: and as by ruinous walls we guess
how stately the buildings once were; so by these remaining Impressions we may
easily gather what goodly Characters of it were once stamped upon us. Thus as
before Christ made it Gospel, Moses gave it as a written Law; so before Moses
made it a written Law, God made it a branch, or rather the root of the Law of
nature.

To wind it up therefore, Tell me I beseech you how inexcusable shall we be if
having so manifold obligations we shall be negligent in the practice of this
duty, Even the Gentiles that have only the remainders of natures Law are
obliged to love, and not observing it will be found justly blameable; much more
the Jews, who besides nature, had the Law of Moses to guide them, but most of
all we Christians who have nature, and Moses Law, and the Law of Christ, to
direct us. A threefold cord (says Solomon) is not easily broken: behold a
threefold obligation lies on us Christians; Christ, Moses, Adam, all Preaching
this Doctrine to us; upon which account St John calls it, the old Commandment
which was from the beginning.

2. There is yet another branch of this first particular Joh. 13. 34.
in the commendation remaining, which we find in the beginning of the eighth
verse, Again a new Commandment I write unto you. That our Apostle by this new
Commandment intends the same which before he calls, not a new, but an old
Commandment, is most probable, partly because the conjunction (...) properly
signifies, and is here rendered again, which therefore seems to look back on
what precedes, and intimates that he continues his discourse upon the same
subject; chiefly because this very command of love is called by our blessed
Savior in the Gospel a new Commandment; nor is this phrase used any where
concerning any other, then this command; and therefore it is most rational so
to understand it here, though Socinus most ab-, surdly contends, that those
words, the darkness is past and the true light now shines, are a command, and
that which here is called a new Commandment.

This being premised, the chief work is to reconcile St John to himself; for if
he speak of the same Commandment, how is it that he calls it in one verse not
new, and in the next a new? is it not a contradiction to affirm and deny the
same thing of the same subject? That of St Ambrose concerning the Cherubims, Si
stabant, quomodo movebant? si movebant, quomodo stabant? If they did move, how
did they stand? and if stand, how move, may be here alluded to? If it is old,
how is it new? if new, how is it old? But surely it is not to be imagined that
this holy Apostle should, as it were with one breath, give himself the lie. Had
it been at a great distance, though an humane Author might forget himself; yet
surely this divinely inspired Apostle could not; and much less being so near as
the next verse. And therefore we must necessarily conclude, that though he
speaks of the same subject, yet not in the same respect. Now it is a known
maxim in Philosophy, That contraryes and contradictions may be attributed to
the same subject in diverse respects; the same snow may be called white as it
falls, and black in its melting; the same person may be in one part hot, and
cold in another. Not to multiply instances, the same Commandment may be old,
and yet in some respect not unfitly be called new.

To illustrate this, give me leave briefly to set before you those several
notions, in which this term new may fit this old Commandment of love.

1. Appellant Haebrei novum quod praestantissimum; Lor. in loc.
it is usual with the Hebrews to call those things new which are excellent. He
has put into my mouth (says David) a new Psalm: and again, Oh sing unto the
Psalm. 40. 4. 90. 1.
Lord a new song, that is, say interpreters, an excellent song. In this sense
it is true here; the command of love is an excellent command: our Savior calls
the love of God the first and great Commandment, and the love of our neighbor
the second, which is like to it. St Paul speaking of Mat. 22. 38, 39.
this grace of charity, and comparing it with, preferres it before faith and
hope. That Apologue is very fit to this purpose, of a consultation among the
virtues, which should have the pre-eminence, whilst one was for chastity,
sister to the Angels; another for justice, which gives every man his due; a
third for prudence, Solomon's choice: not agreeing among themselves, they made
Reason the Vmpire, who passing by all the rest, set the Crown upon the head of
Love. But this interpretation though in it self true, is not so congruous to
our Apostles meaning.

2. That exposition is doubtless more suitable, Novum quia aliter a Christo
explicatum Aret.
which expounds new in opposition to the long received tradition of the
Pharisees concerning this command; for whereas this command had been corruptly
taught for many years by those Doctors of the Law; it was now refined from the
dr^s^e, and purely taught by Christ and his Apostles; and so this Commandment
though old in it self, yea older then their false glosses; yet being but newly
freed from them, is fitly said to be new. It is well observed by Heinsius, that
Heins. in loc.
those things are said to be new, which though they were long before, yet are
denuo restituta, newly restored to their pristine purity. Look as an old house
repaired, may be called a new house, and a rusty sword fourbished, a new sword;
look as an old book new bound up, is as it were a new book, and a defaced
picture refreshed with colors a new pic^ure; so is this command a new
Commandment. For whereas they who sat in Moses his chair, had perverted this
doctrine; Christ was pleased by himself and his Apostles a new to revive and
restore it to its primitive integrity. Indeed it was at this time with Moses
law, as it was in the beginning of our Reformation with Christian Religion. The
primitive doctrine and worship had for some hundred of years been buried under
the ashes of Romish superstition; whereby it is, that the Reformed Religion
though far older then Popery, might be accounted, and was, as it were, a new
Religion. The Moral law in Christ's time as to the both intensive and extensive
meaning of it, had been long hid under the corrupt opinion of the Jewish
Doctors; and in that respect the command of love, as delivered by Christ,
seemed no doubt to the Jews, and was as it were, a new Commandment.

But there are two other interpretations which seem more genuine then the
former. And therefore know,

3. That this Commandment of love is a new Commandment, not substantially, but
circumstantially; not in the essence of the doctrine, but the manner of
patefaction; not in respect of the thing delivered, but the way of delivering
it. It is the same command of love which is now, and was in the law enjoined;
but the example is different; in the law our love to our selves; in the Illyr.
in loc. Spanh. l. d.
Gospel, Christ's love to us, is made the pattern of this duty, Indeed this
variety of example makes no difference at all in the matter of the precept;
when Moses says, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, he requires as
much, as when Christ says, love one another as I have loved you: That of St
Paul concerning the love which ought to be between man and wife, sully
illustrateth this truth; for whereas he uses both these examples, exhorting
husbands to love their wives, as Christ loved Ephesians. 5. 25. 33.
his Church, and every one to love his wife as himself; yet he commands no more
by the one then the other, only presses it hereby with the greater energie.
Not are we to conceive any new addition to the general precept of love; but
only a fuller enforcement of the same precept from this new example. Look as
the Jewish and the Christian Sabbath are both days to be kept holy, but on a
different account, the one of the creation of the world, and the other of
Christ's resurrection; so the Jewish and the Christian command of love are of
the same nature, but the one urged by the example of selflove, and the other of
Christ's, and because the Gospelcommand is enforced with a new argument, and so
delivered in a new manner; it may therefore be styled a new Commandment. Nor is
it unlikely that St John, having before in general exhorted to walk, as Christ
walked, here particularizing in this walk of love, might call it a new
Commandment in this respect, as it is an imitation of Christ's pattern.

4. But there is yet another interpretation which wants not good authority and
reason to back it, and would not be passed by; and that is, to take new not in
opposition to antiquity, but antiquation; new, because it waxes not old, is
never out of date, but always in force. There are some commands which are new
and not old, such are the Sacraments of the Orig. in Number. Did. Calv. Fer. in
loc.
new Testament; others which are old but not new because abolished, such are
the Ceremonial services of the old Testament; and there are others which are
old, and yet new, such are the Precepts of the Moral Law. St Paul compares
Love to a Debt when he says, Owe Romans 13. 15.
nothing to any man but Love: and indeed it is such a Debt that is ever paying,
the Bond being never Cancelled. It is the usual cry of this age, when
Preachers deliver these moral Doctrines, he Preaches old, and common things;
but (my Brethren) they are so old, that they are new, and must continually be
inculeated upon the people. And therefore let us all learn so to look upon this
command, that taking it as new, we may the more carefully observe it. It is
well noted Arnold adv. Racchov. Cat.
by Arnoldus. Solent homines leges novas studio sius observare; paulatim vera
lege inveterascente de studio remittunt, Men are wont to be very observant of a
Law whilst it is fresh and new, but as it grows old, their Obedience becomes
remiss: and therefore it is Maldonates note Maldonatin. Johan.
upon the Gospel, that this newness is to be referred, Non tam ad mandatum
ipsum quam ad studium obediendi, not so much to the command it self as to our
endeavor of obeying it, and since as some trees are green all the year, so
this is always in force, we should with all care and conscience perform it.

To draw to an end, There is one acception of novum for rarum, new for that
which is rare and unusual, which I would to God might not be too true as to
the practice of this Commandment, it is rare and unusual especially in this
frozen age. But however let us remember the command is new that is excellent,
and new that is renewed, and new that is refined, and new that is persuaded by
a new and urgent example: and therefore let our desires and indeavour's be
still new and vigorous in the observance of it: so much the rather considering
that as some of the Ancients gloss, it is Aug. in loc. Bern. de caena dom.
Sermon. 5.
novum quasi innovans, this new Commandment by our obedience to it, will
transform us into new Creatures, and new Men in Christ Jesus. And that we may
be enabled to this obedience, what other course should we take then to pray for
a new Spirit, for that is another Aret. in loc. Est. in loc.
reason given of this phrase, novum quia novo spiritu impletur, it is therefore
called new, because it requires the new grace of the new Testament, which is
given by a new Spirit to fulfill it; for this new grace let us be daily
Orators, so shall we be of this new Commandment daily practisers.

To end all, They say of wine it is best when old, of Honey it is best when
new; behold this command of love is as wine, and to commend it, it is an old
Commandment, as Honey, and to commend it, it is a new Commandment: some men are
plodding antiquaries and delight in old things, old Evidences, old Monuments,
old Gold, old Coins, old Proverbs, and the like: others curious novelists, and
delight in new: here is that may allure both, and therefore which way soever we
are bent, our Apostle has as it were fitted our humor, God grant it may
affect our hearts, so as we may all be in love with this Commandment of love,
which is both an old and new Commandment.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. part of the 8, VERSE. Which thing is true in him and in you, because
the darkness is past, and the true light now shines.
AMong the many observables in sacred writ, it would not be passed by what
frequent use the Penmen make of those two Arts, Logic, and Rhetoric; by the
one proving strongly, and by the other persuading sweetly. It were easy to
discover in these Divine Books the several Topics of Argumentation, Tropes
and Figures of Elocution, and Forms of Oratory. True it is, it had been enough
for the divine Majesty whose Penmen these were, only to assert and enjoin
without either proving or persuading. But such is his Mercy, that knowing our
dullness and perverseness, he is pleased to convince us by undeniable reasons,
and allure us by loving insinuations. A pregnant instance hereof we have in
these words, the scope whereof is to make way for the command of love which our
Apostle was about to give them, friendly bespeaking them with the title of
Brethren, and sweetly preparing them to receive the command by various
Arguments, which are aptly couched in this oratoricall Proaeme. I write not a
new but an old Commandment. And Again a new Commandment I write to you which is
true in him, etc.

Having dispatched the Compellation and the first Part 2.
branch of the Commendation, we are now to proceed to the second, which is
drawn from that conformity this duty has to Christ's pattern, intimated in
those words, Which thing is true, or a thing which is true in him. I am not
ignorant that some learned men refer all that follows in this Verse, to those
words in the beginning of it, A new Commandment I write to you, as if it were
only a Confirmation of that part of the commendation, and so those words, Which
thing is true, are Zanch. in loc. Lorin. in loc.
thus to be Paraphrased; which thing, Namely, That this Commandment of Love is
a new Commandment, is true both respec^u Christi and nostri, in regard of
Christ who has himself fulfilled it, and so given us a new pattern of it, and
in respect of us Christians who by reason of the true light shinining have a
new grace enabling us to perform it our selves. But I rather incline to take
these words as affording new Topics for the commendation of love, and so the
laudatory Character we are now to handle is, that this grace which is enjoined
to Christians is no other then what was true in Christ.

The Clause as it is set down in the Greek carries with it no small
difficulty. Gagneius upon this place Gag. in loc.
ingeniously professes that he could not find out the true sense and meaning
of it. Some Expositors render (...), in it self, as if the sense of these words
were only to assert the verity of the thing concerning which he discourses;
but this to me seems jeiune and unbeseeming the fullness of Scripture
Expressions; besides, if we observe the phrase of this holy Apostle, and that
in this Epistle we shall find it very usual with him to speak of Christ under
those phrases of (...) and (...) as we may observe Loquitur flagrans Joannes
amore Christi. Lor. ibid. Joh. 20. 8.
in the latter end of this, and the beginning of the next Chapter: look as Mary
Magdalen having her own thoughts so full of Christ, conceived there was no need
of nameing him, only to say, Tell me where thou have laid him: so St John
burning with love to Christ, not doubting but that he was well known to them to
whom he wrote, and therefore supposing they would easily guess of whom he wrote,
thinks it enough to say only him, so that we may very well expound this
(...), as our Translators readit, in him, to wit, Christ.

But the greatest difficulty of construing this Clause lies in the first
particle ^, since being of the neuter Gender it cannot agree with the feminine
(...), which is the Substantive immediately preceding; but it is no strange or
unusual thing for an Adjective of the neuter gender to be taken Substantively,
Substantive acceptum. Menoch.
and so quod which is as much as quae res which thing. Thus it is rendered in
our Translation, and is not unfitly expounded by Grotius to be that thing
(namely Love,) Non tam preceptio quam res ipsa hic describitur. Grot.
which is the matter of the old and new Commandment: and indeed though the
phrase may seem somewhat harsh, yet the sense is most fitly thus expressed,
since the Commandment it self referrs to us, not Christ; but the thing or
matter of the Commandment was true in Christ himself, and so lays a greater
obligation upon us to perform the Commandment; nor need we stick at this
Construction, when we find the same in the former Chapter, where in the second
and third Verses after the feminine substantive, (...), is put a neuter Chapter 1.
2.
Adjective ^ as that forementioned Author observes: And now according to this
interpretation, the plain sense of the words appears to be this, A thing
which is true in him, that is, This grace of love which I enjoin you is no
other then what was verified in Christ himself. So that as before he lets them
see it is a Commandment both old and new: so here he acquaints them further, it
was such a Commandment as had Christ himself an Example of it. Ipse enim prius
charitatem Fer. in loc. Beza in loc.
ostendit, says Ferus, For he himself did practice Love, ratum ac reipsa
invenitur primum quidem in illo ut capite, says Beza; In him, as being the
head of the Church, and having received the Spirit without measure was this
primarily accomplished. And this interpretation I so much the rather assent to,
because it so aptly suiteth with what our Apostle had before delivered when he
calls upon them to express the reality of their interest in Christ by keeping
his Commandments, and walking as he walked; whilst he lets them see that the
duty of Love which he was about presently, and did intend chiefly to inculcate
upon them, was the only way to perform both these; By Love, they should keep
the Commandments, for it is both the old and the new Commandment, and by Love
they should walk as Christ walked, for it is a thing which was true in him.

And now, That this was true in Christ, is a truth so clear, that there will be
no need to prove it. Indeed it is tanquam radio solis scripta, written as it
were with a Sun beam: so that he which runs may read it. It is a Subject I
might very well dilate upon, but that I shall have more full occasion to
discuss both the Love of Christ and God to us in the following Chapters. That
it is so cannot be denied, yea, should we be so ungrateful as to deny or doubt
it, the Manger and the Cross would testify against us. If either confering
benefits on us, or suffering injuries for us, can assure his love to us: our
Apostle she weth it to be true in both when he says, To him that loved us, and
washed us Rev. 1. 6.
from our sins in his Blood, and made us Kings and Priests to God the Father.
How legible are the Characters of his love in his Birth, Life, Death,
Resurrection, Ascension, Intercession; and all those advantages of Redemption,
Remission, Adoption, Justification, Salvation; which by those accrue to us?
Which who so knowingly considers, must needs say with St Paul, The love and
Tit. 3. 3.
kindness of God our Savior has appeared: with St Peter, The Lord is
gracious: and with St Bernard, his 1 Pet. 2. 3. Bern. in Psalm. qui habet.
love to us was dignitatis nescius, dignatione dives, affectu potens suasu
efficax, full of condescension and affection. Indeed that it should be so
(though it cannot be gainsaid) may well be admired, especially when we look
upon our selves. What were we the rebellious offspring of degenerate Parents,
Slaves of Satan, Servants of sin, Children of wrath; that Christ should cast an
Eye toward, and place his Love on us? The (...) then is manifest that he loved
us, and you if he ask the (...) Why he loved us? there can no reason on our
part be given of it. And surely since his love was not deserved, no nor so much
as desired by us, fit it is, it should be acknowledged with admiration, and
retaliated with gratulation, and followed by imitation. This last our Apostle
here aims at, in which respect he fitly adds, and in you; it being most
rational that what was true in the Head, should be true also in the Members,
what was true in the Root should be true in the Branches, that as Christ loved
us, so we Christians should love one another.

Before I proceed to this which is the next part, I shall in a few words mind
you of one reading of these words, in which they have reference to this second
part: Grotius tells us that in one Manuscript it is (...), and St Hierom in his
translation, reads it nobis, A thing which is Hier. adv. Jovin l. 2.
true in him, that is, Christ, and in us, that is, his Apostles, who write and
publish this Commandment to you. The Original Copy was drawn by Christ, his
Disciples transcribed it in their own practice, and have commended it to all
Christians to write after both him, and them. This Cup of Love was begun by
Christ, his Apostles pledged him, and it must go round, all Christians are to
drink of it.

And here I cannot but take notice of that which I would to God were seriously
laid to heart by all who succeed the Apostles in the work of the Ministry;
Namely, that as St John in the behalf of himself and Istd. pelus l. 1. Ep. 396.
the other Apostles says, I write to you a Commandment concerning a thing
which is true in us, so we may be able to say, that that which we enjoin the
people is verified in our selves. This is (according to Isidores phrase) (...),
to join living with dead 2 Timothy 2. 15.
instruction, when our life as well as our tongue preaches, this is (according
to Primasius his Exposition) Vide Primas. ibid.
rightly to divide the word of truth, when we confirm our Doctrine by our
practice. Finally, This is (according to Playfers allusion) to lift up the
voice like a Trumpet, which must be held with the hand as well as blown with
the mouth; when we not only report the truth by a lively Preaching, but support
it by a Preaching life. Indeed then only can Ministers publish commands with
authority, so as to gain belief, with boldness so as not to be ashamed, with
efficacy so as to persuade, when they join patterns to their Precepts.

1. Men are very apt to question the truth of that Dectrine Cass. collat. 11.
c. 4. Matthew 7. 29.
to which the Preachers practice gives the lie; the way to imprint an
instruction upon the Hearers heart as well as ear, is to speak by our works as
well as words. It is said of our blessed Savior, He spoke as one having
authority: and St Gregory's moral is, Cum imperio docetur, quod Greg. mor. 23.
7.
prius agitur, quam docetur: he only Preaches with authority, who does what he
teaches.

2. When a Ministers Conversation confuteth his instruction; blushing may well
sit upon his cheeks, and his ears tingle to hear that of St Paul, Thou that
Romans 2. 21.
teach another shall not steal, do thou steal? The Leper in the Law was to
cover his lips, which one morally applies to Leprous Ministers who may well
Lev. 14. 45.
stop their mouths for shame.

3. A speech not accompanied with action, says Isid. pel. l. 3. Ep. 202.
Isidore truly, for the most part is liveless and ineffectuall; if the
Heavens, that is, the Preachers are as Brass only tinckling with sound of
words; no marvel if the Earth, to wit, the People are as Iron, obdurate to all
Steph. Cant.
their counsels: since Cujus vita despicitur, restat ut ejus praecatio
contemnatur, his Preaching is usually despicable, whose life is contemptible:
in which regard St Bernard Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 76.
says truly of such an one, Verendum ne non tam nutriat doctrina verbi, quam
sterili vita noceat. It is to be feared his vicious life more infects then his
pious Doctrine instructs. That Preacher wi, ll both find most comfort in
himself, and do most good to others, who can say in the words of a devout
Abbot, N^n aliquem docui quicquam quod ego prius ipse non fecerim, I never
taught any man any lesson which I did not first learn my self: as here St John
says of this Commandment, it is true in us. And so much for this second
commendatory Character of this grace of Love; its conformity to the pattern of
Christ, and (as you see by some readings) his Apostles. I now hasten to the

3. Last, That conformity which this duty has to the state of the Gospel, and
the truth of Christianity, in these words, And in you, because the darkness is
past and the true light now shines. In these words (...) in you, is employed a
Substantive Verb, which may be put either Indicatively, or Imperatively; is, or
let it be true in you, according to a different construction, of the following
words. Whilst some by darkness and light understand the Legal and Evangelicall
administration: so the Imperative rendering best suiteth, Let this Love be true
in you, because the darkness of the Law is past, and the light of the Gospel
shines. And others by darkness understand the state of unregeneracy, and by
light the state of regeneracy; and so the Indicative best fits this thing which
is commanded the duty of Love is true in you, because you are brought out of
the darkness of nature, into the light of grace. Each of these constructions
are consonant to the Analogy of Faith, agree well with the scope of the
Apostle, want not the concurrence of judicious Expositors, and therefore I
shall neglect neither.

1. In handling these words according to the first interpretation, we shall
loook upon them two ways, as an Assertion, and as an Argument.

1. As an Assertion, we have considerable in them.

A double Subject, darkness, and light.

A double predicate of the darkness, that it is past; of the true light, that
it now shines.

1. It would in the first place be here considred, that the Gospel is set
forth by light, and the Law by Romans 13. 11. Psalm. 19. 2. Dies Diei, i. e.
Christi anus Christiano, nox nocti, i. e. Judaeus Judaeo. Ambrose hortat. ad
Virgin.
darkness. Suitable to this it is that St Paul (as some expound those words,
The night is far spent, the day is at hand) compares the one to the day, and
the other to the night: and St Ambrose interprets these words of the Psalmist,
Day unto day utters speech, and Night unto night shows knowledge, the one of
the Christian, and the other of the Jew.

1. That the Gospel is most fitly described by light is out of question, and
the Analogy may easily be demonstrated in several parables.

The Fountain of light is the Sun, and Christ the Son of righteousness is the
Author of the Gospel, in which respect it is called the word of Christ. The
nature of Col. 3. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 18.
light is pure, the Doctrine of the Gospel is holy: in which regard it is
called the mystery of Godliness, and the Doctrine which is according to
godliness. Light by reason of its splendor and beauty is very am^able,
delighting, chearing, and reviving the beholder. Evangelicall truths are
pleasant and comfortable to the Believer. So much the word (...), signifying a
good message, or (according to the Angels phrase) tidings of Luke 2. 10.
great joy imports: such is the subtilty of the light that it penetrateth the
air, the window, the smallest crevis; and so great is the Gospels efficacy
that it pierces to the very soul. So much the Author to the Hebrews asserts
Heb. 4. 11.
when he says, The Word of God is quick and powerful piercing even to the
deviding asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow, and is a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. Finally, The principal
effect and use of light is to discover and make manifest: things that are
secret and hidden appear in the light, by reason of its clarity and brightness:
for this cause chiefly is the Gospel resembled to light, because it is (...)
and (...), a revelation and manifestation of many glorious Mysteries. The
Trinity of persons in the Unity of Essence; The Unity of the two natures in one
Person, in the incarnation of the Son of God; The meeting together of mercy and
justice in the redemption of the World; The estate of bliss and glory laid up
for Believers in Heaven; The calling of the Gentiles from all parts of the
Earth, out of the state of ignorance to the knowledge of God and Christ; are
those mysterious Doctrines which the Gospel plainly reveals to us; well may
it deserve to be represented by the similitude of light.

2. But though the Metaphor of light very well agree to the Evangelicall, yet
that the other resemblance of darkness should be understood of the Legal
Administration seems somewhat harsh and strange; nor indeed can it be
admitted, but in a qualified sense.

To which end you must know that the Law of Moses may be considered either
Absolutely, or Comparatively. If we consider it Absolutely in it self, it was a
light. David acknowledged it, his son Solomon in his Proverbs asserteth it; and
it were easy to parallel the Law to light as well as the Gospel, inasmuch as
it is the Law of the Lord, an undefiled Law, rejoicing the heart; Yea, inasmuch
as what ever was necessary for the Jew to know in order to Salvation was
delivered in it. Again, If we consider it Comparatively with the state of the
Gentiles at that time, what is here ascribed to the Gospel, belongs even to
the Law, it was then the true light. In Jury was God known, says the Psalmist,
and his name was great in Israel. Whilst the whole world was an Egypt involved
in the darkness of Idolatry, Jury was a Goshen, a place of light for the
Knowledge and Worship of the true God.

But still compare the time of the Law, with the time of the Gospel, and so
this term of darkness may be asserted of it. A light it was but a Candle light,
so Ps. 119 105.
much the phr^se of a light, and a lamp used both by the Father and the Son,
David and Solomon intimate; and Prove. 6. 23.
perhaps the like is intended by St Peter's expression, of a light shining in a
dark place. Now what is a 2 Pet. 1. 19.
Candle light but dark in comparison of Day light.

To clear this, Be pleased to observe that this darkness is not opposed simply
to light, but to the true light and that as shining; now this expression of
true may be taken in a threefold reference, as contradistinguished to that
which is imperfect, figurative and John 1. 9. (...). Great. in loc.
false.

1. As perfect is sometimes no more then true, so true is sometimes as much as
perfect, it is the gloss of Grotius upon the Text. Quod in quaque re eminet
solet dici (...), that which is the most Eminent in any kind, is said to be
truly so, thus the true light is as much as the choice and most resplendent
light; in which sense Christ himself is said in the Gospel to be, and here the
Evangelicall Administration is called the true light. That this is the meaning
of the Epithet here, appears so much the more, in that the Article is
prefixed both before the Substantive, and the Adjective: as if we should render
it the light, the true being so most Eminently and Transcendently. Indeed the
Law is a light, and in some sense a true light because it did not deceive nor
misguide them who walked according to it; but still the Gospel is the true
because the most illustrious light, and so in comparison of it, the Law is as
it were darkness.

2. It is not an unusual signification of true and truth in holy writ, nor
unsuitable to this place to take it in opposition to Types, Figures, and
Ceremonies; in this sense we are to understand it, where Christ is called the
true Tabernacle, that of Moses being only a John 4. 24. 1. 17.
Type of him: and when our Savior says, God will be worshipped in truth, not
according to the Typical and Ceremonial worship of the Law; and yet more
appositely to our present purpose, when it is said, The Law came by Moses, but
grace and truth by Jesus Christ. The meaning whereof is briefly thus, whereas
the Law only enjoyneth, the Gospel enableth, and what the Law taught in
Figures, is nakedly delivered in the Gospel. Aug. contr. Faust. l. 22. c. 6.
Congruous to which is that of St Austin, Grace comes by Christ, Ut data
indulgentia peccatorum quod praeceptum erat ex Dei dono custodiretur, that
indulgence being granted to our failings, what is commanded may by Gods
assistance be performed; and truth, Ut ablata observatione umbraru^ quod
promissium erat ex fide presentaretur, that by removing the obscure Types what
is promised might be made manifest. Upon this account the phrase of (...),
darkness here used may be attributed to the Law, or at least that which is by
the learned Dr Hammond observed to be the reading in the Royal Ham. in loc.
Manuscript (...), a shadow, all the Ceremonies, Types, and Sacrifices of the
Law being but shadows of those things which the true light of the Gospel more
fully discovers. This is excellently expressed by St Paul to the Colossians,
where he calls the Legal Ceremonies Col. 2. 17. Vide Daven.
a shadow, and Christ the Body: to the Hebrews when he says, the Law was a
shadow of good things to Heb. 10. 1.
come; not the very Image: in both which Scriptures put together, you find a
Body, an Image, a Shadow; the Body is Christ, the Image the Gospel, the Shadow
the Law. Now as the Representation which a shadow makes of the Body is very
dark and obscure in comparison of that which the Image shows: since the
shadow represents only in communi, that there is a Body; the Image in
particulari, the several Lineaments of the Body; so the discoveries which the
Law makes of Christ and Salvation by him are very imperfect in comparison of
the Gospel Revelations.

3. If you like to retain the common signification of true as opposite to
false, you must take in the Verb shines, and so the sense will be clear; the
true light shines only in the Gospel, and therefore the Law is called
darkness. True there was a light a true light in the Law, but it did not shine
forth, it was as it were hid under a Bushel; and so a state of darkness in
comparison of the shining light in the Gospel. It is very observable to this
purpose, that all things were covered and wrapped up to the Jews; when they
carried Numb. 4. 13.
the Brazen Altar in the wilderness, they covered it with a Purple Cloth; when
they carried the Ark it was covered with three coverings, a Vail, a Badgers
skin, and a Cloth of blew; the Table of the Show Bread had three coverings; and
except the laver every thing was covered in the Temple; Yea, the Temple it self
had a Veil. When Moses came from the Mount, his Face was veiled; the Priests
bare the things which they might not see: and all this to signify what a
concealment there was of divine knowledge under the Law. To this purpose St
Gregory allegorizeth these words of the Psalmist, Tenebrosa aqua in nubibus,
Dark water in the Greg. mor. l. 17. c. 14.
Clouds, that is, Occulta scientia in Prophetis, the darkness of knowledge in
the Law and Prophets.

It is true, Eternal life, Salvation by Christ, and those other sublime truths
are to be found in the Law, but as a Face under a Mask, as a Sun in a Cloud,
Heavenly wrapped up in Earthly promises, Christ involved in Types and Figures.
There were but few that knew any thing of these truths in comparison of the
multitudes now, and that they did know was but obscurely in comparison of the
clearness now. Divine knowledge was then as an Oyntmennt kept close in an
Alablaster Box, now the savor thereof perfumeth the whole house. Then it was
at best but as the dawning of the Day, now it is full Noon: and those Doctrines
which were velata inveteri, folded up in the Old, are revelata in novo,
unfolded in the New Testament. To this tends that expression used by St Paul
concerning Christians, We all with open face behold the 2 Cor. 4. 13.
glory of the Lord. The Jews faces were veiled, ours are open, they according
to the Apostles phrase elsewhere saw afar of and so darkly, we as it were near
hand and so clearly.

To sum it up, Look as the true shining light of the Gospel in comparison of
that beatificall Vasion, so the typical instruction of the Law in comparison
of Evangelicall teaching is but darkness or at best a shadow. Indeed the
Triumphant Church is in intimis, the holy of holies. The Christian Church
Militant, in atrijs the holy place. But the Jewish in extimis the outward
Court. When God gave the Law the second time, he commanded the people to stand
at the foot of the Mount* Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and the Seaventy Elders of
Israel to worship afar off in the middle of the Mount, and Moses ascends to the
top of the Mount, even within the Cloud: by which three one has represented
the three states of the Church: By those who stood at the bottom, the Jewish;
By them who worshipped in the middle, the Christians; And by Moses the
glorified Church. In one word to use St Ambrose his phrase, Umbra in lege,
imago in Evangelio, veritas in Cael^, the Truth is in Heaven, the Image in the
Gospel, but in the Law only the shadow.

2. The just fitness of those Metaphors darkness and light, in reference to the
Law and Gospel being manifested; that which next is more briefly to be
considered, is that, which is predicated concerning both. Namely, That the one
is past, and the other now shines. Indeed the word for passing is in the
Present Tence (...) it does pass away, for when St John wrote this Epistle, it
was only in fieri, passing, not past: those Legal Ceremonies began to dye at
Christ's Passion: then, in signification thereof was the Vail of the Temple not
only perforatum, or attritum, or laceratum, worn or torn a little, but rent in
twain from the top to the bottom; but they were not dead and buried till the
destruction of the Temple it self; so that during the space between Christ's
Passion and Jerusalems desolation, they were passing away: and the Evangelicall
Administration did more and more display it self. Thus as when the house is
built the Scaffold is pulled down, when the Sun arises the Stars disappear;
when the Prophet himself came the staff was taken off, and when Christ
increased, John the Baptist decereased; so when the Gospel was published the
Legal Administrations vanished away.

And surely the Consideration hereof should teach us on the one hand to bewail
the hardened Jews, who though the darkness be past and the true light now
shines, shut their eyes against the light, and love to abide in darkness. St
Hierome very aptly compares the Jews before Christ, to those that eat the
flesh: Christians under the Gospel to those who eat the Marrow, but the Jews
now to the dogs that gnaw the bone. Indeed those Legal observances at the best
were only (...) a shadow but now they are (...) darkness exitiall to those who
still embrace them? Oh let us pity and pray for the blinded Jews, that the
veil may be taken from their faces; and they may behold the light which
shines so brightly: nor is there less cause of gratulation in respect of our
selves, then lamentation in regard of the Jews. It was a great benefit to
learning, when the obscure hyeroglyphicks of the Egyptians were changed into
letters, and Platoes dark writings were brought down to more easy conceptions
by Aristotle; but surely far greater is the benefit which the Church has
now, the Evangelical Administration suceeding in the room of the legal. Oh,
how fitly may that expression of the Psalmist be taken up by us Christians! God
is the Lord Psalm. 118. 27.
which has showed us light, a clear full glorious light, let us be glad and
rejoice in it!

To wind up this first Interpretation by considering the words (in this sense)
as an argument why this command of love ought to be true in us; Namely, Because
we live under the Christian dispensation. Indeed hatred and malice were not
tolerable in the Jews, but they are abominable in us Christians; who should
live in love if not we, to whom the love of God and Christ is so clearly
revealed? Oh my brethren, how sad is it to think, though (the shadow as some
read it) the darkness (as others) be past, and the true light now shines; yet
we may too truly complain that the shadow remains? nothing but shadows of
grace, fancies of godliness found among us; nay the darkness of envy and
hatred, and all uncharitable walking prevails among us. Oh be we exhorted,
since we have the light, to walk in it, to walk worthy of it, to walk as
children of it, by walking in this path of love. And so much for that
Exposition.

The other interpretation renders these words assertively, is true in you, and
expounds the darkness and light of sin and grace; an Exposition which I
incline to as most rational, it being very probable that our Apostle as in the
following verses he uses the same metaphors; so here intends the same things;
and that there his primary scope is to describe by darkness and light, man's
corrupt and regenerate estate, will appear in the handling. For the better
prosecution of these words in this sense, be pleased to proceed with me by
these steps, and observe,

1. What is the state of all men before conversion; Namely, a state of
darkness; darkness is in our minds, the darkness of ignorance and infidelity,
we neither do nor can know aright either God or our selves, The natural man
perceives not the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor. 2. 14.
is St Paul's general Doctrine, asserting our ignorance of God; and the
particular charge against Laodicea, That she knew not she was wretched and
miserable, poor, Rev. 3. 18.
blind, and naked; may justly be extended to all mankind in regard of
self-ignorance. Indeed there is so much light left in us as may render us
inexcusable, but not as can lead us to Heaven, we neither of our selves can
find out, nor yet discern divine truths, though they are set before us, how
quick sighted soever reason may be in naturals; it is dim yea blind in
spirituals: and as our blessed Savior argues, If the eye be darkness, the
whole body must needs be dark; the eyes of our understanding being darkened; no
marvel if our will and affections be clouded, yea a darkness of sin overrun
our whole man; so that what St Paul says to the Ephesians, is true of all
unregenerate persons, they are not only in the concrete dark, but abstract
darkness it self.

2. What the state of all regenerate persons is, The 2 Cor. 5. 19. Genesis 1. 2, 3.
darkness is past and the true light of saving knowledge and heavenly grace
shines in their hearts. Regenerate Christians are called in the new Testament
new Creatures, and indeed not unfitly; since as it was in the old, so is it in
this new Creation. We read in the beginning of Genesis, That darkness was upon
the face of the deep, and 2 Cor. 4. 6.
God said let there be light. A fit Emblem of the Spirits work in a sinners
Conversion. Whereas darkness Acts 26. 18.
covers the soul before, a glorious light arises in, and diffuseth it self
through it; To this no doubt the Apostle alludeth when he says, God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts: and
for this reason it is that very often the turning of a sinner is set forth by
this Metaphor: so Paul's conversion of the Gentiles is called a turning them
from darkness to light; the converted Colossians are said to be delivered Col.
1. 13. Ephesians. 5. 8.
from the power of darkness; and of the Ephesians it is said, You who were
sometimes darkness, are now light in the Lord. Suitable to all which is this
phrase in my Text, The darkness is past, and that true light now shines.

Nor is it unworthy the observation, how fitly these two clauses are joined
together, since the one cannot be without the other; nay, indeed one is the
cause of the other. In every convert there is not only a passing away of
darkness, but a shining of the true light; yea, the shining of the light is the
cause of the passing away of the darkness; in which respect Zanchy Zanch. in
loc.
notes, that Conjunctio copulans pro causali posita videtur, the Copulative
Conjunction, and is put for the Causall, for. This will the more appear if we
consider Qui diligenter considerat quid sunt, tenebrae nil aliud inveniet, quam
absentiam lucis. Aug. de genesis ad lit.
what St Austin has observed, Namely, That darkness is nothing else but the
non residency of light, and therefore that which expels darkness, must needs
be the presence of light: thus the grace of the Spirit infused into the Soul,
is that which prevails to the expulsion of sin. Look as the taking of an
antidote drives out the poison; the putting of a new Seal upon the Wax
defaceth the old stamp, and the return of the Sun causes the darkness to
vanish; so is it the donation of the Spirit and his grace which dispossesseth
Sin and Satan of the Soul.

Hence we may take notice, what it is that makes the difference between a
Convert and a natural Man, namely, the shining of the light of grace. We that
are converted were once involved in the same state of darkness with the rest of
the world, and as unable to deliver our selves from it, had not Gods free grace
caused the light to shine upon 1 Pet. 2. 9.
us, which he denies to others: in which regard St Peter says to the
converted Christians to whom he wrote, You are a chosen Generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that you should show forth the
praise of him who has called you out of darkness into his mavelous light.

But yet it must withal be considered, that the words in this sense are better
read according to the Greek, the darkness passes away, then that it is past,
since so long as we are here, though our light be true, yet it is not perfect,
but shines more and more to the perfect day. Now according to the increase of
the light is the decrease of the darkness, and therefore because it is not full
noon, perfect day whilst we are here, the darkness cannot be said to be wholly
past, but rather is still passing; if then we are sensible of the remainder of
darkness in our hearts; let it trouble, but not too much dismay us: light and
darkness in remiss degrees may be together, nor must we expect the darkness of
sin to be wholly removed till we participate the light of Glory.

3. In whomsoever the darkness passes, and the true light shines: this is
true of which our Apostle here speaks, this grace and duty of love will show
it self in all regenerate persons: it is a clear maxim, where there is the
cause, there will be the effect; such as is the root, such will be the fruit;
now goodness which is a companion of love, is called by the Apostle Paul, A
fruit of the Spirit, or as some Greek Copies read it, (...), a fruit of light,
this light which here Ephesians. 5. 9.
is said to shine, which is no other then the grace of the Spirit; no wonder if
where this light shines there this beam and fruit of it appear: indeed glowe
worm light and star light is such as has no beat at all to accompany it, but
Sun light which is the true light expelling darkness wants not heat, which is
the Emblem of this grace of love whereby the soul is warmed, yea enflamed.

Examine we then our selves by this Character if we be brought from darkness to
light, this is true in us, who so experienceth this change will find some
measure of strength to perform this command, darkness is hateful, but light
is lovely; the darkness of sin causes hatred, but the light of grace love, if
the wild Beast of envy and malice range abroad in thy Conversation, it is a
plain argument that as yet it is might with thee.

For a close of this particular I have already told you, that according to this
sense these words, true in you, are to be read Affirmatively, and so they are a
commendation of those to whom our Apostle wrote, and intimate, that this
command, which he was to impose on them, was already true in them: and his
design hereby no doubt was to encourage them the more in the practice of this
duty. Since Cic.
according to that of the Orator, Trabimur omnes laudis studio, all men love
to be commended, and praise is a spur to Virtue. This is that policy which
our blessed Saviou^ himself is pleased to use in all his Epistles to the Asian
Churches, Rev. 2. 3.
except that of Laodicea; owning and praising those graces which he saw in
them. The like we may find practiced by all the Apostles in their Epistles. St
Paul writing to the Corinthians, Now 1 Cor. 11. 2. Gal. 5. 2. 2 Pet. 1. 19
I praise you Brethren: to the Galathians, you did run well: St Peter,
Whereunto you do well that you take heed. It were easy to instance in each;
and surely this practice is deservedly imitable by Ministers toward their
People, Superiors toward Inferiors; Yea, all men one toward another. Render
to all their dues, honor to whom honor belongs, says St Paul. It is a
breach of that justice, Romans 13. 7.
which is due from man to man, not to give due commendations. Indeed flattery
is abominable, and therefore there must be Salt as well as Honey, in our
praises: commendations are then commendable when they are done with fidelity,
and exceed not verity; having just ground, and aiming at a right end: we may,
we ought to acknowledge and declare the good, which we see in others, as here
St John does.

But perhaps you will say, if this were true in them already, what need our
Apostle write this Commandment to them? is it not in vain to bid a man do that,
which he already does? I answer, No: and that upon a double account.

1. That which was true, must be still true, and so a command may be given to
enjoin the continuance in, as well as the entrance upon any duty. As the Devil
diverteth some from, so he interrupteth others in the performance of what is
good; we had need to be called upon once and again, least we faint in the race.

2. That which was true, ought to be more true in them; we fulfill no command
so exactly, but we may complain of manifold defects, nor do we ever so well,
but still we may do in all, better; the truth of Love and every grace is in
whom the true light shines, and on whom regeneration is conferred, but the
strength of grace may still be deficient; and therefore there is continual
need of writing and Preaching this Commandment even to those who practice it.

To end all, What remains but that this large and excellent Preface, with
which our Apostle ushereth in his discourse of love, have an effectual
influence upon our hearts and lives, to prepare us for the Doctrine, and excite
us to the practice of it? It is a command, and that not antiquated but still in
force, it was practiced by Christ himself and all his holy Apostles, it is most
suitable to the Gospel Administration, under which we live; yea, if we have
the true light of grace in us, this cannot but be in some measure exercised by
us.

And therefore, that we may obey this old and new Commandment, which God has
given us; that we may follow that choice and excellent pattern, which Christ
and his Apostles have set us; that we may walk worthy of the Gospel, which
shines among us:

Finally, That we may declare our selves to be indeed what we profess, brought
from darkness to light, let us attend to, and set upon the performance of the
following instruction which should now be handled, but that the time prevents,
and therefore must be referred to another opportunity.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 9, 10, 11. He that says he is in the light and hates his
Brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loves his Brother abides in
the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. He that hates his
Brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
WHat humidum and calidum, the natural heat and radical moisture, are to the
body, that are repentance, and love to the soul; nor are those more necessary
to the conservation of our temporal, then these to the sustentation of our
spiritual life. Indeed the principal grace is Faith, this brings as it were
the copula, that which knits Christ and the Christian together in Union with
whom consists our life; but the maintaining of this life is by the moisture of
godly contrition for our sins, and the warmth of holy affection toward God and
Man: no wonder if we find as Faith and Repentance; so likewise Love frequently
inculcated in holy writ upon all Christians. Indeed this latter is one of the
principal Subjects of this Epistle, so that though our Apostle minds us of
Repentance in confessing our sins, and Faith in believing on the Name of Jesus
Christ, yet he chiefly insists on loving, and that as God, so our Brother,
which is the design of the Verses I have now read, He that says he is in the
light, etc.

Having dispatched the preamble inciting, contained in the two former Verses, I
am now to procced to the Doctrine instructing, laid down in these three; for
whereas before he had mentioned a Commandment concerning, which he did now
write to them, and withal adorned it with very amiable Characters, he now
plainly and expressly declares what this Commandment is; Namely, That of loving
our Brother, for so Exegesis and ipsius praecepti, quod superius commendavit
expositio, Dan.
Interpreters well observe these Verses to be an Exposition of the general
commendation in those; and having by his large praises endeavored to inflame
them with desires after the knowledge and practice of it, he goes on to inform
them what it is, and wherein it consists.

Nor would it be passed by, that our Apostle in handling this Doctrine of Love
pursues that Metaphor which he made use of in the former Chapter, where he
lays down the general scope of his Epistle; hereby no doubt intending to
intimate to us that this duty of Brotherly Love, is a primary step of that
walking in the light, which intituleth to fellowship with God; and so on the
contrary, hatred of our Brother, a chief step of that walking in darkness,
which depriveth us of that communion, so that we are now come to the fourth
step of that divine walk, which St John designeth to chalk out in this
Epistle. The first whereof is Repentance, The second Obedience, The third
Imitation of Christ, And now the fourth which we are from these verses to
discourse upon is, The love of our Brethren, He that says he is in the light,
etc.

In these three Verses we have two general parts considerable;

A Grace proposed, The Vice opposed.

The proposition is in the 10. Verse, The opposition in the 9, and 11. Verses.

And inasmuch as the grace is in order of nature before the vice: and
(according to that Geometrical maxim, Rectum est Index sui and obliqui) the
way to know when we commit the sin is to understand the nature of the grace;
and yet further, since the opposition is intended as an amplification of the
proposition, I shall therefore in handling these Verses begin with the
middlemost, wherein is contained

The Thesis or grace proposed, He that loves his Brother Genesis 1.
abides in the light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him.

In the discussion whereof be pleased to observe two things, the nature and the
benefit of the grace, the former in the Subject, the latter in the praedicate
of the proposition.

1. The Subject of the proposition, He that loves his brother. So that the
grace here set before us is the love of our Brother: St Austin speaking of love
has observed a four fold Object, whereabout it is Aug. de doctr. Christ, l.
1. c. 23.
conversant, Quod supra nos, quod nos sumus, quod juxta nos, quod infra nos;
The first above us, namely, God, The second our Selves, The third about Us, The
fourth beneath us, our Bodies; and as he well observes two of them are so
natural that there is no need of a Precept, to wit, our selves, and especially
our bodies; and therefore the command of love is expressed in these two, the
Love of God, and of our Neighbor, the latter of which our Apostle here calls
for.

If you look backward upon the 5. Verse of this v. 15. Vide Na^g^rg. in loc.
Chapter* you find the Apostle speaking of the Love of God, that being indeed
the primary Object of Love: and here he advises to the love of our Brother;
these two being not contrary but subordinate: a little after he speaks of two
Loves which are inconsistent, the Love of v. 15.
the Father, and the Love of the World; but it is not so with the Love of God
and our Brother; nay, Indeed the former is a ^ause of the latter, and the
latter a testimony of the former. Love to our Brother is effected by our love
to God; and our Love to God is perfected by love to our Brother: and therefore
very fitly does our Apostle here speak of the latter, (having before mentioned
the former) because he is now about to describe the word or Commandment the
keeping whereof perfects, that is, declares our love to God to be perfect or
sincere, which is no other then Brotherly love.

For the better unfolding of which, I shall briefly resolve these two queries,

What that Love is which we owe to our Brother?

Who that Brother is whom we are so to Love?

Not to discourse of Love at large, be pleased to know, Quest. 1. Zanch. in loc.
That to Love our Brother as Zanchy well defines, it is To have our mind so
inclined toward him, as that we will, and to the utmost of our power, conferr
good upon him: Suitable hereunto is that description of the Philosopher, Love
is (...)* To will that which is good to, and as far as we are able to do that
which we will for another. If then you ask what is the formal act of this love?
I answer (...)* benevolence. If what is the Arist. Ethic. lib* 9. cap. 5. Amor
Affectivus Amor Effectivus Biel. in. 3. sert. did. 27 art 1.
proper effect of it? The answer is (...), beneficence; nor can love be, where
either of these is wanting: on the one hand, if there be beneficence and not
benevolence, it is not love. When St Paul says, Though I bestow all my goods
to feed the poor, and have not charity, it profits me nothing; he intimates,
that it is possible for a man 1 Cor. 13. 3.
to bestow his goods on the poor, and yet want love, liberality being sometimes
a fruit rather of vain glory, then charity. On the other hand, if there be
benevolence, and not beneficence, it is not love; since it is only vell^^tas,
not voluntas, a wishing and woulding, not a serious willing: Trahit secum
animorum propensio omnem beneficentiam, says Gualter, a cordial propension
carries with it a vigorous prosecution. In this respect St Jam. 2. 16.
James chideth those, who when a Brother or Sister is naked and destitute of
daily bread, say to them depart in peace, be you warmed, be you filled,
notwithstanding they gave them not those things which were needful for the
body: that is not charity which only expresses it self in words, not works;
love being an emanation of the will, in a way of adhaesion to its object,
cannot but will all good to the object loved; and since the will is the Queen
Regent of the whole man (in which regard the actions of all the other faculties
are called the imperate acts of the will) commanding the execution of its
inclination; it must needs follow, that he who seriously wills, cannot but
really endeavor his brothers good; and therefore that velleity which like an
empty cloud vanishes away without efficacy, is not an act of love: in which
respect some not unfitly give the sense of (...) to move every ^^one, and use
all means for accomplishing the good we will; only that caution (according to
our ability must be here inserted: for as S Paul says in this very case, If
there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and
not according to that he has not; where there is want of ability, benevolence
(though it cannot be profitable 2 Cor. 8. 12.
to our Brother, yet) is acceptable to God, and ought to be to him without
beneficence. The one then, namely a good will, is absolutely and always
necessary; The other to wit good works conditionally, and with this limitation,
so far as they are within the sphere of our activity, and compass of our
ability.

Besides this general definition of love; it will not be amiss somewhat more
particularly, to enquire into the several ways of exercising it, that we may
see how many lines meet in this center of love; which may both fully and
briefly be delineated by a double reference.

1. To the present condition of our brother, who Romans 1. 2. 14, 15. Col. 3. 12.
Either has the good already; and then love first blesses God, and next
cong^atulateth him, rejoyceing him at the presence, and willing the
continuance, yea increasing of it, so far as may be good and expedient for
him.

Or else he wants the good, and is distressed by some kind of evil; and then
love bears a part with him in his sufferings by sympathy, wiping away his
tears with the sponge of her compassion; yea, not only so, but endeavors to
relieve him in, and deliver him out of his affliction, above all praying with
earnest prayer and supplication to God for him.

2. To the several kinds of good which concern this life, and that which is
to come. Thus love

1. wills and endeavors chiefly the spiritual good Gal. 6. 1. 1 These. 5.
14.
of his soul, instructing his ignorance, rebuking his wickedness, exciting his
negligence, supporting his weakness, resolving his doubtfullness, laying forth
readily what gifts God has vouchsafed to her; yet still within the compass of
her calling, for the edification of others.

2. Next she wishes well to, and takes care of his temporal advantage in
body, name, estate, feeding the belly, clothing the back of her brother, and
so making the one her barn, and the other her wardrobe, and both her treasury,
concealing those secret faults which might, and confuting those false slanders
which do impair his credit; finally seeking the things of another, his outward
1 Cor. 13. 5.
welfare, gain, prosperity* as well as her own; yea when need requires,
throwing the fat dung of her wealth upon the barren soil of her brothers mean
estate.

By this time you see both the intent and the extent of the a^^ of love, which
is here required. Pass we on to the object, whereabout it ought to be
conversant, and so to a resolution of the second Question, Who this Quest. 2.
brother is, whom we ought thus to love.

To this end, you may please to take notice of a double fraternity, to wit
carnal and spiritual; the one is by the blood of man, the other by the blood of
Christ.

1. Carnal Brotherhood in its utmost latitude reaches very far; nor can we
too far extend the meaning of brother in the Text, according to this notion.
For the clearing whereof* observe these particulars*

1. Brother in the strst and strict acception, is predicated of those who have
the same immediate parents; the word (...) coming from (...) signifying (...)
and (...) uterus intimates as much; one that comes out of the same womb, the
same loins, has the same Father and Mother with another, is most properly a
brother.

2. Brother is sometimes enlarged further to affinity; and so kinsmen are in
Scripture phrase called brethren. The Jews say concerning Christ, Is not this
the Carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joses, and of Juda
and Simon, and are not his Sisters here with us? whenas yet we rationally
conceive, that the blessed Mar. 6. 3.
Virgin never had child besides him; and as he is caled her first born, because
none before him; so we read not of any she had after him, and therefore He her
only one. So that his kindred and a^^yes are called his brethren and sisters,
according to the usual form of speech among the Jews.

3. Brother is sometimes yet more largely applied to all those who are of the
same country: thus where the Jews are forbid to take usu^y of a brother, and
required to set him King over them whom the Lord their God Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
should choose from among their brethren; brother is manifestly taken in
opposition to a stranger, one of another nation; so that not only cognatione
but natione, by kindred but country there comes in a Brotherhood.

4. Brother is yet capable of a far greater extension, and so takes in all
men; inasmuch as there is not only identitas naturae, a specifical identity of
nature, but originis, a numerical identity of original. He is in strict sense a
brother, who has the same immediate parents; well may he be a brother in a
large sense, who has the same mediate parents: thus all men came from Act. 17.
26.
the loins of one man Adam, and from the womb of one woman Eve, in which
respect the Apostle says, he has made of one blood all the nations of the
earth. Indeed all Angels have the same intellectual nature one with another;
but they did not all come from one Angel, but were severally and immediately
created; whereas God (though he could have created millions) made but one man,
and ordained that out of him all the race of mankind should proceed, in which
regard every man is brother to another. And therefore ^ertullian writing to the
Heathen says, Fratres etiam Tert. Apol. c. 39.
vestri sumus jure naturae matris unius; we Christians and you Heathen are
brethren in a natural way, as having the same original. Thus as Circles in the
water do enlarge themselves one greater then the other; so do the acceptions of
this word. If now you shall ask me in what acception brother is here to be
taken? I answer with Augustine, Estius, and Danaeus: Hoc loco fratrem Aug. de
temp. Sermon. 61. Estius in loc. Dan. in loc. Gr. mor. hom. 27. in Evang.
omnem hominem debemus accipere, in the largest, as including every man. St
Gregory speaking of this duty of love, well observes, Aliud est quod sponte
impenditur naturae, aliud quod praeceptis divinis ex charitate debetur
obedientiae; there is doubtless something more intended by the precept, then
what we are prompted to by nature: to love our countrymen, our friends, our
brother, is that which we are naturally inclined to; so that they who do not
perform it, are justly branded as without natural affection; whence by the
way, we may see what an unnatural age we live in, wherein Englishmen are so
cruel to one another, kinsmen worry each other, yea one brother betrayeth and
supplanteth another. But surely the contrary to those horrid acts, I mean
natural affection is not all that is here intended, it is the 2 Timothy 3. 4.
love of all men which is required of us. According to this notion, frater and
proximus, brother and neighbor are of equal extent, and so the mandate is,
(...), the love of our neighbor, or brother, which is indeed (...), of every
man. True it is, our love must be regular and orderly; and therefore caeteris
paribus, other things being alike, we must prefer a brother before a kinsman,
a kinsman before a countryman, a countryman before an alien; but yet so, that
as far as we are able, the beams of our love may sea^ter themselves
throughout the world.

And thus to love our brother is to love every man.

1. Sive bonum, sive malum, as well the bad as the good: God causes his Sun
to shine* and his rain to fall upon the unjust, no less then the just; and we
must express our love to the wicked, as well as godly*

2. Sive amicum, sive inimicum, as well enemy, as Carthus. in loc. Aug. de
temp. Sermon. 61. Id. ibid. Luke 6. 32.
friend: it is Christ's express precept, Love your enemies, and (as S Austin
truly) H^c est vera and germana charitas, this is right Christian-charity. To
wish well to those that wish well to us, to do good to them that do good to us,
is no more then what Publicans do, (so out blessed Savior) nay then what
Thieves, Dragons, Wol^^, and all sort of Beasts, do; so that forementioned
Father: But to wish well to them that wish us ill, and do good to them that do
us hurt, this is that which Christians ought to practice: yea as Tertullian
truly, solorum Tert. ad scap. Romans 12. 20. Prove. 25. 21. 22.
Christianorum, only they can do it. If thy enemy hunger, says St Paul, feed
him, if he thirst, give him drink* the Hebrew word in the proverb whence St
Paul borrows it, is rendered by Vatablus, Propina ei aquam* Vat. ibid.
not only give him drink, but drink to him, as a token of love, that it may
appear, however he is toward thee, thou art reconciled to him. Excellent to
this purpose is that advice of Gregory, Nazianzen, (...), Gregor. Naz. orat. 41.
we must say brethren unto them that hate us, and accordingly express brotherly
love to them. And thus in this construction of brother, we have beheld the
extension of love, how far it reaches, in regard of the objects about which
it is conversant.

2. But besides this carnal fraternity between all men, there is a spiritual
brotherhood between all Christians; 2 ^et. 1. 3* 4. Gal. 4. 26. Tit. 3. 5. 1
Pet. 1. 23. 2. 2.
they have all the same Father, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
begets them again; they have the same Mother the Church, Jerusalem from
above, which brings them forth; they all are washed in the same laver of
regeneration, baptism; partake of the fame immortal seed, and are nourished by
the same sincere milk of the Word. Finally, they are all begotten to the same
undefiled inheritance, heirs of the same glory; (...), says Clemens
Alexandrinus, we call them brethren who Clem. Alex. Stromat. lib. 2.
are born anew of the same Word, yea quanto dignius fratres and dicuntur, and
habentur? says Tertullian; how Tert. Apolog* cap. 39.
much more deservedly then other men are they called and accounted brethren,
who acknowledge one Father, God, have drank of one spirit of holiness, and are
brought forth of the same womb of ignorance, into the glorious light of
Evangelical truth? A brother in the sense abovementioned is only so by nature,
but in this by grace; that is only a brother on the left hand, but this on the
right hand; that of the earth, earthly, but this from heaven, heavenly. In this
sense some Expositors, and as I conceive, most rationally take the word here,
this name brother, being by the Apostle, and afterward in the primitive times
in common language given to all, and only those who did embrace Christian
Religion; and which makes this interpretation more manifest is, that our
Apostle in the next Chap. 3. 10. 5. 1.
Chapter phraseth it, love the brethren, which seems to indigitate a certain
society of men so called: yea in the fifth Chapter at the beginning, he
describes him whom here he calls brother, to be one that is begotten of God.

According to this construction, that which is here required, is called by the
Apostle Peter, (...), 2 ^e^. 1. 7. Gal. 6. 10.
brotherly kindness, and is distinguished as a particular species from its
genus, (...), (which is presently annexed) charity. As then there is a general
love which belongs to all men, so a special love which belongs to all
Christians; and as we must do good to all men, so especially to the household
of faith; indeed seeing the Christian brother has a double cause of love in
him, that is Gods image as a man, and Gods graces as a Christian; we ought to
deal by him as Joseph did by his brother Benjamin, whose mess was five times
greater then the rest of his brethren.

If any shall yet further enquire, why our Apostle speaking of this love to a
Christian, calls him by the name of a brother? I answer for these three
reasons* because this name of brother carries in it an obligation to, a
specification and modification of that Inter fratres communis debet esse metus
gaudiam dolor. Tertull.
love which is here required; since we must love a Christian, quia, quatenus,
qualis, because he is a brother, inasmuch as he is a brother, and with such a
love as is among brothers.

1. This word Brother carries with it a strong Obligation to Love, In fratris
voce ratio, so Danaeus, It is an urgent reason why we should Love a Christian,
because he is our Brother: all relation is a ground of affection: and hence it
is a man loves any thing that is his: the nearer the relation the greater tie
to love, and Perfectior est fraternitas spiritualis, quam carnalis, etc.
Ambros. Ser. 9
therefore the more reason why a Brother should be beloved: the nearest
relation is that which is spiritual, and therefore yet greater reason to Love
a Christian, who is ours, our Brother, yea, our Brother in Christ. When Moses
saw two Israelites Country men struggling together, he said to them, Sirs, you
are Brethren; why do you wrong one another? when Abraham Aug. Sermon. 27* de
verb. Apost.
and Lot (kinsmen) were likely to fall out, says Abraham, Let there be no
strife I pray thee between me and Act. 7. 26. Genesis 13. 8.
thee, for we are Brethren: when Socrates saw two Brethren striving one with
another, he told them they did as if the two hands which were made to help
should beat each other, so that since Christians are Brethren in the highest
and closest relation, this should be a great engagement upon them to love.

2. This word Brother intimates a specification of this love in regard of its
Object, which is then rightly placed when it is upon a Brother as he is a
Brother, that is a Christian, as he is a Christian. One that is a Brother in
this spiritual notion, may be my natural Brother or Kinsman, and then to love
him is what nature dictates; or he is my Friend and Benefactor, and so to love
him gratitude teaches, or he is able to do me either an injury or a courtesy;
so that I have cause to fear the one, and hope the other: and in this respect
to love him, self love prompts me, or (once more) he may be a man of rare
natural and acquired endowments; and to love him, for this ingenuity moves me;
but to love him because he is a Brother in a spiritual sense, this is that
which Christianity inciteth to, and this only is a right Christian love. Indeed
thus to love him, is to love him in reference to God and Christ, because he
has the grace of God in him, the Image of God upon him. To love him as a
Brother in this sense, is to love him as a Son of God, a Member of Christ: and
(as St Hieromes phrase is, Diligere Christum Hierom. Ep.
habitantem in Augustine) to love God, and Christ dwelling in him.

And now if any shall say it is hard, nay, impossible to know any man to be
such a Brother; and therefore how can I love him as such when I cannot know him
to be such? I answer, that there is a great deal of difference between the
judgment of certainty and charity, love does not need nor require infallible,
but only probable signs; and therefore whosoever does profess the true faith of
Christ, and does not by a flagitious conversation give that profession the lie,
love takes him to be a Brother; and to love one, because he atleast seems to
be such a one by his external Profession and Conversation, so as the more
Christian graces we discover in him, the more we are affected toward him, this
is that which most especially falls under the Precept of loving our Brother.

3. Yet once more, there is in this word Brother employed a modification of that
love which we must express toward Christians, to wit, that it must be such as
that which is between Brethren, and that more properly in two things; the
instancy, and the constancy, the fervency and the permanency of it.

1. Brotherly love is fervent, it is a relation of the greatest indearment,
partly as its natural not founded in choice as it is between Man and Wife, and
between Friends; and partly as it is between Equals; not like that between
Parents and Children, whose love toward their Parents has more of neverence
then sweetness in it: hence it is that as no discord, so neither is any love
like to that which has been found among Brethren: such ought our love to be
toward Christians, a bright shining, an hot flaming love. That exhortation of
St Paul is very observable to this purpose, Romans 12. 10.
Be you kindly affected one to another with Brotherly Love, where the Greek
word (...), is rendered by Tertul. adv. Marc. l. 5.
Tertullian affec^uos^, both which note an eminent measure and degree of
affection; such is Brotherly, such ought to be Christian love, very
affectionate. Memorable in this respect was the example of the Primitive
Christians, of whom that forementioned Father says, they did love one another
ad stuporem* Gentilium, to Apolog. c. 39.
the astonishment of the Heathen, so much that the Heathen cried out with
admiration, Vide ut invicem se diligunt, see how they love one another.

2. Brotherly love is lasting, it is natural, and therefore perpetual, it is
a relation that cease not till death, and therefore the affection may well
remain. A Brother if not very unnatural will own his Brother in rags, and love
him in his lowest estate: such must Christian love be toward a Brother of low
as well as high degree, in persecution as well as prosperity, when he wants us,
not we him, nor must our love cease to act toward him, till he cease to be
amongst us. This was that no doubt which the Apostle aimed at when he says,
Let Brotherly love continue, thereby minding what the love of Brethren is, and
what the love Heb. 13. 1.
of Christians ought to be, a continuing and enduring love.

And now what other use should we make of all this discourse upon the nature of
this grace, but hereby to examine our selves whether our love be of the right
stamp, to wit, such a love as is ready to every good word and work, as
extends it self to our very enemies, as is chiefly fixed upon Christians, and
that because they are so; and so much shall suffice to bespoken of the first
part, the Subject of the Thesis: I now proceed more briefly to the

2. Praedicates, Which are plainly two, describing the benefit of this grace;
the one in regard of the condition, and the other of conversation of such a
person: his condition is happy, for he abides in the light, his conversation
is sweet, for there is no occasion of stumbling in him.

1. He that loves his Brether is said to abide in the light, it is not unfitly
here taken notice of by Zanchy, Zanch. in loc.
that as in the Eighth Verse our Apostle argues, a causa ad effectum, from the
cause to the effect, this thing is true in you; namely, the prac^ice of love,
because the darkness is past and the true light now shines, to wit, of grace;
so in this Verse, he reasons ab effecto ad causam, from the effect, to the
cause, He in whom this is true, that he loves his Brother is brought out of
that darkness, and abides in the light.

Light is a Metaphor variously applied in Scripture, we may here take it three
ways.

1. This Metaphor of light is sometimes attributed to Christ, so by our Apostle
in his Gospel, when he calls him the light, of whom John the Baptist did
bear witness, by himself when he says, I am the light Ver. 6.
of the world, and thus abiding in the light is the same with that of abiding
in him. Thus it is an undoubted truth, He that loves his Brother abides in
Christ: that Branch which participateth of the juice and sap of the root, must
needs abide in it. Love is the sap that was in Christ, and therefore he that
partaketh of love from Christ must abide in him; that Member which suffers
with the rest of the Body, declares it self to be in the Body; he that by
loving sympathizeth with his Brother, manifests himself to be a Member of
Christ.

2. Sometimes by this Metaphor of light, the Gospel together with the saving
knowledge of it are represented. Both these we meet with in one Chapter: whilst
St Paul expressly mentions, first the light of the glorious 2 Cor. 4. 46.
Gospel of Christ, and presently the light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ. Justin in loc.
Indeed in the one is the light without, and the other is as the light within,
and he that loves his Brother adideth in this light; hereby declaring that he
has indeed learned and is rightly acquainted with Evangelicall Doctrine: to
this purpose is Justinians note, Eo lumine dignum se ostendit qui luminis
ductum sequitur, by following the conduct of this light, he shows himself in
some measure worthy of it, because answerable to it.

3. But lastly, This Metaphor of light is used to set forth grace and holiness:
in this sense no doubt St Peter is to be understood, when he says of Believers
In splendore gratiae gratum facentis. Carthus. Chapter 1. 6.
that they are called by God out of darkness into his marvelous light; and thus
the light in which he that loves his Brother is said to abide, is the same
with that in the former Chapter, where we have the phrase of walking in the
light, and the meaning of the word is briefly this, He that loves his Brother
is in a state of grace; Charity is an evident demonstration of sanctity: St
Paul reckoning up the fruits of the spirit, places love in the front, as if
there were no clearer fruit of the spirits residence in us, then the exercise
of this duty of love. Indeed there is a love which only argues good nature;
such Amare amantem, naturae, inimicum Charitatis est. Aquin in Cat. sup. Matthew.
5.
is that of a Kinsman, a Friend; but to love an enemy, and that because it is
an Evangelicall injunction, and to love a Christian because he is a Christian,
is such a Flower as grows not in natures garden, but is a fruit of the
Spirit, and so a Testimony of grace.

But because I shall have more full occasion of discussing this in the next
Chapter, I pass on to the

2. Next benefit which attends upon Brotherly love, as it is expressed in those
words, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him.

Not to insist on the several acceptions of the Greek Vide Hierom. in Matthew*
15.
word (...), as it is used by the 70. in the Old Testament, and by the sacred
Writers in the new; this being already done by the late learned Annotator. It
may suffice to know that here according to its derivation from (...), Claudic^,
it signifies any rub or block cast in a man's way, which may endanger halting or
falling: and therefore is fitly here rendered occasion of stumbling. In what
sense this is true, that there is no occasion of stumbling in him that loves
his Brother. Expositors somewhat vary, yet so as that they are all consistent
with the Analogy of Faith, and scope of the place.

1. Some understand scandal in an active sense, Carth. in loc. Aret. in loc.
Est. in loc. Gualt. in loc.
and thus render it, there is no occasion of stumbling given by him; he takes
care that neither by opprobrious language, injurious action, or vicious
example, he give a just offense, so as may occasion the fall and ruin of his
Brother. St Paul writing to the Philippians, exhorts Phil. 2. 15.
them to be blameless and harmless; where the former word (according to its
derivation) signifies that we must not be as beasts who push with their horns,
and thereby do much harm; and the latter word signifies one, de quo nullus
queri potest, of whom none can justly complain, and they are well put together:
since as St Austin aptly, quis de illo just e queritur, qui nemini Aug. de
perfect. justitiae.
male vult? he that is harmless must needs be blameless; nor can he be justly
complained of by, who does no injury to another: such is every one who loves
his Brother. Love nec reti^ tendit, nec laedere intendit; neither Romans 13. 10.
1 ^or. 13. 5.
does, nor desires another wrong, it works no ill says the Apostle, and
again in another place it thinks not evil: wisdom avoideth the snares which
are laid by love lays no snares for others; yea so cautelous is charity that
she will rather abridg her self of liberty, then do what may offend her weak
Brother: and therefore St Paul expressly says to him, who did grieve his
Brother with his meat; which yet was in it Romans 14. 15.
self lawful to eat, now walk thou not charitably. Indeed this is that
which flows from the very nature of love: for since it is, as has been
already showed, a willing of good, it must needs infer a nilling of evil to my
Brother; it being impossible that I should at the same time will and nill the
same thing to the same person; and therefore since if I will good, I must nill
evil: no wonder if by him that has a true love, there be no occasion of
stumbling given to his Brother.

2. Others interpret scandal in a Passive sense, there is no scandal or
occasion of stumbling given to him: not but that there will be blocks laid in
the way, but he passes over them, and so falls not at them; according to
that of Solomon, It is the glory of a man Prove. 19. 17. Zanch. in loc.
to pass over a transgression To this purpose is Zanchies note upon the Text,
it is not Non est illi scandalum, but, Non est in illo scandalum, finding an
Emphasis Grot. ibid.
in that (...), which Grotius conceives to be a Pleonasm; there is no offense
to him, but not in him, that is, 1 Cor. 13. 4.
though it may be given by others, yet it is not taken by him: in which respect
are those expressions of St Paul, Charity suffers long, is not easily
provokt, bears all things: and St Austin observes upon this Aug. in Ep.
place, Qui diligit fratrem tolerat omnia propter unitatem; he that loves his
Brother, for unities sake, bears with all things; the back of love will
sustain a load of wrongs, and when it is moved with violence, it is not
removed from patience. It is St Peter's phrase, 1 Pet. 4. 8.
and he borrows it from the Wiseman, Love covers Prove. 10. 12.
a multitude of sins; and as it covers them from others by concealment, so,
which is especially intended, from her self by connivence and forgiveness; and
this she exercises in respect not of a few, but many injuries, herein (being
to use St Chrysostoms comparison,) like to fire which burns up not only a few
sticks, but a great wood: thus whilst faith is a resolute grace, having cedo
nulli, for her Motto; love is a yielding grace, and so passing over, is not
offended, those wrongs, which like stumbling blocks are thrown in her way.

3. But there is another construction of these words, which as it is of no less
verity, so is of greater latitude, by scandal to understand transgressions;
these being those stumbling blocks which cause us to fall and hurt, yea ruin
our selves; and thus the sense of the clause is, He who loves his Brother
escapes those heinous sins into which others fall, walking in the Commandments
of the Lord blameless. This is that which takes in the other constructions,
for inasmuch as he does not willingly give offense; therefore he avoideth those
sins by which his Brother is offended: and since he does not easily take
offense, he avoideth those sins to which others are provoked. It were easy to
instance in the several Commandments, how the love of our Brother prevents the
breaches of them; he that loves his Brother, because he is a Brother, much
more loves his Father God, and loving God abborreth those prophanations of his
Worship, Name, Day, which ungodly men wound themselves by. Again, he that
loves his Brother, will reverence him if his superior, dare not injure him in
his Wife, Estate, Name, or any thing that is his. And if you please to put
these two together, abiding in the light, and no occasion of stumbling, you
shall find the one a manifest reason of the other. By the opposition of being
in darkness, and walking in darkness, to abiding in the light, it appears
that abiding in the light, implies being and walking in the light, whereby he
escapes what ever might be a stone of offense, or stumbling block in his way.
If any man (says our blessed Savior) walks in the light he stumbleth not,
because he sees the light of this world; and thus he that loves his Brother
having the light of saving knowledge, and grace to shine before Grot. in loc.
him, nunquam imping it; so Grotius, never falls; but inoffenso gradu pergit: so
another, goes on inoffensively, in the path of eternal life. Indeed we must
take this with some restriction, not as if he that loves his Brother did not
sometimes fall into sin, but (...), not into scandalous and injurious sins, and
this too with reference to his abiding in the light; it is possible for a
charitable Christian to step-out of the light, and then he may* fall foulely,
but so far as he is regenerate, and abides in the light, he is free from such
sins.

4. Once more; Grotius conceives that the Apostle id. ibid.
in these words has some reference to the 70. reading of the 165. Verse of the
119. Psalm, (...), great peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall
offend them; and so it intimates the inward tranquillity, which as they that
love the Law, so he that loves his Brother does enjoy, so as that what soever
befalls him he is not disturbed nor distracted by it; it is that indeed which
follows upon all the former, for since he neither justly gives* nor quickly
takes offense, and keeps himself from gross sins in the course of his
Conversation: no wonder if he enjoies a serene calm in his soul, and though
wicked men may be offended at him, yea, raise storms of persecution against
him, yet he is at peace within. Excellent to this purpose is that of St
Ambrose, Charitas pellit omnes tribulationes, Ambrose in Ps. 118.
non ut non eveniant, sed ut non n^ceant; quia licet exterius tribulationes
insurgant, tamen vir justus interius non turbatur: Charity drives away all
troubles, not that they do not come upon, but that they shall not do hurt to
him, because though tribulations arise outwardly, he is not molested inwardly.
That Adage of the Wiseman, No evil shall happen to the just, Prove. 12. 21.
the Vulgar Latin reads, Non contristabit justum quicquid ei acciderit, what
ever happen to the just shall not vex and grieve him; and to use Hugo's
Philosophical Hugo ibid.
comparison, as an accident is present and absent without the corruption of the
Subject; so tribulation when present as well as when absent does not perplex
and disturb the just. Indeed there is nothing occasions offense to such a man
but sin, and therefore abiding in the light he is not stumbled at affliction.
If you cast a spark of fire into the water, how soon is it quenched, Chrisost.
hom. 1. in Ep. ad Corinth. and 16. in Ep. ad Heb.
so are all fears cast into a good Conscience; when the Sky is black with
Clouds, the Stars though they seem to be obscured, yet retain their proper
luster; and good men when they seem in affliction to be clouded with sorrow
says, St Chrysostom^, are not sorrowful but rather rejoicing.

And now what other use should we make of all that has been said, then to
press upon us that Apostolical exhortation, walk in love? Indeed what way
better for us to walk in then this, which is so bright and lightsome, so plain
and clear, so pure and pleasant? It is Solomon's assertion, The way of the
righteous is made plain, Prove. 15. 11.
it is no less true of the charitable, in the way of love, there is nothing to
offend or molest, whilst purity is the track, and tranquillity our companion;
you then that have not experienced this, begin, and you that have begun go on.
I think I need not bid you, your own experience cannot but encourage you in
this sweet way, till you come to that Country whither this way leads you,
where the Law is Charity, the League Unity, and the life Eternity.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 9, 10, 11. He that says he is in the light and hates his
Brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loves his Brother abides in
the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. He that hates his
Brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
OPposita juxta se posita magis illucescunt, says the Logician, things of
greatest distance, set near in place do one illustrate the other. The Sun never
appears so gloriously as when breaking through a Cloud. A Freeman most
prizeth his liberty when he sees the Prisoners Fetters and captives chains;
and Sara becomes doubly beautiful when surrounded with the swarthy
Egyptians. The dolorous noise of War is the best language to proclaim the
sweetness of peace. Health is never so acceptable as when it brings letters of
commendation from sickness, and virtue becomes more amiable* when the contrary
vice is represented; For this reason no doubt it is, that as Painters draw
black shadows to set off their Pictures with a greater luster; and some (I
fear proud) Ladies are wont to wear black patches, that their faces may seem
the more lovely: So do Orators frequently set virtues and vices together, that
the evil of the one may the more advance the good of the other. This way of
illustration is that which is very observable in the Penmen of sacred writ;
especially those two, whom I may well call Heavens darlings. Solomon who is
styled Jedidiah, and John the beloved Disciple; the one you may observe in his
Parables very often setting prudence and folly with such like contraties one by
the other; and the other in this Epistle and more properly in these Verses,
that he might the more commend the goodness of love, enlarges his discourse in
discovering the badness of hatred: He that says he is in the light and hates
his Brother, etc.

It is that part of the Text* I am now to handle, The Antithesis or Opposition
set down in the 9, and 11, Verses. But before I enter upon the severals in this
part, it will not be amiss once for all to take notice of that which we shall
find very usual in this Epistle; Namely, the Repetition and Ingemination of
the same sense, yea, sometimes of the same sentence. This indeed is the first
time we have fully met with this: for though in the first Chapter we find the
Subject of one Chapter 1. v. 8, 10. v. 7, 9.
proposition, if we say we have no sin, and the predicate of another, cleansing
from all sin; yet we meet not with one entire proposition twice mentioned till
now, where these words, He that hates his Brother is in darkness, is both in
the 9, and 11. Verses. Indeed this repetition is not without some variation. In
the 9. Verse, there is an enlargement of the Subject* it is not barely, He that
hates his Brother, but He that says he is in the light and hates his
Brother; and in the 11. Verse there is an amplification of the predicate, not
only he is in darkness, but he walks in darkness, etc. Yet still it is for
substance the same thing which is intended, and the same words are repeated in
both the Verses. And indeed it is that which is easily observable, not only in
this but the rest of the sacred Books. That of David the sweet singer of
Israel is Psalm. 13. 6. Matthew. 5. 1. ^ Luke 6. 20.
remarkable who twenty six times warbleth over the same note, For his mercy
endures for ever, and of Christ that unparalled Preacher, who (as probably
appears by comparing the two Evangelists) preached the same Sermon twice.

Nor are these Repetitions vain Tautologies, It is not without good reason that
the Penmen of sacred writ do sometimes take this course in respect of
themselves, the matter of their writing, and those to whom they wrote.

1. Those holy Penmen by these Repetitions did declare the zeal and vehemence
of their spirits in pressing what they wrote upon the people. What was it which
caused Solomon's Father (as himself relates it) to multiply expressions to the
same purpose, yea, to iterate the Prove. 4. 14, 15* 31. 2.
same expressions in dehorting him from evil company, enter not, go not,
avoid, pass by, turn from, pass away, but his sense of the danger and desire
that he might avoid it. And again, what moved his Mother to amplify her
appellations in the beginning of her counsel to him, What my son, and what the
son of my Womb, and what the son of my vows, but her affectionate desire that
he should hearken to her? Indeed no marvel if the boiling spirit run over in
words, and the zeal of the affection double, nay triple the expression. Thus
was it here (as Bullinger well Bulling. in loc.
observes) with St John, prae ardore suo, such was the vehemence of his hatred
of the sin of hatred, that he can never enough declaim against it, and
therefore not only once but again he reproves it.

2. Those sacred writers by these ingeminations intimate always that the
things about which they write, are of more then ordinary importance, and
necessary concernement to be known and believed in matters of faith, to be
avoided or performed in matters of life: yea and sometimes that there is no
less difficulty then necessity, and whilst they are things which must and
ought, yet they are not easily believed, avoided or practiced. Upon these
grounds no doubt it Eccl. 1. 2.
was that Solomon iterated his doctrine of the worlds vanity, and Christ
inculcateth upon Peter the duty of feeding his sheep: nor is it improbable that
St John here Joh. 20. 21.
had both these in his eye, he well knew how much the very being of
Christianity did depend upon avoiding this sin, and exercising the contrary
grace, how hard it is to cast out this poison of hatred, where it is once
harbored, and withal that as the usurper being ejected, the right heir gets
possession, and the old form being corrupted, the matter is easily susceptible
of a new; so if he could eradicate this weed of hatred, he should with a
greater facility plant the flower of love: and therefore no wonder he does
ingeminate his discourse of the vileness of this sin.

3. Those divine Scribes thought these repetitions very needful for those to
whom they wrote, in regard of the dullness of their minds, and weakness of
their memories, and hardness of their hearts: To write the Phil. 3. 1.
same things to you (says the Apostle Paul to the Philippians) for you it is
safe, to wit, least at the first you should not rightly understand them, or not
remember them, or not be sutably affected with them: God speaks once and
twice says Elihu, and man perceives it not; our memories are of weak
retention, and therefore need renewed incitation: the heart of man is by the
Prophet Ezekiel. 36. 26.
Ezekiel compared to an heart of stone, and it is not one blow of the hammer
will break it: The words of the Eccl. 2. 11.
wise says Solomon are as goads and nails: and truly we are so dull, that
these goads must be often thrust into our sides; so obdurate, that it is not
one stroke will drive these nails to the head, Disciplinam praeceptorum
inculcationibus densamus says Tertullian appositely; Tert. Apolog. cap. 39.
we thicken, and so as it were we strengthen our instructions by inculcations,
which is no more then what the need of the people requires.

The consideration hereof is that which should teach, both the teachers, and
the people.

1. Let it not be grievous to us Ministers to repeat, and thereby inculcate our
doctrines upon the Auditors. If a Mus^^ian shall only strike one string, it
makes no music; but it is ^itting for a Preacher to insist upon one and the
same truth; nor must we here stand upon our own credit, when it comes in
competition with the peoples profit. If it were not grievous to Phil. 3. 1. 2
Pet. 1. 1.
that eminent Apostle Paul, why should it be to any of us; we are not only
instructers, but remembrancers. So St Peter accounted himself, where he says,
I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, and what is the office of a
remembrancer, but to repeat things Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis
discitur.
formerly done, or spoken; that cannot be often enough taught, which can never
be well enough learned. Nor yet do I hereby intend to patronize those
illiterate or lazy, ignorant or negligent Preachers, who use* iterations for
want of premeditation, and therefore say the same thing again, because they
know not what to say next: far be it from me; only I would mind my self and
others, how requisite it is we should sometimes upon some occasions reinforce
by repetition some doctrines upon our hearers.

2. Let it not be tedious to the Auditors to hear the same truths sometimes
repeated by the Ministers: we must not esteem it a dishonor, nor should you
account it a burden. It is that indeed to which hearers are very prone, aut
nouum, aut nihil, some new thing, or nothing, is the cry of many: if we come
with a scitote, something that they knew not before, they listen, but if with a
mementote, something formerly delivered, they think their patience abused. As
they say of drinking wine, the first is for necessity, the second for pleasure,
the third for sleep, so do Auditors with a little inversion account of a
Sermon, the first time they hear it with delight, not the second except of
necessity, and if they meet with it the third time they fall asleep. How sad is
it that if we hear an excellent lesson on an instrument, we call for it once
and again* nay -- decies repetita placebunt. We are not easily weary of it, and
yet we care not to hear the songs of Zion rehearsed: who ever complained of the
renewed rising of the same Sun, or loathed his daily bread? why then are we so
quickly cloyed in spirituals? but especially repetitions most vex us, when they
are of reprehensions, such as this is in my Text, we love not to have our sores
too often rubbed upon; but tell me, are you not willing that the Physician
should repeat his purging course though the potion be bitter, for the health of
your body? and why so loath that we should repeat our reproves for the health
of your souls? Divine and excellent to this purpose, is that ratiocination of
Seneca in his advice to Lucilius, To them that say quousque eadem? how long
shall we hear the same admonitions? Answer quousque eadem peccabitis? how long
will you commit the same faults? Remedia ante vultis quam vitia desinere, will
you leave off the remedy before the disease is cured? Ego vero eo magis dicam,
et quia recusatis perseveralo: nay I will so much the rather reiterate, and
because you are troubled at it, I will Se^. ep. 89.
persevere in it. The truth is, whether you will hear or whether you will
forbear, whether it please or displease, we must warn you of the same sins,
admonish of the same duties, bespeak you with the same counsels again and
again. But it will be better for you, if you are not only content, but willing
to hear the same instructions frequently urged: Let it be true of vain
pleasures, -- commendat rarior usus. That the less they are used, the more they
are commended; far be such thoughts from us in reference to the sacred Oracles.
Those Gentiles when they had heard Paul, Act. 13. 42.
besought him to preach (...), the same words the next Sabbath day* thus should
you, if any doctrine have had a kindly influence upon your spirits, entreat the
reiteration of it, who knows what a second birth may bring forth? and if at
any time you hear the Minister beating upon the same anvil, pressing the same
doctrine, or rebuking the same sin, reflect upon thy self, and say, surely I
have not yet sufficiently learned this lesson, I have not enough repented of
this sin, and therefore I will give new attention, though it be an old
instruction.

And thus much I have thought fit to discourse of this Subject by way of
Apology, not for St John whose divinely inspired writings need none, but for my
self, if in the handling of this Epistle, I should sometimes have occasion to
discuss the same things, and perhaps use the same expressions.

More particularly in this ingeminated opposition, be pleased to observe,

The sin specified, in these words, He that hates his Brother. The state of
the sinner described in the rest of the words: and that Imaginary wherein he
supposes himself to be, He says he is in the light. Real in which indeed he
is set forth in several Characters, in the end of the 9th, and the greatest
part of the 11th. He is in darkness even until now, and again, He is darkness
and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he goes, because that
darkness has blinded his eyes.
1. The first of these is the hinge upon which the Antithesis turns, and
therefore I shall be the more large in unfolding it. To which end I shall
discuss it two ways, by way of Restriction, and by way of enlargement; and
accordingly discover exclusively what hatred is not within the compass of this
sin; and then extensively how far this hatred reaches, which is here declamed
against.

The exclusive restriction of this hatred will appear in these ensuing
propositions.

1. There is a Positive, and there is a Comparative, there is an Absolute, and
there is a Relative hatred. It is very observable, That Jacobs loving Rachel
more Genesis 29. 30, 31.
then Leah is called in the very next Verse hating Leah. That which we less
love then another, we are said to hate in comparison of that love we bear to
the other; and thus it is not a ^^n but a duty to hate our Brother, to wit, in
comparison of Christ. It is our Saviors own assertion, If any man come to me
and hate not his Luke 14. 26.
Father, and Mother, and Wife, and Children, and Brethren, and Sisters, yea,
his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple; an expression seemingly very
harst, but easily understood: if compared with the other Evangelist St Matthew,
where he brings in Christ, Matthew. 10. 37.
says, He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is not worthy of me, and
he that loves Son or Daughter more then me, is not worthy of me; We ought then
to hate our nearest relations, that is, not love them more, nay, (which is the
meaning of the phrase) love them less then Christ. Hence it is, that when
Christ's glory and truth comes in competition with the dearest of our
relations, we must neglect Children, cast off Parents, reject the Wife of our
Bosom rather then deny Christ, yea, we must be averse to them if they go about
to direct us from Christ. Thus that devout Paula (as St Hierome says)
Nesciebat se matrem ut Hier. Ep. 27. c. 3.
Christi probaret ancillam, that she might approve her self Christ's Handmaid,
forgot that she was a Mother: and that same Father else where asserteth it,
Pietatis Hier. Ep. 1. ad Hetrod.
genus est impiumesse pro domino, it is a part of piety to be in some sense
impious, and out of love toward God, to hate our Brother, and therefore this
is not here to be understood.

2. It is one thing to hate our Brother, and another thing to hate the sins of
our Brother, it is solidly determined Aquin 2da 2dae Quest. 34. Art. 3.
by Aquinas, Love is due to my Brother, Secundum id quod a Deo habet, in
respect of that which is communicated to him by God, whither nature, or grace,
or both; but it is not due to him, Secundum id quod habet a seipso and diabolo,
according to that which he has from himself, and the Devil, to wit, sin and
wickedness; and therefore it is lawful to hate my Brothers sin, but not his
nature, much less his grace: Laudabile odium odisse vitia, faith Origin, to
hate evil Orig. in Romans
is a commendable hatred, and that where ever we find it not only in the bad
but the good, the enormities of the one, but the infirmities in the other, not
only in strangers and enemies, but kindred and friends, spying beams, nay,
motes in these as well as those and abhorring them; we must hate this serpent
where ever we find it, though in a garden, nay, though in our own habitations:
indeed as Aquinas excellently, Hoc Id. ibid.
ipsum quod in fratre odimus culpam and defectum pertinet ad fratris amorem,
this hatred of the vice is an effect of love, to the person, so much is
intimated when it is said, Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy heart, Levit.
19. 17.
thou shall in any wise rebvke him, and not suffer si^ upon him, by showing
hatred to his sin in rebuking, we show our love to him; and if we wish good to
him, we cannot but hate what we see evil in him. This hatred is so far from
being sinful, that it is not only lawful and laudable, but excellent, not a
wicked but a pious, yea, a perfect hatred: according to that of Aug. in ^^. 139.
St Austin, Perfectio odij est in Charitate cum nec propter vit a homines
ode^imus, nec vitia propter homines amemus, it is at once the perfection of
hatred, and an argument of love, when we neither hate the man for the sins
sake, nor yet love the sin for the man's sake, but fix our love on the man, and
our hatred on the s^nne.

3. There is odium abominationis, and odium inimicitiae, an hatred of
aversation, and an hatred of enmity, by the one we fly from, by the other we
pursue after, look as in love, there is a benevolence whereby we will good to,
and a complacence whereby we take delight in another; so in hatred there is a
strangness whereby we avoid the society, and an enmity whereby we seek the
mischief of another; the former of these is not forbidden but required and
practiced: godly David says Psalm. 26. 5.
of himself, I hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the
wicked, and that of his practice was justifiable and imitable: since we must
not only fly from the sin, but the sinner, yea, that we may shun the one* we
must avoid the other. Timon was called (...), a man-hater, because he kept not
company with any man save* Alcibiades, and we should Cic. de Amicit. Ephesians. 5.
11. Operibus, i. e. oper^^ribus.
all of us be hatres of wicked men, shunning all needless converse and much
more familiar acquaintance with them. It is St Paul's counsel to the Ephesians,
Have no fellowship with the unfruitful w^^kes (he means workers) of
darkness; yea, it is the strict charge he lays upon the Thessalonians, Now we
command you Brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that 2 These. 3. 6.
you withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks disorderly, we ought
as much to hate familiarity with the wicked, as to dread upon burning coals, or
go into an infected house; and therefore this kind of hatred is not here
intended.

4. Once more, All hatred of enmity in respect of others is not to be condemned
if they be enemies, not so much to us, as to the Church, yea, God himself, and
this not out of ignorance but malice, and so implacable we may, we ought, to be
enemies to them. Holy David has set us a pattern hereof, when speaking to God
Ps. 139. 21.
he says, Do not I hate them oh Lord that hate thee, and am not I grieved with
them that rise up against thee? I bate them with perfect hatred, I count them
mine enemies. Hence no doubt are those imprecations and curses Ps. 59, 12, 13*
68* 1, 2.
which we meet with in the Psalms, wherein we find that holy man wishing, not
only disapointment to the hopes, in^atuation to the counsels, but destruction
to the persons of Zions adversaries. And surely thus far we may and ought to
imitate him as in general to pray against, and wish the ruin of all the
Churches irreconciliable adversaries, though as to particulars we must take
heed of going too far in this way, it being difficult if not impossible for us
determinately to assert concerning any one that he is an implacable enemy of
God and Religion; and yet when we see one who with Julian has professed
himself to be a Christian Brother, and so far Apostatizing as openly to
prosecute Christianity with utmost fury, notwithstanding manifold convictions;
or who still pretending to be a Brother, oppugneth (with no less virulency
though more subtilty) the Christian Religion in its Orthodox profession,
swallowing up her revenues, forbidding her public services, stopping the
mouths of her Preachers, suffering blasphemies and heresies to obscure her,
plucking up the pillars which should uphold her, and persecuting all that
embrace her; and all this against clear convictions which he either has, or
might have, did he not shut his eyes; together with frequent and multiplied
admonitions, since we can have very little or no hopes of such a man's
conversion, we may and ought to desire of God (if he will not please to convert
him) to confound not only his devices but his person, and to cut him off from
the land of the living; only we must take heed to the frame and temper of our
spirit, that this our hatred of, and wishing ill to him, purely proceed from a
love to Gods Church, and a zeal for his glory, not out of any personal or
private respect to our own revenge.

2. Having thus dispatched the first way ^ proposed to tread in, Namely, the
restriction and exclusion, I shall now step into the other path, and let you
see the extent and enlargement of this sin in these following assertions.

1. There are two sins, namely, envy and malice, which Tit. 3. 3.
are as it were the ingredients of this hatred: St Paul seems to intimate so
much, when he first mentions malice and envy as the species, and then hatred
as the genus, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another. And
indeed since hatred (being opposed to love) is both a nilling good, and willing
evil to our Brother, it must needs include in it both these: For

1. Envy is (as Aquinas from Damascen well defines Aquin.
it) Tristitia de alienis bonis, a sorrow for the good of another. To this
purpose Gregory Nyssen, putting Greg. Nyss.
the question, what is the cause of this disease? answers (...), our Brothers
prosperity: for which reason Plutarch compares it, to Plut. mor
a bleare eye which is offended with the light, and the envious man is fitly
resembled to an Archer, who has still some white paper or cloth for his mark,
at which he shoots; now whence does this sorrow arise, but from the act of
hatred which consists in nilling: since because I nill the good to my Brother
which he has, therefore I am troubled that he has it; and hence it is, that
the Egyptians envying Psalm. 105. 25.
the Israelites multitude in Egypt, is called their hating them, when it is
said, He turned their heart to hate his people. Indeed envy is an affection
made up of grief and hatred; grief for the thing, and hatred of the person,
and the hatred of the one, is the cause of grief at the other.

Malice is (as Justinian well expresses it) Improba adversus proximum
cogitatio, a wicked thought against our Neighbor, or if you will have it in
fewer, yet fuller words, it is nocendi desiderium, a desire to Genesis 27. 41.
hurt and injure our Brother in any kind, and this is the proper act of
hatred, which as it does connote a nilling good, so it does principally note a
willing evil. This is observable in Esau, of whom the Text says, he hated
Jacob; and if you will know how that appears, the end of the Verse tells you,
I will stay my Brother Jacob. In this regard, the Fish among the Egyptians is
made an Hieroglyphicke of hatred, because Pier. Hieroglyphick, l. 31. c. 7.
of all Creatures it is most greedy to devour, and hatred fills the mind with
injurious and devouring desires.

2. Though the special Object of our love be our Brother by the second Adam,
yet the prohibition of hatred extends to our Brother by the first Adam; we must
not think that if we be kind to those of the Christian Religion, we may
exercise hostility toward Turks and Pagans. It is true, the Jews were enemies
to the Nations round about them, yea, did pu^sue them to an utter extirpation,
but they had an express warrant from Heaven for it; and therefore their
practice is no pattern till we can show the like warrant: we cannot without
breach at once both of equity and charity under any pretenses whatsoever,
invade the possessions, or destroy the persons of the most barbarous Savages.
But yet still in this as in other sins, the quality of the Object adds to the
quantity of the offense; and though it be a sin to hate any man, it is a
greater sin to hate a Christian, and the more of Christianity there is in him,
the more malignity there is in our hatred, since the better the Object, the
worse the act: and yet further, though it be an heinous sin to hate a Christian
upon any account, yet to hate him because he is a Christian, or because he is a
more exact and conscientious Christian then our selves is the highest degree of
this hatred, and that which borders upon the unpardonable s^n against the holy
Ghost.

3. This hatred of our Brother which is here forbidden is not only of him
whilst he is our friend, but when he becomes our ne^. Indeed it is an high
aggravation of our hatred, when it is of o^^ that loves us, but it is no
excusation when of one that hates us. To hate a friend is inhumane, to hate an
enemy is unchristian, not only to retaliate good for evil, but evil for evil
is against St Paul's precept, and as well he that is second, as he that is
first, in hating his Brother is guilty, how consonant soever it may seem to
corrupt reason, yet it is dissonant to true Religion, for a man to pay another
in his own coin and return cursing for cursing; nor is it enough for us not to
offer an in^^ry, but we must not so much as return it, not only a velle
laedere, a will to hurt, but vindicare to revenge an hurt, yea not only to will
and endeavor a greater, but an equal, nay a less wrong to my brother then he
has done to me, is to hate him.

4. It is not only hurting but hating our brother which is prohibited. Indeed
on the one hand a man may hurt him whom he does not hate, through mere
casualty, and then it is no sin, or through carlesness, and then it is not so
great a sin. Again on the other hand a man may hate his brother, and yet
through want either of ability, or opportunity, not hurt him, nor is his sin
therefore the less. Look as a rich man may relieve his brother, and yet not
love him, and a poor man may love his brother, and yet not relieve him; so a
charitable man may hurt his brother, and yet not hate him, and a malicious man
may be said to hate his brother, when he does not hurt him: the outward
execution is not a sin against charity, unless there be an inward intention,
and the inward intention is a sin, though there be no outward execution. True
it is, the further a sin proceeds, from thought to desire, desire to endeavor,
endeavor to action, it is so much the worse, but still the very desire of
injuring (though it be not accomplished) is a sin, and here called hating our
brother.

5. Yet lastly, Whatever falls short of the duty of loving, comes within the
compass of hating our brother. It is a moral axiom, Omnis recessus a viriute
est vitium, whatever ^ecedeth from virtue is a vice, it is true in this
particular, every departure from love is a degree of hatred: the affections of
love and hatred are like the qualities of heat and cold; and look as the
ceasing of heat is by an accession of cold, so where there is a defect of love,
there is the infection of hatred. Hence it is that an unj^^^ or unadvised Anger
with our brother, is a degree of hating him, indeed not all anger (for there is
an anger of love as well as hatred) but when it is an anger not of just
reprehension, but vain contention, not with moderation, but excess, it is at
least a disposition to hatred. Hence it is, that not only willing evil, but not
willing good to our brother, is an hating him: Look as in point of equity, not
dealing faithfully is cosening; so in point of charity, not loving is hating.
It is a vain fancy, yea a lying deceit, with which some men please themselves
in respect of an enemy* I do not hate him, and yet I do not love him, I will
not do him any harm, but I will not do him any good; the one is as well a sin,
as the other; and when our Apostle here opposes hating to loving, he seems
to intimate, that if we do not love, we hate our brother.

And now beloved, what great reason have all of us to reflect upon our selves
first, and next on the men among whom we live, sadly observing and bewailing
the general prevalency of this sin of hatred amongst us.

To this end consider a few particulars;

1. Are there none who hate those most who are the best, to whom not only their
brother, but his religious conversation is hateful, therefore reviling,
deriding, yea persecuting him because he makes conscience of his ways? Such
are those sons of Belial (men at once both profane and uncharitable) who
because they hate godliness, hate the professors and practisers of it, whoever
will swear, and whore, and quaffe, run to the same excess of riot with
themselves, is in their account an hateful Precisian: whosoever frequenteth
Gods house, observes religious duties in his own house, taking all
opportunities (according to his place and power) of instructing the ignorant,
rebuking the obstinate, exhorting the negligent, is with them an abominable
Puritan.

True it is, there are many, too many, nor were there ever more then in this
Age, whose dissimulation and hypocrisy are manifest, who are very strict in
the duties, and zealous against the sins which respect the first Table, and yet
notoriously irregular in matters of the second Table; these are they whose
practices are bewailed and abhorred by all good Christians, and through the
sides of these, Religion is wounded by profane Atheists. Indeed some ungodly
wretches are apt to pretend when by occasion of such Pharisees they inveigh
against the strict profession of Christianity, that it is not Religion but
dissimulation, piety but hypocrisy which they oppugn, but I shall only desire
them to consider whether they be not thus invective against all that are
zealous, as if they were hypocrites, though they know nothing by them; whether
it be not the very exercises of Religion, their reading, praying, hearing, and
the like, which they detest, since else why do they not imitate those good
duties themselves, as well as abhor the hypocrisy which they lay upon those
who perform them; and yet once more, whether to hear of, or know any gross
sin, by one who is careful of these duties, be not an object rather of their
joy then sorrow, as being glad when they can pick an hole in the coat of a
professor; and surely if their consciences accuse them as guilty in answer to
these Queries, whatever they may account themselves, they will be found haters,
yea the worst sort of haters, because of the best sort of brothers.

2. Are there none who are so ungrateful as to repay courtesy with injury,
love with hatred, who instead of loving those that hate them, hate those that
love them? Thus Jehoram sought to slay Elisha, who had been friendly to him:
Saul intended ruin to David, who had been faithful to him: and the Jews
crucify Christ, who came to save them. It is St Austins complaint, Aug. in loc.
Alas, no wonder if we cannot persuade you to love your enemies, when you hate
your brethren! Certainly they are far from Christian love, who are guilty of
such unnatural hatred.

3. Again how many are there whose hatred (as Solomon expresses it) i^ covered
with deceit, who have Prove. Ael. lib. 5. c. 40.
sharp *teeth with soft gums, who (like the Panther which with sweet breath
allureth other creatures to him, and then devoureth them) speak fair, whilst
seven abominations are in their heart; and surely as Divinity reckons the
first sort, so Morality these among the worst sort of haters, since a false
friend is more pernicious then an open enemy, and ex magno appetitu ^^^ m^^tat
modum loquendi, it is the greatness of hatred, which puts him upon this
pretense of love.

4. Yet again are there not some whose hatred is so deadly to their brother,
that they will be content to do themselves a loss, so they may do him a great
Injury? That Apolog^e of Cupidus and Invidus, the covetous and the envious man
is very observable to this purpose. Jupiter promised that whatsoever the one
asked, the other should have double, whereupon they much strove one with the
other who should ask first: the covetous man refused because he was desirous of
the double portion, and the envious man was no less unwilling, as repining that
the other should have more then himself: At length the envious man resolves to
be the first in asking; but what did he ask? That Jupiter would (...) of his
eyes, because he then knew the other must lose both. Such malicious men there
are, and that among Christians, who care not to deprive themselves, if they may
disappoint their brother. This is that hatred which is fetched from hell,
witness Dives, who desires not that he might come to Lazarus, but that Lazarus
might come to him, as if he had rather Luke 16* ^
Lazarus should be miserable with him, then he happy with Lazarus.

But if there be (as I hope there are) many who can acquit themselves from
these effects of hatred at the height, yet I fear we may observe those
Symptoms in the most, which discover them to be somewhat sick of this disease.
When the eye is evil because God is good, does it not discover that besides
the black which nature has put in the eye as the seat of its perfection, there
is another black which envy has put into it as a seat of corruption? What does
the smoke of detraction, stander, calumny, cursing, railing, scoffing,
back-biteing, which comes forth at the lips of many men, but argue a fire of
malice burning in their hearts? whence comes betraying, quarrelling, fighting,
plundering? yea, killing one another, but from this lust of hatred in men's
minds? Indeed who can consider the hateful practices which are continually
acted among us, and not acknowledge the great predominancy of this sin? Drop
down ye Heavens, and let the Isa. 45. 8.
Skies pour down righteousness, says the Prophet: Drop down ye Heavens, and
let the Skies pour down charity and love, may we say; for it has left the
earth, yea instead thereof the smoke of hatred ascending out of the bottomless
pit, has filled it. What calling or profession of men is free from this vice.
I would to God the black Coat were not besmeared with it. What state and
condition of men is not guilty of it? Oppressors plainly tread in the
footsteps of hatred, and I would to God sufferers did not harbor the lust of
revenge.

How needful then is a dehortation to dissuade you from this sin; and indeed
this very name Brother if it be (as you have already heard) an argument of
love, may well be a disswasive from hatred, if he be a Brother in the highest
notion, he is Christ's Brother as well as thine, and will thou hate him whom
Christ loves? if in the lowest degree he is flesh of thy flesh, and will thou
hide thine eyes (in contempt and haired) from thine own flesh: St Paul says,
No man ever yet hated his own flesh, and will thou be so unreasonable? But if
this consideration be too weak, go on and view the description which follows
of the state of such a sinner; and that is the next general which God willing
the next time shall be set before your eyes, that if possible this sin of
hatred may be eradicated out of your hearts.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 9, 10, 11. He that says he is in the light and hates his
Brother, is in darkness even until now. He that loves his Brother abides in
the light, and there is none occasion of stumbling in him. He that hates his
Brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
AMong the manifold excellencies of Gods Romans 7.
Law this is not the least that it is according to St Paul's phrase, a
spiritual Law, and that not only effective, because dictated by Gods Spirit,
but Objective, because extending to Man's spirit. Indeed it is one of the
differences between humane and divine Precepts, that those only reach the
outward, these the inward man, those only order the conversation, these our
cogitations; Finally, those take hold of words and works, these of thoughts and
desires.

This is evident in matters of Religion toward God: Man requires the
external observance, but Gods internal devotion; Man forbideth profane
Oaths, but God blasphemous Imaginations: nor is it less true, in regard of our
duty toward Man. Humane commands inhibit the gross acts of uncleanness; but
Divine, lustful affections: and to instance in no more, whereas only actual
injuries of our Brother, come within the compass of Man's cognizance. God
prohibits the very hatred and enjoyneth the contrary affection of love to him,
as here we see in the words, He that says he is in the light and hates his
Brother, etc.

Having discussed the first general part of the opposition; Part 2.
Namely, the sin briefly specified, He that hates his Brother, we are now to
go on to the other which is the state of the sinner, as it is largely described
in the 9th, and 11th, Verses.

1. That which first occurreth in this description, is the sinners own
imagination, what he fancyeth himself to be, He says he is in the light. What
is meant by this phrase of being in the light, needs not again to be insisted
on. It is as much as to say he is in Christ, he savingly knows Christ, or he
is in a state of grace. This is that which he that hates his Brother may say.
Indeed this cannot be in truth: for St John says of Non est sed qui dici.
Zanch. in loc.
him, He is in darkness, and to be at once in the light, and in the darkness is
impossible: but yet he may say so, though it be not so, and that two ways*
namely, in opinion and profession.

1. He that hates his Brother may think himself to be in the light, and so say
it in his heart: For

1. He may be acquainted in a great measure with the mysteries of Christian
Religion, and much conversant in divine speculations, and for this reason
imagine himself in the light. The Pharisees though a generation of Vipers for
their venomous nature say it of themselves we see, and no doubt as to the
letter of Moses his Law did see and know much, so may Hypocritical malicious
Christians be versed in the Theory of Christianity.

2. He may be frequent in Religious performances, and upon this account fancy
himself to be in the light* Isa. 1. 15.
Those Israelites whose hands were full of blood, and 1 Timothy 3. 1.
therefore their hearts full of malice, made many Prayers, and offered
multitudes of Sacrifices. Those Gnostics in the Primitive times are
Characterized by St Paul* to be (...), despisers of those that do good, and so
void of Christian love, nay, (...) without natural affection, to wit, toward
their fleshly relations; to be (...)* fierce and cruel in their attempts, yea,
(...), very Devils for the malice of their tongues, and notwithstanding they
were such as had a form of godliness, in regard of external observances, and
so no doubt thought themselves in the light.

3. He may mistake his hatred of his Brother, for zeal, his furious
persecution, for a just prosecution; and no wonder if he think in this respect,
his very hatred to be an argument of his being in the light, when those wicked
Jews hate and pursue Christ even to the death, they plead Blasphemy as the
cause, and so justify the fact: when Saul breathed forth threatenings, and
Phil. 3. 2.
made that havoc of the Church, he says of himself, that it was in his
opinion an act of zeal, concerning John 13. 2.
zeal, persecuting the Church* our blessed Savior acquaineth his Disciples,
That whosoever did kill them should think he did God good service; and when men
do in^^^^re c^^-rati^ne, nay, religione, rage against their Brother, not only
out of rational but religious principles; (to wit, in their apprehensions,) no
wonder if their rage grow very high, and notwithstanding their opinions of
themselves be very good.

2. And surely this being his opinion, no marvel if it be his Profession
wherein he glories, whereof he boasts saying it to others, that he is in the
light. Indeed some there are, who say this in profession contrary to their own
opinion, their consciences tell them, they are in the darkness of wickedness,
and yet they say, they are in the light of grace, and why this, but that hating
their Brother they may with the more certainty and secrecy accomplish their
malicious designs against him.

But though (I hope) the number of these is very small, yet many, very many
there are, who whilst themselves are black with hatred* glitter in shows of
holiness, and make great br^gs of their sanctity, Ficta sanctitos oculas omnium
perstring it, interim neglecta jacet charitas, ^aith* Calvin upon this Text ^^
their fancied piety Calv. in loc.
^^ glorious in the eyes of all, whilst charity lies neglected. We shall do
no wrong either to the Papists on the one hand, or Anabaptists on the other, if
we assert them to be haters of their Brethren; the bloody practices of both do
loudly cry it in the ears of God and Man* and yet many of these think, all of
them boast themselves to be in the light of sanctity, and that they are the
Churches of Christ.

You have heard what this hater of his Brother says, be pleased now to hear
what he is, as his state is really and ^aithfully delineated by our Apostle in
three characters* And yet before I en^er* upon the particulars it will not be
amiss to take notice in general, how contrary the Apostles desciption is to
this Hypocrites opinion, ^^e says he is in the light, the Apostle says, He is
in, and walks in darkness: whereby it appears that his opinion is very
false, because contrary to the judgment of truth* and hence the Greek Scholiast
here supplyeth, Oecumen in loc Cypr. adv. Jud.
(...), and St Cyprian mentitur, he that says he is in the light and hates
his Brother, lies; whence it is easy to observe,

That the estate of a man may be desperately bad when yet in his own opinion it
is excellently good. A man may account himself silver, whilst God rejects him
as dross; he may in his own opinion be a Member of Christ, and yet in Christ's
esteem a Child of the Devil: and whilst he dreameth that he is in the Book of
Life, he may be in Gods account a Reprobate. Weak Christians erring on the
right hand, condemn themselves as if they were in the darkness of
unregeneracy, when yet God sees the light of his grace shining in them.
Presumptuous* Hypocrites on the other, applaud themselves as if they were in
the light of grace, when yet God sees them in the darkness of unregeneracy.

The Pharisee justifies himself, and condemns the Publican, Christ
justifies the Publican, and condemns the Pharisee. Men may be good in the
estimation of other, yea, and that of good men, whilst in truth they are bad.
So the Angel of the Church of Sardis Rev. 3. 2. 15.
had a name that he lived and was dead. Men may be Saints in their own
apprehensions, and yet Devils in Gods sight. So the Angel of the Church of
Laodicea said, He was rich and increased with goods, and had need of nothing,
when as he was wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. Take
we heed how we give credit either to the fair applauses of men, or the smooth
dictates of our own hearts, which being deceitful, sooth us up as if we were
in the light, when yet we are, and walk in darkness.

This being promised come we to a particular view of the several Characters
given to him that hates a Brother, by which three things are represented to us;

His wicked Disposition, He is in darkness even till now, and again, He is in
darkness.

His vicious Conversation, And walks in darkness.

His miserable Condition, And knows not whither he goes, because the
darkness has blinded his eyes.

1. That which first occureth is his wicked Disposition; wherein we have two
things considerable. The Quality, He is in darkness, and the Duration, even
until now.

1. The Quality of his Disposition is described by that ingeminated expression,
He is in darkness: for the fuller handling of which, take notice first of the
emphasis, and then of the meaning of the phrase.

1. The emphasis of the phrase is double;

1. It is observable, That our Apostle does not content himself to say, he is
not in the light, but (as Zanchy well observes, exaggerationis gratia, uses
an Zanch. in loc.
exaggerrating expression, He is in darkness. Indeed the one does necessarily
infer the other, he that is not in the light, must needs be in darkness,
since the remotion of the light is the position of darkness, and as the one
goes, the other comes, but yet this latter is more full: and the Apostle that
he might let us see how grossly such a man is deceived, let us know that he is
so far from being in the light, that he is in darkness, and therefore he is as
much mistaken as if a man in a dark night should say it were noonday.

2. It would yet further be considered, that it is not only said of such a man,
darkness is in him, but he is in darkness, even he that loves his Brother, is
not so in the light, but that there is a mixture of darkness; but he that
hates his Brother is in darkness, and so without Beza in Romans 8. 8.
any light. A man is then said to be in the water when he is covered over with,
and so as it were under the power of it. So that the phrase of being in
darkness is as much as being under the power and dominion of darkness: Col. 1.
11.
according to that phrase of St Paul, where he says, Who has delivered us
from the power of darkness.

2. And now the meaning of the phrase (if we consider what is already asserted
to be intended by light,) appears in plain terms to be this, He that hates
his Brother is in a state of sin, under the dominion of iniquity, a slave of
Satan, or in one word, an unregenerate Man.

To this purpose it is that St Paul speaking of himself and the rest of the
Christians before their Conversion, reckons up this as one of the black marks
of that Tit. 3. 2.
estate, hateful and hating one another; and among Romans 1. 29.
those many brands by which he Characterizeth the wicked Gentiles, this is one,
that they were full of all maliciousness, which afterward he calls malignity.
The malicious man being the true malignant, and so deservedly accounted a
wicked man.

Indeed this is such a sin as rendereth him in whom it reigns, not only ^ess
then a Christian, but worse Bas. de ira hom. 10.
then a Man. What St Basil says concerning anger, is doubtless much more true
of hatred, (...), it makes a man to degenerate into a wild beast; and
therefore such sinners are compared in Scripture to Tigers, Dragons, Lions,
Wolves, and such Marc. Erem. in B. P.
like ravenous Creatures: nay, indeed as Mark the Hermit observes they are,
(...), more brutish then Brutes, and unreasonable then those unreasonable
Creatures; for whereas wolves devour sheep, but not wolves; yea, for the most
part Beasts of the same kind in their way, converse lovingly together, he that
hates his Brother hates one of the same kind and nature with himself, nay,
to carry it one step lower, it denominateth them not only beasts but Devils,
yea, which is strange, worse then Devils: and that upon this very account,
since as Alexander Alensis has observed, though a Devil hates Al. Al. de
Invid.
a man, yet not a Devil, Satan is not divided against Satan, whereas Man
hates Man, well might our Apostle say of such a person, He is in darkness.

This is that which would be so much the rather considered, because so many
judge of themselves and others by a partial rule, if they themselves be free,
or they observe others to be free from those sensual sins of drunkness,
uncleaness, vain-swearing, and the like, they presently infer, that such
persons are in a good condition, whilst yet in the mean time pride, lying,
covetuousness, malice, and all uncharitableness have dominion over them,
whereas in truth, these are no less works of darkness then those: and
therefore St Paul reckons strife and envy, as well as chambering and
wantonness, rioting and drunkenness, among the number. He that startleth at an
oath, and yet belcheth Romans 13. 13.
forth lies, that abhors a Dalilah, and yet makes gold his darling; he that
will not be drunk with liquor, and yet is drunk with hatred, is nevertheless a
wicked unregenerate person. The sum is swearing, intemperate, unclean
Christians are Swine, and lying, covetous, malicious Christians are Dogs: far
be it from me to justi^^e the former, nor will I the latter; those are evil,
and these are not good, for He that hates his Brother is in darkness.

2. The Duration of this Disposition is that which comes next to be inquired
into, in these words, Even until now, that is, Sicut semper fuit sic est
adhuc; so Zanchy, as he was? so he is still: he remains Zanch. in loc.
in darkness, etiam sub Christianismo: so Aretius; notwithstanding he lives in
the Sunshine of Aret. ibid.
Christianity.

And there is a threefold reason may be given for which our Apostle might annex
this clause.

1. By way of Prevention, To take off that Plea which some would be apt to make
against his accusation, Do thou say oh holy Apostle, that we are in darkness,
we have heard thy self and others Preaching Jesus Christ, we believe in his
Name, embrace his Doctrine, and is it possible we should be in darkness? Yes,
says our Apostle, He that hates his Brother is in darkness until now, Not
only while he was an Heathen, but now he pretends to be a Christian, he is
still in darkness. Though I 1 Cor. 13. 2.
have all knowledge, and faith, yet if I have not charity Aquin. ibid.
says St Paul, I am nothing, to wit, in esse gratiae, I have no being in
Christ, I am no body in Gods esteem; thus is it possible for a man to be in the
light, and yet to be in darkness, to enjoy the light of the Gospel, and yet
remain in the darkness of sin; oh then boast not of, nor rest in external
privileges, think not to say we have the Ordinances of Christ, we profess the
Name of Christ; we may for all this be as destitute of true Christianity, as
the very Pagan.

2. By way of Aggravation, To render such an one so much the more inexcusable.
He is in darkness until now, that is, though he have enjoyed the means of
being in the light, yet he remains in darkness. Indeed though these two be
not incons^stent, yet they are very incongruous; that a man in the night time
should be in darkness is no wonder; but to be in the dark when the Sun is risen
and shines forth, is strange and sad: yea, and certainly it were far better
never to have the light, then having it to abide in darkness: upon this account
it is that our blessed Savior denounces so severe a woe against Capernaum and
assures her, it Matthew. 10. 15.
should be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment then
for her. In very deed, a Christian hating his Boother is far more vile and
abominable then an injurious Heathen; and by how much his profession is the
better by so much his sin is the worse, and his state the more wicked.

3. By way of Dehortation, From any longer continuance in this sinful state,
He is in darkness till now; and surely it is long enough, nay, too long to have
been Dan. in loc.
so till now, saltem nunc sapiat, says Danaeus, let him at length learn to be
wise, and no longer continue in this estate; so that our Apostle here says
implicily Romans 13. 9.
what St Paul says expressly. And that knowing the time, it is high time to
awake out of sleep, now that the Gospel is published, Christ is Preached; it
is high time to come out of this darkness: and as St Peter bespeaketh 1 Pet. 4.
3.
those to whom he wrote, For the time past of our life it may suffice to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles* so St John seems to say to these malicious
Christians, for the time past whilst yet you were in Heathenisme, it may
suffice you to have been in darkness, will you continue in it still; it is
enough, nay, too much, that though the Evangelicall light has shone upon you,
you have been in darkness till now; let it be so no longer, break of your sins
by righteousness, your hatred by charity, your malice by love, else your state
is as bad still as ever it was; nay, far worse then it was in those times, when
you heard not of Christ at all. So much for the first Character; pass we on
from his sinful disposition to

2. His vicious Conversation, in those words, And walks in darkness. The full
latitude of this clause will appear in a twofold parallel.

1. Walking in darkness is a going on in the dark, and so intimates a
persisting in evil. This is the property of a malicious man to be obstinate in
his wickedness* Anger is ofttimes sudden, and short, but hatred is settled, and
Bas. de iraa.
confirmed, a passion says St Basil, (...), such as will not admit of a cure.
Hence it is, that he who is possessed with this sin is seldom reclaimed from
it, especially being one who makes profession of Christianity, and says he is
in the light; for as Solomon says, There is more hope of a fool, then of him
that is wise in his own conceit; so there is doubtless more hopes of him that
is an open profane sinner hating his brother, then of him that says he is in
the light, and yet hates him: for whereas the one may probably be brought to
acknowledge that he walks in darkness, and so be persuaded to return out of
it; the other supposing himself always in the light, is deaf to all
admonitions, and so walks on in darkness. St Austin pursuing this Metaphor
inreference Aug. in Ps. 13. 8.
to all sorts of sinners, says elegantly, Cum peccant, tenebrae sunt; cum
insuper non confitentur peccata, sed ea defendunt, tenebrant tenebras suas,
when men sin they are in the dark, but when they will not confess but defend
their sins, they darken their darkness. Thus is it with this sort of sinners,
every one that hates his brother is in darkness, but he that hating his
brother, says he is in the light, and so instead of condemning, justifies
himself, both is and walks on (to wit obstinately) in darkness.

2. Men who walk in darkness, wander and stumble and fall almost every step
they take, so do malicious men stumble and fall into manifold sins, and wander
into several bypath of iniquity. That this is here intended, appears by
the opposition; for as where it is said in the preceding verse of him that
loves his brother there is none occasion of stumbling in him, it implies not
only that he abides, but he walks in the light; so here, when it is said of
the man who hates his brother that he walks in darkness, it implies he
frequently stumbleth at every thing. Solomon says of Prove. 4. 14.
wicked men in general, their way is as darkness, not only dark in the
concrete, but darkness in the abstract, nor only that they walk in the dark,
but their very way is darkness; it is true of him that hates his brother in
particular, every step he takes is darkness, some sin or other. It is not
unworthy our observation, that a troup of sins attend upon hatred in St Paul's
enumeration, Gal. 5. 22.
variance, emulation, wrath, strife, sedition and heresies, all the cursed
brats of this mother. To this purpose it is that Cyprian says of this sin, it
is a seed of mischief, Cypr. de zelo and livore.
seminary of vice, and the matter of much evil; it swells with pride,
imbittereth with rage, prevaricateth by perfidiousness, burns with anger, and
foameth through impatience: Hence Avarice and Ambition, whereby we desire to
equal or rather exceed him whom we hate, in wealth and power: Hence it is that
the fear of God is contemned, the commands of Christ are neglected, truth is
adulterated, unity divided, heresies and schisms fomented, yea all manner of
wickedness committed; yea to carry it a little further, Hence it is not only
that he falls into many sins, but stumbleth in his best actions, and those
religious services, which sometimes he performs, find no acceptance. It is
observed in the Levitical law, that among other fowls, the Levit. 11. 16.
Hawk which is the delight of Princes, fed with cost, and kept with care, is
forbidden in sacrifice; and why? but because it is of a rapacious vindictive
nature: Almighty God tells the Israelites he will not hea^ their Isa. 1. 15.
prayers, yea his soul hated their Assemblies: and why? but because their hands
were full of blood: Christ advises him who brings a gift to the Altar, to go
first and Matthew. 5. 23.
be reconciled to his brother whom he has offended, doubtless thereby to teach
us, that in this sense the gifts of those who live in enmity, are (...), such
as God will not accept.

By all this it appears how sinful the life of such a person is, all his
actions being no better then works, and his ways paths of darkness: and oh
that the sinfulness of this sin might so much the more exasperate us against
it. The name of this Devil may well be Legion, let us then be careful to cast
him out: indeed the saying of Valens is in some respect true concerning anger,
Alienus ab ira alienus a justitia, he that knows not how to be angry, will
not care to be just, but in regard of hatred it is far otherwise, and we may
say Qui non alienus ab odio alienus a justitia: he that is a friend to hatred,
must needs be a stranger to justice. Oh let us conceive a pious hatred against
this impious and injurious hatred, which whosoever exercises toward his
Brother must needs walk in darkness.

3. The last Character of this sinner yet remains, to wit, his miserable
condition, which is

Propounded in those words, And knows not whither he goes. Proved in those,
Because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
1. The misery of him that hates his Brother is asserted though briefly, yet
fully in those words, He knows not whither he goes, It is a clause which
sets forth the sad condition of this sinner both directly and collaterally.

1. Directly, This is verified of every wicked man, and in particular of him
that hates his Brother, he knows not whither he goes, and indeed it
necessarily follows upon the former, since he that walks in darkness cannot
know whither ^e goes. This Zanch. in loc.
is true as Zanchy has well observed in a double reference, ad viam, and ad
terminum; to the way, and the term of his walk; he knows not where nor
whither, neither the badness of the path, nor the sadness of the end. The
former Solomon affirms of all Prove. 4. 16. 9. 18.
wicked men, when he says, Their way is as darkness, and they know not at what
they stumble; the latter of the man, who is invited by an Harlot, He knows
not that the dead are there, and her guests are in the depth of Hell.

But it may be objected, that the person of whom the Apostle here speaks, is
one who is in profession a Christian, for he says he is in the light, and no
doubt is so far in the light, as that he cannot but see and know that hatred of
the Brethren is a deadly sin, and that whilst he continues in it, he goes
down to Hell, how then is it said of him that he knows not whither he goes.

To answer this briefly, It is one thing to know, that is, to apprehend; and
another to know, that is, to consider a thing; Indeed it is impossible but that
such an one should know, and yet as God says of Israel in another case, Israel
does not know, my people does not consider; Isa. 1. 2.
so may it be said of this person, he does not know, that is, he does not
consider whither he goes: to this purpose is Carthusians note, Quantam
damnationem meretur Non attendit tristem exitum Illyr. in loc. Carthus. ibid.
non pensat, he does not lay to heart what damnation he deserves, what a
danger he encurreth.

His judgment dictateth to him in Thesi in general, that hatred is a sin and
leads to Hell; but when it is to pass sentence in Hypothesi, in particular,
it either denies the action which is done against his Brother, to proceed from
hatred; or that though it be a sin, yet it shall not prove deadly to him,
because he is in Christ already; or because he intends to repent of it before
he dies; or else his judgment not at all taking notice of the obliquity of
the work and misory of the wages, dictateth what the will is about to do, as
expedient for the present satisfaction of that which it intends. Suitable
hereunto is that note of Estius upon my Text; That no sin is committed, but
through Est. in loc.
a praevious error of the practical judgment about that particular Object
which the will chooses: therefore does the malicious, yea, every wicked man
commit and persist in his sin, because he noth dot weigh his actions in the
balance of right reason, nor duly ponder either what he does, or whither he
tends.

I cannot let this go without this useful inference; sinners consider
seriously what you do, and think sadly whither you go, whilst you go on in your
sins. Respice finem, look to the end, is a lesson which whosoever learneth not,
will in the end prove a fool. No better way to deal by this Serpent sin, then
(as God commanded Moses in another case) to take it by the tail. The verb
beginning of repentance is at St Peter's 1 Pet. 4. 19.
Question, (...), what is the end of a wicked course?

But further, This phrase, not knowing whither he goes, sets forth the
miserable estate of this sinner Collaterally, and by way of Allusion. For

1. He that knows not whither he goes is in an unquiet restless state, full
of fears and cares, and his mind is never at quiet: a fit emblem of a wicked
man whose name in Hebrew (...) signifies one that is unquiet, and whom the
Prophet compares to the troubled Sea. Isa. 5. 7.
And especially is this true of the malicious hater, who always carries about
him that which tortureth him. Indeed what is envy and hatred to the soul, but
(to use St Bafils comparison) as the fretting rust to the Bas. hom. 12. Socrat.
in D^og. Laert.
iron, and the consuming moath to the garment? Nay (to borrow Socrates his
resemblance,) what is it, but as a Saw continually cutting, or (to allude to
that of our Savior) a worm still gnawing? In one word, to speak in the Poets
language, -- Vt Aetna seipsum, Ovid. Metam.
Sic se, non alios, invidus igne coquit: like to the mountain of Aetna, the
envious man has a ^re always burning within his breast, and so is never at
ease. Upon this account it is that Gregory Nazianzen says of this sin, that it
is both (...) and Greg. Naz. orat.
(...), most unjust to him that is hated, and most just to him that hates, in
that disquietment, with which it perplexeth him.

2. He that knows not whither he goes is usually deceived in his opinion;
when he thinks he is walking Eastward, he walk Westward; and whilst he
imagines himself going forward he is going backward. Thus he that says he is
in the light and hates his Brother is deceived: for whereas he supposes
himself in the way to Heaven, he is posting on to Hell; and truly in this
respect he is so much the more miserable, because he brings himself into a
fools Paradise, and dreameth that he shall be happy.

3. Lastly, He that knows not whither he goes cannot see to avoid, and so
ofttimes suddenly falls into bogs, pits, waters, by which he is destroyed and
perishes. Such is the case of wicked, especially malicious men, they bring
upon thewselves swift and sudden destruction; and which is very considerable,
whilst they plot the ruin of others, they accelerate their own, and the very
mischief which they design for their brethren, falls upon their own heads; and
now putting all this together, tell me if he whose troubles are so distracting,
hopes deceaving, and dangers destroying, be not a miserable man.

2. The proposition is dispatched, He knows not whither he goes. The proof
felloweth, Because the darkness has blinded his eyes; and now our Apostle
carries on the Allegory to the outmost, therefore, He that is in darkness and
walks in it, cannot know whither he goes, because, he cannot see his way;
and therefore he cannot see his way, because by reason of the darkness his eyes
are blinded. For the better opening of this clause, I shall very briesly
consider these particulars;

The part affected, his eyes. The disease, blinded. The cause, darkness.

1. His eyes, that is the part affected, by which no doubt is to be understood,
the understanding. The eye in its proper notion is a part of the body, but
Metaphorically the soul has its eyes as well as the body. It is Olympiodorus
his note, The members of the outward Olympiod. in Eccles.
man are aequivocally attributed to the inward. As the excellencies of the
greater world are after an higher manner in the less; so the parts of the body
are after a more noble way in the soul: what the feet are in the one, the
affections are in the other; what the stomach is in that, the memory is in
this; what the heart is in the one, the will is in the other; Finally, what the
eye is in that, the understanding is in this. We need no better Expositor then
St Paul, who unfolds the meaning of this Ephesians. 1. 18.
Metaphor when he says. The eyes of the understanding.

If you inquire after the Analogies, they are both apt and obvious, which I
shall only mention.

The eye is situate in the upper part of the body, the head; and in the upper
part of the head: so is the understanding a faculty of the superior soul, the
rational, and the superior faculty in the rntionall soul.

The eye is the chiecest of the senses, and the understanding is the choieest
among the faculties, without which the will would be but a brutish appetite.

The use of the eye is to see things visible, (...), say the Greek Etymologists
is quasi, (...), the chamber of vision. The understanding is that whereby we
know and apprehend things intelligible: it is as it were the souls window,
whereby it receives the light of knowledge.

5. Finally, The office of the eye is to guide the motion of the body, to
direct our hands in working, and our feet in walking; such is the office of the
understanding to order the will and affections, in their inclinations and
aversations, to teach us what to choose, and what to refuse, what to love, and
what to hate: you see how fitly the understanding of the mind, is compared to
the eyes of the body.

5. The Disease of this part here specified is blindness, the worst evil that
can befall the eye; as rendering it altogether useless, and the state of the
person dangerous; a dim eye may do some service by preventing many falls, but
a blind eye exposes to continual hazards: well faith our blessed Savior, if
the light (meaning the eye) that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
Matthew. 6. 23.
darkness? Yet this is the state of every wicked, malicious man especially, his
eyes are blinded, his understanding darkened, he knows nothing as he ought to
know: indeed his left eye is quick sighted, but his Jer. 4. 22.
right eye is stark blind, he is wise to do evil, but to do good he has no
knowledge, -- Quantum mortalia pectora caecae, Ovid.
Noctis habent? says the Poet, how dark a night of ignorance overshadoweth
the minds of mortals? It is not seldom that this name of fool is given in
Scripture to an evil man; and not without cause, since he is altogether
destitute of right reason; the Prodigal repenting is said to come to himself,
whereby is intimated, that whilst wandering, he was besides himself; thus is
the sinner a fool, a mad man, a blind man, ignorant of the things which
concern his everlasting peace.

And surely if blindness of the bodily eye be sad, this of the spiritual is
far more doleful; our bodily eye is common to us with beasts; our
intellectual, that where by we partake with Angels; and by how much the eye of
the mind is better then that of the body, by so much the blindness of this is
worse. The bodies eye may be better spared then the souls; yea, the want of
corporal sight may be a means of spiritual good; but the want of spiritual
sight can be no way helpful, but altogether hurtful; yea, which is so much
the more sad, whereas the bodily blind feels and acknowledges his want of
light, the spiritually blind man thinks that none has clearer eyes then
himself. This, Christ says of the Laodicean Angel, he knew not that he was
blind: Rev. 3. 17.
and this sinner in the Text says he is in the light, suam ignorans
ignorantiam, not knowing his want of knowledge, oh learn we to be sensible of,
and affected with the misery of this condition, to have our eyes blinded.

But lastly, The cause of this pernicious disease would be searched into, which
we shall find to arise principally from our selves: it is true, St Paul says
2 Cor. 4.
the God of this world (who is the Prince of darkness) blinds men's eyes; but
chiefly it is the darkness of wickedness within us, that brings this evil
upon us. Wickedness (says the Wiseman) does alter the understanding, Wisd. 4.
11.
and the bewitching of naughtiness does obscure things that are honest: to
which agrees that of St Chrysostom, Chrysostom. in Mat. 7. hom. 19.
Sin does so blind the senses of the sinners, that seeing not the ways of
falsehood, they thrust themselves headlong therein. The truth is, as the Serpent
first wrought upon the Woman, and by her upon the Man; so wickedness first
works upon the affections, and by that upon the understanding; nor is it any
wonder that when those are perverted, this is blinded. Who can see any thing in
a troubled muddy water? No more can the understanding discern aright, when the
affections are stirred and mudded; what mists and foggs are to the air,
darkning it, corrupt unruly passions are to the mind, blinding it. It were
easy to instance in the several sorts of those which the Schools call deadly
sins, how raising a commotion in the affections they obnubilate the judgment.
Olcot upon this account, compares the luxurious man to blind Sampson, the
gluttonous man to him that was born blind, the sloathfull man to blind Tobias,
the covetous to the blind Beggars, the angry to blind Lamech, the envious to
blind Ely, and the proud man to Senecaes blind servant, who would not believe
that she was blind, but the house dark: certain it is, all of these seating
themselves in some one or other of our passions, do not only reign in our
mortal bodies, but domineere in our immortal souls, misleading its most noble
faculty the judgment. Oh what a slave is the mind of a covetuous, luxurious,
malicious man to his affections, it must think, and plot, and dictate, and
judge according as they please: well might our Apostle say of him that hates
his Brother, the darkness blinds his eyes.

Nor would it be passed by, how the bad effect of this spiritual darkness,
exceeds that of natural in this respect: for whereas the eye of a man may be
as good, as strong, as clear in the dark, as in the light, only the darkness
hinders the exercise of the sight; the malicious man by reason of his darkness,
has the very sight of his understanding vitiated, indeed, whereas in naturals
the sight is not blinded, but the medium is darkened, in spirituals the Medium
which is Gods word is not at all darkened, but the Organ is blinded, whilst the
depravation of the passion, is the depravation of the understanding. As
therefore we desire to have our minds savingly enlightened, endeavor we to have
our lusts truly mortified, if we would have our judgments even and upright, let
us not suffer them to be byased by any passion.

To end all, What should this description of a wicked malicious sinners misery,
but serve as a disswasive from this iniquity? Let no violence be found in our
hands, nor hatred in our hearts, especially considering, that we say we are in
the light, (...), says one of the Ancients, it is unbeseeming those who sing
the songs of Zion, to bark in rage, who are Gods Servants, to be slaves to
envious lusts. I cannot expostulate better, then in the words of St Cyprian, Si
homo lucis esse Cypr. de zelo and livor^.
capisti quid in zeli tenebras ruis? if thou art a Child of light, cast off as
all, so especially this work of darkeness, walk no longer in this way of
darkness in which if thou persist, what ever thy deceitful heart may prompt
thee, it will inevitably lead thee to utter darknss, from which good Lord
deliver us.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 12, 13, 14. VERSE. I write unto you little Children, because your sins
are forgiven you for his name sake. I write unto you Fathers, because ye have
known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you young Men, because ye
have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you little Children, because ye have
known the Father. I have written unto you Fathers, because you have known him
that is from the beginning. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are
strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked
one.
AMong the many fimilitudes by which the office of a Minister is represented in
Scripture, those two of a watchman, and a Shepherd are very observable. Indeed
both of them are metaphors, by which God himself is pleased to describe his
Prophets, the one, when he says to Ezekiel, Son of Man, I have set thee a
watchman to the house of Israel; the other in that gracious Ezekiel. 33. 7.
promise to his people, I will set up shepherds over them which shall feed
them. The duty of a watchman Jer. 23. 4.
is first to take, and then give notice of the enemies approach; and it is no
small part of our ministerial employment, to warn the people of those
dangers, with which their spiritual enemies endeavor to surprise them. The
work of a Shepherd is to provide green pastures, still waters for the flock,
and to take care, not only for the grown sheep, but the tender Lambs; and it
is the chief task of a spiritual Pastor to feed his people with knowledge and
understanding, having regard to all persons, conditions, and ages. How fitly
both these agree to this holy Apostle St John, is easiy to observe in this
Epistle: like a vigilant Watchman he warns them in the latter part of this,
and the beginning of the fourth Chapter, of those imps of Satan, Antichristian
Heretics, which did infest, and infect the Church; like a careful Shepherd,
he gives them wholesome instructions for the stablishing of their Faith,
regulateing their life, in the greater part of the Epistle; and here in these
Verses which I have read, he manifests the care he had, not only of the
elder, but younger Christians, I write to you little Children, etc.

In these three Verses we have an answer to three Questions, Quid? Quibus?
Quare?

What S John did? To which the answer is returned in the word write.

To whom he wrote? The answer to which is given in the several titles.

Why he wrote to all, and each of these? The answer whereunto is in those
various clauses; which have a because prefixed.

So that if you please, here are three general parts in this portion of holy
writ to be discussed,

The Persons characterized, little Children, Fathers, young Men, little
Children.

The act performed, I write, I have written.

The reasons annexed, Because your sins are forgiven you for his name sake,
because you have known him that is from the beginning, etc.

According to this proposed Method, I am to begin Genesis 1.
at the middle of the Verses, with the several compellations by which our
Apostle bespeaketh those to whom he wrote. These I find in the usual Greek
copies to be four, (...), but in ou^ translation three, little Children,
Fathers, young Men. St Austin upon this place, seems to insinuate, that these
titles are given by St John generally Aug. in Ep.
to all Christians to whom he wrote, Filij sunt, Patres sunt, Juvenes sunt: in
Filijs nativitas, inpatribus antiquitas, in juvenibus fortitudo: all Believers
are Children in respect of their new birth, Fathers in regard of their
knowledge of the ancient of days, and young Men in respect of their spiritual
strength. To this agrees that of Justinian, who says, that therefore Has
omnes propri t^tes in omnium fidelium meant b^s in^s^^ ma^im^ desid^r^bat, etc.
Justin. in loc.
ou^ Apostle describes all Christians by these names, because he requires the
qualities of little Children, Fathers, and young Men in all Christians: but
this interpretation though pious, seems not so congruous, it being improbable
he should severally inculcate his writing together with the several reasons of
his writing to them, had he intended only Christians in general by all these
compellations.

The generality of Interpreters most probably conceive these titles to have
several references, but yet with some difference, which arises from a double
consideration of the first title, (...), little Children in the twelfth Verse.

1. Some conceive it to be of a particular concernment, and so to note a
distinct sort of persons from Fathers and young Men. That which favors this
interpretation is. 1. That hereby every one of the Members of that division
which our Apostle makes will be repeated. 2. That one Greek Manuscript reads
it (...), in the twelfth Verse, and so it is the same with the word in the
thirteenth. 3. That in the Syriack and some Greek Copies the variation of the
Verb, from the Present Tense to the first Aorist begins at the iteration of
little Children in the end of the thirteenth, and is in these the beginning of
the fourteenth Verse. And to justify the order of enumeration which seems to
be irregular in beginning with little Children, Grotius says; That Grot. ibid.
the Apostle first sets down the extremes of little Children, and Fathers, and
then the middle, young Men.

2. Others conceive the first, little Children in the twelfth Verse to be a
title by which the Apostle bespeaketh all Christians, and then in the
thirteenth Verse he severally addresseth himself to Fathers, young Men, little
Children; and in the fourteenth Verse (not without special reason, as shall
appear in its due place) he repeateth his address to Fathers, and young Justin.
Vori.
Men: this last interpretation however Soeinus is pleased to call it monstrous,
seems to me especially according to our received Greek Copies (from which I
see no cause to recede) the most genuine reasons briefly are these,

1. The original word for little Children in the twelfth, is different from
that in the thirteenth; whereas had the Apostle intended the same thing, he
would probably have used the same word in both places.

2. The original word in the twelfth Verse is the same with that in the first
Verse, where it is plainly spoken of all sorts of Christians.

3. Whereas the reasons specified in the thirteenth Verse are commendations,
and those suitable to the several ages mentioned, as is obvious at the first
view to any Reader; the reason in the twelfth Verse is a consolation, and such
as equally belongs to all Christians.

4. Lastly, According to this interpretation the order of setting down the
several ages is regular, beginning with Fathers, and proceeding with young men,
and descending to little Children.

For these reasons I shall adhere to the latter interpretation, and accordingly
here are two things observable,

A general Denomination, Little Children,

A particular Enumeration, Fathers, young Men, little Children.

1. The general Denomination is, (...), by which (as Danaeus well observes)
Omnes aetates compl^ctitur, Dan. in loc. See part. 1. p. 327.
the Christians of all ages are intended, It is a term which I have already had
occasion to handle, and therefore shall now pass over with the more brevity.

Though it is true in a real notion, yet it is more probable that our Apostle
uses it in a Metaphorical construction, and his design in it is double;
Namely, that this Appellation might be both a testimony of his affection
toward them, and a monitor to them of their duty; and in both these
considerations there was a great deal of reason why our Apostle should use
this title of little Children.

1. He calls them little Children to testify that Fatherly affection which he
did bear to them; and this no doubt that hereby he might gain a filial
affection from them toward him, and an affectionate regard to his Doctrine. It
is no small piece of policy in an Orator to make way for his instruction, by
giving evidence of his affection, what appears to be spoken, is commonly
taken in love: no wonder then if St John, Ad majorem benevalentiam indu^endam
filiolos appellat, as Justiuian appositely, for the gaining of their good will
Justinian. in loc.
to him, declares good will toward them, by calling them little Children.

And truly so much the more cause had our Apostle to endeavor this in respect
both of what he had and was to deliver.

He was now about to dissuade them from loving the world, a lesson to which
they might probably be very averse, it being so hard for us, while we are in
the world, not to be entangled with the love of it; nay, perhaps they might
think he was an enemy to them, in requiring them to be enemies to the world, it
being strange he should will them to contemn that whereof they had continual
use. Now by calling them Children, and thereby insinuating, that he spoke to
them as a Father, they might justly persuade themselves that he advised them to
nothing but what was for their good. Our blessed Savior strongly argues from
the Love of a Father, If his Son ask bread will he give him a Matthew. 7. 9, 11.
stone? or if he ask a fish will he give him a Serpent? A question intending a
negation, doubtless he will not, nay, rather if he ask him stones or a serpent,
he will give him bread or ^^sh. Fathers do not use to give, nor yet to advise
their Children what is hurtful, but useful for them; and therefore by calling
them little Children, he would let them know, that how prejudicial soever this
counsel of not loving the world, might seem to them, it was given by him as a
Father, and that which he knew would be beneficial to them.

Again, He had but now sharply reproved those among them who did hate their
Brethren; and least they should account him guilty of the sin he reproved, as
if his reprehension of them, proceeded from hatred, he presently manifests
his love, by this sweet appellation, little Children. There is never more need
of insinuating into Auditors, an opinion of our candid affection toward them;
then when we use bitter invectives against their sins: men being very apt to
misconstrue our hatred of their sins, as if it were malice against their
persons: and truly what expression could more represent affection then this of
Children? Solomon says, Prove. 27. 6.
The wounds of a Friend are better then the kisses of an enemy; and good reason
since there is more love in the ones wounds, then the others kiss; and if the
wounds of a Friend, much more the reproofs of a Father are from love; if it be
a rod, the Child must kiss it, because it is virga Patris, the rod of a
Father; and surely then, though it be a sharp rebuke, the Child must embrace
it, because it is verbum Patris, the word of a Father: amor, says the old man
in the Poet, est optimum salsamentum, love is that sauce which gives a relish
to things that are otherwise most distastefull and loathsome. Brotherly love
says St Austin, and it is no less true Aug. consess. l. 10. c. 4.
of Fatherly, Sive approbet me, sive improbet me, diligit me; whether it
approve, or reprove me, it still loves me; and where love is the sweet spring,
though the waters be the waters of Marah, I may cheerfully drink them. That
therefore our Apostle might render his severe reprehension the more acceptable,
he would have them know it was from that sincere and tender respect he bare to
them; and that he might convince them of this cordial respect, he bespake them
as a Father with this affectionate title little Children.

2. He styles them little Children to mind them of Matthew. 18. 3.
that duty which concerns all Christians in becoming as little Children, and
according to his masters Precept, whose language he much delights to follow.

Indeed it is that which is not to run parallel in all respects: and therefore
says Jansenius, the imitation Jans. Harmon.
of little Children is either good or bad, according to the things wherein we
resemble them, St Paul in one place bids us (...), show our selves men not
women 2 Cor. 13. 9. 1 Cor. 14. 20. Ephesians. 4. 14.
by cowardice, no nor yet Children by inconstancy; nay, he expressly forbids, Be
not Children in understanding, and again, Be no more Children tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, we must then be unlike and
like to little Children.

We must not think like little Children, for they only mind what is present,
whereas wisdom teaches to look afar off, and think of hereafter; and yet we
must think as little Children, for their thoughts are not carking and
distrustful about what they should eat or drink, or wherewith they should be
clothed; we must not desire as little Children do, for they ofttimes desire
things that may prove hurtful and destructive to them; and yet we must desire
as little Children, for their desires are earnest, and important after the dug:
we must not understand as little Children, for they are but weak and defective
in knowledge: and yet we must understand as little Children, for they are docile
and facile to learn; we must not speak as little Children, for they speak
rashly; and yet we must speak as little Children, for they speak truly: we must
not like them speak all we think, and yet like them, we must speak nothing but
what we think.

In few words, would we know wherein especially we ought to be as little
Children, look backward and forward to the sins here forbidden, and we shall
find little Children fit monitors of avoiding both; and perhaps therefore our
Apostle makes choice of this appellation, as very suitable to these
instructions.

1. Little Children are innocent and harmeless, free Non praecipit Apostolis ut
aetatem habeant parvulorum sed innocentiam. Hier. in Matthew
from hatred and malice, they do not plot nor act mischief to others, they seek
not revenge upon others; and this is that wherein chiefly we must resemble
little Children. To this purpose St Jerome, Christ does not require of his
Apostles that they should be little Children in years but innocence: and
Theodoret on that in Theod. in Psalm.
the Psalms, Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have ordained
strength; asking the question, Who are those Babes and Sucklings? answers,
Qui lactentium puerorum innocentiam imitati sunt, they who imitate the
innocence of Sucking Children; what need we a better Expositor then St Paul,
who admonishes the 1 Cor. 14. 20.
Corinthians, In malice be you Children? And in this Tertul. adv. Valent. 21.
Semel senex bis puer. Cl. Al. poedagog. l. 1. c. 5.
respect (as Tertullians phrase is) he would have the oldest men repuerascere,
grow young again, and so in an excellent sense be twice Children. Indeed as
Clemens Alexandrinus observes, concerning the prohibition of distrustful care,
so may I concerning this of hatred and revenge, he that endeavors to fulfill
it, (...), is a Child both in Men's and Gods account; the World thinks him a
Child, yea a fool, to put up injuries, and God esteems him as a Child, yea,
such a Child of whom is the Kingdom of God.

2. Little Children are not covetous, nor ambitious, nor luxurious, they affect
not variety of delicacies, they are not greedy of gain, nor puffed up with
titles, Si verberantur non afficiuntur odio, nec si laudantur Avend. in Mat.
arrogantia; if corrected they hate not, if commended they swell not; thus
ought Christians to deny worldly lusts, and to conquer all inordinate desires.
Holy David comparing himself to a Child says, My soul Psalm. 131. 2.
was even as a weaned Child, which is no more greedy of the dug, so ought every
good man to have his heart weaned from all the honors, and pleasures, and
profits of this transitory world.

And surely well were it if even Parents would in this regard go to School to
their little Children, and by their behavior learn their own duty; the truth
is to a wise and understanding Christian every Creature is a Preacher, and
every day a Sabboath; with the Be he sucketh honey out of every flower, above,
the Stars; beneath, the fruits, abroad the beasts, at home the little Children
are his instructors of whom he learneth these excellent lessons to contemn the
world, and to abborre malice: which that our Apostle might the more strongly
inculcate upon those to whom he wrote, he calls them little Children: and so
much be spoken of the general denomination in the twelfth Verse: pass we on
to the

Particular Enumeration, As it is set down in the thirteenth Verse, Fathers,
young Men, little Children: I find among Expositors a double reference of these
expressions by some to several degrees of grace, by others to several ages of
life; according to the former construction, the words are to be interpreted
Metaphorically; according to the latter, literally.

Oecumenus upon the place asserts that our Apostle intends by these titles to
express the different sorts of Christians, who were to receive his Epistle,
(...), Oecumen in loc.
whose different progress in Christianity, he sets down with allusion to the
increase of natural life: Origin is express both Orig. in numer. hom. 9.
in a Negative and Positive way, Non corporales aetates, sed animae
perfectionem differentia ponit, by this phrase the Apostle designeth to
difference Christians, not Him. 1. in Cant.
according to the ages of their bodies, but the growth of their souls in grace;
and in another place he says, this is so evident a truth that he thinks none
ever doubted it. Though I am so far from excluding (with this allegorical
Father) the literal construction, that I conceive it is most congruous; yet I
shall not altogether wave the Metaphorical sense. And thus Lap. in l^c.
there is a threefold degree of grace, which is shadowed by these three-ages of
life.

1. Incipie^tes, They who are ^^vices in Christianity, incipients in grace, are
represented by little Children, and if we look into the Metaphor we shall find
the parallel fit and full.

1. Little Children are weak in body, they cannot go with strength, rnu with
swiftness, act with vigor, but what they do, they do it weakly; so is it with
beginners in Religion, they complain of deadness, dullness, weakness, in
performing holy duties; instead of running it is as much as they can do, to go
the way of Gods Commandments* and in going, they often slip, nay fall, though
not through willfullness, yet weakness.

2. Little Children are low of stature; so are beginners in Christianity,
dwarfs in piety. To have our conversation in Heaven, is a lesson long in
learning, we cannot presently nor easily mount up with the wings of an Eagle;
even they who loath sin, know not how to part with the world; and it is by many
steps that they ascend to an Heavenly life.

3. Little Children are fed with milk, their stomachs being not fit to digest
more solid food; thus beginners in Religion are to be instructed in the
rudiments of Christianity, as being incapable of higher mysteries. Christ's
Disciples before the descens^on of the holy Ghost, were but incipients, and
therefore out Savior tells them, I have many things to say to you, but you
cannot bear them yet, St Paul speaking of those Christians among the John 16.
12.
Corinthians, who were Babes in Christ, I have fed you with milk, and not with
meat; for hitherto you were not able to bear it, neither yet now are you able.
Those little Children in the Text had some divine knowledge, but it was very
dim and imperfect; and as yet they had but sucked in the first principles of
Christianity.

4. Little Children are fickle, and inconstant; now this likes them, and by
and by it distasteth them, 1 Cor. 3. 2.
whatever you put into their hands they quickly let it fall, taking no
fasthold of it; thus are weak Christians carried to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine; now this opinion pleases them, and anon it displeases them: and
though the verities of Christian religion are inculcated upon them, they hold
them not fast, but suffer themselves easily to be spoiled of them

5. Finally, Little Children are full of fears easily affrighted with any
thing, so are spiritual Babes, their faith being little, doubts arise, fears
prevail. Wicked sinners are presumpteous, weak Christians are timorous; and as
the Devil luls those asleep in security, so he dismaies these with anxiety.

2. Proficients, Those who have made some progress in Christianity are compared
to young Men: For

1. As youngmen have good stomachs whereby they both earnestly desire, and
easily digest solid meats; so it is with growing Christians; they receive the
manna of the ordinances with attention, retain it by meditation, and so turn
it into good nutriment by practice, they are able to chew and feed upon
evangelicall verities, to digest them in their understandings and memories: in
which respect our Apostle says, The word of God abides in them.

2. Young men are active and vigorous, having strong bodies and nimble joints,
whereby they fulfill their employments without weariness; thus are spiritual
proficients ready to every good word and work: divine commands are not
grievous, Christ's yoke is easy to them, and they do the will of God with
alacrity, for which reason our Apostle says of them they are strong.

3. Young men are fit, by reason of their strength for military employments,
and upon all occasions are called forth to service; so are strong Christians
fit to encounter with temptations, afflictions, persecutions, and through
divine assistance to conquer them, upon which account it is said of these young
men, they had overcome the wicked one.

4. Young men have their blood boiling in their veins, their natural heat is
sprightly in them; so is it with proficients in grace, the supernatural and
spiritual heat of zeal is lively in their hearts, whereby it is that they
boil as it were in love to God, and rage against sin.

5. Finally, Young men are healthful and lusty, and though they fall into a
disease their bodies are able to wrestle with it, and nature gets the better;
so have spiritual proficients an healthful frame of soul, whereby it is that
they seldom fall into great diseases, I mean gross sins; and if at any time
they do fall, grace struggleth with, and prevails against corruption.

^. Perfecti, They who are comparatively not only in respect of bad, but good,
perfect Christians, having attained large measures of grace, are resembled to
Fathers.

1. Aged Fathers know much by their own experience; so do perfect Christians,
they are experienced in the subtilties of Satan, and d^ceits* of their own
hearts, the workings of grace and stirrings of corruptions, the assistances of
Gods Spirit, and manifestations of his Love.

2. Aged Fathers know things that are done many years ago, and perfect
Christians (according to our Apostles phrase) have known him that is from the
beginning; converse with the Father of eternity, and so far as God has
unbosomed himself in his word, are acquainted with the thoughts he had from
everlasting.

3. Lastly, Aged Fathers are usually Fathers of many Children; so are perfect
Christians, they make it a great part of their bui^^ness to admonish the
negligent, support the feeble, reclaim the wandering, comfort the drooping, and
by all means to convert, and confirm their Brethren.

To sum it up, Habent omnes virtutes suas conceptiones, nativitates,
incunabvla, aetatis incrementa, says an Orig. in Number.
Ancient. The virtues have their Conception, Birth, and Growth, and that from
one degree to another: the seed of grace which falls upon good ground, brings
forth in some an hundred, in some sixty, and in some but thirty fold; all the
Israelites did not gather the like quantity of Manna, some an Omer, and some an
Epha, some much, some little; it is no less true of the spiritual Israelites
in gathering grace. Among the ungodly on Jacobs ladder, some were above at the
top, and others below at the foot yet all upon the ladder; the like difference
there is among Christians in their spiritual ascents; as in the Heavens there
are stars of several magnitudes, in Schools there are Scholars of several
so mes; in Houses there are vessels of several bigness; so in the Church there
are Christians of several degrees, for there are Fathers, and young Men, and
little Children. Let not then those who are Fathers grown up in Christianity,
disdain the young Men, who are growing, nor either Fathers or young Men
contemn the little Children. The time was when thou who art a Father wast a
young Man, nay a little Child; and the time may be, when they that are now
little Children, may come to be young Men, nay, Fathers: he that has m^st
grace, began with a little, and those we^k striplings may prove strong Giants
in grace: if thou have much, and others but little, thankfully acknowledge thy
Fathers mercy, but do not proudly scorn thy Brothers infirmity.

Again, Let not those who are as yet but little Children be discouraged at, nor
yet content with those small measures of grace they have attained.

Let them not on the one hand be too much dejected: he that bids Peter feed his
sheep, bids him withal to feed his Lambs; yea, he who is himself the great
Shepherd, takes care of the little Lambs, as well as the grown sheep; when
Nicodemus came to Christ with some few sparks of desire after him, our
compassionate Redeemer non delebat sed alebat, did not extinguish Aug.
but cherish them. Besides the covenant of grace is made with, and the promises
of mercy are made to faith, not only in strength but truth. A little Child is
as truly a man, as a young man, as an old man; and a weak Christian is as
truly a Christian as the most perfect Saint; conclude not too harshly against
thy self from the praemises of weak grace, Qui non potest volare ut aquila,
vole^ ut passer, if we cannot mount with the Eagle, soar with the Lark, let
us fly with the Sparrow; though we cannot with St Paul set our feet in the
third Heaven, yet let us lift up our hands and eyes thither. In a word, let us
neither measure our goodness by another want of it, nor our want of goodness
by another abundance, as if we had no grace because but little, and not so
great a measure as others.

Nor yet on the other hand, let little Children or young Men be contented with
what they have attained. The stature which a Christian is to strive after, is
the stature of the fullness of Christ; and therefore we must never come to our
maximum quod s^c, our full pitch. There is an holy and amiable ambition in
Christianity; oh how good would a good heart be! it looks not only upon its
sins, but graces with grief, and mourning; as that it has been so bad, so that
it is yet no better, Peto ut ac^ipiam and cum acceper^ rursus peto, I ask to
receive grace, and when I have received I ask again, Nec ille deficit in
dando* nec ego satior in accipiendo, he is not weary of giving, nor am I
satisfied with receiving. So St Jerome. Is then the foundation of piety laid,
rear up the building every day higher then other, till it reaches to Heaven.
Is the light of grace risen in Hier. ad Ctesiph. adv pelag.
in thy soul? Let it shine more and more to the perfect day. Finally, art thou
a little Child, grow up to be a young Man, yea, never cease till thou comst to
be a Father in Christ. And so much for the Allegorical Interpretation.

It is a received rule in interpreting Scripture, that Interp. 2.
the litterall sense is to be adhered to, as most genuine, unless necessity
enforce to recede from it. For this cause I conceive it most congruous to
embrace the plain and proper meaning of the words, as they note the ages of
men's life, though withal the other notion is here collaterally to be taken in;
those of these several ages to whom St John writes were converted to
Christianity, and proportionably no doubt as the little Children were but weak,
so as they grew up to be young Men, and Fathers, they gr^w in grace.

For the better clearing of this construction, you must know that Childhood,
Youth, and old Age are the usual distinctions of man's age. I know some make as
it were seven stages of the life of man, Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Manhood,
mid^le Age, old Age, decrepit Age: Aret. in loc.
others reduce the seven to four, Childhood, Youth, Psalm. 37. 25.
Manhood, old Age; the ^^rst whereof is reckoned to ^^fteen, the second to
twenty five, the their(...) to thirty seven, Tit. 2. 34.
and the fourth to the end of life: and these four ages they resemble by the
four Elements in the world, the four seasons in the year, the four h^mours
of the body and the like; and one upon my Text finding four words in these
Verses, (...) and (...), fits them to those four ages. David seems to
comprize Beza in loc.
them in two, I have been young, and now am old, St Paul to Titus mentions only
Aged, and young Men. But the most received distinction of man's age is
threefold, as Beza well observes: correspondent to which was that song of the
Lacedemonian quire, placed in three orders, whereof the first who were the
little Children sang, Quod estis erimus; that which you young and old Men are
we shall be, the second who were the old Men sung, Quod estis fuimus, that
which you young Men and little Children are we once were, and the third which
were the young Men sung, Sumus quod alteri fuerunt and alteri futuri sunt, we
are what you old Men have been, and you little Children are to be.

According to this tripartite* division of man's Age* our Apostle reckons up
Fathers, young Men, and little Children.

1. He begins with Fathers, by which he means old Men, for though the name
Father is properly vox naturae, a word betokening a natural Father, in Justin.
in loc.
which respect whosoever has a Child is a Father; there are besides Patres
religione, Fathers in respect of Religion, so Elisha called Elijah Father: who
was a Prophet^: and it is usual to call Bishops, nay, ordinary Priests, and
Ministers Fathers, Patres dignitate, Fathers in regard of honor and dignity:
upon this account Naamans* servant call him (being a great man) Father.
Senators in Rome were styled Patres Fathers, and Kings are called Patres
Patriae, the Fathers of the Country, over which they rule. Finally, Patres
aetate, Fathers in respect of age, and so all who are stricken in Years, are
wont to be called Fathers: in this sense it is manifestly here used by St John,
and that honoris ergo by way of reverence, whilst he thinks it not fit in
plain terms to call them old men, but in testification of his respect to them
Fathers; nor would it be passed by what this expression teaches us: Namely,

That reverence is due from Young to old Men, as from Children to their
Fathers: what the Apostle says of marriage, is no less true of old Age it is
honorable among Heb. 13. 3.
all men: in Scripture-Heraldry the ancient and the honorable are put
together; yea the command is express, Thou sha^t rise up before the hoary
head, and honor the Isa. 9. 15. Lev. 19. 32. Cognata sunt (...), and (...),
and (...), and (...). Eustath. Phoc. Aul. Gell. l. 2. c. 15.
face of the old man. It is not unfitly observed that in the Greek language,
(...), old age, and (...), an honorary reward, differ nothing as to sound, and
only in a letter as to writing, to intimate that honor is due to old age. It
was one of Chilons golden precepts, (...), to reverence old age. And Phocylides
his phrase is, -- (...) parents and old men are to have equal reverence. To
this purpose it is that Aulus Gellius relates concerning Magna fuit quondam
capitis reverentia cani. Ovid Fast. l. 5. Credebant tunc grande nefa* and morte
pi an dum. Si veteri Juvenis non assurrexerit, etc. Juvenal. Sat. 13.
the ancient Romans, that they did not more honor wealth or birth, then age,
and the younger did reverence the elder, ad deum prope, and parentum vicem, as
if they were their parents, nay Gods; and this (says he) they learned of the
Lacedaemonians, who by Ly^urgus his Laws were enjoined great reverence to aged
persons. Accordingly it is that both Ovid and Juvenal tell us, what great
honor was of old given to the hoary head, and how heinous a crime it was
accounted, as deserveing little less then death, if a young man did not rise up
before the ancient.

How justly will the Heathens of those ages, rise up in judgment against the
Christians of this, wherein old age is become contemptible, and youth malapert:
what more usual then for green heads to contradict and vilify gray hairs?
That brand which is set upon the nation, God was resolved to send against
rebellious Deuteronomy. 28. 30.
Israel, is verified in too many, they respect not the person of the old. Oh
remember, Antiquity is the image of eternity! God is called the ancient of
days, and though it is idolatry in the Romanists to picture God as Dan. 7. 9.
an old man, yet we need not doubt to affirm that an old man is as it were the
picture of the eternal God; and therefore as in despising every man, so
especially an aged man, we despise Gods image.

Learn we then how to account of old men, namely, as Fathers, and accordingly
to give them all due regard in words, gestures, and actions. It is a good
saying of Clemens Alexandrinus, when a man by age draws near his end, (...),
he Clem. Alex. paedag. l. 2. c 3. Antioch. hom ^09.
is so much the more highly to be honored; and Antiochus assures us, that to
respect the ancient, is (...), very acceptable in the ^ight both of God and
man. It is very considerable how 1 Timothy 5. 1.
St Paul advises Timothy though an elder in respect of office, yet being young
in years, that he should entreat the elder (to wit in age) as Fathers. And no
less observable is this of St John, who to manifest his respect to old age,
when he means old men, uses this honorable term of Fathers.

2. By Fathers then he means them who were about fifty years old, or more, in
their declining age, and had lived to see many days, from them he descends
to young men; and though the word here used (as P^llux affirms) be especially
meant of those who are Vide* Casaub exercitat.
in their fourth septenary, from one to eight and twenty; yet here the extent
of it is (as Estius well observes) a Est. in loc.
great deal larger, and comprehends all, qui exeunt ex ^phebis, who are past
fifteen, till they come to the age of fifty. From young men, he comes yet
lower, to little children; and though the diminutive word take in all little
children, (whilst yet they cannot go nor sp^a^) from their very birth, yet
here doubtless it must bear date from the time in which a child begins first to
be capable of rational knowledge (it being not probable that St John did write
to them who were in no capacity of reading or understanding what he wrote) and
beginning at those years, it comprizeth all who are in their nonage, and are
not come to the years of one and twenty.

That then which our Apostle here intimates is, that there were of all these
ages among the Christians. We read in the parable of the Vineyard that some
laborers were hired to work at the third, some at the sixth, and Mat. 20. 3.
5. 6.
others about the ninth and eleaventh hour: Thus does Christ call some little
children with whom it is but the third, some young men with whom it is the
sixth hour, some Fathers with whom it is the ninth, nay eleaventh hour of the
day. God in the Law, says Damianus, made Pet. Dam. l. 6. ep. 17.
choice of Bullocks and Lambs to be offered in sacrifice to him, thereby
intimating the diversity of those whom he brings home to himself: Alij
grandaeva senectute maturi, alij juvenilis incrementi vigore robusti; some
being of ripe, and others of green years. Look as in an Orchard there are
tender plants, midlings, and old trees, so are there in Gods Church persons of
all ages. It is otherwise in this respect (as well as others) in the spiritual,
then in the temporal warfare; in other wars as Priests are exempted by their
calling, women by their sex, sick and impotent persons by their indisposition
of body, so old men and children by their years; but not so in this, to which
children so soon as they begin to understand are engaged, and old men so long
as they live. The Hebrew Proverb says of Golgotha, that there are in it skuls
of all sizes; and as in the Churchyard there are dead bodies, so in the Church
there are living Christians of all years; as the Devil has his slaves among
old men, young men, little children, for the Je^. 7. 17, 18.
Prophet says of the idolatrous Heathen, that the Fathers kindled the fire,
and the women kneaded the dough, and the children gathered sticks to make cakes
for the Queen of heaven; so God has his servants, and Christ his 2 Timothy 1. 5.
members, for St Paul speaks of faith dwelling in the Grandmother Lois, the
Mother Eunice, and Timothy the Child. Among old men and women, we read of
Abraham and Sarah, Zachary and Elizabeth, Paul the aged, and Mnason the old
Disciple. Among young men, we read of Josiah the young King, and Phineas the
young Priest, and Daniel the young Prophet. Among little children, of Samuel 2 Chronicles. 34. 1 Samuel 2. 2 Timothy 3. 15. Mal. 21. 16, 17.
ministering before the Lord from a child, and Timothy instructed in the
Scriptures from a child, and the children crying Hosanna to Christ, when he
came riding to Jerusalem. Sometimes God is pleased to instill grace into the
hearts of little ones; sometimes he gives a stop to young men in their evil
course; sometimes he makes old men the monuments not only of his patience in
sparing them so long, but of his goodness in bringing them to repentance at
last; or else conferres upon towardly little children and virtuous young men,
the reward of length of days in this life, whereby they come to be old.

To draw to an end, I trust Beloved it may be said of some, of many, of all
these Ages, in this City, Parish, Congregation, that they are among the number
of those, who are (at the 12th Verse) called little children, begotten again,
and renewed by the Holy Ghost; sure I am, it concerns us all of all ages, to
be of that number.

It is high time for you that are Fathers (if you have not already) now to
bring forth fruit to God; nor let the old man say in the Eunuchs language, I am
a dry tree, there is no hopes of my fruitfulness; young Devils may prove old
Saints: he that makes dry bones to live, can make the dry trees to flourish:
rather double your prayers and endeavors to bring forth much fruit in a little
time; and if you have been already planted in the house of the Lord, be
careful still to bring forth fruit in old age.

It is full time for you that are young men to study the divine art of
Christianity, though whilst you were Children, you did, and spoke, and
understood as Children; yet now you are become men, put away Childish things,
mind what concerns Gods glory, and your own salvation.

Nor let little Children say with those Jews, it is not time to rear the
building of Religion. The work is long, and the time at longest but short; you
had need begin betimes, the journey is great, and the time but a day to go it
in, there is reason you should set forth early. In one word, let Fathers be
exemplary in piety, let young Men be forward in grace; let little Children make
haste, to be good, so shall there be still in the Church of Christ Militant,
Fathers, young Men, little Children, till the last day come when there shall be
neither old Men, nor little Children, but all shall be young Men, of full
stature and perfect age to all eternity in the Church Triumphant.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 12, 13, 14. VERSE. I write unto you little Children, because your sins
are forgiven you for his name sake. I write unto you Fathers, because ye have
known him that is from the beginning. I write unto you young Men, because ye
have overcome the wicked one. I write unto you little Children, because ye have
known the Father. I have written unto you Fathers, because you have known him
that is from the beginning. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are
strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have ever come the wicked
one.
THere are three things which commend the excellency and worth of any writing
or Doctrine; purity of matter, antiquity of original, and generality of use.
Indeed those Doctrines which patronize any sin, are to be wholly rejected,
which broach any novelty are justly to be suspected, and those which are only
of some particular concernment are not generally to be regarded: But when the
things delivered are pure, the authority of them unquestionable, and their
utility universal, they cannot but challenge our attention and reception; Such
is the Evangelicall Doctrine; such are the Apostlicall writings, such in
particular is this Epistle. To this purpose it is that in this very Chapter St
John asserts all these concerning his Doctrines. Their unspotted purity, Verse
first, where he says, These things I write to you that you sin Verse 1.
not. Their unquestionable antiquity, Verse seventh where he says, I write
not a new Commandment to you, Verse 7.
but an old, the old Commandment is the word which you heard from the
beginning. Finally, their general extent in these Verses, as reaching to all
of all ages, I write to you, little Children, etc.

2. Having handled the first part of this Scripture, namely, the persons
specified: pass we on to the second which is the act performed by St John
toward these persons, and that is writing, as it is often expressed in the
several Verses. That I may give you a full account of this part, I shall
consider the Act here mentioned.

1. Absolutely, and therein take notice both of the Act it self, and the
Iteration of it.

2. Relatively, In reference to the agent, who; the Subject, to whom; and the
Object about which he writes.

1. In the absolute consideration we are to

1. Begin with the Act expressed in the word write. St John had spoken before,
yea, no doubt by Preaching the Gospel to them, had been the means of their
Conversion; (whom therefore he calls in the first Verse my little Children,) and
now to his former speaking Calvin praefat. in ^s.
he adds writing. Thus Calvin conceives that the Prophets did write a
summary or abridgment of those messages they delivered, which were for sometime
affixed to the gates of the Temple for the people to read; and afterward taken
down and laid in the treasury: and it is expressly asserted concerning God
himself, that after he had given the Law, speaking the ten words with his own
lips, he wrote them with his own fingers in two tables of stone.

If you shall inquire a reason why God would have Quest.
his word not only spoken but written, and his Apostles not only Nephtalies, to
give goodly words, but Zebulons to handle the pen; and not only Orators, but
Secretaries?

I answer upon a threefold ground, drawn from Answ.
themselves, their people, and the truth they had delivered.

1. In regard of themselves; Inasmuch as writing was a supply of their absence.
The Mother cannot be always present with the Babe to suckle it with the dug,
and therefore she provideth a sucking bottle to refresh it in her absence; thus
the Apostles, because they could not be in many places at once, and
consequently not always present with their scattered flock, vouchsafed to
write to them, that their wrightings might be instead of vocal instructions.

2. In regard of the people, Since these writings were an excellent means both
of strengthening their memories, and confirming their faith.

1. The writing did bring to the peoples remembrance what the Apostles had
formerly taught them. This St Peter asserteth as the end of his writing, to 2
Pet. 3. 1.
stir up the pure minds of the people by way of remembrance, it being a great
prop to memory, when those truths which have been sounded in the ear, are
afterward presented to the eye, whilst what was lost to the one, is restooed
to the other, and so truth secured to the memory.

2. These writeings were no small confirmation of the people in the faith; by
speaking the Apostles did as it were lay the foundation, and by writeing they
reared the Fabric, by Preaching they planted, and by writeing watered. Finally
by speaking they converted Heathens to, and by writeing they corroborated the
Christians in the faith.

3. Once more, In regard of the truths themselves, that they might hereby be
perpetuated to posterity. To this purpose Rivet asserteth the writings of Gods
Word as not only profitable, but necessary, Labili memoriae and posterorum
successioni, as to help the weakness of memory, so to transmit revelations to
after ages: Aelian Aelian. Histor. Animal.
reports of certain frogs which taking a kind of reed into their mouths, save
themselves from the water serpents that would devour them; thus the holy
Apostles by taking a Pen into their hands, have preserved those precious truths
which the Devil indeavoureth to swallow up. By which it appears, that the
sacred writings though they were directed to them who then lived, yet they are
intended for us. St Paul says of the writings Romans 15. 4.
of the Old Testament. That the things which were written aforetime, were
written for our learning, the like may we say of the writings both of the New
and Old Testament, they are for our use and instruction.

And surely this (...), calls for a (...), reading is the end of writing; and
since the Apostles took the pains to write, it is but just we should bestow the
time to read. It was a sad complaint of God himself against Israel, I have
written to them the great things of my Psalm. 1. 2.
Law, and they have accounted them as a strange thing. Oh that the like
accusation might not be charged by Christ upon us, I have written to them the
great things of my Gospel, but they have counted them as a strange thing, and
are strangers to them! How sad is it to think that whereas David's blessed man
meditateth on Gods Law day and night; with many of us, days and nights, nay,
weeks and months, pass away without reading and meditating on the sacred
writings. Oh let us wip^ of the dust of contempt from the cover of our Bibles,
and recall them from the land of forgetfulness whither our neglect has
banished them.

2. It would yet further be taken notice of, that here is not only a (...), I
write, in the thirteenth, but an (...), I have written, in the fourteenth
Verse, the sense whereof is fitly rendered by Estius to be Scripsi Est. in lo^.
iterumque scribo, I have written, and again I write. Our Apostle does not only
add precept to precept, but line to line, concerning the same precept, and
though he had written just before, yet he writes again, nor are we to imagine
it was through want of matter, but abundance of zeal that our Apostle strikes
a second time upon the same string; That workman who would fasten the nail in
the wall, must drive it home to the head, by repeated blows; many times as
second thoughts are better, so s^ond admonitions are stronger, and have a more
prevailing influence; some indeed awake at the first call, but the most have
need of a second, nay, a third. Calvin too rashly judges these repetitions in
the fourteenth Verse to be superfluous; yet I would to God they were, but St
John knew it otherwise: Calv. in loc.
and we cannot but observe it in our own experience there is a great necessity,
and therefore just reason that we should write and speak the same lesson once,
and again; and surely if it concerns us to write, it behooves you to read the
same writings again and again, the one must not be grievous to us, nor the
other tedious for you; some things need to be read once and again that we may
understand them, or if reading once we understand, let us read again that we
may remember, and if we understand and remember, let us read again that we may
find our affections inlivened.

2. Having viewed the Absolute, pass we on to the Relative consideration of
this Act, and that in reference

1. To the Agent. That which here this holy Apostle takes to himself is only
the writing, not the enditing; he was the Scribe, but the Spirit of God
dictated, or if you will, he was the Pen but the Spirit, the 2 Pet. 1. 21.
hand that guided it. It is St Peter's general assertion, The holy men of God
spoke as being moved by the holy Ghost. And St Paul is no less express when he
says, All Scripture is (...), of divine inspiration, the (...), inspiring, 2 Timothy 3. 16.
is Gods part, and the (...), writing was the Apostles. Indeed we find two
expressions which seem directly opposite one to the other; whenas in the tenth
Verse of the seventh Chapter of the Epistle to the 1 Cor. 7. 10, 12.
Corinthians the Apostle says, I command you; not I, but the Lord, and in the
twelfth Verse, speak I, not the Lord. But it will be easily salved, if we
consider Non dominus sc. express sive totidem verbis, sive suo ipsius ore.
Slat. ibid. Mat. 5. 31, 32.
that St Paul refers to the Doctrine which the Lord Christ delivered himself
concerning divorces, wherein though there is a general prohibition (except in
case of fornication,) yet there is nothing in particular concerning the case of
difference in Religion, when the one is a Christian, and the other a Pagan, and
therefore whereas Verse 40. Id. ibid.
in the general mandate St Paul says, not I, but the Lord; in the particular
counsel he says, I, not the Lord, that is, the Lord Christ has not said any
thing expressly as to this present case, but still what St Paul said in it, was
by the dictate of Gods Spirit; and therefore in the end of that Chapter he
closes with this, I think also (which is (...), an emphaticall diminution
expressing more then an opinion, a confident knowledge) that I have the Spirit
of God.

And surely this consideration is that which should oblige us to read
Apostolical writings with reverence, looking beyond the Penman to God who
inspired them, far be it from any of us to think of these writeings, what
Julian said of certain Papers, which were Bas. Epist. 207.
sent him in vindication of the Christian Religion, (...), I have read, I
understand, I despise them, no, rather let us admire and adore them. The truth
is in the very writings themselves, there is that verity, purity, and elegancy,
which may render them acceptable; but when besides we ponder their authority,
they call not only for acceptance, but reverence.

Nor is it enough thus to read, but we must labor for a transcript of what we
read, that what is written in the Book, may be written in our hearts; and truly
not only the (...), but the (...), in this sense belongs to Gods Spirit. The
Apostle may write to them, but it is the Spirit must write in them. God
appropriateth it to himself as his own act, I will put my Law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts: in reading therefore the sacred Books, let
us implore that Spirit which dictated to the Penman, to imprint upon our
hearts, that so we may be transformed into the Image of those truths we read,
and have within us a copy of the writing without us.

2. To the Subject, Fathers, young Men, Children, and here

1. It would be observed, that our Apostle in writing contents not himself with
generalities, but directs his diicourse particularly, like a good Archer he
does not shoot at random, but level the arrow of his admonition at the
several marks, or like the Master of a Feast does not only set whole dishes,
but carveth to his several Guests. Indeed as Calvin well notes, Generalis
sermo Calv. in loc.
minus afficit, what is spoken generally to all, is too often looked upon as if
it belonged to none: we are all very apt to put of rebuks and counsels as if
they did not concern us; and our question like that of Peter's is, John 21. 21.
what shall this man do? not like that of the Jayler, what shall I do? and
therefore it is a pious prudence in the Acts 16. 30.
Minister, to bring home his discourse by particular application to the various
conditions of his Auditors. Thus St Paul in his Epistle laid down instructions
for Men, for Women, for the Aged, and the Young, for Parents, for Children, for
Masters, for Servants: and here S^ John writes not only to all Christians
Verse twelfth, but particularly to Fathers, young Men, Children, Verses
thirteen, fourteen.

2. Observe, St John in his writing exc^seth not old Men, nor yet excludes
little Children.

1. On the one hand St John writing to old Men, intimates that none are too
old to learn divine Doctrines; and therefore they must not think scorn that
the Ministers of God should instruct them. Elegant is that of Seneca, Tamdiu
audiendum and discendum est Sen. Ep. 77.
quamdiu nescias, quamdiu vivas. We must hear so long as we are ignorant, and
learn so long as we live: more appositely St Austin, Ad discendum and audiendum
nulla aetas Aug. Ep. ad Hier.
senex videri potest, No age exempts from instruction. Since though it is more
proper for old Men to teach then learn, yet it is better for them to learn then
to be ignorant. Indeed St Paul justly blames those who were ever learning, and
never came to the knowledge of the truth: but yet those who are come to the
knowledge of the truth, must be ever learning even to their dying day. It is no
other then a base pride of spirit which causes men to account themselves
either too wise or too old to be taught in the ways of God. It were a strange
reasoning if an old man being constrained to take a tedious journey and not
knowing the way, should say thus within himself, I know not where I am, but I
will not ask the way because I am old; and is not their folly great, who reason
thus about the way to Heaven? Indeed when we address our selves to the ancient,
we must manage our counsels with respect, not imperiously commanding or
malapertly reproving, but humbly entreating* and meekly admonishing them, yet
still neither must they think much to be minded of, nor must we neglect to
acquaint them with their duty, for thus St John as he gives them the reverent
title of Fathers, so he writes to them for their instruction.

2. On the other hand, St John writing to little Children intimates that care
ought to be taken for the institution of little Children.

Indeed little Children are most fit to be taught, Citius Pelag. ad demetr.
assuescit omne quod tenerum, we tame a Lion when it is young, heal a wound
whilst it is green, break an Horse whilst it is a Colt, teach a Dog whilst it
is a Whelp, bow a tree whilst it is a twig, and men as well as other Creatures
are most easily instructed whilst young.

2. Besides what we learn whilst little Children, as it is most easily
received, so most firmly retained, Altius praecepta descendunt quae teneris
imprimuntur aetatibus, Quint. Instituto, l. 1. c. 1.
those precepts which are cast into the minds of little ones take deepest
root. That of the Poet is well known, Quo semel est imbuta recens. -- Horat.
Ed. 2. Prove. 22. 6.
Vessels keep the liquor longest with which they are first seasoned, and
Solomon assures us, Train a Child in the way he should go, and he will not
depart from it when he is old.

3. Add to this, That if Children be not instructed in good, they will learn
evil things; man's mind is like the ground, into which if good seed be not
cast, evil weeds will spring up; or like a restless mill which cannot stand
still, so that if it be not taken up with virtnes, it will employ it self in
vicious practices. Indeed as the Heathen says truly, Omnes praeoccupati sumus,
we are Sen. Ep. 51.
all forestalled, and our minds are naturally inclined to what is evil, the
more need to endeavor the plucking it up before it fasten too much in, and
take too much hold upon us. Upon all these considerations no wonder if S^ John
take little Children as well as young Men into his Tuition by writing to them.

And surely this is that which should mind Parents to take heed of delays in
providing for the ingenious and pious education of their Children, encourage
Schoolmasters to the discharge of their calling, which though conversant about
little Children is of great use and benefit. Finally, Advertise Ministers to
take care for Catechizing the little Children as well as instructing young Men,
and Fathers. Our blessed Savior had so Mark 10. 16.
great a respect for little Children, that he blamed those who would have kept
them from him embraced them in his arms and blessed them. David though a King
disdaineth not to be a teacher of Children; many of the Ancient Psalm* 34. 10.
Fathers, Clemens, Origin, Cyrill of Jerusalem, Gregory Nyssen were
Cathechists, whose office is to instruct little Children; yea, here this holy
Apostle leaves not out in his writings little Children, and so much for the
second.

The last reference of this act is to the Ob^ect whereabout this writing is
conversant. It is that which is not expressed in the Text, and therefore is
supplied by Expositors, yet not without some differen^e.

I ^inde among Interpreters a threefold construction of this (...), I write as
to the matter of it.

1. Some enlarge it as extending to the whole Epistle, Calv. in loc.
and so these Verses are a digression from the pr^ceding matter, and they may
well be called the Epistle Dedicatory; wherein St John gives an account to
whom his Epistle is written; all Christians in general, and in particular to
Fathers, young Men, and Children.

2. Others refer these Verses to the duty of Brotherly love before mentioned:
and having commended the worth he here shows the fitness of it to all ages of
men. I write (...), this Commandment of Love to Beza Zanch. Justin. in loc.
you Fathers, young Men, Children; according to which construction these Verses
look backward and are a close of the preceding discourse. That which
strengthens this reference is that it manifestly appears a great part of this
Epistle insisteth upon the duty of Love; and therefore no wonder if our Apostle
when first he speaks of it both prefixeth a proaemium, declaring its
antiquity and affixeth a peroration, discovering its congruity to all sorts of
Christians.

Finally, Others refer these Verses to that prohibition Est. in loc.
of worldly Love, which follows in the fifteenth, sixteenth, and seaventeenth
Verses; and so it looks Dr Hamm. paraph.
forward, and is as it were an exordium to make way for that inhibition, which
he knew would be so unwelcome to the most, though it concerned them all.

And now though by what is already said, I conceive the middlemost of these
most rational, yet since none of them are either improbable or unprofitable, I
shall handle each.

1. If we extend this writing to the whole Epistle, that which would be
observed, is the community of the holy Scriptures. This Epistle was written by
St John not only to strong but weak Christians, to old but young men, nay
little children; and if it was written, certainly it was intended that it
should be read to them publicly, and by them privately for their edification.
Nor is this less true of the other writings of this Apostle, of the writings of
the other Apostles, and of the Prophets; and therefore Vorstius lays it down
as a general Vorst. in loc.
doctrine from this Text, Sacra Scriptura ^mnibus fidelibus cujusconque aetatis
aut conditionis (dummodo capaces doctrinae) est destinata: The Holy Scripture
is written for all ages and conditions of Christians, who are capable of
instruction.

It is very observable to this purpose what care Saint Paul took for the
public reading of his Epistle to the Colossians, and not only to them, but the
Laodiceans, Col. 4. 16.
what a solemn charge and adjuration by the Lord he gives, that his first
Epistle to the Thessalonians be read to all the holy Brethren. This practice of
public reading was used by the Jewish Church who had Moses and the Prophets
read in their Synagogues on the Sabbath day, and accordingly it was followed by
the Christian Church in the primitive times. Justin Martyr assures us, Just.
Mart. Apolog. 2.
that in the public Assembly on the Lords day, (...), some of the Apostolical
and Prophetical writings were read to the people, and Tertullian says,
Convenimus ad Tertull. Apol.
literarum divinarum commemorationem, one end of our meetings is the
commemoration of the Holy Scriptures. Rhenanus quoting this passage in his
Annotations upon B. Rhenan. Annot. in l. de corona militis. Hier. in Ps.
another Book of that Fathers, breaths forth that pious wish, Utinam redeat
ad nos ista consuetudo, Oh that this custom were in use among us. That note of
St Hierome upon those words of the Psalmist, The Lord shall count when he
writes up the people, as translated by him, Psalm. 87. 6.
would not be passed by, Dominus narrabit in Scriptura populorum, The Lord
shall declare in the writings of the people, so he renders it, that is in
Scripturis sanctis, in the Holy Scriptures, so he glosses it, and presently
adds, Quae Scriptura populis omnibus legitur, hoc est ut omnes intelligant, The
Scripture is read unto all the people, to the end all may understand it.

Nor are the sacred writings only to be read to, but by the people, of what age
and condition soever. It is very observable to this purpose how the Psalmist
inviteth every man, and as St Basil notes upon the place, (he Bas. in Ps. 1.
does not exclude the woman) to meditate day and night, (which supposes
reading) on the Law of God by a promise of blessedness. Nay St John in the
beginning of Rev. 1. 2.
that obscure Book of the Revelation asserts, Blessed is he that reads and
hears the words of this prophesit, as if by that assurance of bliss he would
invite every man to the reading of it. Indeed there want not express precepts
Joh. 5. 39.
in this kind; it is our Saviors command concerning the Old Testament, Search
the Scriptures; and Cyr. Alex. in Joh.
says St Cyrill, (...), Christ gives this charge to the people of the Jews:
nor is his assertion without plain proof. For those to whom Christ speaks these
words, were they who sent to John, and Vide Cae^ar. Arelat. Episc. hom. 20. in
Bibli. pat. T. 2.
they who sent the Priests and Levites to John, were the common people of the
Jews: nor are we to imagine this as a peculiar indulgenc^ to the Jews at that
time because of their incredulity, unless a preceding prohibition can appear,
denying the search of the Scriptures to them; which since it is not to be
found, we truly affirm it to Orig. hom. 22. in Es.
be a general mandate. And Origin infers thence an affectionate desire
concerning Christians, Utinam omnes faceremus illud quod scriptum est,
scrutamini scripturas, I would to God we would all follow that command, Search
the Scriptures: S^ Paul speaking of the New Testament, which is most peculiaaly
the Word of Christ, advises the Colossians, and in them all sorts of
Christians, Let it Col. 3. 16. Hieron. ibid.
dwell in you richly in all wisdom: and S^ Hierome notes on that place, In hoc
ostenditur verbum Christi non suffitienter sed abundanter etiam Lai^os habere
debere, Hereby is asserted that the Laity ought to have the Word of Christ in
them not only sufficiently but abundantly: and S^ Chrysostomes exhortation upon
those words is very Chrysostom. hom. 9. in Col.
general, (...), Hear all you that are employed in the things of this life,
get Bibles, at least the New Testament; nor are we to think that the Fathers
zeal transported him so far as to press that as a duty, which yet was not
consonant to reason, or to put the people upon doing what the Church forbad
them.

Both these to wit the reading of the Scriptures to, and by all sorts and ages
of Christians being clear, it will be needless to insist upon the necessity of
translating them into the languages of several Countries, since otherwise the
reading of them to the unlearned would be in vain, and by them impossible.
Indeed when the Church was confined to the nation of the Jews (in whose
language the Old Testament was written) there was no need of translating it;
but since the Christian Church spread over all the world, there have been
various translations of particular parcels, yea the whole Bible into several
languages, that those writings which belong to, may be in some measure
understood by all.

Indeed when we seriously weigh those several metaphors to which the Word is
compared, especially those of a light, and food, and a sword, we may easily
discern of how necessary use it is for all Christians. David calls it a lanthorn
to his feet, and a light to his paths, and surely then there is no traveller to
that celestial Canaan, but has need of this light to direct him in his Psalm.
119. 107.
journey, and discover to him his way. What food is to the body, that is the
Word to the soul; yea it is such as affoards both meat for men, and milk for
babes, according to S^ Paul's distinction. Est in illis (says Saint Aug. ep. 3.
ad Volusian.
Austin of these writings) quod perfectus c^medat, est etiam quod parvulus
sugat; there is in them what the perfect Christian may eat, and what the
weakling may suck. No wonder if that divi^e Poet says of the Holy Scripture,
-- Nullis animis, nullis non congruit annis. Prudent.
it befits all minds and years. Finally, S^ Paul reckoning up the pieces of our
spiritual armor, calls the Word of God, the sword of the Spirit; and of all
weapons, none more common then the sword; no warrior, from the General to the
meanest Officer, nay common Soldier, goes without his sword; and since all of
all ages are engaged to the Christian warfare, there is great reason why this
spiritual sword should be affoarded to them.

By what has been said, the practice of the Church of Rome in withholding the
free use of the Scriptures from the common people appears very unjust and
impious. Look as it is Tyranny in the Commonwealth (to use Chamier's
comparison) which causes jealous Rulers to deprive Cham. de Canone disput.
the people of their Armor; so is it superstition in the Church which denies
ordinary Christians the reading of the Word, which is their best piece of
Armor: Indeed what do they by this means but render the Bible useless,
whilst it is a fountain sealed, or a Treasury locked up, whence no benef^t can
be expected?

The only plausible argument which the Papists urge in defense of this
practice, is that abuse which ignorant and profane persons are apt to make of
the Scriptures, for the patronizing both of errors and vices, whereby it is
that they wrest them to their own perdition.

That thus it too often falls out, is not to be denied, but that therefore the
free use of the Scriptures is to be interdicted, cannot be granted. When S^
Peter tells 2 Pet. 3. 11.
us, that unlearned and unstable souls did wrest many things in St Paul's
Epistles and other Scriptures to their own perdition, he plainly intimates
that there was then given a liberty to the unlearned of reading the Scriptures,
else how could they have wrested them; nor does he from the wresting infer a
prohibition of reading, but only an advice to those to whom he writes, that
they were not led away with the error of the wicked.

To clear this further, you may please to know that,

1. This perverting is only an accidental consequent, not a necessary or
natural effect of reading the Scriptures. St Paul says expressly, The whole
Scripture is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and for
instruction 2 Timothy 3. 15.
in righteousness: for these ends it is intended by God, to these it tends in
its own nature; and if any contrary use be made of these Books, it is an eveut,
but not an effect, and they only a occasion, but no cause.

2. That the accidental evil of what is in it self good, and by its proper
efficacy produces a good, greater or as great as the evil, is no just ground
for the denegation of the good. True it is, evil must not be done that good
may come of it, but it is as true, that good must not be left undone though
evil come of it. The practice of that King was no way commendable, who cut
down all the Vines in his country, because some men were drunk with the wine.
It would be a mad edict which should forbid men their meat and drink, because
many surfeit through excess. Hezechiahs destroying the brazen Serpent because
some men idolized it, had not been justified if there had been the like benefit
by, and use of it in his as in Moses his time. It is an excellent rule of
Tertullian, Multum differt inter causam and culpam, statum and excessum; non
institutio bonae rei sed exorbitatio Tertul. adv. Marc. l. 1.
reprobanda est, to give you the sense of it in short English. The evil abuse
of a good thing is no sufficient cause for the total dis-use, especially where
the use counter vaileth the abuse. That so it is in this present case is
evident, the good which men generally reap by reading the Scriptures being far
greater then the evil which some men occasionally draw from it. If then this
sword which is put into the hand of any Christiah for his defense against his
spiritual adversaries, be by some mad men turned upon their own and others
breasts; the guilt must lie upon the wicked abuser of this sacred weapon, nor
must the rest of Christ's Soldiers be debarred of it.

Indeed, This liberty which I have now pleaded for, must be both given and
taken with a restriction by putting a difference between the reading and
interpreting of Scriptures, every one may read the Bible, and every one must
labor to understand what they read; but every one may not, ought not to
undertake the expounding of it; none may be wise above what is written, nor
must weak novices think themselves so wise, as to interpret what is written:
little Children and young Men must ask the Fathers, private Christians must
enquire of the Pastors and Doctors of the Church, whom God has appointed in a
peculiar manner for that end. Just therefore is that complaint which St Hierome
made of his times; and I would to God it did not fit this present age, whereas
in secular matters every man follows Hieron. Ep. ad Paulin. Horat.
his particular occupation, -- Tractant fabrilia fabri. as the Poets expression
is, The Smith meddleth with his Anvill, the Carpenter with his Rule, the
Shoemaker with his Last, Sola Scripturarum ar^ est quam sibi omne* vendicant,
The profound art of opening Scripture is that which all sorts presume to assume
to themselves. Every prattling Gossip, and doting Fool, and malapert Boy, will
be meddling with the Scriptures, and instead of deviding, mangle it; expounding,
wrest it, taking upon them to teach, whilst yet they have more need to learn.
Politicians say that Anarchie is worse then Tyrany, and it were better to live
where nothing, then where all things are lawful; and truly in the Church it is
hard to determine which is worse, the Papisticall Tyranny of forbidding all to
read, or the Anabaptisticall Anarchie of allowing all to expound the Scriptures.

To cl^st up this, How great is our happiness (did or would we know) who live
in the bosom of such a Church, which as she denies an unjust, so she
indulgeth to us our just liberty; and how great is both our unhappiness and
wickedness, whilst some boldly entrench Aug. Sermon. 5. de Temp.
upon the one, and more carelessly neglect the other. Let it then be the
practice of all both old and young to read these holy writings; think it not
enough to hear them Damasc. de Orthod. Fide. l. 4. c. 18.
read in the Church, but In domibus vestris aut uos legite aut alios legentes
requirite, at home either read them your selves, or cause them to be read to
you; let not any excuse themselves saying, Non sum monachus, I am no monk
seculars are bound to this duty, Non novi literas, I am not book-learned, the
greater thine and thy Parents negligence: and however, thou may obtain to
have them read to thee. And when in reading or hearing these sacred Books you
meet with difficulties, repair to the Priest, whose lips preserve knowledge;
knock once and again by Prayer for the spirit of illumination, and in this case
make use of Solomon's counsel lean not Prove. 2. 5.
to thy own understanding.

These things are written to you Fathers, be not you strangers to them,
exercise your selves in these Books, make them with David your delight, and
your counselors: they are written unto you young Men, follow the Psalmists
counsel, and by taking heed to this word, learn to cleanse your ways. They are
written to you little Children, do you begin to acquaint your selves with them.
It is recorded for the praise 2 Timothy 3. 15. Chrysostom. ibid.
of Timothy, that from a Child (...) from his first years, wherein he was
capable of learning, and instruction, he knew the holy Scriptures. It is
observed that the 119th Psalm is disposed according to the letters of the
Hebrew Alphabet; perhaps to intimate that Children when they began to learn
their Alphabet, should learn that Psalm. The Jews (as Espenc^us In Tim.
a learned Popish Bishop has noted) Filios suos quinquennes ad saera Biblia
adaptabant, began to acquaint their Children at five years of age with the
Bible, and pudeat Christianos, what a shame is it for Christians not to begin
as early as the Jews. It was the charge Ignatius gave to the Parents, that they
should bring up their Children in the nurture of the Lord, and to Ignat. Ep. ad
Philad.
that end, (...), that they should teach them the holy Scriptures. What if
Children cannot for the present understand? yet they can remember what they
read in the Scriptures, and the reading of them makes such impressions upon
their minds, which are of singular use to them afterward; nor is it any
profanation of those holy writings for Children to take them into their
mouths, though they cannot read them with that knowledge and consequently
devotion as is required in, and expected from young Men and Fathers. It is very
unlikely that those Children knew the meaning of Hosanna, whom yet Christ
forbade not to utter it. It is both piety and prudence to deal with little
Children according to their capacity; let them first be accustomed to read, and
then to remember; and by this means in due time they will be brought to
understand and affect those holy writings.

Though withal, prudence advises that in reading there be a graduall order
observed, beginning with such parcels of holy writ as are most necessary and
easy to be known; The Lords Prayer, The Commandments, The Sermon of Christ
upon the Mount, many of the Psalms of David, Proverbs of Solomon, and such like
Portions of Scripture, would first be taught to Children, and young Men would
be advised to be conversant in, not attempting to look into the more dark and
mysterious parts of Scripture, till they have attained by being Catechized, by
hearing Sermons, and other godly helps, some good measure of divine knowledge;
and then in reading what they cannot understand, with humility to admire, and
modesty to enquire into the sense and meaning of such Scriptures.

2. But further, If we refer this (...), I write, to that command of Love which
is prescribed in the preceding Verses, that which is here intimated is, that
Love is such a command as belongs to all sorts of Christians and ages of Men.

1. It belongs to all sorts of Christians, little Children, weak Christians
are obliged to Love: patience under the Cross, joyfullness in tribulation,
spiritualness in duty, and such like qualifications; are not attained till we
come to be young men, nay, Fathers; but Brotherly Love is to be Practiced by,
and is expected of them who are but little Children in Christianity. Indeed
this is one of the first graces which discovers it self in a Saint, and even
then when a weak Christian cannot say I believe in Christ, yet he can say I
Love my Brother. Nor is this duty to be laid aside, when we come to be young
Men, yea, Fathers; strong, yea, perfect Christians; since as we abound in other
graces, so especially we must abound in this; and the perfecting of a
Christian, consists much in the perfecting of his Love. Indeed when many other
graces shall cease, Love shall remain, the great employment of glorified Saints
being to praise God, and Love one another.

2. It belongs to all ages of Men, none but ought to practice and have need to
be admonished of it. The poison of anger and hatred is apt to creep into us
betimes; little Children are prone to fall out, and quarrel and fight one with
another; and young Men being in heat of blood very often boil over with rage;
yea, old Men are apt to be peevish and froward, so that every age stands in
need of this bridle of Love to restrain their passion; one of the first lessons
a little Child is capable of learning is Love; and old Men when they can do
nothing else, yet may Love; it is that grace which is never out of season, it
is that grace which will fit all Sexes, all sizes, all Ages, and is never out
of fashion.

3. Lastly, If we take this (...), I write, as a Preface to the following
dehortation, it implies the general concernment of avoiding worldly Love.

1. It concerns all sorts of Christians: the first part of that duty which
the grace of God teaches is, to deny all ungo^^^iness and worldly lusts.
Self-denial which includes a renouncing of the world, is the first step in
the ladder of Christianity which Christ has erected; and yet withal, it is
that which even young men and fathers grown perfect Christians have need to be
minded of. It is very hard to walk upon snares, and not be entangled; nor have
the best Christians their conversations so in Heaven, but they are apt to be
enamoured with earth; and whilst they find strength to deny ungodliness, they
still find cause to complain of worldly lusts; no wonder if St John write to
all sorts, Love not the world.

2. It concerns all ages. Love of the world is that which begins betimes to
take hold of our hearts; little Children no sooner begin to know any thing, but
they are taken with these present visible sensual Objects: young men that are
as it were entering upon the world, have much to do in it; and no marvel if
they be too much taken with it; nay, which is both strange and usual, old Men
though they are going out of the world, do yet cling in their affections about
the world; herein their minds resemble their bodies, which the older they grow,
still they bow down more toward the earth: one wittily compares them to the
Rivers, which the nearer they come to the Sea, which is their end, the broader
they are, and the more water they suck; oh how greedy are many old Men of this
world, as if they were to run a new race of fourscore years longer, when they
are ready to drop into the Grave? Quo minus viae restat, eo plus viatici
quaerunt; the less way they have to go, the more provision they crave for
their journey. Good reason then had our Apostle, writing about this sin, to
admonish all ages to beware of it. And thus I have given a dispatch to the
second General part of this Scripture, the Act performed. The last and
greatest part yet remains to be diseussed in the following discourses.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 12. I write unto you little Children, because your sins are
forgiven you for his Names sake.
IT was the peculiar prerogative of the Disciples that they were fellows of
Christ's College. It is the common privilege of all Christians that they are
Students Vide Zanch. Miscell. l. 2. de stud. Christ.
in Christ's Church. The studies wherein they are chiefly to be conversant are
two; namely, of Faith and Repentance; how to obtain pardon of sin past, how to
attain strength against sin for the fature. These studies are each of them very
choice and excellent, and withal of that nature, that they cannot be severed:
in vain does he study for pardon who striveth not against sin; and yet it is
not future Obedience will satisfy for former guilt. As therefore we must be
solicitous for grace that sin may be prevented, so we must be studious for
mercy that guilt may be absolved. To help us in both these studies, namely, To
quicken our Repentance, and to strengthen our Faith, is the great design of
our Apostolical Tutor in this Epistle: in reference to the former he says in
the first Verse, These things I write to you that you sin not, and in regard of
the latter he says in the twelfth Verse, I write to you little Children,
because your sins are forgiven.

The Reasons of our Apostles writing to all Christians Part 3.
in general, and each age in particular, are now to be handled.

1. That with which I am to begin is the Reason of his writing to the little
Children, the Christians in general as it is expressed in the close of the
twelfth Verse, Because your sins are forgiven you for his name sake.

For the further discussion whereof, I shall consider it two ways,

As a Consolatory Assertion, Your sins are forgiven you for his names sake.

As an Hortatory Reason, enducing them to observe what he wrote to them, in the
word because.

These words, Your sins are forgiven you for his name Consid. 1.
sake, contain in them an excellent comfort, a singular blessing, concerning
which we are to take notice of its

Quality, sins are forgiven,
Propriety, your sins,
Efficiency, for his name sake.
Of each in order, with all perspicuous brevity, beginning with

1. The Quality of the blessing here assured, forgiveness of sins; it is the
Subject which I have already had occasion to discourse of in the former
Chapter, but considering both the sweetness and the largeness of it, I See
part. 1. p. 290.
could not here pass it by. Remission of sins is so sweet a comfort, that like
a pleasant tune it affects the more by the iteration; and yet withal, it is a
Doctrine of such ample extent, that notwithstanding what has been already
said, there is somewhat still remaining to be said; yea, when I have said all I
can, I must confess my self unable fully to explicate the nature of it. That I
may give you a further account concerning this excellent benefit, you must know
that sin is to be considered three ways, in it self, in reference to God, and
to the sinner.

1. There are two things observable to our present purpose in sin absolutely
considered, to wit; its essence, and its property, the one whereof is
constitutive, and the other consecutive, if it be allowable to make use of
those phrases, when we speak of a privation.

That wherein sin does primarily consist, is the breach of the Laws
prescription; that which does inseparably attend upon it, is its desert of the
Laws curse; now neither of these are properly the Object of forgiveness; and
the reason is plain, because it is impossible, ex natura rei, and such as
implies a contradiction that a sin should not be a breach of the Law, or being
a breach should not deserve the curse. Indeed it is with the forgiven person in
some respects, and as to some accounts quasi, as if his sin were no sin, as if
the Law had never been violated, nor the penalty deserved; the breach shall not
be imputed to, so as that the penalty shall be inflicted on him; but the
forgiven sin is in it self as truly a sin, and as deserving punishment after as
before: it is one thing to acquit a malefactor as not guilty, and another thing
to absolve him from the punishment due to him for his guilt: when God forgiveth
a sinner, he cannot (be it spoken with an holy reverence*) peccatum non
peccatum facere, make a sin to be no sin; and therefore those phrases which
express forgiveness to be a taking away iniquity, so as though sin be sought
for, it cannot be found; yea, a making Crimson, Scarlet sins to be white as
Snow, and wool, are not to be pressed too rigidly, but construed with a
tanquam; sin forgiven is as if it had never been and were utterly extinct.

2. In sin considered with reference to God there are two things further to be
observed, namely, the aversation from, and the offense to God, which are its
concommitants.

1. By sin we run away and wander far from God. Some of the Schoolmen define
it to be an aversion from the Creator to the Creature, and the remedy of this
is not Remission but Conversion; indeed none have their sins forgiven, but they
who turn from their sin to God; yet the turning a sinner from his sin, and the
pardoning to a sinner his sin, are distinct acts.

2. By sin we offend and displease God. Indeed sin being against him cannot but
displease him; and being a breach of his Law must needs incur his wrath,
insomuch that he is both offended with the sin, and the sinner for his sin. Now
in forgiveness.

On the one hand, the offense against the sin is not removed. Not Gods
toleration, no nor yet his absolution is any approbation. Gods pure nature
cannot but hate sin, and that in those to whom he forgiveth it; far be it from
us to imagine, that whilst God punishes the sins of the wicked, he is well
pleased with the sins of believers; sin in whomsoever it is cannot but offend
Gods holiness.

But yet on the other hand, The displeasure against the sinner is taken away,
and every forgiven sinner is in a state of Reconciliation. To this purpose it
is that we find those two are joined together, (...), and (...), God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing their trespasses, (...),
2 Cor. 5. 19.
and (...), he has graciously accepted us, and we have forgiveness of sins, so
that sin being forgiven, the sinner is reconciled to God. Ephesians. 1. 6, 7.


And yet this must be understood with a distinction of Gods anger, into
judicial and paternal; when God forgiveth sin, he is no longer angry as a
Judge, but still he has a Fatherly anger, whereby it is that he ofttimes
corrects those whom he forgiveth. True it is, those corrections which God
inflicts on forgiven sinners, are called Judgments, but not because they are
laid upon them by him as a Judge (as a late Writer inconsiderately glosseth)
but because they are moderated with Judgment; in which notion Judgment is
opposed to judicial anger, as appears by the Prophets prayer, Oh Lord correct
me, but with judgment, not in anger. To this purpose it is very observable
that S Paul says, When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, not when
we are chastened, we are 1 Cor. 11. 32.
judged, where the (...), plainly notes the chastisement of a Child by his
Father, so that the Apostles manifest assertion is, Whatsoever Judgment
befalls Believers for their sins, they are only the chastisements of a Father,
and so far distant from and preventive of the punishment of condemnation which
he inflicts upon the world as a Judge: and therefore we need not doubt that
when sin is forgiven, Gods judicial anger is appeased.

3. Lastly, In sin considered with reference to the sinner, there are three
things further observable; the spot defiling, the guilt oblieging, and the
punishment attending.

1. The spot or blot of sin is either in respect of the person who is thereby
deprived of that state of innocence and purity wherein before he was, or in
regard of the nature which is bereaved of that excellency and beauty which
before it had. The former of these can never be taken away, it being impossible
to affirm of one who has sinned, that he is an innocent person; for that were
to say he is one who never sinned; even of those who are glorified Saints in
heaven, it must be acknowledged that they were sinners upon earth, so that in
this respect Adam before his fall had that innocence which cannot be attributed
to those who are invested with glory. The latter of these is that which is
removed not by remission, but renovation; justification, but sanctification,
and therefore till sanctification be complete, is not perfectly taken away.

2. The guilt obliging is that whereby the sinner is actually bound to undergo
the punishment due to him by the Law, and passed on him by the Judge for the
breach of it. This is that which is called by the Schools the extrinsecal guilt
of sin, to distinguish it from the intrinsecal, which is included in the
deordination of the act, and which (as is already affirmed) is inseparable from
the sin; and if you would know wherein the nature of forgiveness immediately
and primarily consists, it is in the taking of this obligation, and discharging
the sinner from it. Hence it is that the pardoned sinner Psalm. 51. 8.
is said not to be under the Law, that is not under the curse, the sentence of
condemnation belongs not to him. Isa. 45. 25.
According to this notion all Scripture phrases are to be construed, by which
forgiveness is expressed: God Mic. 7. 19.
when he forgiveth sin, is said to cover them, to remember Heb. 16. 12.
them no more, to cast them behind his back, throw them into the depth of the
sea, blot them out as a cloud, hide his face, turn away his face from them; by
all which expressions, we are not to think that God does not know, se^, take
notice of, or that seeing, he is not displeased with such sins, and believers
for them; but that he will not so take notice of them, as to enter into
judgment with the persons for them; so that the forgiven sinner is free from
obligation of the punishment, as truly, as surely, as fully, as perfectly free,
as if he had never committed the sin, but were altogether innocent: in which
regard we may say with the Poet, Quem p^nite^ peccasse pene est innocens, He
that is paenitent, and so pardoned, is in a manner innocent, to wit Sen. Trag.
in respect of his exemption from any obligation to the curse of the Law,
otherwise due to him for his sin.

3. And then which follows upon the former; there is the punishment it self.

To open which briefly* know,

1. That punishment is a natural consequent of sin, (...), vengeance dogs the
sinner at the heels, the Hebrews by one word express both, they are so near a
kin; if thou do ill (faith God to Cain) sin, (that is the punishment of sin)
lies a^ the door, ready Genesis 4. 7.
to seize upon thee.

2. That punishment which is the attendant on sin Mat. 22. 12. 18. 36.
extensively reaches to all the miseryes which men endure, but especially to
the torments of the other world, as appears by the sentence denounced against
the intruding guest, and the uncharitable servant, which chiefly respect the
estate of the damned, and contain in them allegorical descriptions of hell.

3. Finally, This punishment is not only for a time withheld, but wholly taken
away when sin is forgiven; a reprieve only suspends and deferr^s, but a pardon
takes off, and prevents ^^e execution. That which is most principally the
punishment, to wit of the damned, shall never be inflicted, and whatsoever
miseries and afflictions may befall a pardoned sinner, though they are See this
enlarged in p^. 1 p. 294, 295.
materially, yet they are not formally punishments, because not for
satisfaction of offended justice.

And thus, with what brevity this weighty point would admit, I have discovered
to you the nature of this mercy; and surely by what has been said, we may
easily see how precious a blessing it is, as being eminently the Queen of
mercies, the Ocean of blessings, the Quintessence of comforts, and vertually
all blessings whatsoever we can stand in need of, or long after. Till sin be
forgiven, no good can be expected, and therefore they are put together. Take
away all iniquity, and do Hos. 14. 3.
us good: either God withholds mercy, or else the mercy proves a curse to the
unpardoned sinner; sin being forgiven, there is no evil which we need to fear,
not Gods wrath, not the Laws curse, not Satan's malice, not Hels torments; when
the Angel said of Jesus, He shall save his people from their sins, he implies
Mat. 1. 21.
salvation from all evils, which are the proper effects of sin: since according
to that known Maxim, Sublata causa tollitur effectus, the cause being removed,
the effects cannot but cease. And as there is no evil which we need fear, so
neither is there any good which we may not hope. Zanchy observes Zanch. in loc.
upon the Text, that by a Synecdoche forgiveness of sins is here put for all
blessings: sure I am, all good goes along with pardoning mercy: it is not so
in men's pardons, the forgiven malefactor is not therefore received into favor,
or advanced to honor: but grace and glory, yea, all blessings attend those
whom God forgiveth. Indeed it is only sin which stops the current of mercy, no
wonder then if sin being removed mercy flows in a pace. Reconciliatio^ to,
acceptance with God, both of our persons and services, freedom of access to
the throne of grace, and a merciful audience of our Prayers, supplies of all
needful comforts, and a turning of all afflictions to our good; Finally, the
sonship now, and the inheritance hereafter, do all belong to him whose s^ns are
forgiven. Excellently Fulgent. de Remiss. peccat. l. 1. c. 4.
Fulgentius to our present purpose, Non de re parva disserimus, nec vile
aliquid quaerimus cum de remissione peccatorum disputamus, it is not a light
matter, an unworthy Subject we discourse of, when we speak of Remission of
sins; by this we are freed from eternal punishment, that we may enjoy eternal
bliss, by this that weight of ^^n which either by nature or life has been
contracted, is removed, and Christ gives ease to the weary and laden; by this
the ungodly is freely justi^^ed, his faith being accounted to him for
righteousness. Finally, by Remission of sins men are graciously differenced
from those who shall be eternally tormented with, and by the Devil, and joined
to those who shall eternally reign with Christ: Oh then (according to Ferus his
Fer. in loc.
pious counsel) Hoc ipsum pro maximo dono and gratia repetimus: let us esteem
this the highest favor, and the greatest gift whereof we can be partakers; and
withal, labor we to be among that number to whom this privilege belongs. And
so I am fallen on the

Propriety of the Persons in the word, your. Forgiveness Part 2.
of ^^ns, as you have already heard, is a great, but withal it is a special
blessing. There are some benefits which are common to elect and reprobate, good
and bad; such is that whereby God does spare sinners, and withholds the
execution of punishment from them: for so St Paul speaks of goodness and
forbearance to those Romans 2. 5.
who d^sp^se it. But then there are peculiar benefits which are the portion
only of the good so conferred o^^, as that they a^^ confined to the regenerate,
among which is this o^ ^^rgiveness, and therefore it is said here your sins.

Forgiveness of sins may be considered three ways;

1. In the decree and purpose of it, which was before the beginning of the
world, from all eternity.

In the plenar^ completion and open publication of it which shall not be till
the end of the world, when time shall be no more.

In the particular application of it to several persons which is time by time
in this present world, and is not vouchsafed to any till they are regenerated.

To unfold this more fully, take this your both exclusive and inclusive, by way
of restriction and enlargement, yours, that is, none but yours, yours, that is,
all your sins are forgiven

1. Yours and none but your sins are forgiven. This bread of life is for Sons,
not Slaves; this kiss of Love is for Favorites, not Rebels; this Sunbeame of
mercy for the Children of the Day, not the Night. Indeed we must distinguish
between the collation and the oblation, the conferring and the offering of this
benefit; forgiveness of sins is offered to all, upon the condition of believing
and repenting, but bestowed only upon them who actually believe and repent: and
therefore in the publication of this mercy, Ministers must write a bill of
divorce to all wicked sinners, that so (according to Jer. 25. 10.
Gods command) they may separate the precious from the vile, and in the
Applica^io^ of it, every one must take heed lest he too rashly, hastily, and
presumptuously lay hold upon it. Blessed is that man (says the Psalmist) whose
sins are forgiven; ey but miserable is Psalm. 32. 1.
that man who thinks his ^^ns forgiven when they are not; yea, he is so much
the more miserable, because he thinks himself happy; We need to be very
cautelous how we pass the sentence of absolution, and you have no less reason
to be careful how you ^pply the promises of pardon least a vain presumption ^f
mercy betray you to endless misery.

2. Yours and all your s^ns are forgiven you, whither Fathers, or young Men, or
little Children: That is

1. In a literal sense, little Children having received Baptismall
regeneration, are cleansed from their Original sin; young Men turning to God,
have the folli^s of their Childhood pardoned; yea, to Fathers repenting the
sins of their former ages shall not be mentioned.

2. In a spiritual notion, not only strong but weak Christians are capable of
this benefit: I will remember Heb. 18. 12.
their iniquities no more, is a branch of the n^w Covenan^, and truth of grace
entituleth us to the Covenant. Indeed we must distinguish between the collation
and the manifestation of this mercy, Christians whilst they are but novic^s are
weak in faith, nor can they clearly apprehend that their sins are forgiven,
but still the benefit no less truly belongs to them, then to gro^n Saints.

As then before I dissuaded the wicked from presumption, so now I must warn
the weak of despair, those are too apt to lay hold upon, and these are too
ready to refuse pardon, nor is it more hard to driv^: these from, then to draw
those to eat of this tree of life. But tell me oh drooping soul, Why do thou
frowardly put that comfort far from thee, which truly belongs to thee? though
thou art a stripling, yet thou art a Child, Why should thou distrust thy
Fathers clemency? True thy weakness exposes thee to oftener faylings, but does
not debar thee from merciful indulgence, which as it is confined only, so it
is extended to all the Children of God.

3. The efficiency of the benefit comes last to be considered, as it is
expressed in those words, for his names sake: f^^ the better explication of
which I shall briefly discuss it both Negatively and Affirmatively.

1. Not for your own sakes, Sin is not forgiven without our desiring, God will
have us ask, and seek, and knock for it, it is one of the petitions our
Savior teaches us to use in his Prayer, Forgive us our trespasses; but still
it is without our deserving, their being nothing that is, or can be done by us
in order to forgiveness, which is in the least degree meritorious of it. Do we
confess, bemoane, and forsake our sins? these are no compensations of the wrong
we have offered by them to the divine Majesty; our sins deserve punishment, but
ou^ sorrow cannot satisfy for the offense, nay, could we for the future
perform exact unsinning obedience, it is no more then what we are bound to
observe, and therefore no satisfaction for the former breaches of the Law. It
is not then any thing in us which induces God by way of merit to confer a
pardon on us when he forgiveth sin,

2. For his names sake: where the (...), may have a double reference, either to
God, or Christ; nor is it much material to whom we refer it; indeed insomuch
as Christ is the Proxime antecedent* and withal it is usual with our Apostle,
to speak of Christ in the third person by one or other of these pronouns, it is
most probably referred to Christ, but yet I shall take in both considerations,
as being neither improbable, nor unprofitable.

1. For his, that is, Gods names sake, it is that which Allmighty God himself
asserts in this very particular by the Prophet Isaiah, I even I am ^e that
blotteth Isai. 45. 25.
out your iniquities for my name sake, and accordingly it is that argument by
which David pleads with Psalm. 25. 11.
God for remission, For thy names sake pardon my iniquities. And according to
this reference, name may be taken in a double construction.

1. It is a very usual notion by name to understand honor and glory; when God
says to David, I have made thee a name like the name of men that are in the
earth; when the Church says to God, thou did get thee a name as it is this
day; it is manifest that by name, glory is intended. Suitable to this it is,
that famous men are called by the Hebrews, (...) and by the Latins,
Virinominum, Men of name, in which sense the Poet Genesis 6. 4.
adorneth it with these Epithets, -- Magnum and memorabile nomen, of great and
memorable. Thus when God forgiveth sin, he does it for his names sake, that is
for his own honor and glory. Indeed Gods own glory is the ultimate end of all
his actions, as he is the first, so he is the last, the efficient and the
final cause, nor is any thing done by him which is not for him. The end of our
actions must be his glory, because both our being and working is from him, but
the end of his work is his own glory, because his being and acting is of and
from himself.

Among all divine works, there is none which more sets forth his glory then
this of remission: sin by committing it, brings God a great deal of dishonor,
and yet by forgiving it, God raises to himself a great deal of honor: it is
the glory of a man, and much more of God to pass by an offense; as acts of
power, so acts of grace are exceeding honorable. The attributes of Gods grace,
mercy, goodness, clemency, shine forth in nothing so much as in pardoning sins.
St Paul speaks of riches, of goodness which attend Gods forbearance; how much
greater riches must there needs be in forgiveness? nay, indeed God has so
ordered the way of pardon, that not only the glory of his mercy, but justice;
yea, of his wisdom in the wonderful contemperation of both these is very
illustrious, Nomen quasi not a men, quia notificat. The name is that which
makes one known, and by remission of sins, God makes known his choice and
glorious attributes, and for this end it is that he vouchsafes it.

It is a consideration that may be our consolation. Since God forgiveth sins
for his names sake, he will be ready to forgive many sins, as well as few,
great as small; indeed the more and greater our sins are, the greater ^s the
forgiveness, and consequently the greater is Gods glory: and therefore David
upon this consideration of Gods name and glory, makes the greatness Psalm. 25.
11.
of his iniquity a Motive of forgiveness. Indeed to run into gross sins that God
may glorify himself by forgiving them is an odious presumption, but to hope
that those gross sins we have run into, may, and will be forgiven by God to us,
being truly penitent for his names sake, is a wellgrounded expectation, and
such as may support our spirits against the strongest temptations to despair.

2. By Gods name in Scripture is sometimes understood Ps. 119. 55, 132.
his word, when David says, I have remembered thy name oh Lord in the night,
and again, Look upon me and be merciful unto me as thou usest to do unto them
that love thy name: No doubt we are most congruously to understand by it Gods
Word, of which he discourses throughout the Psalm. And indeed so primarily
does Psalm. 138. 2.
this title of name agree to the word that the Psalmist says to God, Thou have
magnified thy word above all thy name, and in this acceptance the sense is,
that God forgiveth sins for his words sake. He has been pleased 1 John 1. 9.
to oblige himself by promise (which he cannot falsify) to pardon the sins of
his Children, in which respect our Apostle says in the former Chapter, He is
Sec. the first part.
faithful to forgive; and indeed both these acceptions of name are involved,
are within the other since, God forgiveth sins for his words sake, because his
glory is concerned in making good his word.

2. For his, that is, Christ's names sake, and thus there is again a double
construction of the word name, to wit, for person, and ^or power.

1. Name is sometimes taken for the person, thus where it is said, the number
of the Christians was an hundred and twenty names; and again, Thou ^^st ^ (...)
names in Sardis, it is manifestly meant of perso^^* Acts 1. 15.
suitable to this is that of the Poet, -- Nomina magna, for great persons, and
often in Livie, Nomen Latimum, Rev. 2. 3.
Romanum, for a Latin a Roman: and thus frequently in Scripture, the name of
the Lord and Joel 2. 32.
Christ is as much as God and Christ. Calling upon the Lord, is sometimes
expressed by calling on the name of the Job 1. 21.
Lord, and blessed be the Lord, by blessed be the name of Acts 4. 12.
the Lord. When St Peter says there is no name under Heaven but the name of
Christ, he explaineth it in the preceding clause of the person, neither is
there salvation in any other, and when Christ speaks of for saking houses,
land for his names sake, of being hated of all Mark 9. 37.
men for his names sake, of receiving his little ones for his names sake, it is
as much as for his sake. In this sense we may take it here, and it lets us see
in, and through whom remission is vouchsafed; namely, ^n and through Christ,
commission of sin came in by the f^rst Ad^^, Ephesians. 1. 11. 4. ult.
and remission by the second: so St Paul expressly, In whom we have redemption
even the forgiveness of ^^^ sins, and again, God for Christ's sake has forgiven
you.

2. Name is very frequently taken for power and strength, In thy name (that is,
by thy power) we will Psalm. 44 5. 1* Sam. 17. 45.
tread down our enemies, says the Church. I come against thee in the name
(that is, in the might) of the Lord of Hoasts: so David to Goliath* In the name
(that is, in the strength) of Jesus Christ of Nazareth arise Acts 3. 6. Matthew.
16. 17.
and walk* says the Apostle to the ^^ipple. Finally, In my name (that is, in
my might says Christ) t^^ shall cast out Devils. In this sense it may well be
^^^-^red here, and so the meaning is, that through the virtue and power of
Christ this benefit of remission is obtained: so Carthusian glosseth, virtute
and merito Christi, by the virtue and merit of Christ. Indeed Carthus. in loc.
there is a double power in Christ procuring forgiveness; the one of merit, and
that is in his Passion which satisfied Gods justice for our sins; the other of
entreaty, and that is in his Intercession which pleads with God for sinners.
By the one, remission is purchased for, and by the other it is applied to us.
For his names sake, for the Merit of that Blood which he shed, by the efficacy
See part 1. p. 208. and p. 354.
of that Intercession which he ever makes, our sins are forgiven, both which I
have already had occasion to discuss.

To wind it up therefore

1. In a sorrowful sense of our manifold sins learn we

1. To call on, to ask in the name of Christ for this mercy of forgiveness: it
was the assurance our Savior gave his Disciples, (and in them us) That
whatsoever they did ask the Father in his name should be given to them. When
ever then we put up any Prayer to God, and especially this petition for
Remission; let us be sure to present it in Christ's name: it was in Esaus name
that Jacob got the blessing, so must we this blessing of pardon in Christ's name.

2. To trust in this name of Christ, as that which will Prove. 18. 10.
undoubtedly procure our pardon, The name of the Lord (says Solomon) is a
strong tower, the righteous run unto it (to wit, for protection) and are safe*
The name Acts 10. 43.
of Christ (may I say) is a strong tower, and the sinners, penitent sinners run
to it, (to wit, for remission) and are glad. Through his name (says the
Apostle Peter concerning Christ) whosoever believes in him shall receive
Remission of sins. All other props are bruised Reeds, only the name of Christ
is a strong Buckler to them who trust on it* Indeed whatever confidence is
placed on God himself, his merciful and gracious nature, for Remission of
sins; if it be not with reference to Christ's name and merit, it will prove but
a vain hope, since there is no mercy to be expected from God, but only through
Christ; and surely much more vain will all that confidence prove, which is
built upon the rotten foundation of our own righteousness, which is so far from
being available to procure the forgiveness of our sins, that it self has those
sins accompanying it which need to be forgiven.

2. In a comfortable sense of the Remission of our sins, learn we to give unto
Christ the glory due to his name. Per cujus nomen, says the Father upon the
Text, Through whose name are your s^ns forgiven? Through the name of Austin or
Donatus; no, (who is Augustine? Aug. in loc.
or who is Donatus?) nor yet through the name of Paul or Peter, but only the
name of Christ; and therefore not to us, not to us oh blessed Jesus, not to our
Prayers or tears, not to our confessions or good works, but to thy name and
merit be the glory of this grace whereby our sins are forgiven.

Having given you this account of the first consideration Consid. 2.
of the words, to wit, as they are a consolatory assertion it remains that I
now proceed in a few words to the other, which is

As they are an Hortatory reason for so much the causall particle implies, I
write to you, because your sins are forgiven you for his names sake, and here
we shall take in the threefold reference of the Act.

1. I write this whole Epistle, the chief scope whereof is to persuade holiness
of life; because for Christ's sake your sins are forgiven. Gods mercy in
remitting sin, should not make us the more licentious in committing sin,
because our old score is wiped off, far be it from us to encourage our selves
to run upon a new one: no rather, since God for Christ's sake is so gracious as
to wash away our former sins, we should be the more watchful least we defile
our selves again. What servant will not in reason think himself obliged to
serve his Master so much the more faithfully, when he has passed over his
former negligence, riot, and dishonesty, and is not the case the same between
God and us; it is true with ill minded and perverse natures, the forgiving of
past injuries is an invitation to another, but that which clemency leads to,
and works upon an ingenuous spirit, is a care not to offend any more.

2. I write to dissuade you from the love of the world, because your sins are
forgiven you for his names sake, Pudeat quod factum infectum reddere: so Beza.
Why Beza in loc.
should you ungratefully undo what God has mercifully done? Those sins are
remitted to you, which whilst you loved the world, were admitted by you. Oh
take heed that you do not forfeit your pardon by running into the same sins
again, Vos am^te dimissorem iniquitatum vestrarum, so St Austin, You are Aug.
ibid.
bound to love him who has forgiven you your s^ns. So our Savior says of
Mary Magdalen, Much was forgiven L^ke 7. 47.
her, for (which is no doubt there as much as therefore) she loved much, and
Quomodo poterimus amare Deum si ama^us mundum? How can we love God if we love
the world? Can the world do that for us which Christ has done? It draws you
into many sins; but it cannot obtain the pardon of one sin. Oh then shall we
not adhere to Christ, for whose sake our sins are forgiven, and forgo the world?

3. Lastly, and principally, I write to you this Commandment of loving your
Brother, because your sins are forgiven for his names sake. Indeed it is that
which this argument presses in three several ways.

1. In a way of imitation, the Brethren are Gods Darlings, he loves all men so
far as to forbear them, but he loves them so as to forgive them; and surely
fit it i^, that where God forgiveth, we should; and whom he loves, we should*
Besides God loves us so as to forgive us, and forgiving, to give all blessings
to us, and shall not we be merciful, and kind, and loving to one another after
his pattern.

2. In a way of Gratulation, Thus Na^gorgeus urges Naogorg. in loc.
it. So great a benefit as forgiveness, Facile persuadet ut e^ benefaciamus,
strongly persuades that we should return somewhat to him, who, and for whose
sake we are forgiven, Non Christo quidem sed membris, this we cannot to him in
himself, but in his Members; Quibus ille jussit, To whom he has commanded us
to show our affections. Indeed the good Christian cannot but thus reason with
himself. If God has at my request forgiven me pounds, and given me Talents,
shall not I at his command forgive my Brother pence, and give him Mites? That
love he has showed to me is infinitely surpassing that love which he expected
I should show to my Brother. So that it is impossible for him who is truly
affected with his Fathers goodness not to be inflamed with Brotherly kindness;
as therefore the cold stone or iron being warmed by the ^ire casts forth and
reflects that heat which it has received, upon that which is adjacent to it;
So does the sincere Christian reflect the heat of Gods Love which is shed
abroad in his heart, and sheds it abroad in Love to his Brethren.

3. In a way of Impetration. The comfort of this benefit of forgiveness lies
in the knowledge of it. Indeed whosoever has his sins forgiven is Really, but
he only who is assured that they are forgiven is sensibly blessed* A well
grounded assurance cannot be obtained, but by finding those graces wrought in
us, which accompany Remission, amongst which, this of Brotherly Love is not the
least. If I can justly say, That I Love my Brother for his names sake, then,
and not till then, I can comfortably say, My sins are forgiven for his names
sake When therefore we find these passions of hatred, envy, ^^lice, and
uncharitableness to boil in our hearts against others, for those injuries
which either they have, or at least we concei^e they have offered to us: What
better Antidote can we use, then a serious meditation of Gods free and full
underserved and unmeasutable Love toward us, notwithstanding our manifold sins
against him? Which that we may duly imitate, for which, that we may be truly
thankful, and of which, that we may be comfortably assured it concerns us:
and accordingly St John writes to us to Love the Brethren.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 13, 14. VERSE. I write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him
that is from the beginning. I write unto you young Men, because ye have
overcome the wicked one. I write unto you little Children, because ye have
known the Father. I have written unto you Fathers, because you have known him
that is from the beginning. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are
strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have over come the wicked
one.
PHilosophy not unfitly distinguishes of a threefold natural Life,
Vegetative, Sensitive, Rational. The first discovers it self by growth, and
Augmentation. The second by Motion and Sensation. The third by Discourse and
Ratiocination. The first is only in Plants, the first and second in Beasts, all
three in Man: nor would it be passed by, how Man does as it were gradually put
forth these several Lives, living in the Womb the life of growth; so soon as
he comes into the World the life of sense, and after the expiration of some
years, beginning to live the life of reason.

And as thus there are three Lives, so there are three Ages of Man's life, which
are to be reckoned from that time he begins to act as a man, and make use of
his reason; Namely, Childehood, Youth, old Age; Our life is a day, whereof
Childehood is the Morning, Youth the Noon, and old Age the Evening. After which
succeeds the night of death: our life is a journey which consists of three
Stages, Childehood, wherein we go up hill; Youth, in which we run forward; and
old Age, in which we run down hill to the Grave. Finally, Our Childehood is as
a budding Spring, our Youth as a flourishing Summer, our old Age as a withering
Autumn, after which follows the Winter of death. With all these our Apostle
has here to do; and as every one of them is capable of instruction, he
directs his writing to them, not only jointly bu^ severally; in the words now
read, I write to you Fathers, because ye have known, etc.

The particular Reasons why our Apostle wrote to every one of these Ages, do
yet remain to be discussed; and before I enter upon them in particular, there
are two things I will briefly premise:

1. That two of them are repeated, namely, that which respects Fathers and
young Men, whereas that to little Children is only once mentioned, and if we
well view it, we shall find there might be good cause for the Iteration of
them, and so no need to blame the Scribe, as if the fourteenth Verse were
beedlesly added.

Besides that one, namely, that which concerns young Men is not a naked
Repetition, but withal an Amplification; there is a double reason maybe
assigned, why he writes to Fathers, and young Men twice, and but once to
Children.

1. Because his discourse was principally intended for Fathers, young Men; look
as in our Preachings though sometimes occasionally we instruct little Children;
yet we must frequently direct our discourse to those who are drawn up to years
of discretion; so no doubt our Apostle designed this Epistle for, and therefore
directs his writing to the young and old Christians.

2. Because the things about which our Apostle writes are such which young
Men, and Fathers have more need to be minded of then little Children. There is
not so great danger of little Childrens being infected with the world, because
they know not what belongs to it; whereas young Men having so much employments
in, are apt to be entangled with the world, and old Men having been so long
acquainted with, cannot easily weane their affections from it. Little Zanch. in
loc.
Children are not so sensible of injuries, and therefore not so apt to be
enraged with hatred as young Men and Fathers are: No marvel if he write again
and again inculcating the argument, by which he would persuade them to Love
their Brother, and dissuade them from the Love of the World.

2. That all of them are laudatory Characters, commending that good which he
observed in them, the Fathers for their knowledge of Christ, the young Men for
their victory and spiritual strength, and the little Children for their
knowledge of the Father. A fit pattern for all Ministers, for all Superiors,
yea, for all to follow. Indeed to flatter bad men in their sins is abominable;
God pronounces a curse against such Prophets, who daube with untempered
Mortar, and by their smooth language strengthen the hands of evil doers; but
to commend good men for their graces is commendable, and has not only the
pattern of the Apostle, but of Christ and God himself to warrant it.

The truth is, Praise is a due debt to Virtue, and therefore it is an act of
Justice: it is not unfitly observed, that our Apostle joyneth these two
together, If there be any virtue, If there be any praise, to intimate, Phil. 4.
7.
that praise ought to attend on virtue. Nor is it only a debt, but a spur,
and therefore an act of prudence. When a good man is commended, others are
encouraged, and si non amore virtutis, at dilectione laudis accenduntur, many
have been allured with the Love of praise, whom the Love of virtue could not
Gr. Mag. Mor.
persuade: however the person himself being commended is thereby animated, nor
is it unlawful for men to be Moved in a subordinate way with a desire of
praise, and much respect. St Bernard upon those words in the Bern Sermon. 47. ex
parv.
Proverbs, Have thou found honey? Eat so much as is sufficient for thee, says
Potest in hoc lo^o non incongrue mellis nomine favor humanae laudis intelligi,
in this place by honey may be understood not unfitly the favor of humane
praise, Meritoque non ab omni sed ab immoderato ed^lio prohibemur, nor are we
prohibited all, but only an immoderate desire of glory: No wonder then if the
Ministers of Christ whom he has appointed Fishers of men among others make use
of this bait of praise, that commendation may make way for their commands, and
a well- done may encourage their Auditors to do better. This no doubt was the
design of St John, that by this Artifice of praise, his instructions might
have the stronger influence upon them to whom he writes.

Come we now to the several Reasons by which he bespeaketh the several Ages:

1. The first respects the Aged Fathers to whom he wrote, because they knew him
who was from the beginning, as it is expressed in the thirteenth and fourteenth
Verses.

In handling of this Character I shall consider the goodness and the fitness of
it; the goodness of it in it self, by inquiring what it means; and the
fitness of it, both to the Subjects to whom, and the Objects about which our
Apostle wrote.

1. Consider we this Character in it self, and we shall find it not only good
but excellent. Indeed in this one there are two Characters, to wit, of Christ
and the Christian, which offer themselves to our view; of Christ, that he is
from the beginning; of the Christian, that he knows him, who is from the
beginning: of each in order.

1. Our Apostle here affirms concerning Christ that he is from the beginning.
Indeed Illyricus refers Illyr. in loc.
this to God, who is said to be from everlasting to everlasting, and to inhabit
eternity: and is called by Clemens Cl. Al. p^d. l. 2. c. 3.
Alexandrinus, (...) and (...), the most ancient of all things, because before
all things, yea, the Creator. And sutably Plato putting the question, What is
the most ancient thing? answers, God. But I conceive it is most suitable to
the Apostles scope to understand Calv. in loc. Aret. in loc. Zanch. in loc.
it with Calvin, Aretius, and the most, nay, best Interpreters, of Christ. And
thus (as Zanchy well observes) this may be asserted of him in a double
respect, quo ad virtutem salvi^^cam, and quo ad personam: in respect of
virtuall efficacy, and personal subsistence.

1. Christ is from the beginning, to wit, ordained Rev. 13. 8.
and purposed to be the Mediator of his Church, in which sense he is called
the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. Whence it is that though he
dyed in the fullness of time, yet the virtue of his death as it extends
forward to the end, so backward to the beginning of the world.

2. But principally, Christ is said to be from the beginning, inasmuch as his
subsistence is from eternity; to wit, in respect not of his humane, but divine
nature. Thus St Austin appositely, novus Christus in Aug. in loc.
carne, sed antiquus in divinitate, Christ as to his manhood Oecumen. ib.
is new, but as to his Godhead ancient: and Oecumenius expressly, (...), who
is it Joh. 1. 1. Isa. 9. 6. Mic. 5. 3.
that is from the beginning but God the Word? In this respect justly is the
Messiah called by the Prophet Isay, the everlasting Father; and the Prophet
Micah says of him who was to be born in Bethlehem, that his goings forth have
been of old from everlasting. Upon this account the Author to the Hebrews
asserts him to be Heb. 13. 8. Anselm. ibid.
yesterday, to day, and the same for ever; where says Anselm, by yesterday is
denoted the time past, and the vast space of eternity preceding; by to day the
time present; and by for ever that which is to come. Finally, unto this that
metaphorical Character which our Apostle gives of Christ, is plainly to be
referred, where he says his head (that is his Divinity, so Pererius) Rev. 1.
12. Perer. ibid.
and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow, to which in regard of
its antiquity, for so Daniel calling Dan. 7. 9.
God the ancient of days, presently adds, the hair of his head was like pure
wool, namely for whiteness, which is the badge of old age. Not to enlarge upon
this point because it is only collateral in the Text, I shall in a few words
discuss these two propositions which are plainly intimated in this clause, and
clearly, expressed in Scripture.

1. That Jesus Christ had a being before he was born of the Virgin Mary; indeed
he then began to be man, but he did not then begin to be, when his Mother
conceived and brought him forth into the world. It was our blessed Saviors
positive assertion concerning himself, Before Abraham wa^ I am, and if he had a
being before Abraham, certainly he did not begin to be when he Joh. 8. 58.
was made man: That this was the meaning of our Savior, is clear in that it is
returned by him, as an Answer to the Jews Objection, which is manifestly drawn
from the short date of his personal existence, Thou art not yet fifty years
old, and have thou seen Abraham, to v. 57. Aug. in Joh. tract. 48. Phil. 2. 6,
7.
which Christ's words cannot be a full Answer, if they intend not that he had a
personal being before Abraham, and so no wonder if Abraham were known to him;
and that the Jews so understood him, is evident, in that they took up stones
to cast at him, as conceiveing him a blasphemer, in so saying, upon which
accoun^ the Father says excellently; Ecce Judaei intellexerunt quod non
intelligunt Arriani, Behold the Jews understood that which the Arrians will
not, but fondly and impiously endeavor to obscure. Very con^^derable upon this
account is that of St Paul, where he says that being, (or according to the
force of the (...)) subsisting in the form of God, he took upon him the form
of a servant; whence it plainly follows, that before he took upon him the
form of a servant, he had a subsistence. It is not unworthy our observation to
this purpose* that Christ when he was incarnate, is said to come down from
heaven, and to come forth from the Father; whereby is manifestly employed, that
before his incarnation, he was in heaven, and in the bosom of his Father. Joh.
1. 14. Gal. 4. 4.
Thus when we read, The Word was made flesh, and God sent his Son into the
world, it is evident that he was the Word and the Son before, else how could
he be capable of assuming flesh, and being sent into the world. It is a clear
maxim, nothing can be predicated of nothing; so that if he were not at all,
till he was made flesh and sent, it could not be predicated of him that he was
made flesh, or that he was sent by the Father.

2. But further, That being which Jesus Christ had before his incarnation was,
(...), from the beginning, which we cannot better expound, then by that (...),
in the beginning, which we meet with in the Gospel, and so the sense is, that
when the world began to be, Christ was, and so consequently from eternity,
because before all time.

Express to this purpose is that prayer of our Savior, Joh. 17. 5.
Father glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was; the genuine plain doctrine whereof is, that Christ
had a glory (and therefore a co-existence) with his Father before the world
was. I am not ignorant how that Samosatenian and Socinian Heretics interpret
this only of Gods eternal purpose to glorify his Son, after he had finished
his work upon earth. And truly it is worth our noting, how absurdly these
pretended Masters of reason construe (as others) so this Scripture; whilst
they would have us to believe, that when Christ positively says he had this
glory with his Father before the world was; he only means by it, that his
Father decreed before the world was he should have this glory; and so that
which is averred of actual possession, must only signify an intentional
preparation, when yet it had been as easy for Christ to have said (if he had
meant no more) the glory which thou have prepared for me before the world was;
yea whenas both Christ and his Apostles where they would express the decree of
glory, still use the phrases of prepared, and laid up, and such Mat. 25. 34.
like.

No less does it tend to the confirmation of this truth, that the Evangelist
says concerning Christ, All things Col* 1. 5.
are made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made; and
therefore St Paul having asserted that all things were created by him and for
him presently adds, and he is before all things. Indeed as Tertullian
strongly argues, Non potuit c^rere substantia, Tertul. in prax.
quod tantas substantias fe^it, he that gave being to all things, could not
himself want a being, and if all creatures receive their essence and existence
from him, he must needs be before them. It would not be passed by to what a
shift the forenamed Heretics are put to, for evading the force of these Texts,
whilst they would expound the making and creating all things, to be the making
of new men, and the creating of a Christian Church; for besides that the
Apostle manifestly speaks not only of persons (to whom the new creation
belongs, but things, yea all things whatsoever; and therefore the Evangelist
joyneth a negative to the affirmative, without him nothing; and St Paul makes
a distribution of the all into things visible and invisible in heaven and
earth: whereby it appears the first creation is intended. It would yet
further be considered, that the Evangelist and Apostle speak of this making and
creation as a thing already past, yea as the context in the Gospel shows,
done in the beginning, which compared with Moses his in the beginning God
created the heaven and the earth, appears to be the beginning of the world:
whereas the new creation was then, nay is still but in fieri, not in facto, nor
shall be finished till the end of the world.

To end this, Let the meditation hereof confirm us in the faith of our
Saviors Deity, which must necessarily follow upon the preceding doctrine; for
if Christ is so from, as that he was before the beginning of the world, and so
is eternal, he can be no other then the true Jehovah, the most high God;
eternity being one of those incommunicable Attributes of the Deity, which
cannot in its proper and adequate notion be predicated of any thing besides or
below the Godhead. And so much shall suffice to be spoken of the Character
which is here given of Christ; pass we on to the

2. Character by which the aged Christians to whom our Apostle writes are
described, and that is that they know him which was from the beginning. What it
is to know Christ, I had occasion heretofore to discuss, and therefore shall
not insist upon it: only be pleased in brief to take notice

That there is a threefold knowledge of him who is from the beginning,
Comprehensive, Intuitive, and Apprehensive.

1. The Comprehensive knowledge is that which is peculiar to himself, he who is
from the beginning, can only know himself from the beginning. Indeed it is
impossible for any finite Creature to comprehend the infinite eternity of
Christ; himself as man could not comprehensively know himself as God.

2. The Intuitive knowledge of Christ in his person, natures, offices, is
reserved for Glory, when we shall see him as he is, so far as created nature is
capable of.

3. That which then is here meant is an Apprehensive knowledge, whereby it is,
we are enlightened to discern the excellency of Christ, together with the need
we stand in of, and benefit we receive by him. That expression which we find
used by St Paul, To know Ephesians. 3. 19.
the Love of Christ, which passes knowledge, is seemingly contradictory, but
easily reconciled by this distinction; as Christ, so his Love passes knowledge,
because the infiniteness of it is incomprehensible; and yet we both may and
ought to know, that is, in some measure to apprehend the Love of Christ to us.

Now this Apprehensive knowledge is either nuda or Est. in loc.
conjuncta, naked, only situate in the understanding, when we know what Christ
is, and what he has done; or else such as is conjoined with Faith, Love,
Obedience. So to know him as to trust him to prize him, to embrace him, and to
obey him.

This is that knowledge which as it is here the commendation; so ought to be the
endeavor of every Christian. Indeed knowledge considered absolutely is a rare
and precious endowment, and that which a rational nature cannot but set an
high value upon, and industriously seek after. Of all the trees of the garden
none more desirable then that of knowledge; such is its magical sweetness,
that we cannot but fall in love with it. What made the Queen of Sheba come from
far to hear the wisdom of Solomon, but that she might gain knowledge? Indeed
what light is to the eye, that is knowledge to the mind, not only delightful,
but necessary, for as the eye cannot see without light, so neither can the
mind judge and discern of things without knowledge.

Knowledge at large is very amiable, but especially in reference to this Object,
in comparison* of which all other knowledge is nothing worth. I may here very
Prove. 31. 29.
well allude to that of the Wise man, Many Daughters have done virtuously, but
thou surmountest them all. There are several kinds of knowledge, and all of
them delectable, but this transcendeth them all. No Logic like to the
knowledge of him who is (...), the divine reason. The science of the stars is
pleasing; but far short of the knowledge of this star of Jacob, the Sun of
Righteousness; the skill of Lapidaryes is choice, but the knowledge of this
pearl of great price is far above it. Finally, To know antiquities is vety
desirable, but much more to know him that is from the beginning.

Let then no knowledge content us without this, and let us seek after this
though we want other knowledge. Indeed it is the excellency of this knowledge,
that whereas Ex quovis ligno no fit Mercurius, every man is not fit to make a
Scholar, nor are some brains capable of all Arts and Sciences: this knowledge
is that to which every man may, and ought attain in some measure; and therefore
wisdom inviteth the simple to turn into her School. Indeed (which is though a
riddle, yet truth) it is ofttimes seen that mean, vulgar, ignorant persons are
better versed in the experimental saving knowledge of Christ then great
Rabbis, and Learned Doctors.

Let then none despair, but all endeavor after this knowledge, and whilst
some are for the earthy knowledge of secular affairs, others for the watery
knowledge of humane Arts; and others content themselves with an Airy
speculation of divine things; let us labor for a fiery knowledge of Christ,
which may not only enlighten our minds, but warm our affections, so as to
make him who is from the beginning, the end of all our desires, endeavors, the
whole and sole Object of our trust, and love, and service.

2. By this time you have seen somewhat of the goodness of this Character,
proceed we now to consider the fitness of it, and that in a double reference,
to the Subjects, and the Objects of our Apostles writeing.

1. To the persons to whom he writes, namely, Fathers, old Men. It is that
which I shall here once for all take notice of, that the Characters here
specified are such as belong to Christians of all Ages, Fathers as Calv. in loc.
well as young Men must be strong and overcome the wicked one, young Men as
well as Fathers must know him that is from the beginning, Fathers and young Men
as well as little Children must know the Father; but yet withal, there is a
peculiar apitude in each of the Characters to the several ages he mentions.
This is eminently observable in this which is here given to the Fathers: For

1. Senibu^ competit notitia, the act of knowing Est. in loc.
here specified is such as in a special manner belongs to old Men, with the
ancient is wisdom, and in length of days Job 12. 12. Isai. 3. 2.
understanding: so Eliphas, in which respect the ancient and the prudent are
joined together, Tum denique animus scientia floret cum corpus temporis
longinquitate marcessit, says Damascen in his parallels, old Men have o^ttimes
flourishing minds, in withering bodies: and to Damasc. parallel, l. 1. c. 38.
use the Philosophers phrase, the eye of their soul is quick sighted when their
corporal eyes are dull: for this reason it is that as Quintilian observes,
Militem Socrat. in Symp. ^lut.
eligimus juvenem imperatorem senem, a Soldier should be young, but a General
old, and that City is said to be happy, where there are consilia senum, and
hastae juve^um, old Counselors, and young Warriors. Knowledge, though not
always, yet for the most part goes on three legs, and sees with four eyes:
and it was a true saying of a Learned Divine, A few gray Mr Gataker.
hairs will do more work then many young loakes: and surely then St John could
not give a fitter commendation of these Fathers then that they were endued, Non
vulgari prudentia, with divine knowledge.

2. Praecipu^m est aetate provectiori antiquiora nosse, old Men are versed in
the knowledge of ancient things, and therefore it ^s they love to discourse of
things done long-agoe, and beyond the cognizance of those who are younger then
themselves; this then must needs highly commend these Fathers, that their
knowledge looked as far as the beginning, Namely, to him who is from the
beginning, or if with some you will refer the (...), from the beginning, to
the Act that their knowledge of him was not of Yesterday, but* from the
beginning of their life they had been trained up in the knowledge of christ.

And now I would to God there were no cause of turning this commendation into
condemnation. I Job 33. 7.
said days should speak, and multitudes of years teach wisdom said Elihu of
Jobs friends. Indeed so it should be; but how seldom is it so, whilst many
who have multitude of years, instead of speaking and teaching, have need to
hear and learn divine wisdom, (...), Bas. M hom. 24.
he that is a Child of understanding, little differs from a Child in years,
says Basil the great: and alas, how many Fathers are Sen. de Tranquil. l. 1.
c. 3.
in that sense Children? Turpis and ridicula res est senex elementaris, how
ridiculous a sight is an old Man going to School? and yet how many old Men
have need to learn the A. B. C. of Christianity. How fitly may I apply to such
that rebuke of the Author to the Hebrews, For the time Heb. 5. 10.
they have had they might have been teachers, and yet they need to be taught
the rudiments of Religion. Bern. in lo^.
It was the complaint of St Bernard concerning many old Men in his time, I wish
it were not too suitable to ours, Caput canum, cor cavum, facies rugosa, lingu^
n^gosa; notwithstanding their gray heads, and wrinckle faces, they have frothy
tongues, and empty hearts. Oh how many are there who do senescere, and yet both
se and Christum nescire, are Ignoramuses, knowing neither Christ nor
themselves; perhaps indeed they have attained some dexterous knowledge in the
things of this life, they are well skild to get and keep their gold, heap up
wealth; but alas they have not yet learned what treasures of grace and wisdom
are in Christ. For one man that lives to be old, how many dye young, and for
one old Man that knows Christ savingly, how many are altogether unacquainted
with him? Indeed if you question their Faith you shall find them very strong in
confidence of being saved by Christ, and yet if you examine their knowledge,
you shall find them ignorant of that Christ by whom they believe to be saved*
Solomon says, A Eccl. 4. 13.
poor wise Child is b^tter then an old and foolish King; will not many
knowing Children rise up in judgment one day against ignorant Fathers, whilst
a Child of ten years old, shall give a better account of Christian Religion,
then some old men of sixty. I know not whither I shall chide or weep, declaime
against the folly, or bewail the misery of such old Men; when I consider the
dismal threatening uttered by St Paul, That God will come in 2 These. 1. 8.
flaming fire, rendering vengeance to them that know him not; and which will
certainly render the account of these old men the greater, and vengeance
hotter, who live within the Pale of the Church, in that they have not only had
time, but means and opportunity of gaining this Heavenly knowledge, but they
neglect them.

Oh then you Fathers receive a word of admonition, though whilst you were
young men, you were careless of divine things, yet now surely it is time to
look after Cypr. abus. grad.
them: it is one of St Cyprians twelve horrid abuses, Si sine religione senex
esse inve^iatur, for an old man to be irreligious, and a stranger to Heavenly
things; you are almost at the end o^ your days, on labor to know him which is
from the beginning; your natural life through Gods goodness is prolonged. I but
it must at length be ended, let nothing content you without the knowledge of
the Joh. 17. 3.
true God and his Son Jesus Christ which is eternal life. Why should you be
as bad Apprentices that having served seven years, are still to learn their
Trade, hear so much, and so long, and yet know so little of Christ? Assure
your selves the only comforts of old age, are Conscientia been peractae vitae,
and scientia Christi experimentalis; the conscience of a well lead life, when
you are able to reckon not only days and years, but good works done in those
days, and filling up those years, and chiefly the experimental knowledge of
Christ; whereby as good old Simeon you embrace him in your arms. This will be
both your comfort and your honor, An hoary head being Vide Chrysini. Ps. 50.
a crown when it is found in a way of righteousness and knowledge. As then God
is pleased to add to your days, do you add to your knowledge. And though old
age cause your strength of body to cease, yet strive that souls may more and
more increase in this and all other graces of the holy Spirit.

2. There is yet another fitness which would be considered in this Character,
and that is in reference to the matter about which he writes, especially the
praecedent and subsequent Doctrines; that thereby we may see what influence the
right knowledge of Christ has upon those excellent duties of contempt of the
world, and Love of the Brethren.

1. Because you have known him which is from the beginning, love not the world.
It is that which may very well be urged upon a double account, by an argument
drawn.

1. Ab Indecoro, It is a very unbeseeming thing for you who have known him that
is from the beginning, and have been so long Scholars in Christ's School to love
the world. That they who know no better should soar no higher, it is no
w^nder, and therefore if Heathens, Pagans, Infidels, should be earthly minded,
it is no more then what is to be expected, but for them who know Christ, and
knowing him, cannot but know what an excellency there is in him; and what a
vanity there is in the world to dote upon it is very incongruous. A Bristol
stone is very glorious in his eyes who never saw a Diamond, but he would
deservedly be accounted stupid, who should prefer a Bristol stone before a
Diamond; all Christians especially Aged ones cannot but experimentally know
Christ's fullness and the worlds emptinesg; and therefore it must needs be a very
irrational affection in them to Love the world.

2. A Cantrario, The knowledge of him that is from the beginning; and the Love of
these things that have both beginning and ending* are contrary to, and so
inconsistent one with another; and the reason is plain, because (as has been
already intimated) the true knowledge of Christ is inseperably attended with
Love to him, (...), Loving is caused by seeing, where the Object is amiable;
Christ is altogether Lovely, so that it is impossible to see him and not to
Love him. The Orator says of virtue that it is so desirable, that if men could
with bodily eyes behold it, they would be ravished with it; sure I am, he that
with spiritual eyes beholds Christ, cannot but be enamoured with him. Now the
world must needs be vile to him to whom Christ is precious; if the knowledge of
Christ attract us to him, it cannot but weane us from the world; so that
whosoever professes to know Christ, and loves the world, he gives his
profession the lie, and plainly discovers his knowledge to be such, which
though it have light, has no heat, and is none of that knowledge which
Christianity calls for.

2. Because you have known him which is from the beginning, love the Brethren;
and this likewise is that which may be strongly pressed by a double enforcement.

1. Ab Object^, The knowledge of him who is from the beginning, carries with it
a knowledge of that Love which he had from the beginning toward us, and did
manifest in the fullness of time to us, and no such obligation to Love, as Love,
of our Love to the Brethren, as Christ's Love to us. It is very observable how
St Paul persuading Ephesians. 5. 2.
to walk in this path of brotherly love, does not only direct but incite to it
by Christ's example, But walk in Love as Christ has loved us. Indeed he that
knows the Love of Christ, cannot but be in some measure sensible how free,
and how full it is; and surely that Love which is both sine merito, and sine
modo, (to use St Bernards phrase) both undeserved and unmeasurable, may well
engage to a return of Love, in whatsoever way he who has so loved us, should
expect and direct i^.

2. Ab Effecto, Inasmuch as Brotherly Love is, though not an immediate, yet a
genuine effect of the knowledge of Christ, the account whereof, take briefly
thus. Our Brethren (to wit) by grace are Christ's Brethren, and if we love
Christ, we cannot but love his relations. All Christian Brethren have the Image
of Christ stamped upon them, and if we love Christ, we cannot but love his
Image; where then there is a true and sincere affection to Christ, there cannot
but be a love of the Brethren, and where there is a saving knowledge of Christ,
there (as has been already manifested) cannot but be a sincere love to him.

That therefore it may appear, our knowledge of Christ is not merely
notionall, but experimental, such a knowledge of him as is accompanied with a
sense of his love to us, not barely speculative, but practical; such a
knowledge of him, as is attended with our love to him, let us show it by love
to our Brethren.

To close up this discourse, It is an excellent advice of St Hierome, discite
^am scientiam in terris cujus cognitio perseverat in caelis, seek after that
knowledge on ear^h, which will persevere in Heaven, let us now begin, and not
only begin, but according to St Peter's counsel, Grow in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is from the beginning, which shall be consummated in the
end, when we shall enjoy that beatificall vision, which shall need no increase,
and know no end.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 13, 14. VERSE. I write unto you Fathers, because y^ have known him
that is from the beginning. I write unto you young Men, because ye have overcome
the wicked one. I write unto you little Children* because ye have known the
Father. I have written unto you Fathers, because you have known him that is
from the beginning. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are strong,
and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.
AMong others, there are two special qualifications of a good Minister, the
one, that he be faithful, and the other that* he be pr^dent. His faithfullnes^
consists in delivering those things that are true; and his prudence in making
choice of such things as are fit. The fitness of a Ministers discourse lies
chiefly in a double reference. To the season and the persons. All both words
and works receive ^ great deal of beauty from their opportunity, it was not
without reason that he said, Omnium rerum est primum, the chief in all actions
is the fit time: and Solomon concerning a word spoken in due season, mentions
the goodness of it with a question, as if it Prove. 15. 42.
were beyond any positive expression. How good is it? Nor is there ^ess regard
to be had to the condition of the Auditors, then the fitness of the season:
since hereby a discourse becomes not only seasonable but suitable. Physicians,
though (unless necessity enforce) they have a regard to the season, yet
especially, and always they have respect to the different constitution of the
patients in administering their po^ions, and no less does it befit us who are
spiritual Physicians to accommodate our Doctrines to the condition and
disposition of those to whom we preach. Excellent to this purpose is that Ra^.
Maur. de instit. l. 3. c. 37.
of an Ancient, Pro-qualitate audientium formari debet serm^ doctorum ut per
singul^ singulis congruat and a commu^i ^dificationis art nunquam recedat. The
Preachers Sermon ought to correspond to the Auditors condition, so as may best
tend to edification. Look as in Music all the strings of the Instrument though
they are touched with the same hand, yet not with a like stroke; so in
Preaching, all sorts of persons are to be dealt with, but not in the same way;
Aliter admonendi sunt viri aliter faeminae, aliter in opes, aliter locupletes,
aliter juvines, aliter senes, as he excellently goes on, one admonition is fit
for Men, another for Women, one for the Rich, another for the Poor, one for
the Young, another for the Old. This discreet Application of our instructions,
is that whereof the holy Apostles set us a pattern: and among the rest St John,
especially in these Verses, wherein we may observe him bespeaking several
ages, and that in several addresses suitable to those ages, I write to you
Fathers, etc.

2. The reason by which our Apostle inculcateth his writing upon the Fathers
being already handled, that which we are next in order to insist upon, is that
by which he presses his writing upon the young Men; as it is mentioned in the
thirteenth, and again, both repeated and amplified, in the fourteenth Verse.

To put them both together as expressed in these words, You are strong and have
overcome the wicked one, and the word of God abides in you. You may please to
consider them two ways, Absolutely, as a commendation, and Relatively, as an
incitation.

Consider the words as a commendation, and so that Consid. 1.
I may make use of the metaphor, in the Text, be pleased to observe these four
particulars.

The Enemy, The Conquest, The Aids, and The Combatants.

The Enemy is Characterized by that term, the wicked one.

The Conquest is Ingeminated in that phrase, have overcome.

The Aids are specified in these words, strong, and the word of God abides.

The Combatants are included in the you, who are just before expressed to be,
young men.

1. Begin we with the Enemy, who is called The wicked one. There are three
grand adversaries of our salvation, and all of them have this Epithet given to
them: the world is called by St Paul, an evil world, and the flesh which is
the corruption of our nature, is Gal. 1. 4.
called the evil treasure of the heart, and the Devil frequently the evil
one, the wicked one: in this respect Mat. 12. 38.
Zanchy conceives by the wicked one here to be understood Synecdochtically,
all our spiritual enemies; but Zanch. in loc.
I rather incline to that exposition, which interprets the wicked one here
mentioned to be the Devil, he it is who not only here, but twice more in this
Epistle, is so called by our Apostle; and no doubt he learned it from his
Master, who gives him this title in the parable (...). Chrysostom. in orat. dom.
Tertul. de pat. c. 4. de cultu faem. c. 5. de ^uga in persec. c. 8.
of the Tares; yea St Chrysostom and others of the Fathers, are of opinion,
that the evil from which our Savior teaches us to pray, that God would
deliver us, is the Devil, and accordingly Tertullian renders several places of
Scripture which mention the Devil by malus, malignus, nequam, evil, wicked,
malignant.

It is a name which no doubt is given to the Devil, antonomastice, by way of
eminency; (...)* says Illyricus Illyr in loc.
is more then (...), and notes one who is exercitatissimus in omni malitiae
genere, exercised in all kind of wickedness; (...), is more then (...), and
notes one who is insigniter improbus, infamously, notoriously wicked: As
though holiness be a quality communicable to the creature, yet God and Christ
are emphatically called in Scripture the holy one, because according to Hannahs
saying, there is none so holy as the Lord; ^o though there be many evil and
wicked persons in the world, yet the Devil is the wicked one, because there ^^
none so evil as the Devil; and therefore St Chrysostom Chrysostom. ibid.
g^eth this reason of the appellation, Christ calls hi^ the wicked one,
(...), beca^e of that hyperbolical wickedness whereof he is gu^y.

^r the better explanation of this, I shall briefly resolv these two Queries,

How he came to be so?
^here^n he appears to be so?
It ^ould be a little enquired into, how the person Quest. 1.
here s^ken of came to deserve this title, the answer to whi^ I shall return.

1. Natively, he was not so by creation? The Devil, if you loo^^pon him in his
first original was Gods creature, and therefore good, yea in the highest form
of creatures, an Angel, and therefore excellent. Indeed the Angels are
creatures whom God places near to himself, they stand about his royal throne,
from whom he keeps nothing but the regal diadem, and their nature most fully
resembles the divine, who is goodness it self. Upon this account St Austin
asserts, Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 19. c. 13.
and truly, Ipsius diaboli natura in quantum natura est non est mala, the
nature of the Devil is still in it self good, yea very good, because angelical:
the Mani^hees and Pris^illianists very confidently affirm, that the Devil was
created by an evil God, and so evil from the beginning; but when our blessed
Savior says non stetit, it manifestly implies, a fuit in veritate, he did
not stand, that he was in the truth, a state of goodness and integrity. To this
purpose Tostatus well observes, Tostat. in Mat.
that the Devil is called the wicked one, not as if he were simpliciter and
absolute malus, absolutely evil; God indeed is called the Holy one, because he
is so essentially not so the Devil the wicked one; and there fore,

2. Affirmatively, it is not by creation but defecti^^ and apostasy from that
state wherein he was creat^^. That the Devil is become so evil he may thank
himself for it; God made him an Angel of light, but ^e has made himself an
Angel of darkness. It is t^^e, God made him mutably good, inasmuch as he made
his will free to choose or refuse, but this freedom was only the occasion, it
was his own abuse of that li^erty was the cause of his wickedness. Indeed to be
by ^^ture unchangeably good, is an incommunicable prope^^y of the Deity, and
the reason is plain, because it ^^ only the will of God, which is the adequate
rule of go^dness, so that there is nothing good but what he wi^^, and whatever
he wills is good; no wonder then if the creature whose goodness consists in a
conformity to the will of God, be capable of a deflection from the rule, but
still inasmuch as by creation it is invested with a power of willing a
conformity to the rule, and walking according to it, this actual defection is
not to be ascribed to God, but it self, which abusing its innate liberty, chose
to swerve from the divine Law, and so became abominably wicked. And now by how
much the more excellent a creature the Devil was at first, by so much the more
vile and evil he is become: It is a known saying, corruption optimi pessima, the
best wine makes the sowrest vinegar, quanto gradus altior, tanto casus
grandior, the higher the place, the greater the fall; and therefore the Devil
being by creation the best, must needs by transgression be the worst, and so
deserve the name of (...), the wicked one. Quest. 2.


It would further be enquired, wherein it appears that the Devil is so
wicked? The discovery whereof is manifest in these f^ve particulars.

1. He is the wicked one, because he is the first in wickedness, and the
ringleader of rebellion against God, (...), i. e. perditum illum and scelestum
malorum inventorem, Justin. in loc. Joh. 8. 44.
so Justinian, the wicked one, that is the desperate inven^^r of all evil.
Observable to this purpose is it, that our blessed Savior calls him, the
father of lies, he that is the first inventer of any thing, is in the Hebrew
phrase styled, the father of it: Jubal who invented music is called, the
father of all such as handle the Harp and the Organ, so is the Devil the father
of lies, because he made the first lie; indeed if you survey the pedigree not
only of that but all sin, you will find him to be the father of it: our first
parents were great sinners, but yet they sinned by persuasion, Eve by the
Serpent, Adam by Eves solicitation, but the Devil had no tempter, the Angels
are said to leave their own habitation, net keeping their first state (to wit)
voluntarily of their own accord, apostatizing from that state wherein God had
created them, and so rebelling against the divine Majesty. Now look as it is a
great honor to any one to have been the inventer of any thing that is
excellent, the first in finding out any rare secret, so it is a great
aggravation of the Devils wickedness, that he was first in transgression.

2. He is the wicked one, because he is obstinately and immutably wicked; so
Tostatus, Quia in malo firmatus, Tostat. in Mat. Brug. in Mat.
and Brugensis, Cujus voluntas immutabilis a malo ad bonum, as he was the
inventer of, so he is a persister in wickedness. By creation he was, and (as
has been already showed) must be mutable from good to evil. By corruption he
is become immutable from evil to good, God justly denying him that grace which
should change his will. Indeed we read in St James his Epistle, that the Devils
tremble, to wit in respect of the punishment to which they know themselves
reserved; but we read not of their repenting, no not so much as relenting in
respect of the sin they have committed, though they cannot but know and be
fully convinced what they have done, and how repugnant it is to Gods Law, and
consequently to right reason.

3. He is the wicked one, because he is malitiae studiosissimus, so Illyricus,
most industriously wicked, (...), is derived from (...), what pains and labor
does the Illyr. in loc.
D^vil take in wickedness. Among other titles by which sin is called, this is
one, that it is, the work of the Devil, sin being indeed the Devils work which
he does most unweariedly pursue. Devil in our English language is qua^^, do
evil; indeed for this many thousand years it has been his continual
employment, never resting day nor night to perpetrate and promote wickedness.
The most notorious wicked man is sometimes at rest, and allows himself at
least a sleeping time, but the Devil is always active in sin; and as he is
never well employed, so he is never idle; Christ went about doing good, and he
compasses the earth doing evil: In one word, he is sins sworn servant, drudge,
slave. It is true, sometimes this wicked one transformeth himself into an Angel
of light, makes a show of holiness, but it is as true that then he is then
most wicked; nor is the Devil more a Devil at any time, then when he is wrapped
in Samuells mantle, hypocrisy being a duplicated iniquity.

4. He is the wicked one, because conatur malos efficere, so Tostatus, he is a
tempter to wickedness, (...), Tossed. in Mat.
because (...), he is not content to be bad himself, but he draws others to
it; being himself fallen into misery, he envied man's felicity, and therefore
seduced him to impiety; as he was the first sinner, so he was the cause of sin;
he tempts all persons at all times, in all places, and for no other end, but
either to hinder them from good, as he did Paul, who tells the Thessalonians,
he would have come once and again, but These. ^. 18.
Satan hindered him, or else to allure them to evil, as he stirred up David to
number the people, and put it into Judas his heart to betray Chsist. Indeed the
Devil is called in Scripture both a tempter and an accuser, this being his
method first to draw men to, and then to accuse men for sin. It was the brand
set upon Jeroboam, as denominating him a very bad man, that he made Israel to
sin, how abominably wicked then is the Devil, who makes persons, nations, yea
the whole world to sin?

5. And yet lastly, that we may take the height or rather fathom the depth of
his wickedness, he is the wicked one, inasmuch as he vigorously pursues and
constantly persevereth in wickedness, because it is wickedness, not out of any
pretended benefit which may accrue to himself, but because it is dishonorable
to God, and injurious to man. Indeed pleasure and profit and honor are the
arguments by which he persuades, and the baits by which he catches the
sinner; but none of these are any motives in regard of himself: merely the
Antipathy he bears to God, and hatred he has of goodness, puts him upon
endeavors to promote sin in the world; therefore he delights in evil, because
God abhors it; therefore it is his joy, because it is Gods dishonor;
Finally, therefore it pleases his will, because it defaceth Gods image. To
live in any sin though because of a seeming advantage, is odious, but to be
wicked because it is wickedness, is abominable; no man ever came to such a
state of wickedness, but he committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. How
desperately wicked then must the Devil needs be, who sins not only though,
but because he knows it to be sin?

To wind up this then; we all pretend to hate the Devil; oh then why do we love
sin! It is an argument which God himself uses to persuade to holiness, because
it is his Attribute, Be you holy, for I am holy; surely it should be a
prevalent disswasion from wickedness, because it is the Devils property; as we
abhor to be like the Devil, let us abhor to be wicked. Indeed we all defy
Satan as he is the pursuivant of divine justice, but yet I fear we dei^e him as
he is the God of this world, and the Head of the carnal State. Oh remember if
we do his lusts, we own him as our Father, whilst yet we pretend to abhor
him as an enemy! as therefore we would not be the Devils children, let us cast
away our sins.

And especially take we heed of those degrees of wickedness which denominate
him the wicked one: far be it from us to make wickedness our trade, our
business, by customary committing it; as those do who are called workers of
iniquity; to make it not only the work of our hand, but our brain by inventing
it, as they were whom the Apostle characterizeth to be inventers of evil
things; yea not only of our heads, but our hearts by delighting in it, as they
of whom Solomon speaks, that rejoice to do evil; and which is yet Romans 1. 20.
Prove. 2. 14. Act. 13. 10.
worse, to take the Devils office out of his hand, by tempting others to sin,
as Elymas who stirred up Sergius Paulus against the truth, whom therefore Saint
Paul called the child of the Devil, and an enemy of all righteousness.

In one word, Let us be so far from imitating the Devil, as that we learn not
to hearken to him, but rather when he tempts, to answer him in Christ's
language, Get thee behind me Satan. Be sure if the Devil persuade thee to any
thing, it is either in it self wickedness, or for a wicked end; whatever show
of amity he may profess, or promises of good he may make, yet believe him not;
he is thine enemy, and it is though an apparent good, yet a real evil to which
he sollicites thee: for he is the wicked one.

2. Having given you a view of the enemy; that which next comes to be
considered, is the conquest which all true Christians have over this enemy, You
have overcome the wicked one. To give you the full extent of this word,
consider it two ways.

1. As opposed to making peace; it is not you have made a league with, but you
have overcome the wicked one, since there is no way to deal with the Devil but
by victory; indeed in temporal wars the case is different, Bellum geritur, ut
pax acquiratur, a good peace is the end of every just war; yea and a peace
where it may be obtained, is rather to be chosen then victory, that the
effusion of blood may be prevented; but in this spiritual war with Satan,
nothing less then a conquest must suffice. The truth is, every Christian
soldier must either be victor, or victus, a conqueror over, or else conquered
by the wicked one. The Devil will not make peace with us upon any terms; but
that he may be Lord over us; all his fair promises are upon that condition he
made with Christ, If thou will fall down and worship me; so that if we make a
league with, we are overcome by the Devil.

2. As more then fighting: indeed conquest supposes a battle, and victory is
preceded with a fight; if it be not so always in temporal wars by reason of
the cowardice of the enemy, yet it is, in spiritual; since the Devil is too
much a Lion to be overcome without a combat, Quid aliud quotidie in mundo,
quam pugna adversus diabolum geritur? says St Cyprian, we must continually
make Cypr. de Mort.
account to be engaged in a war with Satan: So that what is threatened to Asa,
may be justly said to new born Christians, From henceforth thou shall have war
with the Prince of darkness; and indeed this is that which makes for the
honor of Christian soldiers. For as Maximus Tyrius says of Hercules, if you
take from him, (...), the savage beasts, and cruel tyrants with whom he
grappled, you deprive him of the reputation of his valor; so the graces of a
Christian would not be so illustrious, were it not for the Romans 8. 38.
Devils temptations. Christians then are fighters, and more then fighters, for
withal they are conquerours; nay, if you will believe St Paul, they are
conquerours, and more then conquerours.

Indeed it may seem somewhat strange that our Apostle should speak of this
victory, as of a thing already accomplished, when as (they of whom he speaks
being young men) the war was as it were but begun. It is (and justly) accounted
a presumption in other wars to sing a triumph before the victory, and promise a
victory before the fight, like Lucullus, who in the beginning of his fight
against Tygranes and Mithridates cried out Vicimus, and Caesar, whose usual
boast was veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I overcame. But in this war our
Apostle doubts not to affirm of those young Soldiers, they had overcome, and
that not without good reason: For

1. They are said to overcome the Devil whilst they Non tam ad spiritualem
pugnam incitat quam certam illis victoriam pollicetur. Fer. in loc.
are yet in the fight, because they are sure to overcome, it is not unusual in
Scripture to express, that as accomplished which shall surely be fulfilled. Thus
the Prophets often spoke of Christ's sufferings which a long time after were to
be undergone, in the Present and Preterperfect Tense: for this reason might St
John thus express this victory. Indeed it is not so in other battles, Alea
belli incerta, the success of war is dubious, ofttimes the less number, weaker
side, and worst cause gets the day, in this respect it is justly said, Let not
him that Infirmus hostis qui non potest vincere nisi volentem. Hier. ad Demet
Diabolus suadere and sollicitare potest cogere omnino non potest non enim
cogendo sed suadendo nocet nec extorquet a nobis consensum sed petit. Aug. l.
7. hom. 12. Jam. 4. 8. Matthew. 4. 2. Hier. Ep. 8. ad Demetr.
puts on his armor, boast as he that puts it of, they that have gone into
the field big with hope, have returned home with shame. But in this war its no
more but fight, and the conquest is certain: St James position is express,
resist the Devil and he will fly from you; If we stand to it, he runs away,
Satan cannot conquer us without our own consent; it was his word to Christ,
cast thy self down, he could not cast him down, we may give our selves into his
hands, otherwise he cannot captivate us. Indeed Christ has wrought the victory
for us, so the first promise tells of him, that he should break the Serpents
head, that is, his power and policy: so the Evangelicall History records, how
he overcame in the wilderness Satan's impetuous assaults, Ut oppressum atque
contritum tradat discipulis concul^andum: as St Hierome excellently, that he
might deliver him bruised and subdued to be trampled on by his Disciples.
Finally, So St Paul asserts of him, He spoiled principalities and powers, and
again, Through death he destroyed him Col. 2. 19. Heb. 2. 16.
that had the power of death, to wit, the Devil. No wonder then if all
Christians being ingraffed into Christ, overcome by the blood of the Lamb. It
is safe fighting with a disarmed man and captivated Enemy, Vide Chrysol. Sermon.
2.
well may we be sure of the day who wrestle with a conquered adversary.

2. They are said to overcome, because they have begun the conquest; look how
believers are said to have eternal life, because the spiritual life in them
is the beginning of eternal: So they are said to overcome, because they begin
that conquest which shall never end. Indeed the Church Triumphant is on the
other side the Sun, nor shall a complete victory be obtained till this
mortality put on immortality. The Israelites march out of Egypt, was an Emblem
of our taking the field against Satan: and when had they prevailed? Not till
they lodged their colors in Canaan. Only glorified Saints are above Aliud est
iutra regnare aliud est extra oppugnare. Aug. in John tract. 12.
the Devils reach; but withal we must distinguish between Satan's commanding,
and assaulting power; every converted Christian is delivered from the one, but
not from the other; Satan is not so conquered, but that he still lays siege,
yet he is so conquered, as that he is turned out of the Castle; the Devil
still rages, and more then before, but his dominion is taken away; so that
notwithstanding renewed assaults, and particular f^yles he has no fixed rule
in the heart. As therefore St Paul who bids the Colossians Mortify their
earthly Members, asserting of them just before you are dead, means according
to Davenants gloss, Mortifiecare Daven. ibid.
caepistis, you have begun to dye: So St John intends by this you have
overcome, that is, you have begun to overcome, Col. 3. 3.
yet so as that we must not be weary, but still prepare for more assaults, and
so persevere fighting to the end.

3. They are said to overcome as inchoative, so interpretative. In Gods account
and estimation, our striving against the Devil is a conquest over him; look as
Abraham is said to offer his son Isaac, when yet a Ram was sacrificed, because
his will to offer him was esteemed by God as if he had done it. So a Christian
endeavor to overcome the Devil, (though we cannot fully master him, nay, are
sometimes mastered by him) is accepted as if it were a victory; when the Child
takes the bow in his hand puts the Arrow into the Bow, and draws as far
as it can, the Father accounts it as if the Child had hit the mark; so does
our gracious God look on the struggling of his servants with Satanicall
temptations, and our continuing to combat is (in his merciful acceptance) a
gaining the Conquest.

To end this, what an encouragement should the consideration hereof be to us in
our Christian warfare? What though the victory be difficult; not to be obtained
without sweat and blood? Yet it is possible, nay, certain, if the difficulty
discourage, let the certainty encourage. Indeed there be many inducements to
this combat. The Authority of our call, having a commission from the King of
Kings, The justness of our cause, as being against him who is both ours and
Gods enemy; above all the assurance of success as being such a fight as shall
unquestionably end in conquest.

The truth is on the one hand, If we yield to him he is an imperious Tyrant;
and on the other hand, If we resist him, he is a timorous coward. The Historian
said of Alexander, that he was (...), and (...), a formidable warrior, and a
gentle Conqueror; but the devil is a cruel Conqueror, and a faint warrior.
This Lion to use St Bernards expression, Bern. in Psalm Qui habit. Sermon. 13.
Rugire potest, ferire non potest, may roar but cannot tear, Rugiat quantum
vult, tantu^ non fugiat ovis Christi, let him roar as much as he will, only let
not Christ's sheep run away; fight therefore (according to St Paul's counsel)
this good fight, which is good as in the cause, so in the event, Pugnate ut
vincatis vincite ut coronemini (according to St Austins exhortation, fight that
you may Aug. in loc.
conquer, and conquering be crowned: which that you may be enabled to do,
furnish your selves with choice and excellent weapons: and so I am fallen on
the,

Next considerable the helps whereby this victory is attained in these words,
You are strong, and the word of God abides in you. This wicked one in the Text
with whom we are to encounter, is such an adversary, as wants neither power nor
policy, strength nor skill to set upon us, in regard of the one he is compared
to a Lion, of the other to a Serpent, and truly in both these respects it may
seem strange that we should overcome him; but these words return an Answer to
such an Objection, letting us see that true Christians have that strength
whereby they can grapple with the Devils power, and by the word dwelling in
them, they have that wisdom which can discover and defeat the Devils
subtilties. The participation then of a divine strength, and the inhabitation
of Gods word, are the two singular helps by which the wicked one is overcome.

1. Begin we (and at this time end,) with the first of these as it is briefly
couched in these words, you are strong.

For the unfoulding whereof I shall briefly dispatch two things, namely, the
necessity and nature of this strength.

1. You are strong, and great need there is you should be so, nothing more
necessary for a Soldier, then bodily, for a Christian, then spiritual
strength, and that especially on a threefold account.

1. Soldiers are put upon long and tedious marches, which they cannot perform
without strength; it is no wonder if the weak sickly Soldier throw down his
arms, or lie down in the way, as being not able to march forward; what else is
a Christians life but a journey, a march, wherein he is to continue to the
last? but alas how should he do this without strength? Among the Gal. 6. 10.
many Caveats given us in Scripture, none more frequent Heb. 12. 18.
then those against weariness and fainting in our minds, of backsliding and
drawing back from Christianity, thereby intimating, how hard a work it is to
perform, and how apt we are to fail and faint: and therefore in this respect
we have need of strength.

2. Soldiers are exposed to the scorching heat, and the nights cold, to
hunger, and thirst, and watching; in a word, to much hardship, and this they
cannot endure 2 Timothy 3. 12.
without strength: St Paul asserts it concerning all who live godly in Christ
Jesus, that they must suffer persecution, Romans 8. 37.
and elsewhere he reckons up a Catalogue of evils very incident to Christians,
tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword; and if we
cannot do good, much less can we suffer evil without this strength; it is the
strong back that can bear an heavy burden, a strong ship which can abide
blustering storms, the strong Christian who must take up his cross and undergo
afflictions.

3. Lastly, And most suitable to our present purpose, Soldiers are to encounter
with their enemies, receive and give assaults, and many times the enemy with
whom they are to wrestle is very potent, so that without a considerable
strength, there is no expectation Psalm. 103. 20.
of a victory: upon this account Christians stand in greater need of strength,
since he with whom they fight is (as St John styles him) the great red Dragon,
yea, Rev. 12. 10. Ephesians. 2. 2.
(in St Paul's language) the God of this world. Indeed when we consider, that
this wicked one is for his nature a spirit, an Angel, a Creature which excels
in strength, has for number a legion of Devils at his command, and if he
please to beleagner one simple person wants not power (if God let him loose) to
make use of all Creatures, as the engines of his temptation, we cannot but
acknowledge, his strength is great, and therefore there is no overcoming him
without a greater and surpassing strength.

2. But that which would chiefly be considered is, wherein this strength of a
Christian lies, by which he overcomes the wicked one? In answer to this know
that it consists in three things.

1. In a due preparation, The strength of a Soldier lies much in his weapons,
so does the Christians. When our blessed Savior would let us see the Devils
might, he calls him the strong armed man, therefore strong because armed: and
when St Paul exhorts the Ephesians to be strong, he presently advises them to
put on their armor. Indeed Ephesians. 6. 10.
what hopes of conquest without our weapons over an armed adversary? What the
several pieces of our armor are, we shall find there reckoned up, but among
them all, that which St Paul brings in with an (...), above all, and which S.
Peter singleth out, is our Faith, Whom resist steadfast in the Faith. Indeed as
the Father excellently, Increduli timent diabolum quasi leonem, in fide fortes
despiciunt quasi vermiculum, whilst unbelievers fear Bern.
the Devil as a Lion, the faithful contemn him as a worm.

2. In a firm resolution, strength of body, of Arms will little privaile,
where there is not strength of Mind, and a magnanimous spirit, Say to them
that are of a fearful heart be strong, that is, be Isai. 35. 4.
courageous, and accordingly they are put together, be strong and very
courageous, to which agrees that of the Apostle Paul in his military Josh. 1.
7.
precepts, Quiet your selves like men, be strong, it is not all the wiles and
assaults of the Devil can 2 Cor. 13. 7.
beat off a fixed Christian, he says with Christ, Ge^ thee behind me Satan, or
in words, much like those of David, Depart from me thou unclean spirit, for I
will Psalm. 119. 115.
keep the Commandments of my God: in one word, he that goes out with
resolution, and marches on with courage, holds out with constancy, and
comes off with Conquest.

3. Lastly, In the spirits assistance, it is very observable that the Apostle
when he would have us be strong, presently adds, in the Lord, and in the
power of his might, thereby teaching us where, and in whom our strength lies.
Indeed the preparation we make for the battle is from the Lord, and therefore
our Armor is called the Armor of God, not only in respect of institution, it
being that armor which he appoints us: but constitution, because it is that
armor which he gives us. Besides this, that resolution that is in us, is put
into us, it is God must strengthen our hearts, and when both these are wrought,
there is still required the spirits concurring assistance to enable us in the
resistance; he that works in us to will, must also work in us to do, and he
that helps us to put on, must teach us to use our armor: look as sometimes
when the Army which comes against a City or Country is numerous, there is a
necessity of procuring foreign supplies; so is it always with a Christian in
his combat with Satan, there is a necessity of calling in Heavenly aid.

To end this then, Whenever oh Christian, thou art assaulted by this wicked
one, what should thou do but labor to strengthen thy self against him? but
be sure thou presume not upon thine own strength. Remember Peter's denial, and
trust not to thine own ability, he is the best Soldier in the spiritual
warfare that fights upon his knees, seeking to God for grace. Bewail then
thy own weakness, depend on divine strength, implore the spirits enablement,
and doubt not bus he that begins will finish his good work, and as he calls thee
to the fight by his command, and assist thee in it by his spirit, so he will
crown thee with success and victory after it.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 13, 14. VERSE. I write unto you Fathers, because ye have known him
that is from the beginning. I write unto you young Men, because ye have overcome
the wicked one. I write unto you little Children, because ye have known the
Father. I have written unto you Fathers, because you have known him that is
from the beginning. I have written unto you young Men, because ye are strong,
and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one.
THis is now the sixth time that I have read this Scripture in your ears, not
that I like the humor of dwelling upon one Text, when the sacred Book affords
so much variety, but because I have met with so much variety in this one Text.
Indeed in these Verses our Apostle seems as it were to erect a School,
wherein are three forms, the first of experienced Fathers, the second of
vig^^^u^ young men, and the third of hopeful little Children. And no wonder if
it ask some time to examine these forms and instruct them in their several
lessons: or if you please, you may behold him building three Taber^acl^s, or
rather raising a Fabric of three stories, the uppermost whereof is of old Men,
the middlemost of young Men, and the lowest of little Children; in each of
which there are several Rooms and some of them very spacious. No wonder if it
require many hours to walk through and take a view of them and their
inhabitants. Finally, I may call this Scripture, a Book consisting of three
large and fair leaves; for the instruction of old, young, and little ones;
well may it be often read and perused, I write to you Fathers, etc.

The reason why our Apostle writes to young Men, is that which we are yet in
handling* in which (considered as a commendation) we have observed four
particulars, and that which is next in order to be discussed is the

2. Second branch of the third particular, as it is expressed in these words,
and The word of God abides in you. It is a clause which must be looked upon
two ways, in it self, and in its connection.

1. Look upon the words absolutely, and so they set before us the Character of
a true Christian, he is one in whom the word of God abides. And that you may
see what this means, take a short view of each word.

1. The word] is s^t down indefinitely, it is i^^^^ded universally for the
whole Doctrine of the Gospel which consists of Precepts, promises, and
threatenings. It is the Prophets Isaiah^ invitation to the embracing of the
Evangeli^al^ Doctrine, Come to the waters, buy wine Isai. 55. 1.
and milk: And m^thinketh in these three Metaphors are fitly shadowed the
three parts of the word, the Precepts are as water cleansing, the promises as
milk nourishing, and the threaining as wine searching, all of which we must
buy, and having bought, lay up or rather drink in. Indeed Hypocrites only suck
in the milk, lay hold on the promises refusing to drink the wine and waters,
but the true Christian says of every part of the word with Hezekiah, Good is
the word of the Lord, and accordingly has regard to it.

2. Of God] Therefore the word finds entertainment with a godly man, because it
is Gods word, it being divine authority which aweth the good heart, so that it
dares not neglect, much less reject; and hence it is that both whatsoever
appears to be Gods word, and only that which so appears finds acceptance.

3. Abideth] Nor yet is it a slight entertainment which is given to Gods word,
it not only lodges for a time, but takes up its constant abode, as it is
received, so it is retained, according to that gloss of Estius, Fidem Est. in
loc.
Evangelis constanter retinetis, then the word of God abibideth in, when the
faith of the Gospel is constantly retained and maintained by us.

4. In you] That is, within you, not only in the eyes by reading, ears by
hearing, understanding by knowing but in the heart, the judgment by esteeming,
the memory by remembering, the will by consenting, the affections by loving
delighting, and the conscience by subjecting to it.

I cannot better illustrate this Character, then by taking a short view of
those several Metaphors, by which it is expressed of hiding, eating, graffing,
keeping, dwelling.

David says to God, I have hid thy word in my Psalm. 119. 11.
heart, where the Hebrew word signifies to hide as a treasure. Conceive then
the word as the treasure, the heart as the chest, this as the Cabinet, and that
as the jewel, nor does the covetous man more carefully lock up his treasure
or jewels then David did, and every good man does Gods word.

Jeremiah says to God, Thy words were found, and I did Jer. 15. 16.
eat them. Conceive then Gods word as the souls food, which must be eaten,
that is not only tasted by the mouth, which is hearing, but taken down into the
stomach and concocted, which is meditation.

Our blessed Savior describing the good ground, and distinguishing it from the
rest, sets it forth by this Character, Hearing the word of God with a good and
honest Luke 8. 15.
heart, and keeping it. The word being as the seed which must not only be cast
upon, but covered in the ground, and that is, when it is not only heard with
the ear, but kept by the good heart.

St James calls the word (...), an ingraffed Jam. 1. 21.
word, intimating, that as the graff is set into, whreeby it becomes
incorporated with the tree, so ought the word to be received into our souls.

Finally, St Paul exhorts the Colossians, Let the word Col. 3. 16.
of Christ dwell in you, thereby teaching us, that the word must not only stand
at the door of our ears, but enter into the chamber of our hearts, and that
not as a guest to tarry for a night, but as an inhabitant to dwell with us for
ever, and then it is that the word not only is, but abides in us.

And now what should be the care of every one, but that this word may take
possession of, and abide in our souls; Gods mercy has hitherto continued the
sound of it in our Churches, Oh let us labor to find the power of it in our
hearts! since it will little benefit, may much prejudice us to have had it
among us, if withal it abide not in us.

If we would know whether as yet the word have thus far prevailed, it will best
be discovered by reflecting on the forementioned metaphors. If the word abide
in us as a treasure, it will enrich us with Heavenly grace. If as food it will
strengthen us to the performance of spiritual duties. If as seed it will make
us fruit full in good works. If as a graff it will transform us into Christ's
own likeness. If as an inhabitant it will cast out sin and Satan, and
powerfully rule in our hearts; oh let us endeavor to find this effectual
operation of the word upon the hearts, and that it may be so, take notice, that
there are four things necessarily requisite.

1. Apertio, The opening not only auris of the ear, (concerning which David
speaks, and which is a necessary antecedent) but cor dis of the heart,
whereof Psalm. 40. 6. Acts 16. 14.
the Apostle speaks concerning Lidia. There can be no graffing without
opening the tree, nor can the word enter till the heart be opened; to which end
there must be contritio a breaking of the heart; as the earth is opened by
plowing and breaking it into clods, so is the heart by contrition, which is a
spiritual plowing; the door of the soul is so fast barred, that there can be
no opening without breaking open. To him will I look (says Isai. 66. 2.
God) that is of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word* whereby is
intimated, that Gods word is most carefully received by the contrite spirit;
indeed a broken vessel lets the liquor go, but a broken heart is the best
preserver of Gods word.

2. Purgatio, Besides the opening of the heart by contrition, there must be a
cleansing it by reformation; whilst the stomach is full of ill humors, it
either cannot receive, or else will presently cast up the best food. Gods word
cannot endure a filthy heart, nor will a filthy heart endure Gods word: no
wonder if St James exhorts to lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, James 1. 21
that we may receive with meekness the ingraffed word.

3. Preparatio, Nor yet is this all but the heart being opened and cleansed,
must be furnished and fitted for the entertainment of this Heavenly guest.
Indeed what provision the Shunamite made for the Prophet, we must in a
spiritual sense make for the word, a Chamber, a Table, a Stool, a
Candlestick, and a Bed; a Chamber and that a large one, our whole soul, a Table
and that not of stone, an heart of flesh; a stool and that a low one, an
humble spirit; a Candlestick, and that a bright one, an enlightened mind,
Finally, a Bed, and that a soft one, even a tender conscience, so will this
word vouchsafe to enter in, and dwell with us.

4. Cautela, And yet once more there must be a diligent care that this word
after it is received be not lost; if we would have this word abide with us, we
must according to St Paul's phrase to Titus, (...), hold it fas^, to wit,
against all opposition, whereby our enemy seeks to despoile us of it, and
according to that Apostolical Caveat, Take earnest heed to the things which we
have heard, (...), least (as leaking vessels) at any time we let them slip, and
so instead of staying with us, like a flowing river they pass away from us.

2. Having thus given you a positive aspect of this clause, be pleased to view
it in reflection upon the victory here asserted, which lets us see that

By the abiding of the word of God in us, we overcome the wicked one. Among the
several pieces of our spiritual armor which St Paul reckons up, the the
sword of the spirit is not the least which is the word of God, because like a
sword it cuts and wounds the Devil to the heart, and as the sword does no
execution unless taken into, and managed by the hand, so neither does the word
unless received into the heart. That encounter of David with Goliath is a fit
emblem of the Christians combat with Satan, and as he took five stones out of
the brook, by one of which thrown out of a sling he dashed Goliath in the
forehead, so must we have in readiness those five stones of promises, precepts,
prohibitions, threatenings,, and examples, and throw them upon all occasions in
the sling of faith, against the wicked one. Indeed which way soever the Devil
sets upon us, Gods word in the heart, is of singular use and service; if as a
Lion by violent assaults, it is a chain to fetter him; if as a Serpent by
fraudulent wiles, it is a charm to disappoint him; whatsoever Satan tempts to,
the word armeth us against it, since it is some sin or other to which he
prompts us, and there is no sin against which it affords not powerful
Antodotes.

This the Devil well knows, and therefore one of his principal designs, is
to hinder us from hearing and receiving this word; no sooner had God given a
word Genesis 2. 19.
to Adam, but Satan striveth to subvert his faith in the threat, and thereby
divert him from obedience to the command; no sooner were the Tables of the Law
Vide Rivet. in Exodus
written, but the Devil endeavors to have them broken; for so some conceive
that the Devils aim in tempting the Israelites to idolatry was, that thereby
Moses might be enraged, and the Tables broken. Those fowls of the air in the
parable of the sower, what are they but the Devils of Hell, whose work it is to
pick up the seed of the word which is sown among us, that it may may not abide
with us, and all this because he knows it is our best both offensive and
defensive weapon.

It is true sometimes the Devil striveth to turn this sword into a shield,
alleging (as he did to Christ) Scripture for the justifying of his
temptations, but how falsely and perversely is obvious in that particular
instance, but still the Scripture verities are undoubtedly contrary to his
diabolical lies, discovering the subtilty and weakening the energy of his
assaults.

How careful then should every one of us be both to get and keep Gods word,
whereby we may be enabled to resist the Devils temptations. Because he
continually watches to devour us, let us every day gird this sword upon our
thighs, that he may never find us unprepared. Believe it Christians, Gods word
is the richest treasury to supply our wants, and the strongest Armory to oppose
our enemies. This weapon was that which the Captain of our salvation made Ideo
Jesus omnes tentationes solis sacris Scripturis vicit ut doceret nos sic
pugnare and vincere. Cajet. Gr. M. in Cant.
choice of, for so you find him in the wilderness refelling Satan's renewed
solicitations with a Scriptum est; and surely it is fit that we who are the
common Soldiers, should make use of the same defense, since Christ purposely
so dealt with the Devil, that he might thereby give us an example. Indeed as
the Doves (to use St Gregory's compa^ion) seeing the shadow of the flying Hawks
in the water, by casting themselves upon it escape their fury: So holy men
beholding in Gods word Satanical subtilties, and addicting themselves to those
sacred counsels avoid his snares. And as those that live in Royal Towers, and
Armories (to borrow S Chrysostoms metaphor) are secure from thieves ^hrysost.
hom in Matthew.
and robberies: So where these spiritual Books dwell, diabolical power is
weakened, and poison expelled. The truth is, no Arrow's so sharp as those which
are fetched out of the Lords quiver, those darts which are taken out of Gods
Armorypier^e deepest, and it is the sword of the spirit which cuts best; and
therefore however the Devil change his weapons, yet let us keep ours, making
use of this upon all occasions against all temptations. And so much shall
suffice for the third considerable, namely the helps in the battle.

4. The last but not the least, nay chief observable is yet behind, namely,
the Combatants in the You, to wit, young Men whom he highly commends in that
they were strong by the Word of God abiding in them to overcome the wicked one:
and here is something both employed and expressed.

1. That which is employed, is that the wicked one is especially an enemy to
young men; none are in greater danger then they, to be drawn to wickedness by
this wicked one.

1. He well knows that young men are most capable Nulli aetati ita insidiatur
diabolus, ac adolescentiae. Fer. in loc. Beza ibid.
of doing either God or him service; then they are in the prime of their days,
the faculties of their souls most vigorous, the members of their bodies most
active, and so fit for employment; no wonder if he chiefly strive to divert
them from Gods, and draw them to his service.

2. Besides he subtily observes, that that age of all others is most prone to
corrupt affections and actions. Psalm. 119. 11. Cereus in vitia flecti
monitoribus asper. Horat. 1 Timothy 5. 23. Job 13. 26. Ambr. de inter. Job l. 1.
c. 7.
When David says, Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his ways, whenas yet
the question and answer belongs to every man, what does he imply, but that
young men are very prone to defile their ways? When St Paul exhorts Timothy
(who yet was very weak^ in body) to fly youthful lusts, what does he, but
intimate that lusts are especially incident to youth? It is St Ambrose his note
upon those words of Job, Thou make me to possess the sins of my youth,
Pul^hre id Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 246. Hier. ep. 1.
^tatis arripit ad qu^relam, quae magis ad vitium lubrica esse consuevit, very
fitly does he complain of that age, as being most apt to fall into sin. In this
respect youth is called by S Austin, flos ^tatis, periculum mentis, as the
flower of age, so the danger of the mind, the mind being then in danger; (as S
Hierome observes) now of dashing on the C^^ribdis of luxury, and then of being
plunged into on the Scilla of lust; yea innumerable are the vi^^^ which do
cleave fast to this age.

St Austin comparing childhood and youth and old age together, well infers
to this purpose; if childish and old age be not free from temptations, of which
the one is but entering into, and the other is going out of this life, that but
now was not, and this ere long will not be, Quid sentiendum est de flagrantia
juvenilis aetatis, Aug. l. d.
what may we think of young age, no mervaile if it be shaken with the winds
and waves of various assaults. Indeed those lusts which Children are not come
to, and old age is past, young men are prone to be carried away with: not much
unlike is that observation of St Ambrose, Habet pueritia innocentiam, senectus
prudentiam, etc. Childhood has innocence, old age prudence, only youth is rash
in counsels, weak against temptation, and fervent in evil. Thus as the
boiling pot sends up most s^um, so in flaming youth are the strongest
inclinations to passion, uncleanness, intemperance* Aristotle observes of
youth, that it is eager in desire, bold in enterprises, changeable in mind,
prone to anger, confident in hope, and presumptuous of its own knowledge,
qualities which very much dispose them to evil, besides men in youth begin to
embrace humane society, mutual converses, and alas how easily are they
entangled with evil company, and no wonder if the Devil having so great
advantages against, does with the greatest violence set upon young men.

It is a meditation which should teach young men to be so much the more
watchful, careful, fearful, least they be caught in the Devils snares.
Indeed there is no time wherein we can be secure, but we have most reason to
fear in youth, because we are then most in danger. This old Serpent loves to
entwine himself about young men, this Archenimy of man thinks no triumphs
like to those wherein he leads youth captive; and therefore of all ages, let
young Men walk in an holy fear of, and vigilant preparation against
diabolical assaults.

2. That which is expressed is, That these young men to whom our Apostle wrote,
had prevailed against the Devil, through the strength of Gods Word and Grace.

There are three excellencies which especially belong to young men, and whereof
they much glory, to wit, strength of body, firmeness of memory, victory in war,
and all these our Apostle here attributes to these young Men in a spiritual
and consequently most excellent sense.

1. Adolescentes delectat and ornat fortitudo corporis, says Ferus upon the
Text, bodily strength is an ornament of, and delight to youth, the name for
young men here used Fer. in loc. Justin. in loc.
refers to it as Justinian observes, and it is Solomon's assertion, The glory
of young men is their strength. Lo here Prove. 20. 29.
St John commends these young men, in that they were strong, and that not so
much outwardly as inwardly, in body as mind, in might as grace.

2. It is a great honor to young men that they have as quick wits, so good
memories, whereas Children and old men are forgetful; it was the evcellency of
these young men, that their memories were well employed, to wit, about divine
oracles, they had the word of God abiding in them.

3. The young is the warlike age, youth Gloriatur in viribus gaudet in luctis,
Glories in strength and boasts in combats, such was the Romana juventus, the
Roman youth a people given to war, and delighted in victories. Behold these
young men are happily engaged in an encounter with the worst of enemies, over
whom they obtain the conquest. And surely whilst valorous attempts and exploits
in civil wars deserve due praises, spiritual victories challenge it much
more. Honorable are those young men, who are famous for the natural
endowments of strength and memory for the warlike achievements of victories
and triumphs, but happy, yea, thrice happy are those young men who excel in
those heavenly ornaments of strength and grace, retaining Gods word and victory
over the wicked one.

And n^w Advos mihi sermo O Juvenes (to use St Austins expression) O young men
let me address my discourse Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 246.
to you, you are strong in body, I but are you not weak in grace, you have
Marrow in your bones, blood in your veins, I but have you Gods were abiding in
your hearts? you are perhaps valorous and victorious in wars with men, but are
you not cowards in resisting Satan; Instead of being victors over, are you not
slaves to him; you delight in victories, but are they not such as proclaim you
his captives; the assaulting of beauties to overcome their chastities, the
conquering of one another in cups and oaths, or such like impieties. There is
no tempoation with which the Devil does more frequently beset young men, then
that of procrastination. The Devils voice is, (...), Naz. Orat. 40. Bas. M. In
eos qui differunt paenit. Aug. Sermon. 71. ad fratres in ereme. Cl. Al. hort. ad
gentes.
so Gregory Nazianzen, (...), so Basil the great: that Vox corvina, as St
Austin calls it, the Crows note, Cras, cras, give me to day, let God have to
morrow, give me the time present, let God be served hereafter; And alas how are
the greatest part of youth miserably overcome by temptation, whilst (as
Clemens Alexandrinus sadly complains) whereas in other matters we are hasty,
yea too often precipitant, in business of serving God, we are very deliberate
long before we resolve, and when we resolve before we put it in execution.

Oh that all young men would receive this seasonable word of exhortation; Begin
betimes to acquaint yourselves with Gods word, and engage in the war with this
wicked one. To this end ponder a while on these ensuing considerations.

1. Possibly, nay probably you may not live to be old; old age is that which
none can assure himself of, and comparatively few do partake of it; if the
first death overcome us before we overcome the Devil, we must needs be hurt of
the second death; and if we overcome not whilst we are young, death may
prevent our being old, and so cut us off while we are in the Devils jaws. Oh
who would run so desperate an hazard, considering to how many diseases,
casualties, the young are subject!

2. If you do live to be old; yet consider,

1. The conquest over this wicked one will be the more difficult, by how much
the longer it is delayed; the Proverb says, a young Saint, an old Devil; but I
am sure, it is hard for a young Devil to become an old Saint. Do thou think
it will be so easy to cast out this strong man, when he has had so much time
to fortify himself? Wilt not thou every day become weaker and the enemy
stronger, and must not then the victory be harder? It was much (says St
Chrysostom) that Jonah Chrysostom. ad pop. Antioch.
after three days imprisonment escaped out of the Whales belly; but it is much
more to see an habituated sinner extricate himself out of the Devils snare. Sin
and Satan are not like Tenants at will, to be gone at a Quarters warning, the
best wisdom is to crush the ^ockatrice in the egg. Oh take heed of
accustoming thy self to the Devils yoke, since then it will not be a facile
work to throw it off! Nay further,

2. God may hereafter deny that grace to thee, which now thou^ denyest to thy
self, and then it will not be only difficult, but impossible to overcome him.
It is a sad doom which God utters concerning Ephraim, He is joined to Idols,
let him alone; what if God say so of thee, He is addicted to the Devils
service, let him alone? it is but just when men give themselves over
voluntarily, God should give them over judicially to Satan's power, and then
there is no possibility of escaping out of his hands. Me thinks it is very
observable, that only he who first stepped into the po^l Festinare debet
unusquisque ad deum ne si dum potest noluerit omnino cum voluerit non possit,
Aug.
after the moving of the waters by the Angel, was cured: Post est occasio
calva, time must be taken by the forelock. Oh then make have to list thy self a
soldier under Christ's command, least if now thou may, thou will not; when
perhaps thou would, thou shall not.

3. If through divine grace thou shall hereafter prevail against this wicked
one, yet oh what grief and anguish of heart will it be then to thee, that thou
wast so long bewitched with the Devils temptations? How bitterly does Ps. 25. 7.
David deprecate Allmighty God? Remember not against me the sins of my youth.
No doubt out of the deep sense he had of, and sorrow for them. Quae fuerunt
Ambrose.
inania Juventutis gaudia, haec sunt acerba senectutis gravamina; the vanities
of youth will be the vexation of old age, and if the one be a comedy all upon
pleasure, the other will prove a tragedy of sorrow.

4. Finally, The only ^^t and most acceptable time for this spiritual conflict
and conquest is the time of youth. It Lam. 3. 27.
is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth, (says the Church)
Indeed then he is most able to bear it. This yoke as St Hilary excellently, Non
expectat frigescentis Hilar. in Psal^ 118. lit. Ee^h.
senectatis annos, nec emortuam jam aetatem pro vitiorum cousuetudin^, is not
for the weak shoulders of old men, who are so much the weaker, because sin
through custom is become stronger; yea, as St Ambrose truly, Ambros. ibid.
Quid potest habere laudis? what thanks is it, if when our body is enervated
through pleasures; and the cold frost of old age has seized on it, we should
then offer it to God as a Sacrifice? It is St Basils note, that whereas Bas. M.
de inscrip.
(...), is an inscription prefixed before many Psalms, it is omitted before the
fifteenth, which is a breviary of moral Precepts, the practice whereof must
not be deferred till the end of our lives. Indeed Mane as one wittily observes
is the Devils Verb, who tempts us to continue still in his service; but Gods
Verb, who expects the morning of our youth to be devoted to him. What the fat
was in the sacrifice, that is, the strength of youth in Gods service; very
acceptable to him, oh let it be offered by us.

The truth is, a young Christian Soldier is both most terrible in the Devils,
and amiable in Gods eyes; The figtree puts forth her green figs, and the
vines Cant. 2. 14.
with the tender grapes give a good smell, they are Christ's words to his
Church. Indeed no smell so sweet in his nostrils, as that which comes from the
tender Bern. Sermon. 60. in Cant,
grapes: and withal (as St Bernard observes) Hic odor serpents fugat,
venomous Creatures cannot endure the sent; but so soon as the vines put forth
they remove, Quod volo attendant novitij nostri, a comfort to young Saints who
partake of that spirit whose first fruits the Devils abhor. In one word, as
it is Gods honor and the Devils terror, so it will be our comfort.

Assure thy self oh young man, it will be no grief of heart to thee in thy old
age, that thou did begin in youth to engage thy self in this sacred war
against the wicked one. Temporis preteriti been impensi suavis est memoria. Oh
how sweet is the remembrance of youth well spent? What a joyful Harvest does
the old man reap from the seedtime of a Religious youth, and with what abundant
contentment does he gather those ripe fruits of virtue which budded forth in
his youthful days? Oh then be wise you young m^n and instructed, you that are
of tender years for Gods sake; nay, for your own sake, for his glory, and for
your own comfort and sa^ety, give no place to the Devil, resist him speedily,
resolutely, so shall you overcome him gloriously.

And now if you be such young Men as my Text describes, Consid. 2.
the instructions here given cannot but be welcome to you; no wonder that our
Apostle by these qu^lifications as by so many arguments inciteth to the
practice both of the precedent precept, and the subsequent prohibition.

1. Love not the world because you are strong, and the word of God abides in
you, and you have overcome the wicked one.

He that is given up to the world is wicked, and he that is entangled with it
is weak; a strong Saint is so far from loving, that he contemns it, having
his conversation in Heaven; they that by waiting on the Lord renew Phil. 3. 2.
Isa^. 40. ult.
their strength, Mount up with wings as Eagles, and so are free from deaths
snares. Worldly love will not suffer the word of God to abide in us. This
diverts us from hearing and reading the word; as the Farm and the Oxen kept
them in the Gospel from coming to the Feast; or if not so, it keeps us from
loving and conforming to it; as the thorns in the parable did choke the good
seed. Herod's lust of voluptuousness, Judas his lust of covetousness, would not
let the word take place in their hearts, though it entered into their ears;
indeed it is impossible that the heart which is clogged with the weight of
worldly Love should be lift up to Gods Commandments.

2. Again, If we will overcome the Devil, we must not Love the world, there
being no stronger engine by which the Devil gets and keeps possession of our
hearts. When he would allure us to any sin, what are his enchantments but the
pleasures of the world? when he would affright us from any duty; what are his
weapons but the reproaches and persecutions of the world? so that in order to
this victory, nothing is more needful then the alienating of our affections
from the world.

2. Love the Brethren, because you are strong, and the word of God abides in
you, and you have overcome the wicked one.

Where there is strength of grace, there cannot but be fervent Love, as to God,
so to the Brethren: it is for weak and sickly persons to be froward; none are
more prone to contention and faction, then those that are weak in grace and
knowledge; strong Christians are ever studiou^ of amity and unity. Indeed this
is the way to increase 1 Cor. 16. 13, 14.
our spiritual strength; and therefore when St Col. 3. 15.
Paul advises to be strong, he presently adds, Let all things be done in
love; and charity is called by him the bond of persection.

Again, If the word of God abide in us, we cannot but love one another. Charity
is one of the principal fruits which this seed produces, a lesson which this
School Master teaches. Excellent to this purpose is that saying of
Lactantius, Da mihi hominem iracundum and uno Lactant.
verbo Dei reddam placidum, ut ovem. This word turns Leopards into Kids, Lions
into Lambs, and sweetly cements hearts together in one.

Once more, If we overcome the wicked one, we cannot but love our Brethren; the
Devil is that envious one who sows the Tares of dissension; though he
preserves unity in his own Kingdom, yet he endeavors to create and frame
discord among men; so that as we cannot more gratify the Devil then by
malice; so neither can we better overcome him then by charity. The truth is,
every envious and malicious person is the Devils slave, but the charitable
Christian is his conqueror.

3. Having thus run through the reasons which our Apostle alleges why he
wrote to Fathers, and young Men, it now remains that we give a brief dispatch
to the last which is the reason, why he wrote to little Children, as it is
expressed in the close of the thirteenth Verse in those words, Because you have
known the Father.

In the handling whereof I shall briefly consider three things:

The Quality specified, to know the Father.

The Energy intimated, knowing the Father, is that which engages not to love
the world, but to love the Brethren.

The Congruity to the persons mentioned, little Children you have known the
Father.

1. Having had occasion already once and again, to insist upon this grace of
divine knowledge, it will not be needful to enlarge: only know in brief that

1. It is no other then an Evangelicall knowledge of God, which our Apostle here
intends: to know the Father is to know God to be the Father of Christ, and in
and through him a merciful Father to all true Christians. It is one thing to
know God as a Creator, or as a Lawgiver; and another to know him as a Father:
so only the Gospel reveals him, and accordingly we come to know him.

2. It is less then an operative knowledge, so to know the Father, as to depend
on him for Fatherly protection from all dangers, and provision of all
necessaries; as to give him filial love, fear, service, subjection, to all his
Fatherly commands, and submission to all his Fatherly chastisements. They that
know thy name (says the Psalmest) will trust in thee, and not only trust, but
serve and Psalm. 9. 10.
honor thee.

3. It is not a graduall, but initiall knowledge. It is not unworthy our
observation, that the knowledge of God and Christ is a qualification attributhd
both to the Father, and the Children. Indeed God is both the ^, and the ^, the
first and last; and therefore he must be known by us in our first and last age;
but yet these two knowledges differ in degrees; old Christians have a deep
draught; whereas little Chidren have but a taste of this Heavenly nectar; and
therefore the expression is varied; Fathers are said to know him that is from
the beginning, as being well versed in the mysteries of Christian Religion,
whereas little Children are only said to know the Father, as having but some
general apprehensions of God reconciled in Christ.

2. This knowledge of the Father among many others cannot but produce these two
choice effects, to wit, contempt of the world, and the love of the Brethren. On
the one hand as the twinkling stars are obscured by the light of the glorious
Sun; and therefore they disappear in the day time; so the beams of this
Heavenly knowledge darken all Creature excellencies in our apprehension, and
consequently our estimation of, and affection toward them must needs be
diminished; on the other hand, this fountain of celestial knowledge cannot but
send forth streams of love, and that as chiefly toward the Father, so
secondarily to all who are the Children of this Father, and so our Brethren.

3. This Qualification of knowing the Father is very congruously attributed to
the Children. Infantibus and pueris nihil magis necessarium quam ut patrem
habeant and cognoscant says Ferus well; nothing is more needful for Fer. in
loc. Cualt. in loc. Dan. in loc. Lor. in loc.
Infants and Children, then that they should have and know the Father. The
weakness of little Children needs the conduct and government of another, they
cannot consult for their own safety and benefit, and therefore their Parents
undertake it for them. By this means it is that the Child first takes notice
of his Father and Mother, according to that of the Poet, Incipe parve puer risu
cognsocere Matrem. and hence those pretty Monosyllables by which Father and
Mother are expressed, are first taught and learnt by their Children so soon as
they can speak. And surely as it becomes little Ones so soon as they are
capable to know and own their Parents, so is it an amiable excellency in them
to attain some knowledge of God as their Father: nothing more natural to
Children (when once reason begins to act in them) then to defire knowledge; no
knowledge to which a Child sooner takes, then that of the Father: but oh how
joyful and happy a thing is it when through instruction they begin to
apprehend him who is the Father of us all, and this is the commendation of
these Children that they know the Father.

To wind up this,

1. It is that which should be in the first place an item to Parents that they
be careful to train up their Children in the knowledge of the Father. Oh
Parents you are industrious to provide wealth and riches for your Children, but
why are you not more solicitous to obtain grace and knowledge for them? You
take a great deal of care to enrich their bodies, but why so little for the
adorning of their souls? what is this, but (to use Plutarchs comparison, as if
one should be very Plut. (...)
curious about the shoe, and neglect the foot; or exact id triming the glove
whilst the hand is foul: perhaps you endeavor that your Children may attain
some kind of knowledge, to wit, in the tongues, or arts, and sciences, in a
trade and calling; and herein you do well, learning being a far better portion
then riches, without which the wealthiest heir, is but an Ass laden with gold;
but oh Parents, why stay you here? there is one thing more needful then either
of the other, and that is the knowledge of the Father; what difference is there
between a Pagan and a Christian Parent, if your only care be to acquaint
Children with secular affairs, or educate them in Philosophical studies: oh
let it not suffice that your Children are instructed in humane, whilst they are
ignorant of divine learning.

Tell me I beseech you, is it not a sad thing, and yet I would to God it were
not too common, that little Children through your negligent education should
swear so soon as they ean speak, and learn to blaspheme that God whom yet they
have not been taught to know; such Parents (says S^ Chrysostom,) are worse
Chrysostom. l. 3. in iaud. vitae Monast*
then Homicides, nay, then Parricides; for these take away only the bodily life
of their Parents, but those do what in them lies to cast the souls and bodies
of their Children into Hell; and whilst by generation they were the instruments
of their temporal life, through neglect of good education they become at least
the occasion of their eternal death. It is a doleful story which is reported
by Gregory the great to this purpose, of a Child Gr. M^dial. l. 4. c. 18.
of five years old, which being carelessly or rather wickedly brought up, was
given to blaspheming Gods holy name; and being a little after smitten with
death, the poor Child cries to the Father, Help, help, the Moors are come to
take me away, and so blaspheming God it died, no doubt to the horror and
perplexity of the wicked Father. It is a sad thing when Children in their old
age shall have cause to complain that their Parents had no care to bring them
up in learning; but is it not far more sad, that Children in Hell shall cry out
against their Parents, because they had no regard to instruct them in the
knowledge of God?

Let then all Parents be admonished of this necessary duty which they owe to
their Children. Children are sometimes called pignora, pledges, so they are of
Gods love to us in bestowing them on us, so they ought to be of our love to God
in consecrating them to him. They Ps. 127. 4.
are compared to Arrows as they are at first directed, so afterward they fly^.
Oh let it be your endeavor that they may be directed upwards toward Heaven by
divine knowledge. It much conduced to Alexanders prowess and victory in his wars
that his Father Philip caused him to be brought up (as it is were from his
radle) in Military discipline: Oh let it be the prudent piety of all Parents to
teach their Children betimes the knowledge of the Christian warfare, and to
that end to begin with the knowledge of the Father.

2. But secondly, Let me turn my counsel from the Parents to the Children,
whom I cannot better bespeake then in David's words, Come ye Children, hearken
unto Ps. 34. 11.
me, and I will teach you the knowledge and fear of the Lord. You know your
earthly Parents, I but labor to know your Heavenly; you know the Fathers of
your Flesh, ey but strive to know the Father of your Spirits; you are expert it
may be in Homers Odes, Virgils Ecl^gs, Cicero's Orations, oh but strive to get
understanding in David's Psalms, Solomon's Proverbs, and the other plain Books
of holy writ. Manna was to be gathered in the morning, the Orient pearl is
generated of the morning dew, Aurora musis amica, the morning is a friend to
the muses. Oh remember thy Creator* know him in the morning of thy Childehood.
When God had created the Heavens and the Earth, the first thing he did was to
adorn the world with light, and separate it from the darkness; happy is that
Child on whom the light of saving knowledge begins to dawn early. God in the
Law required the first born, and the first fruits, so he does still our first
days to be offered up to him. They are Wisdoms own words, They that seek me
early Prove. 8. 15.
shall find me. Where a Rabbin observes a (...) is added to the Verb more
then usual, which in numbering goes for fifty; with this note that early
seeking has not only twenty, or thirty, but fifty, nay, indeed an hundred sold
recompense attending on it. He that is long before he seeks God, I will not
say he shall not at all, but it may be long ere he find him: oh begin early
whilst yet you are Children to seek the knowledge of God.

The better to endu^e you hereunto consider my good Children,

1. You were in your very Infancy, almost as soon as born, dedicated to the
Father; being baptized in the name of the blessed Trinity, Father Son, and holy
Ghost: and will you not now that you begin to have the use of your
understanding; endeavor to know the Father? you are already his sworn
servants, and soldiers, will you be ignorant of him to whom you are sworn?

2. If you do not now begin to know the Father, you will be less docible
hereafter; alas how hard is it to instill knowledge into old years? Can it be
imagined that that tree which does not bud nor blossom in the spring, should
bring forth fruit in Autumn, or should flourish in Winter? Now in your
Childhood your wits are fresh, your apprehension quick; oh employ them in
studying and gaining the divine knowledge, so much the rather, because hereby
you shall put to shame those ignorant old ones: who have lived long, and yet
with the Ninivites know not the right hand from the left.

3. Your Parents may prove unnatural and forsake you, however they are
mortal, and when death comes, must leave you; but your Father in Heaven lives
for ever, and if you know and serve him, he will love you, and take care for
you, he will never leave you nor forsake you. The Hen is not more tender of her
Chickens, nor the Sheapheard of his Lambs, then this universal Father, (as
Clemens Alexandrinus calls him) is Cl. Al. paedag. l. 1. c. 5.
of his little ones, towardly and hopeful Children. You may guess at Gods love
by Christ's respect, who commanded little Children to be brought unto him, and
blamed those that kept them from him. It was David's Ps. 27. 10.
comfort, When my Father and Mother forsook me, then God took me up; it may
be yours my little Children if you endeavor to know and love the Father, when
your Parents either cannot or will not help you, he both can and will provide
for you.

Once more, your dear Redeemer and blessed Savior Jesus Christ began himself
betimes, and was so well skild at twelve years old, that he disputed with the
Doctors in the Temple; hereby giving you an example, which though it cannot be
expected you should equalize, yet it is required you should follow; we find in
the Gospel little Children going before Christ, and following after him with
Hosanna's: and it is the praise of Jereboams 1* King. 14. 13.
Child, That there was found in him some good thing toward the Lord God of
Israel. Oh little Children write after these coppies, so much the rather,
because with Jereboams Child, you may dye early, and what a comfort will it be
to your selves and Parents, if then there shall be found in you some knowledge,
and love, and fear of your Father which is in Heaven?

To end all, What remains but that all of all ages, Fathers, young Men,
little Children, make use of this Scripture, as a looking glass, whereby they
may see what they are, at least what they should be, that they may be Isai* 54.
13.
all according to the gracious promise taught of God, from the greatest to the
least, eldest to the youngest? And Ps. 148. 12.
then the Psalmists exhortation will be readily embraced, young Men and Maids,
old Men and Children, let them praise the name of the Lord from this time forth
for evermore.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 15, 16, 17. Love not the world neitherr the things that are in
the world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For
all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes
away and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of God abides forever.
THe Subject of this Scripture is one of the chiefest and most needful lessons
in all practical Divinity, since it is Removens prohibens, a document of
removing that which is one of the greatest hindrances in the exercises of
Christianity. Indeed what the stumbling block is to th Traveller in the way,
the weight to the runner in his race: or to use St Austins comparison,
limetwigs are to the Bird in its Est quod ad (...) profectum amatur and est
quod ad impedimentum amatur. Quod ames in terra impedimentum viscus est
pennarum spiritualim, etc. Aug. de diversis, Sermon. 114. Calv. in lo.
flight; that is, the love of the world to a Christian in his course, either
wholly diverting him from, or greatly entangling him in, or forcibly turning
him out of it. This is one of the fetters which keeps so many from entering
into the path of piety. This is one of those suckers which hinder others from
growth in godliness. Finally, This is that which like a contrary wind to the
ship, beats back many from their former profession. The truth is, (as Calvin
well observes on this place, Till the heart be purged from this corruption,
the ear will be deaf to divine instructions. Hercules could never conquer
Antaeus, Donec a terra matre ^um levasset, till he had lifted him up above his
Mother earth; no more can the spirit of grace subdue us to the obedience of the
Gospel, till he has lifted up our hearts from earthly Love. Heavenly truths
glide of from carnal minds as water from a sphaericall body: No wonder then
if the Apostle Paul exciting the Hebrews Heb. 12. 1.
to run he race which is set before them, advises them to lay aside every
weight, to wit, of worldly care. And here the Apostle John intending chiefly in
this whole Epistle to advance a Christian conversation, endeavors in these
words to take men off from worldly affections, Love not the word, nor the
things of the world, etc.

The discourse of these words moves upon two principal wheels, namely

A command peremptorily inhibiting, which is Propounded in the beglning of the
fifteenth Verse, Love not the world nor the things of the world. Expounded in
the sixteenth Verse, All that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eyes, and the pride of life. An Argument strongly enforcing, which is
drawn from two considerations; The one in regard of worldly love, its direct
contrariety to that which is divine as it is Asserted in the end of the
fifteenth Verse, If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
him. Proved in the end of the sixteenth Verse, For it is not of the Father, but
of the world.
The other in regard of the world it self, its fleeting instability which is

Affirmed in the beginning of the seaventeenth Verse, And the world passes away
and the lusts thereof. Amplified from its contrary, the permanent felicity of
the religious, in the end of the Verse, But he that does the will of God
abides for ever.
So that though the grand wheels of this period are but two, yet we find many
lesser wheels, yea, Rotam in rota, every wheel having another within it.

The first main wheel is the prohibition, and in that is another wheel, the
exposition. The second wheel is the argument; and in that two wheels, the
double motive, each of which has a wheel within it: whilst the first motive is
backed with a probation, and the second with an illustration. May that blessed
spirit of grace vouchsafe to drive the Chariot of my discourse, which shall run
in order upon these wheels; and then I doubt not but we shall attain that which
is, (I trust) the Goal of my Preaching, and your hearing, namely, our
reformation and salvation.

The prohibition is that which I am to begin with: Genesis 1.
and that

1. As propounded in these words, Love not the world, nor the things that are
in the world.

This is in order the sixth step of that walking in the light, which (I have
heretofore told you) is the chief design of this Epistle to delineate. The
first, whereof is a sorrowful confession of sin past. The second, Chap. 1. 9.
2. 1. 3. 6. 10.
a cordial forsaking it for the time to come. The third, an obedientiall
keeping the Commandment. The fourth, a sedulous imitation of Christ. The fifth
a Christian Law of the Brethren, and now, The sixth is an alienation of our
head from the world, Love not the world, etc.

What the intent of this prohibition is, will best apapear by inquiring what is
the proper notion of the word world in this place. Not to trouble my self and
you with giving an account of its several acceptions in sacred writ, Be
pleased to know to our present purpose. Aug. in Johan.
That (to use St Austins similitude) as an house is taken sometimes for the
walls, and rooms which constitute the house; and sometimes for the family which
inhabiteth the house: so by the world is meant sometimes, the things, and
sometimes the persons of the world, and both these constructions Expositors
make use of here.

Some by the world understand the men of the world, Zanch. in loc.
and so conceive that which follows the things of the world to be distinct
from the world, and that this Act of Love is here forbiden about a double
Object.

Others by the world understand the things of the Didym. ibid.
world, and accordingly conceive the latter to be an explication of the former
that whereas when he said love not the world, it might have been inquired, What
oh blessed Apostle is this world which we must not love? to prevent this
Objection he presently adds, nor the things of the world.

1. The former of these interpretations is neither improbable, Interp. 1.
nor unprofitable, and therefore I shall not wholly pass it by; Love not the
world, that is, Love not the Men of the world: for the right understanding of
which prohibition observe these three things.

1. Though world be here taken for the men in it, yet this must be construed
not (...), but (...), generally for all men, but with restriction to wicked and
ungodly men: for in this sense it is frequently used by this Writer, as it were
easy to instance in several places Joh. 1. 10. 15. 18.
of his Gospel, and in some of this Epistle, especially the first Verse of the
next Chapter, wherein I shall ( God willing) enlarge upon this appellation, as
given to the wicked; for the present it may suffice to know, that if we here
interpret the world of persons, it must be confined only to the unregenerate
and ungodly of the world.

2. This world of the wicked men which we are not to love, is not to be
understood of the men, but their wickedness; when the Devil is said to be the
Prince of this world, by our Savior; and the God of this world, by St Paul, it
is no doubt intended as only of the wicked of the world, so in regard of their
wickedness: and in Si naturam spectes, diligendi: si vitia non item. Justin.
Joh. 12. 20. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
the same restraint it must be here taken when we are enjoined not to love
them. Look as when the Apostle Paul forbids us, to be conformed to the world,
his meaning is, that we should not conform to their sinful manners, vicious
practices: so when the Apostle John forbids us to love the world, if we refer
it to men, Romans 12. 2.
it is to be unnerstood as intending to forbid a love to their sins, not to
their nature. The truth is, as men they are the works of Gods hand; and so to
be loved on his score, they are our own flesh, and so to be loved upon our own
account; only as wicked they are the Devils Children, and so not to be loved
but hated. Very observable to this purpose is that expression of St Paul to the
Ephesians, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, he
means, have no fellowship Ephesians. 5. 11.
with the workers, but yet he very aptly says the works, since it is in
reference to their works, that we ought to avoid fellowship with the workers.

3. Once more, we must distinguish of a double love, to wit, Amor
benevolentiae, and complacentiae, a love of benevolence, whereby we wish well
to, and a love of complacency whereby take delight in another. The love of
benevolence is commanded, and that in regard of wicked men, toward whom we must
exercise compassion, for whom we must make supplication, desiring and
endeavoring their eternal welfare. But the love of complacency is forbidden;
since we ought to avoid, nay abhor all familiar society with the ungodly; and
so this love not, may very fitly be expounded by that have no fellowship, not
that all kind of commerce and communion with the wicked is prohibited, but
that this commerce must be a matter of necessity not of choice: we cannot but
live among them, but we must not delight in them, we may upon just occasion
have society, but we must not love the company of the wicked. This is that
Precept whereof holy Psalm. 16. 2. 119. 63, 115.
David has set us a pattern when he says, All my delight is in the Saints,
and the excellent of the earth. again, I am a companion of all them that fear
thee* and again, Depart from me you evil doers, for I will keep the
Commandments of my God. Upon which the gloss well, Abigit tanquam muscas
molestas, He drives them away as so many troublesome flies. Thus must we keep
at a distance from wicked men, and shun all familiar intimacy with them.

And surely would we seriously ^onsider the great danger of love to* and
familiarity with the wicked, not only in regard of suspicion that we are as
they, which brings a scandal upon our names, but of infection, and
destruction: since we can hardly escape without being involved in their
iniquities and calamities, it could not but be a strong inducement to the
observation of this Apostolical Canon, Love not the world, that is, the wicked
men of the world.

But not to insist on this exposition, proceed we to the Interp. 2.
other which to me seems more genuine; and that because both the distribution
of this worlds love into several sorts of lusts; and likewise the arguments by
which it is dissuaded, especially that of the worlds passing away with its
lusts, are most congruous to this latter construction, Love not the world, that
is, not the things of this world.

In the unfolding whereof, I shall plainly proceed by these five steps.

1. When we are forbidden to love the world and the things of it, it is to be
restrained to this sublunary and terrestiall world. Mundi nomine intellige
quicquid ad Calv. in loc.
presentem vitam spectat. So Calvin aptly, By the things of the world, we are
to understand those things which belong to this present life. We cannot have a
better expositor of St John then St Paul, and then the (...), will Col. 3. 2.
be the same with the (...), elsewhere the things of the world, that is, the
things which are upon the earth: those things which appertain to our animal
and sensitive life, in opposition to Heavenly and Spiritual things, and if you
please to distinguish the world and the things of it, you may with one upon the
place by the world understand this life or our abode in this world, and by the
things of it, all those contentments which this life can afford to us.

2. It is not unfitly taken notice of by Ferus, that Fer. in loc.
the Apostle does not say, Exite mundo, but Nolite diligere mundum, Leave the
world, but do not love it. Excellent to this purpose is that of St Gregory, Sic
teneamus ea quae sunt hujusmodi, ut tamenper ea non teneamur. Gr. M. Hom. 36.
in Evang.
We must so possess the things of this world, that we be not possessed by them.
Indeed for the leaving of the world, and the things of it; we must have a just
and special call, or else it becomes sinful; we must not go out of this world
at our own pleasure, but wait Gods leisure, saying with good old Simeon, Lord
let thou thy servant depart in peace. Sapiens non debet fugere vita sed
exire, said Seneca, A wise man must not break prison doors, only be willing
to go forth when they are set open. We cannot stay longer in, and we must not
go sooner out of this world then God pleases* We must not needlessly divest our
selves of those comforts which God affoards us in this life; since it were both
unthankfulness to the giver, whom we basely undervalue by casting away his
gifts, and an injury to our selves the receivers, who hereby should be
difinabled from being so seruice^ble as we might in our generation. Mat. 19. 29.
That forsaking of House, Brethren, Sisters, Father, Mother, Wife, Children,
Lands, to which Christ promises an hundredth fold and eternal life is when it
is for his names sake: So that either we must deny his name, or lose life, and
leave these secular enjoyments; otherwise the general prohibition is not,
possess not, but love not.

3. It is very aptly observed by St Austin, that the Aug. l. 5. contra. Julian.
Apostle does not say, Nolite uti mundo, but Nolite diligere mundum, do not use
the world, but do not love it. He that not loving the world uses it, uses it
as not abusing it: Inasmuch as he uses it not for it self, but in order to
that which he loves, as the Father excellently enlarges. So long as we live
in, we cannot Cuncta temporalia usu non affectu possideamus. G^. M. in Ezekiel.
hom. 20. l. 2. Beda in loc.
but have use of the world, and the things in it; we stand in need of them, we
cannot subsist without them, and consequently not only may, but must make use
of them. But as ^eda well glosseth, Vtamur mundo ad necessitatem and non ad
volnntatem, Use the world for the supplying your necessities, but not for
satisfying your lust. With Gideons three hundred Soldiers we may lap the
waters Judge. 7. 5, 6.
of this world with our tongues, but we must not with the rest bow down our
bodies to drink of them. One has wittily observed of the three ages of man,
that Children ^reep on all sour, being unable to stand of themselves, young
men go on two legs, and old men on three, being necessitated to use their
staff; it may be here applied, wicked men are wholly carried downwars to this
world: the Saints in Heaven trample upon the world, the godly whilst in this
world use it only as a staff for their necessary support. Excellent to this
purpose is that of St Austin concerning these temporal Aug. mus. l. 6. c. 14.
things, His tanquam tabula in fluctibus been utendo cavebimus, We must look
upon them as so many plankes in the waves, which we neither rest upon as firm,
nor yet cast away as needless, but use as helps to carry us to the shore.

4. It is observed by Suidas, that the Greek word Suid. in dict. (...).
(...), (which is the word in the Text,) has two significations, the one
whereof is general, and the same with (...), noting only an ordinary
affection, the other special amounting to as much as (...), To be so pleased
with any Object that we desire nothing else: according to this, that note of St
Aug. in loc.
Austin upon the Text is very apposite, Non te prohibet Deus amare ista, Sed
non diligere ad beatitudinem, It is not every kind of love which is here
prohibited, but so to love them, as to make them our chiefest good.

For the further explicating of which be pleased to know: That

1. Love, as an Ancient has well defined it, is Delectatio Lib. de substantia
dilectionis. in Aug. T. 4.
cordis ad aliquid per desiderium currens per gandium acquiescens, the
enlargement of the heart toward any Object, so as to run to it by desire, and
rest in it by delight. So that indeed love is a compounded mixed affection, made
up of desire in craving, and joy in having the Object we love: and accordingly
some Critics observe of the Verb (...), here used, that it is as much as
(...), or (...), to be very earnest after, and pleased with that which is
beloved.

2. It is not unlawful to look upon the world, and the things in it, as
Objects of our love, both in regard of desire and delight. When our blessed
Savior command us to pray, Give us this day our daily bread, Matthew. 6. 12.
by which Syne^do^hically, all temporal conveniences are intended; He does
hereby plainly intimate that we may desire them, prayer being an expression of
desire. When Solomon says, (and that not in the person of Eccl. 2. 14.
an Epicure,) There is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labor: What does he
but insinuate that to delight our selves in earthly things is allowable. Indeed
whatever is good may justly be the Object of love, and consepuently when
absent, of desire, when present, of delight: so that inasmuch as there is a
goodness, and that originally implanted by God in those things which are the
works of his hands, they cannot but rationally attract our love.

3. But then lastly, There is a great deal of difference between ordinata
Charitas, and inordinata cupiditas, an ordinate charity, and an inordinate
love, and though that is commendable, this is to be condemned; so that the true
meaning of this prohibition will best appear in two propositions.

1. Love not the world, nor the things of the world, that is, When you want
them, desire not inordinately after them. Desire them we may, but not

1. In an unjust way, so to covet these things as to seek them, perfasque,
nefasque, by indirect and unlawful means, that we choose rather to break the
rules of the word, then to want the things of the world is sinful and
abominable; the streams of our affection may move toward the world; but then
it must be in the right channel in Gods way, only in the use of those means
which he allows us.

2. With an undue measure, so to long for any thing Genesis 30. 1.
in this world, as that we will not be content without if; like Rachell that
cried, Give me Children or I die, nor Prove. 30. 16.
yet content with it; like the Horse Leech that still cries, give, give is
immoderate and consequently inordinate; the stream of our affections after
this world, must not rise too high so as to overflow the banks.

3. To an unfiting end, when we crave the things of this world, upon base and
sordid accounts, Asking (as St James says) to consume them upon our lusts,
Jam. 4. 3.
our love is exorbitant, the stream of our affection toward the world, must
not turn aside into by creeks, but run into the maine Ocean of Gods glory.

2. Love not the world, nor the things of it, that is, When you have them,
delight not inordinately in them. Delight in them we may but not, Sine Deo,
without God; so as if we enjoy them it matters not for Gods presence, Supra
Deum, above God, so as to give the pith, the marrow, the cream of our
affections to them, only propte^ Deum, in and for God. Delight in them we may,
but as the Cisterns, not the Fountains of our good, as they may be means, not
as the chief end wherein our bliss consists: In one word, All the things of
this world as they are benefits conferd by God on us; and as they may be helps
leading us to God, may be loved by us, but not under any other notion, for then
it is irregular and comes within the compass of this prohibition.

5. Lastly, This of St John, Love not the world, nor the things of the world,
may very well be expounded by that of St Paul, The world is crucified to me,
and Gal. 6. 14.
I to the world; and if so, then there is more intended then expressed: this
Negative will include an Affirmative, love not, that is, contemn, disdain,
scorn, hate the world and the things of it, when they would alienate thy heart
from God. Indeed then is the world crucified to a Christian when it is to his
heart what a crucified dead carkase is to his eyes, to wit, odious and
loathsome. Then is a Christian crucified to the world, when he is as unwilling
to move according to the solicitations of the world, as a crucified man is
unable to stir hand or foot; and he that is thus affected, is so far from
being in love with the world, or addicted to, that he is altogether estranged
from, yea, enraged against it: and thus I have given you a short, and yet a
just account of the design and latitude of this prohibition. To wind it up in
a brief Application.

You see the sin forbidden, now view your practice. I would to God that all,
even the best of us had not just reason to charge the guilt of this sin upon
our selves. Worldly love is an Epidemicall disease, and such as good men
sometimes fall sick of, even they who would not enjoy this world with the loss
of a better, are yet unwilling to enjoy the other world with the loss of this:
gladly they would have the honey and milk of Canaan, and yet loath they are to
part with the Onions and Garlic of Egypt. Indeed some there are who rail
upon this world, as a place of trouble and disquietment; but yet still they
love; like the buyer who says, It is naught; it is naught, but when he is gone
he Prove. 20. 14.
boasts; to wit, how good a penyworth he has got. If you ask any man whom
he loves best? his answer will be, God; and yet if many, nay most men would
put the question seriously to themselves; the answer must be the world; yea, he
that has made the best progress in learning this lesson, will find upon due
search, that he loves the world too much.

The better to help you in this inquiry, be pleased to observe these ensuing
particulars.

1. Would you know your delectation, take notice of your meditation. David
affirms of the blessed man, His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and he
confirms it by this Medium, and in his Law does he meditate Psalm. 1. 2. 119.
97.
day and night, it is his assertion concerning himself, O how I love thy Law,
and the proof follows, It is my meditation all the day. The truth is, Ubi
amor, ibi oculus, where there is fervency of love, there is frequency of
thoughts. Oh then consider what is it your thoughts most run upon; what are
your morning and evening Meditations? do not the things of this world lie down
in the evening, and rise up with you in the morning? nay, walk with you all the
day, whilst your minds are still busied either about getting, or keeping, or
increasing them, and if so, can you acquit yourselves from this inordinate love?

2. Would you discern your affection, view your election; our love says St
Austin is never so fully tried, Aug. in loc.
as when two Objects are proposed, whereof the one must be embraced, and the
other refused, the one taken and the other left; whilst two men walk together,
you cannot tell whom the Dog follows, but when the time of parting comes,
then the Dog manifests who is his Master. Put the case oh Christian to thy
self, what if the absence of Gods love, and the enjoying of the worlds comforts
come in competition, which would thou cleave to? Certainly, eligere, and
diligere go together, that which is thy choice is thy love; Oh how many with
Demas forsake the faith, 2 Timothy 4. 10.
that they may embrace this present world?

3. Would you find out the Mistresses haunt, trace her Handmaids, fear and
grief are the two attendants upon love. The Poet says

Res est soliciti plena timoris amor, Doloris will stand in the Verse too, and
is as true of the thing. Love is full both of fears and tears, afraid least
it should loose, and troubled when it has lost its beloved Object. How
solicitous was David for Absoloms safety, and how perplexed at the news of his
ruin, and whence this but from his indeared affection toward him. When Christ
wept for Lazarus, the Jews presently cried out, See, how he loved him: and when
we see men John 11. 36.
so fearful of death, which takes them out of this world, and if all those
evils which spoil them of these present contentments; yea, when we behold them
so exceeding sorrowful and heavy under outward crosses and losses, may we not
justly say concerning them, see how they loved this world and the things of it.

4. Would you know the frame of your hearts, observe the language of your lips,
Vbi amor, ibi lingua, as well as oculus, not only the eye, but the tongue are
guided by the heart, Out of the abundance of the heart (says our blessed
Savior) the mouth speaks: and may it Mat. 26. 73.
not be said to many as the maid did to Peter, Thy speech bewrays thee;
whilst their communication is earthly and sensual, chiefly, nay, only about
inferior Objects? Surely the things we are most frequent in talking of, we
take most delight in. How great lovers must they be of the world, whose
discourse tends to nothing else, yea, even upon holy days, when they rest from
servile works, yet they will not cease from secular words? Indeed the
worldlings breath ^avoureth of earth; you may trace his tongue from the Market
to the Exchange, thence to the Key or Wharfe, thence to the Custom House, and
thence to the Warehouse, but seldom to the Church. And does it not plainly
argue, the vessel of the heart is full of the liquor of worldly love when it
runs so constantly over in worldly language?

5. The fervor of our contention clearly manifests the intension of our love:
it is St James his Question and Answer, Whence come wars and fightings among
you? James 4. 1.
come they not hence, even from the lusts that war in your members? and St
Austin is positive, Qui de mundo contendit, perspicue ostendit, quod illum
diligit, men do Aug. in loc.
not use to contend about what they care not for, whilst your emulations,
strifes, quarrels are so great and fierce one with another about worldly
matters; it strongly argues, they have possession of your hearts: she for whom
the gallant adventures his life in the field, is very probably concluded to be
his Mistress; surely the world commands thy heart when it engages thee in
litigious quarrels.

6. Lastly, You may very rationally judge of your affections by your actions,
your love by your care, your delight by your service. When we read that Jacob
served an hard Apprentiship to Laban, and that no less then fourteen years for
the gaining of Rachell, we may certainly infer, that he loved her greatly: men
would never lay out their time and strength so uncessantly in the worlds
drudgery, were she not Mistress of their affections; yea, which does the more
fully proclaim their love, their labor is a pleasure; they are never in their
element, but when like the fish they are swiming in these waters, or like the
mole they are digging in the earth.

By all these considerations we may be able to discern whither our love be not
inordinate toward this world, and the things thereof; and therefore such as we
ought to be deeply sensible of, affected with, and humbled for.

And now what remains, but that to this word of Conniction, I annex a word of
Dehortation, that we all endeavor to wean our hearts from the love of this
world? Oh hearken, and again I say hearken to this sprituall and Heavenly
voice, (as it is called by St Cyprian) Love Cypr. de discipl. and habitu. Sen.
Ep.
not the world, nor the things of the world. Indeed as Seneca says of sorrow,
I may say of love, I do not require that you should not love it at all; but I
earnestly entreat, take heed that you love it not too much: the truth is, our
affections in regard of worldly matters are very prone to excess: in Heavenly
things it is impossible to exceed, in Earthly things it is difficult not to
exceed* our grief quickly degenerateth into anguish, our fear into trembling,
our desire into impatience, our delight into jollity, and our love into dotage.
Oh therefore be wise to watch the out goings of your hearts after worldly
Objects, and remember that as it is of the two best, when brotherly kindness
erreth on the right hand, by loving too much, so when worldly love offends on
the left hand by loving too little.

Oecumenius upon the Text conceives that (...), Oecumen. in loc*
the Apostle writes, these things as to Children, who are most apt to be taken
up with ensuall Justin. ibid.
Objects: but doubtless as one well gl^sseth, Optime omnibus congruit, there
are none of any age but stand in need of it. Beware that you be not engaged and
fettered with worldly love: we read concerning the living Creatures mentioned
by the Prophet Ezekiell, Ezekiel. 1. 7.
that the Soles of their feet were like the soles of a Calves foot. The Caldee
paraphrase reads it like round feet, the feet are an emblem of our affection,
and it is observed of Sphaericall bodies, that if you set them upon the ground,
they only touch it in one point; so should our affections touch this world not
too much cleaving Dioscord.
to, or leaning on it. Dioscorides makes mehtion of an Herh which he calls
the Indian leaf, and observes that it grows in moorish fenny places, Aquae
sine ulla radice ^nnatans, swimming in the water without taking any root in the
bottom. Let this Herb be our emblem whilst we live in, let us not love the
world; and though we make use of it to swim in for a time, let not our hearts
take root by an inordinate love.

The main disswasives from this sin we shall meet with in the Text; only
consider for the present, that this worldly love is unreasonable, injurious,
ungrateful, and unchristian.

1. It is unreasonable, There are two eminent laws of love which are directly
broken by this practice; the one is simili gaudere, the other is diligentem
diligere, like loves like, and love requires love: but alas when we love the
world, we love that which is unlike; there being no proportion between our
noble souls and this worlds good. Indeed our souls were made after the divine
image and similitude, and therefore not made for the love of this inferior
world; Besides, when we love the world, we love that which as it does not give,
so neither can it repay love; at the best it is only capable of serving, not of
loving us, and why should we so pervert the nature of love as to love the
world: But further

2. It is injurious to our selves, as well as incongruous to love, since by
loving the world, it becomes our enemy; it seems strange, yet it is a truth,
the world is only a ^oe to them that love her, if we use her, she is an
obsequious servant; but if we love her, she is a malicious enemy: it is
observed of the shadow, Sequentem fugit, fugientem sequitur, if you follow it,
it flies from you, if you fly from it, it follows after you. It is
proportionaby true of the world, if you contemn it, it will fear you, if you
love it, it will domineer over you; and that known Proverb of fire and water
may justly be applied to the things of the world, they are good servants, but
bad masters: Add to this

3. It is ungrateful to God, as well as injurious to our selves; all these
things of the world are the largesses of Gods bounty, the streams of his
goodness; and is it not an odious ingratitude to dote upon the gift, and
neglect the donor? Very apposite to this purprse is St Austins Aug. in loc.
similitude, If an Husband being in a far Country should send a Ring to his
Spouse out of his ardent affection to her, would he not, might he not justly
take it ill at her hands if she should forget her Husband and fall in love with
the token? Thus do we when we cast God behind our backs, and set our eyes upon
this world.

Finally, It is unchristian there being nothing more unbeseeming a Christian
profession, then a worldly conversation; being Christians we profess the Faith,
and hope of a better world, and shall we fall in love with this, we entitle our
selves the Children of God, and shall we live and love as the Children of this
world? It is our Saviors argument to his Disciples, After these things do the
Matthew. 6. 33.
Gentiles seek; and because they do, we should not, at least wise not as they do
it, with such immoderate affection: and therefore whilst Mammonists like Ravens
feed on garbage; like the Lapwing, make their nest in order; or like Beetles,
never sing but in a bed of dung; let us have higher thoughts, nobler desires,
purer joys, learning of this holy Apostle, not to Love the world nor the
things of the world.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 15, 16. Love not the world neither the things that are in the
world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
THe passions of the soul in their own nature are neither; in their exercise,
are either morally good or bad. Look as a Painters Colors, according to the
several Pictures which they draw, represent a chaste Matron, and a wanton
Strumpet, or as the winds according to the several corners whence they blow,
serve to drieve the ship forward, and backward; so the affections according to
the Object whereabout they are conversant become either helps or hindrances,
virtues or vices; yea, what the Astrologers say of the Planet Mercury in the
Horoscope of man's nativity, if it be in conjunction with a fortunate Planet it
is the better, if with an Ominous the worse; is more truly affirmed of the
passions, when they are joined to good Objects they advance virtue, and when to
bad, they increase vice.

No wonder then if the holy Scripture take so much care about regulating our
affections. Indeed the Stoics would banish and extirpate them, and therefore
say Genesis 26. 16.
to them as Abimelech to Isaac, Go from us for thou art much mightier then we,
but the Christian Religion would only confine or rather refine them by defining
their proper Objects. There is no need of draining up these waters, only of
diverting them into their right channel; of plucking them up, only planting
them in a good soil. We must not use them as Joshuah was to deal with the
Amalekites, wholly cut them off; but as he did by Exodus 17. 11. Josh. 9. 23.
the Gibeonites, make them hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the House
of God. Indeed as one wittily, man fallen, is the Anagram of man created, his
affections (like letters) misplaced, so that there is no need of blotting them
out, only placing them in their right order.

Upon this account it was that we find in sacred writ both precepts, and
prohibitions, commands, and caveats, exhortations, and dehortations, in
reference to the same affections, sometimes in the same Verse; So Christ to the
Disciples, Fear not, but fear; to the Women at the Cross, Weep not, but weep:
ofttimes in the same Chapter, as in this concerning the affection of love; if
you cast your eyes in the foregoing Verses, you shall find those two Objects
which we are to love. God and our Brother, and here in this Verse that single
Verse 5. Verse 9.
though comrehensive Object which we must not love, Love not the world nor the
things that are in the world, etc.

Having dispatched the general proposition in the beginning of the fifteenth
Verse, we are now according to the proposed method to descend to the particular
exposition, as it is set down in the former part of the sixteenth; All that is
in the world the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.

This clause which I call the Exposition you see is a Concupiscentia pro re
concupiscibili. Zanch. in loc.
distribution, intended no doubt for a further and fuller explication of that
prohibition; but whether of the Object or the Act, is somewhat questionable;
since on the one hand the word world refers to the Object, and on the other the
word lust refers to the Act. Interpreters conceive that lust is taken
metonymically for the Object lusted after, and so account it a distribution of
the Object; but withal it is of the Object in reference to the Act. And when I
observe that this all is positively denied to be of the Father, I think it
more rational to construe this (...) by (...), all to be every lust that is in
the world, and so take it as a distribution of the act: discovering the
several channels in which worldly love runeth.

It is inquired by the Schoolmen whither this distribution Al. Alens cum alijs.
do completely enumerate the causes of all sin, and it is affirmatively
resolved. Calvin upon the Text conceives it not much material, whether it be
exact or no: no doubt these are the principal, and all sins may some way or
other be reduced to one of these.

If you please, take a short view of the several references of these lusts
whereby they are differenced one from another.

Serrarius upon the Text has thus ranked them: that Serrar. in loc.
good which is immoderately desired, is either such as is really received into
us, about which is conversant the lust of the flesh; or which is only
transmitted by species to the sight, and so the Object of the lust of the eyes;
or which is neither received by it self, or by species into us, but is
altogether without us, and to this tends the pride of life.

Alexander Hales, out of St Austin goes another, Al. Al. pt. 2a. 9. 159.
and in some respect a contrary way; asserting exorbitant lust to be either
about bonum inferius, some inferior sensual good, which is the lust of the
flesh; or exterius, some external visible good, which is the lust of the eyes;
or interius, some inward opinionated good, which is the pride of life.

Aquinas distinguishes the inordinate appetite of Aquin. ta. 2ae. 9. 8. Art. 5.
man to be after good, either as considered absolutely, or as it is attended
with difficulty: the former is the inordination of that which is called the
concupiscible appetite; and this is either in respect of those things that
please the body, which is concupiscentia naturalis, the natural desire; but in
the excess, the lust of the flesh, or of those things, which by sight delight
the imagination, which is concupiscentia animalis, an animal desire; and in
the excess, the lust of the eyes; the latter is the irregularity of the
irascible apetite, and is the pride of life.

Some not unfitly allude to that distinction of sins into carnal, spiritual,
and of a mixed nature; those sins which take sensible delight in sensible
Objects, are purely carnal; and these belong to the lust of the flesh; those
which take mental delight in mental Objects, are purely spiritual sins, and
belong to the pride of life, those which take an inward delight in outward
Objects are of a mixed nature, and belong to the lust of the eyes.

The most plain and usual reference of them, is of the lust of the flesh, to
sensual pleasures; of the lust of the eyes, to riches; and of the pride of
life to honors: and so the voluptuous, covetous, and ambitious are the sinners
guilty of these lusts. This Grotius looks upon as the genuine meaning, and so
much the rather, because Vide Grot. in loc
he conceives this sentence to be borrowed from the ancient Hebrews, whence
Pythagoras received it, and from him Clynias who mentions these three as the
cause of that unjustice among men, (...), correspondent to which is that of
Philo on the Decalogue, asserting it is the Fountain of all wars among men to
be, (...), the evil lust either of wealth, or honor, or pleasure. But what
the large extent, and withal, the principal intent of these severals are,
will best appear in the distinct handling of them.

The number you see is threefold; and before I go further, I shall a while
d^seant upon them jointly.

If you cast your eyes upon the fifteenth Verse of the third Chapter of St
James, you shall find a tripartite James 3. 15. Gerard. de consummat. saecul.
division of worldly wisdom into earthly, sensual, and devilish; to which me
thinks very fitly corresponds this division of worldly love, the lust of the
flesh being sensual, the lust of the eyes earthly, and the pride of life
devilish.

We read in the foregoing Verses of three ages of men to whom our Apostle
wrote, namely, Children, young Men, and Fathers; and each of these lusts is
especially incident to each of these ages. Men in the beginning of their days
are most prone to the lust of the flesh, in the progress of their age to the
pride of life, and in their old age, to the covetous lust of the eyes.

In the close of the fourteenth Verse of this Chapter St John speaks of
overcoming the wicked one, that is, Genesis 3. 6.
the Devil; and if you would know what are the chief temptations, with which
he does assault, and which if we repel, we overcome him, they are here
presented to us. The fruit with which he tempted our first Parents in the
Garden was good for food, that was a lust of the flesh; pleasant to the sight,
and so came in the lust of the eyes; and to be desired to make one wise, and
that was the pride of life. After four thousand years experience the Devil
could not find out better weapons, and therefore with these he sets upon the
second Adam in the wilderness, tempting him to the lust of the flesh, when he
would have him turn the stones into bread to satisfy his hunger; to the lust
of the eyes, says St Austin, Aug. de ve^a re^ig. c. 35.
when he bid him cast himself down out of curiosity, say others: and more
probably (with the leave of that reverend Father,) when he showed him all the
Kingdoms and glory of the world; and to the pride of life, when he persuaded
him to cast himself down, which was no doubt for that end, to lift him up with
arrogant presumption.

With these temptations it is that he does still assault the Children of men,
so that I may not unfitly compare them to Solomon's threefold cord, by which he
draws men to iniquity; to the fleshooke with three teeth, by which the Priests
servant robbed the Lords Sacrifice; to Hippomenes three golden Apples, by which
he endeavored to hinder Attalantas race; to Jobs three darts, by which he
wounded Absalon to the heart; to the Caldeans three troops, (with St Bernard)
by which they Bern. 8a. pasch. Sermon. 1. Rev. 16. 13.
plundered Job of his goods; or to St John's three unclean spirits crawling
upon, and defiling us.

It is Christ's call to his Spouse, Come with me from Lebanon, Cant. 4. 8.
look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the Lions
dens, from the Ghisler. ibid.
mountains of the Leopards. Ghislerius understands by these three mountains,
these three lusts: the pride of life, by the mountain of Lebanon, which is
exceeding* high, and upon which grow the tall Caedars; by the top of Amana from
whence they might see a great way, the lust of the eyes; by the top of Hermon a
fruitful hill, the lust of the flesh; and these are the mountains on which
wicked men range like Leopards, and the dens of those Lions, the Devils.

These are those lusts which oppose the three grand designs of our life, our
own salvation, others good, and Gods glory. Whilst the lust of the flesh
warreth against our soul, the lust of the eyes makes us uncharitable to
others, and the pride of life robs God of his glory. Correspondent to these
three great sins it seems not improbable that God has appointed those three
sore judgments. The Famine as a punishment of the lust of the Al. Al. Ps. ^ta.
flesh; the Plague (which causes botches and sores) of the lust of the eyes;
and the Sword (which brings Nations low) of the pride of life.

As Armor against these three darts, the Papists superstitiously use a
threefold annoynting in Baptism, to wit, of the loins, the breast, and the
head; but (which is far better) the grace of God teaches to live soberly, in
opposition to the lust of the flesh; justly in opposition to the lust of the
eyes; and godly (which is a walking humbly with God) in opposition to the pride
of life: And which is best of all, our blessed Savior prescribes three duties
(which by the Schools are made the three parts of satisfaction) Fasting as a
remedy of the lust of the flesh; Alms as an eye salve for the lust for the
eyes; and Prayer as an antidote against the pride of life.

To draw yet nearer. These three are all that is in the world, they are the
worlds cursed trinity: according to that of the Poet,

Ambitiosus honos, opes, and foeda valuptas;
Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet.
Which wicked men adore and worship as deities: in which regard Lapide opposes
them to the three persons in the blessed Trinity. The lust of the eyes to the
Lap. in. loc
Father, who is liberal communicating his essence to the Son, and the Spirit;
the lust of the flesh to the Son, whose generation is spiritual and eternal;
the pride of life to the holy Ghost, who is the Spirit of humility. That golden
Calfe, which being made, was set up and worshipped by the Israelites in the
Wilderness; is not unfitly made use of to represent these; the Calfe which is a
wanton Creature, an emblem of the lust of flesh; the Gold of the Calf refering
to the lust of the eyes, and the exalting it, to the pride of life. Oh how do
the most of men fall down before this golden Calf which the world erecteth.

If you please you may conceive the world as making a Feast to entertain her
Lovers; and here are the three courses which she provideth for them; the first
for food, the lust of the flesh; the second for sight, the lust of the eyes;
the third for state, the pride of life: or as entertaining them with a musical
consort, which is made up of three parts, the Base, the lust of the flesh; the
Tenor, the lust of the eyes, and the Treble the pride of life.

Once more you may very well call these three lusts the elements of the
sensual world; the lust of the flesh, being as the fire in regard of its
burning violence; the lust of the eyes, as the earth, because about things
which the earth affoards; and the pride of life, as the air, or winds which
pufs or swells men up.

Not to enlarge further, The world is here represented to us as an Hydea with
three heads, or like Cerberus that three headed Dog, which the Poets feign to
be the Porter of Hell. Worldly love is here set forth as a tree spreading it
self into three main boughs, whence sprout forth the bitter fruit of all s^ns;
or as a Mother bringing forth three monstrous Daughters, with which the most of
the Sons of men fall in love with.

At this time I shall only give you a view of

1. The Eldest Daughter which is the lust of the flesh; for the better
understanding whereof I shall discourse of it first in General, then in
Particular.

1. In General be pleased to take notice,

1. That this word flesh is used several ways in Scripture, as Cassian has
observed. I shall not mention Cass. Collat. 4. c. 10.
all its acceptions; only know that it is taken in sensu optimo, possimo,
medio; in a good sense for a tender frame, and soft disposition of the soul;
whereby it is capable of receiving the impression of grace, and ready to yield
obedience to Gods commands: in this notion Ezekiel. 36. 26.
it is the matter of the promise, I will give you an heart of flesh.

In a very bad sense for the native and inbred corruption which overspreads
soul and body, whereby we become averse to all good, and prone to whatsoever is
evil; and of this St Paul speaks when he says, in Romans 7. 23.
me, that is, in my flesh dwells no good.

In a middle sense for the inferior part of man, his body which chiefly
consists of flesh and blood; and thus we read of Cleansing our selves from all
filthiness of flesh 2 Cor. 7. 1. Calv. in loc.
and spirit, that is, of body and soul; and in this sense Calvin not unfitly
here takes it.

2. That the lust of the flesh is used in Scripture two Id. ibid.
ways; sometimes very largely, as comprehending in it all vicious lusts
whatsoever; in which notion flesh is to be understood of original corruption,
and is as the Fountain of lust: and inasmuch as there is no evil, to which our
natural pravity does not incline us, the lust of the flesh in this sense is as
it were the genus, whereof, the several evil desires which arise in our
hearts, are the species: and in this notion is that of St Paul to be construed,
Walk in the spirit, and you shall not fulfill Gal. 5. 8.
the lust of the flesh. And indeed for the most part, where we read of the lust
of the flesh, it is to be construed in this large acception.

But in this place flesh being put for the body, and the lust of the flesh
being a contradistinct member to the other two, it is doubtless to be
restrained, and (as Estius Est. in loc.
well observes) signifies Desiderium eorum quae pertinent ad carnem, a desire
of those things which belong to the flesh. So that flesh here is rather to be
construed Objective then Effective, not as the principle from whence this lust
flows, but the Object whereabout it is conversant; and thus all sinful desires
after bodily pleasures, especially those which the two senses of tasting and
touching are taken up with, are they which our Apostle designeth to comprize
under this head the lust of the flesh.

3. That there is a double lusting after the flesh, and Cum natura poscit
supplementa quae desunt non vocatur libido sed fames aut sitis, etc. Vide Aug.
contr. Julian. l. 4. c. 14.
those things which are grateful to it, namely; natural and sensual: there
is an appetite which arises merely from natures indigence; and this though
vehement (as in hunger and thirst) is not sinful: nature teaches every living
Creature earnestly to desire the conservation of the individuum by nourishment,
and of the species by propagation, and therefore this kind of desire had been
in man, even in the state of innocence. But then there is an appetite which
sensual indulgence exciteth, and this being always immoderate beyond its due
bounds is prohibited. Indeed neither Religion nor reason do abridg us of all
bodily pleasure; but they forbid us to serve pleasure, so as (according to S^n.
l. de vita Bea^a. c. 15.
Seneca's phrase) to be perplexed in the absence, or strangled with the
abundance of it: in one word, the desires which proceed from the want, the
delight which tends only to refresh the flesh, is allowable, but all desires
and delights which proceed from, and savor of Ambros. de offic. l. 2. c. 21.
wantonness, are culpable and comprised under this head the lust of the flesh.

2. More particularly it will be needful for the further discussing of this
useful truth, to set before you the several kinds of this fleshly lust; for
though she be a Daughter, yet withal, she is a Mother of many Brats, and it is
such an Arm of this tree of worldly love, as has many branches sprouting
forth of it, such as are incontinency, intemperancy, and idleness,

1. The first and worst of these lusts is incontinency, that which is called by
St Paul, the lust of concupisence, 1 These. 4. 5. 2 Pet. 2. 10, 18.
and by St Peter, the lust of uncleanness, yea, the same Apostle speaking of
false teaches, that they allure through the lust of the flesh, and presently
adding, through much wantonness, plainly intimates wantonness to be a lust of
the flesh; and inasmuch as he uses the Plural number, he insinuates that
there are several wanton and unclean lusts of the flesh.

For methods sake be pleased to know, that this lust of the flesh, is
conversant either about a wrong or a right Object.

1. The chief excursion of this carnal lust is after wrong Objects,
concerning all which I shall in general premise.

That not only that wicked disposition of mind, which by St Paul is called
(...), whereby men burn with impetuous desires after libidinous acts,
resolving to lay hold of every opportunity of satisfying their lusts; Nor yet
only all those contemplative delights, whereby men please themselves with
inward fancies and imaginations of that wickedness which either for fear or
shame, they dare not out outwardly commit: but also all kind of desire, though
not plenarily consented to by the will, nor fully resolved upon for the
performance, yea, all those first motions which arise from the vitiated
appetite, though not at all consented to, are within the compass of that which
is called by St Paul, (...), inordinate affection, and here by St John (...),
the lust of the flesh.

In Particular, The Object of this desire is irregular two ways.

1. When the Object is such as does privare ordine^^ natura, transgress the
order of nature, and this either. Al. Al. pt. 2^. 9. 14. membr. 4.


Simply, and Absolutely, and is most properly called unnatural uncleanness,
whether it be with our selves (the sin of Onan) that secret pollution, which
(though hid from man's) is open to Gods eye, or with the same Sex, Men or Women,
Dishonouring their bodies between themselves (the sin of Sodom, and those
Gentiles concerning Genesis 18. 9.
whom St Paul writes) both which are unnatural, because contrary to natures
end, to wit, generation; or which is yet more unnatural, because it tends only
to a monstrous generation, that which is between rational and merely sensitive
Creatures, the bestiall sin of buggery, things that are as horrenda factu, so
pudenda dictu, abominable to be done, yea, shameful to be named.

Or as limited and restrained after the multiplication of humane nature. Of
this sort are all incestuous lusts after those near relations, whether by
affinity or consanguinity, such as are between Brethren and Sisters, Uncles and
N^e^es, Ants and Nephews, Parents and Children, or Grandchildren, whether
natural or civil, all which are manifestly forbidden by the divine Law, and
repugnant to natures Dictates. Nor are they the less filthy, but rather the
more odious when they are covered with the veil of matrimony; to which purpose
St Ambrose dissuading the marriage of a Ambros. l. 8. Ep. 66.
Brother with his sister's Daughter, though by another Mother thus reasons;
Interdictum est naturae jure, interdictum est lege quae est in cordilus
singulorum, interdictum est immutabili praescriptione pietatis and
necessitudinis; It is forbidden by natures Law, by the Law within every man's
heart, by the inviolable praescription of Piety, and that regard which is due
to propinquity. Nor will either the necessary examples of the first men, when
Brothers and Sisters were enforced to marry for the propagation of mankind; or
the example of the Jews, in Brothers marrying their Brothers Wife, to raise up
seed by virtue of a special Law; or those heroical examples (as Luther
calls them) of any of the Patriarchs in any of Luth. in Genesis c. 29.
these kinds (which being dissonant from the Law, are not to be imitated by
others) be found sufficient warrants or excuses for them who shall give way to
any incestuous conjunctions.

2. When the Object is such as does privare ordinem virtutis, transgress the
order of the virtue of chastity, such are all lusts after any person, whom we
may not justly call our own: And thus,

1. If it be after any more then one, though in a matrimonial way, which is
polygamy, it is unlawful as being against the Primitive institution by God, of
one woman, for one man (which the Prophet Malachy says, was because he sought
a godly seed) and therefore not Mal. 2. 15.
justifiable in the Patriarchs, much less excusable in us by their pattern.

2. If it be without Matrimony, any lust after any persons whether one or more,
married or unmarryed is a lust of the flesh. And in the pursuit of any one of
these,

1. When the one party is altogether dissenting it is a rape wherein only the
Agent is the guilty sinner, and the patient is an innocent sufferer.

2. When either both or one of the parties is married, it is adultery in that
party. A lust so much the more vile, because it is a wilful shipwreck abroad,
when there is an harbor and safe remedy provided at home.

3. When one of the persons is s^ngle, it is in that person fornication, and
when both, it is that which is called simple fornication.

Indeed it is questioned by some whether this latter be a lust of the flesh or
no? and the most plausible argument which they allege is, that Acts 15. 20.
in the decree of that Apostolical counsel; fornication is reckoned with
things strangled and blood, which are in themselves of an indifferent nature.
But how invalid this consequence is, will easily appear, if we Aquin. 2a. 2ae.
9. 154. Art 3.
consider that as Aquinas has well observed, the reason of joining these
together is not as if there were no more moral guilt in fornication then the
rest, but because the rest would be offensive to the Jews as well as
fornication; and so equally cause a Rent in the Christian Church, which
consisted of converted Jews and Gentiles. The truth is, though both persons are
single, it is a breach of chastity, and consequently a lust of the flesh; nay,
yet more, though the persons are not only resolved upon marriage, but
contracted each to other; yet the desire of carnal copulation is a fleshly
lust: for contract is but Jus ad rem, it is Matrimony gives Jus in re,
contract binds to marriage, but allows not to touch before; contract is like
Articles agreed upon, but marriage puts to the seal, so that it is as the
taking of possession of a man's own without due course of Law, and therefore
unwarrantable.

2. You have seen the principal outgoings of this lust, but withal you must
know that the Object may be right, and our desire in this kind a lust of the
flesh, when it is (though between persons lawfully married) either
intempestive, or intemperate, in a season prohibited, in a measure not
moderated, or a manner not ordained, or for an end not warranted: upon this
account it is that St Hierome says, quoting the speech of Hier. l. 1. contra
Jovinian.
a Pythagoraean Physopher, Adulter est in suam uxorem amator ardentior, an
excessive lover of, is an adulterer with his Wife, and St Austin quoteth it as
a saying of Aug. l. 2. contra Julian.
St Ambrose, Uxoris adulterum esse qui in usu conjug ali verecundiae,
temperantiae and honestatis nullam rationem habeat; that he is an adulterer,
who uses the marriage delights without regard to modesty, decency, and
temperance. I confess these are harsh expressions, since a man can no more be
an adulterer with his own wife, then a thief with his own goods; and adultery
according to the notion of the Latin word is, Ad alterius thorum accessus, the
coming to another not his own bed. But yet it is thus far true, that its a
breach of the seventh Commandment, which is expressed by that phrase, Thou shall
not commit adultery: for though conjugium purum, marriage be an undefiled
estate; yet conjuges impuri, the married persons may be unclean, and so guilty
of the lust of the flesh.

2. The second sort of fleshly lust, is intemperance, which is the excess of
the appetite in reference to meat Romans 13. 13.
and drink, and is called by St Paul, Gluttony and drunkenness. Very fitly is
this annexed to the former, since, the satiating of intemperate is the exciting
of incontinent lusts; according to that of the Israelites, Aug. Sermon. 56. de
Temp.
They did eat and drink, and rose up to play; Irrigata corporis nostri terra
spumis libidinum germinabit; the soil of our body being too much ^atred sends
forth the Hier. in Ezekiel. 16.
weeds of luxury, Venture been pastus cito despumat in libidinem, the full fed
belly boyleth over with the s^umme of uncleanness. Isidore Pelusiota being
asked by Thalass^us the Monk, why S. Paul seems to call Esau fornicator,
when no such thing is mentioned in the old Heb. 12. 15.
Testament, answers, that he is branded for a glutton, and thence we may
easily infer he was a fornicator. Indeed fasting spittle is the best cure of
this itch, according to that known saying, Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus,
if you will know where Lady Venus lives, it is at the sign of the Ivye bush,
Gula vestibulum luxuriae, intemperance is her gallery, through which she
walks to her bed of sensual pleasure.

And now as the former respects the pleasure of the touch, so this of the
taste, and because the inordination of this lust is in most things of the same
nature, both in regard of eating and drinking, I shall handle these two sins of
gluttony and drunkenness together.

Among all these secular things none are more necessary, for man's preservation
then meat and drink, since without them we are not able to subsist a few
days; hence it is that nothing is more natural, then a desire Isid. pelus. l.
1. Ep. 320.
of those comforts, nature inclining every thing to desire its own preservation.

But the truth is, we are very prone to unlawful desires about lawful
Objects; nor do we more frequently or heinously offend then in these things
which are so needful for the body; not that the food, but our appetite is in
fault, not the natural appetite; for a little satisfies that, but our
sensual desire which is very prone to exceed.

St Gregory enumerating several ways whereby the Gr. M. sup. Genesis 25. Isid.
Hispal. de conflictu. virt. and vit.
lust of intemperance puts it self forth, enlarges them to five; Isidore
Hispalensis reduces them to four; I conceive we may very rationally contract
them into three heads; namely, the quality and quantity of that which is eaten
and drunk, and the time of eating and drinking.

Our desire after meats and drinks is then a fleshly lust,

1. In respect of quality, when not contented with common wholesome food, we
long for strange delicacies, and must be fed with dainties; thus the Israelites
are fed with Heavenly bread by a miraculous providence, and yet they fall a
lusting after Quails, which God gave them, but in wrath. Indeed it sometimes
so falls out, that the choice of meat and drink arises from the weakness of
the stomach, as in sickly persons, that the earnest desire of strange food is
that which nature prompts to, as in women with Child; that the use of various
and costly both meats and drinks is convenient for that state and place wherein
God has set men, as at the Table of Kings, Nobles, and great Ones, all which
are allowable; but when it is merely the wantonness of our appetite, which
calls for delicacies, spreading its net (as Clemens Alexandrinus his phrase
Cl. Al. paedag. l. 2. c. 1.
is) over the whole world, causing Sea and Land to be ransakt for its
provision, yea, engaging Art continually to invent new drinks, new dishes for
its delight, this is justly to be condemned as a lust of the flesh. And which
is yet a further degree of this lust, when it is after a frequent use of such
meats and drinks as serve to be incentives of sin, provocations of uncleanness;
especially in young men whose blood is boiling, and most especially when it is
for that very end, that thereby they may be the more fit for wanton sports, it
is very odious and abominable.

2. In regard of the quantity, When our lust is not satisfied with a competent
measure of meats and drinks, but puts us upon feeding to fullness, and drinking
to excess, so as we may be said rather to swallow then drink, devour then
eat. Indeed there is an extreme desire after meat, which is called by
Physicians, the Doglike appetite, and after drink which is called the dropsy;
and these arise a malis humoribus, from bad humors in the body, and are
diseases not sins, unless when (as too often) they proceed originally a malis
moribus, from intemperate manners. And when not the distemper of the body, but
the disorder of the mind, engages men to an immoderate use of these
Creatures, it is a fleshly lust.

For the understanding whereof it will be needful to enquire, Wherein the
inordinate use of meats and drinks does consist. In answer whereunto, you must
know in general, that the proportion which temperance requires is not Rei but
Personae, in respect of the things, but the persons; since according to the
constitution of men's bodies, that which is too much for one, may be too little
for another. But more particularly, eating and drinking is excessive in any:
Whenas

1. It oppresses nature: To eat and drink more then the stomach can well
digest, and that not through any accidental distemper of the stomach, or
venomous quality, or antipathy in the food, but only the great quantity; so as
either it is thrown up again, or with a great deal of trouble concocted, is
undoubtedly excessive, since whereas the proper end of eating and drinking is
to repair; this tends to the impairing of nature.

2. It disturbeth reason, To eat or rather to drink (for this more especially
concerns drunkenness) so much as wholly devesteth us of the use of reason (as
in men that are dead drunk) or subjecteth reason to any passion either of
anger and rage, or mirth and jollity, or lust and venery, (as in men that are
mad drunk) is unquestianably excessive: the worst degree of drunkness is to
intoxicate, and the next to that to inflame: since whereas the principal end
of eating and drinking is to render us the more fit for Gods service, by this
means we are more unfit both for the duties of the general and particular
calling.

Nor must I here forget to add, that they who are mighty to drink wine, and
men of strength to mingle strong drink; Though they do not manifestly either
overcharge their stomachs, or overturn their brains, are in Gods account
drunkards, and have therefore a woe denounced against them; but yet this is
only true where either it is an acquired strength by frequent compotations, or
being natural, it is made use of customarily, to the devouring of great
quantities, and which is worst of all to the triumphing over weak brains.

In sum, sicut aeger ad medicinam sic ad sumendas August.
dapes debet unus quisque accedere, non in illis voluptatem appetens sed
necessitati succurrens, is the rule of the Father; Every one must look upon his
food as his Physic, seeking in meat and drink not what may please the
appetite, but supply necessity. After the example of that temperate person
mentioned by Socrates, let Socrat. Hist. l. 4. c. 18.
us use our meat and drink, (...), not as a set business, but only a trivial
matter not worth the expending much time upon. Nor yet would I hereby forbid
all use of these comforts beyond what nature requires for its necessary
sustenance, as being a rigidity which neither Religion nor reason exact. It is
very probable at that marriage Feast where Christ was present, as variety was
provided, so they did eat plentifully; and it is more then probable, that they
had well drunk before Christ miraculated wine in the vessels: nor is it to be
imagined that Christ would have wrought that miracle (though it were for the
glory of his power,) had it been unlawful for the guests to drink it, when as
yet necessity of nature did not, could not require it. To eat and to drink
therefore at some, particularly, festival times, not only for the support, but
refreshing of nature, for necessity, but hilarity, is allowable; yet with a
great deal of circumspection, especially in drinking, least hilarity exceed
the bounds John 2. 1.
of sobriety, and become a slippery step to ebriety: and when our desire after
these Creatures carries further then moderate refreshment, so as either for
the meats and drinks, or companies sake to indulge the over free use of them,
it is a sensual sinful lust of the flesh.

3. In respect of the time, and it is a lust of the flesh, when our desire
after meats and drinks is such, as that. 1. We will at no time forbear the
total use of them (though yet the strength of nature will bear it,) no not for
Religious ends. 2. We indulge to our selves a liberal use of them at such time
when the Churches distress calls for fasting, weeping, and mourning. 3.
Finally, We expend too great a part of our time on them (with the rich
glutton,) Faring deliciously every day, Luke 16. 19. Eccl. 10. 6.
feasting too often, with those Princes, Eating in the morning, beginning too
soon, and with those Israelites rising up early that we may follow strong
drink Isai. 5. 18.
and continuing till midnight, staying too long. It is 1 Pet. 4. 3.
very observable, that not only (...), excess of wine, but (...), and (...),
banquetings and drinkings are reckoned among the lusts in which the Gentiles
walked, though we do not eat till we are so pursie that we cannot go, or
drink till we are so giddy that we cannot stand, yet if we delight so much in,
and have such a desire after, that it causes us to spend too much time in
comessations, and compotations, it is a lust of the flesh. Solomon blames them
who tarry long at Prove. 23. 30. Vulg.
the wine, when men dine all day, and sup all night, eat and drink away a
third part, nay, the better half of the time. These men according to the
vulgar translation of the wisemans forementioned expression, Student calicibus
epotandis, make their cups their books and drink their business, meditate
nothing but their Trenchers, and lock up their Souls in the Kitchen, and the
Cellars: according to St Gregory Nyssens phrase, they have (...), their reason
Greg. Nyssen. in Eccl. Hom. 5. Tertull. adv. Psych^. c. ult.
in their throat, or to use Tertullians phrase, Agape in Cacabis fervet, fides
in Culinis calet, spes in ferculis jacet; Their love boyleth in their Caldrons,
their faith is warm in their Kitchins, and their hope lies in their Dishes.
Like the Serpent (to allude with St Ambrose) Ambros. l. de parad. c. 15.
they creep upon their bellies, yea, with that Fish whereof Clemens
Alexandrinus speaks, they have their heart in their belly, as if like
Bonosus, they were borne not to live, but to drink, or like the Megarenses,
they did not eat to live, but live to eat.

3. Besides these which are the principal branches of this arm Ebullitions of
this lust of the flesh; there is yet a third which must not be passed over in
silence, and that is idleness, a lust which renders men liable to temptations
of the former kind, incontinence and intemperance are no strangers to an idle
bosom. The Poet gives this as the reason, why Aegistus was an adulterer? -- In
promptu causa est desidiosus erat. because he was sloathfull; standing water
putrifieth, so does the lazy person, he that loves to do nothing will soon
do worse then nothing.

Now this lust of idleness* expresses it self two ways, by an inordinate
desire of sleep, of play: of each a word.

1. It is a true saying of St Austin, God has given Aug. in Ps. 62.
to man sleep, Quo reparentur membra corporis ut p^ssint vigilantem animam
sustinere, by which the strength both of body and mind may be repaired. Indeed
sleep loves Prove. 20. 13.
man's nature, chearing, refreshing, coroborating it, but yet man must not love
sleep too affectionately: it is the cry of the sluggard in the Proverbs, Yet a
little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, which
the Syriack reads, Ponit manum super pectus, he puts his hand upon his
breast, showing how dear and pleasing his sleep is to him.

If more particularly you would know what love of sleep is immoderate? I answer,

^. When we are so greedy of, that we will not sometimes interrupt it for acts
of devotion, after the example of David, Who rose at midnight to give thanks to
God, and of Christ, who sometimes prayed all night; nay, we suffer sleep to
interrupt us whilst exercised about Religious duties, like Eutyches upon whom
an heavy sleep fell whilst Paul was preaching, and an heavy* hand of God whilst
he was sleeping, a sad warning for all Churchsleepers, to all whom me thinks
Christ says as he did to Peter, Could you not watch with me one hour.

2. When we give such way to sleep on our Couch by day, or our bed by night,
that it is rather sepultura suffocati, then requies lassi, a suffocating then a
refreshing of the spirit, a dulling, then a quickening of the body. It is St
Ambrose his assertion of the blessed Virgin Mary, Non prius dormire cupidit as
quam necessit as fuit, she was rather enforced then willing to sleep. Indeed
vigilance teaches not to sleep sooner nor longer then ^eed requires, and it
is Chrysologus his advice, Indulgendum Chrysostom. Sermon. 24.
somno ut corpus reparet non resolvat ut vires revocet non enervet, Sleep must
be indulged to so far as may repair nature, and recall not weaken strength, or
else it is a lust of the flesh.

2. As to sports and pleasures it is not to be gain said, but that there is a
convenient use of them, (...), Aristot. Eth. l. 10. c. 6. Pind.
says Aristotle truly, It is impossible that the bow should be always bent,
and therefore Pindar fitly calls play, (...), the best ^ure^ of our labors,
but yet excessively to love it is a lust of the flesh; in which respect says
the Greek Father excellently, (...), I do not forbid relaxation, Gr. Nazant.
orat. 6.
but I condemn want of moderation Now our lust after sport is inordinate.

1. For the matter or Object of it, whenas we love to sport with things
unlawful, which are impious, or cruel, or dishonest, or of bad report among
judicious and sober Christians, Ludus noxius in culpa, they are fools (says
the wiseman and justly) who make sport of sin, and they are unwise who prefer
their sport before their credit.

2. For the manner, when as men pursue their play with too much earnestness,
and unrestrained enlargement, as if it were to be (...), the end of their
desire. It is a good advice of St Ambrose, Caveamus ne dum relaxare Ambros.
Offic.
animum volumus solvamus omnem harmonians, we had need take care least by
letting the strings down too loose we spoil the harmony; we may take
recreation as sauce, but not be as greedy of it as if it were our meat; it is
excellent to make our bus^ness a play; but infamous to make play our business.

3. For the Time when men are so eager; that according to Seneca's phrase,
Agitur vita per ludum, they play away their lives, squand^ing days and nights,
months and years in play; and take so much time, that they rob God of his
due, neglect their calling, play when they should pray, and sport when they
should work. Cicero says divinely, we must not indulge to Cic. Offic.
our sports, Priusquam gravibus seriisque rebus satisfecerimus, till we have
discharged more serious and weighty affairs: in which respect Aristotle
advises, (...) to make choice of fit opportunities for recreation.

And thus with what perspicuous brevity, these various and serious subjects
would affoard, I have unfolded the latitude of this evil, which is here called
the lust of the flesh.

To wind up this discourse in few words.

How great a predominancy this lust of the flesh has in the world, the
gluttonies, drunkenness, and unclean practices of the most do sadly proclaim.
Seneca complained that the men of his time were Inter vinum and oleum occupati,
altogether taken up with wine and oil. I would to God such were only to be
found among Pagans, but alas these swarm in the Christian world, nay, which is
yet more sad in the Reformed Protestant Church of England: Oh that Papists and
Sectaries had not too just cause to say, A great part of the English
Protestants are unclean, adulterous, gluttonous epicures, quaffing drunkards,
riotous gamesters, so that whilst they profess the purest faith they lead the
most debauched lives. For these Bastard Sons does their Mother the Church
mourn, and suffer at this day: and yet, as if all her sufferings were not
worth their pity, they still renew and multiply these sins to the dishonor of
her profession, and the prolongation of her miseries.

Indeed according to that known Proverb, Venture non habet aures, The belly has
not ears; voluptuous persons are deaf to divine instructions: and as St
Hierome truly speaking of these sins, Eo deponere est difficilus quo eis uti
est dulcius, they are therefore very difficult Hieron.
to leave, because so sweet to enjoy: so that as Solomon observes of the
Adulterer in particular, it is too true of all those sorts of sinners, they are
hardly, and therefore Prove. 2. 19.
rarely reclaimed, but yet I will not wholly despair even of their conversion;
however for others prevention I shall propose these following considerations;
The lust of the flesh is defiling, debasing, destroying, and consequently not
only to be abandoned, but abborred.

1. It is defiling, True it is as our Savior says, That which goes in at the
mouth (the Object of these lusts) does not defile a man, but it is as true,
that which comes from the heart (the lust after these Objects) does defile.
Indeed all sin is of a polluting nature, but especially these; and therefore
one of these lusts in a pecular manner is called impuri^y and uncleanness. The
gross acts of these sins defile the body, and the very lust after them defiles
the soul.

2. It is debasing, Indeed nothing is more natural then a desir^ after these
Objects, but yet nothing is more unnatural then the inordinate lust after
them; and what a shame is it that the grace of God should not teach us to deny
these lusts, which the light of nature teaches Heathens. It is observed that
of all living Creatures, Man has the narrowest Womb, and the straitest
Throat, as if nature would thereby teach us to be the most abstemious. The
truth is, the lust of the flesh is not only unchristian because contrary to the
precept and practice of our Lord and Master, but inhumane because opposite to
the dictates of ^eason, so that we may truly affirm, men by the fulfilling of
this lust, become like the beast that perishes, whilst gluttony transformeth
them into Tygars, drunknness into Swine, uncleanness into Goats, sloth into
Dormouses, and laziness into Asses; nay, shall I add, they are worse then the
Beasts, for whereas these Creatures cannot be made to eat, or drink more then
their natural appetite requires, and observe their usual times of
conjunction; voluptuous men regard neither season nor measure in the satiating
of their lusts. Add to all this,

3. It is destroying, And here I might enlarge in several respects, this lust
of the flesh, being that which destroys the credit, the state, the body; yea,
(without sincere repentance) the soul of him that indulgeth to it: Solomon
says of the Adulterer, and it is as true of the Prove. 6. 33.
Glutton and Drunkard, A wound and dishonor shall be get, and his reproach
shall not be wiped away; sensual 25. 26.
lusts whilst they please the flesh, blot the name, and 23. 21.
though the execution of them content the sinners taste and touch, they make
him to stink in the nostrils of God and Man. Again the Wiseman warning the
young man not to lust after the whorish woman in his heart, says, That by
means of an whorish woman a man is brought to a piece of bread, and elsewhere
in one Verse he tells us, That the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to
poverty, and Drousiness shall cloth a man with rags. The full cup makes an
empty purse, and the fat dish, a lean bag, a soft bed, a thin shop, and the
costly Mistress, a thredbare servant; yet again Solomon says of the Adulteress,
she hunts for the precious life, it is no less true of banqu^tings, drinkings,
revellings and such like. It is not seldom seen that men by satisfying these
carnal lusts, endanger their lives, ruin their healths, and hasten their
ends. Finally, The Wiseman says of the unclean sinner, that he destroys his
own soul, and it is verified of the rest. The Gluttons table is a snare as well
to his soul as his body; the Drunkards cup spoileth him of grace as well as
wit; the Gamester staketh his soul as well as his state; and the Sluggard by
consulting his bodies temporal ease, hazardeth his souls eternal rest.

And now my Brethren, if upon all these accounts you are at last willing to bid
farewell to this lust of the flesh, remember what is hinted in the beginning of
this discourse, namely, that it is a fire, and therefore you will do well to
take the same course in subduing this lust, which men do in putting out a fire.

More particularly take notice of these four directions.

1. Extinguish it whilst but a spark, least when a flame, it become too
powerful; resist the very beginning, since if you give the least way to, you
will be entangled by it; Verecunda peccati initia, sensual desires at first
are modest, but if consented to, and delighted in, are more and more craving,
yea, at last commanding. Indeed Sensim sine sensu, by little and little
insensibly this lust gets ground of us, therefore let us be watchful betimes
to espy and prevent it.

2. Substract the fuel which feeds and increases it. S^ Peter's counsel is,
Abstain from fleshly lusts, which 1 Pet. 2. 10.
is best done by taking away that which foments them: what St Paul says of the
legal Ceremonies, touch not, taste not, handle not; that I may fitly apply to
sensual lusts, take heed of the occasions inducing to them; Eradenda sunt
pravae cupidinis alimenta, if you would not have lust to fatten, do not feed
it. Not to launch out into those many particulars which might be reckoned up in
this kind, beware especially of evil company. It is Solomon's advice, Be not
amongst wine bibbers, amongst Prove. 23. 20.
riotous eate^s of flesh; The way not to be of them, is not to be one among
them; men seldom imagine till they find it by woeful experience, what an
infectious breath there is in evil society, to corrupt their minds and
manners.

3. Pour out water, even the water of the penitent tears for thy former
impurities. The heads of Dragons are broken in the waters, Draconum capita
vitia capitalia, the heads of Dragons are capital sins, among which
incontinency and intemperance are the chief; and look as the greater the flam^,
the more water must be poured on; it is not drops but buckets, nay, floods of
water must quench the raging furnace: So according to the greatness of thy sins
proportion the multitude of thy tears, and if thou have been a notorious
offender in this kind, thou must be a dolorous mourner?

4. Lastly, Strive to blow out this fire of lust by the breath of thy Prayers,
solicit the throne of grace for chastity, sobriety, vigilance, temperance,
those virtues which are directly opposite to this lust, yea, beseech the Spirit
of God that he would breath into thy soul, and thereby extinguish the flame of
thy lust. Indeed the breath of the evil spirit makes this fire the hotter,
but a blast of the good spirit will put it out, at least much slack it, and
therefore laying hold on the gracious promise of giving his spirit to them that
ask, give not over Praying till thou have obtained the spirit of grace,
whereby thou may mortify this lust of the flesh.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 15, 16. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
THat God of this world, Prince of darkness, and arch enemy of mankind, the
Devil, as he wants not virulency, so he is full of subtilty. Indeed it is his
most usual practice to take sinners in the snares of temptations, nets of
circumvention, and ambushes of destruction; No wonder if St Paul minds the
Corinthians of his (...), as well as (...), devices as well as strong holds.

Among all his cunning stratagems, none more politic and prevalent then those
by which he takes advantage from our selves against our selves. To this
purpose it is that he observes the age of our lives, quality of our outward
condition, the complexion and constitution of our bodies, the abilities and
endowments of our minds, dispositions and inclinations of our hearts, and
accordingly fits his temptations, whereby too often he overcomes us. The last
of these and not the least St Basil takes notice of where he says, Bas. M.
hom. 23.
(...), he uses our own lusts and desires as weapons to fight against us. And
no wonder if the wind of his temptations blow us on amain when it joyneth with
the tide of our own desires. Good reason had St John, having encouraged young
men, and in them all Christians to battle with, and a victory over the wicked
one, to warn them of those lusts, which if not mortified, would be
prejudicial unto them, and serviceable unto him, The lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life.

We are now in order to proceed to a second Daughter of worldly love, namely,
the lust of the eyes; but what St John means by this expression admits among
Expositors of several constructions.

Illyricus conceives that our Apostle intends, Potissimum Illyr. in loc.
libidinosos aspectus, chiefly lust full looks, unclean aspects, wanton
glances. This was that with which St Peter charged the false teachers, that
they 2 Pet. 2. 14.
had eyes full of adultery; and of which our Savior affirms that to look on
a woman (so as to lust after her) is a committing adultery with her in the
heart. But since this more properly is referd to the forementioned Matthew. ^. 28.
lust of the flesh, and withal is too narrow a restriction of the Apostles
meaning, I shall pass it by.

There are two interpretations, the one whereof is St Austins and venerable
Bedes, the other most generally Beda in loc. Aug. in loc. and l. 10. Confess.
and de Relig. c. 35. Aquin. 2a. 2ae. 9. 153.
received by ancient and modern Authors, both of which being probable I shall
reject neither.

Indeed I think we shall do best with Aquinas to look upon them as two members
of one exposition, and so if you would know what this lust of the eyes is? the
Answer is, curiositas, and cupiditas, a desire of knowing, and of having
curiosity and covetousness, the latter of which I shall insist upon, because it
is that which I incline to as most genuine.

1. By this lust of the eyes, We may very well understand curiosity, or an
inordinate desire of knowledge; and whereas there is a double knowledge, to wit,
intellectual and sensitive, both which may be inordinately desired, this lust
of the eyes may very well include both; inasmuch as the mind has its eyes as
well as the body, and so this lust is both of the mental eyes after
intellectual, and of the corporeal after sensitive knowledge.

1. There is a lust of the eyes after intellectual knowledge, not but that
knowledge is suitable to, and consequently des^rable by the mind of man; nor yet
is every earnest desire after knowledge, to be charged with curiosity. Indeed it
is such as cannot be had without, and therefore must be ^ought for with
diligence; but if you would know when it is a lust of the eyes? I answer, the
inordination of this desire is discovered several ways.

1. When it is a desire after knowledge for a bad end. Bern in Ca^t. Sermon. 36.
St Bernard observed in his time, and it is still true, Sunt qui scire volunt
tantum ut sciant, Some desire to know that they may know, and such a desire is
irregular because it makes knowledge and end, whenas it is designed to be a
means of a furrher, and better end. Aquin. 2a. 2ae. 9. 167.
Aquinas observes that there are two accidental effects of knowledge which
are very evil, namely, to puff us up with pride, and make us expert in
wicked-ness; and when those accidental effects of knowledge are the
intentionall ends of our desire, it is a lust of the eyes; the truth is,
knowledge is desirable chiefly in order to practice, and that of good, and
therefore to desire it only as fuel for our self conceit, or which is far
worse, as an help to wicked devices, that we may be wise to do evil, it is
deservedly censured as exorbitant.

2. When it is a desire after knowledge by magical Arts and diabolical Helps.
It is far better to be ignorant, then to go to School to the Devil. That
knowledge we gain by him is far fetched, because from Hell, and dear bought,
because with the hazard of our souls.

3. When by desires and endeavors after the knowledge of the things that are
less needful, we are hindered from the knowledge of what is more needful; thus
when men prefer humane before divine, and in divine, speculative before
practical knowledge, it is justly blameable. They who are diligent searchers
into natures secrets, undervaluing the mysteries of Religion: They who content
themselves with the knowledge of Creatures, but are not by that led to know the
Creator: They who are desirous rather to break their teeth against the bones
of difficulty, then feed their souls with necessary truths; who are inquisitive
after the manner of the ^reatures groaning, but little desirous of experiencing
those groans of the spirit in their own hearts which cannot be uttered; who
are more solicitous where the soul of Lazarus was, whilst his body lay in the
Grave, then where their own souls shall be when their bodies must dwell in the
dust; when and where the last judgment shall be, then how they shall appear in
that day with boldness, are most deservedly charged with curiosity. Indeed as
Eagles when they rest, and Lions when they walk, pull in the one his tallons,
the other his claws, to keep them sharp against such time as they meet with a
prey; so it would be our wisdom to reserve our wits and studies for things of
most weight, and not busy them in matters of less concernement.

4. Lastly, When we desire to know what is without our sphere, and above our
reach. For illiterate Mechanics to busy themselves in expounding the dark
places of Scripture, in fathoming the depth of Theological Controversies: For
the most learned Doctors to be wise above what is written, to endeavor to make
windows in Gods Closet, and unclaspe his secret Books, and so seek after the
knowledge of what God has concealed, it is no other then a lust of curiosity.
And therefore St Austins counsel is very prudent, Compescenda Aug. contra
Manich. l. 6. c. 1.
est humana Temeritas, id quod non est non quaerat, ne quod est non inveniat;
we must bridle our temerity, and check our curiosity, least whilst we pursue
what is not revealed, we find not that which is. Take we heed of soaring too
high, least we be scorched, and wading too deep least we be drowned; there are
some things we may Nescire sine crimine, not know without blame, which we
cannot Scire sine discrimine, know without danger: and in respect of these, a
learned ignorance is to be preferred before an ignorant learning.

2. There is a lust of the eyes after sensitive knowledge: and thus we may
extend it to all the senses; curiosity studying to please them all in their
several ways; and so the eyes being the most noble sense, the lust of the
Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.
eyes may ( Synecdochically) comprehend the rest. We read concerning the
sinners in Sion, that they did lie upon beds (or Bedsteds) of Ivory, by which
their eyes were delighted; stretch themselves upon their Couches, for the
pleasing of their touch, eat the Lambs out of the flocks, and the Calves out
of the midst of the stall, and drink wine in bowls, to the satiating of their
taste; chant to the sound of the Vial, and invent to themselves instruments of
Music for the ravishing of their Ears; and anoint themselves with the chief
Ointment, that their smell might have its sweet savor; so curious are sensual
men in giving content to all their senses. But seeing according to this notion,
the lust of the eyes will in some sort comprehend the lust of the flesh; I
conceive it will be better confined to that particular sense, and so denotes a
curiosity of seeing. In reference to this notion it is that this lust of the
eyes is phrased, Nugacitas spectaculorum, the vanity of seeing shows, the
affection of delectable sights. This seems to have been the curiosity of Eve
in looking on the forbidden fruit, of Lots wife in looking back on flaming
Sodom, Genesis 34. 1.
and of Dinah in going forth to see the Daughters in the Land. Not that all
desire of seeing rare and pleasant Objects, whither of nature or art is
unlawful, but when our desire and consequently our delight is too passionate
even to admiration, and that joined with forgetfullness of the great Artificer,
when it is not carried ad aliquid utile, imo ad aliquid noxium, (as the
Schools determine it) to such sights as may occasion good, yea, rather in^ite
to evil in any kind, it is no other then a lust of the eyes: upon which
account Seneca said truly, Nothing prove^h more prejudiall Sen. Ep. 71.
to good manners, then vain and foolish sights, by which vices steal into the
mind.

As an Appendix to this, is that curiosity of trying (to see being as much
sometimes as to make trial,) whereby men will needlessly put themselves or
others upon such experiments, as may probably prove prejudicial in any kind,
which is no less then a tempting of God; to this the Devil tempted our
Savior, when he bad him cast himself down from the pinnacle, which is referred
by St Austin, as has been already observed to this head, the lust of the eyes.

2. But the other branch of the Interpretation seems to me most probable, and
therefore upon that I shall insist, which by the lust of the eyes,
understands covetousness, that is, The inordinate desire of gold, silver,
goods, lands, houses, and all possessions, which denominate men rich in this
world.

And now for the better discovery of this it will be needful to resolve two
Queries.

Why this lust is called the lust of the eyes?

When our desires of these things becomes the lust of the eyes?

1. It may not be unfitly inquired, why our Apostle calls covetousness the
lust of the eyes? To which a double answer may be returned, because the eyes
are both the inlets and the outlets of this lust; by the eyes as a door, this
lust gets into, and by the eyes as a window it looks out of the soul. That
expression of Solomon, Eccl. 2. 10.
( Whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them,) may at first sight seem
strange, the heart being the seat of desire, and yet it will appear very
rational, if we consider that the eye is the instrument of desire, by which it
is first excited and then cherished.

1. This lust enters in at the eyes. It is that indeed which is true of other
desires as well as this. The ^^e is the souls burning glass, in which the
beams of visible Objects, being as it were contracted, the fire of lust in
several kinds is kindled in the soul: in which respect the eyes are well
called by Seneca, Irritamenta malorum Sen. de remed. fortuit. Prove. 23. 31.
ducesque scelerum, The ringleaders of evil and incentives to wickedness. When
the Wiseman forbids To look upon the wine when it is red, when it gives its
color in the cup; He thereby intimates, says Cassiodorus, that Cassiod. l.
12. var. 3.
not only dulcedo, but pulchritudo, its sweetness to the taste, but
pleasantness to the eye is apt to allure to excess. Job 31. 1. Ex visu nascitur
amor.
This Job was aware of in regard of the lust of uncleanness, and therefore he
says, I made a Covenant with my eyes, that I might not look upon a maid. And
yet more particularly the eyes are usual and prevalent means of stirring up
covetous lusts. When Solomon Prove. 23. 5.
speaking of riches puts the question, not Why will thou set thine heart but
thine eyes? when yet he means the heart, what does he but imply that by our
eyes our hearts become enamoured with them? You know the story of Achan, who
seeing the wedges of gold, and the Babilonish garment was bewitched with, and
laid hold upon them. Indeed there is a strange attractive force both in gold
and silver, being looked upon to gain desire, for which reason perhaps it is
that the Hebrews derive the Noune, (...) which signifies silver, from the
Verb (...) which signifies to desire.

2. This lust goet^ out at the eyes. Covetous men very much please themselves
in beholding their riches: and indeed this is in a sort peculiar to this lust.
For though the Objects of the lust of the flesh, be visible and delightful to
the eye, yet the other senses of taste, and touch are chiefly pleased, and the
lust after them rests not till those senses be pleased, as well as the eye;
whereas riches are so the Objects of the eye, that the other senses have no
carnal pleasure by them; yea, the Aquin. t^. 2ae. 9. 87.
greatest satisfaction a covetous man gives his lust, is looking upon them:
hence it is that he so often when alone, opens his Chest that he may look
upon his white and yellow earth; like that Roman Emperor who had his several
hours in the day of telling over his money, and carrying it from one Chest to
another; or like the covetous old Man in Plautus, who could never endure to
have his pot of Gold out of sight, for this cause it is that he loves to walk
in his Garden, ride through his Lands, that he may take a view of his
possessions; so good reason had our Apostle to phrase it the lust of the eyes.

Indeed there is an Objection here started by a Schoolman, to wit, how the
covetousness of a blind man, can be said to be the lust of the eyes. Al. Al.
Ps. 2a. 9. ^44.


To which the answer is easily given, by reassuming that forementioned
distinction of the corporeal and intellectual eyes, since as he well
observes, Licet color non possit pervenire ad visum, tamen cognitio hujus visi
potest pervenire ad oculum mentis interioris, Though the color of the gold and
silver cannot come to his outward eye, yet the knowledge of th^se visible
Objects may come to his inward eye, and so he feeds his lust by the
contemplation of his wealth.

Having cleared the passage by giving an account of the first, we may now more
easily proceed to a discussion of the second and principal Question, which
will give further light to the reason of the appellation, and so to the
resolution of the former; and if you would know when our lust after wealth is a
lust of the eyes, and so irregular, be pleased to know

That this lust must be considered in a double reference, to wit, respectu
acquirendi and retinendi, in regard of getting and keeping wealth, craving and
saving it. Indeed as the Grave is said to have both a mouth, and an hand in
Scripture, so has this lust of the eyes a mouth to receive, and an hand to
retain, and accordingly it is made up of two ingredients, Rapacity, and
Tenacity.

1. Rapacity, Which is the lust of getting riches offends either respectu
Objecti, or mensurae, in regard of the Aquin. 2a. 2ae. 9. 118. Art. 1.
matter or the measure.

1. The desire of getting is the lust of the eyes, when it is conversant about
either aliena, or superflua, those things which duly belong to another, or
those things which are superfluous and needless for our selves. Zanch. in loc.


1. To lust after other men's estates is undoubtedly sinful, and not improperly
called, a lust of the eyes, since (as Zanchy observes,) such persons, Quicquid
bonorum mundi vident cupiunt and sibi usurpare student, like longing women,
they lust after whatsoever they see, and though it belongs to another, strive
to make it their own. Thus Ahab sees Naboths vineyard, 1 Kings 21. 1.
and presently is sick for it, nor can any thing cure his distemper but Naboths
dispossession: this is that which is expressly forbidden in the last
Commandment, and that in a most extensive phrase, Thou shall not covet Exodus
20. 17.
any thing that is thy Neighbors.

Indeed there are some things of this world that are as common as the air, and
water, wherein all men partake without prejudice one to another; but there are
some things proper, as Lands, Moneys, Goods, in which every legal possessour
has a peculiar interest, and to which he has a just right; and when we look
upon others enjoyments, not only with an evil, that is, an envious eye,
repining that they are theirs; but with an evil, that is, a covetous eye,
wishing they were ours, that is a lust of the eyes. The Rabbis have an Paulus
Fagius sentent. Heb.
excellent saying to this purpose; He that says, mine is thine, and thine is
mine, is an idiot; He that says, mine is mine, and thine is thine, is
moderate; He that says, mine is thine, and thine, is thine is charitable; but
He that says, thine is mine, and mine is mine, is wicked: I though it be only
saying it in his heart to wish it were so. Not Beloved that all desire of what
is at present another, is a covetuous lust; but when as I desire that from
another which is as expedient for him, as it can be for me, or which he takes
delight in, and so is unwilling to part with, or which if it were my own case I
should be loath to forgo to him or any other that should desire it of me in the
like kind, it becomes a sinful desire of the eyes.

2. Not only to lust after what is another, but after what is superfluous is
the lust of the eyes, and fitly so called, inasmuch as what is more then for
our just use, is only for our eyes: covetousness is not simply a desire of
having more, and therefore more must be added to its definition; it is plus
velle quam sat est, a desire of having more then is enough, not for our desire,
but convenience: observable to this purpose is that Prayer of Agur, Give me
neither poverty nor riches, but feed me with food Prove. 30. 8.
convenient for me; where the right Object of a lawful desire is food
convenient, and consequently a desire of riches, that is, a greater measure of
wealth then is convenient, is sinful: if Gods providence cast super abundant
riches upon us in the exercise of our callings, we are gratefully to accept
them: but we may not desire and seek after them. Suitable to which is that gloss
of Estius upon 1 Timothy 6. 10. Est. ibid.
these words of St Paul, They that will be rich, it is not they who are rich,
but they who will be; Cupiditates accusat non facultates, says St Austin,
Riches are gifts in Aug. Hom. 3.
wisdoms left hand, not the having, but the craving them is blame worthy.
Congruous hereunto is that of Reyn^rus, there are some who have them, but love
them not; and others who neither have nor love them: both these especially the
former are to be commended. Again, There are some who have and love them, and
others who want and love them, and both these are to be condemned, not the one,
for the having, or the other for the wanting, but both for the loving them.

The only Question which is here necessary to be resolved is, what are those
superfluous riches which we ought not to desire?

The answer to which will be best returned by the resolving of another
Question, namely, what is to be accounted necessary and convenient? the measure
of which is taken from a double reference, to wit, to our selves and others?

In regard of our selves, there is a threefold necessity.

1. Naturae, What is requisite to procure Food, Raiment, and Habitation,
without which we cannot subsist?

2. Personae, What is needful to provision, for those who belong to us, Wife,
Children, and Servants; who are to be accounted as it were a part of our selves?

3. Status and conditionis, What is competent to, and convenient for the place
to which God has called us, and station wherein he has set us.

In regard of others, there is a double necessity, to wit,

1. Publica, What is needful to render us subservient to the maintenance of
the Magistracy and Ministry of Church and Commonwealth?

2. Privata, What may enable us in some measure to relieve the indigence of
those poor persons amongst whom we live?

And now to desire more then what may fit us for a convenient discharge of
these several obligations, is an unlawful lust, inasmuch as it carries us
after a wrong Object.

2. The lust of getting is a sinful lust of the eyes, when as it is excessive
in measure, which we may well call the greedy eye, according to the derivation
of Atarus from ave, and aurum: and this excess appears especially in three
things: When as it is

1. Resolute, or rather Absolute; That we will have these things (as it were)
whither God will or no; this seems to be the Emphasis of that forementioned
phrase, They that will be rich, that will be so by any means, all is f^sh that
comes to their net, though it be a Snake instead of a Lampr^y; they will
attempt any exploits, be they never so unlawful, rather then not obtain their
desire.

2. Hasty, Impatient of delay, that we will not wait Gods pleasure, or stay his
leisure. The Poets feign, that when Plutus which is riches, was sent from
Jupiter he limpeth away, goes slowly; but when from Pluto (which we may
moralize to be the Devil) he runs: no wonder if Solomon says, He that
Prove. 28. 10.
makes haste to be rich, shall not be innocent; He that hastes to be rich,
has an evil eye. Indeed evil men usually for haste leave the Kings high way,
and leap over hedge, and ditch, take indirect courses, and ofttimes the more
haste, the worst speed.

3. Discentented, So that if our desires succeed not we are froward and peevish
like Jonah; or heavy and melancholy like Ahab; grieved, nay, mad, that we
cannot have our will especially, when being crossed in our designs, we shoot
the Arrows of our rage against Heaven and repine at God himself. And thus I
have given you an account of the first branch of this lust of the eyes.

2. This sinful lust discovers it self no less by Tenacity, then Rapacity.
To understand which aright know,

1. That all desire of keeping is not culpable; we may, nay, ought to be
careful of provision, not only for our present but future uses; it is the Ants
wisdom which Solomon would have us imitate, in Summer to lay up for Winter:
more especially if God bless us with posterity, we are bound to endeavor the
keeping in stone, a proportionable competency, that they may have wherewith to
subsist when we are gone. For to this no doubt that of the Apostle extends, He
that provideth not for his family (to wit, as he is able) is worse then an
Infidel. If therefore you would know what desire of keeping is Tenacity? I
answer

1. When we are impatient at the loss o^ riches: Alexander desiring to know
whither Apelles was in love with Campespee, caused a ^oy to come in whilst
they were discoursing, and cry out, Apelles, your shop is on fire, at the
hearing of which he presently cried out, If the Picture of Campespee be burnt,
I am undone, by which he knew he was in love with her: So are we with riches,
if upon the loss of them, we think our selves undone, and are so far from
learning with Job to bless God, as that according to his Wifes counsel, we
curse him in our hearts, because he takes these things away from us.

2. When we think our treasure is never full enough, laying up abundance, that
we may leave our Children a vast estate, which too often proves a lure for
Birds of prey, betraying them to the fauning of flatterers, embracing of
harlots, society of the riotous, so that what was niggardly kept by the one, is
as prodigally spent by the other: and much more when having no posterity, a man
lays up wealth only that it may be said he died rich. This is he of whom the
Wiseman speaks, There is one alone, and there is not a second, Eccl. 4. 8.
yea, ^e has neither Child, nor Brother, yet is there no end of all his
labor, neither is his eye satisfied with riches, neither says he for whom do
I labor and bereave my soul of good?

3. Chiefly when we are loath to part with our estates upon fitting occasions.
It is the Psalmists caution, If riches increase, set not your hearts upon them;
and this we do when we are not willing to expend them for good uses, and are so
solicitous for the future, that we lay out nothing for the present, caring for
wealth, as (our own) earnestly, using it (as another) sparingly. Indeed
whereas the wise Graecians call riches, (...)* from (...), to use, covetous
men, look upon them as (...), from (...)* to possess.

1. Some there are who out of great estates will not part with any thing for
necessary uses, such are they who will not affoard themselves conveniences,
Parv^ Bellarm. cont. ^
vivunt sordissime vestiuntur, they fare hard and go meanly, and so are in debt
to back and belly; the covetous man Corpus extenuat ut lucrum extendat, keeps
his body empty, that his purse may be full: and so to use the Greek Poets
comparison, He leads a Mules life, or if you will, an Asses life, who being
laden with gold, feeds on Hay. Little better are they who grudge to maintain
their relations in such a way as is convenient both for their comfort and their
own honor; denying to their Wives fitting supplies, suffering their ^hildren
to go in rags, feeding their servants with moldy Crusts, more fit to be thrown
to Dogs, then set before Men.

2. Others there are who will not expend their estates in just uses, who though
they have money in their Chests, yet will not pay Caesar his Tribute, nor the
Minister his Tithes, the Creditor his Debts, nor make restitution to those whom
they have injured, till they are enforced.

3. Finally, Very many there are, who though they are willing to expend for
necessary and just, yet will part with nothing, or at least nothing
proportionable for pious and charitable uses: Like the ground whence their gold
and silver is dig'd, they are barren of good works: out of their thousands they
hardly part with hundreds, no nor scores of pounds, for the relief of their
indigent Brethren. La^an and Nabal are one the Anagram of the other, both
covetous Churls, the one whereof would not part with his sheep to Jacob, though
it was in point of honesty according to his own agreement; and the other would
not give his bread and wine to David and his men, when in great distress. And
this was the avarice of the rich man in the Gospel, who though he laid out his
estate for his own dilicious food, yet would not allow poor Lazarus his crumbs;
these men if they exchange their money for oil to make their own countenance
cheerful, yet they will not for wine to make glad the hearts of the afflicted.

All of these are justly to be charged with tenacity. For Aristot. Eth. l. 4.
c. 1.
whereas the two chief ends of riches (as Aristotle observes) are (...),
discharging of costs, and conferreing of gifts, these do not employ them for
either, at least not for both; and indeed as the former, so this is very fitly
called the lust of the eyes, that the lust of a greedy, and this of a needy
eye, which thinks not abundance a sufficiency, and therefore though it have
much, will part with nothing; by which means it is that such men solos oculos
pascunt, instead of feeding their own and others bellies, only feed their own
eyes, and have no other use of all their wealth, but to behold it: so that as
Asterius Aster. hom. de Avaritia.
has well observed, whereas no man goes to Sea, for it self, but to fetch or
traffic; no man tills the ground for it self, but to reap a gainefull Harvest;
a covetous man gets wealth for it self, not to expend but keep, do good with,
but look upon: so that according to the Poets phrase, -- Pictis tanquam gaudere
tabellis; Horat. sat. l. 2.
He makes little other use of his coin, then men do of their Pictures, which
only serve to please the eye: in reference to which we may apply that of
Solomon, What good is there to the owner thereof, saving the beholding Eccles.
5. 11.
of them with their eyes?

And now Beloved, I could wish that my discourse of this Subject were
impertinent, and of no concernment to any here present; but as when our Savior
Joh. 8. 7, 9.
bad him that was without sin among the people Cast the first stone at the
woman taken in the act of Adultery, they went out one by one, so that Christ
and the Woman were left alone, being as the Text tells us convicted in their
own consciences, to wit, that they were all sinners; so I doubt were this
Congregation put to the test, they would go out one by one, as forced upon due
search to confess themselves guilty of this lust. The truth is as many wear
Gods Livery, who yet are none of his Servants, so there are many servants of
this lust who yet will not wear its Livery. All will acknowledge covetousness
to be a sin, but not themselves to be covetous; and whenas the lusts of the
flesh carry their names in their foreheads, Avarice wears the badge of good
husbandry, the Complexion of frugality, whereby it is that men excuse
themselves from the guilt of it. But whilst, if every man were his own judge,
no man would be nocent, I fear the great Judge will scarce find any man
innocent. Oh who almost is not bitten with this mad Dog. Some are given over
t^o, and most are given to this lust. One would think rich men should not be
troubled with it, and yet you may as soon put out fire with fuel, as
covetousness with riches: one would scarce imagine old men should be infected
with it, and yet (an Ancient observes) Dum membra frigescunt, Aster. l. d.
cupiditas calescit, care senescit, affectus juvenescit, finis vitae vix
imponit finem avaritiae; The desire after gain is young and hot, whilst the
man grows old and cold, nor does this lust extinguish before life. If we look
into the Scripture we shall not find any good man taxed with Avarice; Noah was
drunk, L^^ ^^cest^ous, and Peter treacherous, but not (as Judas) out of
covetousness, whereas in this age none more greedy then they who call
themselves the Godly. The truth is, Though the power of godliness be opposite
to, yet the form of godliness will easily consist with it: No wonder if it too
often lurk under holy garments and rellgious shows. Indeed this disease is
become Epidemicall, both poor and rich, young and old, profane and
Hypocrites, are sick of it.

For your further conviction, give me leave to put a few Queries to you
concerning this particular. 1. Perhaps you do not use unlawful means to be
rich, but are you not discontented because riches do not flow in upon you? you
covet not what is unjust, but do you not crave what is superfluous? you do not
avide rapere aliena, greedily snatch at what belongs to other; but do you not
cupide servare vestra, too niggardly lock up what is your own? Many think they
cannot be too blame for saving their own; but men sin as well in not giving
what they should, as in getting what they should not: and there is little
difference in making wine of another man^ grapes, and being drunk with our
own. 2 Perhaps you are not as bad as Vespasian, who exacting tribute of the
people for urine said, Bonus odor lu^ri e^ re qualibet, gain is sweet ovt of
any thing. Yet is not the gain of wealth more sweet, to you then that of
grace, and your desires far greater, (...), then (...), after gain then after
Christ? 3. You are not such holdfasts as to abridge your selves of
conveniences; but do you not forget the necessities of others? You say, you are
only good husbands, but whilst you pretend to be good husbands, are you not
bad Christians, neglecting Gods service to follow the world, scraping all you
can for your relations, and imparting little or nothing to Christ's Members?
Were these Questions duly pondred, I fear few would be able to acquit
themselves from this lust, and whilst there is no Christian but condemns
covetousness, covetouseness will condemn many, nay most Christians.

Suffer then I beseech you a word of Dehortation, Ne cor tuum terrae vivus
infodias, Bury not your selves alive in earthly desires. This world is as the
high way, and it sounds but ill for one to be buried in the high way: whip this
Mammon out of the temple of your hearts, and let not the lust of the eyes have
dominion over your s^uls. Indeed there is none, not the bes^ of us but by what
you have already heard, stands in need of this counsel, especially when riches
flow in upon us, Oh how hard is it to enjoy this worlds goods, and not dote
upon them! Greg. Nyss hom. 1. in ^ccl.
happy is the man who (to use Gregory Nyssins comparison) is like the Sea which
notwithstanding the greatest flowing in of riches keeps its bounds which
Ambros. l. de Jacob. c. 5.
God has set it, keeping his affection in a due moderation in the midsts of
earthly abundance.

To induce you hereunto, Consider

1. The lust of getting is insatiable, there is no such word as enough in the
worldlings Dictionary, as it is the sin of the covetous, so it is his
punishment that his desire cannot be replenished: It is Solomon's assertion,
Eccl. 5. 10.
He that loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, and he that loves
abundance with increase: suitable to which is that in Ecclesiasticus, A covetous
man's eye is not satisfied with his portion, and that of the Eccl. 14. 19.
Poet; Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit; Antioch. hom 8.
A covetous man (to use Antiochus his comparison) is like the Sea, into which
many Rivers pour themselves, yet it is still receiving. To those three things
which Prove. 31. 15, 16.
are never satisfied, and four that say it is not enough; the Grave, the
barren Womb, the dry Earth, and the Fire; we may well add as a fifth the
covetous Heart. It is strange, and yet true of such an one, his medicine is his
malady, that which should quench does increase his flame, whatever he gets is
but like the putting of water into a vessel with holes; the punishment of
Danaus his Daughter, and though his desire be to get wealth, yet the wealth he
gets does but augment his desire.

2. The lust of keeping is unprofitable, it swells the principal to no purpose,
and lessens the use to all purposes. The covetous man pretends to hoard up much
for fear of want, and yet after all his pains and purchase, he suffers that
really which before he feared vainly, and by not using what he gets, he makes
that to be actually present, and necessary which before was but future,
contingent and possible. Hence it is that according to that known saying,
Deest Chryss. Ser. 104.
avaro tam quod habet quam quod non habet; A Mammonist wants as well what he
has, as what he has not; as he wants who has Meat and does not eat it, as
well as he who has no Meat to eat. He is one, Quem ubertas sterilem,
abundantia inopem, inhumanum copia, divitiae fecere mendicum; Whom plenty
makes needy, abundance indigent, fortune, unfortunate, riches a Beggar, and
for fear of being miserable hereafter, he makes himself miserable for the
present, so justly is he called in our English Language a Miser. Such a man is
like one who has a treasure delivered him, locked up and sealed with the
Royal Seal which he dares not touch, or like those Sisters which had an eye
in their Box, and yet in the mean time saw nothing, or like Tantalus, he has
Water running, Apples growing by him, and yet Drinks not of the one, or
Feeds of the other. Socinius has in this well observed that this phrase the
lust of the eyes, serves to show the folly and misery of the covetous, who
take a great deal of pains in heaping up riches and have no benefit, but only
the seeing of them: in this respect they are as so many Wards, who have Titles
to great possessions, but not the actual enjoyment of them; or as the
Patriarchs sacks that had in them both corn, and coin, but of no further use
then to be worn out in keeping them.

3. This lust both of getting and keeping, is

1. Enslaving, The Proverb says, All things obey money, and too often, they
who possess it. What Drudges are covetous men to their wealth? They have
riches says Seneca excellently, Sicut febrem habere Sen. Ep. 119.
dicimur cum illa nos habeat, as a man is said to have a Fever, that is, his
Fever has him: whereas they should (to use St Hieromes phrase) Hieron. Ep.
Distribuere ut domini, Distribute their wealth, as Masters of it; they do
custodire ut servi, keep it up as its Servants: for which reason Gold and
Silver to such men, are said by St Cyprian, to be Preciosa Cypr. Ep. 2.
supplicia, glorious fetters: and by Diogenes to be (...), golden Halters: and
most P^^sp. de vita contempl. l. 2. c. 11.
aptly by Prosper, ferreum jugum, an iron yoke: which will the better appear,
if you consider further, that this lust is,

2. Tormenting. The covetous Muckworme is distracted with cares, disquieted
with fears, perplexed with continual thoughts, how he should keep what he
has got: what he shall do when he is old? how he may add to his heaps? This
lust of the eyes will not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor his eye lids to close,
Pauper erat (says Austin) and secur e Aug. Sermon. 110 de Temp.
dormiebat, somnus facilis accedebat, When he was poor he slept securely, his
sleep came upon him easily: but now he can take no rest day nor night, it
bereaves his mouth of food, his body of ornaments, yea, his eyes of sleep, and
his heart of joys; so that in the midest of his Silver Chests and Golden Bags,
he is as at a Funeral Feast, where though there be abundance of Cheer, there
is no Mirth. I and which is yet saddest of all, All these, as Isidore Isid.
Pelus. l. 2. Ep. 233.
Pelusiota well observes are but the beginnings of future torments: in which
respect the covetous man is in a far worse condition then the voluptuous, for
whereas the voluptuous man has an Heaven of pleasure now, though an Hell of
torment hereafter, the covetous man has a double Hell; an Hell of vexing care,
gauling fear in this world, an Hell of unspeakable horror, and anguish in the
other. Add to all which that this lust is

3. Infatuating: It was a miracle that our Savior wrought upon the blind man
to restore his sight by clay, sure I am, white and yellow clay, instead of
opening, blind most men's eyes. The Latins say that Avidus is a non videndo,
and covetous M^da^ who fondly desired, that Whatsoever he touched might be
Gold, is so called in the Greek quasi, (...), from seeing nothing. If Sampsons
eyes had not been boared out by the Philistims, he would never have been their
Miller; nor would men grind in the Mill of this world, exhaust their strength,
their time in scraping a little Pelf, were not their minds blinded with the
love of money: In one word, This lust is not only foolish, But

4. Cursed, As being directly opposite to all those virtues which our Savior
has reckoned up as giving Mat. 5. 3, 11.
a Title to blessedness. The Mammonists hunger and thirst is not after
Righteousness, but Gold, instead of a pure heart, he has a foul dirty soul,
he is a mourner, but it is only when his trading does not thrive, and riches
increase; he cares not for poverty of spirit, but fullness in his purse, all
his mercy is to pity and spare his Gold; he is so far from being a
Peacemaker that he will go to Law for a penny, and he resolves to suffer no
persecution, but what is from his own fretting and raging lust. Indeed the one
of these qualifications is true, but it is only in part, men revile him and
speak evil of him, but it is not falsely but justly, for Christ's sake, but his
Moneys sake, and therefore his reproaches are so far from rendering him
blessed, that they make him the more cursed; and however this wretched catiffe
like him in the Poet, applaude himself while the people point and hiss at him,
yet the time will come when God shall upbraide him with his folly, laugh at his
calamity, and then though too late, he shall bewail and abhor, and condemn
himself.

What now remains, but that since the denying this worldly lust appears so
reasonable we resolve upon it, and for our better execution of this resolution
remember these Lessons;

1. Get a contented mind: The Author to the Heb. 13. 5.
Hebrews has aptly joined them together, Let your Conversation be without
covetousness, and be content with such things as you have. Requiring no doubt
the latter in order to the former: what are all of us in this world, but as so
many strangers and Pilgrims; why should we care for more then Money to defray
our charges? we are under the providence of a gracious Father, why should we
Fortunam velut tunicam proba magis concencium quam longam. Ap^l.
not be content with what he sees convenient for us? Certainly that Shoe is
not best which is the greatest, but which is fittest for the Foot, nor that
Garment which is longest or most gorgeous, but that which sets closest to the
Body; let our portion content us, and then the lust of the eyes will not
domineer over us.

2. Labor for a charitable Heart, make not the Mammon of unrighteousness your
friend by loving it, but make you friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness by
giving it, one desire will thrust out another, the good lust of giving and
distributing will expel the bad lust of getting and keeping: St Austins
counsel concerning riches is excellent, Si absint ne per mala opera quaerantur
in terra si ads^nt per bona opera serventur in ^aelo; If they be wanting, seek
them not in earth by evil works, if they be present, lay them up Mat. 7. 14.
in Heaven by good works; if you will needs be laying up of riches, let it be
in the safest place in Heaven (as our Savior directs us) and that is by
laying them out for the poores relief; if you must needs see your riches, let
it be upon the backs of the naked, and the tables of the hungry, this is the
only commendable lust of the eyes.

3. Judge righteous judgment concerning those things with which you are so
enamoured; to which end, shut the eye of your sense, and open the eye of your
reason. Tully writes of a people, who when they went to the field, were wont
pugnare clausis oculis, to fight with their eyes shut; it might be cowardice in
them, it would be wisdom in us, to shut our eyes, not to look too much on
those Objects, least they ensnare us. When the Devil thought to tempt Christ
to the utmost, he showed him all the kingdoms and glory of the world; it is
ill looking on the world, especially when it puts on its Holy Day apparel.
No wonder if David when he desires that his heart may not be inclined to
covetousness, prays also, Turn away mine eyes from beholding ^anity; or if you
will look upon these things, let it be with the eye of reason, or rather faith
to see the vanity and vexation of them; look not upon there pompous outside,
but their rotten inside, and then you will find them like hangings, which on
the one side have pictures of Kings and Queens curiously wrought, but on the
other side rags and patches.

4. Finally, Lift up your eyes to Heaven, by a due meditation of things above.
Anatomists observe, that there is a muscle in man's eye, more then in any other
Creatures, by which he is able to look up. Man in the Greek language is
called (...), and Plato Plut. in Crat.
says, (...) is as it were (...), one that lifts up his countenance: to which
agrees that of the Poet;

Os homimi sublime dedit -- Oh let our bodily constitution mind us of an
Heavenly disposition* Terram despicit qui Coelum aspici^, he will have Earth
under his foot, who has Heaven in his eyes.

In one word, As Moses, so let us (...), look off from this land we possess,
to the promised Land; that Heb. 11. 26.
having respect to that recompense of reward, we may disrespect the treasures
of Egypt; and taking daily walks upon Mount Sion, all these things, silver,
gold, houses, lands, goods, riches, may be little and vile in our eyes: so
shall we be delivered from this second venomous corruption, The lust of the
eyes.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 15, 16. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
AMong those many excellent rules, which belong to the divine Art of Preaching,
this is not of least concernment, that Ministers should not content themselves
with Generalities, either in dissuading evil, or persuading good. Virtues and
vices are then rightly handled, when our Sermons are not like shadows which
represent obscurely, and confusedly, but as glasses, or rather Pictures setting
them forth in their distinct lineaments. It is a known maxim in Logic, Latet
dolus in universalibus, There is a great deal of ambiguity, and consequently
deceit in universal propositions. And though exhortations at large to serve
God, mortify the flesh, and contemn the world, are in themselves true and
good; yet if not more particularly discussed, the Auditors will be too apt to
deceive themselves, by imagining they have learnt those lessons to which
perhaps they are mere strangers. For this cause it was that S^ Paul exhorting
the Colossians Col. 3. 5, 6.
to mortify their earthly members, proceeds to a punctual enumeration of
those members, and not only those of the grossest and worse sort, but those
which seem at least in man's eye of less guilt; and to instance no further for
this very reason, no doubt it was that our Apostle contents not himself in
generals to dehort worldly love, but annexeth a special discovery of the
several lusts, by which it reigns in the hearts and lives of the wicked;
Love not the world, for all that is in the world, lust of the flesh, lust of
the eyes, etc.

The third and last of these lusts is that which now comes to be handled. For
the unfolding whereof I shall discuss the Quid nominis? and the Quid rei; the
Reason of the phrase, and the Nature of the thing.

1. In reference to the phrase here used, (...), the pride or ^stentation of
life, there are three Queries to be resolved,

1. Why does not the Apostle continue the same phrase of (...), it being a
sinful lust which is reproved in this, as well as in the former? To which I
conceive may rationally be answered, that it would have been too narrow an
expression, since the seat of pride extends it self further then the desire,
whereas the lust of the flesh lodges in the sensitive, Pride is in the
rational part; and whereas the lust of the eyes resideth in the affective,
Pride (as will appear in handling) is as well in the intellectual, as in the
affective faculty.

2. Why does not the Apostle rather make choice of Al. Al. l. d.
(...), a word that signifies the inward as well as the outward pride, then
(...), which (as we shall afterward find) most properly points at the
outward. To which may be returned, that it is not as if the inward pride were
excluded, which is indeed chiefly intended, but probably because this ^in is of
such a nature, as it usually loves to show it self: nor is it satisfied,
unless others take notice of it; men are for the most part ashamed of the lust
of the flesh, and therefore either they restrain or as much as they can
conceal the actings of it, and the lust of the eyes loves to lurk in
corners, but pride knows not how to forbear the discovery of it self to
others; She delights not to stay at home, but walks abroad to be seen of
others, even then when she counterfeits humility, it is usually so gross, that
it appears to be counterfeit.

3. Once more it may be inquired, Why it is called not barely pride, but the
pride of life? In answer to which Interpreters do somewhat vary.

The note of Salmeron is too much strained, who Salmer.
would have it called the pride of life, because pride commands even life it
self, and makes men willing rather to lose their life then their greatness.
Sure what S^ Paul says of his religious glorying, the proud man says of his
vain glorying; It were better for me to dye, then that my glorying should be
void.

Alexander Hales his fancy is, That since per sevivere, to Al. Al. l. d.
live of ones self is proper to an intellectual creature and only an
intellectual Creature is capable of pride, therefore it is called the pride of
life, but this is too far fetched.

Possibly there might be the same reason of the (...), as of the (...),
therefore the pride of life; because this sin though it have its rise from the
heart, yet it appears in the life.

Some conceive it is called the pride of life, because Riber.
Semper vivit vigetque, it is a sin that is always lively and vigorous, from
first to last, from the Cradle to the Crutch: there are some sins that are
peculiar to several ages, but this first saluteth, and last leaves us. Our
Savior, set a little Child in the midst of his Disoiples, to teach them
humility; sure it was a very little one, for even Children are apt to be proud,
and as we grow in years, pride gets head, nay, it then flourishes when the
body withers.

But lastly and chiefly, Therefore the pride of life, Quia quaesunt in presenti
vita bona de quibus homo superhit, they are commonly the things of this life,
which are the fuel of pride: to this agrees the Syriack Version, the pride
of this life, and that Animadversion of Vorstius, who observes, that (...),
signifying both life and wealth, which is of greatest concernment to this life:
it may be rendered either way, since as they are the things of this life, so
wealth is that especially in which men are most apt to pride themselves.

Indeed there is a spiritual as well as a carnal pride* and this is a secret
venom subtle evil (as the Father calls Bern. in Psalm. qui habet.
it) being as a moath in our graces, and the rust of our virtues: in this
respect it is truly said, that as repentance is the best fruit of the worst
root sin; so pride is the worst fruit of the best root grace; but usually
Birth, Beauty, Strength, Wit, Learning, Lands, Honors, and such like, become
the incentives of our pride: thus Herod was proud of his eloquence,
Achitophell of his policy, Goliath of his might, Nebuchadnezzar of his palace,
Senacherib of his victories, and Haman of his honor. That the things of the
other life, the graces of the spirit occasion pride, it is altogether
accidental, since in their own nature they prompt to humility, and therefore
as boughs which are most laden with fruit, hang down their heads; and vessels
that are fullest, make the least noise, so they that are richest in grace, are
poorest in spirit; indeed it is rather the show, then the truth, the appearance
then the reallity of grace which lifts men up. They are the things of this
present life, which as in their own nature they are apt, so through the
compliance of our nature, they frequently do engender pride, and thus not one
or few but many; all the things of this life are such as men pride themselves
in, the lust of the flesh is limited by its end, which is to content the flesh,
the lust of the eyes by its instrument, which is the eye, but pride of life is
of an universal and illimited influence. This whole life with all the things
in it, is but sphere enough for pride to move in, the other lusts have their
particular Objects; the lust of the flesh, sensual pleasures, the lust of the
eyes wordly riches, but pride of life, though it principally look at honors,
yet it runs through the Objects of the other lusts: men being apt to glory in
their furnished tables in their replenisht Coffers, yea, in every good thing
they Jer. 9. 23.
enjoy: so great need is there of the Prophet Jeremiah's caution, Let not the
wise man glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength, nor
the rich man glory in his wealth. And thus I have given a dispatch of the Quid
nominis, the reason of the phrase, which was the first thing proposed.

2. Proceed we now to that which is the principal, the Quid rei, the
consideration to the thing; and inquire what this sin of pride is in its utmost
latitude* for so we are here to look upon it, being set down as one of the
three capital lusts, which infect the race of mankind.

For the resolution of which, I must make use of that distinction, which
Peraldus has framed to my hand, Perald. de virtut. and vit.
and has been already intimated. Pride is either internal or external, that
is, (properly) the pride of the heart, this the pride of life, that is, both in
the understanding and the affection; and this (especially) in the words of the
mouth, and the apparel of the body, all of which are within the compass of
that which is here called the pride of life.

1. Begin we with internal pride, and that

1. As situated in the understanding, and so it is nothing else but a false
opinion, and surpassing estimation of a man's own excellencies. This is
observable in the Etymology of (...), which is from (...) and (...), when a
man appears to himself (and would to others) above what really he is, and of
(...), (the word in my Text) which is from a, epitaticum, and (...), sumo, when
a man does assume to himself what belongs not to him. In this respect pride may
well be called an unnatural tumor, puffing a man up as if he had eaten a
spider. Indeed what wind is to the Blather, leaven to the Dough, and poison to
the Body, that is pride to the mind, swelling it up with high conceits of its
own worth in the apprehension of what it either has or does, enjoys or
performs.

More particularly this overweening opinion is as the Schools from St Gregory
well observe, either

1. Ex part rei, in regard of the things themselves, Greg. Mor. 23. Aquin. 1a.
1ae. 9. 26. Art. 4.
whenas we think our selves to have that excellency which indeed we have not,
to wit, either not at all, or else not in that measure which we fancy.

1. Some are so proud, that they attribute to themselves what is no way theirs;
like the fly in the Fable, which setting on the Axle-tree of the Coach wheell,
cried out what a dust do I raise; this was the Laodicean temper, Rev. 3. 17.
which said, She was rich, and increased with goods, and had need of nothing,
when as he was miserable and wretched, poor, and blind, and naked. What is
this but as if a Blackmoore should fancy her self a Beauty, and a Pigmye
imagine himself to be a Giant.

2. Others, yea very many look upon themselves in multiplying and magnifying
glasses, whereby it is that their pence seem pounds, mites talents, and
according to the Proverb, Geese Swans; this was the Pharisees pride, who
thought himself holier, and Rabsakehs who accounted himself mightier, then
indeed he was.

The truth is, An error in the defect is pardonable, to think more meanly, but
in the excess abominable to think more highly of our endowments or enjoyments,
then they deserve in themselves; for what is it but as if a Novice should
pretend himself to be a Doctor, nay, as if a Peasant dream that he is a
Monarch.

2. Ex part causae, In regard of the causall influence upon whatsoever
excellencies is in, or belonging to us: and this is when men account themselves
either as the principal efficient, or as the meritorious causes of any good.

1. Some are so proud as to sacrifice to their own nets, and look upon
themselves as the originals of their own welfare. God complains of the
Israelites, She did Hos. 2. 8.
not know that I gave her corn, and wine, and oil, reproving her ingratitude:
but the proud man goes further, and owneth himself as the Author of his
enjoyments, and achievements. Is not this great Babell which I have built
says Nebuchadnezxar. Dextra mihi Deus and telum -- said Mezentias, my own
right hand got me the victory.

2. More are so proud as though they acknowledge their good things to be of
Gods communicating, yet so, as that they are of their own deserving; these
think God rather beholding to them, then they to him, and look upon all
blessings, not as the gifts of bounty, but rewards of service; like to that
proud Friar who said, Da Domine quod debes, Lord pay what thou owe me, even
when he desired admission into those Heavenly Mansions.

2. Besides this pride of the mind, there is yet further considerable a pride
in the passions, of hope, love, and desire.

1. Pride as in the passion of hope is that which we call presumption: indeed
presumption of Gods mercy is a fruit of infidelity, because we do not rightly
conceive of Gods attributes, nor firmly believe his threatenings; but a
presumption of our own ability, is a branch of arrogance and pride: it is no
wonder if self-conceit be accompanied with self-confidence, and he that
assumeth too much to presume too much upon himself. Hence it is that men think
with those Babell-builders, they can rear a Fabric as high as Heaven; or with
Antiochus, that they can sail on the Earth, and walk on the Water; do things
which are impossible, far beyond the reach of their power, as if a fish should
attempt to fly, or a beast to speak.

2. Pride as in the passion of love is a fond dotage upon Aug. de Civit. Dei.
l. 14. c. 32.
our own excellencies: and this by St Austin is set down as the definition of
that, which most properly is called pride. Amor propriae excellentiae, The
immoderate love of a man's own qualifications: Narcissus-like, to be enamoured
with our own shadow, and admire our own beauty. Indeed to be well pleased with
our own condition whatever it is, is an act of humble contentation, and very
commendable: but to be carried with an affectionate admiration of our own
endowments, as if none were like them, is an act of proud affection, and justly
blameable.

3. Pride as in the passion of desire is nothing else in general but an
inordinate and perverse appetite after excelling and going beyond others.
Indeed in some kind this desire cannot be perverse, though it be vehement:
Namely

1. When it is in spirituals, A desire to go beyond others in virtue, to excel
them in graces, is praise worthy; we must strive to be as holy and religious,
as just and charitable, as sober and temporate as the best; and it is a
commendable emulation to vie one with another in these practices.

2. When it is in mentals, In matters of knowledge (so it be not like Adams
desire to be as God) we may desire and endeavor to outstrip others, to be as
subtle as the acutest Sophister, as intelligent as the profoundest Doctor, as
eloquent as the politest Orator, is a lawful endeavor. But in temporals and
externals, a desire of surpassing others in any kind, is very prone to be
inordinate; and when it is so, deserves no better a name then this of pride.

In particular there are two principal branches of this pride in desire, when
it is of dignity above, and authority over others, or of praise and glory from
others; the former of which is called ambition (and so St Cyprian Ambiti^
saeculi. Cypr.
reads the word here) and the latter vainglory: of each a word.

1. The pride of ambition is an exorbitant desire of power and greatness.
Indeed we may accipere, receive that dignity, which is cast upon us; but we
must not arripere snatch at, and be greedy of preferment: it is not to be
denied, but that there is a lawful desire of power and place: St Paul says,
He that desires the office of a Bishop, desires 2 Timothy 3. 1.
a worthy work: and no doubt it is a worthy desire, if rightly qualified. But
it is then the pride of life,

1. When as it is only praeesse, but not prodesse; that we may be great, but
not that we may do good; only of the dignity, and not of the duty which attends
it: Or

2. When men of low deserts have high desires of grasping that Scepter, which
they are not fit or worthy to manage, soaring high, when yet they want wings. Or

3. When no place will content us, but the highest; so that we will not endure
either superior or equal; as Alexander who told Darius the Heaven had but one
Sun, and the Earth must have but one Alexander; this being the temper of a
proud man, when he is got up to the top to pull up the Ladder, that none may
come after him, but that he may rule alone, and have all in his own hands.

4. Or which is yet worst of all, when this desire puts men upon evil ways,
and unlawful means of attaining, making that of the Poet their principle,
Violandum est jus regni gratia, right may be dispensed with, where it is to
gain a Kingdom.

2. The other branch of this pride, is the desire of vain glory, from which the
Apostle dehorts the Galathians. Gal. 5. 26.
Indeed it is one thing to desire glory, and another to desire vain glory;
great men may lawfully expect that honor and respect from others, which is due
to the place and station, in which God has set them. Every man may desire
praise and commendation from others, for those good actions that are done by
him: St Paul plainly allows it, when he assures eternal life to them who by
welldoing, seek for honor and glory. But if you Laym. Theol. Mor. l. 3. Art. 3.
will know when it is a desire of vain glory, and so pride of life? I answer,
with the Casuists, that the sinfullness of this desire is considerable three
ways,

1. Ex part ejus qui, in regard of him who desires it: Whenas

1. He makes it his principal aim terminating in himself: it is one thing to
do good works, so as they may be seen, another to do them that they may be
seen; it is one thing to do them that they may be seen for our own glory; it is
another to do them that they may be seen for Gods glory. Finally, It is one
thing to make our own honor a subordinate encouragement to, and another to set
it up as the ultimate end of our good actions: the former is allowable, but the
latter abominable.

2. His desire after it is accompanied with a peevish anger at those who give
him not the praise and honor he expects; like Haman, who was mad because he
could not have Mordecays knee: and Achitophell, who is so discontented as to
hang himself, because his wisdom was undervalued in the not following his
counsel. Indeed the proud man, contrary to St Paul's rule of giving, is
altogether for taking honor; and which is very absurd, though he will not give
honor to others, yet he takes it very ill, if others give it not to him.

2. Ex part ejus de quo, in regard of that for which he desires glory: Thus

1. When men according to St Paul's expression, Phil. 3. 19.
glory in their shame, expect to be applauded for their evil deeds, and gather
the grapes of praise upon the thorns of vices.

2. Or when they desire more commendation then their actions (though good)
deserve, thinking that others should value them, as they do themselves; as if
not the merit of our works, but the estimation we have of them, were to be the
rule of others judgment.

3. Ex part ejus a quo, in regard of him, from whom we desire praise: And thus

1. When according to the Character, (which is given of the Hypocritical Jew)
Our praise is not of God, but of Romans 2. 30.
men, we regard more to approve our selves to the world, then to God; whereas
our aim should be to find approbation, first in the Court of God, then of
Conscience, then of Men.

2. When among men, we desire praise not of the learned, but the ignorant, who
are no competent judges; not of the good, but of the bad, whose praise indeed
is a dispraise; and by speaking well of us, disparage us.

And thus I have given you an account of the first kind of pride, which I
proposed to handle; namely, internal: by which it appears, that her Charret
is drawn with four Horses; selfe-estimation, arrogant presumption, ha^ghty
ambition, and vainglory.

2. Pass we on to the other sort, which is called external pride. Not to
enlarge in all those ways, whereby pride does manifest it self, I shall only
insist on two, which are most usual, and to which indeed the word in the Text
prompts us, namely, in Language and Apparel.

1. Pride having her imperial throne in the will, commands the whole man,
especially the tongue, to vent her swelling words. One of the Characters, which
St Paul gives of the men of the last times, is that they shall be boasters:
where the word is from the same root, with this in the Text: Suitable to which
it is that the Greeks tell us he, is properly (...), who uses stately 2 Timothy
3. 3.
language, and a vain pomp of splendid words, in proclaiming his own worth and
abilities.

Now this is either in praising or promising.

1. To praise our selves for what we either have or do, except when it is in
way of a just and needful apology, is no other then the language of pride;
and therefore Prove. 27. 2.
it was good counsel of Solomon, Let another man's mouth praise thee, and not
thine own. In the Law every open vessel which had no covering found upon it,
was unclean; an emblem of the proud person, Qui per studium ostentationis
patens, nullo velamine taciturnitatis operitur: who has an open mouth to vent
and vaunt his own virtues, though hereby he does not, nay undoth what he is
doing, discommending himself by his self-comendation. Those words of holy Job,
If my mouth has kissed my hand, Job 31. 7. Manus symbolum operationis. Pined.
are not unfitly moralized to this purpose, Our mouth kisseth our hand, when
(like Hens which Cackle when they lay) our tongue blazons our own actions.
Indeed sometimes pride puts men upon dispraising and undervaluing themselves:
but even then they put praise to usury, it being for this end that they may
receive it from others with advantage.

2. It is no less evidently, a badge of pride, when men are golden tongued, and
leaden handed; make large promises of things, which they are no way able to
perform; learning herein of their Father the Devil, who showing Christ the
Kingdoms and glory of the world, told him, all these will I give thee, when
yet none of them were in his power to give. To this (as Vlpian tells us) the
signification of the Greek word here used, extends; indeed such kind of
promises argue men at the worst deceitful imposters; at the best, vain
glorious boasters.

2. Besides this pride of language, there is another, which is far more
frequent; to wit, the pride of apparel. Indeed it is strange that any should
make apparel the fuel of their pride: we all know that garments are but
things about us, not inhering in, but adhering to us; so that to be proud of
that, is as if an Horse should be proud of his Trappings; nay, more we are
beholding for them to other Creatures; Sheep for the wool, Worms for our
silk, and the like: so that to be proud of them, is as if a man should be
proud of another parts; nay, which is yet worse, they were occasioned by sin:
in which respect the Hebrews derive the Noune, (...) which signifies a
garment, from the Verb, (...) which signifies to deal perfidiously; so to be
proud of them, is as if a Thief should be proud, because he is burnt in the
hand. What more absurd, then to boast of what is extraneous, nay borrowed; nay
to glory in that which is a monitour of our shame? And yet what more usual
then this kind of pride? which would therefore so much the rather be reproved,
because it is so commonly practiced. Nor shall I swerve from my Text to meet
with this sort of proud persons, since the Peacocks pride which is in her gaudy
Feather; according to that of the Poet

Laudatas ostentat avis Junonia pennas, Is an Emblem of this pride in
apparel: and the Greek Epithete, (...), which they give the Peacock on this
account, is near a kin to the word in my Text.

For the better understanding of this sort of pride, whereby we may pass a just
censure upon our selves: (for I would have none too forward in judging others,
upon this or any other account) Be pleased to take notice of these particulars,

1. It is not to be denied but that apparel in it self is of an indifferent
nature, either as to moral goodness, or badness, whither it be of this or that
matter, form or color; though garments came in by sin, yet they are not in
themselves sinful.

2. It is very laudable for some persons to wear costly apparel. God has
stored the wardrobe of nature, not only with induments, but ornaments, which
may no doubt be accordingly made use of. When St Peter advises women that
their adorning should not be 1 Pet. 3. 3.
the outward adorning of plaiting the hair, of wearing of gold, or putting on
of apparel, it is not to be understood as an absolute, but a comparative
prohibition: otherwise, no doubt it is necessary to put on apparel, and
lawful for some women to wear gold, and use outward adorning.

3. It is not unlawful in some sort to conform to the fashion of the place,
wherein we live; when S^ Paul would not have us conform to the world, he
means in things sinful, not indifferent. The truth is, there is a
possibility of pride in not following the fashion, to wit, when it is through
affectation of singularity, and there may be a following the fashion without
pride, to wit, when it is only to avoid being singular, yea in one case it may
be necessary; namely, where there is an intervening injunction of a superior,
(as King, Husband, Parent, or the like) in reference to any fashion which is
otherwise indifferent.

4. But still there is nothing more true then that there is a great deal of
pride in apparel, and that both in the costliness and fashionableness of it.

1. In the costliness: If you ask what is worth most and cost least? I answer
Humility; if what is worth least and cost most? I answer Pride. The proud man
expends so much upon his clothing, that whereas our Savior says, The body is
more worth then raiment, it may be said of him, his raiment is more worth then
his body; like the Bird of Paradise, whose Feathers are of more value then the
Carcass. More particularly this costliness of our apparel is a sign of pride;
Whenas it is

1. Above the measure of our estate: when they that are not able to buy cloth
will wear silk, nay they will starve their bodies, to adorn their backs; and
rather then this shall want superfluities, the other shall want necessaries.

2. Above the quality of our state: Soft clothing is for them that are in
Kings houses; it is not for Peasants Digna res risu imo planctu domina ancilla
procedit ornatior. Hier. Ep. ad Demetr.
to wear Robes, nor them that sit on the dunghill to be clothed in Scarlet:
in which respect St Hierome looked upon it as a thing worthy of laughter, or
rather sorrow, the Handmaides went finer then their Mistresses.

2. In the fashionableness: And thus to be curious and speedy; in following,
much more to be ringleaders and inventers of fashions, yea to conform to any
which are beyond the bounds of modesty and decency, is at best a badge of
pride. And here I cannot but condemn all such fashions as are the attire of
Harlots, or garbes of Ruffians, as tend to make us appear of another sex, or
complexion, color, shape; then indeed we are, to be at least indecent if not
immodest, and so sad signs that i^ not wantonness, yet pride dwells within.

I have at length drawn before you those several lines which meet in this
center. And now I would to God there were not just cause of a general
Humiliation for this sin of pride, it being that poison which infects almost
all of all sorts. The Question of Solomon, Who can say I have made my heart
clean, I am pure from sin? may be truly put by every one to himself concerning
this sin; he that says he is pure from it, is probably most guilty of it. That
in the Psalms of sitting in the seat of the scorners, is read by the vulgar
Latin, in the chair of pestilence: upon which St Austin ingenuously observes
Aug. in Ps. 1.
to our present purpose, the seat of the proud scorners, may well be called the
chair of pestilence, because that disease is infectious, and commonly proves
Epidemicall, Ita fere nemo est, qui careat amore dominandi, and humanam non
appetat gloriam, there is scarce any man, who is not in some kind or other
desirous of preheminency and glory.

There want not some wicked men who are proud of their vices, please themselves
in, and would have others applaud them for their black spots; and even good men
are too often proud of their virtues: in Prosp. Ep.
which respect Prosper observes, That they who have overcome other lusts, are
yet foiled with this, whilst after their best deeds they are apt, In se potius,
quam in domino gloriari, to glory not in the Lord, but in themselves. The
Scholar is proud of his Learning, which like wine fumeth into his head; and
the fool is ofttimes proud and self conceited notwithstanding his ignorance.
Pride (especially that of apparel) has been heretofore the sin of women; thus
the Prophet taxes the haughty Daughters of Sion; but in our days it is no
less the crime Isai. 3.
of men; the male being as much if not more fantastic then the female.
Finally, not only Masters and Mistresses, but as the Poet complained Maxima
queque domus servis est plena superbis, Even servants who are in a low
condition, yet have high minds.

We have all too great reason in this particular to cry guilty. Oh let us
accuse, abhor, and condemn our selves for this sin, and at last learn to be
meek and lowly within, in our thoughts and desires; without, in our language
and deportment. The more effectually to dissuade from this lust? consider we
how boundless, devilish, and deadly a sin it is.

1. What has been already observed of Avarice, is no less true of pride, it is
never satisfied; whence those so often renewed fashions in our garments, but
because pride will not be long contented with one? What is the reason men never
think they are valued by others according to their worth, nor advanced
according to their deserts, but because pride is aspiring, no staire pleases
the ambitious man, whilst there is an higher; he is no sooner laid in his bed
of honor, but he dreams of greater preferment. How obvious is this in all
kinds of advancement, Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military? Take an instance in
one for all. The Officer must be a Captain, the Captain a Collonell, the
Collonell a General, and then he must have an higher Title; to which end, he
leapeth from martial to civil honor; nor will any thing less serve him at
last then a Crown: nay then not content to rule at home, he will stretch his
power as far as the Indies, ye he would be honored and adored as a God; and
still he is discontent because he is not Omnipotent, and cannot do all his
will, which is, were it in his power to depose the supreme Monarch of Heaven
and Earth. Thus the proud mind knows no limits; and what wiseman would give
way to that which being boundless must needs be Innocent: de contemptu mundi.
l. 2. c. 29. Bern. ad Eugen. l. 2.
restless, and create continual cares, fears, and troubles to the mind? in
which regard it is called by St Bernard aptly, ambientium Crux, the Cross and
torment of those who pursue it.

2. Besides which may render this lust so much the more hateful to us, is,
that it is the sin wherein of all others the Devil is most delighted. Indeed
the proud man like a mountain between the Sun and the Valley, Umbram facit
Diabolo, makes a shadow, wherein the Devil loves to repose himself; and no
wonder since it is most properly his lust: in which respect St Bernard Bern.
says of the proud Pharisee, (who said of himself) I am not as other men,
therefore as the Devils: Apostatae angelo similis efficit^^, qui similis
hominibus nolit esse. Greg. M.
and to the same purpose St Gregory, He that will not be like, but above other
men, becomes like the Apostate Angels.

3. Lastly, Where pride is in the Saddle, shame and ignorance is in the
crupper: proud men like chaff fly aloft, till at the length the wind of Gods
wrath scatter them; pride cast the first of Creatures ( Angels) out Adam dum
rapere voluit divinitatem, amisit faelicitatem. Id.
of Heaven; the first of men ( Adam) out of Paradise; and the first Israelitish
King (Saul) out of his throne. They say of the Raven, that she carries the nut
on high and then by letting it fall, breaks it; so does the world, Erigendo
dejicere, destroy the proud man by advancing him: he ascends by little and
little, but comes down with a vengeance, and the higher he climbeth over
others heads, the sooner he breaks his own neck. It is the temper of pride,
it loves to go before, and so it shall; but as Solomon truly prognostics,
Pride goes before Prove. 16. 18.
destruction, and an haughty mind before a fall. Witness ambitious Haman,
arrogant Nebuchadnezzar, vaunting Goliath, vain glorious Herod, blaspheming
Rabshakeh, gorgeous Dives, and painted Jezabell. Humble thy self therefore oh
man, least God humble thee, in thy highest estate; keep thy heart lowly, ever
remembering that humility is both thy honor, and the security of that honor.

To this end, be persuaded to look upon your selves

1. As Men, Quid superbis terra and cinis? Why should thou, who art earth at
first, and ashes at last, be proud? It was well spoken by him to King Philip
after a great Victory, That if he did measure his shadow, he should find it no
longer then it was before; and it was well done of that King, to appoint that
one should often sound in his ears, Remember you are a Man.

2. As Christians, And so obliged to conform to Christ, who in particular
calls upon us to learn of him, because he is meek and lowly. Why art thou so
gaudy in apparel, when thy Savior was content with a plain coat? Why
should thou exalt thy self, when as thy Redeemer humbled himself? Finally,
Why should thou aspire to be a Lord, when Christ took upon him the form of a
Servant?

And because notwithstanding all these considerations, we are still apt to be
ensnared; let us according to that excellent counsel of our Savior, watch and
pray; ever suspect thy deceitful heart, and take heed of every thing thou
either have or do, least it puff thee up. Plato being mounted upon an horse,
and judging himself a little touched with pride upon it, presently Hierom. in
vita Hilarion.
lighted off, and would ride no surther: St Hierome tells us of Hilarion, that
having done many excellent cures, for which the people flocked after him, he
wept, least by this means he should grow proud, and so lose his reward. Oh let
us watch our hearts in all our enjoyments, in all our achievements, earnestly
imploring the renewed assistance of grace against all temptations to this pride
of life.

Having given you this particular account of these several lusts, I shall now
look upon them together, and wind up all with a three fold observation.

1. This all in the world, which our Apostle here Mundus nihil habet, quod
animae accomodare possit. Fer in loc.
mentions, Concerns only the flesh, and the eyes, and this present life.
Whence Ferus has ingenuously taken notice, This world has nothing which can
satisfy the soul; Meats and drinks, can no more feed the soul, then painted
dishes can the stomach; Non corpus aura, non cor auro, the body may as soon be
filled with air, as the mind with gold; you may as soon find an arm full in
a shadow, as an heart full in honor.

2. Not only the outward works, but the inward lusts are prohibited; many
there are who refrain from the action, and yet retain the affection: some
external Motives impede the doing, whilst yet they burn with desire. But alas
how vain and insufficient is this Reformation? To what purpose are the
branches cut off, whilst the root remains; or if the fountain be defiled, how
can the streams be pure? It is Gods call to Jerusalem, Wash thine heart from
wickedness; and St James would not only have sinners to cleanse their hands, to
wit, from external works; but the double minded to purify their hearts, to
wit, from internal lusts. In one word, had we only to do with men, it might
suffice to have a care of our words and works, but since we have to do with
God, there must be a regard of thoughts and desires.

3. Lastly, It is not the lust of the flesh, or the lust of the eyes; but, and,
to intimate to us, that any one of these denominate a man a lover of the world;
and therefore it is not enough that we are free from one, but we must be
without any of these lusts, to wit, reigning and ruling over us. I have read a
story of an holy man, to whom an Angel came with this message, Veni, and
ostendam tibi operva hominum, Come and I will show thee the works of the Bibl.
Patr. Apothegm.
sons of men. To this end, he leads him first to a field, where he showed him
a man gathering sticks, making a bundle, and taking it on his shoulder to carry
it; but finding it too weighty, he lays it down and gathers more, but then
he could not so much as stir it: Then he leads him to a river, where he
showed him a man taking up water, and pouring it into a leaking vessel, which
let it out as fast almost as it was put in. Then he led him to a Temple, where
he finds two men carrying a piece of wood cross, whereby neither could get
into the Temple; whereas if one would have permitted the other to have gone
before, both might have entered in. In these three sights we have a
representation of these three lusts, the springs of those works: The first of
the voluptuous, who continually gather sticks of the Tree of pleasure, and are
so bewitched, that they leave not gathering, till the burden of them become at
last intolerable. The second of the covetous, whose insatiable desire is like a
vessel full of holes, which yet he is still endeavoring to fill. The third of
the proud, who whilst they will not suffer another to go before them, hinder
each other from entering into that caelestiall Temple.

Some there are who prostitute themselves (so far as they are consistent one
with the other) to all these lusts. It is observed of the Swanne, that he has
a threefold habitation, the Water, the Earth, the Air: a fit Emblem of many
sinners, who swim in the water of sensual pleasure; walk upon the earth by
the feet of covetous affections, and fly in the air with the wings of pride.

Others there are, who are only addicted to one of these lusts, whilst they are
free from, nay haters of the other. Thus the voluptuous Epicure hates to be
covetous, the covetous Mammonist abhors to be voluptuous, and some proud men
hate both; we all (says the Prophet) Like sheep have gone astray, and turned
every one to his own way. Though all naturally go in a bad way, yet not in the
same; some in the path of pride, and others of curiosity, others of avarice,
and others of sensuality. But, if the Enemy enter in at any one of these gates,
he gets the Castle, ^e that goes in any of these Chrysostom. hom. 5. in Matthew.
paths, is in the broad way, and he that is caught by any of these nets, is the
Devils Slave. It will little avail the sensual man to say, I am not proud or
covetous, or the proud man to say, I am not covetous or sensual; nor the
covetous man to say, I am not 1 King. 19. 17.
sensual or proud. That threatening against Israel, Him that escapes the sword
of Hazael shall Jehu slay; and him that escapes the sword of Jehu shall Elisha
slay, may be here fitly alluded to, and is too often verified: Him that
escapes the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes slays: and him that
escapes the lust of the eyes, the pride of life slays. It is ofttimes in
this case according to Amos 5. 19.
that of the Prophet Amos, As if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met
him; or went into the house, and leaned his hand on the wall, and a Serpent bit
him. Many a man that abhors the lust of the flesh, is ensnared by the lust
of the eyes: and some as St Ambrose observes, Quos nulla potuit vincere
luxuria, nulla avaritia, subruere, ambitio facit criminosos, whom neither
luxury nor avarice could overcome, pride has surprised and subdued: and
therefore let our abstinence be universal, or else it cannot be effectual.
Thus did Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26.
Moses, when he chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then
to enjoy the pleasures of sin, which are but for a season; when he esteemed
the reproach of Christ, greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt; when
being come to years, he refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs Daughter.
Thus did Christ when to satisfy his hunger, he would not command stones to be
bread, when he would not fall down and worship the Devil, to gain all the
Kingdoms of the world, when he would not vain gloriously cast himself down
from the Pinnacle, to show himself the Son Matthew. 4. 3, 10
of God. Thus must every Christian do in some measure: then and not till then
are we good Scholars in the School of grace, when we have learnt to deny all
ungodliness and worldly lusts, namely, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
WHat was the saying of those Jews upon the hearing of Christ's discourse, I
doubt is the thought of many Christians upon the reading of this Scripture;
This is an hard saying, who can hear it? John* 6. 60.
Promises of mercy tickle, but precepts of duty (such especially as are
contrary to our lusts) grate the ears; the very hearing is irksome, but the
practicing much more. This is an hard saying, who can hear it? It is harder
doing, who can perform it? True, the work is excellent, but withal
difficult: it is a matter of moment, but not acted in a moment. To divert our
corrupt natures from worldly love, is no less then to turn a stream; and that
will ask no little time and pains. No wonder then if our Apostle contents not
himself with the bare mention of this duty, but withal annexeth strong
inducements to the performance of it; that hearing, not only what we are to do,
but what great reason there is why we should do it, we might with the stronger
resolution set about it: Love not the world, for if any man love the world, etc.

It is that part of the Text I am now come to; namely, Genesis 2.
the Argumentation which our Apostle adjoyneth to his Dehortation; which
consists of two parts, or rather presents us with two Arguments.

1. The first whereof is drawn from worldly love, its contrariety to that which
is divine; and this is both asserted in the end of the fifteenth, and proved in
the end of the sixteenth; so that in this part there are two things offer
themselves to our discussion.

An eminent point, An evident proof; or, if you will, here is a double
confirmation;
The one Principal, which is the reason of the dehortation, in these words, If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

The other Collateral, which is a reason of the reason, and is expressed in
those words, Is not of the Father, but of the world.

At this time of the first, the principal confirmation; If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him; which words are so a proof, that
they are withal a point well worthy my discussion, and your attention. They
are an universal negative proposition, wherein we are to take notice of the
subject, and the praedicate, of whom, and what it is, that is here denied.

1. The Subject of this proposition is every lover of the world; it is that I
shall not need to insist upon as having been already handled at large in the
prhibition* only give me leave to mind you in a few words, That

1. On the one hand this is to be restrained to the immoderate lovers of the
world, who wanting, excessively desire after; or having, unmeasurably delight
in it. Indeed it cannot be denied, but that the very having of this world is
dangerous, and therefore our Savior asserts, its difficult for rich men to
enter into Heaven; and St Paul says, not many mighty are called. A large
portion of worldly things, is like a long garment, which reaching to the foot,
retards men in their walking; nay* sometimes makes them stumble. But still,
only the loving, not the having of this world; no nor yet the love of the world
which is subordinate, but only that which is coordinate, and so inordinate, is
inconsistent with the love of the Father. It is an excellent saying of St
Bernard, Sic vult amari Deus, ut cunctae res simul am^n^ur Bern. in coena dom.
Sermon. 8.
cum ipso, and sic vult amari ut nihil praeter ipsum ametur: God will be so
loved, that all things else may be loved with him; and yet so loved, that
nothing be loved besides him; that is, (as he fully explaineth it) he will have
every Creature to be loved, as from him; and it is himself, he will have to be
loved in every Creature; and only such a love of the world, as is in, and for
God, consists with the love of God.

2. On the other hand, This is to be enlarged to all those several lusts,
which grow out of this root of worldly love: to wit, Gluttony, Ebriety, Luxury,
Rapacity, Tenacity, and Curiosity, self Conceitedness, Ambition, and vain
Glory: all of which where ever they are entertained, whither jointly or singly,
will not suffer divine love to have any room in the heart; so that these
words, If any man love the world, may be thus Paraphrased, and are accordingly
to be understood, If any man inordinately lust after and take delight in the
pleasures, riches, or honors which this world affords: or if you will more
particularly, If any man live in Gluttony, and drunkenness, chambering, and
wantonness, sloth, and idleness, rapine, and covetousness, pride and ambition.

2. But that which is here especially to be unfolded, is the predicate which is
denied concerning all worldly lovers, to wit, the love of the Father.

The better to make way for the handling of this, Be pleased to know, That the
love of the Father may be construed either Actively, or Passively: Actively,
the Father is the Subject of this love, and him the Object; Passively, the
Father is the Object, and him the Subject, and so here is a double Negative in
this one.

1. The worldly lover has no intrest in the Fathers love; he may be in the
warm Sunshine, but it is without Gods blessing; or rather he may have the Moon
light of outward comforts, but he wants the warm Sunshine of Gods favor. St
Paul says of the widow that lives in 1 Timothy 5. 6.
pleasure, that she is dead whilst she lives; so are all voluptuous Epicures,
as so many dead, nay, loathsome carkases in Gods account. The Psalmist
mentioning Ps. 10. 3.
the covetous, fasteneth this brand upon him, whom the Lord abhors: he that
sits in the Heavens, spurneth at them, who creep upon the Earth; Finally, St
James James 4. 6.
speaking of the proud, asserts, That God resists him, ((...), a military
phrase) he sets himself as it were in Battle-array, bidding open defance and
proclaiming war against the proud. In a word, he that will be the worlds
Darling, loses a Friend of God.

A sad truth, and such as may justly strike terror, and horror into the heart
of every worldling. Indeed however men sooth up themselves in their present
prosperity, not regarding Gods favor, whilst they enjoy the worlds treasure:
yet the day is coming when they shall know and acknowledge how infinitely
miserable their condition is, for want of a smile from Heaven: yea, when they
would purchase a beam of Gods love (were it possible) with a total and final
abdication of all secular contentments. Alas, poor wretches, notwithstanding
all the comfort they have for present, it is but night with them; and when the
time comes, that the Moon and Stars shall hide their heads, lose their light
(methinks they should tremble to consider) in what a black night, of worse then
Egyptian darkness, they shall be for ever involved, and that because the Sun
will deny his golden beams, God will eternally withhold his favor from them.

2. But though this be a very useful meditation, yet I conceive it is not here
intended, since it is not said, The love of the Father is on, but in him: and
so the Negation here asserted is, That the worldly lover has no love of the
Father in him.

Before I proceed further in the discussion of this point, it will be needful
to take notice of the fitness of the phrase, which our Apostle uses, when he
says, the love of the Father.

That by the Father is meant God, I suppose is obvious Patris i. e. caelestis
patris Dan.
to every eye; nor would it be passed by that God is emphatically called the
Father. Look as though there are other lives, yet the life to come is sometimes
(...), called life; so though there are other Fathers, yet here God is styled
the Father, as he to whom this primarily belongs. Other Fathers are but the
instruments, he is the principal efficient of our being. They are the Fathers
of our flesh, he is the Father of our spirits: they are but earthly, he is our
Heavenly Father; Finally, They provide for us only for a time, he takes care
for our eternal welfare, and therefore eminently the Father.

Again, It would not be passed by, that our Apostle says, not your, but the
Father: since though he is a Father, yet not to them, who love the world.
Indeed they are ofttimes so presumptuous as to call him Father, but they are
none of his Children. These lusts wherever they rule, are not the spots of
Gods Children.

But that which would be here especially observed is, that our Apostle speaking
of the love of God, calls it the love of the Father: nor is it without good
reason, and that upon a double account.

1. To inform us under what notion chiefly God is the Object of love. True
indeed in himself, he is good, nay goodness, which is loves Object; but yet
this goodness is known to us by its communication; and it is good as known
which causes love; so that we love God chiefly under those merciful relations
in which he stands to us; nor is there any relation of greater goodness toward
man, then that of a Father. He is our King, our Master, our Judge: but under
these notions he is especially to be feared; as he is our Father, principally
he is to be loved.

2. To insinuate how greatly we are obliged to love God, rather then the world.
The world, at the best is but a servant, at the worst our enemy; as our
servant, it is to be used, not loved; at least not with a choice love: as our
enemy, it is to be, not loved, but hated, and trampled on. Now God is our
Father, and there is a natural affection due from Children to their Parents,
whom should we love if not our Father? so that to love the world before God is,
as if one should prefer his Servant, nay his enemy before his friend, his
Lord, his Father: then which what can be more monstrous? And when I find the
Apostle here dissuading from worldly love, upon the account of its
inconsistency with the love of God; I am apt to believe that he purposely
phraseth it, the love of the Father, to render the love of the world, which is
so repugnant to the love of God, so much the more odious to us.

But to let go the phrase, The design of this proposition is manifest; there is
no positive love of God in him, in whom there is a Superlative love of the
world; he that loves the world chiefly, does not love God truly; he that is a
lover of pleasure, or wealth, or honor more then God, is not at all a lover of
God. Indeed a worldling may be in show a Saint, and (as far as words will go)
a friend of God; so may an Harlot seem kind to her Husband; but as she who
gives her heart to another, bears no real love to her Husband; so he who
loves the world has no sincere affection to God. Upon which account St James
calls worldly sinners, Adulterers James 4. 4.
and Adulteresses; so that to speak after our Apostles phrase elsewhere, He
that says he loves the Father, and yet loves the world, is a liar, and there
is no truth in him.

It is that indeed which holds true, both ways; as it is with a pair of
scales, the one goes up, the other goes down, so it is with these two Loves.

1. On the one hand, The Negation holds firm, the proposition being inverted,
If any man love the Father, the love of the world is not in him. Moses rod
swallowed up the Magicians; so does the love of God all other loves. It is
observed of the Sun beams, that if they shine bright and hot upon the fire,
they put it out; so do Heavenly affections extinguish Earthly; Postquam
Amarillis nos tenuit, Galatea reliquit.

When divine love enters in, carnal goes out. The command of love to God, is
of a large extent, Thou shall Divinus amor ubi venerit omnes captivat affectus.
Bern. Sermon. 13. in Cant.
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
might: and if the love of God take up the whole, there is not so much as a
corner for left worldly love. St Bernard commenting upon that precept thus
expounds it, and that aptly to our present purpose, thou shall love God withal
thy heart, soul, might, that is, dulciter, prudenter, fortiter, sweetly,
wisely, strongly, and where this love is predominant, (as that Father has
excellently observed) there is no room for worldly lusts; he that loves God
sweetly withal his heart, tastes no sweetness in carnal things, which is the
lust of the flesh; he that loves God wisely with all his soul, is not curicus,
or covetous of temporal things, which is the lust of the eyes; he that loves
God strongly, so as to endure all things for him, regards not honors, which is
the pride of life.

Nor is it less true in the direct, then in the inverted notion, If any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. Indeed one who has been
a lover of the world, may be won to be a lover of God; yea, he who loves the
world in the second, may love God in the first place: but as St Gregory has
pithily and aptly expressed Greg. Mor. l. 18. c. 5.
it, Utraque s^mul and aequaliter amari non possunt, both cannot together be
equally loved; when the inferior sensitive powers of the soul are vehemently
affected, the superior rational faculties are hindered in their operations; so
is spiritual love by carnal. The trees which spread in breadth grow not in
height; those who extend their love to the things below, ascend not in love to
the things above. Pharaohs lean Kine did eat up the fat; so does the pining
love of the world devour the love of God, which is the Fat and Marrow of the
soul. It is very observable, that St Paul describing the wicked conversation of
false teachers, brands Phil. 3. 19, 20.
them with these three lusts, whose belly is their God, the lust of the flesh;
who glory in their shame, or as some read it, whose glory is their shame, the
pride of life; who mind earthly things, the lust of the eyes; to all which he
opposes that one character of himself, and the rest of the teachers, but our
conversation is in Heaven, thereby intimating, that they who give themselves to
worldly lusts, are strangers to an Heavenly conversation, and consequently to
divine affection, by which especially we climb to, and converse with God in
Heaven.

To give you yet more fully the sense of this proposition, if you compare it
with parallel Scriptures, you shall find it will admit of a double
enlargement, to wit, in regard of the predicate, and the copula; the thing
denied, and the manner of denying it.

1. The love of the Father is not in him, nay The hatred of the Father is in
him: so St James his assertion James 4. 4.
runs, Know you not that the friendship of the world is enmity with God, and
that he might bring the charge home to their consciences, he repeats it with
the change of the Abstract into the Concrete, Whosoever therefore will be a
friend of the world, is an enemy of God. It is true (as has been already
intimated) he may be a seeming friend, but he is a real enemy, and so much the
worse enemy, because a seeming friend.

I know if this Question were put to many lovers of the world, Do you hate God?
they would say in Hazaels language, Am I a dead Dog, that I should do this
thing? I say my Prayers, frequent the Church: and think you I hate, nay do I
not love God? But oh vain man, do not deceive thy self; whosoever is the
worlds friend, is at least virtually Gods enemy; and so far from loving, that
he does in effect hate him; and all his servioes, are no better then a mocking
(as much as in him lies) of the sacred deity.

2. The love of the Father is not; nay not only is not, but cannot be in him;
our blessed Savior is express concerning Mat. 6. 24.
obedience; you cannot serve God and Mammon; and it is no less true of love,
you cannot love God and the world, much less the world and God. The
impossibility of the consistency of these two, will appear if you consider

1. The nature of love, It is an ingrosser appropriating the heart to the
Object; love says to its beloved, I am thine, to wit, wholly, soly; and
therefore it cannot be another; when the stream runs into one channel, then
it runs violently; vehement affection admits not of division. It is as possible
for a direct line to terminate in two points, or for one member to serve two
bodies, as for love intensively at once to mind two Objects.

2. The contrariety of the Objects; God and the world, in the very next Verse,
they are set one in opposition to the other. The Father is above, the world is
below; so that to use a comparison of an Ancient, the same eyes may as well at
the same time behold Heaven and Earth, as the same affection be carried toward
God and the 12. Abusionum gradus in Cypr. Aug.
world. God is light, and the world is darkness; Fieri non potest (says
Damascen) It cannot be that divine and worldly love should cohabit, no more
then that light and darkness should reside together. Two contrary forms
Damasc. par. l. 1. c. 30.
may as soon at once inform one and the same matter, and two contrary intense
qualities meet together in the same Subject, as the love of the world, and the
love of the Father dwell in the same heart. If I love another man's enemy and
that as he is his enemy, I must needs be an enemy to him; the worldling loves
the world, not as in subordination to, but competition with; and therefore he
can be no other then an enemy to God; so true is this of our Apostle, If any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

That it may yet more plainly appear, that there neither is nor can be any true
love of God in the worldling: take notice of these ensuing particulars.

1. Can there be any love of the Father in him, who has no love to his name,
especially his word which God has magnified above all his name? and yet this
is evident in worldly lovers; their lusts like thorns choke the good seed of
the word, that it can take no root in their hearts; their proud necks will not
stoop to put on this sacred yoke; the voluptuous man's ear is deaf to this
Heavenly charm; and when the spiritual fishers would catch the covetous, he
slippeth (with the Eele) into the mud of the world, and so renders all their
pains useless.

2. Can there be any love of the Father in him, who does not cleave to him with
full purpose of heart, and will renounce his Religion, rather then suffer
persecution? If any man draw back, my soul (says God) shall have no pleasure
in him; and it is as true, his soul has no pleasure in God. Now the love of
the world causes men to grow lukewarm, nay at last, quite cold. St Paul
observes it, as the ground of Demas his Apostasy, he 2 Timothy 4. 10.
has forsaken me (and with him Christ) having embraced (to wit, with the arms
of love) this present world. What made Judas so frozen, so false hearted to so
gracious a Master, but the love of money? had not Moses instead of loving
despised the pleasures and honors of Pharaohs Court, he had left the People of
God. Danger and nakedness, want and penury, reproach and infamy, will quickly
affright that man from his Christian Profession in whom the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life reign.

3. He that has any true love of the Father, will call the Lords day a
delight; loves to converse with God by Prayer and other holy ordinances; but
the worldly lover either wholly casts off holy duties, holy days, holy things;
or else he takes no joy in the performance of them; no time being worse spent
in his esteem, then that which is in Gods courts. Worldly men in Heavenly
duties are like a fish upon the shore, they faint and gasp, and are never
well, till they return to the muddy waters. When will the Sabboath be gone,
that we may sell and get gain, says the covetous; that we may take our
pleasure, says the voluptuous; that we may pursue our politic designs, says
the ambitious? Nay it is not seldom seen, that every one of these will not
stick to fulfill their own lusts even when they should be employed in Gods
service.

4. It is impossible that the love of the Father should consist with
sacrilege. No man ever looked upon a thief as his friend; to live in any
sin, much more in such a sin as reflects upon God, must needs be repugnant
to the love of him. Now worldly love puts men upon the commission of this great
wickedness. Every proud man is a sacrilegious thief, robbing God of his glory,
which he will not give to another; and it is not seldom seen that covetous and
voluptuous men rob God of his Revenues. Belshazzer prostitutes the vessels of
the Temple, to the lust of the flesh, by quaffing in them. Achan through the
lust of the eyes, alienateth the devoted gold, and garment; wicked worldlings
will not stick to be not only sellers and buyers in, but of the Temple, taking
the houses of God into their possession.

5. Finally, He that sets up any thing in the room of God, cannot have a
sincere affection toward him. The cursed Idolater as much as in him lies,
dethroneth the divine majesty, which surely cannot consist with amity. And yet
it is an undoubted truth; every worldling is an idolater, to wit, in a
spiritual sense, bowing down Vide Cypr. de 2^^. martyr.
though not with his knee to an Idol, yet with his heart to the world. St Paul
speaking of Epicures, who are given over to the lust of the flesh, gives them
this brand, whose belly is their God, and consequently their Kitchen is their
Temple, Table their Altar, and Cook their Priest. The same Apostle mentioning
covetousness, presently adds which is Idolatry. Indeed with a covetous man,
seulpture is his Scripture; Bills and Bonds are his Bible; the Exchange his
Temple, and Gold his God; as he says to it, thou art my love, so likewise thou
art my hope, my trust; The proper acts of natural worship, which are due only
to the Deity. He deals with it (as the two Giants sometime did with Mars,)
first he looks it fast, and then worships it. Finally, The proud man
worshippeth (though not images, yet) his own imaginations, and sets up himself
in Gods room, admiring and adoring his own (though but sometime fancied)
excellencies; nay, which is yet Jer. 48. 26, 29, 4^.
worse, he so sets himself above, that he sets himself against God; for so the
Prophet accusing M^a^ of pride, and haughtiness; proves it by this Medium,
Thou have magnified thy self against God. In this respect it is enquired and
resolved by the Schools, Aquin. 2a. 2ae. l. d.
that pride is the greatest of s^ns: for whereas in other lusts, there is
directly a conversion to the Creature, in this there is a direct aversion from
the Creator; by all which it appears, how injurious these lusts are to the
Father, and therefore incompatible with the love of the Father.

To what has been already said concerning the express and positive truth of
this clause, I must Est. in loc.
not forget to add, that there is another implicit and consequentiall truth
wrapped up in it; namely, That if any man love the world, the love of the
Brethren is not in him. Indeed the s^nse of these words, the love of the
Father, may be rendered, the love which the Father requires, and so it extends
to Botherly love. Besides, the Connection seems to intimate, that loving the
world is forbidden as an enemy to Brotherly love, which is discussed a little
before. Finally, Omne majus continet in ^se mi^^s, the less is involved in the
greater: so that as E^ius well notes, since the love of the Father (which is
the greater) the love of the Brethren (which is the less) is also to be denied
of him, who loves ^he world, S Paul speaking of charity says, she seeks not
her own, whereas the worldling is altogether for himself, and therefore has no
affection to others; though to speak truth, as he is nomini bonus, good to no
man, so he is sibi nequam, worse to himself.

To enlarge upon this a little, Consider the worldly lover, in reference to his
Superiors, Inferior, Equals, and you shall find he has no love to any.

1. He is so far from loving, that he envieth those that are are above him,
in place, in wealth, in power. To use the phrase of the Text, The Sixth. pap. l.
de divitiis.
love of the Father is not in him, not of the political Father, against whom
he will not stick to rebel, when opportunity is offered. The proud man
grudgeth Subjection; the Covetous man Tribute; and the Epicure Obedience to his
Laws: Not of the Ecclesiastical Father, whom worldly lusts prompt him to
undervalue; yea if he reprove him to spurn against; nay ofttimes not of the
natural Father, whilst they who are tainted with these lusts, like Esau,
wish, The days of mourning for their Father were at hand; nay some like
Absalom consult their Fathers ruin, that they may enjoy their honors and
estates.

2. As for those who are under him, he is very apt to trample them under his
feet; and if they be in want, very backward to reach forth an hand of succor
to them. The Voluptuous lays out so much upon his pleasures; the ambitious
wants so much for the maintaining of his honors, and the covetous lays up so
much for the satisfying of his eyes, that they have little or nothing to spare
for the needy; nay that too often they oppress and grind the faces of the
poor.

3. Instead of loving his equal, he is apt to contend and quarrel with them,
Whence come wars and fightings among you? says St James, and answering his
Question he adds, Come they not hence, even of the lusts that war in your
Members? Omnia perfect in pace consisterent si hominem imperandi cupiditas non
teneret, said Valerius truly. It is the desire of being Valor. hom. 20. de
Arasit.
above others, that hinders us from living in peace with others; and speaking
of covetousness, he asserts, Hinc pullulare odiorum causas and amicitiarum
faedera dissipari, it to be the breaker of amity, and begetter of enmity
amongst men; nor is it less true of sensual lusts, which very often blow the
fire of discord into a flame.

In one word, what wrong will not men do to their Neighbors in their
relations, names, estates, by fraud and treachery, by violence and cruelty, in
words and works, for the base love of wealth, of honor, or pleasure, all which
are directly repugnant to brotherly love?

To close up with some useful inferences from the consideration of what has
been handled: Learn we

1. How desperate and dangerous a sin is worldly love. One upon this clause
has well observed, Lor. in loc.
Lenis oration, sed plena aculeo, it is seemingly a gentle speech, but carries
a sting with it. For in saying there is no love of the Father, and consequently
not of his Brother, in him that loves the world, he says in effect, he is one
that breaks all the Commandment; for if love be the fullfilling of the Law,
to wit, love to God of the first, and love to our Neighbor of the second, he
that neither loves God nor Men, must needs break both. It is very observable,
that David praying God to incline his heart to his Testimonies, presently
adds, and not to covetousness; thereby implying, that if he were inclined to
covetousnes, he could not love or keep Gods Testimonies. Moses brake the Table
in pieces out of a zealous anger at the golden Calfe; and the worldling will
break the Laws written on those Tables, for the Gold upon the Calfe. The love
of money, I and of honor and pleasure, is the rot of all goodness, and the
root of all wickedness, the Moath of sanctity, the rust of virtue, the breeder
and the feeder of vice. Ungodliness and worldly lusts are coupled together 1 Timothy 6. 10. Titus 2. 11. 1 Pet 2. 11. Bern. in Psalm. Qui habit.
by St Paul; Abstain from fleshly lusts, and having our conversation honest,
are joined together by St Peter: there is neither honesty nor piety to be
found, where worldly love reigns.

2. How great is the folly of Hypocrites, who think to join what here St John
has opposed) the love of the world, and the love of the Father together. Many
there are (says Isidore Hispalensis truly) who will fly to Heaven by a divine
conversation, but yet they are loath to leave earthly contentments; Provocat
eos amor Christi, sed revocat amor seculi; The love of Christ puts them a
little forward, but the love of the world pulls them backward: and so (as
Erasmus is Munst. Cosmog.
painted by the Romans) they hang between Heaven and Earth. There is a City in
Germany, which belonging to two Governments, was called Mindin, which is
(according to the s^gnification of it in the Germane language) mine and thine.
Thus the Hypocrite says to God, thou art mine, and to the world, I am 1 King.
17. 32, 18, 11.
thine: in which respect he is called a double minded man, and is said to have
an heart, and an heart; like the Samaritans who feared the Lord, and served
Idols, the Israelites who halted between God and Baal; those in the Prophet
Zephany, who did swear by the Lord and Malchom, and those lukewarm
Laodiceans, Zeph. 1. 5.
who were neither hot nor cold. But alas how vainly do such men deceive
themselves! Indeed the false Mother of the Child would have it parted between
them, but the true Mother would have all or none. The world is content to have
a corner in thy heart, but God will have thy whole heart. The Arc and Dagon
cannot stand together in one Temple; and therefore when Sivis esse templum
veritatis, fuge idolum falsitatis, etc. Aug. Sermon 14. in festo sanct.
the Arc is brought in, Dagon falls down; no more can God and the world in one
soul: and therefore if we will set up God in the throne, the world must be
cast down, nay out. The Spouse in the Canticles is said to wound Christ with
one eye, Quia alterum non habebat, because she had no other; Christ calls upon
us in the Gospel, to cut off one foot, one hand, and to pluck out one eye: the
heart in all languages is a Monasyllable, unum uni, the one heart must be
dedicated to the one God. In the meat offering God required all the
Frankincense, and in the sacrifices all the fat; to teach us that the intention
of our mind and affection of our heart must be wholly carried toward God.
Among the Pythagoreans the Duall number was infamous; sure I am, the double
minded man is odious to God, so odious that he threatens (...), to cut him
asunder, a punishment very suitable to his fault; like that which the King of
the Albines inflicted on the King of the Romans, when he caused him to be tied
to two horses, who by drawing contrary ways, tore his body in two pieces.

3. Lastly, How just and necessary it is to cast the love of the world out of
the hearts, in order to the entertaining of the love of the Father. Indeed as
St Gregory Greg. Mor. l. 18. c. 8. Leo Sermon. 51. septimi mensis.
and Leo have both well observed, The reasonable soul cannot be all together
without delight and void of love. Aut infimis delectatur, aut summis; so the
one Aut, Dei amator est, aut mundi; so the other, Our delight must either
ascend or descend, our love must either be set upon God or the world. How
impossible it is for these two to dwell together, you have already heard; so
that either we must hate the one, or love the other, or hold to the one, and
despise the other, as our Savior tells us* And now as Eliah said to the
Israelites, If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal be God, follow him; so
let me beseech you, If the Lord be God, love him; if the world, love it. If the
world have as much excellency in it as God has; if the world have as much
right to you, as God has; if the world can do as much for you, as God can and
will, then love it. But alas, whatever good is in the world, is but a ray of
that Sun, a drop of that Fountain derived from, and infinitely inferior to
the goodness of God; in which respect says St Austin excellently, Aug. in loc.
Pulcher est mundus, sed pulchrior a quo factus est mundus, The world is
beautiful; surely then he that made it so, is far more beautiful. Besides,
The world was made for us, and therefore only to be used, whereas God is our
Creator, Master, Father; and therefore to be feared, and honored, and loved.
Methinketh, the Father says to us concerning the world, as Saul to his
Servants concerning David, Will the Son 1 Samuel 22. 7.
of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards? will or can the world do
that for you, which I will do, give you grace and glory, felicity and
immortality? Nay, let me add a word more, The world would infect and infest
us, instead of doing us good, bring us into temptations and snares: and tell me
then, whither the Father be not to be preferred in our estimation and affection
before the world? Infine, that God should have our love we cannot but
acknowledge most reasonable; and therefore what remains, but that every one
of us take up firm resolutions of rejecting the world; love both we cannot,
one we will, God we ought; and to that end, we must leave the world, that we
may cleave to God.

No doubt the world is, and will be a very earnest and importunate suitor to us
for our love; and too often she so far prevails, that we consent; but
remember I beseech you our Father forbids the banes, and shall we match against
our Fathers consent, nay let me tell you, if we marry the world, the Father
will disclaim and disown us as none of his Children, and therefore if we call
on the Father, let us renounce the world. Believe it, an ill match is better
broken then carried on, and so much the rather, because whatever promise we
make to the world, it is a breach of the first vow we made to God in our
Baptism, and therefore to be disannulled, as inconsistent with our former
obligation.

To end all: I cannot better press this then in St Austins language, who calls
these words Verba extirpantia, words of extirpation; if you find a weed you
grub it up, that you may sow good corn; so must we pluck up worldly, that we
plant Heavenly love. Vas es (says that Father) si plenum, effunde quod habes,
effunde amorem saeculi, Aug. l. d.
ut implearis amore Dei. Thy soul is a vessel, if it be full, (as indeed whose
is not?) empty it, pour out the love of the world, that thou may be filled
with the love of God, which otherwise is impossible. For if any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 16, 17. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of
the world. And the world passes away and the lust thereof, but he that does
the will of God abides forever.
A Naked command from God is a sufficient ground of obedience from man, no
doubt St Paul so accounted it, and therefore exhorting the Thessalonians to
abstain from fornication, uses this as a strong inducement; for this is the
will of God. The truth is, obedience is most ingenious when least discreet, it
being very reasonable that we should obey God without asking a reason of his
Precept. It was the praise of Caesar's Soldiers, Quod imperium potius quam
consilium sequebantur, that they executed their Generals injunctions, without
inquiring into his 1 These. 4. 3.
consultations. It is the Character of a good Christian to believe, because God
asserteth, and obey, because he requires.

But see the condescension of our merciful God, who is pleased not only to
command by his authority, but teach by his grace: so St Paul says, The grace
of God Tit. 2. 10.
teaches us to deny worldly lusts; not only to require, but 1 Pet. 2. 11.
to entreat; so St Peter, Dearly beloved, I beseech you abstain from fleshly
lusts. Finally, Not only to prescribe, but persuade, and therefore as he
enjoyneth a duty, so he adjoyneth a Motive, and that drawn from the necessity,
equity, and utility of observing the command, whither it be to avoid or do.

This is evident in the prohibition here given by St John concerning worldly
love, which he contents not himself barely to propound, but strongly presses
as necessary, because else we cannot love the Father; and as just, because this
world is of a short continuance. For all that is in the world, etc. And the
world passes away, etc.

In handling the Argumentation, we have dispatched Genesis 2.
the maine of the first Reason, to wit, the principal confirmation which is
drawn from the incompossibility of the love of the Father, with the love of the
world; and now because this may seem a very strange assertion, our Apostle does
not only assert, but prove it in the close of the sixteenth Verse, which I am
in order to discuss: And it is that which I call

The Collateral Conformation, as it is set down in those words, is not of the
Father, but is of the world* for the fuller handling whereof, I shall consider
it both Absolutely and Relatively,

1. If we look upon this clause absolutely, we shall find the design of it to
discover the principle and original of the All that is in the world, and that
both Negatively and Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, The All in the world is not of the Father. Indeed if we
understand this All of those things which are the Objects of our lusts; this
Negation must have a limitation.

1. Pleasures, Riches, Honors, must be considered either in themselves and
their own nature, or as they allure through their external beauty to
inordinate lust; in which latter respect they are not of God, since they were
never made by him for that end, to be as it were the ba^ds of lust.

2. Either as lawfully or unlawfully acquired; in the latter notion they are
not of the Father, except that it is by his permission they are enjoyed, which
is no less true of all wickedness that is acted; in the former they are
blessings of God, yet of his left, not his right hand; and so are dona Dei, the
gifts of God, but not Patris of the Father. There are some things which God
gives as a Father in special love only to his Children, such are grace and
glory. There are other things which he gives as a God, out of common bounty to
enemies as well as Children, and such are food and raiment, wealth, and
preferment; in which respect (at best) in a strict sense they are not of the
Father.

But I rather conceive that this Negative is to be understood of the lusts
after these things: to which agrees that of St Austin, We know that the
Apostle did Aug. adv. Jul. l. 4. c. 13.
not mean this world, the Heavens and the Earth with the things in them, when
he says, All that is in the world, is not of the Father. Indeed the poison is
not in the flower, but in the Spider which sucketh it; nor are the things
themselves, but the lusts after them evil, and consequently not of the Father;
nor yet is all lust after those things to be denied to be of the Father. There
is implanted in every living Creature an appetite after those things which are
suitable to its nature. Now the nature of man being partly Angelical, and
partly Bestiall: Spiritual in its upper, and sensual in its lower faculties;
there could not but be in man as created, Inclinatio ad sensibilia, an
inclination to sensible Objects. But withal, This lust was such as was neither
in it self evil, nor did of it self incline to evil.

I know I am here fallen upon a Controverse, whilst it is affirmed by the
Romanists with others, that man in Vide Bellarm. de amiss. gratiae l. 5. c. 14.
puris naturalibus, in his pure naturals, had ex necessaria materiae
condition, from the condition of his matter, such a concupiscence, which
rendered him prone to evil, and did need supernaturali quodam fraeno, a golden
Bridle of supernatural grace to restrain it. It being here urged upon them,
that this concupiscence being natural, is of God; and if it need a bridle, it
is apt to be irregular and exorbitant, which exorbitancie must needs reflec^ on
God himself, who made man of such a temper: their only evasion is, that it is
from the condition of the matter, praeter intentionem divinam, besides the
intention of the Maker; by which means, whilst they endeavor to vindicate Gods
purity, they calumniate his wisdom, it being no other then the voice of folly,
to say, non putaram, I did not think of or intend such an event.

I cannot therefore but look upon it as most safe to assert with the Orthodox,
that man's natural concupiscence was not apt to be irregular, Nec fraenum nec
calcar desiderabatur. There was no such tardity in the sensitive part as should
need a spur, nor yet any such impetuousness as should require a Bridle.

For the clearing whereof know, that the sensitive appetite of man being borne,
sub regne, under the dominion was to be governed sceptrotionis, by the command
of reason, so that whereas it is ranaturall in a bruit to be carried toward
sensual Objects, juxta impetum, in a way of violence; it is natural to man to
bend toward them, juxta imperium, according to the dictate Aristot. Eth. l. 1.
c. 13.
of reason. Upon this account even by the Philosopher, sensuality in man is
asserted to be (...), reasons servant, and accordingly Damascen is Damasc. de
orthod. fide. l. 2. c. 12.
express, (...), the rational part does naturally rule the irrational, so
that though in man there be a necessary desire of things Aquin. part 3ia. 9,
15. art. 3.
sensible, yet it is, (as Aquinas well) Secundum modum and ordinem rationis, in
that measure and order which reason prescribes; the sensitive powers being not
factious or rebellious, but readily subject to the higher powers, that is, the
intellectuals.

The Proneness therefore of the sensitive appetite to extravagancy is not
natural but contranaturall, not from the Creation, but by transgression: and
of those lusts which the vitiated concupiscense in fallen man does send forth,
is it here affirmed, that they are not of the Father.

Indeed that any sinful lust should be of the Father, is inconsistent with
the. 1. Purity of his nature which cannot endure, must less effect the least
in. 2. Verity of his word which prohibiteth and threatens all sin, and either
those threats are not the declarations of his real intention, (which is
Blasphemy to imagine) or he cannot be the Author of any wicked inclinations. 3.
Equity of his punishments, it being (as Fulgentius excellently) Justitia ea non
est si puniendum reum non juvenisse sed secisse Deus dicatur. Fulgen.
most unjust for God not to clear the guilty, if he made them so. And
therefore for the preventing Objections, and further evidencing of this truth
be pleased to know,

1. It is one thing to make use of men's lusts, and another to stir up those
lust in men. It pleased God to accomplish his own ends by Pharoahs proud lust
in punishing Israel, and Judas his covetous lust in betraying Christ, but he
was no way the cause of these lusts. Thus whilst the holiness of the Father
abhors evil, the wisdom of the Father draws good out of it.

2. It is one thing Extra elicere quod intus latitat, to draw forth that lust
which is in the heart by proposing Objects, and another, Pravis suggestionibus
solicitare, to instill evil lusts into the heart by seducing suggestions. It
cannot be denied, but that Gods providence is pleased (according to that
expression in the Prophet Jeremiah) to lay stumbling blocks before men, that is,
such Objects as prove stumbling blocks, yea that God does purposely present
such things to try but not to seduce them; nor is God therefore any more guilty
of these lusts, which those Objects kindle, then a Master is of his servants
theft, when he layteh a bag of money in his way, to make trial of his
honesty. That expression in the Psalmist concerning God in reference to the
Egyptians (I confess) is very harsh where it is said, He turned their heart to
hate his People, and to deal subtly with his Servants, but if you observe
the story and look upon the preceding Psalm. 105. 25. Verse 24.
Verse, you shall find it was only by increasing his people, and making them
stronger then their enemies God does good to the Israelites, and this becomes
accidentally an occasion of envy in the Egyptians, in which respect only it is
true, He turned their hearts to hate them.

3. It is one thing for God to give leave to men whereby they have opportunity
of, and another to incite them to the fullfilling of their lusts. When we read
concerning David, 2 Samuel 24. 1.
That the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David to
number the people, Either (comparing it with the parallel place in the
Chronicles) we 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
must expound that he to be Satan, or else we must construe that he moved, to
be no more but he permitted Satan to move David to that proud lust. Thus when
it is said by David of Shemie, The Lord has bid him curse me, jussit is no
more but concessit, he has bid, that is, he has given him leave; and that
expression, Go and be a lying spirit in the mouth of all the Prophets, is not
to be understood as a commission, but a permission, as granting a warrant, but
only giving him leave to seduce the Prophets, and by them Ahab. And though the
not restraining sin when it is in man's power, involve him in the guilt, because
he is bound to hinder all sin to his utmost; yet this can no way be charged
upon God, who is no way obliged to bridle men's lusts, and yet withal never
suffers them to break forth, b^ when he has designed to make them
serviceable for some glorious ends.

4. Once more, It is one thing to give up men to their own lusts, and another
to infuse lust into them; the former is a judicial act which God does, only by
withdrawing or withholding from impenitent sinners, that grace which they have
abused or refused. Thus when those Israelites would not hearken to Gods voice,
and would have none of him, He gave them up to their Psalm. 81. 11, 12.
own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels. And when those
Heathens, Knowing God glorified him Romans 1. 21, 24, 26.
not as God, neither were thankful, God gave them up to uncleanness through
the lusts of their own hearts. It being most just with God to let loose the
reins to those sinners who will not be bridled, where by their lusts hurry
them to destruction. But still notwithstanding his Objective proposals and wise
disposals, permissive concession and poenall tradition, these lusts are not of
the Father, he is not an instiller or inciter of, nor an inducer, or rather
seducer to them.

I end this with that caution of St James, Let no man James 1. 13.
say when he is tempted, he is tempted of God. It is useless to cast the blame
of our lusts upon others, but blasphemous to cast it upon God. It is a great
sin to arrogate the good we do to our selves, but a far greater to attribute
the evil we do to God. Indeed it is such a sin (according to St Basils
observation) as borders upon Atheism, all the difference between them consists
in Bas. M. hom. quid Deus non est author mali.
this; The Atheist says, God is not, and the Blasphemer says, God is not
good; which latter Plutarch asserts to be worse then the former, making the
case his own, I had rather (says he) one should say there never was such a man
as Plutarch, then that he was a bad man; Plut. Mor.
and I account it worse to affirm that God is the Author of vice, then to deny
that there is a God. Oh then take we heed how we tread in the steps of our
great Grandfather Adam, who to excuse himself, translateth ^he crime, though
not explicitly, yet implicitly upon God, when he says, The woman which thou
gave me, gave to me, and I did eat. We cannot do a greater dishonor to God,
then to spit, nay cast dirt upon the face of his purity, by charging him with
the least iniquity. And now if you please to know whence these lusts have their
Original, pass we on to the other clause wherein it is expressed.

2. Affirmatively, But is of the world, The conceptions of Interpreters are
somewhat various about this clause, yet all such as are most true, and seem to
discover the spring of these lusts.

1. Of the world, that is, says Justinian, Ex prava Justin. in loc.
illa affectione and vitio hominum naturae indito ob primi parentis lapsum,
from the corrupt and vicious inclination which is in man's nature, through Adams
fall. All these evil lusts are the ebullitions of our natural corruption,
which renders us both backward to whatsoever is good, and forward to all evil:
according to that of St James, Every man when be is tempted, James 1. 13.
is drawn aside, and enticed of his own lust. Were it not for this, all
external temptations would (as balls thrown against a stone wall) make no
impression, or as sparks cast into the Sea be presently extinguished, it is
our inbred vitiosity which makes us like Tinder, ready to catch fire at every
spark. But though this interpretation best agree with the thing, yet it is
somewhat aliene from the phrase, there being no parallel place in which by
world is understood original contagion.

2. Of the world, that is, says Oecumenius, of the Oecumen. in loc.
God of this world, not of the Father of believers, but the Father of the
wicked, that is, the Devil, these lusts are they (...), whereof Satan is the
sower and the planter. He it was who under the shape of a Serpent enticed our
first Parents: No wonder if he seduce us to these lusts. Indeed the pride of
life only, is his lust subjective, since he being a spirit is not capable of
the other two, but all these lusts are his effective, because he is a suggester
of, and inticer to them, his temptations are the bellows which blow the fire of
original lust to a flame, but this interpretatation is also incongruous to the
phrase, and therefore I pass it by.

3. Be pleased then to remember what I have already told you that world may be
either understood of persons or things, and accordingly both constructions may
here not unfitly be made use of.

1. Of the world, that is says St Austin, Ab hominibus Aug. in loc.
mundi dilectoribus, of those men who are the worlds darlings, and thus these
lusts are said to be of the world, as a pattern or exemplary cause, inasmuch as
to walk in them, is according to the Apostles phrase, To walk according to
the course of the world. The truth is, we are very apt to learn of, and
conform to the corrupt lusts and practices of the world. We do not with the
Pelagians (far be it from us) say, that sin came in only by imitation, but
yet withal it is an undeniable truth that imitation is a cause of much sin,
that corrupt nature which is with in us rendering us prone to follow others in
their evil ways. This is that which those Dehortations both of St Paul, and
St Peter plainly intimate, This I say and testify in the Lord, that ye
henceforth Ephesians. 4. 17. 1 Pet. 4. 7.
walk not as other Gentiles walk; so St Paul, For the time past of our lives
may it suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, So St Peter. Both
imply, that we are very ready to walk in the way, do the will of the wicked
among whom we live.

2. But that interpretation which I look upon as most genuine is by the world,
to understand the things of the world, and therefore these lusts are said to be
of the world, because by reason of our inbred corruption, these worldly things
become occasions and inciters of lust Tit. 2. 10.
To this purpose it is that St Paul calls these lusts, worldly lusts not only
because they are conversant about the world: but because the world is in some
sense a cause that is an external moving cause of them. The Father of these
lusts is the Devil, their Mother the flesh, the world is a Midwife to bring
forth, and a Nurse to bring up these monstrous brats, no wonder if upon this
account it is reckoned as one of the three grand enemies of man's salvation.

Learn we then that excellent admonition of St James James 1. 27.
To keep our selves unspotted of the world. The truth is, mundus immundus, the
world is unclean and filthy, and if we take not heed, it will defile and
besmeare us, if we be not very careful where we tread, we shall soon step into
a dirty puddle, if we be not very wary where we walk, we shall quickly be
caught in a snare. Oh how hard is it to look upon these things, and not long
after them, to use them and not love them, to have them in our eye or hand, and
yet keep them out of our heart? Oh therefore watch and be sober, so often as
you are engaged about worldly things, keep a godly jealousy over your hearts,
least they go out too much after them, for the world is very insinuating and
too often creeps into our hearts, the presence Chamber of the King of glory,
in which respects these lusts are most truly said to be of the world. And so
much for the two branches of this clause Absolutely considered.

2. Pass we on now to a Relative view, and thus it may have a double reference.

1. Some conceive it as an Argument why we should not love the world, and the
things of it; and truly whither we understand the Subject of this proposition,
All that is in the world is not of the Father, but is of the world, of the
things themselves or the lust after them, it will hold good.

1. Love not the things of the world, because these things are not of the
Father but of the world, Qualia sunt haec, says Zanchy aptly, how low poor
things are these, how unworthy of a Christian love? These are from Zanch. in
loc.
an earthly extraction an inferior principle, Set your affections (says St
Paul) on the things that are above, and not on the things that are upon the
earth, if you will love, let it be those things above that are of the Father,
of Col. 3. 2.
a noble divine original, not these earthly things which are of the world.

2. Love not the things of the world, because those lusts which are conversant
about those things, are not of the father but of the world, the strength of
which argument will better appear if we consider who they are, namely,
Believers, such as are not of the world but of the father, to whom this
dehortation is given, it being very unreasonable that they who are not of the
world but of the father, should harbor those lusts which are not of the father
but Dan. in loc.
of the world. When therefore oh Christian any desires arise in thine heart,
put these two questions to them, whither tend they? and especially whence are
they? if they be of the father, and so consequently tending upwards, embrace
them, but if of the world, and so necessarily bending downwards refuse them.

2. But though I do not reject these Interpretations, yet I rather adhere to
that exposition which looks upon this clause, as a reason of the reason
preceding, why the love of the world and the love of the Father are
inconsistent, and the strength of the Argument may be drawn out two ways.

1. These worldly lusts are not of the Father, and therefore not to the Father.
Things move in a circle where they begin, there they end. Rivers come from, and
return to the Sea. These lusts the being not of the Father, cannot be toward
him, nay indeed are against him, and therefore cannot consist with the love of
him. The love of the Father carries the heart toward him, these lusts being
not of the Father, turn away the heart from him, how can they agree together?

2. Where there is a love of the Father, only that which is of the Father, will
find acceptance, yea whatever is not of the Father, the soul that loves him
cannot choose but abhor; he that loves God truly has a sympathy and
antipathy correspondent to his; what God loves he loves, what God hates he
hates; and therefore since these lusts are so far from being of the Father,
that they are of the world, yea the Father instead of an Author or an Abettour
of them is an abhorer and opposer of them; no wonder if there be no sincere
love of the Father, where the love of the world is predominant.

And this shall suffice to have been spoken of the first branch of the
Argumentation drawn from the love of world, its repugnancy to the love of God.
It now remains that we proceed to,

The other branch which is taken from the world it self, its short continuance
as it is set down in the seaventeenth Verse, For the world passes away and the
lusts thereof, but he that does the will of God indureth for ever; where there
are two general parts occur to our observation, to wit, A

Thesis or proposition, For the world passes away and the lust thereof,
Antithesis or opposition added by way of Amplification, but he that does the
will of God endures for ever.
1. Begin we with the proposition, into which if you please to look narrowly,
you shall find these three Assertions.

Of each in order.
The world passes away, The lust after the world passes away, The worldly
lover passes away.
1. The world passes away: In several places of Scripture we find a division
of worlds, into that which now is, and that which is to come; as for that which
is to come, the Author to the Hebrews plainly intimates, that it is a
continuing City, where he says, We have no continuing City, but we seek one to
come, of this present world therefore is this assertion to be understood.

And thus if we take this world (...), in its largest and most comprehensive
notion, for the whole Fabric of the visible Heavens and the Earth; it is true,
the world passes away: yea, as Grotius notes upon the Grot. in loc.
Text, Ea lege factus ut aliquando pereat, it was created corruptible, and is
as sure to perish, as that it once Ps. 102. 25, 26.
began to flourish. This is affirmed by the Psalmist, Of old thou have laid the
foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of thy hands, they
shall perish, yea all of them shall wax old like a garment, as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. By our Savior himself, Heaven and
Earth shall pass away, and by Mat. 24. 35. 2 Pet. 3. 7, 10.
St Peter, both the things and the means of accomplishing it are indicated.
The Heaven and the earth that n^w is, are reserved to fire; and yet more fully,
The day of the Lord shall come as a thief, in which the Heavens shall pass away
with a great noise, the Elements shall melt with fervent heat, the Earth also
and the works that are therein shall be burnt up. This Witch (for so she is
indeed to the greatest part of men) shall be burnt up with all her baggage.
This world (to use Isidore Pelusiot as comparison) Isid. Pelus. l. 2. ep. 6. 26.
(...), reeleth to and fro like a Drunken man, till at last it falldown. So
true is that of St Cyprian, Haec Cypr. ep. ad Demetr.
sentent in m^nd^ data, ut omnia orta occidant, This doom is inevitably passed
upon the world, that as it had a beginning, so it shall have an end.

I am not ignorant that there is some contrarierty among Divines about the
nature of this passing away, whither it shall be substantial or accidental.

Some expounding this of St John, the world, by that 1 Cor. 7. 31. Ambrose ibid.
of St Paul, The fashion of this world passes away, affirm the passing away
to be only accidental: and to this Gr. M. Job l. 17. c. 5.
purpose St Gregory is express, Vtraque haec (speaking of the Heavens and the
Earth) Per eam, quam nunc habent imaginem, transeunt; sed tamen per essentiam
sine fine subsistunt, Both these pass away as to their present shape, but in
their essence they shall endure for ever.

Others conceive, That since at the last day the wicked shall be banished into
everlasting flames, and the godly received into the Kingdom prepared for them,
this present world will be useless as an house, wherein there is no inhabitant,
it shall be pulled down, and the very materials of it annihilated.

But after all debates upon this Question, it will be a presumption to
determine it, because the Scripture is silent. I could wish as this, so many
other disputes of the like nature, were either wholly silenced, or more calmely
discussed. Why should we contend one with another about the manner, so long as
we all believe the thing?

But that to which I rather incline, is to understand the world (...), in a
moral notion, for those things of the world which are the Objects and
Allurements of these lusts, it being most rational to take the world in the
motive, in the same sense in which it is understood in the Dehortation; so that
the plain scope of our Apostle in this clause, is to assert, that All these
things of the world with which the Children of Men are so apt to be in love are
of a fading, transitory nature.

Indeed the Greek word here used (...), admits of several acceptions, each of
which may very well be admitted in this place.

1. If we look to the derivation of the word (from (...), and (...),) it is
most properly rendered, transversum agit, the world carries its lovers headlong
contrary to the dictates of Gods word, and right reason. We are all Travelers,
the world is an Horse, which whilst a man rides with the bridle of moderation,
it serves to carry him on his journey; but when through too much love he
lays as it were the reins upon its neck, it carries him into cross ways,
over hedge and ditch, till at last it throws, yea overthrows him. We are all
Sailors, this world is as the Sea, and our affections as the winds, which
being set upon the world, like a contrary blast, drive the ship of the soul
upon rocks and sands, till it split and sink into ruin. Suitable to which is
that of St Austin, Ama saeculum, and absorbebit te, amatores suos Aug.
novit vorare non portare, Love the world and it will drown thee, it knows
how to swallow, not to bear its lovers.

2. The Greek word among profane Authors is used Thucyd*
sed to signify as much as to deceive or seduce by fair promises: and in this
sense it is true of the world, which by its specious shows and subtle
insinuations, deceives the fond lover. The world pretends to be a kind Nurse
to her Children, but if you draw her two Dugs, instead of milk, you shall
find nothing but the water of vanity in the one, and the wind of vexation in
the other. No wonder if St Hierome compare Hierome.
it to Nebuchadnezzars golden Image, into which whosoever looks will find
only an empty hollowness, and St Gregory to a rotten Nut, which how fair
soever it Greg. M.
seems, if you open it with the knife of truth, you shall find it only full
of Worms. One being invited to a covetous man's house, who had a stately gate
and an empty Hall, wondered that there should be so much without and so little
within: a fit emblem of these worldly things, which promise much, and perform
little: very fitly says Seneca, (alluding to the stage) Omnium personata est
faelicitas, all the comfort of these worldly enjoyments, is only personated,
not real. They seem to be what they are not, and to do what they cannot. In
one word, The world is the greatest bankrupt, and at best does but compound
with its lovers, not satisfying the half of what it promises.

3. But the most usual signification of the word especially in sacred writ, is
to pass away: that it is so to be taken here, appears in that it is opposed
to abiding in the next clause, and therefore in this notion, I shall now handle
it.

1. It is that which is true of these things considered absolutely in
themselves, they are of a fading nature: 2 Cor. 4. 16. Eccl. 1. 2. Greg. Nyss.
ibid.
according that of St Paul, The things that are seen are temporal. Indeed as
Gregory Nyssen well observes, (...), that which is of slender substance must
needs be of short durance, in vain is perpetuity expected from vanity, and
this all according to Solomon's assertion is, vanity, yea vanity of vanities,
where the Hebrew word signifies a breath, yea the breath of an Infant which is
scarce perceiveable. It is very considerable to this purpose, that the Wise man
says of riches, they are not, and our Savior implicitly asserteth as much of
honor, where he says to the sons of Zebedee, Hitherto you have asked me
nothing, when yet they had petitioned the one to sit at his right hand, and the
other at his Aug. tract. in Joh. 102.
left hand: upon which St Austin note is, Solum bonum spirituale estimari debet
aliquid, only that which is spiritual, is real; as for riches, honor and all
worldly things, they are nothing, because of no intrinsecall worth, nor lasting
continuance. Heraclitus compares them, (...), to the running water which is
still passing, so that we cannot go twice into one and the same water. St
Gregory to those treasures of snow mentioned Job 38. 20. Greg. M. ibid.
in Job, which after a great deal of pains in gathering together melt away.
This world is not quercetum a thicket of Oaks, which stand long, but
arundinetum, a place of willows, which soon bend. The Garden of Eden (which may
well be called the Diamond of the Cypr. de laud Martyr.
worlds Ring) was situated by the Land of Nod, which signifies instable,
thereby intimating the tottering condition of all worldly excellencies. It is
storyed of Edward the first, that after all his famous victories, he died on
the borders of Scotland, at a place called Furbis Sands, wherenote Genesis 4. 16.
says the Historian, upon how sandy a foundation all worldly greaness is
built. No wonder if that which has a weak and infirm foundation, do not long
continue.

2. Besides whilst these things in themselves continue, they pass away from
their possessors, and change their masters. Nothing more usual then for
worldly things to pass like wild foul, from one man's field, or like the river,
from one man's bank to another. The Apostle Paul calls them uncertain riches,
(it is no less true of honors and pleasures,) because we have no certain
tenure 1 Timothy 6. 18.
of them. The utmost we can enjoy them, is Durante vita, during life, when the
worldly lovers breath expireth these things to which he has cleaved will leave
him; but alas we are not sure to enjoy them so long: the marriage between the
world and its lover is not like that between Husband and Wife, to have and to
bold till death part, no nor yet is the possession of them certain, Quam diu
quis been se gesserit, so long as a man uses them well: they pass away from
good as well as bad, so that the term of our tenure, is only durante
beneplacito, so long as God pleases. And if you look upon the dispensations of
divine providence what frequent changes may you observe it to ring in the
Steeple of this world, soon turning plenty into scarcity, wealth into want,
glory into ignominy, and honor into contempt?

3. Thus do these things pass away, and that (as Zanchy well observes upon
the words) instar rapidissimi Zanch. in loc. Aug. in Ps. 110.
fluminis, like a swift running river, or as (St Austin allegorizeth that in
the Psalms, he shall drink of the brook in the way,) a violent and impetuous
torrent. We read concerning the tempter, that he showed Christ all the
Kingdoms and glory of the world in a moment: upon Luke 4. 5. Ambrose ibid.
which St Ambrose excellently, Non tam conspectus ^^leritas indicatur quam
caduca fragilitas potestatis exprimitur, not so much the sodaineness of the
sight, as the transitorines of the things themselves is thereby intimated,
worldly power and honor passing away in a moment. The wise man says of
riches, they take them wings (not feet only) and flee away, to wit, speedily,
suddenly, before we are aware. Worldly wealth (as St Gregory excellently)
Difficile habetur, cito amittitur, is hardly got, and easily lost, like the
cobweb, far longer in the spinning then it is in the sweeping down. The
Spaniard Proverb says of sickness, It comes on horseback, and goes away on
foot, but wealth comes on foot, and goes away on horseback; creeps along
like a Snaile, but flies from us like an Eagle. That similitude of the
Psalmist concerning the grass, Which in the morning Psalm. 90. 3. Vulg. Lat.
grows up and flourishes, but in the evening is cut down and withers, is a
fit emblem of all worldly enjoyments, and the vulgar Latins reading which is
with a double transeat intimates, that it is passing from morning to evening;
and in that the condition of these things is so much the more represented,
which are continually in motion from first to last: and as St Austin
excellently, Quo magis celeriter crescunt ut sint; eo magis festinant Aug.
confess. l. 4. c. 10. Greg. M. l. 16.
ut non sint, The longer they are enjoyed, the nearer they are to decaying. In
one word, what St Gregory observes of secular glory is true of all the rest.
Dum nitet ^adit; dum extollitur, repentino interrupta fine terminatur, whilst
it glittereth and shines gloriously, on a sudden it vanishes away. Like
ears of corn, which the higher they grow, the sooner they hang down their
heads. Indeed (to use Gregory Nazianzens comparison) what is this world, but a
show, a scene, a representation, which having pleased our eyes for a few
minutes, is presently removed; agreeing with that parallel place of St Paul,
The fashion of this world passes away, and thus I have given you a short view
of the worlds passing, which is the first branch of the position.

2. The next follows, which is, that The lust of, or after the world, and the
things of it passes away. Indeed those who understand the world in the former
clause largely, for the whole visible Fabric; Expound this lust metonymically,
for the things of this world lusted after, and so the sense is, that as the
whole world in general, so in particular the most desirable and amiable things
in the world pass away, not only the field, but the flower of the field
withers. But I know no reason to recede from the plain meaning of the word,
and therefore I shall so discuss it; The lust, the desire after, and delight in
worldly things passes away. This is that which is true in a double
consideration, to wit, whilst we live, and when we die.

1. Whilst men live their lusts pass away in a double sense,

1. They pass away, that is, they are abortive, as having no strength to bring
forth: it is the difference between Heavenly or Earthly, spiritual and carnal
desires: those shall certainly be sasisfied, but these are frequently
disappointed; these for the most part end in a shameful sadness; those in a
gladsome success. God many times is pleased to blast the hopes, cross the
desires, and evacuate the hopes and endeavors of wicked men in their sinful
ways, according to that threat in the Psalms, The Ps. 112. 6.
desire of the wicked shall perish. Hence it is that their desires create a
great deal of sorrow and perplexity to them; and who would give way to such
lusts, which prove so often suecessless, and being disappointed, end in grief
and impatiency.

2. They pass away, that is, being fulfilled, they are soon glutted: in this
sense, worldly men like Children are soon weary when they have what they
desire. It is an excellent saying of St Austine, Laetitia seculi cum magna Aug.
in John tract. 7.
expectatione speratur, ut veniat; praeterit, cum venerit; men are big with
hopes of a great deal of content, and joy in the accomplishment of their
desires, and alas delight is no sooner come but it is gone: and to the same
purpose Sen. consol. ad polyb. c. 27.
Seneca says of worldly pleasures, Fluit and transit, and paene, antequam
veniat, aufertur; it is of a Fluid transient nature, and is taken away almost
as soon as enjoyed. The truth is, many times whilst the things themselves stay
with us, our lust to, love of, and delight in them cease: in which respect
the world may fitly be compared to the grass, and our lust to the flower of the
grass: for as the flower fades away before the grass, so our lust passes away
whilst yet the worldly Object continues; yea, ofttimes our longing is turned
into loathing, and our love into hatred; witness the story of Amnon and Thamar.
That observation of St Gregory is very apt to this purpose, concerning the
difference between corporal and spiritual delights, these Cum non habentur,
in fastidio, cum habentur, in desiderio, whilst we want them they are loathed,
when we have them they are loved, but those Cum non habentur in desiderio, cum
habentur in fastidio, whilst we want them, are desired, when we have them, they
are loathed. Hence it is, that as weak stomachs must have choice of diet, so
worldly desires call for change of Objects. Why did Solomon study such variety
of pleasures, but because they soon satiate, and the wanton appetite is still
calling for a new Object? Nothing more easy then to surfeit of earthly
enjoyments, and for those things which being absent, were our earnest desire,
by their continued presence, to become an heavy burden. Oh let us learn to
abhor these lusts which will of themselves at last end in abhorring.

2. Once more, Whatever enjoyment we may have of, or contentments in these
lusts whilst we live, they shall all cease when we dye: When death comes, the
covetous man shall graspe no more wealth, the ambitious shall gape no more
after honor, nor the luxurious neigh after his Dalilah. As there is no
wisdom nor counsel, so there is no desire or delight in the Grave whither we
are going. These lusts will leave thee when thou dyest, how much better is it
for thee to leave them whilst thou live.

3. There remains yet one branch more of the position, and that is, though
not expressed, yet employed concerning the worldly lover himself. For in the other
clause the person who does Gods will is said to abide for ever, and so by way
of analogy, this passing away must be understood, not only of the things and
the lust, but the person who lusts after these things.

Indeed we are all in this world, as in a ship, not only the ship it self
moves, but the passengers are carried away in it; yea which is the Riddle, The
Passengers go faster then the ship, since even whilst the world continues, the
inhabitants pass away. Paulinus desired St Austin Aug. Ep. ad paulin.
to write somewhat de statu humanae vitae, of the state of humane life, he
presently corrects him, telling him he should have said, de cursu humanae
^itae, of the course of humane life, our life being a swift race to the Goal
of death. And well were it if we would still join in our meditations, our own,
and the worlds passing away together. If these things do not leave us, yet we
must leave them, and as Esau said, I dye, and what good will my birthright do
me? so let us often think, I must be gone, and what good will my honors,
riches, pleasures do me? It is the Question and Answer of St James, What is
your life, it is James 4. 14.
even a vapor, which appears for a little while, and then vanishes away?
some Expositors observe an emphasis in the your, you that are so much in love
with this life, and the things of it, how brittle, frail, and transitory, are
they and it?

Nor yet is this all that is here employed, since not only that which is common
to worldlings with other men is here asserted, to wit, the passing away by
death, but such a passing away, as is peculiar to him, in opposition to the
happy estate of them that love God, and then the meaning is this, he passes
away, not only by a first, but a second death, he loses this life, so as never
to enjoy another; he so passes away, as to perish, not by annihilation, but by
condemnation, he passes from the worlds joys to Hells torments. Oh the
dismal change which a worldling makes, when he dies, all his good things are
taken from him, and horror, anxiety, despair, and everlasting misery seize
upon him: So true is that of an Ancient, Amor mundi non solum peritorius sed
peremptorius, Worldly love is not only vain, but deadly, killing not only the
body, but soul of the sinner to all eternity.

To bring this home in a brief Applecation,

1. Oh that every one of us would be convinced of the worlds instability.
Indeed in this (as well as in many others) the world is a juggler, that though
it be so inconstant yet it promises continuance. Fully to this purpose St
Gregory, The vain joys of this present life, Quasi manendo Greg. M. l. 1.
Bern. c. 12.
blandiuntur sed amatores suos cito transeundo decipiunt; flatter us as if they
would stay with us, and on a sudden by passing away they cheat us. Look as the
Sun, Moon, and Stars, (to borrow that similitude of Philo the Jew) though they
move with a most swift and Philo l. de confus. ling.
rapid motion, seem to the vulgar eye to stand still, at least move slowly; so
do these sublunary things in a worldlings eye. That rich man in the Gospel who
said to himself, Soul thou have much goods laid up for Luke 12. 19, 20.
many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; is called a fool, for
so saying, a fool he was in many respects, in that he thought his soul could
take any concent in his barnes, in that he expected to find ease in the things
of this world, which are as thorns, in that he supposed those things were only
given him to eat, drink, and be merry with, but the worst fool of all, in
that he imagined he should enjoy these goods for many years. Such fools were
those Drunkards who say, We will fill our Isai. 65. 12.
selves with strong drink, and to morrow shall be as to day, and much more
abundant: and those Mammonists of Ps. 4^. 11.
whom the Psalmist says, Their inward thought is, that their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations. But oh when
will we believe that which we so often see and hear, and acknowledge what daily
experience confirms, that this worlds goods are (as they are called)
movables, yea all these worldly things mutable and inconstant. Alas my
Brethren, the time will come when (too late) we shall see their vanity and
instability, Vilia and sluida esse cognoscit amissa Gr. M. l. 8. c. 20.
(says St Gregory) quae, duri aderant magna and mansura videbantur. When we
are strip^ of all, the vain fugacity of these things (which whilst we enjoy,
are so glorious and permanent in our eyes) will appear. But oh how much better
will it be for us, whilst yet they are present with us, to look upon them as
parting from us.

To this end, Pray we for a spiritually enlightened mind. It is the saying of
Jamblicus, If a man could behold Jambl.
this world in the light of divine knowledge, he will find it to be a
vanishing shadow, and Plato Etymologizing Plato.
(...), which signifies wisdom, says it is (...), a due apprehension of the
fluid motion of these terrene contentments, oh let us implore this wisdom from
above. That blind man in the Gospel whose eyes Christ opened, saw at first men
walking like trees, an argument of the weakness of his natural sight, but in a
mystical sense (says Chrysologus) it argues the strength of Chrysol. Sermon.
176.
spiritual sight, to see all the things of this world, not as pillars, but as
trees, and those not standing but walking in a continual motion. It is very
observable with what a different aspect our blessed Savior looked upon the
stones of the Temple from the standers by, they beheld Luke 21. 5.
them as goodly stones, but Christ saw one stone not left upon another, thus
whilst these worldly Objects appear amiable to a carnal eye, the spiritual
Christian beholds them as those which in a little time will perish and come to
naught.

2. Being thoroughly persuaded of this truth, it will (I trust) make way for
that which is the maine design of our Apostle, namely, to dissuade us from the
love of the world, because it passes away. It was a notable speech of Lacon^u^
in Plutarch, when he was told of a Plut. Ap^t^^g.
ship richly laden that was come into the Port, I am not (says he) much moved
with that prosperity which hangs upon ropes. Oh then why are we so much taken
with this world, which is so uncertain, quid strepis oh munde Aug. Sermon. 29.
de verbis dom. in mante.
immunde, says St Austin, oh thou filthy world, what a noise do thou make,
how would men dote upon thee if thou were lasting, who love thee so well,
though thou art fading. Alas Beloved, you may as well stop the running stream
with your hand, blow back the wind with your breath, or cause the Sun to stand
still, as hinder the passing away of these worldly things, and why will you
hold that fast in affection, which you cannot long in possession. Swallows
(they say) will not build their nests in an house which is ready to fall, which
of you if the Carpenter should tell you your house would drop down within few
days, would not presently remove from it; oh let us leave this world, before
it leave us, and possess it as though we possessed it not, because ere long we
shall be dispossessed of it. We sometimes laugh at Children that are pleased
with paper Castles, which may be philipt down in a moment; have we not more
reason to weep over our selves, who hold fast deceit, and set our hearts on
those things which are so easily and suddenly snatched away from us. What is
pleasure, wealth, honor, but as the sand; (so Gregory Nyssen aptly) and you
Greg. Nyss. hom. in Eccl.
know when Children have been running up and down in the sand, so soon as they
are gone, no footsteps remain of all their toil. The truth is, how wise
soever worldly lovers may account themselves, they are notorious fools even
upon this account, that they lean upon a broken reed, feed upon the wind, and
graspe at a shadow. Let therefore the counsel of devout Anselme be acceptable
to us, Nolite constanter mundum, Ans. in Romans
diligere quando ipse quem diligitis non potest constare. Incassum cor quasi
manenter figitis dum fugit ipse quem diligitis, Why should we so constantly
love this world, whenas this world which we love is so inconstant, let not our
foolish heart think to fix it self on that which is still ready to fly away.

Tell me I beseech you, Would any of you weary your selves in scraping up
wealth, in compassing honor, pursuing pleasure, did you certainly know, that
before to morrow, either you should die, or those enjoyments should be taken
away from you? can any of you secure your selves that it shall not be so? yea,
is there any thing more possible then that these things may presently or more
certain then that they shall ere long pass away? and therefore since the world
passes away Leo Sermon. 5. de jejun. 7m i mensis.
from us, let us according to Leo's counsel resolutely pass by the world, so
as it may be only viaticum itineris non illecebra mansionis, a subservient
handmaid, not a domineering Mistress.

And now that this Argument which our Apostle here uses, may have the stronger
influence upon us, to dissuade from worldly love, let me entreat you seriously
to ponder upon these four particulars;

1. What a disproportion there is, and that upon this very account between this
world and our souls. It is a rule in marriage, that there should be a fit
proportion as in other things, so in years between the persons, how unfit then
is it for thy soul to be married to this world, whenas the world is transitory,
and thy soul is immortal, can thou be so sottish as to think that God did
breath that immateriall spirit of thine into thee, to have only the happiness
of a muckworme, which breeds and feeds in dung, or at best of an Indian
Emmet, which glittereth in golden dust about it? Do thou imagine what that
soul of thine which is glued to this world, will do when this world shall be
taken from it? surely as Philip said to his Son, Par tibi regnum quaere, seek a
Kingdom suitable to thy greatness, so let me say to thee, seek an Object
proportionable to thy soul, and that cannot be the world, for it passes away.

1. This world as in it self it is transitory, so it passes away soonest from
them who set their hearts upon it. I have read of certain flitting Islands,
which seem continually to move in the Sea, and if you sail toward them, the
nearer you approach to them, the further they remove from you. A fit Emblem of
these worldly things which many times are farthest from them, who seek most
after them. In this respect what is observable of the shadow, sequentem fugit,
fugientem sequitur, may be applied to the world, It often follows him that
flies from it, and flies from him who follows it. Very apt to this purpose
is that similitude of water, which the faster you think to graspe it in your
hands, slideth away the sooner from you. Thus are covetous, ambitious, and
voluptuous men frequently deceived in their expectations of enjoying this
world, which they so dearly love. Indeed it is the usual dispensation of
divine providence, to take away from men those comforts which he sees to
steal away their hearts from him. It is high time for the Mistress to turn
the Maid out of doors, when she finds her Husbands affections taken off
from Her, and set upon the Maid; what more just then that God should pluck
away those deligths from us, which alienate our hearts from him, so that in one
word, the way to enjoy a comfort is to be willing to lose it, and the way to
lose it is immoderately to love it.

3. This world passes away from its lovers when they have most need of it;
Solomon says of riches, and it is true of honors and pleasures, they profit
not in the day of wrath, and then it is we shall be in greatest want of comfort
and support. When Absalom is caught in the thick bows of a great Oak, and is
taken up between 2 Samuel 18. 9. Drogo Host. in Sermon. de dom. pals.
the Heaven and the Earth, the Mule that was under him went away. Absoloms Mule
is a fit emblem of this world, which then leaves us when we are in the
greatest streights. That similitude which Job applies to his deceitful
Brethren, may no less Job 6. 19, 20
aptly be used in reference to these worldly things, as the streams of Brooks
they pass away, for as these vanish away in the heat, so that the thirsty
traveller which comes thither for relief, is confounded because he hoped; so
do those fail us in the day of distress, and shame sets upon the faces of
those who loved and trusted in them.

4. Lastly, The world passes away, with its lust, but the sting remains: the
pleasure vanishes, but the torment abides. All these delights like the
Candle, burn for a time, but when they go out, they leave a stink behind
them: and oh how miserable is the worldlings condition, who when these things
take their leave of him, has nothing left but a dispairing remembrance of, and
sorrowful regret at his folly, in being bewitched with, and spending so much
time Bern. de fallacia presentis vitae.
upon these perishing contentments. Who would drink of such waters, which
though sweet as Honey in the mouth, are bitter as Gall and Wormwood in the
belly. When therefore you find these worldly Objects alluring your hearts,
look upon them not as venientes sed abeuntes, coming, but going, flourishing,
but withering, and then I am confident, your hearts will be weaned from them.
Oh remember at the best they are but fading flowers, at the worst, they are
pricking thorns, they are chaff, in the hand, light, in the eye, troubling;
never any grasped them with affection, but found woe and vexation.

What therefore now remains, but that upon all these urging considerations,
we every one at last resolve to bid this world farewell. Say then (oh my soul)*
Hence you vanishing pleasures, I will no longer repose my self under your
shadows. Adie^ you flying riches, I will no longer seek for covert under your
wings, farewell fading honors, I will no longer gaze upon your beauty; be gone
all you gilded follies, your seeming splendour shall no more deceive me; It is
now high time for me to look after my soul, and I am sure you cannot make that
happy; If I do not now leave you, I know ere long you will leave me, and if I
make not provision before hand, what will then become of me? Henceforth I shall
use you as Servants, but never more love you as Friends; Why should I forsake
my own mercies, to observe lying vanities? And thus I have dispatched the
Proposition of the worlds passing away, and hastening to an end* I should
proceed to the Opposition, but the hour is passed away, and bids me end my
discourse for this time.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 17. And the world passes away and the lust thereof, but he
that does the will of God abides for ever.
IT is a known Maxim in Morality Voluntas non fertur nisi in bonum* The will
is not carried toward any Object, but under the notion of good; Yet it is as
true, that the good which the will embraces, is many times not verum, but
apparens; good in the reality of the thing, but only in the opinion of the
person, to whose misguided judgment, it appears of another nature, then
indeed it is. This is that which is evident in pleasures, riches, honors,
about which the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life
are conversant. By their lovers they are esteemed not only good, but the only
good things, in the fruition of which they place their happiness; and yet alas
how miserably do their fond imaginations delude them; since those things (at
best) are but in the lowest rank of good; yea they rather have a show, a
shadow, a semblance, then any reality, solidity, or substance of good in them.
This it is whereof our Apostle endeavors to convince the worldling in this
Verse, and that by an undeniable argument, namely the short and fading
continuance of all these things; whose goodnness (to borrow the Prophet Hoseas
similitudes) is like the Hos. 6. 3.
morning cloud, and like the early dew, it vanishes away: for the world
passes away and the lust thereof, but he that does the will of God, etc.

Having dispatch the position, in which the maine force of the Argument
consists, that which now remains to be discussed is the opposition annexed by
way of Amplification. But he that does the will of God abides for ever.

For the better handling of which clause, I shall consider it first in it self,
and then in its connection, with that which precedeth.

1. That which this clause presents us with, considered by it self, is the
permanent faelicity of an obedient Christian, and in it are two particulars
considerable;

The Qualification or duty required, implicitly in these words, He that does
the will of God, The Remuneration or mercy assured in these, endures forever.

1. That which first occurreth to our discussion is the Qualification, for the
handling whereof two things would be opened;

What will of God is intended?

What doing of his will is required?

1. In answer to the first, be pleased to know,

1. That will may be taken two ways; either for the faculty and act of
willing* or for the Object, o^ thing which is willed. When St Paul says, God
has predestined us according to the good pleasure of his will, it is plainly
meant of the faculty and act of willing, which in God is the same with his
essance. But in all those places where the Scripture speaks of doing Gods
Will* it must be referred to the Object of his will, and means a doing of the
thing* which God wills to be done.

2. In respect of the things which God wills to be done, Know further, that
his will is secret, or revealed: Gods secret will, is his eternal counsel and
purpose, either of permitting or effecting, either immediately or mediately,
whatsoever is done in the world. This is that which is called by the Schools,
voluntas efficax, that will of God which is Isai. 45. 10.
always done according as he says himself, My counsel* shall stand* I will
do all my pleasure. Indeed in this notion these two are convertible, whatever
God wills is done, and whatever is done God wills; if it be evil, he wills to
suffer it, if it be good, he wills either by himself, or his Creatures, to
effect it. And the reason is plain, because if any thing could be done, Deo
nolente, against Gods will, it must be either because he did not know of the
doing it, and then he were not omniscient; or because he did know, and could
not hinder the doing of it, and then he were not omnipotent; to deny either of
which, is to deny him to be a God. According to this construction, the truth
is, even wicked men do Gods will; whilst their design is to fulfill their own
mischievous lusts; they accomplish Gods righteous pleasure, whilst they intend
to oppose the will of God which they know, they effect his hidden counsel. But
since (as God says of the King of Assyria, he means not so) it is against
their will, that they do Gods; yea their intention is to cross his, even when
they do it; such a doing his will is no virtue, and therefore not the secret,
but the revealed will of God is here intended.

3. Be pleased further to take notice, That the things which God reveals to
be his will, are of two sorts; either such as are to be done de nobis, upon us;
or a nobis by us.

1. Gods revealed will concerning the things to be done upon us, is either pro,
or contra; for or against us: and is manifest, either by the predictions of his
word, whither promissory, or minatory; or by the execution of his works,
whither in mercies or judgments; and this will of God calls for the practice
of several graces, according to its various dispensation, both in regard of
good and evil.

1. The Revelation of Gods will for us, is considerable, either as it is in the
promise or the performance: as it is in the promise, it is that we are to hope
and pray for, to trust in, and rest upon. Thus David, I have hoped in thy word:
and Psalm. 119. 67.
again, Deal bountifully with thy servant according to thy word, that is, thy
promise, which is a revelation of Gods gracious will. As it is in the
performance, it is that we are to praise him for, and walk worthy of; nothing
being more equal, then that when it pleases God to do us good, we should give
him thanks, ascribing what we enjoy, not to the worthiness of our work, but
the goodness of his will: according to that Angelical hymn, when the
pleasure of the Lord was accomplished in the incarnation of Christ, Glory to
God on high, good will toward Men. Luke 2. 10.


2. The revelation of Gods will against us, is likewise to be considered,
either as it is in the threatening, or in the inflicting; As threatened, it is
that we are to fear; when inflicted, it is that we are to bear. Before we
know it to be his determinate pleasure, we may pray against it, so soon as it
appears to be his pleasure, we must submit to it. Thus did Ely, when upon
that doleful message iterated by Samuel in his ears, he says, It is 1 Samuel
3. 18.
the Lord, let him do what seems good in his sight. Thus did Job, when being
spoiled of all, he says, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be
the name of the Lord; yea thus did that divine Philosopher Epictetus when
Epictet. Arr.
he said, I have submitted my will to Gods; if he will have me burn with a
fever, or labor with any misery, I am willing. Indeed the name of that Deacon
to whom St Austin wrote, Quod vult Deus, ought to be the temper of every
Christian; what God will; that we may be able to say in his severest dealings
with us, what Harpalus said, when he was invited to a feast by Astyages,
whereof one dish was the head of his Son baked, and the King asked him, how he
liked it? what pleases the King, pleases me. But this is the will of God
which we are to suffer with patience and chearfullness: And therefore

2. It remains, that the will of God here intended is his revealed will of
those things which are to be done by us, that will in regard of which we are
not to be Passive, but Active; to which we owe not patience, but obedience; a
voluntary submission, but ready subjection. This is that will of God which Est.
in loc.
is called voluntas imperans, or praeceptiva, Gods prescribing or commanding
will, because it is revealed in his commands; and these both Affirmative and
Negative, enjoining what is good, that we may practice it; and inhibiting what
is evil, that we may avoid it; so that if you will explain one word by
another, that which in this and such like Scriptures, is called the will of
God, is the same with that, which is called the Law of the Lord: and so much in
Answer to the first Question.

2. That which comes next in order to be inquired, is, what doing of Gods will
is required? ^n answer to which take notice,

1. That it is not (...), but (...), he that knows, but he that does the will
of God. Indeed we cannot do Gods will (at least not as Gods will) till we know
it: in which respect that Apostolical counsel is very necessary, Be not
unwise, but understanding what the will of the Lord is; and to this end, we
must according to our Saviors advice, search the Scriptures which are the
Records of his will; and for this reason, no doubt, David so often prays,
Teach me thy statutes, show me thy ways, make me to understand the way of thy
precepts. But still the end of our knowing must be doing, and therefore God
bids Moses teach the Israelites his commands that they Psalm. 25. 12. 11. 27.
might do them; and our Savior tells his Disciples, If you kn^w these things,
happy are you if you do them; it is St James his caution, Be not hearers but
doers of the word, deceiving your own souls. Sitting Mary, and stirring Martha,
are Deuteronomy. 6. 1.
emblemes of contemplation and action, and as they dwell in one house, so must
these in one heart: beautiful Rachell, and fruitful Leah, are Emblemes of
knowledge and obedience, and as Jacob was Married to both; so must the
Christian, only with this difference, whereas Jacob was first married to Leah,
and then to Rachell; the Christian must first be married to knowledge, and then
to obedience. In one word, doing cannot be without knowing, and knowing must
not be without doing.

2. But further, It is not every kind of doing Gods will which is the
qualification required; our Savior has taught us to Pray, that Gods will may
be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven; the most genuine sense whereof no doubt
is, that men may do Gods will, as it is done by the Angels, and he that
partaketh with them in the felicity, must imitate them in the duty.

More particularly there are two properties of doing Gods will, to wit,
Integrity, and Alacrity.

1. The will of God must be done fully, not in respect of exact performance
(that is only for Angels not for Saints, till they are glorified) but of
sincere endeavor. To fulfill every Tota of Matthew. 6. 10.
divine precept is impossible; to have respect to every precept is needful for
every man who will be happy. The truth is, he that does Gods will with
exception, does not Gods will, but his own; hence it is, that when Gods will
crosses his, he crosses Gods will, and who can esteem him a good Servant, who
will do his Masters injunctions, no further then it agrees with his
inclination. To do Gods will aright, is to do it as his will; and, a quatenus
ad omne valet consequentia, says the Logician, he that performs any duty
under this notion, that it is the will of God, will for the same reason account
himself obliged to the performance of every thing which he knows to be Gods
will.

2. Gods will must be done cheerfully, to bring Gods will to ours is
abominable, to bring our will to Gods, praise worthy; and thus we do, when
our will freely consents to, nay makes choice of Gods will for its rule. Thus
did David who says of himself, Lo I come to do Psalm. 40. 6.
thy will, and again, I delight to do thy will oh God. Thus our blessed Savior
says, It was his meat and drink to do John 4. 34.
his Fathers will; never went the hungry or thirsty man with a better will to
his Meat and Drink, then Christ did to do his Fathers pleasure. And truly
when all is done, it is the will God looked at in doing his will, when the will
is present, the deed will follow, if there be opportunity and ability, else it
is a wishing, not a willing, and if the deed be performed, without the free and
full consent of the will, it will nothing avail; yea whereas sometimes, and in
some cases the will is accepted and rewarded without the deed, the deed is
never without the will, so that not only to avoid, but abhor whatsoever God
forbids, not only to act, but effect whatever God enjoyneth is to do the will
of God.

And now before I go further, here is a double consideration, offers it self
to enduce the doing Gods will; namely, cujus, and qualis, whose, and what will
it is; the former is expressed, the latter is easily inferd from the former.

1. It is the will of God to whom we owe whatever we are or can do, and shall
we not do his will. He is our Master, our Father, our King. Solomon says,
Where the word of a King is, there is power, much more where the Word of a God
is. He is the Supreme Majesty, having, absolute sovereignty, and therefore his
will is most justly a Law, shall we refuse to do it? God himself reasons, If
I be a Father, where ^^ my honor, If I be a Master, where is my fear? Nature
teaches Children to do their Fathers will, Pater est, etsi paterna esset, said
he in the Comedy, it is my Father, otherwise I would not yield: and the very
notion of a Servant is to be at the will and command of his Lord: in which
respect service is defined by Cicero, to be Obedienciae animi arbitria carentis
suo, the obedience of a mind, Cic. parad.
destitute (as it were) of its own free will; if therefore we will approve our
selves faithful Servants, obedient Children, loyal Subjects, let us do his
will: So much the rather considering that

2. Being it is his will, it cannot but be most just and equal. It is
impossible God should will us to do any thing which is not most agreeable to
right reason, since he does not will any thing because it is right, but it is
right, because he wills it. St Paul's Epithets of the will of God are good,
perfect, acceptable, indeed since whatever God wills us to do, is not only
good, but perfect, well may it be acceptable. The Prophet Micah puts these two
together, He has showed thee oh Man Rom 12. 2. Micah 6. 8.
what is good, and what the Lord thy God requires of thee; thereby intimating,
that God requires nothing of us but what is good, and therefore most fitting
to be obeyed.

By what you have already heard, it plainly appears, that the doing Gods will
is very reasonable: but if this will not prevail, behold here is a further
inducement in the Text. The doing Gods will is not only reasonable, but
profitable. And I trust if the beauty of this Virgin Obedience cannot attract
you, yet her dowry will invite you, which is no less then eternal happiness:
And so I am fallen on the

2. Remuneration, as it is set forth in these words, Abides forever. An
Assertion, which at first view seems false, at least defective.

1. It seems false, since obedient Saints dye, as well as disobedient
sinners. Indeed the good Angels doing Gods will endure for ever, but good Men
notwithstanding their obedience, are liable to a dissolution. It is Gods decree
that his servants as well as his enemies should walk through the shadow of
death, and their doing his will of command cannot exempt them from fullfilling
his will of decree. It was the Prophet Isaiah's complaint in his time, the
Righteous perishes, nay whilst the wicked continue, Isai. 57. 1.
the Righteous are taken away; your Fathers, where are they, the Prophets, do
they live for ever? is the Prophet Zach. 1. 5.
Zachariahs Question, intending a Negation. The Prophets though such as both
did, and declared Gods will, yet lived not for ever. Abraham was a pattern of
obedience and conformity to Gods will, and yet he escaped not the Axe of death.

But to all this the Answer is easily returned, and that two ways,

1. He abides forever, not in this, but the other world. This world passes
away, (as he says just before) and good as well as bad are only Passengers
through this world, but in the other world they shall have a durable
habitation. In which respect death is no impediment, but rather an help to put
them in possession of that eternity: and therefore says the Apostle, If this
earthly house of our Tabernacle be 2 Cor. 5. 1.
dissolved, we have a building made without hands, eternal in the Heavens.
Consonant hereunto it is that Christ says of the Believer, He has eternal
life, and I will raise him up at the last day, to wit, to the actual fruition
of that life in another, which he had only by faith and hope in this world.

2. Or we may thus expound it, he abides for ever, to wit, in his soul. When
our Savior says, God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Agitur de
vita animae. Dan. Matthew. 22. 31.
presently adds, God is not the God of the dead, but of the living; he
seems to intimate, that those Patriarchs do now live, to wit, in their souls;
and we Rev. 6. 9.
read expressly that St John saw the souls of them that were slain under the
Altar, that is (as some gloss) with Christ, who is the Christians Altar, so
that it is true both ways, He abides in his soul for ever, without any
interruption, and though he must go out of this world, he abides for even in
his person in the world to come.

2. But it may yet further be Objected, that this is a defective assertion, for
what is there in this of reward to continue for ever. Are not the souls of the
wicked immortal as well as of the godly? shall not the bodies of the bad be
raised as well as of the good? will not the state of the disobedient in the
other world be eternal as well as of the obedient? and how then is this
annexed as a promise to the doer of Gods will, that he abides for ever?

But to this it is justly answered, that more is intended Agitur de faelici and
gloria mansione. Dan. Est. Heb. 10. 36. Verse 25.
then is expressed, it is not a mere continuance of being, but an eternity of
well being; you have need of patience (says the Author to the Hebrews) that
after you have done the will of God, you may receive the promise; and will you
know what the promise is, our Apostle tells you in this Chapter, it is eternal
life, so that we must expound this by that, it is not only abiding, but living
for ever which is here assured. Indeed though the wicked shall continue for
ever, yet when the Scripture speaks of their future state, it is called a
perishing for ever: if you would know where are the (...), the many Mansiens or
abiding places; Christ tells his Disciples, it is in his Fathers house, that
is, John 14. 2.
in Heaven, in Gods presence; so that to abide eternally in the beatificall
vision, in the place and state of happiness, is that which is here intended by
our Apostle.

If any shall ask a reason how it comes to pass, that by doing Gods will, we
obtain an eternity of bliss?

I answer both in regard of God, and his will, or word,

1. St Cyprian quoting this Text, adds by way of Cypr. de Discipl. and ^ab.
Explication, Quomodo Deus manet in aeternum, He abides for ever as God
abides for ever. And that this is employed, will appear by the connection, for
as there it is expressed, that the world passes away; so here it is employed,
that God abides for ever, the comparison being made both between God and the
world, and the lovers of God, and the lovers of the world. So then God is a,
and o, the beginning and the end, he inhabiteth eternity, and with him is no
variableness or shadow of changing. And though eternity in its most
comprehensive notion be peculiar to a deity, and incommunicable to any
Creature, yet eternity a part post, is that which God has made rational
Creatures capable of, and as he abides for ever, so will he grant to them that
do his will, to abide with him for ever.

2. Danaeus commenting upon this clause thus Paraphraseth, sicut voluntas Dei
est aeterna, ita qui facit voluntatem Dei, as Gods will is eternal, so he that
does it, must needs be eternal. St Peter having illustrated the frailty of
man, by the resemblance of the grass and the flower, presently adds, but the
1 Pet. 1. 24, 25.
word of the Lord (which is his revealed will) endures for ever. Now Gods will
and word is said to endure for ever, not only because it is of eternal verity
in it self, but because it makes them ca^able of eternity who obey it: and
the Apostle in the same place a little before affirms of Believers, that they
are borne again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of
God which lives and abides for ever, to wit, not only subjective in it self,
but effective, making them who are borne again of it, eternal; and if you
would know how we are borne again, our Savior tells us Luke 8. 21.
when he says, He that does the will of God, is my Mother, my Brother; to wit,
by this new birth. For this reason it is that Christ calls his word the Meat
that endures to everlasting life, because being John 5. 28.
eaten by faith, and digested by obedience, it nourishes the soul to eternity:
No wonder that our Apostle here asserteth, He that does the will of God
abibideth for ever.

And now Brethren, If this consideration cannot induce us to the doing Gods
will, what will? If any man should come and pretend to tell us how we might
abide for ever in this world; we would readily receive, and speedily follow his
advice. But alas the most learned and experienced Physician though he may
prescribe rules, De servanda valitudine, of preserving health for a time,
cannot give any De tuendo a morte, for the escaping of death. Whereas we set
before you the way to an eternal durance, in a far better world, and are
forced to complain with the Prophet Isaiah, Who has Isai. 53. 1.
believed our report? Is there any of us so brutish, as not to desire
participation of a blessed eternity. Surely as Paul said to Agrippa, Believe
thou the Prophets, I know thou believe, I may say in this, Desire thou to
be happy, I know thou desire it, and if so, see here by doing Gods will, thou
shall have thy own; if thou endeavor to fulfill his commands, he will satisfy
thy desires. Doing Gods Precepts for a time on Earth, will obtain the enjoying
Gods face for ever in Heaven. What then was Mary's e^mmendation, let it be our
imitation, She chose that good part which shall not be taken Luke 10. 42.
from her, that is says Grotius, Cujus fruc^us perpetuo mansurus, whose
benefit should remain for ever? and will you know what that good part was, it
appears by the context, to be sitting at Christ's feet, for this end, no doubt
that she may first learn, and then do Gods will. Learn we to do likewise, let
our first care be to know, and our next to do what God has required, that so
we may now comfortably hope, and at last, happily enjoy what he has promised,
an eternal Mansion. And so much shall suffice to have been spoken of the
clause considered in it self.

2. That which next presents it self to our Meditation, and would by no means
be left out, is the Relative connection of this with what precedeth. And here
both parts of this clause would be looked upon; and it is not unworthy our
inquiry, how and upon what account they are brought in?

1. It may at first view seem somewhat strange, that this qualification of
doing Gods will, should be here inserted, as seeming to have little or no
affinity with what precedeth; had the Apostle said, but he that loves the
Father* or had he said, but he that denies these worldly l^sis, it would have
been very congruous, but how this comes in, ^e that does the will of God is
not so obvious. Yet i^ you please to look into it a little more narrowly; you
shall find it very suitable to the Apostles scope, and far more Emphaticall,
then if he had used either of the above mentioned Phrases: For

1. In saying, not He that loves the Father, but He that does the will of God,
the Apostle sets down that which is the most real Character of a true lover of
the Father. There is nothing wherein men more deceive themselves, then in this
grace of loving God, there is scarce any man but lays claim to it, and is
ready to say, I love God with all my heart; so that if St John had only said,
He that loves God abides for ever, every man would have flattered himself
with the hopes of this eternity. But in saying, he that does the will of God,
he hereby puts our love of God upon the trial, and that by such a Character,
as (if we impartially examine our selves by it) I am afraid the love of most
Christians toward God, will be found base and counterfeit.

1. True love is not only affective, but active, (...), say some, is from
(...), as fire is the most active element, so love is the most working grace,
Amor si non operatur non est, says St Gregory, If Greg. M.
love act not, it is no love, so that what St James, says of faith, may as
truly be applied to love, show me thy faith, thy love, by thy works.

2. Again, True love conformeth it self in will, affection, action, to the
Object loved. How fearful are we to offend? careful are we to please whom we
love? If a man's Beloved bid him come, he comes, go he runs, do this or
that, he does it. In which respct Isidore says truly, Qui Dei praecepta
cantemnit Deum non diligit, neque enim regem diligimas si odio ejus leges
habemus, he that contemns Gods Precepts, does not love him, no more then ^e
does his King who hates his Laws. The voice of love is, I am my beloveds,
wholly at his command, and that not only in a complement, but reality. What
will thou have me to do? is loves Question, be it never so difficult love
accounts it easy, and the very labor is beloved.

Would we then know whether we love God? Here is the trial, what do we? where
is our obedience to his Laws? our conformity to his will? is it possible we
should love him, and yet offend, grieve, dishonor him, and cast his commands
behind our backs? If you love me, says our blessed Savior, keep my
Commandments; and again, You are my Friends, if you do whatsoever I command
you: I love my Master, and I will not go free, says the Servant in the Law. Oh
let us approve the sincerity of our love, by the reality of our obedience. For
which cause no doubt it was that our Apostle says, Not he that loves God, but
he that does the will of God.

2. In saying He that does the will of God, our Apostle says as much as He
that denies the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, and the pride of
life, and somewhat more; so that as in the former consideration, it appears
to be a discriminating, so in this we shall find it a comprehensive Character:
For

1. Sui Repudium Christiani praeludium, The first step in doing Gods will, is
denying our own, and these lusts are the ebullitions of our own corrupt wills.
To do Gods will, is to obey his prohibitions, and these lusts are the
principal Objects of those prohibitions, so that the renouncing worldly lusts,
is plainly employed, in this of doing Gods will.

2. To do Gods will is of a larger extent, Inasmuch as it super adds the
practice of the graces, contrary to these lusts. Sobriety and chastity, justice
and charity, modesty and humility, are but several branches of Gods will; and
these are manifestly opposite to the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes,
and the pride of life; and therefore in saying he that does Gods will, he
says, he that is temperate, and merciful, and humble; and calls not only for
a forsaking evil lusts, but a performance of the contrary graces. So that
hereby our Apostle teaches us, that to attain eternal felicity, it is not
enough to be free from these lusts, but we must exercise our selves to virtue,
to cleanse our selves from filthiness, but we must perfect holiness; and the
reason is plain, since we cannot be happy but by doing Gods will: Gods will is
expressed, not only by prohibitions of evil, but prescriptions of good; and
therefore we cannot do Gods will unless we act what is commanded, as well as
shun what is forbidden. So that whether you take this qualification as in
opposition to those lusts mentioned in the sixteenth Verse, or as an
explanation of the love of the Father, mentioned in the fifteenth Verse, it
appears to be very fitly made choice of.

2. But that in which the connection chiefly lies (and which will more easily
appear) is the remuneration that enduring for ever, which is promised to him
that does Gods will. And doubtless, there was a double reason why our Apostle
having spoken of the worlds transit^riness, adds by way of amplification,
this clause of eternal felicity. The one in regard of the world, that it may
appear so much the more transit^ry; the other in regard of the worldly lover,
that his f^lly in setting his heart upon the world, may appear so much the
more foolish, yea abominable: and of each a word.

1. The world considered absolutely is transitory, but if compared with
eternity it is momentany. Surely as St Paul speaking of the afflictions of this
present time, 2 Cor. 4. 17.
in comparison with that exceeding eternal weight of glory, affirms them to
be light, and but for a moment; so may we upon the same ground of all the
enjoyments of this life. As all the splendour of this world, in respect of that
felicity, is but as the light of a Gloworme to the Sun; so the longest
continuance of this world, in regard of that eternity, is but as the drop of
the Bucket to the Ocean. Suppose the time of the worlds continuance to last a
Million of years, yet that Million is but a Moment to Eternity. Indeed a
Million of years is far less in comparison of eternity, then an hour is in
comparison of a Million of years; and the reason is plain, because eternity
infinitely exceeds a Million, whereas a Million does but finitely exceed an
hour; you may easily count how much longer a Million is then an hour, but you
can never reckon how much Eternity is longer then a Million; so that our
Apostle could not have found out a fitter way of illustrating this truth then
this.

There are many things which he might have compared the world to; we meet with
them often in Scripture, and indeed they are very significant; but this that he
compares the present world with that to come, serves far more clearly to
represent it. Indeed as a Dwarf placed by a Giant, seems exceeding little;
or as a Mite weighed in the Balance with a Talent, is exceeding light: so
these worldly, when set by Heavenly things, appear exceeding base, vile, and
transitory.

Oh then let it be our frequent practice to meditate on the things above,
deliberately to ponder their excellency, eternity, that so the things below may
seem so much the more perishing and contemptible in our eyes. The first thing
God made in this circular world was the Heavens, and the last was Man in a
Circle, the beginning and the end meet and close together; so should Man and
Heaven; and as to him that stands on an high Hill, Giants seem Dwarfes, so to
the Man whose conversation is in Heaven, the greatest things of earth cannot
but appear small. It is observed of Abraham, that addressing himself in Prayer
to God, he calls himself Dust and Ashes; no doubt in consideration of the
divine glory and majesty: and to him who duly considers that incorruptible
inheritance, immarcessible Crown, and never fading Paradise, all the riches,
honors, and pleasures of this world, must needs seem of a short, very short
continuance, such indeed as is not worth the naming.

2. And as the worlds fugacity, so the worldlings folly, becomes hereby the
more manifest. To build upon the Sands is foolish, but to prefer the Sands
before the Rock, is yet far more foolish to settle upon that which is
flitting, argues want of wisdom, but to do it with the contempt of that which
is lasting, argues most desperate folly; yet thus does the worldling, an happy
eternity is offered to him, upon the terms of doing Gods will, and yet to
fulfill his own lusts, he makes choice of this temporal prosperity. Like
that wretched Duke, who would not change Paris for Paradise, he had rather have
a short life and (as he calls it) a sweet one on Earth, then an happy and
everlasting life in Heaven. In one word (to use Gregory Nazianzens comparison)
he fixes upon Gr. Naz. orat. 43.
that which is transient, and passes by that which is permanent, and can there
be a greater madness? Indeed it discovers him void, not only of grace, but
reason; that whereas the Apostle says a little before, If any man love the
world, the love of the Father is not in him, we may add, If any man love the
world, the reason of a man is not in him. And more truly may every such man
take up that concerning himself which Agur said, I am brutish and have not the
understanding of a man, Angustum est Gillebert. Sermon. 29. ^n Cant.
cor, (says Gillebertus) that heart is too narrow which confineth it self
within the bounds of temporal pleasures, but that is too narrow an expression,
it is an Argument not only of a narrow heart, but a frantic brain, to dote on
toys, and neglect Pearls.

Oh then learn we at last to be wise, and set a right Sen. Ep.
value upon things. Seneca says excellently, it is a matter of no small
concernment, Pretium rebus imponere, to put a just estimate upon things; and
one, nay the chief rule by which the worth of things is to be measured, is
their durance. Id bonum cura, says the same Author pithily, quod vetustate fit
melius; covet that good which the older it is, the better it is. Who would not
prefer golden and silver before earthen and glassie vessels? and that as for
others, so this reason, that these are soon broken in pieces, but those are
little the worse for using. Oh that this reason might sway with us to take off
our affections from Earth, and place them in Heaven.

Whenas Lysimachus being very thirsty, had parted with his Kingdom for a
little water, he cries out, Ob quam brevem voluptatem summam amisi
faelicitatem? how great a treasure have I lost for a short pleasure? Could you
but lay your ears to Hell, you might hear the like despairing moanes from
those damned spirits? What an eternity of bliss have we lost for a momentany
contentment? fools, mad men that we were, to pursue those delights which are
now ended in torments, and neglect those joys which we might now have
possessed for ever! But oh how much better were it for us now to be convinced
of, and reclaimed from this brutish simplicity? Excellent to this purpose is
that of St Bernard, Ne casuri gloriam mundi Bern. Ep. 64.
quasi stantem aspiciatis, and vere stantem amittatis, etc. Oh you mortals, do
not look upon the glory of the world as abiding, and in the mean time, lose
that which abides for ever. Let not your present prosperity so far bewitch
you, as not to regard that future felicity, nor yet to take notice of that
endless misery which is the end of it.

That Bruits which are led only by sense, should mind nothing but what is
before them, is no wonder but God forbid that men whose reasonable souls are
capable of seeing a far off, should only regard what is present. That Pagans
who know little or nothing of the future eternity, should busy their thoughts,
desires and endeavors about these perishing comforts, is no wonder: but as Leo
well, Ad aeterna prae electos peritura non Leo. Sermon. de resur.
occupent, far be it from us Christians to regard these Objects, who are not
only acquainted with, but ordained to eternal bliss. When Alexander heard of,
and was resolved for the riches of India, he divided Macedonia among his
Captains; and shall not we who hear of, and hope for a glorious mansion,
contemn these worldly cottages? When Serapion read in the Bible of the joys
of Heaven, he left his earthly possessions saying, hic liber me spoliavit, this
book has spoiled me. In that his zeal was too rash; but the assurance we have
of those eternal joys, should engage us (though not wholly to relinquish,
yet) not to love these temporal contentments. Quis alius noster finis? (says
St Austin) quam pervenire ad Aug.
regnum cujus non est finis? What is our ultimate end, but to come to that
Kingdom, whereof there is no end? And shall we so live in this world which
shall have an end, as if the world were to be our chief end? far be it from
us. So often therefore as the vanities of earth affect us, let our meditations
fly upwards to the glories of Heaven: and according to the Fathers Inci pe
esse ubi futuruses. Id.
counsel, Let us begin to be there now in our thoughts and desires, where we
hope at last to be in our Persons.

To draw to an end. In this Scripture our Apostle seems to put us to our
choice, setting before us vanity and verity, instability and premanency; nay in
effect, perishing misery, and abiding felicity. And now to use St Austins
Interogation, Quid vis? what wilt Aug. in loc.
thou? Whither will thou love the temporals and pass away with time? or not
love this world, and live for ever with God? The truth is, as that same Father
elegantly, Talis est quisque, qualis est dilectio, every man is such as his
love is; if he loves earth, earthly; if Heaven Heavenly; if the perishing
world, thou shall perish, if the eternal God, thou shall live eternally. Love
is an uniting, mingling affection, and according to that with which it is
mingled, it is either pure or impure; so that look as silver if mingled with
lead, is debased, if with gold, advanced; so thy soul, if by love mingled with
the world, must perish, but if united to God, for ever happy. Oh therefore let
it be the serious purpose of every one of us from henceforth to leave the
world, and cleave to God, to abhore the lust of the one, and do the will of the
other, that so in the end of this life, we may have the inchoation, and in the
end of the world, the consummation of that happiness, which though it have a
beginning, shall know no ending.

And thus I have at length (through divine assistance) finished this golden
period worthy to be engraven upon the Tables of Epicures, the Chests of
Mammonists, and the Palaces of great Ones. And though I have done with
handling, yet I trust you will not with reading, remembering, and pondering it;
yea I would to God that every Morning before you go about your worldly affairs,
you would revolve this Scripture in your mind with a Prayer to God to imprint
it on your hearts: Love not the world, neither the things that are in the
world; if any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all
that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world. And the world passes
away and the lusts thereof, but he that does the will of God, abides for ever.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 18, 19. VERSE. Little children, it is the last time, and as ye have
heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there many Antichrists, whereby
we know that it is the last time. They went out from us, but they were not of
us, for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but
they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
THis present World is not without just cause branded as one of the greatest
enemies of our Salvation, and that especially upon a double account; in as much
as the things of this World by alluring our wills lead us into vice, and the
men of this world by perverting our judgments draw us into errors: Both of
these are so dangerous that it is hard to determine which is the worst. St.
Paul's Epithites of lusts are foolish and hurtful, St. Peter's character of 1 Timothy 6, 7. 2 Pet. 2. 1.
Here sie is damnable; these as well as those drowning men in perdition and
destruction, no wonder if this holy Apostle caution those to whom he wrote, of
both these Rocks; and as in the foregoing verses he warns them of being
defiled with the mud of worldly lusts, so in these he takes care that they
might not be infected with the veno^e of Antichristian doctrins; Little
children, it is the last time, etc.

The subsequent part of this Chapter, from the eighteenth verse to the nine and
twentieth, has a special reference to, and dependence on the exhortation which
is mentioned in verse the four and twentieth, iterated, verse the eight and
twentieth, and is in order the seventh step of that light some walk which our
Apostles chief design is to delineate in this Epistle, namely a steadfast
perseverance in the Doctrine and faith of Christ, in order to this it is that
here are three things discussed.

1 Periculum, the great danger they were in of being withdrawn from the truth,
by reason of the many Antichrists, which (this being the last hour) were now
among them, who taught abominable lies, denying both God and Christ, and this
is handled in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and again in the two and three and
twentieth, and again in the six and twentieth verse.

2 Auxilium, the chief help which God had afforded them against this danger,
that sacred unction which did inform them fully of the truth, and thereby was
able to preserve them from error, and this is in the twentieth and one and
twentieth, and again inculcated in the seven and twentieth verse.

3 Motivum, The strong inducements to persuade their constancy in the faith,
that hereby their fellowship with God and Christ might be continued, the
promise of eternal life obtained, and their confidence at the coming of Christ
strengthened, and this is enlarged in the four, five, and eight and twenty
verses.

In these two verses which I have now read, the scope of our Apostle is double,
namely,

To discover a danger, that they might not be ensnared by,

To prevent a scandal, that they might not he offended at those false teachers
which were among them, the former in the eighteenth, and the latter in the
nineteenth verse.

In handling the eighteenth verse, which is the discovery of the danger, that
we may proceed according to the order of the words, be pleased to observe these
three parts:

An Appellation, Little children. An Affirmation, It is the last time. A
Confirmation, in the rest of the verse, And as you have heard, etc.
A word of the first, the Appellation, or Title here used, Little children. It
is sometimes used as a word of imperfection, whether in regard of age, denoting
such as are not come to maturity of years, or in regard of grace, such as are
weak in faith, and in this sense Beza Beza in Loc.
here construeth it; indeed this Caveat is very needful for such, who being
children are apt to be tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine, but yet
not only for such; and when I find the Apostle commending (and that Verse. 21.
doubtless without flattery) those to whom he writes, for their knowledge of
the truth, I cannot imagine that he intends the word Children in this notion.
Rather with Danaeus, as I conceive, Omnes cujuscunque atatis hic monet, Dan. in
Loc.
he speaks to all of all ages in Christianity, not only to children, but
young men, and Fathers, and so the (...) here is of the same notion with (...)
in the beginning of the Chapter. Suitable whereunto it is that the Syriack
uses the same word in both places; and as Grotius well observes, it is blanda
appellatio, a word of Grot. ibid.
affection, by which our Apostle would let us see, that Parents are not more
desirous of their little childrens safety, and studious of their welfare, than
he was of theirs, and that tender love and parental care which he had over
them, induced him to warn them of those Antichrists, which would infest and
infect them; but having once and again handled this Title in this notion, I
shall insist no longer upon it, but pass on to the

2 Affirmation, as it follows in the text, It is the last time.

The only Question here to be resolved, is in reference to what our Apostle
asserts the time, in which he lived, to be the last.

1 The general opinion of Divines refer it to the world, and so this clause
seems to be a proof of what is asserted in the former verse, The world
passes away, Probat quod dixit. Lap.
for even now is the last time of the worlds duration, beyond which it shall
not continue.

In this sense the whole space of time from Christ's first to his last coming is
the last time; those are the last days concerning which Joel prophesies, that
in them God Joel 2. 28.
would pour out his Spirit on all flesh, for in the very beginning Acts 2. 17.
of the Evangelical times the Apostle tells us, that Prophecy was fulfilled;
these are the last days in which the Author to the Hebrews says, that God who
spoke to Heb. 1. 1, 2.
the Fathers by his Prophets, has spoken to us by his Son, who coming in our
flesh, revealed his Fathers will to the world; and in this notion the assertion
is true, that even in St. John's days it was the last time of the world. This
being taken for the meaning of the clause, it would rationally be enquired,
upon what account this space of time (which has already continued so long, and
when it shall expire is unknown) may be called the last.

Oecumenius gives a double answer, but neither satisfactory. Oecumen. in Loc.


1 He says, it is called the last, because the worst, as lees and dreggs are
in the bottom of the liquor: but though possibly the last time may be the
worst, yet is it not therefore the last because the worst, or the worst because
the last.

2 He adds, that if we divide time into the first, the middle, and the last,
whatsoever time is after the middle is the last, and accordingly all the time
before Christ may be called the first, and since his coming the last. But
though we read that God sent his Son into the world in the fullness of time,
yet not that it was in the middle of time, and whether the world shall not last
longer after, than the time of its continuance before the Messiahs incarnation
is a question, which though some have rashly undertaken, yet I am sure none can
justly resolve. As for that opinion, that as the world was six days in making,
so it shall be only six thousand years in lasting, it is but a Rabbinical
conceit, and a groundless dream; nor does St. Peter's assertion, that a thousand
years is with 2 Pet. 3. 10.
the Lord as one day, at all favor this opinion, since it seems rather to
be uttered on a contrary design, namely, to let us know, that how many
thousand years soever the world shall last, yet God is not therefore slack,
since with him they are but as so many days.

That indeed which seems the most rational account of this phrase in this
notion is, that it is the last time, because it is the last period of time, and
the Messiah being come, there are now no more changes or alterations of the
external administrations in Religion to be expected. The life of man, the
little world, is a fit emblem of the duration of this great world, and look as
there are three ages of man's life, Youth, Manhood, and Old Age, so the world
has three periods, from Adam to Moses, from Moses to Christ, from Christ's
first to his last coming; and as Old Age (though it many times be as long as
either, nay it may be as both) is called the last age, because death is that
which next succeeds after it, so this period of the Evangelical time how long
soever it may be, is the last time, because that which closes it is the Day
of Judgment: in which respect St. Austin says truly, Ipsa novissima Aug. in
Luc.
hora diuturna est, sed tamen novissima hora, the last time is long, but yet it
is the last time. Look as the Job 42. 12, 16
time of Jobs continuance upon earth after his restitution to a prosperous
estate, which was an hundred and forty years, and so a large part of his life,
is yet called the latter end of Job, so may this of the Evangelical
administration, though of a long durance, be styled the latter end of the world.

And upon this account it may serve to discover the folly of that Generation of
Seekers, which among the numerous brood of Heresies has sprouted forth amongst
us; in vain do they expect a new Church, new Ordinances, new Administrations,
when as this is the last time. St. Paul plainly tells us, that the Christian
Church by administering the holy Sacrament must show forth the Lords death till
he come, that is, to judge the quick and the dead, and surely by way of Analogy
it holds true of all the Evangelical institutions; there is nothing to be
expected but the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ in the end of the world.

2 But though this interpretation may be true, it is very harsh, especially
considering that the word which we translate, Time, signifies that which is
one of the shortest durations of time, an hour; and it may be very well looked
upon as incongruous, that so large a space of time should be called an hour. I
know Expositors endeavor to salve this, by telling us, that it is but an hour,
Comparatione futuri saeculi (so Carthusian) in comparison of Carthus. and Calv.
in Loc.
the duration of the other world; and to the same purpose Calvin, Siregni Dei
^ternitas, etc. If we revolve in our minds the eternity of Gods Kingdom, the
longest continuance will seem but a moment; but though this be in it self an
undeniable verity, yet it is not any more a reason why the time from Christ's
first to his last advent should be called an hour, than why the whole time of
the world from the first to the last man should be so called. Upon this
consideration perhaps it was that Cajetan conceives St. John's meaning might
be, that the time wherein he lived was like to the last hour, and as it should
be at the end of the world, so it was then: but this construction is too
forced, nor is it rational to imagine that when St. John says, it is, and
again, by this we know it is the last hour, he means only a resemblance.

If then there be something else* to which this last hour may upon a more just
account be referred, doubtless that must needs be the most genuine
interpretation, and this we shall find to be not the world, but the Jewish
Church and state, whose end was then at hand; I confess Socinus is the first
in whom I meet with this construction, Socin. in Loc.
but I shall not refuse to take up a Pearl though I find it in a Dunghill, and
as I shall never receive, so neither will I reject any exposition because of
the person that brings it. Besides him, that learned Mr. Mede occasionally
Mede Apostasy of latter times.
speaking of these words, conceives it to be the last hour of Daniels seventy
weeks, and so consequently of the Jews Commonwealth; Suitable whereunto is the
Annotation both of H. Grotius, and Dr. Hammond, to whom for their excellent
illustrations of many Scriptures, this age is, and future will be much
beholding. The only objection that can lie against this interpretation is, that
this Epistle was written after the destruction of Jerusalem, but this can only
be said, not proved. True, St. John outlived that desolation, but this Epistle
might be written before it, yea this text renders it very probable, and
accordingly Mr. Mede conceives it might be written in the last of Daniels
weeks, about Joseph. Jud. Bell. 1. 7.
which time Jesu Ananiah began that woeful cry, Woe to Jerusalem, woe to the
Temple.

Taking the clause in this construction, the emphasis of this word Hour will
prompt two things to our meditation, That the time of the Jews ruin was a set
time, and a short time.

1 An hour is a measured part of time, consisting of a set number of minutes,
whereby is intimated, that the time of Jerusalems ruin was fixed, and her
years numbered, it is that which would be considered in a double reference; to
wit, as the Jews were a Nation, and a Church.

1 Consider them as a Nation and People, and we may see in them this truth
exemplified, That to all Nations, there is an appointed time how long they
shall continue; he Job 38. 11.
that sets bounds to the Sea, hithert^ shall thou pass and no further, sets
periods to all the Kingdoms of the earth, thus long they shall flourish and no
longer. The signification of that word Mean, which the hand wrote upon the wall
concerning Belshazzar, God has numbered thy Kingdom Dan. 5. 26.
and finished it, carries in it a general truth concerning all Monarchies,
Kingdoms, States, the number of the years for their continuation, and the term
of time for their expiration, is determined by God. What is become of the
Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman Empires, whose glorious splendour in a
certain space of time vanished away? Indeed according to the Poets expression,
Momento permagna ruunt, summisque negatum Claud.
Stare di^ -- Though some Nations flourish longer than others, yet all have
their Autumn as well as Spring, Winter as well as Summer, and when the time
registered in Heaven is accomplished on earth, the most potent Politic Kingdoms
moulder away in a moment.

2 Consider them as a Church, and Gods people, it lets us see, that as
Kingdoms, so Churches have their periods; indeed the universal Church shall not
fayl, God will have if not in one place, yet in another, an Orb wherein the
light of his truth shall shine (though not always with the same clearness) to
the Day of Judgment, but still particular Churches have their doleful
eclipses, yea their dismal settings, by the removing of the Sun of the Gospel
from them. Those seven Churches of Asia are deplorable instances of this
Doctrine, who though once golden candlesticks holding forth the word of life,
are now inveloped in Mahumetan darkness.

Oh see my Brethren, what sin will do to Nations, to Churches, for though it
is God who determines, yet it is sin which deserves their ruin. That which
moves God to remove the Candlestick from a Church, is their contempt of the
light; That which provokes God to put a period to a Kingdoms prosperity, is
their heightened iniquity: and therefore when we behold (as we of this Land at
this day sadly do) a flourishing Church withered, a goodly Kingdom overturned;
oh let us so acknowledge Gods hand, as to blame our own demerits, since it is
upon foresight of a peoples transgression, that God prefixeth a time for their
destruction.

2 An hour is a short space of time, there are many parts of time longer, days,
weeks, months, years, Jubilees, Ages, but there is only one shorter, to wit,
minutes, nay the shortest time by which men commonly reckon is the hour, with
its several parts, so that where our Apostle says it was the last hour, he
intends that it was but an hour, that is, a very short time, and Jerusalem
should be destroyed. Look as when the duration of an affliction is set forth by
an hour, it notes the brevity of its continuance; so when the coming of an
affliction is measured by an hour, it notes the celerity of its approach; in
the former sense we read elsewhere of an hour of temptation, and Revel. 3. 10
here in the latter, that it is the last hour.

Indeed if we look upon the Jews at this very time, we shall find they were
very secure, not dreaming of so near and great a destruction. The Characters
which St. James gives of the rich Jews are, that they heaped treasure Jam. 5.
3. 5
together, they lived in pleasure, were want^n, and nourished their hearts as
in a day of slaughter, they indulged to their covetous and voluptuous lusts,
putting the evil day far from them, and yet those were the last days, as that
Apostle calls them, nay the last hour in our Apostles language. In this respect
it is that our Savior Matthew. 24. 37
speaking of this destruction, fore-telleth it should be then as it was in the
days of Noah, when they ate and drank, married, and gave in marriage, till the
day that Noah entered into the Ark, as being overwhelmed with a general
security, when ready to be overwhelmed with the flood.

Thus may Judgment be at hand, when men think it far off, and the Judge
stand at the door, when the thief imagines he is many miles distant; when they
shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as travel
upon a woman with child, and they cannot escape, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3
is the sad threatening which Saint Paul utters against presumptuous sinners;
wicked men are never more secure than when destruction is nearest, and
destruction is never nearer than when they are most secure. Indeed when men
through infidelity contemn, it is high time for God to execute his threatenings,
that by hastening his wrath he may justify his truth. It is but reason that
they who will not believe should feel, and what they would not learn by the
Word, they should find in their own sad experience; take we heed therefore how
we look at the wrong end of the Perspective, which makes the object seem at a
greater distance than it is. Alas, how soon may the brightest sky be
over-cast. Voluptuous Epicures, Job 21. 13
(says Job) spend their days in wealth, and in a moment they go down to the
grave. When Judgment comes, it cannot be avoided, and too often it surprizeth
men before it is expected. Whilst the wicked Jews were encompassed with
plenty, and promised themselves tranquillity, St. John fore-tells their misery,
and that as approaching, It is the last hour.

To close up this clause with a moral application. M^net hoc verbo Apostolus,
ut omnem horam veluti novissimam reputemus, says Ferus piously; our Apostle
does F^r. in Loc.
here admonish every particular man, that he should still think every hour to
be his last; indeed the time of every man's life is fixed in Gods eternal
Council, it is Jobs Divinity, and that not only in regard of himself, but man
indefinitely, or rather universally considered; is there not an appointed time
to man upon earth? and again, his days Job 2. 1. 14. 5
are determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed
his bounds that he cannot pass; nor is it any long time which is allotted, and
therefore the swiftness of man's life is elegantly set forth by several
metaphors, both in the Book of Job, and other places of Scripture; indeed if
the longest life be considered in reference to the eternity of that other life,
it is but a day, nay an hour, a minute; that it cannot be long we are sure, and
yet when it will expire we are not sure, and because we know not how soon, we
should make account of it continually, and though we cannot say of every hour,
this is or shall be, yet to say, this may be my last hour; and if you mark it,
this is prompted to little children, who (as Grotius well observes) are apt to
think they have time Gr^^. in Loc.
enough before them, and yet even with them it may be the last hour, since
though the old must, the young may dye; no wonder if he speak to children
(says Saint Austin) Aug. ibid.
Ut festinent crescere, that they make haste to grow in grace. That word in the
Chaldee which signifies an hour, is derived from a verb, which signifies to
have regard to, so ought every man to observe the hours of his life how they
pass, there being none which might not be his last. And truly this
consideration would have a great influence upon the precedent dehortation of
not loveing the world, as Oecumenius observes; A dying man Occumen. ibid.
is not at all taken with the choycest dainties, richest treasures, highest
dignities, no more would we if we did still look upon our selves as dying.
He will not trifle away his hours in pursuing worldly vanities, who
considers how quickly they pass away, and how soon they may be at an end. In
one word, happy is that man who so thinks of his last hour, as that he does
that every hour, which he would be found doing in his last, at least who does
nothing in any, which he durst not be found doing in his last hour. And so
much for the Second general part, the Affirmation, It is the last hour. I now
hasten (lest I should exceed the hour) to the

3 Last part of the text, the Confirmation, as it follows in the rest of the
verse, and as you have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there
many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time.

Before I enter upon the severals of this General, it will be needful to spend
a little time in clearing the sense of (...), the Antichrist here spoken of.
The generality of Interpreters observing the Article prefixed before the Noun,
conceive that the Apostle intends by this (...) the same with St. Paul's (...),
him who is transcendently Antichrist; and should I trace this exposition, I
must fall upon another inquiry, in the solution of which Divines are of various
opinions, namely who is this, The Antichrist.

The Ancients generally conceive that Antichrist shall Iren. Greg. M. Hierom.
come toward the end of the world, whom Christ shall destroy by the
brightness of his coming.

Some late Writers imagine that the Antichrist came Gro^. Dr Ha^.
soon after the plantation of Christianity in the world, and fix it, some on
Simon Magus, others on Barchocebus, others on Claudius, and Nero, Emperors.

A great part of the Reformed assert the succession of Popes from the time that
the Bishop of Rome usurped the Call. Jun. Polan, etc.
title of universal, to be the Antichrist, which began about six hundred years
after Christ, and according to that Prophetical account of one thousand two
hundred and forty days, they suppose the continuance to be so many years.

Did I conceive that our Apostle designed this (...) to signify an Antichrist
which is so above all other Heretics and enemies of Christ whatsoever, yet
positively to determine who he is, I should not undertake, only thus much I
look upon as rational, that according to the definition which our Apostle
himself gives of Antichrist a little after, he who most directly, expressly,
vehemently denies Jesus to be the Christ, and accordingly denies both the
Father, and the Son, he is the Antichrist.

But that I may speak my thoughts freely, I can by no means be induced to
believe that (...), the Antichrist, is here to be taken singularly, and
determinately, but indefinitely, and collectively; for the clearing whereof,
observe,

1 That it is very usual for a word of the singular number to denote a
multitude, yea not only without, but with the Article; take one instance among
many, that 2 Timothy 3. 16
of St. Paul, where he says, The Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and
is profitable, etc. that (...), the man of God may be perfect, whereby is not
understood some one that was so eminently, but indefinitely any, or rather
universally every man of God, and it seems our Translators understood this
(...) no otherwise, since both here and in other places they render Verse. 22.
and 23
it not The, but An, as also (...), a Liar, suitable to which it is that (...)
is presently explained by (...), he, that is, whosoever denies.

2 That our Apostle in the very next clause enlarges this singular (...), the
Antichrist, by that plural (...), many Antichrists, as in the next Epistle at
the seventh verse, he contracts the plural, (...), many deceivers, into the
singular, (...), John Ep. 2. 8.
a Deceiver, and an Antichrist.

I well know, that the Antichrist, and many Antichrists are by most
Interpreters severally referred, but withal in so doing they force the sense,
whereas if both be referred to the same, the construction is plain, for by
this means the (...), even now there are, answers fitly to the (...), as you
have heard, the latter clause testifying the impletion of the prediction
alleged in the former; nay more, the (...) that follows, by which we know it
is the last hour, can have no solid strength in it, if the former be not thus
interpreted, since unless that which our Apostle alleges as foretold, that
Antichrist should come, to wit, (before the last hour) were then accordingly
accomplished, and so attested, when he says, even now there are many
Antichrists, it could have been no symptom by which they could conclude that
it was then the last hour; That which serves further to justify this
construction is, that our Apostle, as here he asserteth the fulfilling of the
Prediction by the plural, there are many Antichrists, so in this Epistle
elsewhere he affirms in the singular (...), This is that spirit of Chap. 4. 3
Antichrist, which you have heard, shall come, and is now already in the world;
I shall only add, that this (...) which you have heard, is, if not only, yet
without doubt principally to be referrd to that of our Savior in the Gospel,
wherein we find nothing concerning Matthew. 24.
the great Antichrist, but only those Antichrists which either were to precede,
or else immediately to follow the destruction of Jerusalem.

No doubt then the plain design of this part of the verse is this, our Apostle
having before affirmed, that it was the last hour of Jerusalems ruin, he
confirms it by this strong medium, that which our blessed Lord foretold as an
immediate forerunner of that destruction (to wit, the coming of Antichrist)
was now already fulfilled in the many Antichrists which were among them.

According to this construction there are three things observable in this part
of the text.

A Prediction, whereof they are minded, you have heard that Antichrist should
come. An impletion of that Prediction assured, even now there are many
Antichrists. The significancy of that impletion expressed, whereby we know that
it is the last hour.
1 Our Apostle minds those to whom he writes, of our Saviors prediction,
that Antichrist should come, whereby the great care of this chief Shepherd of
the sheep appears, in fore-warning them of those Wolves which would devour
them; it was that which Christ was pleased to do upon a double account.

1 The one in regard of his Apostles, who were to be the Leaders of his Church,
that they might be so much the more vigilant in observing the rise of
Seducers, and diligent in confirming the people in the orthodox faith* for this
reason no doubt it was that St. Paul gathered the Elders of Acts 20. 30.
the Ephesian Church together, and minded them of those perverse Teachers which
would ere long infest the Church, and accordingly the inference he draws
thence is (...), therefore watch.

2 The other in regard of the whole Church, and every member, that they might
not be too much troubled when false Teachers shall arise, Tela pr^visa minus
feriunt, Darts foreseen are less terrible and hurtful. All evils are then
most grievous when unexpected; that danger whereof we are forewarned, may
either be more patiently sustained, or prudently avoided. For this reason
Christ fore-tells his Disciples of those Persecutions which would befall them
in particular, that they might not think strange at the fiery trial; for this
cause he foretold them of those Seducers which would endeavor to pervert
Christians from the faith, that they might be less offended at them* and the
more carefully take heed of them. Thus after Christ's example, let all who are
Spiritual Watchmen be vigilant in giving notice to the Church Militant of the
approach of her enemies, that being forewarned she may be fore-armed to
encounter with them.

2 What was thus foretold by Christ is accordingly come to pass, even now
there are many Antichrists.

Before I go further it will not be amiss to stay a while in this general
meditation, to wit, the verity of divine Predictions, as you have heard, it is
now come to pass; it is that which is, and shall be true of whatever Matthew. 5.
18
has been foretold by God, by Christ, and his Prophets, Till heaven and earth
pass, one jot, or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be
fulfilled, so says our blessed Savior; where the stability of the Laws
prediction is compared with, and exalted above the stability of the heaven and
earth, for the heaven and the earth though lasting in their duration, shall
pass away at last, but whatever is threatened or promised in the Law shall
infallibly receive its suitable accomplishment. Among those many glorious
attributes whereby God has made known himself to the Sons of men, that of his
truth and fidelity is not the least, which then shines forth in its
brightness, when he fulfilleth what he has said, since as the prediction
gives testimony to his praescience, so the impletion to his faithfulness.

Oh then with what fear and reverence should we receive his threats? with what
hope and confidence should we embrace his Promises? with what faith and
credence should we adhere to all his Praedictions? you have heard, that God
will come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on 2 These 1. 8 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10
them that know him not; That neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor
thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall
inherit the kingdom of God; That at the last day Christ will say to all the
workers of iniquity, Depart from me ye eursed; oh ^eleeve, and tremble, for
the time will come that all impenitent sinners shall say, As we have heard, so
we find; we sadly feel the execution of that vengeance which we proudly
contemned when denounced. Again, you have heard that sweet voice, Come unto me
all you that travel Matthew. 11. 28. Joh. 3. 16.
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest; that Evangelical Charter, God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life; that comfortable
promise, unto them that look for him, he shall appear the second Heb. 9. 28.
time without sin unto salvation. Oh be not faithless but believing, for the
day will come, when all believing Penitents shall say, As we have heard, so we
have seen. Psalm. 48. 8.
Indeed it were easy to multiply instances of this truth, how not only the
substance, but the circumstances of Scripture Predictions have been exactly
accomplished, as well in regard of the time as the thing; but what need we go
further than the text, wherein we have the punctual impletion of our Saviors
Prophecy, concerning the rise of Antichrists before Jerusalems fall asserted?
Even now there are many Antichrists.

More particularly in this assertion, we are to take notice of the quality,
and the quantity, the temper, and the number of those Seducers which were in
St. John's time.

1 For quality, they are described to be Antichrists, a word which according
to a double acception of the Preposition (...), may admit of a double
construction, the one restrictive, the other extensive.

1 The Preposition (...), sometimes signifies as much as in the stead or place
of, thus, (...) is one that falsely calls himself a King, and (...), is one
that sets himself up in the Generals room; in this notion, (...) is one that
pretends himself to be Christ, and is the same with (...), a false Christ.
That such should be, our Savior had told them, where he says, Many shall come
in my name, saying, I Matthew. 24. 5. Acts 21. 31.
am Christ. That such were (as Theudas, whom Fadus discomfited, and that
Egyptian mentioned in the Acts, with many others) Josephus testifies in
several places, Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c* 2. Bell* Iud. l. 2. c. 12. 2 Timothy 3. 3.
and to these our Apostle here might have an eye. It lets us see how prone men
are to arrogate to themselves that which they are not, whom the Apostle taxes
under the name of boasters; yea, to what an height of impudence such men
sometimes grow, as to assume to themselves what is Gods, and Christ's peculiar.
But if it be odious for one who is of a base extraction to usurp Dominion, and
being born a Beggar, to make himself a King, it is no less than blasphemy, for
base mortals to take upon them the name and authority of the Messiah.

2 The Preposition (...) most properly signifies as much as against, so (...)
is an opposition, or one axiom set against another, (...) is one who sets
himself against another, and (...) is one who withstandeth and oppugneth
Christ; this sort was also foretold by Christ, where he says, many false
Matthew. 24. 11.
Prophets shall arise; and that our Apostle chiefly intends, these, appears
by the definition he gives of these Antichrists, that they were such who
denied Jesus to be the Christ, which many did, who yet did not assert
themselves to be Christ's: and to that Apostolical definition I shall refer
the larger prosecution of this subject; pass we on therefore from the Quality,

2 To the Quantity, in that it is not said, as you have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even so now he is come, but now there are many Antichrists; indeed
our Savior speaking of both sorts, uses this very epithet, many false
Christ's, and false Prophets. There were several primipili, or antesignani of
these black Regiments, as Epiphanius, and St. Cyril have recounted them, Simon
Epiphan. Haer. Cyr* Catech. 6.
Magus, Cerinthus, Menander, Carpocrates, with many others* and each of these
had many followers; for Christ like wise foretold they should deceive many,
and St. Peter, that many shall follow their pernicious ways. Indeed Heresy is
of a spreading nature, so much St. 2 Timothy 2. 17.
Paul intimates, when he says of Heretical teachers, their word will eat as
does a canker, or gangrene, which stops not till it have infected and destroyed
the whole body. A thing says Estius so well known by sad experience, Esto.
ibid.
that it need not many words to attest it. There is but one truth, but there
are many errors; there is but one Christ, but there are many Antichrists.
False Teachers are compared by St. John to Locusts, a sort of creatures Revel.
9. 3. Prove. 30. 27.
of which Solomon observes, that they go forth by bands, yea the Hebrew word
(...) which signifies a Locust, is derived from (...) that signifies to
multiply, intimating the great multitudes of Locusts, in which respect they are
a fit emblem of false Prophets. Our Mat. 7. 15, 16
blessed Savior speaking of such, implicitly, resembles them to thorns and
thistles, and the similitude holds in this, that as thorns and thistles grow
every where in great numbers, so do these abound in every place; of old there
were four hundred lying Prophets which deceived Ahab, to one Micaiah that told
him truth* four 2 King. 18, 19. 22. 6.
hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal* to one El^jab; in the Primitive times,
there were a multitude of A^rian Bishops to one Athanasius, and thus still,
numerous pejor major, The Antichristian party is the greatest.

Take we heed then how we do, (...) (according to Gregory Nazianzens phrase)
define the Church of Christ by multitude, certainly if number may carry the
cause, Antichrists Synag^gue will far outvie the Christian Churches, and
therefore it is St. Hieroms saying to a Pelagian Heretic. Multitudo Hier l, 3.
adv. Pelag.
sociorum nequaquam te Catholicum sed Hereticum esse monstrabit, The multitude
of thy fellows does not prove you a Catholic, but rather an Heretic; that way
in which the most walk is for the most part, to be suspected as a false path,
for wide is the gate, and broad is the way (says Matthew. 7. 10.
our blessed Savior) which leads to destruction, and many there be that go
in there at. Indeed, when the number of the Orthodox increases, and
prevails, it should be our joy, but if the number of the Heterodox be
greater, it need not be our wonder, only let our care be, that as (according
to Moses his precept) we do not follow a multitude to do what is evil, so
neither to believe what is false; and so much for the second particular.

3 Lastly, by the coming of these Antichrists, according as they had heard,
they might know it was the last hour, and that Jerusalems destruction was then
at hand. To illustrate this briefly, know that there are three sorts of Signs.
Some are memorative, to mind us of what was long ago accomplished, for which end
God has set his Bow in the clouds; some are demonstrative, to discover
something that is newly existent, such was that of a Child lying in a Manger to
the Shepherds, in reference to the Messiahs birth; finally, some are
Prognostick^, to foretell something which is to come to pass; now of this sort
some are only probable, as a red evening of a fair day; others are certain, as
Jonahs coming out after he had lain three days and three nights in the Whales
belly, of Christ's Resurrection; by those we only think and imagine, by these we
know and are sure that the thing shall be effected. Again, some are remote and
at a great distance, such was that which God gave Abraham, of delivering Genesis
15. 6.
his seed above four hundred years after out of Egypt. Some are nearer hand,
and immediately preceding that whereof they are signs, as that to Hezekiah of
his recovery; by those we see it shall be, but Isa 38. 7.
not yet, by these that it shall be ere long; of this latter sort was the
coming of these Antichrists in reference to Jerusalems ruin, for since Christ
had foretold it, as that which should a little precede that great desolation,
it (being now come to pass) became not a probable, but a certain, not a
remote, but an immediate sign, by which they did not only rationally
conjecture, but infallibly know, and that not only that there would be such an
hour, but that then it was Jerusalems last hour.

To wind it up, It is no small mercy of God to a people, that when as he
intends to bring ruin on them, before hand he gives them warning. Among his
many ways of warning, this is one, that he fore-tells, and accordingly sends
such signs which are forerunners of their desolation, his design in which is,
partly in regard of the wicked, that if possible their sleepy Consciences may
be awakened to see, and by repentance to prevent that approaching ruin; and
oh how happy might Jerusalem have been, had they made use of these signs,
partly in regard of the good, that they being hereby admonished might be the
better fitted to undergo the temporal calamity, or (if Godopen a way) provide
for their own safety, as the Story tells us, many of the godly Jews did, by
flying to Joseph. Antiq.
Pella, before the City was sacked by the Romans.

And now (my Brethren) though we have not, nor must expect particular
Predictions, or Signs given us of destructive Judgments, yet a wise observer
and comparer of Gods Word and works together, may be able to discern what is
likely to come upon the place wherein he lives, it is Solomon's general
assertion, The prudent man foreseeth Prove. 22. 3.
the evil, this being that which every Spiritually wise man may attain to in
some measure, and accordingly ought to endeavor after. Now the best means of
obtaining this foresight is to observe what have been the signs and
forerunners of Gods Judgments on other Nations, especially those in Holy
Writ, as in particular concerning Jerusalem, and if we find the like to befall
in our days, we may thence, if not undoubtedly, yet rationally, conclude our
own destruction to be at hand. Among others, there were two very observable
signs of Jerusalems destruction, the one great wars and rumors of wars, the
other multitudes of false Christ's, and false Prophets; and as we have for many
years felt the one, so who does not see the other? we need not go to Rome to
find out Antichrist, we have swarms of Antichrists among our selves, so that
this Age, and Land, and City of ours, is become a sink of filthy and loathsome
Heresies, yea which is the worst kind of Antichristianism, Pseudochristianism
is the brand of our Times, whilst all these Antichrists pretend themselves to
be the only Christians, yea some of them assert themselves to be Christified
and Deified, nay one of them is so sacrilegiously impudent, as to style himself
the Christ. What Christian heart bleeds not to hear of these Heresies,
Blasphemies? James Nayler.
and that as chiefly because of the dishonor done to Christ, so secondarily of
that sad presage which they give of the mournful downfall of this once
flourishing Church, Kingdom, and City; But I would not be a Prophet of misery
to my Native Country, yea I should be glad to prove a false Prophet, and
therefore instead of a doleful Prediction, I shall close up with an earnest
supplication, that all these Antichrists may be either reclaimed, or
suppressed, that the Orthodox Faith may be maintained, the Church restored, our
wars ended, our sins reformed, and so our ruin prevented.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out,
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
THe Gospel had no sooner ascended the horizon of the Gentiles, and dispelled
that universal shade wherein they had been be nighted, but the Prince of the Air
raised the clouds, or rather fogs and mists, of heresy, to obscure the luster
thereof. No sooner had those Apostolical Merchants erected factories in several
parts of the World for the advancement of Christian Religion, but the Devil had
his Emissaries in all places to interrupt the trade of truth. This our Apostle
well knew, and therefore armeth those to whom he wrote, both against the
peril, and the scandal of Antichristian Teachers: when the Market is full of
Adulterous wares, counterfeit coins, specious falsehoods, there is great danger
of being deceived, and therefore it concerns us to be so much the more
careful what wares and commodities we take, what Doctrins we receive as true;
when the brats of ugly errors are laid at the door of the Christian Church,
Satan's design is to bring her in disgrace, and men are too apt to fancy her the
mother of such monsters; great reason there is to take heed we be not offended,
yea, through our ^incogitant precipitancy stumble and fall at this block. The
prevention of the former of these, namely, the danger, is the design of our
Apostle in the precedent verse, and now in this verse he goes on to remove
the scandal, letting the Christians know, That they went out from, but they
were not of them, for if they had been, etc.

In the words these two particulars are plainly considerable.

The occasion, and the remotion of the scandal.

The occasion of offense, set down in these words, They went out from us.

The Remotion of this, as being no just cause, in the rest of the words, But
they were not of us, etc.

Begin we with that which first occurreth, to wit, the Genesis 1.
occasion of the offense, They went out from us; in which words there is
something employed, and something expressed.

1 That which these words imply, as Calvin, Danaeus, with others observe, is,
that those Antichristian Impostors, Calv* in loc. Dan. in loc.
had been in the bosom of the Church, and embraced the Christian profession.
Thus we read of Simon Magus, one of the chief Ringleaders, that he believed
Act 8. 6.
and was baptized; and Nicolaus was one of those seven Deacons upon whom the
Apostles laid hands; and Epiphanius Epiph. Haer. 28.
affirms Cerinthus to have been very conversant with the Apostles and Elders
at Jerusalem; and S. Paul tells the Pastors of Ephesus, that men speaking
perverse Act. 20. 30.
things should arise of their own selves: so that in this case that often falls
out, a man's enemies are those of his own household. The Churches seeming members
prove her worst enemies. As a lilly among thorns* so is my love among the C^nt*
^. 2. Non dictum est in medio alienarum sed in medio filiarum. Aug. in Psa. 59.
Daughters, says Christ of his Spouse, where it is observed by St. Austin,
that it is not said among strangers, that were no great wonder, but among her
Daughters, even they who profess the Church to be their mother, prove thorns
to vex her, not only they who are without (to wit, the pale of the Church) as
having never received the Christian Faith, such as were Jews and Pagans, but
many who are within, become false brethren; not only the wild Boar out of the
forest endeavors to lay waste Gods vineyard, but there are foxes within to
pluck off, and spoil its grapes; nay, as St. Austin well observes, multae foris
Aug. in Joh. tr. 45.
oves, multi intus lupi, many without are sheep, such as belong to, and are at
last brought into the fold, whiles many within are wolves, though in sheeps
clothing, whose aim is to deceive and destroy. Even in Jerusalem, that is, the
Church (says Origon) are many Jebusites; in Gods field, Orig. in Josh. hom. 2.
there want not tares sown by the envious man. The visible Church is as a net,
wherein are bad as well as good Aug. quaest. super Ge^. 73. et Ser. de Temp. 78.
fish; a garden, wherein are weeds as well as flowers; as Rebecca's womb, in
which are two sorts of people struggling, to wit, (as St. Austin moralizeth it)
spiritual and carnal. In one word, to use St. Paul's comparison, in this 2 Timothy
2. 17* 20
house of the Church, there are as golden and silver, so earthen and wooden
vessels, of which sort were Hymineus and Philetus.

To end this therefore, It is a consideration which indeed may be matter of
sorrow, that there should be such chaff among the Wheat, such Canaanites among
the people of Israel, such vipers in the bowels of the Church, but yet it is no
more than what has been in all ages. God in wisdom permits it, the Devil in
malice contriveth it* that Antichristian teachers should grow up among the
Christians, non mirandum quod exurgant sed vigilandum, ne noceant, is St.
Austins excellent advice, wonder not that they do arise, beware that they do
not hurt, and though they are mingled with us, let us take heed we be not
partakers with, and so infected by them.

2 But that which is here expressed, and would chiefly be considered, is, that
these Antichristian teachers went out from the Apostles; for the unfolding
whereof I shall discuss these two things.

What this going out imports?

Whence it comes to pass?

1 The first Question to be resolved is, what this going out imports? to which
end observe,

1 It is one thing to go out by virtue of a Commission, and another to go out
in a way of desertion. We read of the King, that he sent his servants, and
bid them go out into Mat 22. 9.
the high ways, to wit, to invite guests to the wedding, thus did the Apostles
go forth from Christ as being sent by him to Preach the Gospel: but in this
sense it cannot be here understood, as if these Antichrists; went forth
Commissioned from the Apostles, because that to these words, they went out from
us, are opposed those, They would have continued with us. Now continuing with
the Apostles if taken in opposition to going out from them with Commission, had
been a crime, and would have deserved that check, why stand you idle? whereas
nothing clearer than that this continuing with them is here intended, as that
which was their duty to have done, and consequently the going out can bear no
other sense than their forsaking the Apostles.

2 It is one thing to be cast out, and another to go out, the former is a
punishment or censure of the Church, consisting of various degrees, according
to the quality of offenses, some being ^ast out e coetu participantium, of the
number of the communicants; others not only so, but e coetu procumbentium, from
prayers, as well as Sacraments: others e coetu audi^ntium, nay fidelium, not
suffered so much as to hear the Word, or to converse with the faithful. These
Censures (though none more deserve them than those my text speaks of) may for
some gross mis-demeanours be inflicted on those who yet are true members o^ the
Church; indeed this judicial casting out is that which is done by the
governors of the Church, not only as an act of Justice, but mercy, with
charitable and compassionate intentions, that the casting out may prove the
casting down of the delinquent; and that casting down may tend to the raising
up, and receiving in again of the penitent. But this going out is the act of
wicked Apostates, a sin of a very deep dye, and heinous nature, nor can they
who thus cast themselves out, ever call themselves in, yea, they are seldom,
if ever, called in again.

3 This sin of Apostasy in going out from the Church is Pelluntur
excommunicati, schismatici discedu^t, ^^retici exeunt. Lor.
committed two ways, viz. by Heresy and Schism, a going out from the faith,
and from the fellowship of the Church. Indeed Heresy and Schism like abortive
twins in many particulars are coincident, and like Jacob and Esau one holds
fast by the others heels. Haeresies in point of faith do easily produce a
separation in the use of Ordinances, and forms of worship. So the Arrian
Heresy brought in a different doxology: and schism in point of communion,
frequently induces into Heretical Doctrins, ut recte ab ecclesia discessisse
videantur, as St. Hierom excellently, that the Schismatic may thereby the
better maintain his unlawful separation; and by both these ways did the
Antichrist go out.

1 They went out, that is, they Apostatized from the Act. 14. 27
faith which was once delivered, and had been by them professed. That
expression of the Apostle, The door of Faith, intimates that faith is the door
of the Church; so that by embracing, we enter in, by deserting the faith we 1 Timothy 1. 19. ^0.
go out of the Church. Thus St. Paul says of Hymeneus and Philetus, that
concerning the faith they made shipwreck, that is, as Mariners in a storm cast
their wares over board, so did they cast away the Orthodox Doctrine of
Christianity; such were those whom the Apostle Peter charge for bringing in
damnable Heresies, destructive to the foundamentals 2 Pet. 2. 1
of Religion, and the salvation of the people, against whom therefore the
Apostle Jude exhorts sincere Jud. verse. 3
Christians to contend earnestly.

2 They went out, that is, they departed from the fellowship Hierom ad Tit. c*
3.
of the Apostles, with whom they had held communion before. Having endeavored
to deprave the Churches Truth by Heresy, they disturb the peace by schism,
rending themselves from that body of which they professed themselves members,
such were those some whose manner Heb. 10* 25
St. Paul tells us, was to forsake the assembly, and this is one of those
brands which St. Jude marketh the false Jude 19.
teachers with, that they did separate themselves, not willing to be confined
within the limits and bounds of the Churches Communion.

4 Once more, this phrase they went out from us is a (...), more being intended
than is expressed, not only that they went out from, but that being gone out
they did set themselves against the Church, and therefore he calls them in the
former verse Antichrists, which is far more than Apostates: their separation
was not only negatively a nen-communion, but positively a direct opposition,
gathering to themselves parties, erecting, as it were, a Church against a
Church, an Altar against an Altar, they did not only forsake their colors,
but did fight under the enemies banner, and charge desperately in their
forlorn; in one word, not only a falling from the doctrine and communion, but
a rising against both, through an internal malicious d^testation, is that which
is the extent of the accusation, which our Apostle intends by these words, They
went out from us.

2 The next question which would be resolved, is, how this came to pass that
these schismatical Heretics went out from the Church? nor need we go further
for an answer, than the foregoing verses, where the Apostle first dehorts in
general from the love of the world, and particularly from the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the Verse. 15, 16.
pride of life; all of which we shall find to have a great influence upon
Antichristian Apostates.

1 They went out from the Church, because they loved the world; it was St.
Paul's charge against Demas, he 2 Timothy* 4. 10.
has forsaken us, having loved this present world. That heart which is
tenacious of the world, will easily let go its hold of truth. Our Apostle
says a little before, If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not
in him; it is as true, the love of his Mother (the Church) is not in him.
Indeed in the Primitive times, it so fell out, that by reason of Persecution,
they could not cleave to the Church, unless they were willing to leave the
world: and no wonder if the love of the world caused many of them to leave the
Church.

2 But more particularly.

1 The lust of the flesh was a special cause of their Apostasy, the Churches
bounds were too narrow, her Laws too strict for those licentious Antichrists.
Indeed it is frequently observable, that the great Rabbis against the Church,
are extraordinary Chaplains to the Romans 16. 18. Phil. 3. 17.
Trencher. St. Paul describing those false Teachers says, they were such as
did serve their own bellies; nay more, whose God is their belly: St. Peter
characterizeth them 2 Pet. 2. 10* 13, 14, 18*
to be such as did count it a pleasure to riot in the day time, having eyes
full of adultery, that cannot cease from sin, such as did allure through the
lust of the flesh, through much wantonness; in a word, he compares them to
Dogs and Swine, and calls them, the Servants of corruption. Finally, St. Jude
affirms of those Separatists, that they were sensual, so great affinity has
Epicurisme with Antichristianisme, and Sensuality with Jude, v. 19.
Heresy.

2 The lust of the eyes (and that in both notions) is no less an incentive of
this sinful departure. For,

1 Curiosity has ever been a nurse of error, Prurigo sciendi scabies
ecclesiae, the itch of knowing more than we should, proves too often an
Heretical scab; when men are not content with truths revealed, no wonder if
they wander into bypath, and lose themselves in a maze of P. Lomb. l. 1.
Did. 41.
folly. Melior est fidelis ignorantia quam temeraria scientia, was a good
saying of the Master of the Sentences, a modest ignorance is better than a
presumptuous knowledge; as we must not be too credulous in receiving what is
delivered, so neither curious in prying into what is concealed; it is not
seldom seen, that as Thales gazing on the Stars fell into a pit, so men that
meddle with Divine secrets, fall into the pit of error.

2 But that which has ever proved the most usual source of Apostasy, is
Avarice; observe the Apostolical character of the Antichristian Teachers, and
you shall still find this to be one, they are destitute of the truth, (says
St. Paul to Timothy) supposing that gain is godliness; 1 Timothy 6. 8. 5. 10.
and again, the love of money is the root of all evil, which while some have
coveted after, they have erred from the faith. They teach things which they
ought not (says the same Apostle to Titus) for filthy Lucres sake. Tit. 1. 11.
Through covetousness, they with feigned words make Merchandise of you (says
the Apostle Peter) and again, 2 Pet. 2. 3. 14. 15.
an heart they have exercised with covetous practices, which have fors^^k the
right way, and are gone astray, following the way of Balaam the Son of Beor,
who loved the wages of unrighteousness. Thus Ignatius, St. John's contemporary
complained of some, that they were (...), Ignat. Ep. ad Trall.
rather Merchants of Christ than Christians indeed carrying about the name of
Christ fraudulently, handling the Word of Christ deceitfully, mingling with
smooth words poisonous errors. Thus St. Cyprian accused that Apostatizing
Heretic Novatus, Cypr. ad Novat.
of whom he says, that he was avaritiae inexplebili rapacitate furibundus,
not only covetous but ravenous, and insatiably greedy of gain. And Isidorus
observing, that the Novatians styled themselves the pure, says, Mundams Isi.
Orig. ^. 8.
se potius quam mundos vocarent, they should have called themselves not
Puritans, but Mammonists. And however the Antichristian Apostates of our age
have other pretenses, to wit, of purity and godliness, yet who so diveth into
the bottom of their departure from the Church, shall find it to be the
enriching themselves, especially with the Sacrilegious spoils of her Lands and
Avaritia fidem and probitatem subvertit ac Deum negligere and omnia venalia
habere docuit. Sal. de conj. Catil.
Revenues. It is a notable saying of Salust concerning avarice, that it
subverts fidelity and honesty, it teaches men to neglect God, and make sale of
every thing; and what he found true in the Commonwealth, we may in the Church,
that the love of gain causes men to renounce the faith, and they stick not to
sell their Religion, their Consciences, their Souls for money.

3 Add to the two former, that which must by no Matter omnium b^retico^um
superbia. Aug. Epi. 165.
means in this case be left out, as having a great hand in it, namely, The
pride of life, and that double.

1 An arrogant self-conceit too often causes men to depart from the Church;
one sort of the Heretics in the Apostles time were the Gnostics, who were so
called from their vain affectation, and opinion of their own knowledge; no
wonder if St. Paul's advise is not to Romans 12. 3.
think of our ownselves more highly than we ought. It is the observation of
the Reverend and Learned Hooker, Hook. Eccles. pol* 5. c. 9.
that the chief cause of those Heresies which infected the Eastern Church, was
the restless wits of the Graecians* ever more proud of their own curious and
subtle inventions, which having once contrived, they knew how plausibly to
vent: and Eusebius informs us of that Eusebius Histo^. l. 2. c. 1^.
forementioned Heretic Novatus, that he was a man blown up with pride and
self-conceit, and Vincentius Lyrinensis of Nestorius, that such was his
scelerata presumptio, daring boldness, as to boast himself the first and
Vincent. Lyr. c. 4^
only man. Thus do Heretics and Schismatics go out from, because they
account themselves above others, above Fathers, Councils, Antiquity,
Authority, Church, Scriptures, all, according to that proud speech of
Abailardus, Omnes alii sic, ego autem non sic, All others Bern. Ep. 190
think thus, but I think not so.

2 An haughty desire of Honor and greatness, which because they cannot obtain
in the Church, they seek after by going out of it. That (...) (as Eusebius
Eusebius. l. d.
calls him) ringleader of Heresy, Simon Magus, would be (...), some great
one, and therefore broached Act. 8. 10.
those hellish doctrines; Diotrephes loved the pre-eminence* and that opens his
mouth in prating against S. John. It were easy to instance in Donatus, Arrius,
and others, John Ep. 3. 10.
who aspiring after dignities, and being discontented, the one that Cecilian
Bishop of Carthage, the other that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, were
preferred into those seats which they aimed at, did thereupon desert the
Catholic Church; look, as through ambition it was that the Devil himself stood
not in the truth, so he still carries his instruments to this pinnacle, whence
he throws them down into errors.

And thus I have given you a brief portraicture both of the crime and its
causes, of which these Antichrists are accused, They went out from us.

This heinous charge is, that which the Papists at this day draw up against us,
because we have deserted them, condemning us as Heretics, Schismatics,
Apostates, and such as have forsaken the communion of the Christian, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church: But how causless and unjust th^s accusation is, has
been both of old and latter days fo abundanly discovered by many learned pens,
as that I shall not need to enlarge, only give me leave in a few words, to
let you see how vast a difference there is between our going out from them, and
the going out of these Heretics from the Apostles.

1 These Antichrists in going out from the Apostles, and their followers, went
out from the whole Christian Church, that had been planted by them in several
parts, whereas we in going out from the Roman, go out only from a particular
Church. I well know the Papists proudly arrogate to themselves the title of
Catholic, but without the least show of reason; nay, it is with as great
absurdity, as if a man should say, a part, nay a less part, is the whole: The
number of Christians being far greater which renounceth, than that which
imbraceth the Popish Doctrine.

2 These Antichrists, in going out from the Apostles, went out from those
Ecclesiastical governors, to whom they owed subjection: but we owe no
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, and therefore have justly cast off his yoke.

Indeed he most presumptuously assumeth to himself the title of Universal
Bishop, and makes himself the Vicar of Christ, upon the account that he is
the successor of St. Peter. But as it is no way to be evinced from Scripture,
that S. Peter had any more power communicated to him than what the other
Apostles had, so neither can any reason be given, why this power (if granted
to S. Peter) should be derived to his successor at Rome, rather than at
Antioch; nay, why it should not have devolved from him to the Apostle S. John,
who outlived him, and so to his successors; that this universal power
therefore belongs not to him of right, is manifest, and it is no less clear,
that, defacto, it was never exercised by any Roman Bishop, for more than six
hundred years after Christ, Boniface the third being the first who obtained of
^asson* in vit. Bonif.
that wicked Emperor Phocas, the title of Universal Bishop.

And whereas the Pope claims a peculiar right to our obedience, upon the
score of having planted Christianity amongst us, and having had a concession of
it from some Kings. To the former it is answered, that this Island was
converted to the faith of Christ long before Augustines, preaching to the
Saxons, either by Joseph of Arimathea, or Simon Zelotes, as our Annals tell us;
and secondly, that though Augustine whom the Pope sent over, had been the means
of our conversion, yet that is no argument for our subjection to the Pope; for
by the same reason all the Nations converted by S. Paul and his ministry, are
in all ages obliged to be subject to that chair where S. Paul sat at the time
of his sending out, or going himself to convert them; which as it has no truth
in it self, so would it be very prejudicial to S. Peter's Pastor-ship. To the
latter it is returned, that either this power of that concession, was so
originally vested in our Kings, that they might lawfully grant it to whom they
pleased, and then as one King conceded it, another may recall it; or else, if
it were not, then was the grant invalid, and being but a robbery in the giver,
can devolve no right to the receiver. By all which it appears, that we have
made no schism in withholding obedience from the Pope.

3 Chiefly these Antichrists in going out from the Apostolical, went out from a
pure Church, in which there neither wanted sound doctrine, nor good discipline:
but we in going out from the Papists, go out from a Church degenerated, and
polluted with damnable heresies. To clear this, know

1 That when any Church or number of Christians are grown so corrupt a body,
and so far infected, that we canno communicate with it, without manifest sin,
we not only may, but ought to go out from them. Indeed* it is necessa^y both
by virtue of that precept which calls upon Gods people to ^ome out from
Babylon, and likewise as a means of preservation from that contagion, we
otherwise must needs receive: so that it is as needful to separate from such a
Church in order to the souls safety, as it is for a man to go out of an
infected house, or abstai^ from a Lepers company, in order to his bodily health.

2 That the Church of Rome at that time, when we went out from her, was, and
still continues, a very corrupt Church. Many of her Doctrines directly
contrary to the Scriptures, not heard of in the primitive Church, yet imposed
as articles of faith; Her Wo^ship superstitious, Ridiculous, Incongruous to
right Reason, Apostolical Practice, yea, Divine precept, and yet pressed as
necessary to be performed; by which means it is, that they put upon us the sad
dilemma of going from their communion, or going against the clear light of
Divine Truth shining from Gods Word upon our consciences, in which respect we
justly say, they, not we, have made the separation, and so the schism lies at
their door.

To shut it up, what S. Austin said to the Donatists, we say to the Romanists,
Tollatur paries erroris, simul sumus, let the partition wall of imposing
unreasonable opinions and practices upon us, be taken away; and we are ready
to unite with them; we divide not from them as they are a part of, but so f^r
as they are divided from the Catholic Church; we have done our part in
reforming our selves, and it is their fault, that upon this follows a breach
of communion with them, who will not reform. They, not we, are gone out from
the Ancient Primitive and Apostolical Church, in which respect they are justly
termed Antichristian; nor do we any further go out from them, than in those
things wherein they are gone forth from the Apostles. When Jeroboam with others
of the children of Israel revolted from their Lawful King, and Gods instituted
worship, some of the P^iests, L^vits, and others, left their habitation, and
went to Judah, that they might serve God, and their King, surely, not those who
went, but those who stayed, were the Rebels and the Schismatics: thus are the
Romanists guilty for leaving the footsteps of the Apostles, not we, for
leaving theirs to follow the Apostles. Finally, we still hold communion with
them in votis, earnestly desiring that those just causes they have given of our
Non-communion with them, by their Popes usurpation of Supremacy and
infallibility, by their superstitious innovations, both in matters of Doctrine
and practice, may be removed, and to this end, that a general Council might
be lawfully called, and freely act, to whose determination we are willing to
submit, and therefore can acquit our selves from Schism, in the sight of God
and man.

But whilst the Papists unjustly revile the Church of England, I am sure she
has had cause of weeping over the multitudes of those who in this Apostatizing
age have gone out from her; how justly may she take up a Isa. 1. 2.
complaint in Gods own language? Hear O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, I have
nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me; They that
have been baptized in her Font, educated by her Pastors, and sucked what
knowledge and grace they have (if yet they may be said to have any) from her
breasts, have now forsaken her, yea are risen up against her, Viper-like eating
out her bowels. Oh what sad breaches have been made in the Doctrine and
Disciplins of the Church by those wild beasts (Socinians, Familists,
Anabaptists, Quakers, and such like) who being made to go out of the field,
have trampled down the hedge, endeavoring to lay all waste?

And now, I would to God that all Sectaries would at length sadly consider
these two things, how causeless, yea how cursed this their departure from the
Church of England is.

1 How causeless their going out is, were easy to make appear by an induction
of the several particulars, which are alleged as pretenses, such as are
Infants Baptism, Episcopal Ordination, and Jurisdiction, Administration of the
Lords Supper to all baptized persons of age, not convicted of any scandalous
offenses (which they call mixed Communion) as also those harmless, yea useful,
because significant Ceremonies, which our Church retained, all which (though by
them declaimed against as Popish) will be found upon due inqniry, some of them
Apostolical, all of them ancient institutions, and practices of the Catholic
Christian Church; though yet should we grant some of them to be pollutions,
and spots in our Church, it would only infer a lawful desire and endeavor of
reformation, not warrant a Schismatical separation, since no corruptions in any
Church can give allowance of going out of it, unlesle they be such as strike at
the very foundation of Christian Doctrine and Worship. It may perhaps be here
pleaded, that as we forsook the communion of the Roman Church, because we
apprehended it guilty of such erroneous Doctrines and practices with which we
could not communicate without sin, so do the Sectaries upon the same
apprehension of the like in our Church, forsake ours, and therefore if their
separation from us be causeless, ours from the Papists may seem to be as
unjust.

But to this we return, that neither have we given them the like cause, as the
Church of Rome gave us, not have they the like rational conviction as we had:
We impose nothing to be believed in Doctrine as necessary to Salvation, which
we do not demonstrate to have been the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles,
and the Catholic Church, and so ought to be believed; we require nothing to
be done in matter of practice which is not of ancient usage in the Christian
Church, and in its own nature is at least indifferent, and so may be done
without sin; and therefore it is not a just conviction, but at best a deceiving
persuasion, at worst a wilfulresolution, which causes their separation, and so
it is in truth causeless.

2. Add to this, that other consideration, namely how cursed it is, which is
evident in several respects.

1 Of Christ and his Spirit, who is hereby grieved. It is very observable, that
they who are said in this verse to go out from the Apostles, are called in the
verse before Antichrists; whilst we go from Christ's Church, we go against
Christ, and by rending from his Body, we grieve his Spirit, and therefore St.
Ambrose calls Schism a sin against the Holy Ghost.

2 Of the Church which is hereby weakened; the taking of any stones out of the
building lesseneth the strength of the whole fabric; if one Soldier break his
rank the whole company is disordered by it: thus do they who go out of the
Church, ruire the Church it self, interrupting her unity, which is at once her
strength and beauty: upon this account it is well observed, that whereas other
sins are, contra sngulos, against particular persons, this of Schism is,
contra universos, against a generality; so that as much as community is above a
person, so much is Schism above other sins, yea, as much as a sacred is better
than a civil command, so much this sin is worse than that of Sedition.

3 Of others, in as much as by this means,

1 Those that are malicious enemies against the Church, have their mouths
opened to calumniate her, and all that are strangers without the Church, are
hindered from coming in to her. Clemens Alexandrinus repeateth the saying of one
to this purpose, who cried out, You Christians have so many Sects, let my soul
be Cl. Al. Padag.
with the Philosophers.

2 Those who are within the Church, in as much as some (to wit, the weak) are
staggered, and ready to question which is the true Church, nay whether there be
any Church at all; and others (to wit, the strong) are sadded, whilst for these
divisions of Ruben are great searchings of heart.

4. Lastly, of themselves, who by their backsliding separation hasten upon
themselves perdition; a branch plucked from the root must needs wither, a
member ^^^ off from the body dies, and those that leave the Church, perish. Nos
tentat D^abolus ut lupus ovem a grege, says Cypr. de Unit. Eccles.
St. Cyprian, As the Wolf tempts the sheep from the Fold, so does the Devil men
from the Church; and why this? but that he may worry and devour them,
Discedentes ^^ Ecclesi^ (says Ireneus) de font Spiritus sancti non Iran. adv.
Haer.
p^tant, They that leave the garden of the Church cannot drink of the fountain
of the Spirit. What became of those who were out of the Ark when the ^loud
came? they must needs perish in the waters; no less miserable is their
condition, who go out of the Church.

Yea, which renders their condition so much the more desperate is, that they
who once go out of the Church, do seldom return to it. That of the Poet,
Quis peccandi sibi finem possuit, is as true ^rrandi, both sin and errors are
boundless; in this respect among others, the wandering, as of Sinners, so
Heretics, is like that of a lost sheep, which strayeth from pasture to
pasture, but never of it self goes back to the fold; the path of error is a
going down hill, in which men go, nay run from error to error, till at last
they fall into the pit of destruction.

And now (my Brethren) think I beseech you, that the Church of England
bespeaketh you this day in those Joh. 6 67, 68.
words of our Savior upon a like occasion, Will you also go away? nor can we
return a better answer than that which St. Peter, in behalf of himself, and the
rest, gave to Christ, Whither shall we go? thou have the words of eternal
life; in this Church is the Orthodox dispensation of the Gospel, the faithful
administration of the Sacraments, and the Primitive Apostolical Discipline
established, and therefore whither shall we go? Here it is that Christ feeds
his Flock in green pastures, by still waters, why should we be as they that
turn aside? Oh let us pity the seduced multitude, who have left Churches for
Conventicles; judicious preaching, for ignorant prating; their learned Pasters,
for illiterate Mechanics; and their true Baptism in the Font, for a vain
dipping in a Pond, yea let us not only weep over, but pray for them, (as our
Mother the Church has taught us in her excellently composed Letany) that God
would bring into the way of truth all such as have erred, and are deceived.
However (if they will not return to us) let us take heed we go not forth to
them; rather let us bless God, that has caused our lot to fall within the
bosom of so pure a Church, and let us earnestly beseech him to strengthen us
by his grace, that we may continue in her communion to the end, so may we
confidently and comfortably take up those words of the Author to the Hebrews,
But we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them Heb. 10. 39.
that believe, to the saving of the soul.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 19. They went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us, but they went out,
that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us.
THat general assertion of God himself by the Prophet Isaiah, My ways are not
as your Isa. 55. 8.
ways, neither are my thoughts as your thoughts, is not unfitly exemplified in
the state of the militant Church; our thoughts are, That the Church of God even
on earth should be without spot or wrinkle, without fear of danger; That Gods
House should neither be infected with the contagion of error, nor infested
with the breach of Schism; That Christ's flock should be securely free from
Wolves, or though the Sheep be among Wolves, yet that there should be no Goats
among the sheep. But see how far distant Gods thoughts are from ours, who so
orders it, that the Churches splendour here below shall not be like that of
the Sun, but the Moon, borrowed and imperfect, that her condition should be
like that of a ship tossed with the waves of persecution, yea, sometimes like
the earth rent asunder with the wind of division; And surely to use S. Paul's
expression, The foolishness 1 Cor. 1. 25.
of God is wiser than the wisdom of man, and therefore let us give him leave
to know what is fitter for his Church, than we; far be it from us to repine
at his purposes, because they agree not with our projects, rather let us
subseribe to the prudence of his determinations, as in governing the World, so
in ordering his Church, whilst for excellent and admirable ends, he
permits heretical and schismatical Apostates, to obscure her Doctrine, and
disturb her peace; A pregnant instance whereof we find in the Primitive
Church, even whilst S. John lived, by reason of those many Antichrists which
did arise; concerning whom he says here, They went out from us, but they were
not of us, etc.

Having dispatched the concession which intimates what was the occasion of the
scandal, They went out from us, pass we on to the correction, which removes
that occasion, by discovering it to be no just cause, and that two ways.

1 By a negation, in respect of the persons, who went out, that indeed they
never were members of the Church, which is

Asserted in those words but they were not of us.

Proved in those, for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us.

2 By an affirmation, which declares that the going out of those Antichrists
was permitted by God for a very good end, to wit, that they might appear to be
but Hypocrites, But they went out, that it might be manifest they were not all
of us.

1 Begin we with the Negation. And before I enter upon the particulars, I
cannot but take notice of that injurious interpretation, which Socinus puts
upon this clause, on purpose to evade that Argument, which is drawn hence for
the doctrine of perseverance, and amounts Soein. in loc.
to this sense, that whereas these Antichrists though gone out of the Church,
might pretend, that they were still of the same faith with the Apostles; S.
John lets them know, that though they had been, yet now (to wit, a little
before, or about the time of their going out from them) they were not of them,
of which their leaving communion with them, was a sufficient argument.

In opposition to which interpretation, I shall offer these three things.

1 It does not appear, nor is it probable, that these Antichrists, when gone
out from the Apostles, did still pretend to the Orthodox faith, and therefore
no need for the Apostle to make any provision against it. Nay, it is plainly
intimated by the following discourse, that these Antichrists being gone forth
did set themselves expressly, directly, against the Orthodox, denying that Jesus
(whom they did profess) to be the Christ, and therefore the design of this
clause is most rationally conceived to be the prevention of that scandal which
their horrid Apostasy might give to weak Christians, nor could any thing more
effectually prevent, or remove it, than to let them know, that these
Antichristian Apostates were never true Stars in the firmament of the Church,
but only blazing Comets, as their falling away did evidently demonstrate.

2 That the words, they were not of us, import an absolute denial, so that to
put a limitation is to put a sense upon them, and if that which this
interpretation offers were the Apostles meaning, it had been more proper for
him, to have said, because they ceased to be of us, than to say, they were not
of us; nor will that slender Grammar prop of the preter-imperfect-tense support
this gloss, nothing being more usual, than even by that tense to take in the
whole time past; and look as when a man speaking of any place, says, I was not
there, he is understood, to mean not that he was not there just before, or
that when he left the place he was not there, but that he was not there at
all. So when our Apostle says, they were not of us, his meaning doubtless is
not, they were not of us at the time when they left us, but they were not at
all of us.

3 That if this which he pretends were the Apostles meaning, the addition of a
reason to confirm it were supervacaneous, it being as needless to prove that
these Antichrists were not, about the time when they deserted the Apostles, of
the same spirit, and faith with them, as to prove, that they who run from their
colors were not just as they run away, of the same mind, and for the same
cause with those who valiantly fight.

Having thus blown away that light and empty exposition, come we now to handle
the clause, as it is both generally and rationally interpreted. To this end
consider we the negation.

1 As asserted in those words, But they were not of us.

For the right understanding of which clause, it will not be amiss to make use
of that distinction of Zanchy Zanc. in loc.
between these two phrases, Esse in, et de Ecclesia, to be in the Church, and
to be of it, the former being of a far larger extent than the latter, since
though all that are of the Church are in it: Yet all that are in the Church,
are not* of it. All that take upon them the profession of the true Christian
faith, and communicate with the visible Society of the faithful in Evangelical
administrations, are justly said to be in the Church, only they, who being
before all time graciously elected, are in due time effectually called, and so
united to Christ by a lively faith to their Fellow Christians by a cordial
love, are truly said to be of the Church. This will the better appear by
taking notice of another phrase, which we meet with in this very Epistle,
namely, to be of the world, Aliud est esse in mundo, aliud esse Serrar. in loc.
de mundo; There is a vast difference between these two, to be in the World,
and of it all who live, and move, and have their being in the World, are said
to be in in it, only those who delight in, and set their hearts on the World,
are said Verse. 15, 16.
to be of it: look then how good Christians are said to be in the World and
yet not of it; So wicked Antichrists may be said to be in the Church, but not
of it, no not even whilst they continue in it, for that no doubt is our
Apostles design, to acquaint us, that even before they went Aug. l. de Cor. et
great.
out, whilst yet they were among, they were not of them, according as St.
Austin excellently glosseth, quando videbantur in nobis non erant ex nobis,
when they seemed to be, they were not of us.

Look as on the one hand it may be said of many; who are not among us, they
are yet of us, because their names Gal. 1. 15
are written in the book of life, in which sense Paul was of the Church,
whilst a Persecutor against it, because Aug. l. de bono persever. c. 8.
a chosen vessel, separated (as he says himself) from his Mothers womb. So on
the other hand, it may be said of many who are among us, they are not of us,
Quia non erant in Christo electi ante mundi constitutionem, says S. Austin,
because they are not eternally elected, nor effectually converted.

Indeed to use Spalatensis his phrase, they may be said Spalat. l. 7. c. 10
to be de ecclesia praesumptive, sed non realiter, non veraciter, of the
Church in their own and others opinion, but they are not so really: So long as
they outwardly profess the true faith, without open Scandal, Charity presumes
them to be of the Church, but verity denies them to be so.

The Learned Davenant well argues. Nothing is that truly and formally, which
it is said to be with the addition of Daven. Deter.
a term of diminution, as a dead man is not a man, but a carcass: now wicked
men, whilst yer in the bosom of the Church, they are but dead members,
branches in Christ, not bearing fruit, according to our Saviors expression,
Joh. 15. 2^
they are not parts, but pestes; not membra, but mali humores. (So S. Austin,)
not parts, but pests of the Aug in loc.
Church, not members of, but ill-humores in the body. Very apt to this purpose
is that Similitude which the same Father borrows from an house, in which
there are rubbish and Cobwebs, but they are none of the materials Aug. de bapt*
contra. Donat. l. 7. c. 10. Aug. tr. 21 in Johan.
which constitute the fabric of it. In one word, what St. Austine says
concerning Judas, Un^^ erat numero non merito, specie non virtute, commixione
corporali non vinculo Spirituali, he was one of the Apostles in number, not
merit, by corporal conversation, not spiritual conjunction; that may no less
justly be asserted of all Hypocrites, of whom Bellarmine himself says in St.
Austines Bellarm. de Gem. col. l. 1. c. 2.
language, Adecclesiam pertinent numero non merito, they fill up the number of
visible Professors, but want the reality of true believers. Thus as the Romans
said of that Traitor to the City, Iste non est noster, non est Romanus, sed
Paenus, he is none of ours, he is not a Roman, but a Carthaginian, or as
Homer of the cowardly Grecians (...), oh Gracians, you are not Gracians; so
here the Apostle of degenerate Christians, they were no Christians, they were
not of us, as being destitute of a true and genuine faith. And now what should
the consideration hereof teach us, but,

1 Not to content our selves that we are received into the Church by Baptism,
and partake of its external privileges, Multi qui non ex nobis recipient
Sacramentum, etc. says St. Austin upon the place, many that Aug. in Loc.
are not of us do yet communicate with us; St. Paul says of a Jew, He is not
a Jew that is one outwardly, nor is Romans 2. 28.
that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh. The like may I say of a
Christian, he is not a Christian that is one outwardly, nor is that Baptism
which is outward in the body, Frustra miscetur caetui Sanctorum in Temple
manufact^ qui submotus est a consortio Dei and ab universo corpore mystico
Christi, says St. Cyprian excellently, in Cypr. de duplici Matryr*
vain is he joined to the society of visible Professors, who is dis-joyned from
Christ's mystical body, and has not communion with God.

2 Not to be much offended, when we see some within the Church going out of it.
Indeed it should be our grief, but not our scandal, mourn we ought for their
sin in going out from the Church, but still so as to comfort our selves with
this meditation, they never were true members of the Church. Avolent quantum
volent paleae Tertul. de prescript. c. 3.
leves, eo purior massa frumenti, in herdeum domini reponetur, so Tertullian,
let the light chafe fly away whither it will, the good corn will be laid up
so much the purer in Gods Barn; Quand^ evomuntur mali humores relevatur corpus,
so St. Austin, when the ill humors Aug. in Loc.
are vomited up, the stomach is eased, and the body releeved. The departure of
wicked men from the Church, is like the flying away of the chafe, and the
casting out of bad humors, and though it be a woeful decession to them, it is
a good riddance to the Church, nor does she lose any from her, but those who
were never of her; the truth of which will more evidently appear, if you take a
view of

2 The argument annexed, whereby this Negation is proved, in those words, For
if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us. The
strength of the proof is obvious to every capacity, that there will be no need
to insist upon it, for if they who are of the Church do continue in it, it
must necessarily follow that they who do not continue, but go out of the
Church, were never of it. That therefore which we are a little to inquire into
is the truth of the point, That they who are of the Church, do undoubtedly
continue in it. It is a Doctrine I shall have frequent occasion to discuss in
my progress through this Epistle, and therefore I shall so handle it, as to
reserve something to be said hereafter. For the present I shall propose and
resolve these two Queries.

How far, or in what sense, this is verified?

Upon what ground the truth of it is founded?

1 To unfold the meaning of the Position, know,

1 That continuing with us is here to be construed in opposition, not to all
going out, but that which is malicious and impenitent, for such was the
apostasy of those Antichrists. They who are of the Church may be for a time
seduced from the Church, from her truth to error, from her unity to Schism;
but,

1 They go not out totally, though from a particular, yet not from the
Catholic Church, though from some truths which are as superstructures, yet not
from those which are at least fundamentally, and absolutely necessary to
salvation; and though perhaps sometimes they may doubt of them, yet not so as
to deny them, or if sometimes out of fear and infirmity to deny, yet not
wilfully and resolvedly to oppose them. Those instances of Peter and Judas do
very well illustrate the difference in this particular, between the departure
which is incident to a true Christian, and an Hypocrite. Peter indeed sadly
Apostatized, when he not only forsook, but denied his Master, but it was
against the bent of his heart, which was to profess Christ, though all others
forsook him, as appears by his own expression, in which regard Tertullian
says of him, Fidei robur fuit concussum Tertul.
non excussum, fides mota, non amota, the strength of his faith was moved and
shaken, but not the truth of it removed and thrown down; and St. Gregory, that
his faith Greg Hom. 15. in Ezekiel. (...). Theoph. in Luc.
that herb of Grace was not withered, but rather trodden down with the foot of
fear; and to the same purpose the Greek Father, though the wind of Satan's
assault had blown down the leaves, the root was alive; whereas Judas betrayed
his Master, out of a deliberate and wilful resolution, as appears by the
contract he made about it before hand; thus whilst Hypocrites wilfully make
shipwreck of the faith, true believers are against their wills, through the
violence of temptation, dashed upon a rock.

2 They go not out finally, so as never to return to the truth and unity of
the Church, vel raro cadunt, vel dei beneficio resurgunt, says Daneus, they
seldom fall into Dan. in loc.
gross errors, and when they do, they rise again by repentance; though these
sheep may sometimes wander out of the fold, the shepherd brings them back
again. Very suitable to this purpose, is that allusion of S. Cyprian, Cypr.
adv. novat. Genesis 8. 7, 8
to the Dove and the Crow, both of which went forth from the Ark, but the Dove
returned, whereas the Crow never did. The Ark is a fit emblem of the Church,
the Dove of a seduced Catholic, and the Crow of an obstinate Heretic and
whereas the Heretic having left the Church, goes still downward to the gates
of destruction, the Catholic, though he may go out, returns with prayers and
tears. In this respect that observation of Cicero, Cic. Tuscul. 1
concerning the Corinthian brass, that it does not gather rust so soon as
other, and is more easily scoured than other, is fitly applicable to the true
members of the Church, who are not presently withdrawn, and speedily recalled.

2 That continuing with us, which is here asserted, is to be understood, not
in reference to their own strength, but Divine power; they that are of the
Church (if left to themselves) would soon leave her. Temptations from the World
and the Devil, are so frequent and violent, grace in the best, so weak and
defective, that were is not for that manutenentia Dei, Gods upholding mercy, it
were impossible they should not be drawn aside; surely if the Angels and Adam
(who yet had no inherent cortuption to by as them) soon left that state of
integrity in which God created them, the best Christians (having the remainder
of sin) must needs be more apt to turn aside from God; but says the Apostle
Peter, we are kept by 1 Pet. 1. 5.
the power of God through faith unto salvation, that effectual Aug. de bono
persever. c. 12.
grace says Austin, quae facit ut accedamus, facit ne discedamus, which
causes us to draw near, keeps us from drawing back, so that as in regard of
our own weakness, it is impossible we should continue of our selves; so in
regard of divine power, it is impossible but we should continue. By all which,
the meaning of our Apostle in these words, appears to be briefly this, that
they who are true members of the Church, are undoubtedly so far preserved by
Gods power, that either they shall not go out, or if they do, they shall
return, and so continue to the end.

This is that truth which is shadowed forth in the Psalmist, by the resemblance
of a tree planted by the Rivers of waters, which brings forth fruit in its
season, whose leaf Psa. 1. 3
shall not fade; in the Gospel, by the similitude of an house built upon the
rock, which falls not, though the winds blow, storms Mat. 7. last.
rage, and the waves beat against it. We read concerning the Temple of Solomon,
that it was made of the wood of Lebanon, which (they say) never corrupts; upon
which S. Gregory thus moralizeth, secundum praescientiae suae gratiam Greg M.
in. l. 1 Reg.
sanctam ecclesiam de in aeternum permansuris sanctis constituit; the materials
of the spiritual Temple are persevering Saints, according to which, is the
promise of Christ to every true believer, under the title of a Conqueror, Him
that overcommeth will I make a pillar in the Rev. 3. ^
Temple of my God, and he shall go no more out.

2 Having unfolded the genuine sense of this position, it now remains that
we inquire into the grounds upon which the truth of it is established, which
we shall find to be four, Two in regard of God, and two in regard of Christ.

1 In regard of God, the certain continuance of the true members of the Church,
depends upon the love of his Election, and the fidelity of his Covenant.

1 It is impossible that any of those whom God has from all eternity chosen to
salvation, should perish; now out of the Church, there is no salvation, and
therefore it is impossible, they who are of the number of the faithful, and
chosen of God, should utterly go out of the Church, this is that which our
Savior himself, speaking of those false Christ's, and false Prophets, which
should arise, and show great signs and wonders, intimates, as that, which
secureth Mat. 24. 24
true believers from being seduced by them, because they are elected; for when
he says, insomuch, that if it were possible, they should deceive the very
Elect, he manifestly implies, that since they are elected, it is impossible
that they should be deceived, to wit, so as utterly to renounce the Christian
faith. Indeed, look as the passing of that bitter cup of the passion, was
impossible, not simply in it Mat. 26 29
self, but in respect of Gods Decree, so the seduction of the elect to a total
and final apostasy, is, though very possible in respect of the Devils power and
policy, of the elects infirmities and corruptions, yet is impossible in regard
of Gods decree to glorify them, and in order to that to preserve them. To this
purpose is that of St. Paul, who having mentioned the woeful Apostasy of
Hymeneus and 2 Timothy 2. 18. 19
Philetus, presently adds for the comfort of sincere Believers, Nevertheless,
The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them
that are his, where by foundation is not improbably understood, that decree of
election which is unchangeable, and they who are his, that is, in a peculiar
manner, as being chosen by him, are known to him, to wit, by a special
knowledge, so as to take care of them, that they shall not make such a
shipwreck of their faith as to sink into perdition.

2 The Covenant which God has made with the elect in Christ, does not only
promise a reward to them which continue, but the grace of continuance, and not
only the grace whereby they may continue (if they will) but that grace whereby
they shall, at once be both able and willing to continue; what can be clearer
to this purpose than that of God by the Prophet Jeremy, to the Elect Jews, and
in them to all his chosen? I will make an everlasting covenant Jerem. 32. 40
with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put
my fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Indeed these
last words they shall not, are not directly according to the Hebrew, yet they
express the sense, which can amount to no less than a certainty of the event,
for since the grace of fear promised is a sufficient means of not departing,
and the promise of putting his fear into them for that end, argues, that it
was his intention they should not depart, this event could not but infallibly
be produced, in as much as Divine intention, seconded with sufficient means to
produce the effect, cannot possibly miscarry.

2 In regard of Christ, the certain continuance of all the true members of the
Church depends upon the energie of his death, and the efficacy of his
intercession.

1 Though the design of Christ's death was in some respect general, namely to
purchase a possibility of Salvation for all, upon the conditions of faith and
repentance, yet I doubt not to assert, that besides this, there was a
particular design of his death, which was to purchase a certainty of Salvation
by faith and repentance for some, to wit the elect, this being the most
rational way of reconciling those Scriptures which do enlarge Christ's death to
the whole world, with those that restrain it to his Church.

Indeed, if there be not some who shall be actually saved by Christ's death, his
death will be in vain: if there be not some for whom Christ has purchased
more than a possibility of Salvation, upon condition, it is possible none
should be actually saved by it, especially if (as those who deny this peculiar
intention affirm) the performing of the condition depends so on the liberty of
our will, that notwithstanding the influence of grace, a man may choose or
refuse to do it, for then it is as possible that every man may not believe, as
that he may, and consequently it is possible no man may be saved by Christ's
death, and so Christ's death in vain, as to that which was its primary end, and
consequently his intention frustrated; it remains then, that as Christ
intended his death to be sufficient for all, so that it might be efficient to
some, in order to which it was necessary, that for those persons he should
purchase grace, yea not only grace, but perseverance in grace till they come to
glory.

2 Among those many things for which Christ intercedeth with the Father in
behalf of his members, this is not the least, that they may be preserved to his
heavenly Kingdom, and to that end that the Holy Spirit may be conferd on them.
That Prayer of Christ on earth is generally acknowledged as the sum of what
he intercedeth for in Heaven, and if you peruse it, you shall find him
praying, not only for the Apostles, but all that shall believe Joh. 17. 11. 15.
20. 24.
through their word, that the Father would keep them through his own name,
from the evil (to wit, of this world) so as they may be with him where he is
(to wit in Heaven) and behold his glory. That promise which Christ made to his
Disciples on earth, he made good in Heaven, I will pray to the Father, and he
shall Joh. 14. 16.
give you another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever; nor is this
prayer made only for the Apostles, but for the whole Church, and every
particular member, on whom by virtue of Christ's intercession, the Spirit is in
some measure bestowed, and that for this end, to be an exhorter, a comforter,
an instructor, an upholder of them in the way, till they come to the desired
end; so that now put all together, since all sincere members of the Church are
such, whom God has freely predestined to Salvation by Sanctification, and
with whom he has made a gracious Covenant in Christ to give them grace and
glory; since they are a purchased people, for whom Christ has given himself to
redeem them from all iniquity, to bring them to felicity and glory; to which
end, as he once shed his blood, so still he makes intercession for them, and
communicates his Spirit to them; well might the Apostle assert that, if they
had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us.

To apply this.

1 Do we see any who having made (though never so glorious) profession of the
truth, degenerate into blasphemous Heresies, and impieties, and utterly fall
away, we need not fear to conclude, that they never were what they seemed to
be; if the seed which is cast into the ground do not fructify, we may safely
infer it is not the good ground; if the house fall through the violence of
the storms, we may truly deny that it was ever built upon the rock; if when the
wind of Persecution comes, any Professors vanish by an utter Apostasy, we may
justly assert they were not Wheat, but Chafe. It was our blessed Saviors
plain assertion, If you continue in my word, Tentatio probat quia non sunt ex
nobis quand^ illis tentatio venerit velut occasion venti volant for as quia
grana non erant. Aug. in loc. Nemo aestimer b^nos de Ecclesia posse discedere,
Triticum non rapit ventu^, nec arborem solida radice fundatam procella
subvertit. Inanes paleae tempestate jactantur, invalidae arbores turbinis
incursione evertu^tur, ex nobis exierunt sed non fuerint ex nobis, etc. Cypr. l
de simplic. Praelat.
then are you my Disciples indeed; whereby is employed, that total and final
Apostasy is an argument of Hypocrisy, and therefore whereas it it said, many
of his Disciples went away from him, St. Austine says, Discipuli appellan^ur,
and tamen non erant vere discipuli; quia non manserunt in verbo ejus, secundum
id quod ait, si manseritis in verbo meo vere discipuli mei estis, Though they
were called Disciples, they were not so indeed, because they did not continue
in Christ's word, according to that in the Gospel, If you continue in my word,
you are my Disciples indeed, in reference to which it is, that he says a
little after, Tune vero sunt quod appellantur, si manserint in eo propter quod
^ic appellantur, then, and then only are they that which they are called,
Christ's Disciples, if they abide in that for which they are so called.

2 Let all true members of the Church rejoice in this comfortable Doctrine; that
phrase of St. Paul, The grace of God wherein we stand, is taken notice of by
S. Chrysostom, as very emphatical, (...), very aptly Ioh. 8. 31. 6. 54.
it is said, we stand, for the grace of God knows no limits, has no end,
and whereas earthly dignities are quickly lost, because the favor of Princes
is changeable, yea, Aug. de Cor. et great. c. 9. Romans 5. 2 Chrysostom. ibid.
however, though none else, death will put a man out of the highest Office; by
the Grace and Favor of God we stand so fast, that nothing can wholly divest
us of this glorious privilege to be a member of the Church. Herein it is that
our estate by conversion, is far better than Adams by creation, he indeed was
in a state of perfect purity, but with all in a state of mutability, and though
placed in Paradise, yet so as that he might, nay, did forfeit it to the utter
ejection of himself, and his Posterity; we being through regeneration grafted
into Christ, attain by his grace, though not exact innocence, yet a kind of
immutability, and are so planted in the garden of the Church, that we cannot
be plucked up.

This consideration is that which should enlarge our spiritual joy, but yet not
diminish our prudential fear, and therefore we should do well (according to
the Psalmists advice) to rejoice with trembling. It is not Psa. 2. 9
to be denied, but that this Doctrine being abused may become to some an
occasion of security, but withal, it is only so to them whom it concerns
not, the false, not the true members of the Church, and it is only so, because
mis-understood, not in its own nature. Indeed, were this the Doctrine, that they
who are of the Church shall continue in it, though they live never so loosely,
and go on in their sin impenitently, it would be not only an occasion, but a
cause of presumptuous security, but the intent of this Doctrine is only to
assure those who are of the Church, that through the spirit of Christ, by the
use of those means God affords, and exercise of those duties he requires,
they shall be so far preserved, as that either they shall not at all go out
of, or if through the Enemies subtilty, and their own infirmity, and
inanimadvertency, they are seduced, they shall at length return by
weeping-cross into the bosom of the Church, and what place is here left for
sloth and negligence, for presumption and security?

1 The truth is, it is no easy matter, on good ground to assure our selves,
that we are of the Church; many not only in others, but their own opinion are
of the Church, and yet are not in reality, and if we be not indeed of the
Church, we cannot continue. In this respect that counsel of St. Paul is very
needful, examine, prove your selves, whether you be in the faith, use all
diligence and 2 Cor. 13. 5
faithfulness in searching out your spiritual estate.

2 If we be of the Church, we are not so secured, but that we may fall
scandalously, and for a time go out from her communion; sad experience makes
it good at this day in many, who have wretchedly forsaken the truth, and the
Church, for whose return we pray, and of which we are not altogether without
hope, since we trust, some of them are gone astray, not through wilfulness
and contempt, but ignorance and weakness, and therefore not only he that
thinks he stands, but he that does stand, had need to take heed lest he
fall.

3 Finally, There is no assurance of continuance to the true members of the
Church, but in the use of means; we are kept by Gods power to salvation, but
it is through faith, and so likewise through fear and watchfulness, and
humility, and obedience, and prayer, and attending on the word, and Sacraments,
and therefore they who are real Christians, will not dare to neglect their duty
in a fond presumption of Gods upholding mercy.

The sum of all is, our first work* must be to make it sure on good grounds,
that we are indeed members of the Church, being in some measure assured of
that, our next care must be to apply our selves to a conscientious use of all
the ways and helps which may preserve us in it; and then though still we must
be diffident in regard of our selves, as being conscious of our own impotency,
yet in regard of God, we may, we ought to be confident, that he who has
begun his good work in us, will perfect it to the day of Jesus, and having
effectually called us into Phil. 1. 3
his Church militant, that he will mercifully conduct us to his Church
triumphant.

2 Having dispatched the Negative, it now remains that we proceed to the
other way of removing the scandal taken at the Apostasy of these Antichrists,
to wit, the affirmative, which assigns the end, for which God permitted it,
But they went out from us, that it might be manifested that they were not all
of us.

These words, They went out from us, are not expressed in the Original, but are
necessarily employed, and therefore fitly supplied by the Translator.

These words, They were not all of us, seem to intimate, that some of these
Antichrists who went out were of us, but the true sense of that clause will be
easily understood, if either according to the Hebrew manner of speaking, we
read non omnis, nullus, they were not all, that is, none of us, suitable to
which, is that of St. Paul Romans 3. 20.
to the Romans* fetched from David's Psalms, All flesh shall not be justified*
that is, no flesh; or if after, they, we add, who were among us* for so it
amounts to this, that all who are joined to the society, are not of the number
of the faithful, and that they who were not so, might be discovered, was the
reason why God suffered them to go out. Congruous to this, is St. Austins gloss
upon this text, intus cum sint, non ex nobis sunt, non tamen manifesti, sed
exeundo manifestantur, whilst they were among us* they were not of us, but they
were not manifested till they went out; so that by their going out, they did
not so much fall away from what they were, as make known what they were not,
and that they were far otherwise than what they seemed to be.

Indeed, there is a double manifestation which God aims at in permitting the
Apostasy of Hypocrites.

1 The one of the sincere-hearted, that their integrity and constancy may the
better appear; this S. Paul asserts, where he says, There must be Heresies,
that they which 1 Cor. 11. 19.
are approved may be made manifest. That Question of our Savior to Peter, and
the rest, Will you also go away? seems to intimate, that then when so many
went from him, was a time of discovering what metal they were made of, and then
their true-heartednesse to their master had an opportunity to show it self. Had
it not been for those Heretical and Schismatical Apostates of Old, those
Ancient Fathers, both of the Greek and Latin Church, had not been such
illustrious stars in the firmament of the Church; were it not for those of our
latter days* and here among us, our Church would not have had so much to glory
of her Cranmer, Latimer, Ridley, Jewel, Whitaker, Whitgift, and the rest, who
were so famous in their Generation, for their magnanimity in maintaining the
truth against Apostatical opposers.

2 The other of the false-hearted, who by going out show themselves in their
colors; This is that which divine Providence brings about for a double end.

1 For the shame of themselves, ut quod occultaverunt ingenium nudarent, so
Lorinus, that their evil disposition, Lor. in loc.
which before lay hid, may be laid open to their disgrace; whilst these men
are in the Church as gilded posts, painted sepulchers, whited walls, they seem
beautiful, but when they go out, the gilt, and paint, and white, are as it were
washed off, whereby their shameful rottenness appears, and according to S.
Paul's phrase, Their folly is made manifest to all men. This is that 2 Timothy 3. 9
which must fully be accomplished at the last day, when the separation between
the sheep and the goats, the Orthodox and the Here tick, godly and wicked,
shall be most perspicuous; and shame shall cover the faces of all Apostates,
Separatio perspicue in die judicii futura est. Aug.
but sometimes it is that which divine providence orders to fall out in this
World, and that as for their greater ignominy: So

2 For the safety of others, ut a fidelibus vitari Dan in loc. Est. in loc.
possint, so Estius; ne alios corrumpant, so Daneus; that being discovered they
may be avoided, and their infection prevented; whilst the wolf is covered
with a sheep skin, he is not so easily discerned, but when the skin is plucked
over his ears, the true sheep can far better beware him.

To wind up this, learn we hence,

1 To adore, admire, and extol the Wisdom, Mercy, and Justice of our God, in
discovering Hypocrites by their Apostasy. It is that we have so much the more
reason to take notice of, because we see it so much fulfilled in our days.
The times we live in have been times of Trial, God has as it were by a fan
winnowed us, whereby the chafe is discovered, as by a wind shaken us, so that
the rotten boughs, and fruit, fall off. How many, who whilst the Church had
the reigns of government in her hands, embraced her doctrine, reverenced her
Clergy, conformed to her discipline, have now made manifest, that though among,
they were not of us? their factious schismatical spirits, which fear then
bridled having now had an opportunity, show themselves openly. Oh let us bless
that divine providence which has suffered it thus to be, as in justice to them
for their detection, so in mercy to the Church for her purgation.

2 To beware how we please our selves with hypocritical shows; Nemo diu
ingenium abscondit, we cannot long conceal our temper; though the Ape be
dressed up in a man's habit, it will upon any opportunity discover its apish
nature, cito ad naturam ficta redierunt, what is feigned is forced, and cannot
be lasting; besides, it is the just judgment of God on all Hypocrites, sooner
or later to discover them; they may for a time cousen men, but God cannot be
deceived, whilst yet they remain in the Church, they are known to him, as
Judas was to Christ, and though he wink at them for a time, yet in due time
he will pluck off their mask, and so order it, that they shall be made
manifest: for so it fell out here with these Antichrists, who (says the
Apostle) went away from us, that it might be manifest they were not of us.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 20, 21. VERSE. 20 But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye
know all things. 21 I have not written unto you, because ye know not the
truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.
IT is not unfitly observed, that in those colder and frosty Countries of the
East, there are plenty of Beasts, which afford furrs to keep men's bodies warm;
That in the beginning of the spring, when Serpents peep out of their holes, the
ash puts forth, which is a present remedy against their sting and teeth: no
less, yea, far more considerable is the care of God in reference to his
Church, who as he permits Heresies and Schisms to disturb her, so he has
provided helps to perserve her. For this end he has appointed her his written
word, as a sure canon, a safe guide, and an unerring rule; for this cause he
has given some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers, to build her up in the Orthodox faith. Finally, to this
end, above all, he has given her his holy Spirit, whose illuminating and
sanctifying grace, is sufficient for her; of which it is our Apostle here
minds the Christians.

But you have an unction from the holy One, etc.

In these two verses, we have two Generals.

A Remedy prescribed, or rather described against the Antichristian poison, But
you have an unction from the holy One, and know all things.

An Apology annexed, whereby an objection is prevented, which otherwise might
have been made, I have not written unto you, because ye know not the truth,
but because you know it, and that no lie is of the truth.

Begin we with the Remedy, as it is set down in the Gener. 1.
twentieth verse; concerning which we may take notice of four particulars.

The Quality, what it is, an unction. The Community, whose it is, you have an
unction. The Originality, whence it is, from the Holy One. The efficacy, what
it does, and you know all things.
If you please to reduce the four to three, take notice of,

The Nature of the Antidote, it is an unction. The Author of it, who is called
the Holy One. The worth of it, by it we know all things.
Once more, reduce the three to two, and then here is observable,

Doni collatio, A gift conferred, You have an unction from the Holy One.

Beneficii illatio, A benefit inferred, and you know all things.

In the handling of the former of these, we shall consider Part. 1
these three things.

The matter, or thing given, an unction. The Recipients, to whom it is given,
you have. The Donor, by whom it is given, the Holy One.
1 The thing given as an Antidote or remedy against the poison of Antichristian
Doctrine, is an Unction; A Metaphorical and allusive expression. Annoynting most
properly is with oil, or else with Ointments, in which usually oil is the chief
ingredient; but metaphorically annoynting is with the Spirit, which is as oil
and ointment. Thus we find the Prophet saying, concerning himself literally,
and Christ mystically, The Spirit of Isa. 61. 1.
the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, to wit, with his
Spirit; more plainly the Apostle Peter, Acts 10. 48
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost; and St. Paul sufficiently
intimates it, when he says 2 Cor. 1. 21, 22
concerning Christians, God has anointed, and sealed us, and given us the
earnest of his Spirit in our hearts, the Spirit being as the earnest, so the
seal and the ointment: and accordingly the generality of Expositors do here
interpret the Spirit of God, with his gifts and graces to be this Unction. St.
Austine among many others is express, Aug. in Loc.
Unctio spiritualis ipse spiritus sanctus, the Spirit of God is the spiritual
unction. And accordingly this is one of the titles which are given to the Holy
Ghost in that Divine Hymn,

The Fountain, and the lively Spring, of joy celestial,
The Fire so bright, the Love so clear, and Unction spiritual.
That the fragrancy of this Metaphor may the better appear, give me leave to
break the Box, and let you see how fitly it is applicable to the blessed
Spirit; to this end it will not be amiss to confider the Properties, and the
Uses of oil and ointment.

1 There are three eminent properties of oil, which fully agree to the Holy
Ghost, Purity, Permanency, and Excellency*

1 Oil is of such a nature as that it will hardly mingle with other Liquors,
and whatsoever liquor you mix it with, it still is uppermost. In this a fit
emblem of the Spirit, especially in respect of its sanctifying grace, which
will not mix it self with any sin, and wherever it is, keeps corruption
under. Indeed wine and water will easily incorporate, but oil will not; natural
and acquired habits may consist with the predominancy of some lust, and
therefore it is, that acuteness of wit, strength of memory, depth of
judgment, readiness of elocution, skill in Arts and Sciences, and such like
excellencies are to be found in wicked men, but those Spiritual infused habits
of grace will not admit the dominion of any sin, so that though sin still
remain, yet it does not, cannot rule in the regenerate.

2 Oil is of a lasting durance, it is not as the water, evaporated by the
scorching heat, or congealed by the freezing cold; whereby is shadowed the
perpetuity of the Spirits renewing grace, notwithstanding the heat of
persecution, and the cold of temptation; The hypocrites fruit withers, when
the Sun scorcheth; like the standing Pool, he is dry in the heat of Summer, his
courage fails, grace decays; whereas the true Christian retains his
integrity in the worst adversity; when the Northern wind of Diabolical
temptation blows upon an Hypocrite, his zeal cools, his grace freezeth;
whereas sanctifying grace in the heart of the regenerate keeps its virtue.

3 Oil is of great worth, it is reckoned up as one of those choice blessings
which God conferred upon Israel, I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and
multiplied her Ezekiel. 16. 19
silver and gold; it was one of the precious things in Hezekiahs Treasury which
he showed to the King of Babylons messenger, The Silver, the Gold, the Spices,
and Esa* 39. 2
the precious Ointment, where it is observable, that besides it is numbered
among the precious things, it has also the Epithet of precious in particular
annexed to it* as also by Solomon, where he says, A good name is better than
precious ointment. But surely as there the Wise man preferres a good name, so
much more is the Spirit and his grace to be preferred before it, (...), says
the Greek Father; In very deed the holy Spirit is a precious thing; this Oil is
invaluable, this Cy^. catech. 16.
Jewel incomparable, and if the Soul which dwells in our bodies be more worth
than an whole world, this Spirit which dwells in our souls must needs be of
an infinite and transcendent value.

2 Besides these properties, there is a double use of oil, to wit, for eating,
and anointing, and the operation of oil in both these uses, aptly sets forth
the Spirits efficacy.

1 Oil, being eaten is sweet to the palate, and therefore Ezekiel. 16. 13
manna, for its pleasant taste, is compared to it; wholesome and nourishing to
the body, and therefore joined Numb 11. 8 1 King. 17. 12
with fine flour and honey; it was by meal and oil, that the widow was
preserved alive in famine: besides, it helps digestion of other meats, and
therefore it is eaten with raw herbs, and such like cool things; nay, more than
so, though a man have swallowed poison, being taken into the stomach, it will
expel it, and preserve the body from death. All which are true of the Spirits
graces, by which we are enabled to digest the word of God, not only its
promises, but threatenings, the poison of sin is expelled out of the heart, so
far as it shall not hurt us, our spiritual taste is delighted, yea, our soul is
nourished to eternal life.

2 But I must remember the Word in my text is unction, and therefore it is most
suitable to consider Oil, as it is of use in anointing, and thus the Parallel
will hold in several respects, some whereof are more general, and others more
special, both very significant to our present purpose.

1 The more general uses of anointing with Oil, are these six.

1 Anointing wounds with Oil heals them, upon which account the Samaritan
poured in, as wine for cleansing, so Luke 10. 25.
Oil for healing the wounded man; nothing more frequently used by Apothecaries
and Chirurgions, than oils, and ointments: This is the Spirits efficacy, who
is therefore called the comforter, viz. against all those disquietments, which
unsettle the mind, and wound the Conscience. The Prophet Isaiah, speaking in
the person Isa. 61. 3.
of Christ, says, The Spirit of the Lord was upon him, to heal the
brokenhearted; indeed, in regard of the wicked, he is a reprover, to wound,
but in regard of the weak, he is a comforter, to heal.

2 Anointing tumors with Oil softeneth them; to this, the Prophet alludeth,
where speaking of the diseases of Isa. 1. 6*
Isreal's Commonwealth, he says, They have not been mollified with ointment:
This is the Spirits operation, to soften the obdurate, and proud sinner, and
therefore when Almighty God promises to take away the stony-heart, and Ezekiel.
36. 26, 27
give an heart of flesh, he presently adds, I will put my Spirit within you.

3 Anointing the joints with oil suppleth them, whereby they are nimble and
active; for which cause it is, that Runners and Wrastlers, were used to anoint
themselves before hand: Thus does the Spirit by his graces, strengthen us with
all might, to run the way of Gods Commandments, Psalm. 51. 9
and to wrestle with our Corruptions. It is the prayer of David, Establish me
with thy free Spirit, whom he calls by that Epithet, no doubt, for this
reason, because it is the Spirits work to set us free from the setters of sin.
Upon the same account, he is called by the Prophet, the Spirit of strength,
and by the Apostle, the Spirit of Life, Isa 11. 2. Rom* 8. 2
in as much as he strengthens us in our Christian race, and quickens us to
spiritual performances, unctio spiritualis gratiae adjuvat infirmitatem
nostram, says the Latin Bern.
Father, the ointment of the Spirits grace helps the weakness of our flesh,
and the Greek Father aptly, we are enabled, not only to do, but to suffer,
(...), by the efficacy of the Holy Ghost. Cyr. Cat 16


4 Anointing the face with Oil, puts as it were a gloss and beauty on it; of
this the Psalmist takes notice, where Psalm. 104. 15 Ruth 3. 3
he says, Oil to cause the face to shine; Naomi bids Ruth, before she went
to Boaz, to anoint her self; and those virgins which were prepared for the
Persian King, did Esth. 2. 12
use Oil of myrrh, which has an abstersive virtue, getting wrinkles out of
the skin, and beautifying the face: so does the Spirit by his graces, put a
beauty upon the soul, whereby it becomes amiable in Gods eyes; Thou Cant. 1.
15
art fair (says Christ of his Spouse) which as it is true chiefly in regard of
his imputed, so secondarily, in regard of the Spirits imparted righteousness.
All the wrinkles of sin spots of the soul, are in part, and shall be fully
done away by this ointment, which can turn Ethiopians into Nazarites.

5 Anointing the body, especially the head with Oil, is a great refreshment,
in as much as it makes way for the emission of noxious vapors, and the free
passage of the Spirits. There are three qualities of oil, laevor, nitor, odor,
a smoothness to the touch, brightness to the sight, fragrancy to the smell,
and so gratifying the senses, it must needs cause delight to those who are
anointed with it. Upon this account, do doubt it was used in feasts and
banquets; so much David intimates, when he joyneth Psalm. 23. 5
anointing his head, with preparing his table; and our Savior, Mat. 6. 17
when he joyneth washing the face, and anointing the Head. To this Solomon
alludeth, when persuading Eccl. ^. 8
to a cheerful life he says, Let thy head want no ointment; and the Prophet
Amos, when describing the jollity of Amos 6. 6
those Epicures, he says, They anoint themselves with the chief ointments:
to which agrees that of wisdom, Wisd. 2. 7.
Come, let us fill our selves with wine and ointment. How fitly does this
represent the Spirits unction, which alone can rejoice and exhilarate the soul?
for this reason it is, that the Psalm. 45. 7
Holy Ghost is called the Oil of Gladness, and joy is called the Joy of the
Holy Ghost, and is reckoned up as Rom 14. 17 Gal 5. 22
one of the fruits of the Spirit; that joy which does not proceed from him, is
a worldly madness, not true joy; the heart cannot be really merry, till it is
anointed with the grace and comfort of the Spirit.

6 Lastly, and most suitably to the text in hand, Anointing the eyes clears
them, so much is intimated in the Counsel of Christ to the Laodicean Church,
anoint Rev. 3. 17
thine eyes with eie-salve, that thou may see: so does this spiritual
unction enable the mind to discern spiritual objects; and whereas other
ointments may help the dim sight, this opens the blind eyes; this is that
which is illustrated by the penetrating virtue of oil, when applied to any
part of the body, which is by opening the pores; what other is the Spirits
illumination, but a sacred penetration, by opening the understanding? To this
purpose is that allusion concerning Oil, that it feeds the Lamp, and so
maintains the light, which otherwise would go out, for which reason, Oil was
prepared for the Light of the Exodus 25. 6.
Sanctuary: Thus does the blessed Spirit, first cause (which Oil cannot do) and
then preserve a Divine light, in the Soul, to guide its feet into the way of
peace. We find in the Ancient Hieroglyphics, the Olive to have been an
emblem of Wisdom, true Wisdom is from above, and drops down from that Olive
tree, the sacred Spirit. In one word, as the Dove bringing an Olive Branch to
Noah, assured him that the waters were abated; So the Spirit bringing an
Olive Branch of peace to the Soul, enableth it to know, that the waters of Gods
wrath are abated, than which, no knowledge more desirable.

2 The more special use of anointing with Oil, is for the consecration, or
setting persons apart for some eminent office; more particularly, there were
three Offices to which men were with Oil anointed, to wit, that of a King, a
Priest, and a Prophet. We read in the Ceremonial Exodus 29. 7
Law, of an Oil, which by Gods direction, was first to be made, and then
poured on Aaron, and his Sons the Priests; it was the command of God to Samuel,
that he 1 Samuel* 15. 1
should take an horn of Oil, and anoint David King, The like Ceremony we
find used in Solomon's inauguration, 1 King. 19. 16.
God bid Elijah, to anoint Elisha the Son of Shaphat to be Prophet in his
room. To this practice Calvin conceives that Calv. in loc.
the Apostle alludeth in this place; Indeed, by this unction it is, that we
are consecrated Kings, to captivate our lusts, moderate our Passions, and order
our conversations; Priests, to keep our selves unspotted of the World, to
sacrifize our bestiallusts, and to offer up prayers and praises to God;
finally* (and most congruously, to our Apostles scope) Prophets, to understand
in some measure the spiritual mysteries of salvation.

What now remains for the closing of this particular, but that we look upon
this word Unction, as a word of Security, of Humility, of Dignity, of Hilarity,
of Faelicity, and of Duty?

It is a word

1 Of Security. Indeed, that is the design of our Apostle, to point out to us,
what is our best safeguard against the blows, refuge from the storm, and
antidote against the poison, especially, of Heretics and heresies, so much the
adversative particle, But, intimates, that this Unction is opposed as a
preservative against heresy. That Promise of God to his People, concerning the
Assyrian, his burden shall be taken from thy shoulder, and his yoke from Isa.
10. 27
off thy neck, because of the anointing, is no less true of this Unction, by
which our necks are freed from the yoke of destroying errors. Warriors of
Old, that they might make their Armor glister, and render themselves
formidable to their enemies, used to anoint it with Oil, to this the Prophet
alludeth, where he says, Arise you Princes, and anoint the shield. Lo Isa.
21. 5*
here an anointing, which is our shield, whereby we become terrible to Satan
and his instruments; so that in vain do Antichrists set themselves against
those who are guarded with this unction.

2 Of humility, letting us see what we are, in, and of ourselves, how hard our
hearts, dead our affections, blind our uderstandings, how destitute of grace
and peace, and joy, yea, all heavenly good; else what need were there of this
Unction, to soften, enlighten, and inliven us? The truthis, as the box has no
fragrancy in it self, but what it receives from the Ointment that is in it, no
more have we any excellency, but what we receive from the Spirit; Abraham's
faith, Solomon's Wisdom, Jobs Patience, David's Zeal, Noah's Obedience, were all
but as so many drops of this Oil; and therefore let us learn to be vile in
our own eyes, taking nothing to our selves, but ignorance, and f^lly, and
wickedness.

3 Of dignity. Glorious things are spoken of believers by the Apostle Peter,
where he says, They are a chosen Generation, 1 Pet. 2. 9
a Royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, and these privileges
they partake of by virtue of this unction. Greater honor there cannot be,
than those of Royalty and Priesthood; Kings are honorable, and Priests are
venerable, Kings are the greatest of men, Priests are men of God; such honor
have all they to whom this sacred Unction is given. Wicked men have low
thoughts of believers, it is because they perceive not this Unction; but it
matters not to be despicable in the worlds, whilst we are honorable in Gods
eyes.

4 Of Hilarity. Indeed this Oil is called by the Psalmist, The Oil of
gladness, in as much as it fills the heart with spiritual joy. There is as
Bellarmine well observes, an Oil of Sadness, which is used at Funerals, Bell.
cone. 31.
and there is an Oil of gladness, which is used at Festivals, and to this is
the Spirit compared; none are more cheerful in all conditions, than the
anointed ones; this oil so mitigateth the asperity of affliction, that those
who have it are exceeding joyful in all their tribulations, in which respect
St. Jerome says excellently, Multi vident Bernard.
crucem nostram, sed non vident unctionem nostram, Many see our affliction, but
not our unction, our troubles, but not our comforts, our tribulation, but not
our consolation, which far exceeds them.

5 Of Felicity. Indeed as the annoynting of David by Samuel assured him of the
possession of the Crown and Kingdom in due time, so does this Unction ascertain
all believers of the Kingdom, which was prepared for them from the beginning of
the world; to this purpose it is, that the Spirit which here is called the
Unction, is elsewhere by St. Paul styled the earnest of our inheritance, and as
Ephesians. 1. 13.
receiving the earnest entituleth to the inheritance, so does the receiving of
the Spirit, Thus by what we have, we conclude what we shall have, and the
participation of the Unction gives a firm expectance of the Coronation.

6 Of Duty, which lies in two things.

1 Making use of this Unction for those choice and excellent ends to which it
is designed. It is not the ointment in the bon, but applied to the part, which
becomes effectual, what will the most precious unguent avail him that has it,
but does not use it? oh therefore Christians be wise to improve this Unction to
the best advantage. When then at any time we feel our Consciences wounded, our
spirits dejected, have recourse to this unction for benefit and comfort, if, as
oh how often, thou perceivest in thy self an bardnesse, and dullness, rendering
thee unprofitable under the means of grace, and unfit for holy services, make
use of this Unction to soften and quicken thee.

2 Walking worthy of, and answerably to this Unction. It is an undoubted truth,
where much is received, much is expected, the greater helps are afforded, the
greater performances are required; God looks for more from them to whom he
has given his written word, than from those who have only the light of Nature,
and he looks for yet far more from them to whom he gives an internal
Unction, than those who have only an external Revelation, and therefore as St.
Paul exhorts the Thessalonians, to walk worthy of their 1 These. 4. 1
high and heavenly calling, so let me exhort Christians, to walk worthy of this
high and heavenly Unction; and so much for the matter of the gift; pass we on
to

2 The Recipients of this gift, in the pronoun You, not only we Apostles, but
you Christians, and so this appears to be a privilege belonging to all that
are effectually called to Christianity. It is St. Paul's universal negative, If
any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is Rom, 8. 9.
none of his, in which is included that universal Affirmative, All that are
Christ's have his spirit.

To open this briefly, you must distinguish,

1 Between the miraculous and the gracious Unction; some Expositors conceive
our Apostle here referres to that Unction of the Apostles in the day of
Pentecost with extraordinary gifts, whereby the truth of Evangelical Doctrine
was confirmed: but had this been his meaning, he should rather have said, we
have an Unction; for though the sent and perfume of that Unction filled the
whole Church, and so it was for the benefit of all Christians, establishing
them in the faith, yet the oil it self was poured upon the Apostles, and
therefore that sense of that phrase seems much strained, You have an Unction,
that is, we have an unction for your good. It is true. that in the Primitive
times the miraculous Unction was not only conferred upon the Apostles, but upon
many Christians, but yet since our Apostle affirms it indefinitely of those
to whom he wrote, I rather conceive that here he intends that Unction of
illuminating and sanctifiing grace, which every Christian is partaker of, and
by which he is enabled to know, and believe to salvation* for though every
believer is not anointed with the Holy Ghost and power, yet he is anointed
with the Holy Ghost and grace.

2 Between the possession and the manifestation of this Unction; it is one
thing to have it, and another to know we have it; there may be a presence of
the Spirit, and yet not a sense of that presence; a man may have a treasure in
his field, and not know it; all Christians have this Unction from their first
conversion, though perhaps they are not presently apprehensive of its virtue
and operation.

3 Between the droppings, and the pourings out of this unction; it is one thing
to have the Spirit, and another to be filled with the Spirit. This Unction is
variously distributed, to some in a greater, to others, in a lesser, but to all
Christians in some measure; it is not for every Christian like St. Stephen, to
be filled with the Holy Ghost, and Acts 6. 8
yet there is no Christian of whom it can be said, as St. Jude of those false
teachers, not having the Spirit. Jude 19.


To wind it up, if we pretend to Christianity, where is our Unction? where are
the virtues and efficacies of our Unction? The Holy Ghost who is here called an
Unction, is elsewhere compared to a seal, and as men use to set their seals on
their own wares, so does God his Spirit upon them that are his. Oh let this be
the chief of our desires and endeavors, that God would make us his sealed, his
anointed ones, and whilst others count it their happiness when they can say,
we have Lands, and Houses, and riches* we have Swords, and Scepters, and
Robes; we have Dainties, and Music, and all sort of delights; let us esteem it
our bliss, and make it the height of our ambition to say, we have an unction;
and so much for that.

3* The last particular remaining to be discussed in this General, is the Donor
of this gift, namely the holy one. By which some understand the third Person in
the sacred Trinity, to whom this character so fitly agrees, that he is usually
set forth by this title, the Holy Ghost; but the Scripture phrase is not
annoynting from, but with the Holy Ghost, by which is intimated, that the Holy
Ghost is the unguent itself, and therefore it is more rational to understand
(...) Interpretor de Christ^. Dan. Grot.
by the Holy one, Christ, from whom it is we have the unction of his Spirit;
so that in the handling of this part, I shall first give you an account how
fitly and fully it agrees to Christ, and then reflect upon the unction, how
justly it is affirmed to be from Christ.

1 It would not be passed by, that the Apostle mentioning Christ, describes
him by holiness, it is the title by which he characterizeth himself in the
beginning of his Epistle to the Church of Philadelphia, These things says
Revel. 3. 7
he that is holy; and that he spoke no more than truth of himself, you may hear
the same from the mouth of his, and our grand Adversary the Devil, I know thee
who thot^ art, the holy one of God. Our Apostle here sets it down Mark 1. 24
very emphatically, The Holy one, that is, singularly, eminently, perfectly
holy, or in Daniels phrase, the holy of holies, which our Translators fitly
render by the superlative Dan. 9. 24
degree, the most holy one; look, as a little before the Devil is called The
wicked one, because he is extremely wicked, so Christ is called the Holy one,
as being transcendently holy.

It is that which is true of Christ in reference to both his Natures, as God,
and as Man.

1 Holiness is the inseparable property of a Deity, it is as it were the
excellency and perfection of the Godhead, and Crown of all the Attributes; now
Christ is Gods own Son, to whom he communicates himself, and so this
holiness. The Angels in Isaiah, and the Beasts in the Revelation, Isa. 6. 3
Revel. 4. 5 Vide Damasc. de Orth^d. fide. l. 3. c. 10
giving glory to God, three times iterate, Holy, Holy, Holy; with reference, as
some conceive, to all the three Persons, Holy Father, Holy Son, and Holy
Spirit, and thus Christ, as God, is holy in his Nature, in his Decrees, in his
Word and Works, and eternally holy in all he is and wills, he says and does,
according to that of the Psalmist, He is holy in all his works. Psalm 141. 17


2 As man, he is the holy one, and that both in respect of his conception, and
conversation.

1 His conception was holy, because of the Holy Ghost, who over-shadowed the
Virgin, purifying that part of her substance of which Christ was born, whereby
he was free from all that corruption which is by Adam propagated to his
posterity. To this probably referrs that phrase, the holy child Jesus, and
certainly that of the Angel to Acts 4. 23.
the Virgin, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest
shall over-shadow thee, therefore the holy Luke 1. 35
thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. True it is,
Christ took upon him the reality of frail flesh, but only the likeness of
sinful flesh, and though he assumed our natural, yet not our vicious defects.

2 His conversation was holy. Indeed how could any impure stream flow from so
pure a spring? his nature being holy, his life could not be unholy, and there
being an exact integrity in the one, there must needs be a spotless innocence
in the other; on the one hand he was to be a pattern of holiness, after whose
copy all Christians are to write, good reason it should be exact without the
least blot; on the other hand, he was to be a sacrifice for sin, which he could
not have been, if he had not been without sin, and therefore it behoved him to
fulfill all righteousness, by a full conformity to that exact rule of Gods Law.

Nor is he only Holy, but the Holy one, in respect of both his Natures.

1 In regard of his Divine Nature, in as much as he is essentially, infinitely,
originally, and immutably Holy; essentially, because his holiness is not an
accident to him, but his very essence; infinitely, because his holiness is not
only without imperfection, but limitation, originally, because his holiness is
from himself, and he is the cause of all holiness in the Creature; immutably,
because it is altogether impossible he should cease to be holy, for then he
must cease to be 1 Samuel 2. 6
God; well might Hannah say, None holy as the Lord; and indeed this phrase is
most properly verified of him in this regard; for as Aristotle, though he call
other things good, yet when he speaks of the chief good, he calls it by way
of eminency (...), The Good; so though the Creature may be said to be holy,
yet (...) The holy one, most properly belongs to God, though yet

Secondarily, and in a comparative sense, not only with all other men, but
Angels, Christ in respect of his Humane nature is the Holy one, and that upon a
double account.

The one, because the holiness of his Humane nature far surpasses that
which is in any other creature, and that in as much as it was presently to be
united with the Godhead, and if some measure of holiness be required in all
that approach God, how unmeasurable and perfect must be that holiness of
Christ's Humane nature, which is united with God, and in whom the fullness of
the Godhead dwells bodily?

The other, because, whereas all other Creatures have holiness only for
themselves, and cannot convey it to others, Aug. adv. Pelag.
in which respect St. Austine says of holy Parents, they beget their children,
Non e principiis novitatis, sed e reliquiis vetustatis, not from the principles
of the new man, but the remainders of the old man, and so cannot communicate
their holiness to their children; Christ is a Son of righteousness, imparting
holiness to his Church; a root of holiness (as the first Adam was of
wickedness) giving the sap of grace to all his branches, in which regard St.
Paul says expressly, he is made to us of God sanctification.

O then let us learn to magnify Christ in and for his holiness. That phrase
in Moses his Hymn, Who is like to thee O Lord, glorious in holiness, what does
it intimate, but that holiness calls for glory and praise? Worthy then is he
who is the holy one to be honored and adored by us. That expression of the
Psalmist, Holy and reverent is his name, plainly teaches us, that sanctity
calls for reverence; oh let us reverence the Person, and hallow the name of
Christ, because he is the holy one; what the Romanists do parasitically to the
Pope, Christ's pretended Vicar, calling him superlatively, Most Holy Father, and
abstractively, his Holiness, that we need not fear to do Religiously to
Christ himself.

And since we call our selves Christians, oh let us account our selves engaged
to the study and exercise of holiness; it is St. Peter's reasoning, since he
which has 1 Pet. 1. 15
called you is holy; nor is the argument less valid, He by whose name you are
called, is holy, be you holy in all manner of conversation, because it is
written, Be you holy for I am holy. How unsuitable are unholy members to an
holy head? and therefore how abominable must profane Christians be to this
Holy Jesus? certainly the Holy one is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity (to
wit, without fury) in any, and much less in his own followers; and Levit. 10. 3
as Moses says, God will be sanctified in those who draw nigh to him, so let
me tell you, Christ will be sanctified by those who profess his name, and
therefore either disclaim Christianity, or embrace sanctity, that you may be in
some measure like him, who is here styled, The Holy one.

2 Having given you this view of the title by which Christ is called, be
pleased now to look upon this person so called, as he is affirmed to be the
donor of the Unction, for so the text runs, You have an unction from the holy
one, that is, from Christ.

It is that which is true of Christ in a double causality. 1 Meritorious, in as
much as he was at the cost to purchase this unction, and that at no less a
rate than his own blood; the Apostle Paul speaking of Christ says, not only
that in him we have redemption through his blood; but a little after, in whom
you were s^aled with Ephesians. 1. 9, 10
that holy Spirit of promise, the donation of the Spirit being one of those
precious benefits which Christ's death has procured for us.

2 Efficient, in as much as having on the Cross purchased this Unction for us,
he rose from the grave, and went up into Heaven, for this cause among others,
that he might actually confer it on us. It is said, there was in Rome, at the
day of Christ's birth, a Fountain of Oil which sprang forth; sure I am* this
Unction of the Spirit is given to Christ, not only for himself, but his Church;
and as the Ointment trickled down from Aarons head to Psalm. 133. 3
the very skirts of his garment, so the oil of the Spirit is diffused from
Christ to all his members. Those two Olive branches mentioned by the Prophet
Zachary, are Zach. 4. 12
by some expounded of Christ his two Natures, and of them it is said, they
empty the golden oil out of themselves, to note that communicative influence
from Christ to the Christian, whereby he partaketh of this unction. It Colos.
1. 17
pleased the Father (says the Apostle) that in him should all fullness dwell,
not only plenitudo abundantiae, but redundantiae, vasis, but fontis, an
abundant fullness, as in a vessel filled up to the brim, but a redundant
fullness, as in a fountain, whose streams make glad the City of God. Thus, as
it is said Psalm. 68. 20
in the Psalms, he received gifts, so in the Epistle, he gave gifts,
intimating, that he received gifts, not only for himself, Ephesians. 4. 10
but his Church; that as he received from his Father the Spirit without
measure, so we might receive from him the Spirit by measure; no wonder if the
Spirit be called in Scripture, the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ
Jesus, and the Spirit of the Lord.

If any shall ask why the Apostle did not say, you have an unction from him, or
from Christ, but from the 2 Cor. 3. 17 Phil. 1. 19 Romans 8. 9
Holy one; the answer may probably be returned, that it is to intimate the
nature of this unction, which is an holy ointment, and for that end it is
chiefly given by Christ, namely for the renewing and sanctifying of our
natures; that as the ointment which God appointed to be made by Moses did
sanctify the things, and persons, which were anointed with it, so does this
unction confer holiness on those to whom it is given, upon which account it is
called, the Spirit of holiness; and thus it is universally given to all
believers, for the preserving them, both from sin, and error.

To end this point, and so this discourse. You who are Christians only in name,
and want this Unction; you who are Christians indeed, and would have this
Unction more abundantly, learn whither to repair for it. It is Exo. 30. 26. 29
our Saviors advice to the Laodicean Church, and in her to all Christians, I
counsel thee to buy of me, this choice commodity is no where else to be had,
and though it cost him dear, yet he sells it us cheap, our buying is only
begging, our paying praying; and therefore acknowledging, as all our comfort to
be in him, so grace to be from him, let us continually depend on him, earnestly
seek to him, that as he has shed his blood for us, so he would shed his Spirit
on us.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 20. But ye have an unction from the holy One, and ye know all
things.
THE Christian Religion, as it imposes difficult precepts, so it proposes
precious pr^mises, and though it put the Professors of it upon frequent
dangers, yet it withal assures them of glorious privileges. Among those many
Promises and Privileges, none of more special concernment than this of the
Holy Unction, the Spirits Donation by which we are enabled to all duty, and
confirmed against all perils. There are two things especially, by which the
Christian Church, and her members are endangered, namely, violent Persecutions,
and virulent Heresies, these corrupt our minds, those perplex our hearts,
these cheat us of, those affright us out of truth; but this spiritual Unction
is both our consolation and illumination, the latter of which it is that our
Apostle acquaints us with in the Text, But you have, etc.

The second part of this verse, is that which I am now to handle, namely,
Beneficii illatio, the Benefit conferred on all true Christians, by virtue of
this Unction, as it is set down in those words, And you know all things. For
the fuller discussion whereof, be pleased to consider it both absolutely and
relatively, inclusively and exclusively; by the one we shall see the Nature of
the benefit, wherein it consists, how far it reaches, and by the other, its
Original whence it flows, and on what it depends, namely, the Holy unction.

1 Begin we with the absolute consideration of the benefit, and inquire what
is involved in this, You know all things. There is some little difference in
the reading of one word in this clause, which would not be omitted, Sir.
The Syriack reads it as if it were (...), you know all men, and so the benefit
here intended, is that which is called by S. Paul, discerning of spirits,
(...), says Theophilact, 1 Cor 12. 10. Vide Theoph. ibid.
(...), that is, to know who is spiritual, and who is not, who is a Prophet,
and who is a deceiver; nor is this reading here unsuitable* because the Apostle
just before speaks of Antichrists, between whom and the Orthodox S. John
might look upon the Christians, to whom he wrote, as able to judge. Now this
gift in the primitive times was double, The one more special, only conferred
by the Spirits extraordinary unction upon some eminent persons, whereby they
were able to dive into the very hearts of men, and could positively conclude
them (as the Apostle Peter did Simon Magus) Act. 8. ^3
to be in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, notwithstanding their
fair professions, and specious pretenses. The other more general, and to which
all Christians by virtue of this unction were enabled, namely, to know all men
by their fruits, according to that rule our Savior gives concerning false
Teachers, who being Mat 7. 16.
ravenous Wolves, came in sheeps clothing, by their fruits, (that is, by their
works and conversation) or rather by their fruits, (that is, by their doctrins
and positions) you shall know them. A gift, which if every Christian might not
in some measure attain to, that counsel of trying the spirits, which our
Apostle gives in this very Epistle, would be in vain.

But the Greek Lection is our best rule, which is (...), and accordingly our
English version is most genuine, you know all things; for the fuller opening of
which, take notice of the extent of the Object, All things, and the intent of
the Act, You know.

1 Begin we with the extent of the object, and this is set down in a word of
the utmost latitude, all things, but yet a limitation must be annexed to this
latitude, and this universal particle restrained. It is the observation of a
Dr. Done.
Learned Divine, that God admits into his own names and attributes, that
addition of universality, omne, as though he would especially be known by
that; thus he is said to be omnipresent, omnisussicient, omnipotent, and
omniscient; and indeed as an ubiquitary existence, illimited fullness, infinite
power; so an universal knowledge is reciprocal with the Deity, and therefore
incommunicable to any creature, so that though there be not expressed, yet it
must be supplied, a qualifying word. They are quaedam omnia, some certain all
things, which Christians do know by virtue of this unction.

More particularly, there is a threefold limitation of this all things.

1 All divine things. We are not to imagine that this unction makes all
Christians acquainted with the secrets of Nature, Mysteries of Trades, Axioms
of Arts, Idioms of Languages, for then every Christian should be an Orator,
Philosopher, Artificer, expert in all manner of knowledge. Indeed, if the
Spirit pleased, he could inspire such a knowledge into the minds of believers,
and we find particular instances of those to whom he has extraordinarily
given knowledge in humane things, when it has been in subserviency to some
divine ends. So Bezaleel is said to be filled with the Spirit, and skilled to
do Exodus 31. 3
the work of the Sanctuary, thus the illiterate fishermen were furnished with
the gift of tongues, to speak to the people in their several Languages, the
mysteries of the Gospel; but yet this is not the Spirits ordinary way, who
leaves humane knowledge to the acquisition of humane industry, and
consequently it is only the knowledge of divine things, which is here meant.

2 All divine things revealed. That speech of Moses, secret things belong to
God, revealed things to us and to our Deuteronomy. 29. 29
children, plainly intimates, that there are some things which God in wisdom
keeps hid from the sons of men; and as he in Plutarch, answered the man
which asked him, why his basket was covered? because he should not look into
it; so has God therefore concealed those things, that we should not pry into
them. It was the fault of our first Parents, that they desired to know more
than God would have them; as we do not, so we must not desire to know hidden
mysteries. Indeed, the Psalmists expression is, The secret of the Lord is with
them that Psalm. 2^* ^3
fear him, but what that secret is, appears in the very next verse, he will
show them his Covenant, which is revealed in his word, and is only secret,
because hid from them that perish. True it is, where this unction is
extraordinarily conferred upon Prophets and Apostles, they have been so
inspired, as to discern, and accordingly to utter strange things, such as were
to come to pass many ages after, but still the ordinary influence of this
unction enableth only to know those things which God has revealed in his word.

3 All Divine things revealed, that are necessary to be known, Omnia
necessaria cognoscendis antichristis, et cavendis illorum insidiis, so Beza and
Grotius, All things necessary Beza in loc. Grot. in loc.
for discovering these Antichrists, and avoiding their snares; Omnia quae ad
salutem pertinent* so Bernard and Ferus, All things which are necessary to
salvation. We are Fer. in loc. Bern. Sermon. 2. de pentecost.
not to imagine, that this unction inlightneth every Christian to understand
the whole Scripture, so far as to interpret its dark sentences, aenigmatical
phrases, abstruse prophecies; but ^o far as is needful in order to preserve us
from damnable Heresies, and the attaining of eternal salvation, this Unction
enableth to apprehend the will of God, revealed in his word.

With these limitations, we may very well enlarge the all things, to God,
Christ, our Selves, Sin, Satan, the Law, the Gospel, Grace, and Glory;
Christians know God his unity and Trinity, his Mercy and Faithfulness, Power
and Wisdom, Justice and Goodness; they know Christ, his Person, his Nature,
his Offices, his Benefits, and that Love of his, which passes knowledge; they
know themselves, how Wretched, and Miserable, Poor, Blind, and Naked; they
know the sinfulness of sin, the devices of Satan, the deceitfulness of their
own hearts; they know what it is God requires of them, and what he has
promised to them; they know the things that are freely given them of God, and
the things that are mercifully prepared for them; in a word, whatever things
pertain to Life and Godliness, ^o Glory and Happiness, are in some measure
made known to them; and thus you have a short account of the large extent of
this object, pass we on to the

2 Intent of the act, you know. Now that knowledge which this unction effects
in the minds of believers, has these three properties, it is

1 Certain and establishing, it is not a conjectural opinion, but a Confident
persuasion, which Christians have of divine truths, Non levi quadam et
perfunctoria, sed solid a cognitione rerum imb^ti est is, so Grotius glosseth;
it is not a G^^t. in los.
slight, and perfunctory, but a solid and evident knowledge; so that neither
the subtilties of Antichristian Teachers, nor the violences of Antichristian
persecutours, can withdraw such an one from the truth he has embraced. We
believe, and are sure, (says S. Peter, in the name of himself, and the rest of
the Disciples) That thou art that Joh. 6. 69.
Christ the son of the living God. Indeed there are different degrees of this
certainty, according to the different dispensation of this unction, but every
one who is taught of God, and anointed with the Holy Ghost, has some measure
of certainty, as to fundamental verities: when perhaps his head is too weak to
grapple with some kind of heretical Arguments, yet his heart is strongly
resolved to hold fast the Evangelical Doctrines, and though he cannot dispute,
yet he will believe; and though they be things not seen by sense or reason,
yet his faith being Heb. 11. 1.
built on a divine Testimony, makes them clear and evident, so as he dares
venture his soul on them.

2 Savoury and relishing. He that has this unction, so knows, as to taste a
sweetness and excellency in divine things, insomuch that with St. Paul, he
accounts all other things as dung and loss in comparison of the excellency of
this knowledge. There is a great deal of difference between that knowledge a
man has of Countries, by a map* and that which he attaineth to by travels. It
is one thing for a man to hear a discourse of the beauty of Colors, or the
sweetness of honey, and another for a man to see the one, and taste the other.
Oh taste and see (says the Psalmist) that the Lord is Good; so does every
Christian, Psalm. 34. 6
his knowledge in Divine things is like the eye to colors, and the taste to
meats; he so sees, as to be enamoured with the beauty, he so tastes, as to
be well pleased with the sweetness of them. The needle which is tou^hed with
the loadstone, does not more naturally move toward the pole, than a soul
touched with the blessed Spirit moves toward heavenly objects. In one word,
this knowledge, like the Light, not of the Moon, but Sun is ever attended with
heat, and so does not only inlighten the mind, but inliven and inflame the
affections.

3 Operative and transforming. We all (says the Apostle) with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image;
in other sciences 2 Cor. 3. 18.
a man may be exact at the theory, and unskilful in the practick, but in
Divinity, that only is the right knowledge, which mouldeth a man into the
frame of what he knows. We read of Jacob, that upon the agreement between
him and Laban, He took rods of green poplar, and the hasel, and chesnut-tree,
and peeled white strakes in them, and made the white appear that Genesis 30. 37,
38, 39.
was in the rods, and set them before the flocks, in the gutter, in the
watering troughs, when the flock came to drink, and conceiving before the rods,
they brought forth ring-striked, speckled and spotted; the like efficacy, has
a true sight and apprehension of Evangelical truths upon every Christian,
inabling him to turn words into works, and show forth a conformity to them in
his life; he knows God and Christ, so as to trust in, and become like to
them; the precepts, so as to observe and obey them; sin and heresies, so as to
abandon and abhor them; for which cause perhaps it is that the Gospel is called
a doctrine according to godliness, not only because it teaches godliness, but
being rightly known, it enableth men to live godly. E^napi^^, in the Life of
Porphiry, speaking of his master Longinus, says, that he was (...)* a living
library, a walking study; so is the anointed Christian, having digested the
sense of Scripture into vital blood, and commenting upon Scriptural Doctrine by
a practical conversation.

To shut up this first consideration in a double meditation.

1 How glorious a privilege is it to be a Christian, and partake of the
Unction; what is more valued by a rational creature than knowledge? and by
virtue of this unction we attain the knowledge of all things; I mean those all
things which are the only things, and without which he that has the tongue of
men and Angels, and has the exactest insight into Arts and Sciences, may yet
be said to know nothing, nothing of that which he ought chiefly to know, and
which every true Christian in some measure attaineth to. How clear and
quick-sighted is a spiritual enlightened eye? it sees not only things that
are near, but a far off, present, but future, things below, but above, looking
even within the veil, into the Holy of Holies. The Christian knows those
things which others are mere strangers to, he knows those things he did
before, after another and a better manner. That blasphemous expression of the
Familists, that a Christian is Deified, may in some sense receive a fair
construction, whilst every Christian has a kind of omnipotency and
omnisciency, the Phil. 4. 13.
former is by St. Paul asserted of himself, I can do all things, to wit,
through Christ that strengthens me, and the other is here affirmed by S. John
of the Christians, You know all things, to wit, having received the unction.

2 How great will the capacity of our knowledge be when we come to Heaven?
what a surpassing brightness shall then encompasse our souls, when we shall
see all truth in him who is truth it self? That phrase of St. Paul, We know in
part, seems directly opposite to 1 Cor. 13. 9
this of St. John, You know all things, but yet they are easiy reconciled, by
observing St. Paul's scope in that place, which is to compare our knowledge for
the present, with that which we shall have hereafter; in reference to which the
largest measure of knowledge we attain here is but a narrow scantling; the
knowledge we have here is an integral knowledge, extending it self to all
things necessary, as a child is an integral man, having all the faculties and
members of a man, and therefore truly says our Apostle, You know all things;
but yet with all it is a gradual knowledge, rising by degrees, as a child
grows stronger and taller, and is so imperfect, that in comparison of that
knowledge we hope for, justly said St. Paul, We know in part; indeed our
present knowledge is but sci^tilla futur^ lucis, a spark to that flame, a drop
to that flood, a beam to that splendour we shall then enjoy; so that though in
it self it be an extensive, yet in this respect it is a defective knowledge
which we now attain; Then, and not till then, it is that we shall know all
things which a rational creature is capable of, we shall swim in a vast Ocean
of divine knowledge, we shall be surrounded with such a glorious Light,
whereby we shall exactly, perfectly know what ever may conduce to make us
happy; Oh! how few are the all things we see now, in respect of the all things
we shall behold then? how many things are now hid from us, which shall then
be discovered to us? and surely that little taste we have now of divine
knowledge, cannot but make us long for that state wherein we shall have our
full draught.

2 Having dispatched the absolute, pass we on to the relative consideration of
this benefit, as it is an effect of that unction mentioned in the former
clause, and that such an effect, as can flow from no other cause, so that the
affirmation intends a negation, and when it is said, you have an unction, and
know all things, it* implies, that without this unction you cannot know any
thing, to wit, of those things, and with that knowledge which is here intended,
and has already been unfolded.

Indeed, as to corporeal sight, there are among others two things especially
required, to wit, an eye within, and a Light without, and therefore if either
adest lumen, et desunt oculi, light be present, but the visive faculty absent,
or adsunt oculi, et deest lumen, the visive faculty be present, but the light
absent, there can be no sight: so is there required to spiritual knowledge, an
external revelation, and an internal illumination, the one whereof sets the
object before us, and the other elevateth the understanding within us, and both
of those are from this unction.

1 By the extraordinary unction of the Holy Ghost, the Apostles were inspired
to reveal, both by their Tongues and pens, Evangelical Doctrine, and had there
not been this Revelation of it, we could never have known it. It is not once,
but often that the Gospel is called, a mystery, yea, says S. Paul, without
controversy it is a great mystery. Now a mystery, as S. Chrysostom well
observes, is (...), something unutterable, Chrysostom in 1^ Cor. Hom. 7.
admirable, and unconceivable, so that it could never have been found out by
us, had it not been made known to us from above. As for Humane and Natural
things Reason is conversant about them, and yet ever in these it is many times
nonplus'd, as being not able to fathom the depth of them; but as to Divine
things, Reason is not only dim, but blind. Indeed, there are (...), some
common Principles of Divinity, and Morality, Religion, and Honesty, still
remaining in our Nature, but Evangelical verities, are such as Reason could
never have prompted to us, so that what our Savior said to Peter concerning
the particular Article of his Matthew. 16. 17
being the Son of the living God, flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee,
may be asserted of all the Doctrins of the Gospel, they are such as Natural
reason could never have revealed to us. True it is, reason, that Candle of the
Lord, as Solomon calls it, affords so much light, even to Pagans, as will
render them inexcusable, since their not walking according to Reasons dictates
shall be Prove. 20. 27
their condemnation, but it is Christ, The Sun of Righteousness, as Malachy
calls him, who gives us that light, Mal. 4. 2
by following of which, we may attain salvation, for no man knows the Father
(whom to know is eternal life) Matthew. 11. 27
but the Son, and him to whom the Son reveals him. But this is that truth,
which is agreed to on all hands, even Pelagians, and Socinians, acknowledging
the necessity of Divine Revelation in order to the acquisition of Happiness.

Be pleased therefore to know further, that by the ordinary unction of the
Spirit, which is conferred on every Christian in some degree or other; there is
a spiritual illumination of the mind, whereby Natural Reason is elevated to a
right apprehension of Evangelical doctrines, and this is no less needful than
the former; to which purpose is that gloss of Calvin upon the Text, Non acumine
Calv. in loc.
proprii sensus recte sapiunt homines, sed illuminatione Spiritus. It is not by
the sharpness of our own understanding, but by the inlightning of the Spirit,
that we savor divine things.

To this Truth S. Paul gives a most clear and full evidence, where he says
in express words, But the natural 1 Cor. 2. 14
man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishness
unto him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned;
where the chief question to be resolved in order to the genuine Interpretation
of the words, is, who is the (...), Natural man, concerning whom this is said,
that he receives not, and cannot know the things of the Spirit of God.

Some affirm the Natural man to be the weak believer, but how weakly, will
appear, if we observe the opposition of (...), which is not to (...), one who
is perfect, but (...), every one who is spiritual, which though it be more
eminently true of the strong, yet it is verified of every true Christian, he
is one who has not received the spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is
of God, and so is among the number of the we Verse. 12
mentioned in the twelfth verse of that Chapter. And which fully clears it,
that the (...) here cannot be the weak Christian, is, that the things of the
Spirit are said to be foolishness to him, which cannot be affirmed of any
true Christian, though never so weak, who has Learned to adore and admire
those divine mysteries, which he cannot apprehend; Suitable hereunto it is,
that the Apostle in the eighteenth verse of the former Chapter, 1 Cor. 1. 18
says, The Preaching of the Cross is foolishness, (...), to them that
perish, whereas the weakest Christian is among the number of the (...) in the
latter clause of that verse, them who are saved, to whom therefore it is
impossible that the things of the Spirit should be foolishness.

Others there are who by (...) understand the man who is altogether destitute
of the helps of ingenuous education, and Divine Revelation, whereas our Apostle
plainly tells us in the former chapter, that they were the wise Disputers of
the World, to whom Evangelical doctrine (when revealed) did seem no other than
folly, and therefore when Paul Preached at Athens, a place of literature and
Act. 17. 18.
Knowledge, Arts and Sciences, the cry of those Sophies is, what will this
babbler say?

Once again, Some there are who interpret this (...), to be one who is given
to sensual lusts, and so has his Reason clouded by carnal affections; but it
should then have been (...) not (...), between which Suidas in voce (...)
Issid. P^lus. l. 4. ep. 127.
Suidas and Isidore Peleusiota (from whom probably the other borrowed it) make
this distinction, that the Carnal man is one who serves the flesh, and
suffers himself to be guided by his corrupt affections, and the natural, or
animal man, one who builds upon humane Reason, thinking by his ra^i^cinations,
disputations, and syllogismes, to find out what is just and profitable, not
craving, or admitting the influence of the Spirit.

The (...) then here mentioned, is every man who (though otherwise well
furnished with intellectuals and morals, having all those improvements of
Reason which all kind of Philosophy can afford him) is yet altogether
destitute of the inlightening and renewing grace of the Holy Spirit; nor is
this my distinction, but St. Judes, who in the Characters he gives of those
false Teachers, puts these two together, (...), explaining the former by the
latter, and letting us see that all such who have not the Spirit are mere
Natural men.

Of this Natural man St. Paul plainly and positively asserteth, he receives
not the things of the Spirit of God, indeed there are (...) some things of God,
which a natural man may know, but (...), the things of the Spirit of God, to
wit, the truths which are purely Evangelical, he receives not, nor is it
said, (...) but (...), he does not find them out, but when they are found out
and revealed to him, he does not receive them; nor is it only a reception of
them into his will, but understanding which is intended, for it follows, he
cannot know them; nor is it only said, he does not, but he cannot, it being
impossible for him merely by the help of natural reason to attain the knowledge
of them, and this because they are spiritually discerned, that is, the Spirit
of God which reveals them must also enable to discern them. Indeed, Socinus
would explain the (...) by (...), he receives not, that is, he finds not
out the things of the Spirit of God; but this notion of the word finds no
parallel in the New Testament, nay, is against the nature of the thing, for
receiving supposes some thing offered, which when it is applied to Doctrins,
the offering is the revealing them; nor is it less incongruity to interpret
this of St. Paul, he receives not, that is, he finds not out, than if one
should expound that of S. James, receive the ingrafted word, James 1. 21.
that is, find it out, which will so much the more appear, if you observe the
reason annexed, why the natural man receives them not, to wit, because they
are foolishness to him, and if these things were to be found out, how could
the natural man apprehend them to be foolishness? I have been so much the
longer in the Explication of this Scripture, because it is an explication of
the Text, and the truth in hand.

For the prevention of those Objections which may be made against, and the
further confirmation of this position, be pleased to know, that,

1 The Reasonable Creature is the subject of Evangelical Doctrine, this Spirit
does not bestow his Oil upon Trees and Plants, Beasts, or Birds, nor does he
raise up of stones, and blooks, children to Abraham; all Divine knowledge is
grafted upon the stock of Natural Reason.

2 By that Native light of reason within us, we may attain the knowledge of
many things delivered in the Gospel, those I mean which are common to the Holy
Scripture with other writings. How many things Historical, Moral, Speculative,
Practical, are there in the sacred books, which we meet with in Heathen
Authors? Our gracious God would not so over-whelm humane infirmity in the
patefaction of Evangelical mysteries, that there should be nothing for reason
to fix upon, and yet withal he would not have all things so suitable to
reason, that there should be no need of faith.

3 The litteral sense of the Scripture words may through industry be attained
to by the help of Reason. Skill in the Tongues, though it was for a time
immediately and extraordinary conferred upon illiterate persons by the Holy
Ghost, yet is such a gift as may be attained to by common helps, and the same
industry which renders a man expert in giving the Grammatical sense of other
Authors, may no doubt enable him to do the like, in reading the books of the
sacred Penmen, nay more, the Spirit of God in Scripture, does not affect that
obscurity of Language which some other writers do, and so the sense of it may
more easily be gathered.

4 The Spirit of God inlightening us to understand those truths which are
purely Evangelical, makes use of Reason, this (...), flower of the soul is not
blasted, but rather the more opened by the blowing of the blessed Spirit; when
a man comes to be initiated into the School of Christianity, he is not
commanded to throw away his Reason, only to subjugate it. Indeed, every
Christian must deny his Reason, but that is, as he must deny his affections;
as it is not the extirpating, but the moderating of his affections, so it is
not the casting away, but the captivating of his Reason to the obedience of
faith, which Christian Religion requires. In one word, whilst the Spirits
grace is acknowledged to be principium, the principal efficient cause, I shall
not deny Reason to be instrumentum, an instrumental cause, whereby we come to
the knowledge of Divine things.

5 And therefore lastly, this still remains as a sure maxim, That Natural
Reason, by what helps soever improved, is altogether insufficient, without the
Spirits grace, to the savoury apprehension of those supernatural and purely
Evangelical verities, which are revealed in the Holy Scriptures. It is not
unfitly observed, that as nature has its Secrets, and Arts their crafts, so
all Religions have their mysteries, which are not known but to them who are
brought up in them. It were easy to instance in the Persians, Indians, Syrians,
Grecians, Egyptians, Romans, who had their mysterious rites, which the Devil
taught them, and accordingly were taken up in imitation of the true Religion,
which both in the Jewish and Christian Church, never wanted its mysteries, such
as none can comprehend, neither can any apprehend, but those who are taught by
the blessed Spirit.

This is expressly asserted by Christ himself, when he says to his Disciples,
It is given to you to know the mysterys of the Kingdom, vobis datum, non
vobiscum natum, this Mat. 13. 11.
knowledge is not born with you, but given to you; if then innate reason were
sufficient, what need it be given? nor is it only by outward revelation, for
so it was to those Scribes and Pharisees, the wise and prudent, from whom yet
those things are said to be hid, to wit, because their eyes were not
spiritually enlightened to discern them; if you would know what it is that was
given to these Disciples, let one of them, the beloved Disciple, inform you,
and that in this very Epistle, where he says, The Son of God is come, and
has given us an understanding to know him that is true; so that not only the
Revelation of that we are 1 John 5. 20
to know, but the (...) understanding it self, whereby we know, was given by
Christ, and this as a peculiar grace conferred on some, whilst its denied to
others.

To this purpose tend those metaphors of opening the eyes, Act. 26. 18. 16. 14
and opening the heart; plainly intimating, that in the work of Conversion,
there is not only an outward, but an inward work; nor are Evangelical truths
only revealed by the Word, but the rational faculties are rectified by the
Spirit; what more pregnant instance of this truth, than Nicodemus, to whom the
Evangelical Doctrine of Regeneration Joh. 3. 5
was preached by Christ himself, and yet by whom it was not understood for want
of the Spirits illumination? no wonder if Gods Promise to his people runs, I
will give them an heart to know me; without which, though Ierem. 24. 7
he had showed his Word and Statutes to them, they would still have continued
ignorant, as to any spiritual and saving knowledge. It is a known Axiom in
Philosophy, that there must be a due proportion between the faculty and the
object, and therefore as sense cannot apprehend the things of reason, so
neither can reason the things of the Spirit; there being no proportion between
natural Reason and spirtual verities. Indeed, Reason in it self is a thing
spiritual, as spiritual is opposite to material, but not as it is opposed to
natural; and it must be a spiritual, that is, a supernatural quality infused
by the Spirit, which can enable us to apprehend supernatural objects; suitable
hereunto is that distinction in the Schools, of a threefold light, of Nature,
of Grace, of Glory, one whereof is far short of the other, and as the light of
Grace is not proportionable to those beatifical objects of Glory, so neither is
the light of nature to the spiritual objects of grace, and therefore most justly
is this affirmative, You have an Unction, and know all things, construed, as
including the negative, if you had not this Unction, you could not know any
thing.

To conclude then, let the consideration hereof learn us a double lesson, to
wit, of Humility and Prayer.

1 Let it abase us in our own estimation, notwithstanding our choicest natural
or acquired abilities; vain man (says Eliphaz) would be wise, though he be
born like a Job 11. 11.
wild Asses colt; men would be Masters, not only of natural, but Divine
Knowledge, but they become vain in their Imaginations. In reason, as
corrupted, there is a direct enmity against the Gospels simplicity, yea, the
line of reason at the best, is too short to fathom the depth of evangelical 1
Cor. 3. 18.
mysteries, and therefore if any one would be wise (let him according to S.
Paul's Counsel) become a fool, that he may be wise; he only is in a fit
capacity for divine knowledge, who humbly acknowledges his own inability of
himself to attain it.

2 As we desire to know all things needful to salvation, pray we for the
Spirits Illumination; it is strange, and yet true, to consider how simple
Idiots are able more divinely to discourse of Gospel verities, than some
learned Clerks, and whence this, but from this special Unction of the renewing
Spirit? and when we hear wicked Christians sometimes fluently uttering divine
knowledge, whence is it but from the common Unction of the illuminating Spirit?
There is no unfolding Samsons riddle, unless we plow with Samsons Heifer; no
understanding the things of the Spirit, but by the grace of the Spirit, and
therefore I shall end my discourse with the beginning of that excellent Hymn.

Oh Holy Ghost, into our wits, send down thy heavenly light
Kindle our hearts with servent love to serve God day and night.
Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 21. I have not written unto you, because ye know not the
truth, but because ye know it, and that no lie is of the truth.
THis Verse may well be called a Religious Valent ^ac ad conciliandam
benevlentiam magnopere. L^r. in loc.
Complement, inserted by the Apostle, no doubt for this end, that he might the
better gain upon those to whom he wrote. That piece of Oratory which teaches
captare benevelentiam, to seek the good will of Auditors, is of good use in
Divinity. They are too mor^se Vide Calv. in lo^.
and rigid, who account all Civil Language in a Pulpit, da^bing with untempered
mortar. St. Paul doubtless did not court Agrippa with a falsehood, when he
says, Beleevest thou the Prophets? I know thou beleevest Act. 26. 27.
them; nor did he gild rotten posts, when he says to those Hebrews, I am
persuaded better things of you, though Heb. 6. 9.
I thus speak: far be it from St. John who declaimeth against hars, at the
same time to be guilty of flattery, which is no better than lying; To sooth up
our hearers in their wickedness, is abominable, but to smooth them with oily
Language, and silken words, that they may be more pliable to what is good, is
allowable, whilst herein we trace the footsteps of the penmen of holy writ,
particularly S. John, and that in this verse, which is as it were an
insinuating parenthesis, I have not written unto you, because ye know not the
truth, etc.

In which words there are three General Observable.

I A Delineation of the Gospel, by a double character.

1 Principal and ^rect, ^n that it is called the truth.

2 Coll^^eral and Co^seque^^ial, when it is said, no lie is of the Truth,

II A Commendation of the Christians to whom the Apostle wrote, by removing
ignorance from them, attributing knowledge to them, in those words, not because
you know not the Truth, but because ye know it, etc.

III An Anticipation of an objection which might be made against his writing to
them who were thus knowing, in those words, I have not written unto you, etc.

Begin we with the Delineation, and therein,

1 The Principal Character, which though comprised Gen 1.
in that one word Truth, carries in it a great deal of weight.

Not to trouble you with the Philosophical distinctions of Truth, be pleased to
know to our present purpose,

1 As there is a double word, so there is a double truth, to wit, personal and
doctrinal; our blessed Savior says of himself, I am the truth, and some
Interpreters conceive that by truth here, the Apostle means Christ; when Joh.
14. 6
our Savior prays for his Disciples, sanctify them through thy truth, he
presently adds, Thy Word is truth, and accordingly others expound Truth here
to be the 17. 17.
Evangelical Doctrine. To this latter interpretation I rather adhere, because it
is most probable that St. John understands the same by truth in this verse,
which he intends by all things in the former, and those are all things revealed
in the Gospel.

2 Truth may be construed in a double opposition, either to that which is
Typical, or that which is false.

1 Sometimes the truth is opposed to Types and Ceremonies; thus when we are
required to worship the Father Joh 4. 16
in Spirit, and in Truth; as the former is opposed to hypocritical, so the
latter most rationally to ceremonial worship; and when it is said, The Law came
by Moses, but grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ, we may probably 1. 17.
conceive the sense to be, that whereas Moses only delivered precepts to be
done, Christ gives by his Spirit grace to do them; and whereas the Ceremonial
Law consisted only of Types and Shadows, the Truth, that is, the impletion of
all those, is now performed by Christ; Accordingly the Gospel is the truth,
because it reveals the body of those shadows, the mystery of those figures,
the substance of those Types, and to this Zanchy conceives, the Apostle Paul
might have respect, when he calls it, The word of truth. Ephesians. 1. 12. Zanch.
ibid.


2 Sometimes the truth is opposed to falsehood and lies, for that is the most
genuine signification of the Word, and withal the most rational interpretation
of it in this place, where we find a lie expressly set in opposition to it;
Col. 1. 4. 2 ^im. 2. 15 2 pet. 2. 2 1 pet. 1. 23
upon this account no doubt it is, that the Gospel is so frequently styled the
word of truth, and the way of truth, and the truth. To this purpose is that
metaphorical ^hrase of S. Peter, where he calls it, the sincere milk of the
Word, to wit, without any base mixture of falsehood Indeed, there are some
doctrins of the Gospel, which are nor verisimilia, probable to our reason, but
still all of them are verissima, of most certain verity.

For the clearer manifestation whereof (which was never more needful, than in
this Skeptical, yea, Atheistical age) and that in opposition to all other
doctrins whatsoever, be pleased to consider the matter, the witnesses, the
Miracles, and the success of the Evangelical doctrine.

1 The matter of the Gospel proclaims it to be the truth, inasmuch as it
lays down surer principles, purer precepts, and higher Promises than any
other doctrine whatsoever. This is that Doctrine which makes full provision for
our comfort, by teaching us how God and man may be brought together, how
justice and mercy may meet each other, by proposing to us such a reward, which
for its excellency and perpetuity is every way adaequate to a rational desire.
This is that doctrine which gives full direction for our obedience, by
injoyning such duties as are most just and pure, and so most consonant to right
reason.

2 The Testimony given to the Historical part of this Doctrine, especially that
of Christ's resurrection (which if acknowledged true, there will be no reason
to deny the truth of any thing revealed in the Gospel) is so valid, See more of
this part 1. page 71.
that there need not, could not be a clearer evidence. For however they were
persons tenuioris fortunae, of a mean estate, yet they were inc^lpatae famae,
of unblemished credit; nor was it only one or two, but a great number of men
and women, who testified the truth of it, and this not upon hearsay, but as
that which they had seen with their eyes, and their hands had handled, nor
(which would not be left out) was there any hope of profit or preferment which
might induce them to attest a falsehood.

4. The Miracles which accompanied those Oracles were such as abundantly
confirm their Truth, for though it is true; the publishers of lying doctrines
have by the Devils help wrought wonders, yet either they were (as St. Paul
calls them, lying wonders) mere delusions, making things appear which are not,
by corrupting sometimes the fancy, sometimes the sense, sometimes the air, and
sometimes the object; or if they were true wonders, yet they were not Miracles
properly so called, because, not above the power of nature, only the Devil,
either by his agility removing of, or bringing on objects upon the stage in a
moment (as it was probably in the Magicians imitation of Moses, when he turned
Rods into Serpents) or by his sagacity, discovering the secrets of nature, often
times effects such things as to us being unknown, are wonderful, though indeed
they are but natural. But the wonders which were wrought by the preachers of
the Gospel plainly appear to be such, as either no created power can at all
effect, as raising the dead, curing the blind, lame, and deaf, which were so
out of a natural defect in the Organ, and are reckoned among those total
privations, which in course of nature, admit of no return to the habit, or
which if a natural virtue can effect, yet not in that way and time, as the
healing of the sick by a touch, by a word, at a distance, in an instant, and
therefore were no other than divine Miracles. So that, unless were will suppose
that the true God would confirm a lie, by signs and wonders, we must needs
acknowledge the Truth of the Gospel.

4. Lastly, The wonderful success which this Doctrine has had in the world,
may very rationally evince its Truth. It is a known saying, veritas magna and
praevalebit, the power of Truth is unconquerable, and though sometimes it may
be suppressed, yet it cannot be extinguished: Indeed it is not true
reciprocally, that though Truth will preval at last, yet every Doctrine which
prevails for a time, is Truth; If this plea were sufficient, nakedly
considered, the Mahumetan Doctrine would challenge this Title of Truth, as
having gained upon the greatest part of the habitable world for many hundred
years; It is not therefore simply the strength, but the strangeness of the
Gospels prevalency, which argues its verity. That the Mahumetan Doctrine should
be generally embraced, is no wonder, partly because it is a Doctrine congruous
to man's corrupt inclination; it was at first propagated, and is still
maintained by force of arms: But that the Evangelical Doctrine which teaches
Lessons contrary to flesh and blood, liberality to a covetous, humility to a
proud, piety to a profane, and righteousness to a cruel world, which was so
much opposed and persecuted by the wise and great men, the Princes of this
world, should be published by twelve illiterate, unarmed men, who had not
spears, but only staves in their hands, not swords, but scrips by their sides,
and were as a few Sheep among a multitude of ravenous Wolves, and yet the
publishing should be so effectual, as to gain a multitude of Disciples in all
parts, and those such as did many of them lose their liberties, states, and
lives in defense of it, is so strange a success, as may very well be a strong
Argument to testify the Truth of the Gospel; by all which it appears what
good reason St. John had to call the Gospel, the Truth, in opposition to
falsehood.

But yet this is not all which this type prompts us to, for in that the Apostle
does not say, the true Doctrine, in the concrete, but the Truth, in the
abstract, so that whereas there are many other Truths which every Art and
Science teaches, he seems to appropriate it to the Evangelical Doctrine, as
if that only deserved the name of Truth, is very Emphatical, and no doubt his
intention hereby is to let us see that the Gospel is eminently and
transcendently true: Indeed veritas consistit in indivisibili, one thing cannot
be truer than another, but yet one Truth may be of greater eminency than
another; Such is the Doctrine of the Gospel, whose excellency will appear, if
you consider that it is a Divine, an Universal, and an effectual truth.

Well may the Gospel be called the truth, in as much as it is,

1 The Divine truth, which was dictated to those who published it by the Spirit
of God; I grant as St. Ambrose says, omnis veritas a spiritu sancto, all, even
humane truth, is from the Divine Spirit; in which respect, Truth is called by
the Greek Poet, the daughter (...) Pind. Olymp.
of God, but still it is only Scriptural truth, which is of immediate
inspiration; all truth calls God Father, but this is his Reuben, his
firstborn, These things says Rev. 3. 14. 17
he that is true; and again, These things says the Amen, the faithful, and
true witness; so run the Prefaces of the two Epistles to Philadelphiae, and
Laodicea, and accordingly St. Peter, They spoke as moved by the 2 Pet. 1. last.
Holy Ghost. Indeed, if you please to review three of the forementioned
Arguments, to wit, the matter, the miracles, and success of this Doctrine, you
shall find them proving as well the Divinity, as the verity of the Gospel.

2 An Universal truth, such as contains in it all truth needful to be known
in order to salvation: Indeed, there are many natural truths which are below
the Majesty, and beside the Scope of the Gospel, and therefore are not
contained in it, but all saving truths either formaliter or reductive, in
express words, or plain necessary consequences, are revealed by the Gospel;
hence it is that this Doctrine is as it were a rule or standard, by which all
Doctrines must be tried, so that, If an Angel Preach any other Gospel he is
ac^ursed; for which reason no doubt, it is called a Canon by St. Paul, where
Gal. 1. 8. 6. 16.
he says, As many as walk according to this rule (or Canon) peace be upon
them, and upon the Israel of God.

3 Lastly, An effectual truth, the truth which of all others has the most
powerful operation; indeed as it was first inspired by, so the Preaching of it
is still accompanied with the Holy Spirit, whereby it has a far greater
efficacy, than any other truth whatsoever; for whereas other truths have only
an influence upon the understanding, this, together with the understanding,
has an influence upon the Will and Affections; other truths may make us wise,
but this will make us both wise and better; Glorious things are spoken of thee,
oh thou celestial truth* The truth shall make you free, sanctify them Joh. 8.
32. 17. 17.
through thy truth, they are Christ's own words, ^^ his own good will begat he
us by the word of truth, So St. James 1. 18
Peter; all truth is Gods daughter, but this is as it were his Spouse, by which
he begets Sons and Daughters to himself. In one Word, it is this truth, and
this alone, which does so inlighten the mind, as to incline the will, regulate
the passions, comfort the conscience, renew our nature, and sanctify our whole
man; No wonder, if our Apostle call it abstractively Truth, and emphatically,
the Truth.

Having given you this Account of the Principal, it will be easy to infer the
Collateral Character of the Gospel, where it is said, No lie is of the truth:
In the Greek it seems to be a particular proposition, Every lie is not of
the truth, but it is equivalent to an universal, and therefore is fitly
rendered, no lie is of the truth. To open the sense briefly.

There is a threefold Lie, verbal, practical, Doctrinal; verbal is, an untrue
narration, when we either affirm what is false, or deny what is true;
Practical is, an unsuitable conversation, when we unsay with our lives, what
we say with our lips; Doctrinal is, an erroneous position concerning matters
of faith or practice, and though it be true of all sort of lies, yet no doubt
it is the doctrinal lie which is here chiefly intended.

2 Whereas it is possible upon false hypotheses to infer true conclusions
(whence it is usual in Astronomy, by supposing things that are not, to
demonstrate the truth of things that are) it is impossible from true positions
to infer a false conclusion. Indeed, too often wicked Heretics fasten their
lies upon the Evangelical truth, and for this reason probably St. John inserted
this clause (which at first may seem supervacaneous) that whereas the
Antichristian* Teachers might pretend to boast of the Truth, our Apostle
assures those to whom he wrote, that the truth did not, could not father any
such lies. The truth is, when Heretics endeavor to prove their Doctrines by
Scripture, they deal by it as Caligula did by the Image of Jupiter Olympiacus,
when he took from it its own head, which was of Gold, and put upon it one of
Brass, they spoil Truth of its genuine sense, to put upon it a corrupt gloss;
it being as possible for cold to come from heat, or darkness from light, as
any lie from the Truth.

3 Nor yet is this all that this clause imports, minus dicit, plus volens
intelligi, says Estius, our Apostle intends Est. in loc.
more than he speaks, for whereas he says, No lie is of the truth, he
means, every lie is against the truth. Indeed, some Lies have a semblance of
Truth, and are so bold as to claim kindred to it; but notwithstanding their
seeming consonancy, there is a real repugnancy, and they are so far from being
of, that they are contrary to the truth.

To close up this first general; since the Gospel is the truth, and
consequently no Lie is of it, learn we to embrace it with those two Arms of
faith and love.

1 Let us steadfastly believe it; The Heathen had an high opinion of their
Sybils, as appears by that of the Poet, Credit me folium vobis recitare
Sybillae, and Juvenal.
shall not we yield a firm credence to the Gospel? St. Paul says of the
Thessalonians, that the Gospel came not to them only in Word, but in Power,
and in the Holy 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5
Ghost, and in much assurrnce, intimating, that they had not only a
conjectural opinion, but a full persuasion of the truth of the Gospel; let the
same confidenee be in us. It is the truth, and therefore we may infallibly
venture our souls upon it, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before the least
jot of it shall be found false and lying.

2 Let us affectionately love it, so as not only to yield obedience to, but
contend in the defense of it, whenever we are called to it. The Heathen in
their sacrifices to Apollo, cried out, (...), truth is sweet. Let us say with
David of this Truth, Oh how sweet is it to my taste? it is sweeter than the
honey and the honey comb; Veritas Christianorum incomparabiliter pulchrior
Angest.
Helena Graecorum, says St. Austin, The Christians truth is incomparably:
fairer than the Hellen of Greece and if the Grecians so hotly strove for the
one, how zealously should we contend for the other? we may venture our souls
on it, and we must be willing to venture ou^ states and bodies for it, and as
he said, though upon another account, Amicus Plato, Amicus Aristoteles, sed
magis amica veritas; Plato and Aristotle are my friends, but truth much more:
so let us in this, my Liberty, my Life, is dear to me, but the truth of the
Gospel is far dearer; And that we may thus believe and love, let us be
careful to know it, for which it is that our Apostle praises these Christians,
and so I am fallen on the Commendation, Not because you know not the truth, but
because ye know it, whence it will not be amiss to observe Genesis Second.


1 In General, that this holy Apostle is not awanting in just praises of those
to whom he writes; very often in this Epistle he calls them, Little
Children, and in this he deals with them as with Little Children, who are
best won upon by encouraging commendations. It was one of St. Jeromes counsels
to Laeta, about the bringing up of her daughter, Laudibus excitandum est Hier.
Ep ad L^^.
ingenium, that she should excite her by praises.

When the Schoolmaster by commending his Scholar for doing well, lets him see,
that he has a good opinion of him; it is a notable spur to put him upon
preserving and increasing that good opinion, by doing better; what the blowing
of the horn is to the hounds in their chase, and the sounding of the Trumpet to
the Horse in the battle, that is praise to men in their prosecution of virtue,
and opposition against vice. And therefore let all Ministers learn to take
notice of, and encourage the forwardness of their people, and let them be no
less careful to extol their virtues, than to reprove their vices; when the
people do what is commendable, it is but just we should commend what they do;
and if they find matter, let not us want words, in giving them their deserved
praises, according to the pattern which here St. John sets us.

2 In special, take a view of the commendation here given, which is first by
way of remotion, acquitting them from ignorance; they were not like St. Paul's
silly women, which were ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth, not like those Hebrews, 2 Timothy 3. 7
who, whereas for the time they ought to have Heb. 5. 12.
been Teachers, they had need that one teach them again, which be the first
Principles of the Oracles of God, they were not such as did not know the truth.
And then by way of attribution, asserting that they were such who did know the
truth; yea, that they had a distinct knowledge of it, whereby they were able to
distinguish * between truth and falsehood, for that you know is very fitly by
interpreters supplied in the last clause, you know that no Lie is of the truth.
Our blessed Savior speaking of his sheep, says, they know his voice, and that
so, as to distinguish it from the voice of strangers, for so it follows, and
a stranger will they not follow; thus Joh. 10. 3, 4.
does S. John here commend these Christians, not only for a true, but a clear
knowledge, whereby they were able to judge aright, and discern between things
that differ: Indeed, according to that known maxim, rectum est index sui et
obliqui, that which is true, discovers not only it self, but that which is
false, and therefore he that knows the truth, knows that no lie is of it.

That it may the better appear, how high a commendation this is, it will be
needful to discuss a little on the one hand, the evil of ignorance; and on the
other, the good of knowledge.

1 Not to know the truth is a sin sadly to be bemoaned, and such as contracts
not only guilt, but shame upon the person. Indeed this is not true of all
kind of Ignorance.

There is an Ignorance which is commendable, not to know what God has kept
secret, because he would not have us know; its no shame for a man not to know
that which is not in his possibility, and such are all those things which God
has not been pleased to reveal.

There is an Ignorance which is excusable, to wit, 1 when it is of such truths,
which are without our sphere, and therefore have no need to know them; 2 when
it is of such truths as are polemical, problematical; which partly by reason of
the difficulty of the matter, and partly by reason of the imbecility of our
understanding, we cannot attain to a full knowledge of; 3 when though it be of
the Evangelical Truth, yet it is either through a defect of Revelation, which
is the only means whereby we can know it; as in Pagans, who never heard of
the Gospel, and therefore shall not be condemned for not knowing and believing
it; or through a natural incapacity, as in infants, and fools, and madmen, who
being not able to make use of their reason, cannot attain to this knowledge.

But not to know in some measure the necessary truths of the Gospel,
notwithstanding the opportunities and means of knowledge afforded to us, is an
ignorance deservedly blameable. Indeed, it is negligentia non impotentia,
incuria non incapacitas, not an impotent incapacity, but a retchlesse
negligence, it is not an invincible, but a vincible, not a negative, but a
Privative, not an involuntary, but a wilful ignorance, not of one who would,
but cannot, but of one who may, but will not know the truth. And now to be
thus ignorant, is our sin, our shame, our ruin; what a travellor is without
his feet, a workman without his hands, a Painter without his eyes, that is a
Christian without knowledge, unable to do the will of God: What danger a ship
is in that wants a Rudder, Ballasse, Anchors, Cables, Sails, the like is he in
who wants knowledge. How easily is he tossed up and down with every wind of
Doctrine? how unable is he to stear a right course toward heaven? how quickly
is he overturned into a gulf of errors, and vices? no wonder if God complain
by the Prophet Hoseah, My Hos. 4. 6.
people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Our proverb says, The blind man
swalloweth many a fly, and catches many a fall; it is no less true of an
Ignorant Christian, he swalloweth many an error, and falls into many a sin;
this jaw bone of an Ass, I mean Ignorance, has slain its thousands, laying
heaps upon heaps: In a word, Almighty God is so far provoked with affected
ignorance, that he threatens by his Prophet, It is a people of no
understanding, Isa. 27. 11.
therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed
them, will show them no favor, and by his Apostle, that the Lord Jesus shall
beerevealed 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
from heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God.

2 To know the Truth, and that no Lie is of it, is a virtue highly to be
commended. Indeed, there is an excellency in all kind of knowledge; it is a
pearl despised of none but fools, Knowledge having no enemy but the Ignorant.
Alexander was wont to say, he had rather excel in knowledge, than be great
in Power. Indeed, what Plut. Apophth. Lactant. Instit. l. 1. c. 1.
the eye is in the body, that is knowledge in the mind, that the choycest
member of the one, this the noblest ornament of the other; but surely this
knowledge whereof my Text speaks, is far more excellent than all other
knowledge whatsoever, for whereas by knowledge it is that a man differs from a
beast, by this knowledge it is that a Christian differs from other men,
nullus omnino cibus suavior quam cognitio veritatis, says Lactantius, no
sweeter food to the mind, than the knowledge of truth, and especially of this
truth. What the foundation is to the building, the root to the tree, that is
this knowledge to the Soul, the beginning of all grace and goodness; what the
Sun is to the world, that is this knowledge to the mind, to inlighten,
inliven, and rejoice it; if that Philosopher when he had gained a new notion
in Astronomy, was so ravished, that he cried out, (...), I have found it, I
have found it; how much greater joy has the Christian, knowing supernatural
truths? In a word, this knowledge is not only that which leads to grace and
joy, but glory. S. Paul has put them together, when he says, God would have
all men come to the knowledge of the truth, that they may be saved; no wonder,
if St. John account 1 Timothy 2^ 4
those Christians praiseworthy, for this, that they did know the truth.

And now I would to God, that we could say the same of all our hearers; but I
fear, in regard of too many, we may instead of commending, condemn, of
praising complain, that they are not such as do know the truth, but do not know
it; Our Language may not be this of S. John's, but that of S. Paul, Some have
not the knowledge of God, I speak this to your shame: indeed, a shame it is
that any 1 Cor. 15. 34
among us should be ignorant, for to allude to the Apostles phrase, Have they
not heard? yea, the sound is gone throughout all the Land, All means of
knowledge, Romans 11. 18
Preaching, Catechizing, writing, are plentifully afforded; God may say to us,
as he did to his People of Old, Have I been a Wilderness to the house of
Israel, a land of darkness? and yet how many remain destitute of saving Jer.
24. 31
knowledge? It might have been said of this Land for these many years, in
regard of the Gospel, what is said of Rhodes in regard of the Sun, Semper in
sole sita est Rhodos, it is always in the Sunshine; The light of truth has
shone gloriously among us; And yet how many Owls fly up and down in this
bright-firmament? how many Lactant.
Beetles in this Goshen Land of Light? Lactantius observes, that there was
never less Wisdom in Greece, than in the time of the seven wise men; and they
say of the Indians, among whom all the Gold is, that none are more meanly clad
than they: Oh that even in this Land, which has equallized, if not excelled
all other parts of the Christian world for perspicuous instruction, there were
not to be found many grossly ignorant. The truth is,

1 Some, though they be strangely ignorant, are highly conceited of (than
which no greater enemy to) their knowledge. The opinion of having attained
knowledge, as it is an argument that a man has not attained, and therefore
says St. Paul, He that thinks he knows any 1 Cor. 8. 2
thing, knows nothing as he ought to know; so it keeps a man from
endeavoring to attain, and therefore says Solomon, See thou a man wise in
his own conceit, there is Prove. 26. 12
more hope of a fool than of him.

2 Some who are sensible of their ignorance, are yet ashamed to discover it,
and therefore they seek it not at the Priests lips; hence it is, that whilst
you frequently consult with the Lawyer, to know the certainty of your
evidences; and with the Physician, to be informed in the state of your body,
yet you seldom or never repair to the Minister, to inquire of, and be informed
by him in the things that concern your souls.

3 Too many look upon divine knowledge as a thing to which only the Divine is
obliged, they need not trouble themselves about it. If the Merchant can but
know how to keep his accounts, how to import and export his wares; if the
Tradesman can but skill how to buy and sell, and get gain; If the Husbandman
can but learn how to mannure his ground, it matters not for the mystery of
godliness, and knowledge of the truth.

4 Nay, I would to God there were not some, who do not only neglect but reject
this knowledge, saying, with those Profane Atheists, to God, we desire not
the knowledge of Job 21. 14
thy waiss, and that they may continue in their ignorance, they either content
themselves without any, or with some blind guide, who instead of teaching
others, had need himself to be a catechumenist.

Suffer, I beseech you, the Word of Exhortation, to answer the means with some
measure of knowledge. Philip rejoiced that Alexander was born in the days of
Aristotle: Let us bless God, that we are born in the times of light, and
since God is not awanting to us, let not us be awanting to our selves; wait at
the Posts of Wisdoms house, sit at the feet of your Teachers, and inquire what
you know not, from their mouths; diligently peruse the holy Scriptures, the
rich cabinet in which this jewel, the knowledge of the truth, is to be found,
purge your hearts of arrogant self-conceit, taste the sweetness of divine
truths, obediently practice what you know, so shall you more and more know what
to practice; above all, according to Solomon's advice, Cry after knowledge, and
lift up your voice for understanding; Prove. 23.
what St. Paul prays for the Ephesians, beg of God for thy self, that the eyes
of thy understanding may be Ephesians. 1. 18.
enlightened. And when thou have attained the knowledge of the truth, be not
proud, but humble, still acknowledging thy need of further helps, by the
tongues and pens of Gods ministers, as St. John here intimates, in that he
says, I have written unto you, because you know, which leads to the
Anticipation of an objection, which might arise in Genesis Third.
their minds from that which is asserted in the preceding verse, If we have
an Unction, by which we know all things, to what end, might they say, or at
least think, is your writing? which objection he prevents, by adding, I have
not written to you because you do not know the truth, but because you know it.

Some Expositors conceive these words to be an Apology for his writing so
little, alioqui largiore Grot. in loc.
vobiscum usus sum sermon, so Grotius, If you had not known the truth, I would
have written more largely to you, but verbum sapienti sat est, a word is enough
to the wise; and doubtless, it is a piece of prudence in a Minister, to make a
distinction between Auditories, when they speak to the simple and ignorant, to
use more plain, large, and loose expressions, but when to intelligent
Christians, more concise, pithy, and exact.

The Generality of Interpreters conceive this an Apology for his writing at
all, which might seem supervacaneous to those, who by virtue of a Divine
Unction knew so much already, wherein our Apostle lets them know, that
notwithstanding the knowledge they had attained, it was still needful to write
to them, and that because they had attained this knowledge. In particular,
there might be a threefold reason of St. John's writing to those knowing
Christians.

1 In memoriam revocare, to bring that truth to their memory which had been
already imprinted in their Illyr. in loc. Carthus. in loc.
understanding, upon this account, as St. John here, so elsewhere, the other
Apostles expressly Apologize for themselves, I will therefore put you in
remembrance, though you once knew this; So St. Jude. I will not be negligent
Jude verse. 5.
to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know them, and
be established in the present truth, So St. Peter. And I my self also am
persuaded of you 2 Pet. 1. 12.
my brethren, that ye also are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge,
able also to admonish one another, nevertheless brethren, I have written the
more boldly unto you in some Romans 15. 14, 15
sort, as putting you in mind, because of the grace that is given to me of
God, so St. Paul. The truth is, we are very apt to forget what we know, ye
have forgotten the exhortation which speaks unto you as unto Heb. 12. 5
Children, says the Apostle; our memories are like sives that let go the
flower, and retain the branne, we remember what is to be forgotten, and
forget what is to be remembered, need there is we should be minded.

2 Scientiam a^gere, to increase our knowledge; the truth is, the greatest part
of the things we know, is the least part of what we do not know; No Truths
are so well, but they may be better known; Every command is exceeding broad,
and every Article very deep, no^ can any say, There is nothing contained in
either, which I do not fully know; disce docendus adhuc, was good counsel, be
still willing to learn: Luther confessed himself Catechismi Discipulum, a Scholar
to the Catechism; The most knowing Christian has need to be instructed even
in the things he knows.

3 In veritate confirmare; to confirm us in the truth we know, notitiam vobis
concedo, sed de constantia vestr a sollicitus sum, so Aretius glosseth, I grant
you are knowing Christians, Aret. in loc.
but I am sollicitous for your constancy in the faith; we are but too prone to
waver in our profession, and too weak hold-fasts in spiritual truths, Etiam
currentibus addenda sunt calearia, though we run well, we need sp^rring to
make us ^old out, or else we should grow dull and weary; so that in all these
respects there appears sufficient reason why our Apostle wrote even to them
that knew the truth.

I end all. Take heed how any of you vilify the Ministry of the word either
Preached or Written. They are words too often in many men's mouths, I know as
much as the Preacher can tell me; do thou so? I rejoice in it, but still
the Preacher may remember thee of, and confirm thee in what thou know; and
perhaps thou may learn from him to know it better; believe it, there is use
of Evangelical Preaching, and Apostolical Writing, not only to inform the
simple, and instruct the Ignorant, but to mind the forgetful, strengthen the
Weak, and supply defects either of knowledge or affection, or both, in the most
knowing Christian, which made our Apostle thus be-speak the Christians in his
time, I have not written unto you because you know not the truth, but because
you know it.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 22, 23, VERSE. Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christ? he is Antichrist that denies the Father, and the Son. Whosoever
denies the Son, the same has not the Father, but he that acknowledges the
Son, has the Father also.
THe Knowledge of the disease is the better part of the cure, and therefore the
Physicians skill is more seen in discovering the malady, than in prescribing
the Remedy. The greatest danger of a ship at Sea, is by reason of unseen
shelfs, unknown rocks, and therefore the Pilots chiefest care is by his own and
others experience, to learn upon what coast they lie. Finally, An enemy
discovered is half vanquished, and Plut. Apophth
therefore it is the saying of Chabrias in Plutarch, he is the best General,
who is most acquainted with the designs and motions of his enemy. Upon this
consideration, no doubt it is that our Apostle having before in general
admonished those to whom he writes, of these Antichristian enemies, does here
more particularly discover their heresies, to us, whereby they might at once
be more easily discerned and avoided, who is a Liar, but he that denies that
Jesus is the Christ?

In these two verses we have two generals.

A Description of the Heretics in St. John days, in the two and twentieth
verse, Who is a Liar, etc.

An Amplification of that description as to the latter part of it, in the three
and twentieth verse, Whosoever denies the Son, etc.

1 In the description we shall consider a

1 Double Appellation, with which he brandeth them; in those words, Who is a
Liar? and he is Antichrist.

2 Double Accusation, which he charge upon them, of denying that Jesus is
the Christ, and denying the Father and the Son.

Begin we with the Appellations, which are two, Liar and Antichrist.

1 The latter of these is, that which has been discussed alr^^dy from the
eighteenth verse, and therefore shall now be only touched.

That the (...) does not here design that person or party, to which this title
is by Divines particularly attributed, will sufficiently appear by what is
already said in the forementioned verse, and accordingly Calvin is express,
Calv. in loc.
The Apostle speaks not here of that man of sin who shall sit in the Temple
of God. So that it is most rationally conceived as a Title given to those many
Heretical Teachers, which were Apostatized from the Church, even in the
Apostles days.

There are Christiani sine Christo, Christians without Christ, such are all
they who professing his name, have no real interest in him; but here are
Christiani contrae Christum, Christians against Christ, so far degenerated from
their christian profession, as to set themselves in direct opposition to
Christ; That the Jews and Heathens should be Antichrists, is no wonder, but
that such who had been Baptized into Christ, yea, had Preached Christ, should
Apostatize to a renouncing of him, ^enders them so much the more Antichristian,
and perhaps for this reason the Apostle prefixeth the Emphatical Article; for
whereas the Jews and Heathen were Antichrists, because not knowing, they never
owned, but opposed him, these were such as knowing had professed him, but
either through fear of men, or love of the World, or which is worst of all,
desperate malice, not only deserted, but rejected him.

2 The former of the titles is not only asserted, but as Gualter well
observes, by way of Interrogation amplified, Gualt. in loc.
it is not, he is a Liar, who denies? but, who is a Liar, but he that
denies? which is as much as to say, If he be not a Liar, none is, according
to that expression which we sometimes use (as Estius well observes) Est. in
loc.
by way of Aggravation; what is wickedness if this be not? so that our
Apostle hereby affirms of these Antichristian Teachers, that they were
Egr^gi^^^* not^rious Liars, for so Beda glosseth, In hujus comparatione Beda
ibid.
mendacii, c^tera, aut parva videntur, aut nulla, in comparison of this Lie,
others are small, or none at all.

There are two things which denominate a man an odious Liar, the one, when that
which is affirmed or denied, is evidently contrary to truth, and the other,
when the thing so asserted is injurious and pernicious to them that believe it.
And truly, both these may justly be charged on the Liars in the Text, for
they denied that which was in it self manifest, yea, which they themselves had
been convinced of, and that which they denied tended to no less than the utter
subversion of the Christian faith, and the destruction of those who adhered to
it, and therefore no wonder if St. John by way of question, accuse the Heretics
in his time, of Lying, who is a Liar? etc.

That which I shall briefly observe from both these titles, is the zeal of this
holy Apostle in reproving these Heretics; Liars, are execrabile hominum genus,
a most execrable sort of men, hated and abhorred of all; nor is a Liar more
odious among all men, than an Antichrist is among all Christians, so that our
Apostle could not well have branded them with names more odious than these. The
truth is, two sorts of sinners are severely to be rebuked, Hypocrites, and
Heretics; an example of the former, we have from Christ himself, who
reprehending the Hypocritical Pharisees, calls them fools and Vipers, and of
the latter in St. John, who gainsaying the Heretical Teachers of his time,
calls them Antichrists and Liars.

Indeed, in one of those Titles, is a latent reason of his bitterness against
them, namely, because they were against Christ; Had they been only his
Antagonists, no doubt, he would have been mild and gentle, but his masters
honor was concerned in the quarrel, no wonder if he be so zealous; Moses the
meekest man upon earth in his own concernments, is so enraged against the
Israelites for their Idolatry, that he breaks the Tables of the Law. The
Historian observes of Caesar's soldiers, that they pursued their Generals
Engagements with vigor, whilst they were cool and temperate in their own
concernments; and surely, though toward our own Adversaries we must show
meekness, yet when they are not only ours but Christ's enemies, it becomes us
to testify our love to Christ by our Indignation against them. It was an
excellent saying of Guevara, in an Epistle to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
Christianus nulla re magis dignosci potest, quam si De^ factas contumelias et
blasphemias severissime ulciscatur, suas obliviscatur, there is no better
Character of a right Christian, than to forget the injuries done to himself,
but to be angry at the blasphemies against God and Christ.

And which serves so much the more to justify our Apostles severity in
reproving those false Teachers, is, that they were not obliquely, but directly
opposers of Christ; they were such who did not only endeavor to lop off the
branches of Christianity, but to pluck it up by the roots, to deface the
building of Religion, but to destroy the foundation; as there is a difference
in sins, so in errors; all diseases are not alike malignant, nor all errors
equally pestiferous; every Heterodox opinion is not a sufficient warrant to
brand a man with these Appellations of Liar and Antichrist; but when they were
so heretical as to deny Jesus to be the Christ, no marvail if this holy
Apostle, not out of a rash bitterness, but a well-grounded zeal, use these
harsh invectives. It is a frame of spirit which we find in other servants of
God, as well as S. John; The Apostle Paul having to do with Elimas, spares him
not, but calls him a Child of the Devil, an enemy of all righteousness; and
writing to the Philippians concerning heretical Act. 13. 10.
teachers, calls them the concision, and compares them to dogs; no less
Satirical was that of Polycarpus Phil. 3. 2
to Marcian, Agnosco te primogenitum diaboli, I know thee to be the Devils
firstborn; Let the same spirit be in us in oppugning the Authors and Abetters
of damnable heresies. The visible descending of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, was in fiery tongues, such tempers had they, yea, all their
successors, the Bishops and Pastors of the Church, ought to have tongues set on
fire from heaven, which may flame forth in vehement increpations, as of
notorious sinners, so of venomous heretics.

2 From the Appellations, proceed we to the Accusations.

I. The first whereof we find to be denying that Jesus is the Christ, in which
words there is,

A Truth implicitly asserted by the Apostle, Jesus is the Christ.

An heresy explicitly charged on the false Teachers, namely, the denial of
this truth, he that denies that Jesus is the Christ.

1 When our Apostle says, who is a Liar but he that denies? what does he
but tacitly assirm this to be a truth, That Jesus is the Christ? and because
it is a fundamental truth, upon which the whole Fabric of Christian Religion
stands, give me leave a while to insist upon it, not as questioning, but for
the further streng thening your assent to it, so much the rather, because of
the multitude of Jews, which are at this time crept in among us, whom though I
have little hope to convince, yet I would strive to prevent in those secret
indeav^rs (which probably they use) to sedu^e Christians from the faith of
Christ.

That there was such a man as Jesus of Nazareth, born and living among the
Jews, is an history so authentical, that there will be no need of spending
time about the Joseph. Antiqu. l. 18. c. 14.
proof of it. It is acknowledged by the Jews themselves, witness Josephus in
his Jewish Antiquities, where he makes an honorable mention of him, in these
words, At that time was Jesus, a wise man (if it be lawful to call him man)
etc. It is confessed by Pagans, Suetonius in the life of Claudius, Sueton. l. 5.
speaks of him by the name of Chrestus, Tacitus, and Tacit. l. 15.
Pliny the younger, acknowledged him by the name Christus; and surely that
which not only his followers, Plin. Jun. l. 10. Ep. 97.
but his enemies confess, may well be taken for granted.

The only difficulty is to make it appear, that this Jesus that then lived, is
the Christ, that is, the person whom Moses and the Prophets foretold to be the
Messiah. To this end, the only thing to be done, is an inquiry into the
Praedictions concerning the Messiah, which, if they be found verified in this
Jesus, and no other person can be assigned, in whom they are verified, it will
be clearly manifest, that Jesus is the Christ. This way of arguing, I so much
the rather make choice of, because it is that to which Christ himself directs
us, when he bids the Jews to search the Scriptures, that is, the Old Testament,
(which then was the only written word) upon this account Joh. 5. 39
for they are they that testify of me, thereby putting the controversy to this
issue, that if he were not the person of whom the scripture did testify as the
Messiah, let him be accounted an Impostor and Deceiver. Accordingly it is, that
his Apostles in their discourses concerning him, still have recourse to the
Prophetical writings. Thus St. Paul says of himself, that he was separated
unto the Gospel of God, which he Romans 1. 12
had promised before by his Prophets in the Holy Scriptures, and concerning his
Doctrine, that he said no other things Act. 26. 22.
than those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come; for this Reason
it was no doubt, that St. Peter 2* Pet. 1. 19
wills those to whom he writes, that they should take heed to the sure word
of Prophecy, as to a light that shines in a dark place.

In this comparing of the Prophecies concerning the Messiah, with the History
of Jesus, I shall not mention all, nor yet largely insist on th^se I shall
mention, so as to vindicate them from all cavils, since then, this one
discourse would swell to a volume, and besides, it has been abundantly done by
the Learned already; only I shall run over the principal, and that in such a
way as (I hope) will strengthen the Christian, if not convince the gainsayer.

The Prophecies of the Messiah, which we meet with in the Old Testament, are
such as concern his Birth, Doctrine, Miracles, Offices, Sufferings, and
Exaltation, all which will, upon due search be found true in Jesus.

1 Concerning the Messiahs Birth, there are four forts of Predictions,
referring to the time, the place, the tribe, the manner.

1 The first prophecy we meet with concerning the time of the Messiahs coming
into the world, is that of Jacob, where he ^aith, The Scepter shall not depart
from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come, and unto
Genesis 43. 10
him shall the gathering of the people be. That by Shiloh is meant, the
Messiah, may appear, in that it is so rendered by the threefold Targum of
O^kelos, Jonathan, and Jerusalem; and withal the periphrasis annexed ( to him
shall be the gathering of the people) can agree to none but him. Now that
which Jacob asserteth concerning the Messiah, is* that there should not be a
total extirpation of all Civil power in the tribe of Judah, before the Messiah
came, and thence it necessarily follows, that the extirpation of the Civil
power is a sure note of the Messiahs being come. Another Prophecy concerning
the Messiahs advent, we meet with in Daniel, and it is uttered by an Angel,
Seventy weeks are determined upon thy people, and upon thy holy City, to finish
the transgression* and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and Dan. 9. 24, 25, 26.
to bring in everlasting Righteousness, and to seal up the ^^sion and
Prophecy, and to anoint the most holy know therefore and understand, that from
the going forth of the Commandment, to restore, and to build Jerusalem, unto
the Messiah, the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks
shall the street be built again, and the wall, even in troublesome times, and
after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself,
and the people of the Prince that shall come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary, and the end thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the
war, desolations are determined; where the Angel plainly assirmeth, among many
other things, that the Messiah should come, and be cut off before the
destruction of the City and the Sanctuary, whence it is naturally inferred,
that the actual overthrow of the City and Sanctuary, is an undoubted sign of
the Messiahs being come. Parallel to this are those two Prophecies, the one in
Haggai, and the other in Malachy, The Prophet Haggai brings in God himself,
thus saying, Yet once it is a little while, and I will shake the Heavens, and
the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry land, and I will shake Hag. 2. 6, 7, 9
all Nations, and the desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this
house with glory, yea, the glory of this latter house shall be greater than of
the former, says the Lord of Hoasts. That this is a prediction of the Messiah,
will appear among others, by this one irrefragable argument; The latter house,
which is here spoken of, was far short of the former; and in particular, there
were five things awanting in it, The Urim and Thummim, The Ark of the Covenant,
The Schechinah, The fire from Heaven, and The spirit of Prophecy* Now there
cannot any thing be rationally affirmed, as that which notwithstanding those
defects should render this latter house more glorious than the former, but
only the Messiahs presence. Finally, the Prophet Malachy, in the name of Mal.
3. 1
God, says, Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way
before me, and the Lord whom you seek shall suddenly come to his Temple; even
the messenger of the Covenant whom you delight in, behold, he shall come;
where those words, The Lord whom you seek. are no other then a periphrasis of
the Messiah whom the Jews expected, whom this last of the Prophets fore-tells,
not only to come, but to come suddenly, and that with a double behold, to
intimate both the certainty and propinquity of his coming; by both these
predictions it is elearly manifest, that the Time of the Messiahs coming was
to be, whilst this latter Temple was standing, and therefore the destruction
of the Temple is an undeniable note of the Messiahs being come*

By what has been said from these Prophecies, one would think the Jew might
be convinced of his folly, in still looking for a Messiah, when as it is so
many hundred years since the Jewish Government, together with the City and
Temple of Jerusalem was destroyed. And that the Jesus whom we profess to be
the Christ, was born before this utter dissipation, is an History so clear,
that I suppose none will question it. Indeed, many Learned Christians have
taken great pains, and to good purpose, exactly paralleling the time of the
coming of Jesus, with the Prophecies of Christ, and especially with that which
is the most punctual Prophecy, to wit, Daniels, referring the going forth of
the Commandment, not to that which was given by Cyrus, but by Artaxerxes
Longimanus, in the twentieth year of his reign; yea, some among the Jews (as
Rabbi N^hemiah, who lived fifty years before Jesus) did affirm, that the
Messiah should come at that time when Jesus was born: Nay, Porphiry, that
bitter enemy of Christians, saw the History of Jesus so clearly corresponding
to the Prophecy in Daniel, that his last refuge is, to deny those Prophecies to
be Daniels. But not troubling my self or you with Chronological computations,
It is enough for our present purpose, if it be granted (which I see not how it
can be denied) that Jesus was born whilst yet the Temple and City of
Jerusalem was standing, and about the time of the utter departure of the Civil
Government from Judah. Besides, the Sacred History of the Gospel, the Testimony
of Josephus the Jew, and the Letter sent by Pilate a Roman to Tiberius Tertul.
Apolog. c. 21.
(to which both Tertullian and Justin Martyr appeal) do sufficiently evince
that there was such a person at that time born and living in Judea, and at last
crucified by the Jews

2 As to the place where the Messiah was to be born, the Prophet Micah is
express, where he says, But thou Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou be little
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me
that is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth have been Micah 5. 2
from of Old, from Everlasting; from which Scripture it is, that the Pharisees
gave their answer upon Herod's inquiry concerning the place of his birth, in
which respect the Prophet and Evangelist are fitly reconciled, while one
calls it the least, and the other says, it is not the least, to wit, because
of the greatness of the person born in it. Now that Jesus was born in
Bethlehem, we have no meaner Testimony than that of an Angel, in his message to
the Shepherds, To you is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord; nor would it be Luke 2. 1^
passed by the strangeness of that providence* which brought it about that he
should be born there, for whereas Joseph and Mary dwelt in Nazareth, (twenty
miles distant from Bethlehem and it was far besides their thoughts to go to
Bethelhem) it so falls out, that in a peaceable time, the present Emperor
imposes an universal Tax upon the Jews among others, by which means every one
is to go up to the City of their Tribe, and so those of the house of David to
Bethlehem the City of David, and this fell out to be the very time when the
days of Mary were accomplished that she should be delivered, and this was done
that the Prophecy should be fulfilled.

3 The Tribe of which the Messiah should come, was that of Judah, and more
particularly, the house of David. This is intimated by Jacob, when he
foretells Genesis 43. 10.
the coming of the Messiah under the name of Shiloh, which some interpret his
Son, to wit, Judah, and in* as much as this prediction is inserted in the
benediction of Judah, which can be for no other reason, but that the Messiah
was to come of him. More plain, and particular Isay 11. 1
is that Prophecy of Isaiah, There shall come forth a rod out of the stem of
Jesse, and a branch shall grow out of his roots, where the Chaldee Paraphrase,
expressly testifies by that rod to be designed the Messiah, who should spring
forth of David, who was a stem of Jesse; yet more punctually does this appear,
in that promise made Psalm. 132. 11
to David, by God, of the fruit of thy loins will I set upon this Throne, and
again, I will set up thy seed after thee, 2 Samuel 7. 12.
which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his Kingdom for
ever, the former of which is expressly applied to the Messiah, by S. Peter; in
reference to this, it is, Act. 2. 30. Isa. 55. 3
that we read of the sure mercies of David, yea, by Jeremy and Hosea this name
of David is applied to the Messiah, Jer. 30. 9
they shall serve, or seek the Lord their God, and David their King, which
cannot be meant literally of David, who fell Hos. 3. 5
asleep long before, and therefore is mystically expounded of the Messiah, who
is called David, because he was to come from his family. This truth was so
known among Mat. 22. 42
the Jews, that when Jesus asked the Pharisees, what think you of Christ? whose
Son is he? they say to him, The Son of David.

Now that our Lord sprang out of the Tribe of Judah, Heb. 1. 14
is affirmed by the Author to the Hebrews to be evident, 2 Timothy 2. 3
and he is said by St. Paul expressly, to be of the seed of David; remarkable to
this purpose are his own words, Rev. 22. 16
where he says, I am the Root, and the Offspring of David, to wit, according
to his two natures, in respect of his Godhead the Root, and his Manhood, the
Offspring of David, by which that Riddle is unfolded, of his being both the
Lord, and the Son of David. As for his Legal Father, Joseph, it is (...) by St.
Matthew, that he was of Judahs Tribe, and Jesus being born of Mary after her
Espousals to Joseph* is upon that account to be reckoned of the tribe of
Judah: for if when the Deuteronomy. 25. 8.
brother did raise the seed to his brother, by marrying his widow, the
firstborn was to succeed in the name of the dead brother, and consequently
reckoned as his Son; well might Mary's Son whom she miraculously conceived by
the Holy Ghost overshadowing, be reputed Joseph's, to whom she was espoused;
and it being the custom of the Jews to derive the Genealogy from the Fathers,
in which respect it was a Proverb among them, the mothers family is no family,
Jesus is justly asserted to be of his Fathers Tribe, though he was not his
natural, but only his Legal Father. Though withal Luke 1. 26
there is nothing rationally to contradict, that Mary was of the house of
David, of the Tribe of Judah; It is true, Elizabeth who was of the house of
Aaron, the Tribe of Levi, is called her Cousen, but inasmuch as it was lawful
for the Tribe of Levi, having no possessions of their own, to marry into any
Tribe, it may be probably conceived, that either some of the Virgin Mary's
Ancestors married a wife of Levies Tribe, or some of Elizabeth's Ancestors did
marry a wife of Judahs Tribe, and so either way there might be an affinity
between the Virgin Mary and Elizabeth. Besides this, that there is no
convincing reason against it, there are good arguments inferring it, for since
upon that particular occasion of Zelophehads daughters, there was a Law enacted
of every Numb. 36
daughter marrying in her own Tribe which had an inheritance, and if (as
Casaubon argues) the blessed Virgin Casaub. Exercit.
were though in a mean condition, yet heir to an estate, it is very probable
that she was of Joseph's own Tribe, since he has the testimony of a just man,
and therefore one who would not violate so manifest a Law. Add to this, that
those words in St. Luke, of the house of David, may as well be referred* ^he
Virgin espoused to Joseph, as to Joseph, and then it becomes a positive
assertion, Luke 1. 27.
that Mary was of the house of David; and yet once more, if (as Spanhemius
strongly urges) St. Lukes genealogy Spanhem. dub. Evang.
gives us the lineage of Mary, it is without all doubt, that both by Father and
Mothers side, Jesus was of the Tribe of Judah.

4 The predictions concerning the Messiah, assert that he should be born of a
Virgin. The Prophet Isaiah Isa. 7. 14.
is express, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and though the
Hebrew word may signify any young woman, yet that there it should be rendered
Virgin, even this consideration will evince, because it is ushered in with a
behold of admiration, and it is intended as a sign for confirmation of Ahaz,
whereas it were no wonder, and therefore not fit to be a sign, that a young
woman should conceive, and bear a Son; Being then a Prophecy of a Son to be
brought forth by a virgin, it is no other doubtless, than the Messiah, whose
birth is there intended; and the very name Immanuel, by which he is to be
called, intimates as much, it being a name too high for any person, except the
Messiah. What in this Prophecy Isaiah spoke plainly, in the fifty third chap.
he utters allusively, where speaking of the Messiah, (for that that Chapter is
to be understood of him, is so evident, that he who runs may read it) he
says, He shall Isa. 53. 2
grow up as a tender plant in a dry ground, that is (say some not improbably)
of a Virgin, without the help of a man: Now that Jesus was born of Mary whilst
yet a Virgin, the Evangelical History plainly affirms; nor need it seem
impossible either to Jew or Pagan.

As for the Jew, why may he not believe, that the same Divine power which
caused Old Sarah to conceive, and bring forth, when she was as good as dead?
which made Aarons rod to bud, blossom, and bring forth Almonds? yea, which
formed the first man Adam without the help of woman, could enable a Virgin to
conceive and bring forth without the help of man?

As for the Pagans, they affirm that Venus was engendered of the froth of the
Sea, animated by the warmth of the Sun; that Pallas came from Joves brain, and
Bacchus from his thigh; that some of their Heroes were begotten by their Gods,
upon mortal creatures; Hercules, on Alemena, by Jupiter; Pan, on P^nelope, by
Mercury; Romulus, on Rhea, a Virgin, by Mars; and why is it not credible, that
Jesus should be born of the Virgin Mary by the overshadowing of the Holy
Ghost? And thus I have given you a brief account of the parallel between the
Prophecy of the Messiah, and the History of Jesus, as to his birth.

2 The Prophet Isaiah speaking concerning the Messiah, tells us, that the
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, Isa. 11. 2
the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, the Spirit of Counsel and Might, and
the Spirit of Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; that this Spirit did rest
on Jesus appears, both by the Oracles he spoke, and the Works, especially by
the Miracles, he wrought. It was the testimony the people gave of him, that
never man spoke like him, Joh. 7. 46
by which it appears, that the Spirit of Wisdom and Knowledge did rest on
him, never did any so clearly reveal the Will of God to the people as he. The
Glorious Promises were never so unveiled as by him, and by him the Precepts of
the Law were most exactly interpreted. That the Spirit of Might did rest on him
eminently, appeared in his wondrous Miracles, which were not Mark 2. 12
done in a corner, but openly before the people, who cried out, we never saw
it on this fashion. That Miraculous works were expected by the Jews from the
Messiah, when he should come, appears by the Question, when Christ comes,
will he do more Miracles than those which this man has done? and accordingly
when John Joh. 7. 31.
sent to Jesus, Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another? he
returns this Answer, Go, and show John again, those things which you do hear
and see, The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are Mat. 11.
3, 4, 5
cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, all which could not have
been done by him, if he had not been anointed with the Holy Ghost, and with
Power.

3 Concerning the Messiah, we find a Threefold Office to which he was
anointed, to wit, of King, Priest, and Prophet; Moses fore-tells him to be a
Prophet, where Deuteronomy. 18. 15
he says, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren; David mentions him under the Offices of a King, and a Priest, Yet
have I set my King Psalm. 2. 6. 110. 4
upon my holy hill of Sion, and, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck. This was that which was peculiar to the Messiah, for though David
was a King and a Prophet, Samuel was a Prophet and a Priest, and Melchisedeck
was a King and a Priest, yet only the Messiah was a King, Priest, and Prophet;
accordingly it is that we find Jesus as a Prophet, teaching the Mysteries of
the Kingdom, as a Priest, praying, yea dying for the people, and acknowledged
by the Magi to be King of the Jews.

Once more, it is foretold in the Psalms, and the Prophets, concerning the
Messiah, that he should be a man of sorrows, despised, and rejected of men;
yea that he Isa. 53. 3* 10
should be cut off from the land of the living, that he Psa. 16. 110.
should be taken from Prison and Judgment, that having drunk of the brook in
the way, he should lift up his head; that he should not see corruption, and
sit at the right hand of God. And now that all these things which were written
concerning the Son of Man were accomplished, the Evangelical Histories do
abundantly testify; it were Vide Episcop. Page 190.
easy to trace out an exact Parallel, not only as to substance, but
circumstances, concerning the humiliation and exaltation of Christ. As for that
pretense of the Jews, opposing our Saviors Resurrection, that his Disciples
stole him away, it is so frivolous and absurd, that no rational man can believe
it, yea that Dilemma of St. Austine abundantly confuteth it, If the Soldiers
were not asleep, when the Disciples stole his body, why did they permit them to
do it; if they were asleep, how could they affirm it to be done?

By all these considerations put together, it cannot but appear an undeniable
truth, that Jesus is the Christ; and however it may be alleged, that some
Prophecies which concern the glory and power of the Messiahs Kingdom seem not
yet to be accomplished; the Answer is justly returned, that it is not an
outward and visible, but an invisible and spiritual glory and power which is in
those Prophecies intended, and that is continually fulfilled in the preaching
of the Gospel; and withal they may very rationally be extended to his Second
coming, when he shall appear in glory to Judge the World, and when every knee
shall bow to him, and every tongue shall confess (what now perhaps it denies)
that Jesus is the Lord, the Christ, to the glory of God the Father; and so I
have given a dispatch to the truth implicitly asserted, pass we on more
briefly to the

2 Heresy explicitly charged on the false teachers, namely, denying that Jesus
is the Christ. If we render the words exactly, according to the Greek text, it
is, He that denies that Jesus is not the Christ, but yet the not is justly
left out in our translation, because according to our way of speaking, He that
denies that Jesus is not the Christ, is he who affirms Jesus is the Christ,
which is the truth; whereas in the Greek Language, Gemina negatio fortius
negat, A double negation denies more vehemently. Parallel to this is that
speech of our Savior to Peter, The Cock shall not crow this day before thou
shall thrice Luke 22. 34
deny that thou know me; where in each clause the Greek uses two Negatives
for the greater emphasis. We cannot better express the force of the Greek
phrase in our English Language, than by supplying a word after denies, namely
thus; who is a liar but he that denies, saying that Jesus is not the Christ?
and surely, if the affirmative be the truth, as has been already proved, he
must needs be a Liar, who asserteth the negative.

That this then is a lying Heresy, appears by the preceding Discourse; that
which only remains to be inquired, is the truth of the charge, that these
false teachers Justin. in loc.
did deny Jesus to be the Christ; indeed as Justinian well, Hoc maxim
faciebant Judai, this was that which the Jews did most expressly deny, but yet
withal there were Judaizing false teachers among the Christians, such was
Simon Magus, Menander, Ebion, and Cerinthus, with others, upon whom this was
justly charged. Simon Magus taught, that it was he who appeared among the Jews
as the Son, in Samaria as the Father, and to the rest of the Nations as the
Holy Ghost; Menander, that he was sent from the invisible Powers a Savior for
the redemption of men; and so affirmed themselves to be the Christ, and in that
denied Jesus to be the Christ. Valentinus, Ebion, and Cerinthus, affirmed Jesus
to be a Eusebius. hist. l. 3. c. 21. Iren. l. 1. c. 20, 21
mere man, begotten by Joseph, conceived and born of Mary after the ordinary
way, and that Christ was another Person who descended on him in the shape of a
Dove, when he was thirty years of age; and that it was not Idem. l. 1. c. 25
and l. 3. c. 17
Christ, but Jesus who dyed upon the Cross, and was buried, and rose again;
and what did these but in effect deny Jesus to be the Christ? And now if any
shall say, this concerns not us, for we do heartily acknowledge, and openly
profess, that Jesus is the Christ; I shall desire such to consider, that there
is a direct, and a collateral, a dogmatical, and a practical denying Jesus to
be the Christ.

1 He who acknowledging Jesus to be the Christ, does yet detract from any of
his Offices to which he was anointed, vertually and collaterally denies him
to be the Christ; upon this account, both Socinians and Papists are justly
charged by the Orthodox as Antichristian Liars.

The Socinians indeed acknowledge Christ's Regal, Prophetical, and Sacerdotal
Offices, but yet they confound the Regal and the Sacerdotal; they detract from
the Regal, taking the rise of it from his Resurrection, when as the Angel says
of him, as soon as born, he is Christ the Lord; and chiefly from his
Sacerdotal, whilst they acknowledge his intercession, but deny his Sacrifice,
and assert his death to be only a consecration of him to his Priesthood,
which (say they) he only exercises in Heaven.

The Papists likewise do ascribe those three Offices to him, and yet they
detract from every one of them; from his Prophetical, by denying the written
Word to be a sufficient and perfect rule of Faith and manners; from his
Sacerdotical, in both the parts of it, by their Superstitious sacrifice of the
Mass, and praying to Saints and Angels, to be their Intercessours. Finally,
from the Regal, by setting up the Pope as Head of the Church, and giving him
that power of supremacy and infallibility, which he never derived from Christ.

2 But to bring it yet a little nearer to our selves, he who professedly
assents to this truth, that Jesus is the Christ, and yet is not guided by him
as a Prophet, governed by him as a King, and rests not on him as his Priest,
practically denies him to be the Christ. Very apposite to this purpose is
that of St. Austin, Quiescat paululum lingu^, interroga vitam, Aug in loc.
quisquis factis negat Christum Antichristus est, let thy life speak rather
than thy tongue, whosoever denies Christ in his works, is an Antichrist. If
any provide not for his house, 1 Timothy 5. 8
says St. Paul, he has denied the faith, that is, done an act inconsistent
with the Christian faith, whereof he makes profession, which is in effect to
deny the faith; thus he whose life dishonours Christ, who gives not up
himself to the rule and government of Christ, who says in his actions, I will
not have this man to reign over me, in truth denies Christ, and is no better
than an Antichrist; and oh how many Antichristian Christians then are there?

In one word, whatever profession we make of Christ, and our faith in him,
Whilst by our Envy, and Malice, pride, and Covetousness, Rapine, and
oppression, Intemperance, and Profaneness, we walk directly contrary to the
Law. and Life, the Command, and Example of our holy, humble, peaceable, and
charitable (...)s, we do that in our actions, which the false Teachers did in
their Doctrins, deny Jesus to be the Christ; and thus much shall suffice for
the dispatch of the first-branch of the accusation; the time being expired I
shall put off the further prosecution of the charge against these Antichrists,
till another Sessions.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 22, 23, VERSE. Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christ? he is Antichrist that denies the Father, and the Son. Whosoever
denies the Son, the same has not the Father, but he that acknowledges the
Son, has the Father also.
Our blessed Savior calling those two sons of Zebedee, James and John, to be
his Mark 3. 17
Disciples, gave them the Sur-name of Boanerges, which signifies, a Son of
thunder; Brig. ibid
mutatio nominis d^ni alicujus spiritualis significationem habet, where names
are changed, some spiritual gift is conferred; it was so no doubt, upon those
Apostles, to whom Christ gave eminent abilities of asserting truth, confuting
errors, reproving sin, persuading repentance, in such a way, as might like
thunder awaken the dull and drowsy world. That St. James was such a Thunderer,
appears by his sufferings, it being very probable, that his powerful
Preaching of the Gospel, was the occasion of Herod's malicious persecution, and
that the liberty of his tongue cost him his life. That St. John was one who did
not only lighten in his conversation, but thunder in his Doctrines, appears
by his writings, and more particularly, this Epistle, wherein he cries aloud,
and lifts up his voice like thunder, against both the Hypocrites and
Heretics of his time, against those, in the former chapter, these, in this,
and more especially in these verses, Who is a Liar, etc.

The latter branch of the accusation against the Antichrists in S. John's days,
is that which now comes to be discussed, as it is propounded in the end of
the two and twentieth, and proved in the three and twentieth verse.

1 Begin we with the charge it self, He is Antichrist that denies the Father
and the Son. These words are looked upon by Expositors in a double notion,
either as a distinct accusation, or as an aggravation of the former charge.

1 Serrarius upon this clause, says, Altera haeresis Serrar. in loc.
est negantium patrem et filium, in these words another sort of Heretics are
charged, who denied the Father and the Son, inasmuch as they feigned another
father; so did Basilides, and Saturnius, as Epiphanius and Epiphan. adv.
Haeres. l. 1 Iren. l. 3. c. 15 Tertul. adv. Prax. c. 31.
Irenaeus informs us. Such also were those heretics, who confounded the Father
and the Son, as if they were one and the same perso^n, to whom Tertullian
applies this very clause, where he says, Negant patrem dum cundem et filium
dicunt, et negant filium dum eundem patr^^ credunt, dando illis quae non sunt,
auferendo quae sunt, they deny the Father, in asserting him to be the Son,
they deny the Son, in affirming him to be the Father, ascribing to both what
they are not, and taking from them what they are. To this may be referred
those fabulous things which were broached in those heretical schools of Simon,
and others, concerning God introducing a multitude of Rulers, under the names
of Barbel, Abrakan, Karlakan, etc. by whom the World was governed, which was
indeed to deny the father.

2 But that which seems to me most rational, is to look upon this clause as
an aggravation of the former charge, letting us see what follows upon denying
Jesus to be the Christ, namely, a denial of the Father and the Son, and
consequently how pernitions this Antichristian doctrine is: for whereas levius
videri poterat, it may seem a small thing to deny Jesus (who appeared in the
form of Eorum crimen amplificat. Matlor.
a Servant) to be the Christ, addit quid gravius, he adds that which might
justly startle them, that how little account soever they made of it, it was no
other than to deny the Father and the Son, and so in effect the denying this
man to be the Christ, is to deny God himself. To open this distinctly in its
full latitude, we shall find a threefold charge in this one.

1 He that denies Jesus to be the Christ, denies the Son of God. I begin
with the Son, though the Father be the first person, because he is most
directly denied. This will be the more easily understood, if we consider what
our Apostle takes here for granted, that Christ is no other than the Son of
God. How, and in what respect he is the Son of God, I shall have more full
occasion to discuss at the ninth verse of the fourth Chapter, it shall suffice
here to take notice* that the Messiah was looked upon as having the near
relation to God of a Son. S. Peter in that excellent confession of his Faith,
puts these two together, Thou art the Christ, The Son of the living Mat. 16. 16
God; nay* the very Devils who came out of them that were possessed,
^cknowledging him to be the Christ, do withal declare him to be the Son, Thou
art Christ the Luke 4 41
Son of God; and that this was a received opinion among the Jews, appears by
that question which the High Priest put to him, art thou the Christ the Son of
the blessed? Mark. 14. 61
yea, as Grotius well observes, apparet hoc cognomen vulgo Grot.
Messiae datum, it appears to have been a name of the Messiah, well known
among the vulgar, by that of the very Seamen; who beholding the miracle wrought
by him on the winds, cried out, of a truth thou art the Mat. 14. 33
Son of God, that is, the Messiah. Suitable to this it is, that the Ancient
Hebrews did mystically interpret those words in the Psalms, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee, of the Messiah, by which it is evident, that to
deny him who is the Christ, is no other than to deny Gods Son.

2 He does not only deny the Son, but the Father; For

1 The relation between the Father and the Son, is very near, no wonder, if the
injury done to the Son, reflect upon the Father; it is thus among men, much
more in the Deity, where the Son is consubstantial and coeternal with the
Father. Being the Son, he is the brightness of his fathers glory, and
express Image of his person. So St. Paul characterizeth him, for which reason
it is that all men should honor the Son as they honor the Father. So our
Savior Heb. 1. 2 John 5. 23
himself expressly asserteth and thence infers* He that honors not the
Son, honors not the Father.

2 The Father it is who sends his Son into the World, and to deny him who is
sent, what is it but to deny him Grot. in loc.
who sends? To deny (says Grotius) is sometimes as much as authoritatem
alicui detrahere, to detract from ones authority, and to deny the Person sent,
is in effect to deny the Authority of the sender; in this respect it is, that
in the Scripture but now quoted, those words are added, that sent him, and to
this purpose that of our Savior elsewhere, is very apposite, He that
despises you, despises Luke 10. 16
me (to wit, because they were sent by him) and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me, to wit, the father, by whom Christ was sent.

3 The Father having sent his Son, was pleased to give Testimony to him. They
are Christ's own words, The Father himself which sent me has born witness of
Joh. 5. 37
me* accordingly if you look into St. Matthews Gospel, Mat. 3, 17 17. 5
you shall find, that at his baptism, a voice was heard from Heaven, saying,
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and again, at his
transfiguration on the Mount, behold, a voice from the clouds, which said, This
is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, to which last St.
Peter alludeth, where he says of Christ, 2 Pet. 1. 17
He received from God the Father Honor and Glory, when there came forth a
voice to him from the excellent glory, so that God having given this testimony
(than which what can be more full or immediate) of the Messiah, that he was
his Son, whosoever denies the Christ the Son of God, gives the Father the
Lie, according as our Apostle more fully expresses in the close of this
Epistle. He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, because 1 John 5. 10
he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son.

3 Lastly, Though it be not expressed, yet it would be supplied, he denies
not only the Father and the Son, but the Holy Ghost; for as in the first
Chapter, where out followship is said to be with the Father and his Son, the
Holy Ghost is included, so here doubtless, the third Person is employed, who is
no less denied than the other two, by them who deny Jesus to be the Christ.
The Greek word (...), comes from the Verb which signifies to anoint; now to
this anointing, all the three persons did concur, there is persona ungens,
uncta, and unctio, the Father anointing, the Son anointed, and the Holy Ghost
the ointment, and therefore he that denies the Christ, denies all three
persons; it was by no other than the Holy Ghost that Jesus Christ did all his
glorious miracles, his mighty works; in which respect, the Pharisees denying
Jesus to be the Christ, became guilty of the sin against the Holy Ghost; and
thus this heresy is no less than a denial of the blessed Trinity.

To shut up this clause, learn we hence, when we receive any Doctrins, to
consider what consequence; do naturally flow from them. I have so much charity
as to think, that many of the Jews, and some of the followers of those
Antichrists, did not think, that by denying Jesus to be the Christ, they were
guilty of such a blasphemy against the Deity, as to deny the Father and the
Son, but yet so it was, as appears by what has been already said. I have the
same opinion of many seduced persons in this age, who are not so considerate,
to weigh the evil inferences, which are justly deducible from such praemises
which they embrace as truth.

Indeed we must distinguish between natural and forced deductions, some like
Spiders suck poison out of flowers, like bad stomachs, turn the best nutriment
into ill humors, perverting the soundest Doctrins by fallacious paralogismes.
If we are made sinners by one man's disobedience, then say some, God is unjust,
in charging Adams posterity with his guilt; If Justification be by Faith
alone, then say others, what need of good works? If Christ be the Propitiation
for the sins of the world, then say others, we need not fear though we add
sin to sin; and thus the most precious Doctrins of the Gospel, are abused to
patronize horrid conclusions; but how irrational they are, easily appears to
any who shall judiciously examine them. Nor does this hinder, but that many
specious doctrines have a sting in their tail, and how amiable soever they seem
in their direct aspects, yet they will be found very detestable in their
reflection. The Antinomian, in denying that God seeeth any sin in justified
persons, or is at all displeased with them when they sin, denies that he is
Omniscient, not knowing all things, and that he is a Pure, and Holy God, hating
sin wherever he finds it. The Socinian, in denying that Christ did expiate
sin, and satisfy justice, denies the merit of his death, the dignity of his
person, and justification by faith in his blood. Many instances of this kind
might be brought in several erroneous positions, both of these, and other
Heretics; the truth is, according to that known saying, uno dato absurdo mill
sequnntur, one absurdity being granted, a thousand follow, and such as were
they apprehended, would doubtless be abhorred, though not by those who broach,
yet by many of them who entertain such positions, and therefore let it be our
Wisdom to examine whither this or that Doctrine tends, to what it leads, and
what must necessarily follow upon it, for so does S. John here, in which
respect he charge them who deny that Jesus is the Christ, with denying the
Father and the Son.

2 The Proof of this latter part of the charge, is that which now follows in
the next verse, Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not the Father, but
he that acknowledges the Son, has the Father also. I call this a proof, and
not without Reason, since the Argument is strong, He that has not the Father
denies him, he that denies the Son has not the Father, and therefore he
denies the Father and the Son.

The verse consists of two clauses, the latter whereof is not in our ordinary
Greek Copies, and therefore is left out by Calvin, and is conceived by Daneus
to have crept out of the gloss into the Text. But Beza assures us, Calv Vid.
Dan. Beza in loc.
that he saw it in two Greek manuscripts, it is also in the Syriack and vulgar
Latin, and inserted (though in another Character) by our Translators. If we
peruse the writings of this Apostle, we shall find no way of illustration
more frequent than that which is by contraries, whilst sometime the
Affirmative is amplified by the Negative, and then again the Negative by the
Affirmative, in which respect it is not improbable, that this affirmative might
here be annexed by the Apostle. But since I shall have a more fit occasion of
handling the duty of confessing Christ, when (by Gods grace) I shall come to
the second and thirteenth verses of the fourth Chapter, and withal (there
being the same reason of contraries) the unfolding of the one is virtually an
explication of the other. I shall not enlarge in a distinct handling of these
clauses.

That which would here be principally inquired into, is the notion of this
phrase, (...), to have the Father, of which Interpreters give a threefold
construction.

1 That phrase in the first Commandment, of having Exodus 2^. 3
none but Jehovah to be our God, may give some light to this; for as there
habendi verbum pro credere, intelligere, usurpatur, the word having is as much
as knowing and believing; So here; and then the design of our Apostle in these
words, is to let us know, that all Jews and others, who deny the Messiah,
however they pretend to believe in, and give worship to, and have the knowledge
of the true God, in truth, they are ignorant of him, and so neither believe nor
worship him aright, because they do not know, believe, and worship him as the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Indeed, this is to be understood (as to the
explicit notion) with a limitation in reference to Christ already come. As for
the Jews before Christ (though the godly among them had some glympse of this,
for otherwise they could not have believed in the Messiah, which was to come)
yet it was not expressly required of them to invocate God as the father of
Christ; but God having now sent his Son into, and by him revealed himself unto
the World, he can no other ways be rightly adored, and invocated, but as his
Father. To this purpose it is that Christ is called by the Apostle, the image
of the invisible God, which though it be true of him, as he is the Son of
God, in respect of his eternal Generation, by which the Divine essence being
communicated to him he is the Image of God, that is, ( personally taken) God
the Father; yet in that the Apostle says not only, the Image Col 1. 15
of God, but of the invisible God, there seems to be a tacit Antithesis, and
so it is to be understood of the Son of God made man, who by his incarnation
is become a visible Image of the invisible God; for this reason it is, he
says himself elsewhere, if ye knew me, you would know the father also; and
indeed, as we cannot comfortably Joh. 14. 7
see the Sun with a direct aspect, but in its reflection, so neither can we
rightly know the father, but in Christ, who is his visible Image: Suitable
hereunto it is, that our Savior expressly says, No man knows the Son but
the Father, neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and Mat. 11. 27
he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him; and among other constructions of
those words, you believe in God, Joh. 14. 1
believe also in me, this is one, That if they did not believe in him, they
could not believe in God: so that from hence Musc. ibid. ^
we may infer, that not only the Barbarous Pagans, who worship the Sun, the
fire, or any other creatures of Gods making, or stones, and Images of their own
making, but the Mahumetans, and the Jews, who worship the Great Creator,
inasmuch as those only worship him, as revealing himself (in their fanatic
opinion) by Mahumet, and these worship him, only as he was pleased to reveal
himself of Old by Moses, but not as now he has manifested himself in his Son
Jesus, nay, both of them denying his Son Jesus, are therefore most justly
looked upon, not only as false Worshippers of a true God, but in some sense as
Worshipers of a false God, because they have not, that is, they know not,
neither do they believe and worship the Father of Christ, to wit, not formally,
though materially, adoring him who is, but not as he is the Father.

2 That phrase of St. Paul, (...), we have the mind of Christ, may serve as a
paraphrase upon this; To have the Father, is to have the mind of the Father,
which 1 Cor. 2. 16
is else where called, his good, acceptable, and perfect will. This will or
good pleasure of the father, is the redemption of the World, which he sent his
Son, both to accomplish and reveal, in this respect St. Basil upon these words,
He that has Basil ad. Amphilech c. 3
seen me, has seen the Father, thus glosseth, (...), not the figure or form
of the Fathers essence, which is most simple and uncompounded, but the goodness
of his will, and therefore he who denies the Son cannot have, but is either
altogether ignorant of, or Apostatized from the Doctrine of the Father; of which
latter the Apostle especially speaking, the notion of (...), is taken as if it
were (...) (for so it is many times used) to hold, and accordingly Grotius
glosseth, Non tenet quae sit voluntas patris, he does not hold fast the good
will of the Father, which is published in the Evangelical Doctrine. And no
wonder, for he that has not, holds not the foundation, cannot have the
Superstructure. Now this Thesis, That Jesus is the Christ, is the very
foundation of that Gospel Truth which the Father has by Christ imparted to us,
and consequently the denial of this cannot consist with having the father, that
is, with holding the will and mind of the Father declared in the Gospel.

3 Lastly, that Gloss of St. Cyprian, would by no means be left out, Non
habet patrem benevolum, he has Cypr. Exhot. ad Martyr.
not the father benevolous and propitious to him, and so we may construe this
phrase by that in the first chapter, of having fellowship with the father; and
whereas it is said in the former verse, he denies the father, this carries
more in it, namely, That the father denies him. Indeed, all that love the
father has to us, and fellowship we have with the father, is through his Son.
Whence it follows, that every one who has not the Son, but much more he who
denies the Son, has not the Father, yea, the Father is highly displeased and
enraged against him. When Theodosius would not be entreated by Amphilochius,
to suppress the Arrian Heretics, who denied Christ to be the eternal Son of
God, that Godly Bishop (says Theodoret) (...), found out a memorable stratagem
to convince him of his fault, for going into the Palace when Theodosius, and
his Son Arcadius Theod. Eccle. hist. l. 5. c 16
were together, he saluteth the Emperor with his wonted reverence, but gives
no Honor to the Son, the Emperor supposing it was a forgetful neglect, puts
him in mind of it; to whom his Answer was, it was enough that he had done
obedience to him, at which the Emperor being greatly offended, the good Bishop
thus bespoke him, (...), You see O King how ill you take it, that your Son
should be dishonored, how angry you are with me for not giving him
Reverence, (...). Believe therefore, that the great Lord of the universe,
cannot but abhor those who blaspheme his only begotten Son. Of this number
were these Antichrists, concerning whom St. John plainly asserteth, that
denying the Son, they have not the father; no true knowledge of him, nor of his
Doctrine, nor can they expect his love and favor toward them.

What now remains but that we take heed least we be found among the number
of them who deny the Son: nor is this Caution unseasonable, for,

1 There want not among us, such (the Socinians I mean) who affirm (with those
Heretics of old) Christ to be only man, and these however they pretend to
acknowledge, yet consequentially deny him to be the Son of God, for says the
Author to the Hebrews, Unto which Heb. 1. 6
of the Angels said he at any time thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee? and if not to the Angels, surely, not to a mere man, who is lower than
the Angels. It would not be passed by, that a little after in that very
Epistle, Jesus whom the Apostle had proved to be far Heb. 2, 6, 7, 8, 9
higher than the Angels, and that in this very particular of being Gods Son) is
said to be little lower than the Angles: and that this is to be understood in
respect of his man hood, appears by the Scripture, just before quoted, what
is man that thou art mindful of him, thou have made him a little lower than the
Angels, the litteral sense whereof is, to assert the humane nature inferior to
the Angelical; surely, then in respect of that nature wherein he is below, he
cannot be far above the Angels, and therefore to assert him a mere man (though
never so highly honored) is to deny him to be the Son of God in the Apostles
sense, that is, so as by reason of that Sonship to be higher than the Angels,
for to allude to S. Paul's expression ( though they are called Gods, whether in
heaven or in earth; as 1 Cor. 8. 5. 6
there be Gods many, and Lords many, but there is but one God the father) so
though there be that are called the Sons of God, whether Angels or men, yet
there is but one who is the begotten Son of God, which is so high a dignity,
that he must be more than Man or Angel, who is capable of it, and
consequently to assert him a mere man, is to deny him to be Gods Son.

2 Besides, we may be Orthodox in our Judgment, concerning the Son of God,
and forward in our confession of him, and yet interpretatively deny him, and
that especially two ways.

1 When we detract from the al-sufficiency of his merits; upon what is it,
that the infinite virtue of our Saviors death did chiefly depend, but this,
that he is the Son of God? so that he that does not rely on the virtue of
his death, denies him to be Gods Son, and yet how apt are many to offend in
this kind; by either a total despairing of salvation through Christ, or a part
al-joyning of other Saviors with him, and to say, that either Christ's blood
cannot at all, or that it cannot alone (to wit, as a meritorious cause) expiate
sin, is to say, it is insufficient* and consequently it is not the blood of the
Son of God, which may justly be interpreted, a denial of the Son of God.

2 When we refuse to hear, and obey the Word of God, who at sundry times, and
in diverse manners spoke in times Heb. 1. 12
past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, and has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son. Of this Son the voice said twice hear him, and not to hearken to
him when he speaks to us, is in effect to deny him; who is it but the Son
that wooeth us in the Ministry of the Gospel, to accept of mercy, pardon, and
salvation, upon the terms of faith, repentance, and obedience, and if we say
no in our hearts, is not this to deny him? How often (says Christ to
Jerusalem) would I have gathered thy children Mat. 23. 37
together, as un Hen does her Chickens under her wings, but you would not? May
he not take up the same complaint of us? See that you refuse not him that
speaks, (says the Author to the Hebrews) for if they escaped Heb. 12. 24
not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we
turn away from him that speaks from heaven; where the two words of refusing
and turning away are very emphatical, the one signifying to pray against a
thing, for so oft-times we refuse with a God forbid, and so it notes a
refusal with indignation, the other importing an alienation of the heart from a
thing, since we turn away from what we cannot endure, and so intimates a
rejection with detestation, and have not we need of this caution? Since though
(being the Son of God) he came and spoke from Heaven, yet we reject his
sayings, and is not this to deny him?

3 Add to this, that Christum deserit qui Christianum se non asserit, he that
does not profess himself a Christian, denies Christ; not only those who
wilfully, professedly, maliciously, and so at once both inwardly and outwardly
deny the Christ, the Son of God; but those who whilst inwardly they believe in
him, do yet refuse (if called to it) openly to own him, either through fear,
or shame, or both, are vertually deniers of him. It is very observable, that
what is here called a denying of the Son, is elsewhere phrased a not honoring
the Son; that Joh. 5. 23 Mat. 10. 33 Mark 8. 38 2 Timothy 2. 12
whereas in St. Matthew it is, Whosoever shall deny me, in St. Mark it is,
Whosoever shall be ashamed of me; that in St. Paul's Epistle to Timothy,
denying Christ is opposed to suffering for him. Finally, that here is no medium
in the text, between denying and acknowledging the Son. By all which it
appears, that though we do not wretchedly oppose, and gainsay the Son of
God, yet if we do not honor him, and that as we honor the Father, with the
same adoration both of soul and body, if we are not ready upon all occasions to
acknowledge him, if because of reproach we are ashamed to own him; nay if we
refuse (being called) to suffer, though it be death it self, for his name, we
are no other than deniers of him.

And now beloved, though at present there be neither disgrace, nor danger in
acknowledging the Messiah the Son of God, nay indeed, quaestuosa res est nomen
Christi, it is both gainful and honorable to be a Christian, and therefore it
is little thanks to own Christ, yet what think you if we had lived in the
Pagan Persecution, or if God should (which his mercy avert) let loose the Turk
to invade Christendom, or suffer the Socinian Heresy to overspread the
world, as once the Arrian did, have we ready hearts, willing minds to contend
for the says; nay rather would we not wretchedly renounce, at least cowardly
conceal our Christian profession; certainly my brethren, they who now deny
obedience to his call, will then deny the profession of his name; they that
will not hear the Son speaking to them in his Word, will never bear reproaches
and persecutions for his sake. Upon all these considerations, it is an useful
admonition to us, that we do not deny, but acknowledge the Son. It is the
Psalmists advice even to Kings, well may we follow it, Kiss the Son lest he
be angry; kiss Psalm. 2. 10
him with a kiss of affection, of subjection, be ready to testify your faith
in him, reverence of him, love to him, upon all occasions.

The more to enforce this upon us, take notice

1 Who it is, the Son, and that in a double notion.

1 Being the Son, he thinks it no robbery to be equal with God, in as much as
according to the Athanasian Phil. 2. 5
Creed, he is God of God, Light of Light, very God of very God, being the Son
he is Heir of all things, Lord of Heaven and Earth, and shall we in any kind,
or for any cause deny him? This is that which St. Jude brings in as an
Aggravation of the sin of these very Antichrists, whom he calls certain men
crept in unawares, they denied Jude, verse. 4
the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; where though some take the words
dis-junctively, applying the first clause to the Father, and the second to the
Son, yet since there is no Article in the Greek between (...) and (...), God
and Lord, to divide them; yea the word (...), in that parallel place of St.
Peter, is evidently used of Christ, and withal the Heresies of those times
more directly struck at Christ, than at God the Father; it is not improbable
that St. Jude intended here only to set forth Christ in his Natures and
Prerogatives, whom he calls the only Lord God (as elsewhere the Father is
styled the only true God) not in exclusion of the other Persons, but of all
false Deities. And now when we set before us the Divinity, Majesty,
Sovereignty, and authority of Christ the only Lord God, how must the sin of
denying him appear beyond measure sinful?

2 This glorious and eternal Son of God was pleased to undertake and accomplish
the work of our Redemption, and it would be no other than a monstrous
ingratitude to deny him; upon this account St. Peter speaking of these very
Antichrists under the name of false teachers, 2 Pet. 2. 2
aggravateth their denial of Christ, in that it was of the Lord that bought
them; there cannot be a more execrable villainy, than for a slave to disown his
Lord that has ransomed him; who would not cry shame on that Son who should
deny his own Father? and may I not say of the Son of God in Moses his language
to every one of us, Is not he thy Father that has bought thee? what Deuteronomy. 32. 6
is there thou can be in danger of by acknowledging him, which he did not
actually undergo to redeem thee? Is it loss of estate, he was poor; of
credit, he was reviled; of liberty, he was bound; of life, he was Crucified;
and shall any of these dishearten us from honoring or enduce us to deny him?
when therefore any temptations shall assault us (as once they did Peter) to
deny him, let us remember what he is in himself, and what he has done for us;
let us consider his greatness, and be afraid; his goodness, and be ashamed;
for fear, or shame, or any cause whatsoever to deny him.

2 That I may drive the nayl to the head, let us often set before our eyes that
dismal commination so often denounced in the Gospel by the Son of God himself
against those who shall deny him, Whosoever shall deny me before Mat. 10. 33
men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in heaven; and again
inculcated by St. Paul, if we deny 2 Timothy 2. 13.
him he will deny us; a threat then which none more just, and yet withal none
more terrible; just it is, in that it is the retaliation of like for like; what
more rational than that despisers should be despised, forsakers should be
forsaken, and denyers should be denied; and how terrible it is will soon
appear, if you consider that the Son of God will then deny us, when he shall
appear in his glory, that he will deny us not only before men, but Angels, nay
his Father; that if he pronounce upon us an, I know you not (which is to deny
us) we are the cursed of the Father, he will not acknowledge them for his
adopted children, who durst not here own his begotten Son, and whom his Son
will not then own for brethren, yea which consummateth the misery of such
Apostates, they must have their portion with Hypocrites, having denied Christ,
and being denied by him, they must depart from him into that fire which is
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, there being no reason that they should
be near to Christ hereafter, who follow him a far off, nay, run away from him
here.

With these meditations let us arm our selves against this heinous sin; that we
may be the better strengthened.

1 Labor we to be thoroughly established upon good grounds in this fundamental
doctrine, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God. He that imbraceth Christian
Religion upon the account only of the Public Law, or private education, will
in time of trial renege it. Let therefore our assent to this Doctrine rest upon
these sure Pillars, primarily the authority of Scriptures, and secondarily the
Catholic Church, and then we shall not easily deny it; nor let us content our
selves with a Conjectural opinion, but strive for a firm and settled
persuasion, a stake in the ground may be quickly plucked up, but a tree rooted
in the ground abides unmovable; he that doubts may soon be brought to deny,
but a well grounded persuasion will not quickly be moved, much less removed.

2 Learn we according to our Saviors precept, to deny our selves, since often
times, self and Christ come in competition, Mat. 16. 24
so that one must be denied, and if we have not in some measure taken out this
excellent lesson of self denial, we shall soon deny him; No wonder if an
Ancient says ingenuously, Christiani praludium sui repudium, the first step in
the ladder of Christianity, is self-denial.

3 Nor must we forget that advice of St. Paul, to deny Worldly Lusts, for if
we take not our hearts off Tit. 2. 14
from the World, the World will take them off from Christ, it is very
observable that our Savior had no sooner threatened this sin of denying him,
but he presently forbids, Loving Father or Mother, Son or daughter Man* 10.
33, 37.
more than him, intimating how prone the inordinate love of worldly things is,
to alienate us from him.

4 Finally, strive for a real union to Christ by a lively faith, he who is but
a visible Christian, may cease to be so much as visible, but the spiritual
union, will not endure a dissolution, much less an abnegation, maintain and
increase familiar communion with him, that thou may more and more taste the
sweetness that is in him, and then no allurement or affrightment shall cause
thee to deny him.

I end all, as we desire not to be found deniers of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as we desire to have the Father, propitious toward us, and Christ to
own us before the Father at the last day, let us dread to deny, let us be ready
to acknowledge, with our hearts, lipes, lives, Jesus the Christ, the Son of
God, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed Honor, and
Glory, now, and for ever.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 24. and 25. Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have
heard from the beginning; if that which ye have heard from the beginning,
shall remain in you, ye shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. And this
is the Promise that he has promised to us, even eternal life.
ZEal, Sincerity, and Perseverance, are not so much particular graces, as each
of them necessary ingredients to every grace; Zeal being the fervor; sincerity
the truth; and perseverance, the duration of all graces; of these three, the
last is not the least needful, since constancy is the best evidence of
sincerity; nor will fervor avail without permanency; no wonder if it be called
by Bonaventure, conditio annexa cuilibet virtuti, an Bonavent. in sent 3. did.
24. Aquin. 1a 2ae quaest. 26. ar. 2
inseparable condition of every virtue, and by Aquinas, donum que caetera
servantur d^nae, that gift which preserves all the rest: without perseverance,
our Love will prove not a Star but a Comet; our Devotion not a flame, but a
flash; our Repentance not a River, but a Pond; our Hope not a Staff, but a
Reed; and our Faith not a sub- stance, but a shadow. And since this grace of
Faith last mentioned, is indeed the First, the Root, the Mother Grace,
constancy is not more needful in any than this. The truth is, there is no Grace
more oppugned by the Devil than our faith, he well knows, that if he can
undermine the foundation, he shall soon overthrow the building; for which
reason, having obtained leave to sift S. Peter, our Savior prays for him,
that his faith may not fail, Upon this account it is, that more or less in all
ages, the Devil has raised up false Teachers in the Church, whose endeavor it
is to withdraw the people from the Ancient Catholic, and Apostolic Faith,
and for this cause no doubt it is, that one of the chief designs of the holy
Apostles in all their Epistles, is to stablish Christians in the faith. A
pregnant instance whereof we have in this Epistle, particularly in these
verses, whose scope is, by most obliging arguments, to persuade a steadfast
adherence to the truth which they had embraced, Let that therefore which you
have heard from the beginning, etc.

Which words do plainly part themselves into two generals, a mandate and a
motive, a command and a comfort, an exhortation and an incitation.

The Exhortation enjoyneth a needful duty, Let that therefore abide in you
which ye heard from the beginning.

The Incitation adjoyneth a powerful motive, drawn from the present comfort and
future bliss of persevering Saints, If that which you have heard from the
beginning, shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the
Father; And this is the Promise which he has promised, eternal life.

Begin we with the Duty, which we shall find Genesis 1.
to be in order the seventh step of that lightsome walk the delineating
whereof I have once and again told you, is the principal design of this Epistle.

The first word we meet with in the Greek, (...), seems here to be
superfluous, as also in the beginning of the seven and twentieth verse; but
whether we look upon it as transposed, or put absolutely, it will bear a good
construction. By way of transposition, (...) is as much as (...), Thus our
Translators here read it, Let that therefore which you have heard, and also in
the other verse, The anointing which you have received. Absolutely taken both
here and there, it is an Ellipsis, and the sense is as much as, As for you
therefore, as if he should have said, however others fallaway, yet let that
which you have heard abide in you. These Antichrists (with their followers)
forsake, but do you continue in the Apostolical Doctrine; nay, therefore because
they are fallen, do you stand the more firmly. In this sense the Apostles
counsel is much like Joshuahs Resolution, But as for me, and my Josh. 24. 15
house, we will serve the Lord. Indeed, it is the glory of a Christian, like
fish, to keep fresh in salt waters; to profess Christ's name where Satan's
throne is, and like stars in Rev. 2. 13
a dark night, to shine in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation; the
truth is, to be Antichristian among Antichrists is usual, to be a Christian
among Christians is laudable, to be Antichristian among Christians is
abominable, but to be a Christian among Antichrists is admirable; no such
Trial of Constancy, as in times of Apostasy; Virtue is never more amiable in
Gods eyes, than when she is out of fashion in the World; It is said Genesis 6. 7
of Noah, that he found grace in the eyes of the Lord, and the next verse
tells the reason, He was perfect and upright in his Generation: Grace, though
only in the heart, finds grace in Gods eyes, but especially in the life, and
more especially when (like Noah) it is in a degenerating generation; Mat. 26. 33
had Peter done as he said ( though all me^ should be offended, yet will not
I) he might well have challenged the privilege of being Christ's beloved
Disciple. Oh let us fix in our minds this holy purpose of cleaving to Christ
and his Truth, though others leave it; yea, let their defection by a kind of
Antiperistasis corroborate our resolution of continuing in the Doctrine we have
received.

More particularly, in the Exhortation, we shall take notice of the Object,
which it concerns, and the duty which it requires; the object proposed, is
that which they had heard from the beginning, the duty required, is, that it
abide in them.

1 The matter spoken of is, That which they had heard from the beginning. By
beginning in this place is to be understood the beginning of the Preaching of
the Gospel to them, ex quo institui coepistis, so Beza glosseth, since you Beza
in loc.
began to be instructed in Christianity, for it is not said, Let that abide in
you which was from the beginning, then the date might have been taken from the
beginning of the World, since so soon as Adam fell, the Gospel was Preached,
but that which you have heard from the beginning, and though at the seventh
verse the phrase of an Old Commandment gave just occasion to refer that from
the beginning, to a further distance, and so of interpreting there you by your
Ancestors, yet here there being no such reason enducing we are not to recede
from the most plain meaning of the letter, especially when we consider that
the Exhortation, Let that abide in you, most rationally refers to what they
themselves had heard, and therefore in this place, those words from the
begnining, refer to the time of their first reception of the faith.

If you ask what it was that they heard from the beginning, the Answer is
returned, either particularly, Primarium dogma de Christi divinitate, So
Justinian, the fundamental Justin. ibid.
verity of Christ's Divinity, or Generally, The Whole Evangelical Doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, which had been Preached to them by the Apostles.

If you ` ask', why it is thus phrased, not, let that which the Gospel
reveals, but that which you have heard from the beginning. I Answer upon a
double account, to let us see.

1 What is the true Doctrine, namely, that which was delivered from the
beginning, for though it is possible for falsehood to be Ancient, yet Truth is
always first. The Envious man may sow his Tares, in the field where the good
seed was sown, and possibly the tares may grow so fast as to hide the Wheat,
but still the good seed was first sown; prime Antiquity is a sure note of
verity. The Primitive times and truths, were of all other the purest, like the
clear water at the springhead; but of this I have spoken heretofore.

2 By what means they received the Evangelical Doctrine, namely, by hearing.

Among those several senses, with which God has invested man, I know not any
more needful than that of hearing, in what capacity soever you consider him,
especially as he is, (...), by nature, a reasonable, by converse, a sociable,
and may be by grace, a new, a divine creature.

1 Reason is the perfection of man, and hearing is the improvement of Reason.
Auris, say some, quasi hauris ab hauriendo, the ear being the sense by which
we suck in knowledge, in which respect the Son of Syrach says, God has given
man ears, and an heart to understand. Knowledge Eccl. 17. 5
is as the liquor, the soul the vessel, and as the tongue is the tap to let it
out, so the ear is the tunnel to let it in. Whence it is that Learners are
called Auditores, Hearers. Upon this account perhaps it is, that whereas other
parts have their shuts, sometimes to close them up, the eyes, lids like
Curtains, to draw over those Christaline windows, and the Tongue encompassed
with an Ivory wall of teeth, only the nostrils and the ears be always open,
those for breathing, these for hearing, that man which is ever learning, might
be ever hearing.

2 Society is the delight of man, and hearing is the sense of Society, Auribus
alienas sermones admittimus and mente recondimus, says a Rabbin, by hearing
we have converse L. Gersh.
each with other, we enjoy the comfort one of another advice, discourse,
conference. A deaf man is as a dead man to others, and lives only to himself,
as being unfit either for company, or traffic, or Magistracy, and therefore
the Ancients, though they painted their Judges without eyes, because they
should not respect persons, and without hands, because they should take no
bribes, yet not without ears, nay, with both ears, because they were to hear
both parties, so needful is this sense, for all civil transactions.

3 But lastly, Hearing is not only sensus discipline et societatis, but fidei
et Religionis, the sense of Discipline, and Converse, but of Faith and
Religion, in which respect St. Paul is express, Faith comes by hearing,
Aurium Romans 10. 17 Lactaut. l, 6. c. 21
sensus ideo datus est, says Lactantius, ut doctrinam Dei percipere possimus,
for this cause chiefly is our hearing given us, that we may receive Divine
truths, suitable to Tertul. Scorp. c. 3.
which is that of Tertallian, Vera ornamenta aurium dei voces, Gods Words are
the best Jewels we can hang at our ears; indeed such is our present state,
that we receive the greatest spiritual advantages by hearing, oculus organum
patriae, auditus viae, when we come to our Country, we shall use our eyes,
but whilst we are in the way, our chiefest use is of the ear; faith (says
the Apostle) is the evidence of things not seen, and we are most properly said
to believe what we do not see, but still we believe what we hear, and by
hearing we come to believe; at S. Paul's Conversion there was a light seen, and
Act 9. 4
a voice heard, the light astonished, but the voice converted him, and in this
respect we may call the Ear the in-rode and thorough-fare of grace, the souls
custom house for her spiritual traffic in Divine Wisdom, the matrix or
womb of our New Birth, the pale into which is put the milk of the Word, the
still or limbeck of the dew of heaven, the window to let in the light of the
Gospel, the channel of the water of Life, the Pipe for the conveyance of Faith;
in a word, the Orifice or Mouth of the Soul, by which it receives spiritual
food, for by this means it was, these Christians did partake of the Gospel.
That which you have heard.

But yet this is not all that is intended in this phrase, for in as much as by
Hearing we are brought to Believing, therefore Hearing is used to connote
Beleving. Thus 2 Timothy 1. 12
Timothy heard the form of sound words from the Apostle Paul, that is, so as to
embrace it, and therefore he exhorts him to hold it fast, in this sense no
doubt it is here to be understood, for in that our Apostle would have it to
abide, it intimates they had heard, so as to receive it, so that we are here
implicitly taught, we must so hear with our Ears, as to believe with our
hearts, Evangelical Doctrins. This is the Character which our Savior gives of
the good ground, that it hears the word with a good and honest heart, which
is, when the heart Luke 8. 5
does firmly assent and consent to that which is heard. It is the Counsel of
Solomon, keep thy foot when thou go to Eccl. 5. 1
the house of God, and be ready to hear; the latter words in the Hebrew are,
and near to hear, which being joined with the former clause, seem to intimate,
that the foot should be near to hear, and indeed he only hears aright, who
hears with his foot and his heart, as well as his ear; he hears with his
foot who so hears as to obey, and he hears with his heart, who so hears
as to believe. I shut up this with that usual close of the Epistles to the
Churches of Asia, He that has an ear to hear, let him hear, though all men
have ears, yet all have not ears to hear; there are too many Idol hearers, of
whom it may be said, as the Psalmist says of Idols, ears have they, but Psalm.
115. 6* Aug de bono persever. l. 2. c. 14.
they hear not, audientes videlicet corporis sensu, non audiunt cordis assensu,
as St. Austin elegantly; hearing with the sense of the body, they hear not with
the assent of the mind. Oh let us beg of God that which Solomon tells us, is
Prove. 20* 12
only in his power to give, the hearing ear: Indeed, whether we understand it
in a corporal or a spiritual notion, it is Gods gift, he rightly disposes the
Organ, and it is he who fitly qualifieth the mind, the former whereof makes
it an hearing ear in a natural, and the latter an hearing ear in a supernatural
sense; our ears in reference to the Word of God and Christ, are stopped, not
with wax Zech. 7. 11
or wool, or frankincense, but earth, let us beseech God to open them, they are
dull and heavy, let us pray him to awaken Isa. 50. 5
them, that we may be diligent and attentive hearers, and having by the door
of our hearing admitted the Gospel into the closet of our souls, that which
will be most needful to press upon us, is the

2 Duty here required, Let that which you have heard abide in you. A duty which
may be capable of a double notion, either as injoyning a careful remembrance
of, or 2 resolute adherence to that which they had heard from the beginning.

1 Let that which you have heard abide in you, by a faithful recordation. To
this St. Jude exhorts, But beloved remember the words which were spoken before
of the Apostles of Jude v. 17
our Lord Jesus Christ. Our memories must be storehouses, and r Teasuries of
precious Truths, and holy instructions, and like books in a Library must be
chained to them: with this agrees that advice of our Savior to the Angel of
the Church of Sardis, Remember therefore Rev. 3. 3
how thou have received, and heard, and hold fast, by hearing we receive, and
by remembering we retain and hold fast Evangelical Doctrins.

Nor is this exhortation needless, when we consider the badnesse of our
memories in Divine matters, we ought to give (says the Author to the Hebrews,)
the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest at any time we
should let them slip, tacitly resembling our crasy memories Heb. 2. 1
to leaking vessels, out of which the water of life soon slips, if they be not
stopped. Perhaps, like sieves, whilestthey are in the water, they are full, but
no sooner are they taken forth, but all runs out presently; we can remember
somewhat whilst we are hearing, but soon after we are gone out of Gods house,
what we heard is gone out of our minds, in this sense therefore it is needful
counsel, Let that abide, etc.

2 But that which I conceive is the Duty here persuaded, is, Let that abide in
you which you have heard from the beginning, by a constant adhesion to the end;
ad fidei constantiam hortatur, is Calvin's gloss, it is an exhortation Calv. in
loc.
to constancy in the faith, we may very well expound it by that of St. Paul to
the Colossians, If you continue in the faith grounded and settled, and be not
moved away from Col. 1. 23 Vide Daven. ib.
the hope of the Gospel which you have heard, where the two words grounded and
settled, are metaphors borrowed the one from building, the other from a Chair;
so that as buildings which are upon rocky and firm foundations, are not quickly
thrown down; or as men that are fixed in their Chair, are not easily moved out
of their place; no more must we Christians, be withdrawn from our assent to,
and love of those truths we have heard. This is that 1 Cor. 16. 11 2 Timothy 4. 7
which is expressed by those phrases of standing fast in the Faith, like a
Soldier which keeps his ground, of keeping the faith, as a Commander keeps
a Castle, and of holding fast, by which three Greek words are translated, and
all of them very emphatieal, hold fast that which thou have, says Christ to
the Angel of the Church of Philadelphia, Rev. 3. 11
where the Greek Verb is (...) from (...), that signifies strength, and
intimates holding fast with a strong hand, by force or might, as we do one
that would get away from us; Hold fast that which is good, is 1 These. 5. 21
St. Paul's advice to the Thessalonians, where the word is, (...), which notes
a firm holding with both hands, and is used of them that are violently held in
Prison. Holding fast the faithful word, is St. Paul's word to Titus, Tit, 1. 9
where the Greek Verb is, (...), by which the Seventy render the Hebrew Verb
(...) and which according to its derivation, signifies to hold fast against
opposers; thus must we by divine streugth so hold that which we have heard,
as resolving not to let it go whatever befall us.

Nor is it without cause, that our Apostle advises to this steadfast retaining
of the Evangelical Doctrine, if we consider what danger they were, and more or
lessc Christians in all ages are, of being deprived of it. That which we have
in possession may be taken from us three ways, rapto, furto, dolo, by
manifest Theft, by subtle fraud, and by violent force, by all these means do
our spiritual enemies endeavor to bereave us of that which we have heard.

1 Very often the lusts of the flesh, and the delights of the World, steal away
that which we have heard, out of our Mat. 13. 4
hearts, as the fowls of the Air plucked up the seed which fell by the
Highway side. Oh how many are so bewitched with carnal pleasures, that they
let go spiritual truths? like the Dog, who lost the flesh in his mouth, by
catching at the shadow of it in the water.

2 Not seldom false Teachers by their fair pretenses of divine Revelations,
sublime notions, Gospel- light, endeavor to cheat us of that we have heard
from the beginning. S. Paul's phrase is very apposite to this purpose, where he
speaks of (...), the slight Ephesians. 4. 14. Vide Erasm. ib.
of men, tacitly comparing them to false gamesters, who have devices by cogging
a dye, to deceive the unskilful; nothing more usual, than for Heretics by
subtle insinuations to be guile the unlearned and unstable of those precious
truths which they had before received.

3 Sometimes the Devil stirs up wicked Persecutors, who set upon us with
open violence, to make us let go our hold of the Gospel, and as Lactantius
well, Haec vera est constant^a, ^t nullus terror a Deo possit avertere, then
does that we have heard abide in us, when no terrors can divert us from it;
that is a truly Heroical spirit, which will not be dared out of his Religion,
which determines to let go estate, liberty, nay life it self, rather than that
which it has heard and embraced; it was a brave resolve of the Spartan, (...),
either to bring back his buckler, or to be brought back upon it; such should
be a Christians resolution in point of Religion, either to defend it, or dye
for it, we know not what storms and Tempests may arise, needful it is we
should be unmoved, like the rocks, in the midst of opposition.

But oh what cause is there of bemoaning the unsettledness of many in matters
of Religion? Pliny reports of a swimming Island, which never appears in the
same place one whole day together, and Carystius of a flower that changes
color three times in one day, how fit emblemes are these of the Professors of
this age, who are ever and anon changing their Religion, like the ship without
an Anchor, that is tossed to and fro in the Sea, or like the chaff that is
carried up and down with every blast? let any one start up, and broach some new
doctrine under the mask of a glorious truth, and how do the giddy multitude run
after him, forsaking those Orthodox Doctrines in which they were heretofore
instructed? What went you out for to see, a Reed shaken with the wind? too many
such reeds may be seen every where in these Apostatizing days, men as of barren
lives, so of fickle minds, unprofitable in their conversations, and unstable
in their judgments. And especially if any thing of self-interest, as to
Profit, or Honor, or Pleasure, come in competition, Oh how easily are they
removed from their former Profession? no wonder if when danger approaches and
looks them in the face, their trembling hands let go their hold, and they
forgo the truth. In few words, some are so foolish, as to be cheated, more
are so careless, as to be robbed, the most are so cowardly, as to be frighted
out of the truth which they have heard and professed.

Receive then a word of admonition, to retain and maintain the ancient
Catholic and Apostolic faith.

Indeed it is that which by way of Analogy may be pressed upon the Ministers of
the Gospel, Let that abide in them which they have taught from the beginning.
In the Law, the shoulder of the Beast that was Sacrificed was the Priests, and
that is (...), an emblem of strength. The first Priests name Aaron, signifies
a mountain of strength; and the Altar was called Ariel, The Lion of the Lord,
by all which is intimated how valiant they should be for the Truth, who serve
at the Altar, and are the Priests of the most High God. It is set down by the
Apostle as one of the Characters of a Bishop, Tit. 1. 9.
holding fast the faithful Word, for this the Angel of the Church of
Philadelphia is highly commended, and comforted, Because thou have kept the
Word of my Patience, and it is the Apostles charge to Timothy, that good thing
Rev. 3. 10 1 Timothy 6. 20
which is committed to thee, keep. Indeed, the Evangelical Doctrine, is a
sacred depositum, which Christ has left with the Bishops and Pastors of the
Church, To us (says the Apostle) is committed the Word of Reconciliation. Oh
let us not be so unfaithful, as to betray our trust.

But yet it is not only the Ministers, but all Christians who are concerned in
this duty; as that must abide with the Preachers which they have taught, so
that must 3 Cor. 5. 19
abide with the People they which have heard from the beginning. This was that
which St. Paul, and Barnabas persuaded the Jews and Religious Professors, which
followed them, namely to continue in the grace of God, for this end they
returned to Lystra, and Iconium, and Antioch, to confirm the souls of the
Disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith. It is sage Counsel of the
Wiseman, Buy the Truth, but sell it not, buy it at any rate, but sell it at
none; Prove. 23. 23* Act. 13. 4^. 14. 22.
truth, as it is the Ministers trust, so it is the Inheritance of all
Christians; say we therefore with Naboth, God forbid I should sell the
inheritance of my father. Beloved, now is the time of trial, whether we will
dye like Soldiers, or run away like Cowards; whether we will quit our selves
like men, or be tossed to and fro like children. God, Angels, Men, are
spectators to see how we will acquit our selves, and whether we will adhere to
the truth we have embraced. And truly, when we consider how tenacious
Heretics are of their Novel errors, it may put blushing into our faces, who
are so apt to be withdrawn from primitive truths; besides, what will it avayl
us to have heard, and that so as to believe, if that Joh. 8. 31
which we have heard do not abide? If you continue in my word (says our
blessed Savior) then are you my Disciples indeed; as virtue, so truth says to
us, Either never choose me, or never leave me, Fides, non accepta sed Cypr. l.
1. Ep. 5.
custodita vivificat, it is not the receiving, but the keeping of the faith
which entituleth to life. Indeed, as the Pilot keeping the ship is kept by the
ship, so by the Gospels abiding in us, it is that we are preserved to life
eternal. In one word, that which you have heard, is the faith Jude v. 4.
which was once delivered to the Saints, once for all, unalterably,
unchangeably, as it has been delivered to, let it be preserved by you; we
cannot always remain with you, but oh, let that which you have heard from us
remain with you, and as you have heard it from the beginning, so let it abide
with you to the end.

That this counsel may be the better followed, observe these short directions.

1 Strive for a well-grounded knowledge; he that embraces the truth, he
knows not why, will leave it, he knows not how; the Ship that is not well
ballast may soon be overturned, silly women are easily captivated, by crafty
teachers; let that which has been heard by you, be assented to upon good
grounds, and then it will abide with you.

2 Keep the mind lowly. Ignorance is a sponge to suck in, and Pride is a bawd
to vent error; none more likely to fall, than he that proudly leans to his own
understanding; nor are any hearers more foolishly fickle, than they that think
themselves wiser than their teachers.

3 Love the truth affectionately; Hold fast (says St. Paul to Timothy) that
which thou have heard of me in faith and love; these are the two hands by
which we both receive, and retain what we hear; love is the best key to open
the heart for receiving Gods Word, and the strongest lock to keep it in when we
have received it; the reason why they of whom St. Paul speaks were carried 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8
away with delusious, is, because they received not the truth in the love of
it. Love says to truth, as Ruth did to Naomi, Where thou go, I will go,
nothing shall part thee and me but death.

4 Practice what you have heard; that meat which turns into good nourishment
stays with us; he that digesteth the word by obedience, retains it by
perseverance. St. Paul says of them who put away a good conscience, 1 Timothy 1.
21
that they made shipwreck of their faith; a good conscience is as the Bark, and
Faith as the Commodity; if the Bark miscarry, the commodity cannot be safe.

5 Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might* Neque enim quae
habemus ab eo, servare, aut tenere possimus sine eo, says St. Bernard; truly
what we receive from him we cannot keep without him; as the hearing ear, Bern.
Sermon. 3 qui habit.
so the holding hand is his gift.

6 Finally, fix your eyes on the advantage of Christian constancy both here
and hereafter, as it is set forth in the text, which leads me to the

Motive, by which the duty is enforced, and that

1 In respect of the present comfort which attends Gen 2.
upon them, in whom what they have heard abides, as it is exprested in this
verse, If that which you have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, you
also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father; in which clause are
considerable, the condition required, and the benefit assured.

1 The condition required, is the same with the duty prescribed in the
foregoing clause, and therefore will not need any further explication, only
the different manner of proposal would not be passed by, that it may appear the
repetition is not needless.

That which is before expressed as the matter of a precept, is here repeated as
the condition of a promise; whereby is intimated to us, a double necessity of
this, as indeed of all other duties, namely, according to that known
distinction in the Schools, praecepti and medii, of the precept, and the means.

1 The necessity of the precept, is that whereby every Creature is obliged to
obey the command of its Creator; we have an usual Proverb, Must is for the
King, much more for the King of Kings. It is said by the Tacit.
Historian, of Caesar's Soldiers, Imperium potius quam consilium sequebantur,
receiving a precept they needed not persuasion; not, why but what is the
question which every inferior ought to make in reference to the Supreme power,
and upon this account the duty of perseverance in the faith, though there were
no benefit accruing to us, is necessary, because required by him.

2 But lo yet another necessity of the means, which is in order to the
obtaining of an end, that which is called a conditional necessity, and is true
of all such means, without which it is impossible the end should be
accomplished; if a man will go to an Island, he must pass over the wa^^r; if
he will preserve his life, he must eat and drink; if we will continue in the
Father, and the Son, that which we have heard must abide in us. Thus is
Almighty God pleased to enforce that upon us for our own sakes, which we ought
to do for his sake, herein condescending to our infirmity, which stands in
need of manifold obligations to our duty.

2 From the Condition proceed we to the benefit, and therein take notice of
these two things* its proportionality, how suitable, its excellency, how
precious.

1 How suitable is the benefit to the condition? here is continuance
recompensed with continuance, the remaining of the Word in us, that is the
Duty, remaining in the Father and the Son, that is the mercy. It is that which
is not only here but elsewhere, and that very often to be observed. Indeed,
that which is called a Geometrical proportion, not only of quality, but
equality, is only to be found in Threatenings, between the sin and the
punishment, (since the largesses of mercy are far beyond our performance^) and
this not in all threatenings neither, only in those which denounce eternal
vengeance. But the Arithmetical proportion which is of quality, by way of
Analogy, is that which we find, as in Threatenings, so in Promises, between
the Service and the Reward, and this expressed two ways.

1 Sometimes one contrary is promised as the recompense Mat. 5. 3, 4, 6 James
4. 10 Psalm. 126. 5
of another; To the Mourners is assured comfort; to the Hungry, fullness; to
the Humble, exaltation; to the Poor, a Kingdom; and to them that sow in tears,
a joyful Harvest; in all which how great a congruity there is, is obvious at
the first view.

2 Sometimes Like is promised as the reward of like, 1 Samuel 2. 30 Ioh. 14 23
Mat. 6. 14 Luke 6. 38 Mat. 5. 7 Rom 2. 6
thus we read of Honor to them that Honor God, and Love to them that Love
him, of Giving to them that Give, Forgiving to them that Forgive and Mercy to
them that are Merciful, of Eternal life to them that continue in well doing,
and here of eternal life, and continuing in the Father and the Son, to them
that continue in what they have heard.

2 How precious is the benefit considered in it self? you shall continue in the
Son and in the Father, that is, Occumen. in loc
says the Greek Father, (...), and so the same in substance with that in the
former Chapter, Our fellowship is with the Father and his Son Jesus Christ,
only the manner of expression is somewhat more ^mphatical, whilst the
Preposition (...) in notes the Propinquity, and the Verb (...), the
permanency of this fellowship.

That Question why the Holy Ghost is not mentioned, is thus resolved by Estiu^,
Quia de eo non erat oborta question, Est. ibid.
because as yet there was no controversy raised, and so no need of mentioning
him.

If it be asked why the Son is put before the Father, the answer is well
returned, because the Apostle had just before inveighed against those, who
though they pretended to acknowledge the Father, yet deny the Son. Though
withal there may besides be a double reason assigned. The one to insinuate,
that the Son is not less than the Father, but that they are equal in essence
and dignity, upon this account, most probable it is, that the Apostolical
benediction begins with the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and then
follows the love of God the Father. The other, because as Beda well glosseth,
No man comes to; or continues in the Father, but by the Son; who says of
himself, I am the way, the truth, and the life.

To draw it up, lo here, Eximia laus doctrinae, an high commendation of
Evangelical Doctrine, that it leads up to Christ, and by him to the Father; the
water rises as high as the spring, from whence it flows, no wonder, if the
Gospel which comes from God through Christ, lead us back again through Christ
to God; and as by hearing and believing this Doctrine, we are united to, so by
adhering to, and persevering in it, we continue in the Son, and the Father.
Suitable to this is that promise of our blessed Savior, If any man love me
he will keep my Word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him,
and Joh. 14. 23
make our abode with him; if we not only receive, but keep Christ's word, he
and the Father will not only come, but continue with us.

They who never heard nor received the Gospel, are without God, and without
Christ, so St. Paul says of the Ephesians, whilst they were in their
Heathenish condition. Ephesians. 2. 8


They who having heard the Gospel, and for sake it, are far from God and
Christ, God himself says, If any man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure
in him, but if that which we have heard abide with us, we shall continue in
the favor and affection of, in ^nion and communion with Christ and the Father.

And now beloved, if the Psalmist said, Blessed are they that dwell in thy
house, much more may I. Blessed are they Psalm. 84. 4
that continue in the Son and in the Father, if S. Peter said of being on Mount
Tabor with Christ at his Transfiguration, it is good for us to be here, much
more may we say, It is good for us to be with the Son and the Father. If he
that was asked, where his treasure was, answered, (...), Xenoph. Cyr.
where Cyrus was his friend, well may the Christian, (...), place his wealth,
in the friendship of, and fellowship with the Son and the Father.

Let me then be speak you in those words of St. Jude, keep your selves in the
love of God, which though it be chiefly Jude v. 18
understood in the active sense, keep in you a love to God, yet withal it may
admit a Passive Interpretation, keep your selves in Gods love; not is there any
better way than by keeping Gods word in our selves, if Christ's word dwell in
us, he himself will dwell with us, the Ark was a blessing to Obed Edoms house,
so is the Gospel to the place where it is Preached, much more to them who so
hear as to receive, and so receive as to retain it. Let that therefore abide in
you which you have heard, that you may continue in the Son and the Father, so
much the rather when we consider what Follows in the next verse, an assurance
that this continuance shall know no end, but being begun on earth, it shall be
perpetuated in heaven to all eternity, for this is the Promise which he has
promised ^^* eternal life, which God willing, in our next discourse, shall be
unfolded.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. 25. VERSE. And this is the Promise that he has promised us, even
eternal life.
AS there is in bad men an averseness from, so there is in the best, a
backwardness to their duty. The one through wickedness have an Antipathy, the
other through weakness an inability to what is good, corruption is so
prevalent in those, that they will not receive, and so remanent in these that
they have much ado to retain either Truth in their minds, or grace in their
hearts. For this Reason no doubt it is, that Almighty God is pleased by his
sacred Pen*men, not only to impose services but propose rewards, and to
enforce his commands by arguments.

Among those many Arguments by which our duty is persuaded, none more effectual
than those which concern our selves, there being in us all such a principle of
self-love as puts us upon seeking our own advantage, and of all those
advantages which allure to the doing our duty, none equal to that recompense of
reward, that eternal life which is laid up for, promised to, and shall be
conferred upon us.

How fitly has our Apostle here coupled together, a difficult duty, and an
excellent motive, perseverance, whether in well believing, or well-doing, is no
easy task, the hands of our Faith and obedience like those of Moses, are apt to
Exodus 17. 11
grow heavy, and have need of the stone of a Promise to be put under them,
that they may be steady to the going down of the Sun of our lives, and a
sweeter fuller Promise there is not in the whole book of God, than that which
we are here put in mind of. And This is the Promise which he has promised
us, Even eternal life.

In which words we have four particulars worthy our observation.

An excellent benefit, eternal life. A sure conveyance, has promised. An
Eminent Author, He.
The peculiar persons, us. All which when I have severally unfolded, I shall
jointly apply, and that especially with reference to (that which our Apostle
here intends) the duty of perseverance.

1 The excellency of the benefit, though it be last in the verse, would first
be considered, as it is delineated in those words, eternal life.

If we here examine the Grammar of the Greek Text, we shall find it
incongruous, the accusative (...), put for the Nominative (...), but that which
is called in Rhetoric, (...), the putting of one case for another is not
unusual, and withal it is very frequent to put the Antecedent in the case of
the Relative, as appears by those two Instances among many others, the one
Virgils, Urbem quam statuo vestra est, and the other Terences, Virg.
Populo ut place^ent quas fecissent fabulas, so here (...). Tereat.


The Emphasis of the Article prefixed before both the Substantive and the
Adjective, (...), would not be passed by, since as one well, magnum pondus
addit orationi, it adds a great deal of weight to the expression, intimating
that it is not an ordinary kind of Beza in loc.
life, but that which is most transcendent, whereof the Apostle speaks, and
withal that the eternity is that which adds much to its excellency.

That which is especially to be inquired into is, what is the benefit which is
represented under these Characters, and why it is so represented?

1 That happy and glorious estate which shall hereafter be enjoyed, is without
all doubt that which is here and else where intended by this phrase, eternal
life.

It may perhaps be here objected, that eternal life in a strict and proper
notion may be affirmed of the miserable condition of the wicked, as well as
the blisseful state of the godly, for the Resurrection shall be general, and
the term of that Resurrection shall be an union of soul and body, and that
union shall be inseparable, which denominateth it eternal, in which respect
St. Austin says expressly Aust. de civit. dei l. 19. c. 11.
of the damned, In eternum cruciari non poterint nisi vixerint in eternum, they
could not be for ever tormented, if they did not live eternally.

But to this it is well answered, that this word life is not always taken
pronuda existentia, a bare existing in, but foelici condition, an happy
condition of life, non magnum est Id* de verb. ^^^ Sermon. 6^.
din vivere; aut semper vivere, sed magnum est beat vivere, says St. Austin.
It is no great matter to live long, or always, but to live happily. That Loyal
prayer, Let the King live (in every Language) imports a prosperous estate, when
the Psalmist says, Who is the man that would see Psalm. 34. 1^
life? he explaineth himself presently after by good days; vivere among the
Latins, is sometime as much as valere, to live, is as much as to be well, and
upon this account it is, that as on the one hand the Scripture calls the state
of the damned, an eternal death, because their life is only a continuance in
misery, so on the other, the state of the blessed an eternal life, because it
is a perpetual abode in felicity.

2 Having found out what is the benefit intended, I shall now go on to enlarge
in the description of it. Indeed, eternal life is a subject so sweet and
pleasant, that you cannot want patience to hear of it, though withal it is so
sublime and transcendent, that I want a tongue to speak of it, acquiri potest,
exprimi non potest, it is our comfort we may attain it, but our defect that
we cannot conceive, much less express it; when we come to the fruition of
this life, we shall not say with those in the Psalm, as we have heard, so we
have seen, but with Psalm. 48. 8.
the Queen of Sheba, the one half was not told us, all that can be said of
that joyful eternity, being but as Stilla Mari, a drop to the Ocean, or
scintilla igni, a spark to the flame. But though a perfect discovery of this
bliss be 2 Chronicles. 9. 6
impossible at such a distance as earth is from heaven, yet in the Scripture
lineaments we may behold it, and that so much of it (if we seriously view it)
as that we cannot choose but be enamoured with it: nor shall I go further
than my Text, wherein we find a description consisting of two words.

A word of quality, and praelation, life. A word of quantity and duration,
eternal.
Because men love to live, promissa est illis vita, says St. Austin, life is
promised to them, and because they most fear death, promissa est illis aterna,
eternal life is promised. What do thou love? To live, this thou shall have;
what do thou fear? to dye, this thou shall not suffer* it is life eternal,
of each a word.

1 That future state is described by life* and if you please to examine it, you
shall find two things shadowed forth by it, namely, Wherein that bliss
consists, and how far it surpasses all other enjoyments.

1 Inasmuch as it is called Life, it intimates wherein that happiness
consists, to wit, in the Beatifical vision. To clear which you must know, that,
Aug de verb. Dom. Sermon. ^4


1 Nat^ral life is the union of the soul with the body, and accordingly
supernatural life is the union of the soul with God; and look as the body being
united to the soul lives, because the soul is the principle of life: so the
soul ^nited to God must needs live much more, because God is the living God,
the fountain, and Original of life.

2 This union of the soul with God is double, and accordingly Aug.
with St. Austin we distinguish of a double supernatural life, ^na fide,
altera specie, una in tempore peregrinationis, altera in eternitate mansionis,
there is a mediate union, we have with God in this Pilgrimage, by faith, and
there is an immediate union we have with him in that mansion, by sight; that
is the life of grace this the life of glory, when S. Paul says, we Walk by
faith, and 2 Cor. 5. 7
not by sight, he expresses the former, and withal intimates the latter
life, when we shall walk by Sight and not by faith, Thus whereas God himself
told Moses, No man can see me and live, it may in this respect be inverted,
Exodus 31. 8
no man can live without seeing God, since by seeing it is the Saints have an
union with, and fruition of God, and so live, to which those words of the
Psalmist are fitly applicable, Thou will show me the path of life, in thy
Psalm. 16. 11
presence is fullness of joy.

2 In that it is called life, it infers its surpassing worth and value. To
illustrate this, it would be considered that life is the most precious
treasure, and choicest p^^rl in the Cabinet of nature: though a Lion be a
far more noble bruit than a Dog, yet such is the excellency of life, that a
living Dog is better than a dead Lion; though Eccl 9. 4*
the Sun be so glorious and splendent a creature, yet mus^^ ^nimae
praestantior sole, the little fly in respect of its life, is more excellent
than the Sun. And as life is in it self, so is it in man's estimation among all
outward blessings of greatest worth; skin for skin, (or as it may be better
rendered) skin after skin, one thing after another) and all a man has (till he
be stripped to his skin) will a man give Job 2. 4
for his life, says the Father of Lies truly, a man will Mark. 5. 26
part with his Honors, his Wealth, suffer bondage and pain to save his Life.
The Woman in the Gospel, spent all she had upon Physicians, and why, but to
perserve her life. Had Hamans design been only to make the Est. 7. 4.
Jews staves, Hester would have been silent, but when their lives were
concerned, she resolves to petition the King. This was the singular boon
which the King requested of God, He asked life of thee, and thou gave it
Psalm. 21. 3 34 10
him. In a word, who is the man that would see life says David, and who is the
man that would not see Life? scarce any man (if not besides himself) but would
choose to live, though it were in poverty, exile, trouble, and misery, rather
than not to live at all. By all this the pretiousness of life appears, and in
that respect how fit an emblem of the state of bliss, which is infinitely
beyond all earthly comforts, yea, in comparison of which this life (which I
have told you, is of so great a price) is yet vile and base, and therefore it
is that this life is sometimes called life without any additament. So by our
blessed Saviors answering the young man's question, what shall I do that I may
inherit eternal life? says, If thou will enter Mat. 19. 16, 17
into life, as if there were no life besides that, or at least as if this life
were not worthy to be called so in comparison of that.

It is well observed by an Ancient, that cum varia et multa Andr. Caesar.
seculi sint bona illorum usus et participatio variis nominibus exprimitur, so
great is the variety of the good things of happiness, that it is expressed by
several names, and those you will find allusive to what things are most
amiable, and desirable on earth, thus it is called a rest Hebr. 4 9 Mat. 2^. 21
^ uk. 24. 43 Romans 8. 21
for the people of God, the joy of the Lord, the glorious liberty of the Sons
of God, it is styled Paradise, a Crown, a Kingdom, an Inheritance, a weight of
glory, but of all expressions, none so frequent as this, that it is called
Life: Luke 12. 35 ^ Pet. 1. 4* 2 Cor. 4. 17 1 Pet. 5. 4 Rev. 2. 7, 10 21. 8.
yea, as if this were the we^ghtest and choicest thing, by which the worth and
value of that bliss could be set forth, when it is compared to other things,
still Life is annexed; If to water, it is the water of Life; to a Tree, the
Tree of Life; to light, the light of Life; to a Crown, a Crown of Life;
Finally, if to an inheritance, it is of the grace of life. The sum is this, so
manifold are the comforts of that state, that all similitudes are too narrow to
express it, and therefore the Scripture uses not one, but many, and among all
these things to which it is compared, Life is to be preferred far before them,
and therefore not once but often, I think I may say more often, it is called by
this name Life, than by any other.

2. As the state of bliss is called Life, so this Life is said to be eternal;
for the opening whereof I shall briefly discuss three things.

In what sense this Life is eternal. Why it must be eternal. Why so often
called eternal Life.
In answer to the first, you must know that there is a double eternal life.

The one, that which is so, both a part ante, and a part post, having neither
beginning of days, nor end of time; and in this notion it is the
incommunicable property of the Deity, who lives from everlasting to
everlasting, and as himself is the beginning and end of all things, so he has
neither beginning nor end.

The other, that which is so, a part post, but not a part ante, has a
beginning but no ending, and this is that life which is communicab^e to the
Holy Angels, and glorified Saints, the greatness of this life is unmeasurable,
the worth of it inestimable, the joies of it innumerable, so the duration of it
is interminable, vitae illius cursus erit sine termino, usus sine fastidio,
refectio sine cibo, adjutorium sine defectu, says the Father elegantly, that
Life shall be maintained without any aliment, sustained without any defect,
retained without any loathing, and once obtained, shall know no ending.

2 That this life must be in this sense eternal, there needs no other medium
to prove, than that it is a state of bliss, which could not be, were it not
eternal. This will easily appear by a double argumentation, the one of St.
Austin, the other of Aquinas.

1 St. Austin thus argues, If that life should end, it must be either with or
against, or neither with nor against August. de Civitate Dei. l. 14. c. 25.
the will of him that enjoys it; that he should lose it with his will, is
not imaginable, because he had it not against his will, yea, it is impossible
that life should be happy, which he that injoyeth desires to be rid of; nor
can he lose it against his will, since that life is not to be accounted
happy, which though it be in a man's will, yet it is not in his power to keep;
nor yet is it to be imagined, that a glorified person should be indifferent
whether he have it or no, since if good be that which all de sire, the chief
good which is blessedness, must be desired with vehemence of affection, and
therefore he that is once, is for ever possessed of this life.

2 Aquinas thus reasons, Beatitudo debet quietum reddere appetitum, that
only is a blessed state which Aquin. 1a 3ae. Quaest. 5. Art. 4
quieteth the appetite, and satiateth the desire, which no state can do, though
never so glorious, if it be not eternal; it is not the mere fruition of the
most splendid condition, which contents the mind, without an assurance of its
continuance, since the very thought and fear of future losing, would much take
off the joy and bliss of present enjoying; no wonder, if happiness be
defined by Boethius to be interminabilis vitae tota simulet perfect a
possessio, Boet. de consol.
a total, si^^ultancous, perfect and interminable possession of life.

3 It is not unworthy our observation, that by whatsoever resemblance that
future state of happiness is illustrated, eternal and everlasting is still
annexed as the 2 Cor. 5. 1 2 Pet. 1. 11 2 Timothy 2. 10
adjunct; Thus we read of an house eternal in the heavens, an everlasting
Kingdom, an eternal glory, and everlasting joy, an eternal inheritance, and
everlasting Isa, 35. 10 Heb. 9. 15 Isa. 5. 17 Tit. 1. 2 Gal. 6. 8
salvation, and very frequently eternal and everlasting life; nor is it without
good reason, that this Epithete is made so much use of, and that especially on
a double account.

1 Propter eminentiam, to advance the excellency of this Life. St. Austin
enlarging in the praises of this life, heapeth up a multitude of excellencies,
The Life says he which God has prepared for them that love him, is, vita
vitalis, beata, secura, tranquilla, pulchra, munda, Aug. meditat. l. c 22
casta, sancta, a lively, happy, secure, peaceable, amiable, pure, chaste, and
holy life but still that which crowns all is its eternity, and therefore the
Father goes on, ignaramortis, nescia tristitiae, it is a joy which cannot be
interrupted with any sorrow, and a life which is altogether ignorant of death,
it is sine labe, sine dolor, sine anxietate, sine perturbatione, corruptione,
et mutatione, without spot, or wrinkle, without sorrow, or vexation, without
change, or corruption. Look as in respect of Divine attributes, eternity is
that which runs through, and puts a luster upon them all, so that it were
little to say of God, he is holy, wise, just, good, nay, that he is
omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, unless we could say he is eternally all
these: so is it in respect of the excellencies of that other life, they could
afford little comfort were they not eternal.

2 Propter differentiam, to difference it from, and set it in opposition
against this present life. This life, how sweet soever, is but short; that life
is not only sweet but lasting, yea, everlasting. This life, as to many acts of
it, is suspended by sleep, and at last wholly taken away by death; that life
knows no cessation, nor interruption, but shall be one continued act. Here
Orimur, morimur, we no sooner begin to live, but we hasten to death; our life
is like an hourglass, which is no sooner turned up, but it begins to run out,
or like a Lease, which is no sooner taken, but it begins to expire; the longer
our time past has been on earth, that to come is so much the shorter, and the
more we grow in Life, the nearer we are to Death: But there the Sun rises
and never sets, continually shining in its full spendor, that estate is not
a Lease for years, but an inheritance for ever. This Life is a fading flower, a
flitting shadow, a vanishing vapor: but that is a flourishing laurel, an
enduring substance, a fixed Star. Finally, This Life is so short, that it may
be measured by months, by days, by hours* but that is so long, as it cannot
be measured by Years, nor Jubiles, nor Ages, since, when those happy Saints
have lived, so many millions of ages, as there are piles of grass on the
earth, drops of water in the Ocean, sands upon the Seashore, or stars in the
firmament, their life shall be as new to begin, and as long to continue, as at
the first moment when they entered into the possession of it; and thus I have
given you an account of the excellency of the benefit, pass we on to the Part
second.


Certainty of the Conveyance, in those words; This is the Promise promised, The
Explication of this branch will be dispatched in two Queries.

What this means, that eternal life is said to be promised?

Why it is so emphatically called, The Promise?

1 Inquire we a little into the import of this word promised, and this will
the better appear by considering it in a fourfold opposition, to wit, twofold
in reference to him by whom, and twofold in respect of us to whom it is
promised.

1 In regard of him by whom it is promised, we may very well consider it as
opposed to a bare intention, and a mere declaration.

1 Eternal Life is promised, not only purposed. I confess* in one Scripture,
promised is no more than purposed, to wit, where St. Paul to Titus says of
eternal Tit. 1* 2.
Life, it was promised before the World began, but according to the common
notion, and usual acception, promised is more than purposed. A Purpose is only
the thought of the heart, a Promise is the fruit of the lips; A purpose is
secret and hidden, a promise is open and manifest; Finally, A Purpose is only
an intention of the mind; but a Promise is the revelation of the intention.
This Eternal Life was from all eternity purposed, and being purposed, could not
but be accomplished, for the Decrees of God must stand: but had it not been
promised as well as purposed, we might at last have enjoyed it, but in the
mean time could not have known it, it would have been as a treasure hid, a
fountain sealed, a spring shut up. Gods purpose then is the emanation, and his
promise is the signification of his will, whereby it becomes manifest unto us.
Nor yet is this all, but

2 Promised is more than declared, it is one thing to reveal, and another to
promise, that only m^keth known, but this makes sure; that gives notice of,
but this an interest in, when therefore eternal Life is said to be promised,
it does not only mean that it is intended, but that it is manifested, yea, not
only that it is manifested, but that it is assured, God has not only set
before the Sons of men this eternal life as a thing in it self real and
excellent, no, nor yet only as that which may possibly yea, probably be
attained, but he has promised, that is, he has in his word given an
undoubted assurance, that he will bestow it, and this is the meaning of, has
promised.

Nor yet is it a simple naked promise, but such as is attended Heb. 6. 17, 18.
with an oath, so the Author to the Hebrews expressly, God willing more
abundantly to show unto us the heirs of Promise, the immutability of his
counsel, confirms it by an Oath, that we might have strong consolation, who
have fled for refuge to the hope set before us; which hope is no other than the
thing hoped for, eternal life; yea more than this, both the word and oath are
upon record in Holy Writ, and all this has a seal annexed to it, both the
privy seal of the Spirit, and the broad seal of the holy Sacraments, for our
further confirmation. If then you will have the import of these words, be has
promised, in reference to God, it is, that he has not only resolved, but
spoken it; not only spoken of such a life* but said he will give it us; yea
not only spoken, but sworn, and this not only with his lips, but it is as is
were under hand and seal.

2 In respect of us to whom it is promised, we may look upon it in a double
opposition, to actual possession, and due desert.

Eternal life is promised, yet not possessed; the promise is past, it is the
preterperfect tense, has, the possession to come. St. Paul uses the future
tense, shall give. It is not 2 Timothy 4. 8
unfitly observed, that it is the wisdom of Divine dispensation, first to make
a promise, and afterward to give the thing, partly in regard of himself, Ut in
iis quae non habemus August.
largitorem habeamus debitorem, says St. Austine excellently, that where he
is not a Donor he may become a Debtor, and may glorify not only his goodness
in giving the thing, but his faithfulness in making good his word; partly in
regard of us, that he may give us occasion of exercising our faith, hope, and
patience; since on the one hand, if it were presently given, there were no use
for hope to expect, and patience to wait; and on the other hand* if it were not
promised, there were no ground for faith to believe.

2 Eternal life is promised to, not deserved by us. I confess these two are
not necessarily opposed, there is a promise which is an act of Justice* as when
a Debt^r promises the payment of his debts, or a Master promises the Labourer
his hire, the Servant his wages* but withal there is a promise, which is an
act of grace and mercy, as when a King promises a Malefactor a pardon, or a
friend promises another a courtesy, and of this latter sort are all Gods
promises to us, especially this of eternal life, which is infinitely beyond
whatever we can, or whatsoever he requires we should do, or suffer; Ireckon
(says St. Paul, and I hope he is not out in his reckoning) that the sufferings
(surely then the doings) of this present life are not worthy the glory which
shall be revealed; Devout Anselme said truly, Si h^mo mill Anselm.
annis serviret Deo ferventissime, non mereretur ex condigno dimidium diei esse
in regno caelorum, If a man could serve God most fervently a thousand years
together, it would not deserve one half days, much less an eternal fruition of
that life; Indeed the promise being past, it is just with God to perform it, in
which respect St. Paul expects this crown from God as a righteous Judge; but 2 Timothy 4. 8
withal, since mere mercy moved him to promise, and what we do as the
condition is no way equivalent to the reward, it is a gift of mere grace; and
therefore our Savior teaches his Disciples to expect it from God, as Luke 12.
32
a merciful Father, It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom;
and the same St. Paul expressly calls it a gift, eternal life is the gift of God
through Jesus Romans 6. 23
Christ our Lord; and so much in answer to the first question.

2 If it shall in the next place be enquired, why eternal life is called the
promise? the answer is given by St. Peter, 2 Pet. 1. 4
where speaking of the promises of eternal life, he calls them exceeding great
and precious.

1 The promise, because an exceeding precious promise, all other promises
whatsoever being put in the one scale, and this in the other, this will
infinitely preponderate them; look what the paper and pack-thread are in
respect of the commodity for which we bargain, that are all the promises of
this life, in respect of those which concern that to come, circumstantials, and
of no value. Not only so, but

2 The promise, because an exceeding great promise, it is as it were the center
in which all other promises meet, it is such a promise as without which all the
other would afford little comfort; what a figure is to the Ciphers, that is
this promise to the rest, without which they signify nothing, it is the
fundamental promise, upon which all the rest are bottomed; because God has
promised eternal life, therefore he will not stick at any thing else, yea
whatsoever promises he has made are in order to this; therefore he promises
earthly things, that they may help us to heavenly, nor are temporalls any
further within the promise than they are subservient to eternal, therefore he
promises his Spirit, and the graces of his Spirit, that by them we may be
fitted for glory, therefore he promised to send his only begotten Son, that we
might through him obtain eternal life; and since it is as it were the alpha,
the first, the chief of all promises, yea the omega, the end to which they
lead, it may well be called the promise. And so you see the second particular
unfolded, which is the certain conveyance.

3 The eminency of the Author by whom this promise is made, comes next to be
considered, in the Relative, He.

If you cast your eyes on the preceding verse, you will find the Antecedent to
this Relative, namely, the Father, and the Son; our Savior tells the
Disciples, it was the Fathers good pleasure to give them the Kingdom; and it is
his good pleasure in the mean time to give them the promise of it; but because
the Father promises it by the Son, therefore interpreters look upon the Son as
the Antecedent, so much the rather, because throughout this Epistle, when the
Apostle uses this pronoun He, he means* Christ.

Indeed a Caution must be here inserted, that if we understand this He to
be the Son, we do not so construe it as if eternal life were not promised
before Christ came. As the Father has spoken to us in these last days by his
Son, so he spoke to them that were before, at diverse times, and diverse manners,
and that concerning eternal life. I well know that the Socinians positively
assert the first promise of eternal life to be made by Christ, and it is not to
be denied, but that some of the Fathers Hier. l. 1. adv. Pelag.
seem to incline to this opinion; St. Hierom, where he says, The Kingdom of
Heaven was not promised in the Old Testament; Theophilact, who makes this
distinction Theoph. in Luke 1.
between the Law and the Gospel, that to the Law only temporal promises are
annexed, but in the Gospel eternal promises are revealed; but how improbable
this opinion is, will appear by several considerations. The Author Heb. 11. 16
to the Hebrews says of the Patriarcks, Abel, Enoch, Noah* Abraham, that they
desired a better Country, that is an heavenly; and could they have desired it
if they had not known it, and could they have known it if God had not Verse. 9.
revealed it? In the same Chapter it is said of Abraham in particular, that he
looked for a City which has foundation, whose builder and maker is God. Is not
that City the Jerusalem which is above, and could he with any confidence have
looked for it, if God had not promised it? Verse. 26.
That recompense of reward which Moses had an eye to, when he forsook the
honors and pleasures of Pharaohs Court, to suffer affliction with the people
of God, was certainly more than temporal, for otherwise how could it have
justly preponderated the contentments he might have had, or recompensed the
sufferings he made choice of? nor could he have had respect to it, if it had
not been set before him. Not to enlarge, when our blessed Savior referres Luke
19. 20
the young man to the Law of Moses, for answer to the question, What shall I
do to inherit eternal life? and Joh. 5. 39
when he exhorts the Jews to search the Scriptures, for in them you think to
have eternal life; does he not plainly intimate, that in the Law of Moses, and
Scriptures of the Prophets, Eternal Life is made known, together with the way
that leads to it. In one word, the Resurrection of the dead, the term whereof
is eternal life, is expressly called by the Apostle Paul, the Promise of God
made unto Act. 26. 6
the Fathers.

This then is the Promise which he has promised, not that it was not at all
promised before, but not so fully, so clearly; eternal life was promised in the
Old Testament, rather typically than literally, in general phrases, than in
express terms, and hence it is that they were but a few comparatively, who
understood any thing by those Promises concerning it, whereas now, according to
St. Paul's 2 Timothy 1. 10
expression, Christ has brought life and immortality to light through the
Gospel, which plainly makes it manifest to us, in which respect the Promises
of the Gospel Heb. 8. 6
are called by the Author to the Hebrews, better promises; not as to the things
promised, which are the same for substance, but as to the easiness of the
condition, and chiefly the clearness of the Revelation.

It will not now be amiss to consider a while who this He is, by whom this
promise is so punctually promised, nor need we any further character of him
than what is given before in this very chapter.

It is he that is righteous, and therefore cannot deceive. It is he that is
the Holy one, and therefore cannot lie: so that since it is he that has
promised, it must be performed. It is he who is an advocate with the Father
to plead for our admission into heaven, who is the Propitiation for our sins.
to wit, by his blood, which is also the purchase of this life. It is he who is
the Christ, anointed to the office of a Prophet, that he might reveal to, of
a Priest, that he might obtain for, and of a King, that he might conf^r on us
this eternal life. Finally, it is he who is the Son, and being the Son, is the
Heir, and being the Heir, has a title to this Life, not only to enjoy it
himself, but impart it to us. By all which it appears, that whereas men
oftentimes promise those things which they have no power or right to give, yea,
sometimes, they promise what they never intend to give, and hence it is that
their Promises are vain, lying, and deceitful, He that has promised has
Power and Will to give it, he says nothing, but what he really intends, and
will certainly fulfill; and now if you would know to whom this promise belongs,
go on to a view of the next and last particular, which is, the

4 Propriety of the persons, in the pronoune us. It is that which may be looked
upon, both in a way of enlargement, and of restriction.

1 In a way of enlargement, us, not me only, the Pro^ise was not peculiarly to
the Apostles, but to all true Christians, upon this account St. Paul elsewhere
speaking of this benefit, under the name of a crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.
8
says, it is that which the Lord the Righteous Judge will give me at that
day, and not me only, but all them that love his appearing. In other Races,
though never so many run, yet only one obtains the prize, but this prize is
given to all Christian runners; that which entitled St. John to this life, was
not his new office of an Apostle, but his new birth as a Christian, so much the
Apostle Peter implies, when he says, Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has begotten us to a lively hope, to an inheritance,
and the meanest Christian is begotten of God, as well as any of the Apostles;
it is not Grace in strength, but Truth, which is the condition of Glory, and
therefore this us takes in all those sorts of Christians before mentioned, not
only Fathers, but Young men, nay, little Children.

2 In a way of restriction, us, not all, but us, who are thus and thus
qualified, and if you please you may take in all those who are before
expressed, in this Chapter, us, who keep his Commandments, for the promise and
the precept are knit together, nor can any partake of the one, who Verse. 3
do not keep the other; us, who walk as Christ walked, for we cannot expect to
attain the end which he has promised, Verse. 6.
if we do not walk in the way which he has walked Verse. 11.
in, and which leads to the end; us, who love our brother, this being the Old
and the New Commandment, must Verse. 1^.
be obeyed, if we will enter into life; us, who love not the World, nor the
things of the World, for he is unworthy of the Life in that World to come, who
doteth with the love of this; us, who acknowledge the Son, since only he
Verse. 22.
that has the Son, has Life. Finally and principally, us, in whom that
abides which we have heard from the beginning. Verse. 24


Indeed, if you mark it, you shall still find the Promises of Eternal Life
made to perseverance, To them wh^ by patient continuance in well doing, seek
for Glory, Honor, and Immortality, Eternal Life, so St. Paul to the Romans;
Rom 2. 7.
I have fought the good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of 2 Timothy 4. 7, 8
Righteousness; so the same Apostle concerning himself; not to multiply
instances, in those seven Epistles to the seven Angels of the Churches of Asia,
we find eternal life promised under several metaphors, but still the condition
prefixed, is to him that overcommeth, not to him that fights, but who
continues fighting till he overcome, so true is that of St. Bernard, whereas
all the virtues run Bern.
in the race, it is perseverance alone which carries away the reward. And thus
I have given you an account of all the parts of the Text.

I close up all in one word of Application, and that

1 In General, is there an Eternal Life promised? why then do we not believe
it? and if we do believe it, why do we not prize it? and if we prize it, why
do we not seek after it? Were it possible that men should be so much in love^
with this Life, did they believe there were another? or could they dote so much
on a frail fading Life, did they believe there were one that is Eternal? If we
view the practices of the Sons and Daughters of men, we may sadly observe,
that this Life is ever providing for, as if it should never end, and that Life
is never prepared for, as if it should never begin, whereas this Life shall
soon end, but that never. We see says St. Austin the Lovers of this present
Life using Aug. de verb. dom. Sermon. 64.
their utmost care and cost to preserve it, and all they can do is only ut
differant, non auferant mortem, to delay that Death which they cannot prevent;
if men are solicitous, ut aliquantulum plus vivatur, that they may live a
little longer, Quomodo agendum est, ut semper vivatur, How studious should they
be, that they may live for ever?

Oh that we would at length, be effectually convinced of the certain and
infallible verity of this promise in it self, and then there would be little
need to persuade our endeavors, to make sure our own interest in it.
Cleombrotus reading of this future immortality, though but darkely delineated
in Platoes writings, by casting himself into the Sea, dispossessed himself of
this life, that he might be the sooner possessed of that; Far be his
Practice from our imitation, we are taught to wait Gods leisure for the
accomplishment of this Promise, but surely the due consideration of an Eternal
Life will teach us to make a preparation for that, the main business of this
life, ever remembering, that this moment is given us by God to be the only
opportunity of gaining that eternity.

In special, Memoria promissae mercedis perseverantem te faciat in opere, since
eternal life is promised by him to us, let that which we have heard from him
abide in us. True perseverance in the Faith is very difficult, and sometimes
proves dangerous, but its as true, Eternal Life is very Excellent and
advantageous. Videamus quid promisit, says St. Austin, let us seriously Aug.
in loc. et in Evang. Joh. tract. 23.
view, what it is he has promised, not Gold or Silver, Houses, Lands, or any
earthly Possessions, and yet what will not men endure for the gaining of these?
shall not Eternal Life, have a stronger influence upon us? Oh consider on the
one hand what is it thou can probably gain by forsaking the truth, perhaps
favor with great ones, large revenues, stately palaces, Honorable titles; But
tell me in good earnest, can these countervail the loss of Eternal life?
undoubtedly they cannot. On the other hand, what is it thou can possibly lose
by retaining the truth? perhaps thy estate, thy liberty, thy life; I but, what
think thou? will not eternal life make amends for all these losses?
certainly it will. As therefore the runners of old were wont to engrave the
reward upon the palms of their hands, that when they began to faint, the fight
of that might revive them; So let us encourage our selves to a patient abiding
in the Doctrine which we have heard, notwithstanding all opposition, by a
serious remembrance of the Promised remuneration, eternal life, and so much the
rather, because it is promised upon this condition, and is no otherwise to be
expected. To end therefore, Have thou begun well by embracing the Faith, lose
not the reward for want of adhering, but hold it fast to the end, that thou
may receive in the end, this Life, which shall be without end.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 26, 27, 28. These things have I written unto you concerning
them that seduce you. But the anointing which you have received of him abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him. And now little children abide in him, that
when he shall appear ye may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at
his coming.
IF you compare these three with the eight foregoing verses, you shall find
them to be a summary repetition of what it there more largely delivered. There
are three hinges upon which the precedent discourse turns, namely, the peril
of Antichristian doctrine, the benefit of the Spirits Unction, the duty of
perseverance in the Christian faith, and these three are inculcated in these
verses. Indeed, where the danger is very great, the admonition cannot be too
frequent; when the benefit is of singular advantage, it would be often
considered, and a duty which must be performed, cannot be too much pressed;
no wonder, if St. John propose them in this gemination to our second thoughts.
And yet it is not a naked repetition neither, but such as has a variation and
amplification in every particular. The Duty is reinforced at the eight and
twentieth verse, but in another phrase, of abiding in Christ, and with a new
motive drawn from the second coming of Christ. The benefit is reiterated, and
much amplified in the seven and twentieth verse, as to its excellency and
energy. Finally, the danger is repeated, but with another description of those
by whom they were in danger, whilst as before he had called them Antichrists
for their enmity against Christ: So here, for their malignity against
Christians, he calls them seducers, These things have I written to you
concerning them that seduce you, etc.

By what you have already heard, you see the scope of those verses, which
(according to their number) divide themselves into three generals.

A Caution, These things have I written, etc.

A Comfort, But the anointing which you have received, etc.

A Counsel, And now little Children abide in him, etc.

1 Begin, and at this time end we with the Caution, Par. 1.
which is given in the six and twentieth verse, These things have I written
unto you concerning them that seduce you.

As it is in the World, so is it also in the Church. In the World all good and
useful things have their contraries. There are fruitful showers, and there are
harmful storms; there are refreshing dews, and infecting vapors; there are
wholesome herbs, and there are noisome drugs; There are tame living creatures,
and there are wild beasts. Thus in the Church, there are sound, and there are
rotten Professors, true and false Prophets faithful and deceitful Apostles, and
if you look upon this verse, you may find a brand set upon the one, and a
Character given of the other,-whi^e^t the two parts of the Text are,

The Mischievous design of the Antichrists, which was to seduce, Them that
seduce you; and the pious care of St. John, which was to give warning, These
things have I written to you concerning them.

1 In handling the former of these, I shall take notice of these three things.

The Who? them, whom? you, wha? seduce.

1 If you inquire who these seducers were, we shall find two things not
unworthy our observation.

1 That their names are not mentioned. It may perhaps be asked, since the
Apostle does not name them, how should they know them, and if they could not
know them, how should they avoid them? But to this it is easily answered, that

He had sufficiently described them before by their Antichristian doctrine, so
that of whomsoever they heard such positions, they might conclude them to be
the Persons, and since in this respect there was no necessity of mentioning, it
is justly looked upon as an act of prudence, his concealing their names.
Indeed, we find this Apostle Ep. ^ 5 1 Timothy 1. 20. 2, 1. 15
in one of his Epistles, expressly naming Diotrephes, and St. Paul naming
Himeneus, and Alexander, Phygellus, and Hermogenes, in his Epistle to Timothy.
There may be sometimes urgent reason of mentioning names: But for the most
part both these Apostles are silent in this particular, and those other
Apostles, St. Peter and St. Jude, though they are large and sharp in their
invectives against those Heretics, yet they name not any. The reason of this
is not unfitly given by Lorinus upon the text, to Lorin. in loc.
wit, ne magis irritarentur, to avoid all exasperation, and it is a good note
he inferrs upon it, Abstineudum quoad fieri potest a cujusquam publica not a.
As much as may be, we must abstain from throwing dirt in the faces of
particular persons, though they be flagitious in life, or erroneous in
doctrine; very apposite to this purpose is that gloss of Theophilact, on these
words of St. Paul, many Theoph. in Phil. Ignat. ad Smyrn. Ep. 10.
walk of whom I have told you often, etc. (...), he intimates who they were,
in saying, I have told you often, but he does not nominate, lest he should
provoke them. In that parabolical narration of Dives and Lazarus, the rich man's
name is not mentioned; The Reason whereof is generally conceived to be, that
our Savior thought him not worthy the naming, upon which account Ignatius
would not insert, (...), the Faithless names of certain Heretics in his
writings. But that note of Maldonate may very well be allowed, and is very
suitable to the present matter, it was the prudent moderation of our Savior,
Ut pauperem quem laudaret nominaret, divitem quem vituperabat non nominaret, to
mention the beggars name whom he did commend, but to conceal the rich man's
whom he did condemn. That rule which is given, though not so well observed by
the Epigrammatist, is fit to be followed by all Preachers and Writers.

Parcere personis dicere de vitiis. Mart. Epigr.
To reprove sins and spare persons, to confute errors and conceal names. That
Character of the Philosopher, insectatur vitia, non homines, he inveighed
against vices, not men, well befits a Preacher. When we praise and commend the
good, it should be with reflection on persons, and that by name, for their
greater encouragement, but when we reprove or condemn the evil, it should be
(unless for some weighty reasons) without naming persons, to avoid
provocation, whilst those who on such an occasion are named, are apt to
suppose it as an argument of ill will, and so instead of being bettered by the
reproof, to be imbittered against the reprover.

2 Their office (to which probably some of them were called, and which no doubt
all of them pretended) was to teach and instruct the people. Thus in all ages
there have not wanted seducers, among the Teachers of the Church. God
complained by his Prophet Isaiah, The leaders of this Isa. 3. 11. 9 16
People caused them to err, so by Jeremiah, I have seen folly in the Prophets
of Samaria, they have prophesied in Baal, and caused my people Israel to err;
upon this account the Jer. 2^. 13
Pharisees are called by our Savior, blind guides, and those Seducers, by St.
Paul, false Apostles, and both by Mat. 23. 16 2 Pet. 2. 1 1 John 4. 1
St. Peter and St. John, False Prophets. And truly, though this be too
common, it is very sad; what more incongruous than blindness in a guide,
injustice in a Judge, ignorance in a Scholar, and Heresy in a Teacher? Those
sheep must needs wander, which either are without a Shepherd, or whose
Shepherd misleads them. Oh what need is there of earnest Prayer, that God
would give us Pastors after his own heart, which may feed us with wisdom and
understanding? and so much for the Who.

2 That which next comes to be considered, is, the Whom, you, that is, says
Grotius, Judaeos, ex quorum Grot. in loc.
gente vos estis, many of the Jews, whose Countrymen you are, who were seduced
by them; but more rationally say others, you, that is, you, who have received
the Unction, and abide in the faith, to whom I have written this Epistle. But
if those were the You, how is it that these false Teachers, are challenged with
seducing them, since they were not seduced, but continued steadfast in the
faith? The solution of this objection is presently made, by distinguishing
between the intent and event, the endeavor and the effect; These false
Teachers did seduce them in design, who yet were not actually seduced by them,
and because they did endeavor to do it, therefore they are charged as if they
had done it.

It is a Note not unworthy our observation before we go any further, That
whatsoever evil is inchoated by a resolved endeavor, and only impeded by
divine prevention, is a^ if it had been consummated by a complete execution.
True it is, the sin is the grosser* and the guilt the greater, when a wicked
attempt is accomplished, but still the very intent, much more the attempt,
denominateth a man guilty.

He that solliciteth a woman's chastity, though he never commit the outward
act, is an Adulterer; He that contriveth and striveth to take away a man's
life, though he do not kill him, is a murderer; and he that preaches false
Doctrine to the people, with an intent to deceive them, is a seducer, though his
Hearers are not infected by him. We see in man's law, he that breaks open a
man's house, though his stealing be prevented, is looked upon as a Thief. He
that plotteth a treason against his Sovereign, though he do not execute it, is
adjudged as a Traitor, and surely it must much more hold true in Gods Law,
which is therefore more strict, because more large in its extent than man's.

Nor is it without just reason that thus it should be, since he that
endeavors, would accomplish, were he not hindered, and that the act is not
correspondent to the design, is not for want of will, but power; it was no
thanks to Bal^c, or Balaam, that the people of Israel were not cursed, nor to
Saul, that David was not destroyed, nor to Haman, that the Jews were not cut
off; now that wherein the sinfulness of sin consists is in the voluntarinesse
of it, and therefore as where the act is done against the will, it is
excusable, so where the will is bent, though the act be not done, it is
culpable; who would not be enraged at him, who knowing himself to have a
Plague Sore running about him, should run into every house, and thrust himself
into every company, and censure him as worthy of punishment, though (perhaps)
through Gods mercy none were infected by him? Oh let us repent, not only of our
evil deeds, but our wicked attempts, and accuse our selves, as well for what we
would have done, as what we have done.

And withal it is that which holds true on the other hand, and would be taken
notice of for the comfort of the good, Men's boni stud^^ ac pii voti e^iamsi
effectum Salv* de Guber.
non invenerit habet tamen praemium volunt at is, says Salvian excellently, in
all honest and pious endeavors, though the work be not effected, the will
shall be rewarded; when the Child takes the Bow into his hand, puts the
Arrow into the Bow, draws it as far as he can, the Father accepts it, as
if he had drawn it to the head, and h^ the mark. It is said of Abraham, by St.
James, that he offered his Son Isaac upon the Altar, when yet not Isaac, but
the Ram was offered, and good reason, Iam 2. 21
since on Abraham's part there was nothing wanting* according Genesis 22. ^ 6. 9
to Gods command, he rose up early in the morning, sadled his Ass, took Isaac
his Son with him, clave the wood, went to the place, built an Altar, prepared
the fire, laid the wood on the Altar, Isaac on the wood, took the knife to slay
him, and had not an Angel from God prevented him, he had actually slain him.
Where God denies ability, or opp^rtunity, he always accepts the will for the
deed.

It is that which may more particularly be taken notice of, for the comfort of
the Ministers of the Gospel, who sincerely endeavoring the conversion of
Sinners, though they prove not successeful, shall be looked upon by God as if
they were. A Pilot (says Quintilian) Quintil. declain. l. 3.
cannot be denied his lawful plea, though the ship miscarry, whilst he holds
the helm aright, and sayleth by the Compass; nor shall he who carefully
steereth the course of his Ministry by the compass of Gods Word, be found
guilty, though the ship whereof he is Pilot sink into perdition; that promise
in the Book of Da^i^l* They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firma^^nt, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever Dan.
12. 3
and ever, is probably to be understood in the first clause, of all the godly
who are most truly wise; and in the second, of the Prophets of God, who are
said to turn many to righteousness (even when perhaps they do not turn any)
in respect of their cordial* desires, and earnest labors, as here false
Prophets and Teachers are charged to seduce them, whom yet they did not seduce,
because of their design and endeavor.

3 The last and chief thing considerable in this part of the text is, the what,
the act, in that word seduce; indeed Bed. in loc.
venerable Bede by these Seducers understands all those who by fair or foul
means draw men to any evil, and thereby hinder them from partaking the promise
of eternal life mentioned in the former verse; but I rather with the stream of
Interpreters, expound these Seducers to be the Heretical Antichrists spoken of
before, though in the handling I shall reflect on all that seduce to any evil.

The Greek word here used, most properly belongs to Travelers, when they
wander out of the way; from thence it is applied in the first place to erring,
which is a wandering from the way of truth; so in that of St. James, Do not
err my beloved brethren; and in the next to seducers, which is a causing
others to err; so Jam. 1. 16
here, and many other places; indeed Aretius on the text Aret. in loc.
takes in both, (...), Id est qui errant, and alios in errorem trahunt, them
that seduce, that is, them who err themselves, and draw others into it. That
which would here be observed, is the evil temper of Heretics, who having
espoused an error, are very solicitous to be get children, by causing others to
err; for this cause they are compared by St. Jude to wandering stars, by
which we are not to understand the Planets in the Heaven (which are so called,
because by reason of their various motions they seem in the eye of the vulgar
to wander) but the fiery Meteors in the air, which are called Stars, for that
resemblance they have to Stars in outward appearance, which being hurried up
and down by the wind themselves, do oft-times misguide the unwary Traveller
into Boggs and Fens; thus Jude v. 13.
having before borrowed a Metaphor from the Air, resembling these false
Teachers to Clouds without rain, for their vainglorious boasting; from the
Earth, comparing them to withered Trees, for their barren conversations; from
the Water, resembling them to the raging waves of the Sea, for their furious
cruelty; so taking in all the Elements, he borrows a Metaphor from the Fire,
comparing them to wandering stars, or meteors, because of their mischievous
mis-leading; for as these* especially the Ignes fatui (as they are called)
foolish Fires, being carried up and down by the Wind, have themselves an
uncertain motion, and mis-guide the Traveller into a wrong path; so did those
Heretics, having themselves forsaken the right way, entice others to follow
them; in which respect St. Paul says of these Seducers, that 2 Timothy 3 14.
they wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.

Nor is this less observable in other sorts of sinners. Jeroboam having set up
Calves at Dan and Bethel, ingageth the people to worship them. Absalom having a
rebellious design against his King, and Father, David, attempts to steal away
the hearts of the People from him. The Prove. 3. 15.
Harlot resolving to prostitute herself, goes forth to inveagle the next young
man she meets, to her wanton embraces, and those bloody miscreants call upon
others, 1. 11.
saying, Come let us lie in wait for blood.

Thus there is in wicked men, a kind of itching desire to make others as bad
as themselves, and perhaps this is the meaning of the phrase in the Prophet,
They draw Isa. 1. 19.
iniquity, to wit, by drawing others to iniquity. Indeed, here in they follow
the suggestion of that Prince of darkness, for as it was Christ's charge to
Peter, Being converted, strengthen thy brethren, so it is the Devils to his
Agents, Being perverted, pervert thy Brethren, nay, hereby it is they do not
only obey the Command, but imitate that pattern of their Father the Devil, who
not standing in the truth, with too happy, or rather unhappy a success,
endeavored man's fall, that as he with his evil Angels were thrown out of
Heaven, so Adam with his Posterity might be cast out of an earthly, and kept
out of ^n heavenly Paradise.

And now I would to God all Hercticks would consider how great an evil this
is, to be a seducer. It is bad to be an actor of evil our selves, but far
worse to be an inticer; It is bad to be seduced by, but much worse to be a
seducer of others; we seldom find Jeroboam the Son of Nebat mentioned, but
with this mark, That made Israel to sin, no doubt for his greater infamy. When
Elimas Act. ^3. ^
indeavoureth to turn away the Deputy from the Faith, St. Paul is enraged with
an holy zeal, and in him gives every Seducer his due brand, Thou full of all
subtilty and mischief, child of the devil, and enemy of ^ll righteousness.
We are not able to answer for our own sins, we had not need contract upon us
the guilt of others; we cannot pay our own scores, there is no reason for us
to make others debts ours. God knows we have sins enough (as so many Sons)
of our own, why should we adopt others? yet so does the Seducer (whilst
without timely repentance) he must give an account for all those souls, which
he has either in design, or effect, seduced* either to error of Doctrine, or
evil of manners; and surely, if they who turn many to righteousness, shall
shine as the Sun in Heaven, they who turn many from it, to error and
wickedness, shall burn as coals in Hell. But I fear seducing Heretics, whilst
they have open mouths, and n^mble tongues to the perverting of others, have
their ears heavy, nay, closed, lest they should be converted themselves, and
therefore though I shall not cease to pray for, I shall forbear any longer to
speak to them.

The Improvement that should be made of this doctrine by the godly and Orthodox,
is,

1 That we take heed of going amongst, or conversing with Heretics, lest we
be seduced by them. Indeed, it were ground enough of abstaining their society,
lest we should be thought such, but much more lest we should prove such. This
Holy Apostle would not stay in the bath with that Arch-heretick Cerinthus, out
of a just indignation against him; we should not frequent the company of such,
out of a wise circumspection in reference to our selves. The Orthodox hearers
of Athanasius forsook the Church when Lucius the Arrian Bishop came to Preach;
both the private society, and more public meetings of Heretics, should be
avoided by us; it is ill coming within the breath of such rotten persons. There
is not more danger of being burned by coming too near the fire, of being
defiled by touching pitch or dirt, and of being infected, by coming near one
that is sick of the plague, than of being seduced by harkening to, and having
familiarity with Heretics.

It is that indeed which may be extended, and I would to God were observed as
a general rule in regard of all wicked company, Come out from among her my
people Rev. 19. 4.
(says God concerning Babylon) lest thou be partaker of her sins. Depart from
me you evil doers, (says David) Psalm. 119. 115.
for I will keep the Commandments of my God. Wicked men will strive to make us
like themselves, nor have we any promise of assistance against their
inticements, if we needlessly associate with them. The Psalmist says, Blessed
is the man that walks not after the counsel of the Psalm. 1. 1
ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners. Indeed, he that would not walk in
the wickeds counsel, must not stand in his way, lest if the wicked find him in
his way* he entice him to go along with him.

2 That they obliquely imitate these seducers, in striving to make others, as
sound in the faith, and conscientious in their lives, as themselves, why should
(and yet how often is it so) the Devils instruments be more forward than
Christ's Servants, his messengers more active than Christ's Ministers? Did
Heliogabalus take care to make his Son like himself, luxurious, and shall not
religious Parents endeavor that their children may serve the Lord? did the
Pharisees compass Sea and Land to make a Proselite, and shall not Christ's
Apostles do as much to make Christians? Are the Wolves ranging up and down to
worry, and shall not the Shepherds be watchful to preserve the sheep? Are
Heretics industrious to seduce from, and shall not the Orthodox be solicitous
to reduce to the truth? God forbid. Oh let the heavenly stars as readily give
forth their light to guide the people into the way of Truth and Peace, as those
fiery meteors are to lead them into the bogs and ditches of sin and errors.
Them that seduce you.

But this is not all that our Apostle intends by this expression. The word here
rendered seduce, is elsewhere in this Epistle, yea, generally through the New
Testament, 1 Ep. 1. 8 3. 8.
translated deceive, and accordingly Planus which is derived from it, is used
by the Latin Poet to signify an Horat.
Impostor, now decipimur specie recti, we are deceived by specious pretenses,
and accordingly such a kind of seducing, which is, by making us believe we
are in the right, when we are in the wrong way, is that which is here meant.

It lets us see what is the cunning of Heretical seducers, St. Paul says of
them, that by good words and fair speeches Romans 16. 8
they deceive the hearts of the simple; like the Hyaena, which when she
intends to devour, feigneth a man's voice. St. Austin observes, that the Devil
seeing his Temples Ang. de Civit. ^ i.
forsaken, Altars demolished, and Oracles silenced, by Christ's coming into the
world, to make a new supply of his Kingdom, stirred up certain Heretics, (of
whom Mat. 24. 4
Christ himself foretold, and whom no doubt our Apostle here means) qui sub
vocabulo Christianae doctrinae resisterent Christianae, who under the name of
Christian doctrine should oppose Christianity, like Pirates, who hang out their
colors, whom they mean to surprise. Indeed, it has ever been the practice of
false Teachers, to lead into error by a pretext of truth, like those (to use
Irenaeus Iren. ad. haer. l. 3. c. 19
his comparison) who give lime mixed with water, instead of milk, deceiving by
the similitude of the color, herein as St. Paul observes, learning of their
Master 2 Cor. 11. 14
the Devil, who though the Prince of Darkness, often times transformeth himself
into an Angel of Light. The truth is, Id. praefat. l. 1.
as the forementioned Father observes, (...), error loves not to appear
naked, as being foul and ugly, no wonder if she cover her self with borrowed
robes, that she may be the more amiable.

It will not I suppose be a digression from the Text, nor loss of time, to
inquire into the (...) and (...), (to use St. Paul's language) sleights Ephesians. 4.
14
and methods of error, whereby these Seducers lie in wait to deceive, and
these we shall find to be of many sorts. Heretics (Proteus like) make use
of several shapes under which they delude many. In particular we my observe
them seducing by the mixtur of some truths, the Promise of much Liberty, the
Plea of long Tradition, and the show of glorious Miracles, under the veil of an
outside religion, the vernish of humane reason, the color of divine
Revelation, the gloss of sacred Scripture, and the name of the true Church.

1 A mixture of truth with error is an usual trick of these impostours, herein
doing like those who put off lead or brass in Coins with the mingling of
silver, or who convey poison in milk, or some such wholesome food. Greg. Mor.
l. 5. c. 12.
This St. Gregory took notice of when he says of Heretics, miscent recta
perversis, ut ostendendo bona auditores ad se pertrahant, et exhibendo mala
latenti peste corrumpant, They join right Doctrines with perverse, that by an
open publication of the one, they may secretly instill the other; even these
Antichrists did acknowledge some truth, Preaching a Christ that came from
heaven, but withal denying Jesus to be the Christ.

2 A Promise of Liberty, is another cheat of these Jugglers, as well knowing
how suitable liberty is to man's corrupt nature. Heretics (how rigid soever
they may be upon design in their personal Practice) yet are commonly
libertines in their doctrine, indulging to their followers a lawless
licentiousness. This St. Peter and St. Jude observed in these Antichrists, of
whom the one says, they did promise to the people liberty, and the 2 Pet. 2.
19 Jude v. 4
other, that they did turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness.

3 The Plea of Tradition is much used by Heretics, all Nations and Persons,
both Jews and Gentiles, being very tenacious of those things which they have
received from their Ancestors. By traditions it was, that the Pharisees in
Christ's time endeavored to make the Law of God of none effect, and with
traditions it was, that the Heretics in the Apostles time did spoil the people
of the Truth, for so much St. Paul intimates, when he gives that Caveat,
Beware lest any man spoil you through vain deceit after the traditions of men.
Not that all sorts Col. 2. 8
of Traditions are to be slighted, yea, the Traditions which have been
delivered and received in the Universal Church from age to age, are to be
regarded by us next to the written word, but not in opposition against, or in
competition with it, such vain superstitious traditions were those which the
Apostle condemned, and which the Heretics made use of.

4 A show of Miracles, is that which is sometimes made by these Deceivers. Look
as of Old, when Moses and Aaron wrought Miracles, Jannes and Jambres the
Egyptian Sorcerers, imitated them. So in the beginning of Christianity, as God
confirmed it by real Miracles, so the Devil opposed it with Lying wonders. This
was our Saviors prediction concerning these Antichristian Seducers, whereof my
Text speaks, There shall come false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall
show signs Mark. 13. 44.
and wonders, so St. Mark; Great signs and wonders, so St. Matthew, to seduce
and deceive if it were possible Matthew. 24. 4
the very Elect; and thus the coming of the man of sin is said by St. Paul to
be after the working of Satan, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, where that Epithet of Lying
would not be passed by, those wonders which the Devil works by Heretics,
being lying, not only because they accompany doctrins of Lies, but likewise
because they are for the most part delusions, not realities, nor are the
greatest of those wonders, above the power of nature, and therefore though they
are matter of wonder to us, who often times cannot understand how they are
wrought, yet they are not so in themselves. But surely there is no device more
subtle and prevailing than this, men being very apt to believe, that their
words are Oracles whose works are Miracles; and indeed were they so really, it
were a sufficient ground of belief, but as they are, to wit, only so in
appearance, they have too great an influence upon the vulgar.

5 A veil of Religion, is many times put on by these Cheaters, their garb,
their look, their Language, speak nothing but holiness, whilst their doctrins
breath nothing but Heresy. As too many of the Orthodox dishonor their teaching
well by living ill, so do many Heretics credit their ill-teaching by
well-living. It is one of St. Paul's characters of Seducers, Having a 2 Timothy 3. 5
show of godliness, and Gregory Nazianzen, says of the Macedonians, that
their life was admirable, whilst Gr. Naz. orat. 44.
their Doctrine was abominable. Thus as Harlots paint their faces, and perfume
their beds, to allure. Heretics feign godliness, and profess Religion to
seduce.

6 A vernish of Reason, is drawn over false opinions, by these Seducers,
because that is very taking with a rational creature. This St. Paul intimates
in that forementioned Col. 2. 8.
Caution, Beware, lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit.
Accordingly Tertullian observes, Tert. praescript. adv. h^^. l. c. 6.
that the Ancient Heresies concerning the Ae^nes, were fetched from Plato's
Ideaes, the equality of the first matter with God, from Zeno, the death of the
Soul, from Epicurus, and the denial of the Resurrection of the Body, de una
omnium Philosophorum Schola, from the l. contra Herm^.
Schools of all the Philosophers. Upon this account it is, that the Father
elsewhere asserts Philosophers to be the Patriarks of Heretics, and that all
Heresies are founded upon, and supported by the rules and dictates of
Philosophy, not that Philosophy and natural Reason is to be rejected by the
Orthodox, as of no use, nay, indeed it is an help to Divinity, when in its
right place, but our Divinity must not be regulated by Philosophy, and our
Religion bounded by reason. The Orthodox use her as an handmaid to wait, but
the Heterodox make her a Mistress to seduce.

7 The color of a Revelation, is often times used to set off lying Doctrine. When
St. Paul says, If an Angel from Gal. 1. 8
Heaven Preach any other Gospel, let him be accursed, he intimates that some
might pretend to bring another Gospel from heaven, and indeed such there were
who broached fictitious Gospels, as if they had been divinely inspired. Simon
Magus pretended himself to be the Holy Ghost, so did Montanus, and vented the
Dreams of his Whores, Priscilla, Maximilla, and Quintilla, for prephecies.
Indeed, Divine Revelation is the proper ground of Faith. No wonder if
Heretics, that they may gain credit, and so seduce the people, lay claim to it,

8 The Gloss of Scripture is very often times put upon false opinions, by the
assertours of them, to delude the people. In this, as St. Hierome well
observes, they trace Apolog. Hier. contra Lucif.
the Devils footsteps, who quoted Scripture, thereby fondly imagining he might
delude Christ himself. Thus the Judaizing false Teachers in the Apostles time,
made use of the Old Testament Scripture, quoting Moses and the Prophets; and
Irenaeus observes of the Heretics of Iren* l. 1. c. 1
those times, that they dealt by the Sacred Writings, as a Graver does by the
goodly image of a King, which by altering the form, he turns into the
likeness of a dog or wolf, and then affirms it, (...), to be the lovely
image of the King, they take the words of Scripture, and put upon them their
own sense, and then say it is Scripture, it is so indeed materially, but not
formally, as the metal is the Kings, but the stamp is a Wolf; so the words are
Scripture, but the sense the Heretics.

9 To all these I may add, the name of a Church is no small bait whereby
Heretics allure and catch the simple in their snares; our Savior tells us
what their sayings Mat. 24. 6
should be, Lee here is Christ, and there is Christ, in this conventicle, and
that meeting, by which they withdraw many from the Apostolical assemblies. In
this respect St. Judes Character of them, is, that they did separate
themselves, to wit, from the Apostles, and (which Jude v. 19.
must needs follow) they no doubt assumed to themselves the title to the true
Church of Christ; and thus did the Novatians in St. Cyprians time, and the
Donatists in St. Augustines time, fighting against the Church under the name of
the Church.

By all this we see how Antichristian heretics abuse the best things to the
worst designs, Truth, Liberty, Tradition, Miracles, Holiness, Reason,
Revelation, Scripture, the Church, are all of them of singular concernment and
advantage to the Orthodox Christian Catholic Religion, but yet even these are
falsely pretended by heretics, and by the feigned semblance of these, it is
that they endeavor (and often times with too much success) to seduce their
auditors from the faith.

These Seducers have been more or less in all ages, but I think I may safely
say never more than in this, and if you mark it, you shall find the Old cheats
still practiced. The Papists on the one hand pretend to the Church, Traditions,
Miracles, and a formal sanctity. The Socinians boast much of Reason. The
Antinomians of Liberty. The Anabaptists, Quakers, and such like, of
Enthusiasms, a light within, breathings, impulses, and discoveries of the
Spirit. All Sects have some mixtures of truth, and would father their Errors
upon the Scriptures.

And now being encompassed as it were with such subtle Sophisters, crafty
Seducers, what need is there of a prudent vigilance, lest we be ensnared by
them, according 2 Fet. 3. 17
to that excellent advice of St. Peter Beware lest ye also being led away, with
the error of the wicked Mat. 10. 12
fall from your own steadfastness. Behold, says our blessed Savior to his
Disciples, I send you forth as sheep among wolves, be ye wise as Serpents,
and innocent as Doves, wise as Serpents, to defend themselves, innocent as
Doves, in not offending others, or (as Prosper to our present purpose) innocent
as Doves, in not circumventing any, and wise as Serpents, in not suffering
themselves to be circumvented; and surely this Serpentine wisdom is that
which concerns all Christians in some measure to attain, so much the rather,
because these wolves, as our Savior elsewhere speaks, come in sheeps
clothing, for this reason, says Optatus, Ut prius ovis mordentem lupum
sentiat quam praesentiat Optat. contra Part. l. 2.
venientem, that they may seize upon the sheep before it can perceive them
coming. He that walks among snares, had need be cautelous, and no less
reason have we to be circumspect, who are in the same danger which those
Christians were in, of them that would seduce then, and so much shall suffice
to have been spoken of the first General, namely, the mischievous design of the
false Teachers. I go on to a more brief dispatch of the other, which is,

The Pious care of true Apostles, These things have I Genesis Second.
written to you concerning them. For the full discussion whereof, I shall look
upon the writing here mentioned in a double reference, namely, as it was a
result of the Spirits dictate, and as it was an argument of St. John's care.

1 As a result of the Spirits dictates, for St. John and the other holy men of
God spoke and wrote as moved by the Holy Ghost, and so we are here to take
notice, that the Divinely inspired writings are of excellent use against
Seducers. Indeed, as a straight line discovers what is crooked, and the clear
light dispells darkness, so the word of God serves to discover who are
Seducers, and to dissipate their clondy errors; you err (says our blessed
Mat. 22. 29
Savior to the Sadduces,) not knowing the Scriptures; tacitly teaching us,
that the Scriptures well known, and rightly understood, are a guard against
error. The whole Scripture, says St. Paul, is of divine inspiration, 2 Timothy
3. 15
and is profitable, as for reproof of sin, so for the correction of error.

Let it therefore be our business, especially in such erroneous times as
these, to study the Scriptures, and not only to be well versed in the letter,
but acquainted with the meaning of them, that as our Savior refelled the
tempter, so we may be able to refute seducers with a scriptum est. No darts
pierce so deep, as those which are taken out of the Lords armory; no arrows hit
the mark like those which are drawn out of Gods quiver, nor is any sword so
sharp as that of the Spirit, and therefore as David hid Gods word in his heart,
that he might Psalm. 1^9. 9
not fall into sin, so let us, that we may not run into error.

2 But that which would be chiefly taken notice of, is, that his writing these
things concerning Seducers, was an argument of his care, that the people might
not be deceived by them. It is that which we find to have been not only the
care of this, but the other holy Apostles; the greatest part of St. Judes
Epistle, and of St. Peter's second Epistle is concerning these Seducers;
frequent caveats we meet with in St. Paul's Epistles, to the same purpose,
witness his (...) to the Col^ssians, Beware Col. 2. 8.
lest any man spoil you; nay, his threefold (...) to the Philippians, beware of
Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware Phil. 3. 2
of the concision, and to name no more, his (...) to the Romans, beseeching
that they would mark and Romans 16. 17
avoid such. It were easy to let you see how the Fathers of the Church, have in
this particular traced the footst eps of the Apostles. Ignatius bespeaketh the
Christians Ignat. ad Antioc. Ep. 1. 2.
of Antioch, in words much like those of St. Paul to the Philippians, (...),
etc. Beware of Dogs, Serpents, Dragons, Aspes, Bazilisks, Scorpions. St.
Cyprian Cypr. Ep. 40.
in his Epistle to all the people, is very urgent with his ^r^ vos fratres, and
again with his admone^ pariter et consulo, advising, admonishing, entreating,
that they would not believe the smooth words of false Teachers, lest they did
mistake darkness for light, night for day, and poison for a remedy. Irenaeus
in his Preface to his first book against Iren. praefat. l 1. adv. Haer.
Heresys, says, this was the reason of his writing those books, that the
wolves might not devour the sheep of Christ through his default* for the same
cause were those things written by Epiphanius, Athanasius, St. Augustine, and
many others, which are extant concerning heresies.

Nor was it without a great deal of Reason, that those holy men were, and in
particular here St. John was, so careful to write concerning Seducers, and that
both respectu populi, in regard of the people, for the preservation of their
safety, and respectu sui, in regard of himself, for the discharging of his own
duty.

1 In respect of the people, St. John well knew,

1 That all men are naturally prone to error, their understanding (as well as
will) being corrupted; yea, that the best being but men, may through want of
judgment, and partiality of affection, be led aside. The bad through
wickedness, and the good through weakness, sometimes like sheep have gone
astray.

2 That the errors to which these Antichrists did endeavor to seduce them,
were in things fundamental, for so it appears by the charge he laiet^
against them, which is, that they denied the Father and the Son, that they
denied Jesus to be the Christ, a doctrine upon which the whole Christian
Religion is founded. St. Hierom upon that o^ our Savior, Be Hieron. in Mat.
wise as Serpents, observes, Serpentis astutia ponitur in exemplum, quia toto
corpore occul^at capu^, ut illud in quo vita est protegat, the Serpent is
therefore mentioned, as an Example of Wisdom, because it is careful to hide
the Head, wherein its Life lies, with the whole body; Christ is the Head of
the Church, and the Errors of these Seducers did strike at the Head, no wonder
if the Apostle wrote concerning them.

3 That to be seduced, especially in such errors, is dangerous, and
destructive. It was the Prophet Isaiahs sad complaint, The Leaders of this
people cause Isa. 9. 16
them to err, and they that are lead of them are destroyed; and St. Peter's
Epithet, which he gives to 2 Pet. 2* 1
these H^resies, is no^lesse than damnable, or (according to the Greek phrase)
heresies of perdition. To this purpose tends that phrase of St. Paul, when he
calls Seducer^, Spoilers, where the Greek word alludeth Col. 2. 8
to Thieves and Robbers, or to Soldiers and Plunderers, who take the Cattle of
their enemy, and Zanch. ibid. Daven. ibid.
carry it away as a Prey, for such are false Teachers, the Devils Agents, to
lead Captive poor souls, that they may be the Devils prey. It is not unworthy
our observation, that the Apostle having in the verse before, mentioned the
Promise of eternal life, he presently adds this caveat concerning these
Seducers, intimating, that the flatteries of these Seducers if hearkened to,
would deprive them of the Promise of Eternal Life, so that it was no less than
their everlasting welfare, which was endangered. Good reason had the Apostle
upon all these considerations, to write concerning these Seducers, to the
Christians, in respect of their safety.

2 Besides this, there was an Obligation in regard of himself, that he might
perform his duty. So Lorinus glosseth upon the Text, Videtur fidem suam Lor. in
lo^.
liberare, ac suo se functum munere protestari, by this writing he discharges
that Office to which he was called, and that trust which was reposed in him by
his Lord and Master. Indeed, if the Minister of Christ warn the people of
Seducers, though they miscarry, yet he shall be acquitted, but a pastore
exigitur quicquid per inertiam non custoditur, says St. Cyprian Cypr. de
pastor* cur.
truly, if the sheep wander through the negligence of the Shepherd, it will
be exacted of him, according to that of God himself, I have made thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel, and therefore hear the word at my mouth, and
give them warning from me, when I say unto the wicked, thou shall surely dye,
and Ezekiel. 3. 17. 18. 19.
thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wickedness, to save his life, the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thine hand, yet if thou warn the wicked, and if
he turn not from his wickedness* nor from his wicked way, he shall dye in his
iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.

To close up this with a threefold inference.

1 See hence what is the reason why Diotrephes prated against this Apostle (as
himself tells us) with malicious words, and why it is that Seducers (with Ep.
3. 10.
their followers) rail at the Ministers of the Gospel, namely, because they
Preach and Write concerning them. For this cause it is, that in all Ages they
have been, and still are, so solicitous to stop the mouths and pens, to take
away the livings and lives of the Orthodox, as well knowing, that else they
cannot have the opportunity of sowing their tares, at leastwise, not with so
good success. It was no slight Policy of Philip, to offer the Athenians peace
upon condition of delivering up their Orators to him, whom Demosthenes answered
with an Apologue very suitable to this present matter, The Wolves were willing
to make an agreement with the sheep, provided they would deliver up their Dogs.
The truth is, Seducing Wolves are most afraid of, and angry at, the Ministers
of the Gospel, whom that great Shepherd of our souls has appointed to watch
his flock.

2 Learn hence how unlike those Ministers are to this Apostle, who are dumb
dogs in the midst of ravening Wolves, and thereby suffer the sheep of Christ to
be worried; what a shame is it, that the Heterodox should be bold, and the
Orthodox cold, the Seducers clamorous in conventicles, and the Catholics
silent in Churches? Oh let all the Ministers of the Gospel learn their duty,
especially in such times as these, which is not only oves aggregare, to gather
together the sheep, but Lupos abigere, to drive away the Wolves; we must not
only be as Mercuriuses to the Traveller, which point out the right way, but
as Sea-Marks to the Mariner, which warn him of Shelves, Sands, and Rocks; we
are called in scripture, both guides and watchmen, to teach us, that as we
ought to lead the people in the truth, so to give them notice of Heretics; nor
can we be fa^thful and wise servants, unless we as well admonish the people
of their danger as instruct them in their duty.

3 Finally, Let not the care of those Ministers (who after St. John's pattern)
Preach and Write concerning Seducers, be dis-regarded by, but let their
Caveats be acceptable to, the people. He will easily open his ears to
Seducers, who shuts them against true Teachers. Obey them (therefore) that have
the rule over you, and watch for Heb. 13. 17
your souls, be guided by their advice, so shall you not be led aside of
Heretics by their devices. But above all, seek after, and pray for that
Unction, which will arm you against error, whereof our Apostle treats in the
next verse, and shall ( God willing) be discussed the next time.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 27. But the anointing which you have received of him abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him.
THe virulency of persecution, and the subtilty of seduction, are the Devils
two great Engines, by which he has still endeavored to batter down the
Church of Christ; sometimes he is a raging spirit in the hands of cruel
Tyrants to destroy, and sometimes a lying spirit in the mouths of false
Teachers to deceive the Orthodox Professors of the Christian Religion. By the
latter of these it is that he has done more mischief than the former: for
whereas in the one, he acts openly, as an enemy, in the other he works
closely, as a seeming friend; and whereas the blood of Martyrs, (though against
the will of their persecutours) has been a means to propagate and increase,
the poison of Heretics has too often prevailed to the infection and damage of
the Church; no wonder then, if one of the designs of this Holy Apostle in this
Epistle, be to write to the Christians concerning Seducers, and to mind them
of the great goodness of God in providing an Antidote against this poison, in
those words, But the Anointing which you have received of him abides in you,
etc.

Having in the former discourse handled the Caution, that which next occurreth
to our discussion is the Comfort, which is not only mentioned, but enlarged
upon, in these words, But the anointing, etc.

The right understanding of this whole verse, depends upon the genuine notion
of (...), the anointing, once and again here spoken of. In order to which it
will be needful to inquire, to what this anointing alludeth? what it does
import? and wherein the Analogy holds?

The Jesuits in their Comments, would have us believe, that St. John alludeth
to the Anointing which is used in their Church at the Sacrament of Baptism,
before, in the breast, and between the shoulders, and after, on the top of the
head. But though I cannot deny, that the use of Anointing in Baptism, is very
ancient, as finding it mentioned not only by St. Augustine, but St. Cyprian
Cypr. Ep 70. Tertul. de Re^. carnis. Aug. de Trinit. l. 15. c. 24
and Tertullian, yet sure I am it is no where spoken of in the New Testament,
as either instituted by Christ, or Preached by the Apostles, in which respect
it cannot rationally be conceived that St. John alludeth to it. Indeed we
find in St. James an anointing of the sick with Oil, to be then practiced,
though (by the way) that of a far different nature from the Popish extreme
Unction, for wheareas the Papists anoint the sick in order to their better
passage out, the anointing then used was in order to their recovery, and
longer continuance in this World. But as there is no reason to imagine that St.
John had any eye to St. James his Unction, so much less can he be supposed
to allude to an Unction which was not at all used in his time. If therefore you
would know from what this phrase is borrowed, the Answer is, that very probably
the Apostle had an eye to that unction which was in use under the Law, the
ingredients and composition whereof you have set down at large by Moses; Exodus
30. 15
and so much the rather, because, as that is called the Holy Oil, so this
anointing is said before to be from the Holy One.

2 The Socinians inquiring into the meaning of this Metaphor, understand by it
the Evangelical Doctrine, construing (...), the anointing in this, by (...),
hat which you have heard, at the four and twentieth verse, and conceiving it to
be called the Unction, because that by that wonderful effusion of the Holy
Ghost, the Apostles were enabled to publish it, for which reason they suppose
it is elsewhere called the Spirit, and the ministration 2 Cor. ^. 6. 8
of the Spirit; with this interpretation some of our late Orthodox writers
accord, though upon a far different reason; For whereas the Socinians falsely
denying any need of the Spirits illumination, to be conferred upon every
Christian, but only of that Revelation which was at first vouchsafed to the
Apostles, and by them to the World, endeavor to evade the argument which is
brought against them, from this Scripture, by this Exposition; The Orthodox
justly denying any new Revelation, or extraordinary inspiration now to be
expected, answer the argument which Euthusiasts bring from this Scripture, by
this interpretation. For my own part, I am very unwilling, (without great
cause) to recede Aug. in lo^. Greg. Mor. 5. 19. Call in lo^. Illyr in lo^. Lap.
in lo^. Lor. in lo^.
from the Generally received exposition of any scripture. And as to this
particular text,

1 I find the anointing by the far greatest part both of Ancient and Modern,
Protestant and Popish Commentators to be expounded the Holy Spirit, suitable to
which it is, that the latter annoynting is read Spirit in the Aethiopick
version, his Spirit teaches you of all Aethiop.
things.

2 There are several considerations which render the common exposition most
rational, in as much as

1 Usually where the Scripture speaks of annoynting, S^^ the 27th. L^^.
it is meant of the Spirit, as appears in the former discourse upon the
twentieth verse.

2 It is not here said, the annoynting which we (to wit Apostles) have
received of him, for then it might most probably have referred to the visible
descension of the Holy Ghost upon them; nor yet is it said, the annoynting
which you have received of us, for then it might justly have been construed as
the same with (...), that which you have heard, this Evangelical Doctrine which
was delivered by the inspired Apostles; but in as much as it is the annoynting
which you have received of him, it is most rationally construed of that
Spiritual illumination which every Christian receives in some measure from
Christ.

3 Add to this, that our Apostle in this verse manifestly intends to mind the
Christians what a singular help Christ had provided for them against seducers,
whereby they might be enabled to continue in that which they had heard, and
therefore it cannot rationally be looked upon as one and the same with that
which they had heard, but rather the enlightening grace of his Spirit is to be
understood, than which there cannot be a stronger antidote against error.

Finally, as by this exposition this Scripture becomes a sharp sword against
the Socinians, so (as shall appear in the handling) it will not hereby become a
buckler for the Anabaptists, and therefore I shall acquiesce, and adhere to it
as most genuine.

3 As to the last enquiry, how fitly the Spirit of God is compared to, and
resembled by, oil, and annoynting, the answer has been already returned in the
discourse upon the former clause of the twentieth verse, whither I refer the
Reader; nor shall I add any thing further, but only, that as the holy Ointment
was made of several Spices mixed with the oil, and whatsoever things or persons
were anointed therewith, were legally sanctified by it; so we are here to
understand by this annoynting, not the illumination of the Spirit, which is
oft-times found alone, and is vouchsafed to the unregenerate, but that which is
as it were made up of the several graces of the Spirit, whereby not only the
mind is enlightened, but the whole man is sanctified.

Having given you this account of the annoynting, which is as it were the hinge
upon which the whole verse turns, it now remains that I go on to consider
what is here affirmed concerning this Unction, and because I have already
traced the metaphor of oil, and our Apostle is pleased to insist upon another
similitude of teaching, I shall follow that, and accordingly you may conceive
the Spirit of God, who is the annoynting, to be likewise here represented as a
Schoolmaster, whose excellency is set forth by four Characters, namely, his
Residency, Sufficiency, Fidelity, and Efficiency. His

1 Residency, permanent, in those words, The annoynting which you have received
of him, abides in you. 2 Sufficiency, abundant, in those words, And you need
not that any man teach you, but as the same annoynting teaches you of all
things. 3 Fidelity, eminent, in those words, and is truth, and is no lie. 4
Efficiency, evident, in those words, and as it has taught you, you shall abide
in him.
Begin we with the Residency of this Schoolmaster, as Genesis 1.
it is set forth in the beginning of the verse, The annoynting which you have
received of him abides in you; and here we have something supposed, and
something proposed; that which is supposed is his presence, The annoynting
which you have received of him; that which is proposed is his residence,
Abides in you.

1 That which is here supposed concerning this unction, comes first to be
considered, and shall be dispatched in three Propositions.

1 That this annoynting is not in us of our selves, but received by us from
another. It is St. Paul's Question, and though it be occasioned by a discourse
of those extraordinary gifts, yet it holds true in reference to all, What have
thou that thou have not received? the sins which we 1 Cor. 4. 7
commit are our own, but the grace to subdue them is received; though we are
sometimes subdue into error, yet we are apt to fall into them our selves, but
the unction which armeth us against those errors is received.

It is a meditation which should keep the best Christians lowly in their own
eyes; Have thou this annoynting, whilst others want it, or have thou it in a
greater measure than others? be not proud, but humble, for though it be in thee
subjectively, yet it is not from thee effectively, and therefore no just cause
of Self-exaltation; it is St. Paul's inference upon the forementioned question,
If thou do receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received
it? Where the manner of proposal by way of question intimates (as Musculus
well glosseth) Musc. in loc.
the impudence of this arrogance, Ridiculum plane est de alienis bonis
superbire, It is a ridiculous thing, with Aesops Crow, to be proud of borrowed
feathers; in one word, as to boast our selves of what we have not is
abominable, so it it little less odious to boast of what we have, as if it
were our own, when as it is only received.

2 That this annoynting is received of him, that is Christ; it was at first
received by Christ himself, to wit, as man in his Human nature, but he received
it not so much for himself as us, Voluit accipere, ut potuit tribuere, he would
as Man receive, that as Mediator he might convey it to us. Indeed it has
pleased the Father, Col. 2. 9
(says St. Paul) that in him should all fullness dwell; to wit, as water in
the Fountain, light in the Sun, Wine Ioh. 1. 16
in the Grape, and oil in the Olive; and accordingly says St. John, of his
fullness we all receive, and that, grace for grace. What the Head is to the
Body, that is Christ to the Church; and as the members receive sense and motion
from the Head, so does the Church this unction from Christ. Learn hence

1 How greatly we are beholding to Christ, of whom it is that we receive
whatsoever measure we have of this Spiritual unction; the truth is, whatsoever
Spiritual benefit we receive, it is only in and through Christ. The Remission
of sins, and Adoption of Sons, the Justification of our persons, and
Sanctification of our natures, the Donation of his Spirit, and acceptance of
our services, the Redemption of our bodies, and Salvation of our Souls, are all
received through Christ; so justly does St. Paul say, He has blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.

2 What need we have to be ingrafted into Christ, since as we can receive
nothing but of him, so neither can we unless we first receive him. To as many
as received him (says the Evangelist) to them he gave power to Joh. 1. 11
become the Sons of God, and to as many as receive him it is that he gives
his Spirit; no wonder that St. Paul praying for the Ephesians, that they might
be strengthened with the spirit of Christ, prays also, that he might Ephesians.
3. 16, 17
dwell in their hearts by faith, since it is by our faith in Christ that we
receive him, and consequently his Spirit, which is this annoynting.

3 Lastly, This receiving of the unction from him is by way of gift. Indeed
receiving in its largest extent is the correlative, both of debitum and donum,
a debt and a gift, what is duly paid, and what is freely given, both are said
to be received. But when it is used in reference to God and Christ, it cannot
relate but only to a gift, since whatever we receive of him, and much more
the anointing of the Spirit, is given of his mere mercy. Indeed in respect of
himself, it may be called a debt, he having pleased by his Promise to make
himself a debtor, and accordingly it is that the Spirit is called the Spirit of
Promise, because promised both by the Ephesians. 1. 13.
Father and the Son, for so we find the expressions varyed, the Comforter
whom my Father will send, and I will Joh. 16. 25.
give you. But still in respect of us, it is a free gift, it was love moved him
at first to promise this unction to, and since to confer it on, us, in which
respect it is called the Act. 2. 38.
gift of the holy Ghost. True it is, this anointing was received by Christ
from his Father, as purchased by his precious blood, but it is received by us
from Christ, as bestowed by his free grace.

It is a consideration which should so much the more oblige us to thankfulness
for this unction, it being but reason, that when we receive we should
acknowledge the Donor, and that what is received freely, should be
acknowledged the more gratefully, we have received the Spirit of God, (says
the Apostle) that we may know the things which are freely given us of God,
among which the 1 Cor 2. 12.
Spirit himself is not the least, and who so knows them to be freely given,
cannot but be greatly thankful. Holy Jesus, we could do nothing that is good,
nor avoid what is evil, did we not receive this Unction from thee, nor do we
receive this Unction as a reward of our merit, but a fruit of thy bounty. We
are unworthy to receive the anointing from thee, but thou art worthy to
receive from us glory, and honor, and praise, now and for ever.

2 That which is next in order to be discussed, and is more directly expressed,
is the Residency of this Schoolmaster, the abiding of this Unctio^. Things that
are ^^id in Oil are most lasting, this sacred anointing is prmanent. It is
that which is true in respect of the Church in general, and each Christian in
particular.

1 This Anointing abides in the Church. That Holy Spirit who is here set
forth under the notion of a Teacher, is by our Savior described as a
Comforter, concerning Ioh 14. 16
whom he tells his Disciples, that he shall abide with them for ever, which
Promise was made to them, as the then representatives of, and so in them to the
whole Church, accordingly it is, that the Spirit has been resident in all Ages
with the Christian Church, to teach, and comfort, and perform all other
Offices, whereof she stands in need. Christ's presence with his Disciples was
temporary, in which respect St. John's word is, (...), Ioh 1. 1^.
he dwelt among us, so our Translation reads it, but as in a Tabernacle, so
much the force of the Greek carries in it, he only sojourned for a time with
his Disciples, but his Spirit, (...), abides with his Church from one
Generation to another, (...), so Theophilact glosseth, for his presence Theoph.
in Ioh.
is not as Christ's was, only for a season. True it is, Rev. 1. 13.
Christ is said to be in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, but that is by
his Spirit. In respect of his corporal presence, he says in one place, The
Poor you have always Mat. 26. 12.
with you, but me you have not always, in regard of his 28. 20.
Spiritual presence, it is that he says in another place, Lo I am with you
always, even to the end of the world.

2 As this Anointing, which we receive from Christ, abides in the Church, so
does it in all the chosen and faithful members of the Church. It is said of the
Apostles, that when this unction visibly and gloriously descended on them,
there appeared cloven tongues, as it were on fire, and sat upon each of them;
Sitting is a fixed posture, and notes permanency, Act. 2. 8.
it does so in some, though not the same measure and manner upon every true
Believer. At the eighth verse of the next chapter (where I shall God willing,
enlarge upon this subject) it is resembled to seed, and that such as is not
only cast into, but remains in the ground; 1 Ioh. 3. 8
by our blessed Savior it is compared to water, and that river water, which is
continually running, and therefore Ioh. 7. 37*
said to be living; and again it is said to be a well of water, springing up
in the heart of a believer to everlasting life. Finally, by John the Baptist it
is likened to fire, and Mat. 3. 11
such a fire it is, which like that under the Altar never goes out.

The consideration hereof may serve,

1 To rectifye our judgments in the true estimate of, and accordingly to
quicken our endeavors in the ardent pursuit after, this unction. Ah Lord! how
eager are men in scraping the things of this World, which when with difficulty
obtained by us, are easily snatched from us? how much rather should we seek
after this anointing, which being received, abides in us? Labor not (says
our blessed Savior) for the meat that perishes, but labor for Ioh. 6. 27
the meat that indureth to everlasting life, thereby plainly intimating, that
perpetuity is that which much advances excellency; every thing being so much
the more amiable, by how much it is the more durable; no wise man but would
prefer lasting brass, before fading gold, a constant table, though of a few
dishes, before the largest feast which should only last for a few days; and
surely then, when we consider how much this, and all other spiritual blessings
transcend corporal, both in their nature and durance, we cannot but judge them
worthy our highest esteem, and choicest endeavor. A good name (says the wise
man) is better than precious ointment; but this precious Eccl. 7. 1
ointment is better than a good name, and much more than wealth and pleasure,
or whatever it is that this world can afford. This is one of those gifts to
which St. James gives those Epithites of good and perfect. Every gift is good,
though but temporal, but spiritual gifts being of a never ^ading durance, are
both good and perfect, great reason have we to beg these above all others. Oh
let us not cease in asking, seeking, knocking, for this unction, which being
given to us (like Mary's good part) Luke 10. 32
shall never be taken from us.

2 To comfort those who have received this unction, when they consider its
perpetual duration. Habet Oleum Hug. Card.
Deus, habet et Mundus, says Hugo, God has his Oil, and the World too, Oleum
mundi in vasis deficit, Oleo dei vasa deficiunt, The Worlds Oil fails in the
vessels, but the vessels fail for Gods Oil; the one, nunquam sufficit, will
never satisfy, the other, nunquam deficit, will never waste; whatever worldly
comforts we receive, our fear of losing allaieth the sweetness of enjoying;
but it is not so with the grace of the Spirit, which being received, abides
with us. Though withal a Caution must be annexed; that we use our endeavor
to preserve and maintain this Oil in the lamp of our souls. This Schoolmaster
is willing to reside with us, but then we must remember St. Paul's caveat,
Grieve not the Holy Spirit of God, whereby Ephesians. 4. 30.
you are sealed to the day of redemption, for if we grieve him he will at least
for a time withdraw himself from us. This fire is of a lasting nature, being
once thoroughly kindled, but then we must observe that other injunction of the
Apostle, Quench not the Spirit, for though it be not wholly 1 Thessalonians 5. 17.
put out, it may be much quenched by our Negligence. This Anointing is
abiding, but then we must take notice of our Saviors assertion, To him that
has shall be given, but from him that has not, shall be taken away that
Mat. 25* ^9
which he has. We must make use of, and improve this holy Oil, concerning
which that riddle is a truth, the more we spend, the more it increases; the
Oil in the widows vessel, ceased not so long as she poured it out; this holy
Oil is best preserved by using it to the Glory of God, our own and others
advantage; and thus much shall suffice for the first character of the residency
of this Schoolmaster, proceed we to the next, which is

2 The sufficiency of his instruction, as it is set forth Affirmatively, in
those words, The same anointing teaches you of all things.

Negatively, in those, And you need not that any man teach you.

1 Begin we with the assirmative part, and therein consider

The latitude of the Object, all things, and The Quality of the Act, Teaches.
1 The Object is expressed in the same latitude at the twentieth verse, where
has been largely discussed, how, and with what restrictions it is to be
interpreted. It was the promise of our Savior to his Disciples, that his
Spirit should guide them into all truth, Ioh. 16. 13
nor was this confined to them, but is here assured to all Christians, that the
anointing should teach them all things, all things, that is all truth, truth
being the proper object of the understanding, which is that faculty whereby we
are capable of teaching; nor yet must this be extended as far as the Spirit is
able to teach and lead, but only as far as was requisite for them, and is for
us to know, and understand; thus the Spirit led them into all truth, whereby
they were able to propagate Christian Religion in the World, and he teaches
every Christian all truth which is needful in order to the prevention of
fundamental errors, and the salvation of his precious soul. It would not be
passed by, that our Apostles phrase is at once both extensive and restrictive,
it is not (...), but (...), He teaches all things, but of, or concerning all
things, that is, something of all things. These all things are not taught
simultaneously, but successively; fully, but gradually: the Disciples
themselves were taught by degrees, and did not know all things at first, nay
indeed, not exactly at the last; it is but a partial knowledge, the best have
of these all things; but yet all those things which conduce to the
strengthening us against error, and the guiding us in the way of truth, are in
some, though not the same measure, taught by this Unction.

2 The chief thing here to be discussed is the quality of the act, what kind of
teaching it is that is here attributed to the Spirit, whereof all Christians
participate.

For the better understanding hereof, take notice of a double distinction.

1 The teaching of this unction, is either extraordinary, or ordinary, that
peculiar to some, this common to all Christians; in reference to the
extraordinary teaching it is that St. Gregory says excellently, Ungit Spiritus
iste sanctus Citharaedum, and Psalmistam facit, ungit pastorem, Greg. Mag.
and Prophetam facit, ungit Piscatorem, and praedicatorem facit, ungit
persecutorem, and doctorem gentium facit, ungit publicanum, and facit
Evangelistam, the annoynting of this holy Spirit makes an Harper (so was
David) a Psalmist; a Shepherd (so was Amos) a Prophet; a Fisherman (so was St.
Peter) a Fisher of men, by preaching; a Publican, (so was St. Matthew) an
Evangelist; finally, a Persecutor (so was St. Paul) a Teacher of the Gentiles.
But it is the ordinary, not that peculiar and extraordinary way of teaching
which is here intended.

2 The ordinary teaching of the Spirit is either external, or internal, and
both these are no doubt included.

1 The outward teaching of the Spirit is by the Ministry of the Word, and
preaching of the Gospel, which is contained in the holy Scriptures; look as the
holy Writings were at first inspired by the Holy Ghost, so by them he still
teaches his Church. Accordingly it is that all saving truths were dictated by
the Spirit to the Penmen, and are fully, faithfully delineated in sacred Writ.
It is a form of sound words every way complete, explicating, (as Gregory the
great says) all the Divine mysteries of Religion, and delivering all precepts
for Moral practice, Quibus quidem duabus partibus omnis nostrae salutis and
faelicitatis ratio continetur, in which two consists the whole doctrine of
attaining true happiness, and therefore in this respect this of the Apostle is
verified, The annoynting teaches us of all things, to wit, in the external
ministration of the Word.

2 Besides this outward there is an inward teaching, which the Spirit
vouchsafes to the Church, and every true member of it, and is here principally
aimed at. This is that teaching, which being the secret work of Gods Spirit, is
not so visibly discernable; the more things are abstracted from sense, the more
mysterious they are, no wonder if it be difficult to apprehend what this
teaching is, which according to St. Gregory is, Allocutio intimae
inspirationis, an inward inspiration, or Spiritual allocution. It is a Question
much controverted in the Schools, how the Angels being Spiritual substances
impart their conceptions to one another, and surely it is much more hard to
know how the Spirit imparts his Divine learning to the soul, even they who are
thus taught are sure of the (...), that so it is, but are not able to unfold
the (...), how it is so.

And yet that we may in some measure apprehend what we cannot fully conceive,
I shall in a few words acquaint you with that notion of this teaching which the
Scripture is pleased to give us, and accordingly if you ask what this inward
teaching is whereof the Apostle speaks, I shall return the answer in the
words of the Prophet Jeremy, or rather God by the Prophet, It is Ier. 31. 33
the putting his Law in our inward parts, and writing it in our hearts. Indeed,
as we say in general, the Scripture is the best interpreter of it self, so in
this particular, the Prophet is the best Commentator on the Apostle; and
therefore that we may more clearly understand the one, it will be needful
more particularly to comment on the other, and let you see what this putting
this Law in our inward parts, and writing it in our hearts means, by which
we shall the better perceive what this teaching is; in reference to which I
shall lay down a double conclusion.

1 That which the Spirit teaches inwardly, is the same with that he teaches
outwardly, and therefore that which he is said to write in the heart of man, is
no other than that Law which is written in the Book of God. As the mind of the
Spirit in one parcel agrees with the mind of the Spirit in another parcel of
Holy Writ* so the impressions of the Spirit on the soul, answer to the dictates
of the Spirit in the Scriptures. It is very observable that Christ tells his
Disciples, the Spirit should Ioh. 14. 26
bring all things to their remembrance; as if the chief end of the miraculous
descension of the Holy Ghost upon them, were not to teach them any new
doctrine, but to bring to remembrance what Christ had before taught them;
surely then the inward teaching of this Unction whereof all Christians
participate, does not reveal any new mysteries which are not already delivered
in the Word. Among other resemblances, the Spirits working upon the Soul, is
said to be a sealing, and among other reasons, for this, because as the seal
makes no stamp upon the wax, but what is answerable to that which is upon the
seal; so whatsoever the Spirit teaches the heart, is answerable to what it
teaches in the Word.

2 The inward teaching, or writing of the Spirit, is the imprinting of
Scripture-truths upon the soul. Conceive then the soul as the paper, the truths
revealed in Gods Word, as the Letters, the Spirit of God, as the Scribe, and
the ayl of his grace, as the Ink, by which there is an impression made of the
letters upon the paper, truths upon the soul. For the more particular opening
hereof know:

1 That this teaching is not a naked motion, but a real impression; not a
superficial wetting, but a deep soaking. Many there are to whom the Spirit
vouchsafes some taste, yet never drink a full draught, who have some gliding
aspects, but no direct beams of the Sun of righteousness shining on them; it
is one thing to hear the voice of the Spirit speaking, another to find the Pen
of the Spirit writing; that teaching which is here meant, is such as confirms
against error, and therefore does not glide off like water, but abide like oil,
slightly move, but strongly work upon the soul.

2 That this impression of the Spirits teaching is upon the whole soul (more
especially) the two chief faculties of the soul, the Understanding, and the
Will; so much seems to be intimated by that double character of the subject
(the inward parts, and the heart) which we find in the Prophet; as of old the
Law was literally written by Gods Finger in two Tables of Stone; so it is
spiritually written by Gods Spirit in two Tables of flesh, the mind and the
heart. This annoynting then teaches,

1 Illuminando intellectum, by enlightening the understanding, to see and
discover those things which are revealed in the Word; the first work of the
Spirit in conversion answers that first word and work of God in the Creation,
Let there be light; by this light it is that the Genesis 1. 3
darkness of ignorance is expelled, and the eyes of the mind are opened, to
apprehend Divine Writings in their own luster and beauty. It is observed of
Paper, that being oyled it is thereby made bright, and so fitter to receive the
beams of the Sun, and conveigh the light into the room; so is it with our
minds, which being anointed with this oil, are thereby fitted to receive that
heavenly light of Evangelical Doctrine; and whereas the oil which is put to the
Lamp feeds it when it is kindled, but cannot give light to it; such is the
excellency of this Unction, that it gives the light of saving knowledge to
them who are altogether destitute of it. Nor is this all, but further,

2 Inclinand^ voluntatem, by inclining the will to embrace the goodness, and
taste the sweetness of those truths which are understood; this oil does not
only cherish the light of the Lamp, but softens the hardness of the tumor,
remove the darkness of the understanding, but mollify the perverseness of the
will. As for the manner of the Spirits operation upon the will, it is not to
be disputed, many Controversies which trouble the Church would easily be
reconciled, were the Modus laid aside. I suppose none will deny, but he who
made the will knows how to persuade it without coaction, and incline it
without compulsion, and therefore we need not fear to affirm, that the
annoynting teaches, by inclining the will; the truth is, were it not that this
teaching had an influence upon the will, as well as the understanding, it could
not guard against Error, and preserve from Apostasy, nothing being more usual
than for those who are taught outwardly, and not inwardly, to reject those
truths whereof they have been fully convinced, for want of a kindly influence
upon the will, by which they should constantly adhere.

To sum up this point, and therewith this Discourse. See the excellency of
the Spirits teaching beyond all others; other Schoolmasters set only truths
before us, but cannot put them into us, they present them to our eyes, or ears,
but cannot write them upon our hearts, only this Schoolmaster can, and does,
not only by his Word speak to our ears, but by his Grace to our souls; oh
therefore let us implore this sacred Unction, that he would vouchsafe to become
our Teacher; let us beg of him, that he would first give us flexible spirits,
and decible minds, whereby we may be willing to be taught, which is to take
away the heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh; and then that he would
make us to know and embrace Divine Truths, which is to write his Law in our
hearts. And withal take we heed how we grieve this Schoolmaster by a
careless neglect of his instructions. If at any time he be pleased to put
any good motions into our minds, let us cherish them, and let us beseech him,
that to those motions he would add his powerful impressions, and if we be
thus taught of him, we are well taught, so well that we need no other teacher;
which leads me to the other branch of the sufficiency of his instruction, in
the negative expression, You need not that any man teach you. But the time
being expired denies any further progress at present, and therefore the
discussion of that, with the other parts of the verse, must be referred to the
next opportunity.

THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 27. But the anointing which you have received of him abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him.
THis whole World may not unfitly be resembled to a Book, whereof the cover is
the Heavens, whose Gilded imbossements are the glittering stars, letters are
the elements, words are the several creatures, compounded of those elements,
sentences are the motions, and actions of those creatures, and periods are its
various ages. This is the Book which Almighty God has given all mankind to
read, and there is in every man a natural reason, which serves as a Candle,
whereby we may discern the characters engraven on it, and as a Schoolmaster,
whereby we are instructed in the lessons to be learned from it. But besides
this School of the World, in which the Creator has appointed to train up all
men; there is another School of the Church, which our Redeemer has designed
for the education of Christians, in which respect one of the names by which
they are frequently called, is (...), the Disciples or Scholars of Christ. The
Book wherein they are to learn, is no other than the Holy Scriptures of the
Old, and (more espeoially) of the New Testament. The Ushers or Inferior
Teachers are the Ministers, whose lips are therefore said to preserve
knowledge, and at whose mouth we must seek the Law. And if you would know who
is the Head-master in this School, let St. John give you the answer in the
words of the text, it is no other than the Holy Spirit of God, here called the
Anointing, But the Anointing which you have received of him, etc.

The sufficiency of this unction in teaching Christians, is that part of the
Text I am now in handling, and having discussed the Affirmative assertion, in
that it is said to teach all things, I am now in order to proceed to the

Negative amplification, which is expressed in those 2 Particul.
words, And you need not that any man teach you.

The Apostle Peter speaking of the unlearned and unstable, 2 Pet. 3. 16
tells us, that they did wrest, as many things in St. Paul's Epistles, so
likewise in other Scriptures, to their own perdition, where the Greek word
(...), as Gerard well observes, is a metaphor borrowed from those Gerard. ibid.
who put men upon the Rack* whereby they often times force them to speak things
against their knowledge and conscience, for so do Heretics impose upon the
Scripture a sense contrary to what the Spirit of God intended.

An instance hereof we have in this Text, particularly in this clause, which
(together with those parallel words of the Prophet Jeremy, quoted by the
Apostle Ier. 31. 34. Hebr. 8. 11
Paul: They shall not teach every man his Neighbor, and every man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord) is wrested by the Quakers, and such like Sectavies among
us, as it was by the Enthusiasts heretofore, to the undervaluing of the
Ministry, as needless in the Church, yea, of the Holy Scriptures themselves,
whilst pretending to a light within them, which is communicated by this
Unction, they think they need no light without them, no not that which shines
from the sacred writings. For the proof whereof they thus argue from this Text.

All who are taught by the Unction, need not that any man should teach them,
and consequently not the holy men of God.

But all Christians are taught by the Unction which they receive from Christ,
Therefore, etc.

That this Syllogism, how rational soever it may seem, is but a Paralogism, and
particularly, that Sophism, which is called by Logicians, Fallacia a dicto
secundum quid, ad dictum simpliciter, a fallacy arguing from that which is
spoken only as to some respect, as if it were to be construed in its utmost
latitude, will plainly appear in the following discourse. And that I may at
once both refell this argument, and unfold the clause, I shall first
demonstrate, that those words, you need not that any man teach you, cannot with
any show of Reason, nor yet without apparent contradiction, be intended by S.
John as an absolute negation; and then I shall acquaint you with those
constructions which are probable, and which of them I conceive most natural.

1 In pursuance of the negative part of the Explication, I shall promise
something by way of prevention; and then propose somewhat by way of confutation.

1 By way of prevention, take notice of these particulars, which cannot but be
granted.

1 Without doubt there will be a time when Gods annointted ones shall not need
the teaching of any man, and that is in the other life, when Glorified Saints
shall behold, in the vision of Gods face, all things which may conduce to their
happiness. It is a true rule in Divinity, Promissiones novi foeder is
inchoantur in hac vita, implentur in futura. Evangelical Promises have some
impletion in this life, but their Camer. Myroth.
completion in the other. Accordingly it is, that those words, They shall teach
no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the
Lord, for they shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest, are
by some of the Fathers understood of that knowledge which we shall have in the
Country; and though I look not Aug l. de Sp. e^ lit c 14. Anselm. in Heb.
upon this as the genuine scope of these words, yet doubtless then, and then
only it is that those words shall most exactly be fulfilled. To the two states
of this, and that other Life, no doubt St. Paul refers under the resemblance
of 1 Cor. 13. 11.
a Child, speaking, doing, and understanding as a Child, and of a man's putting
away childish things, intending not differrnt degrees of grace, but the
difference between grace here, and glory hereafter. We are not such grown men
whilst on earth, that we should look upon the external means of grace as
childish things, to be put away, it is the sole privilege of heaven (where
we shall know as we are known) that there all helps of humane instruction
shall be supervacaneous. Indeed, as Aquinas excellently argues, It is a sign
of perfect knowledge, Aquin. Par. 1^. q. 106. art. 1.
when one needs not to be taught, because Learning is the way to the
attainment of knowledge, Et ideo cessat doctrina acquisita perfect scientia,
and therefore in that state of perfect knowledge, no wonder if all teaching
cease.

2 In respect of our present state in this life, know further, that

1 On the one hand it is an undoubted truth, that notwithstanding we are
taught by men, there is great need of the teaching of this unction, so great,
that without it all other teaching is in vain. Every Instructor says to his
Auditors, in words, much like those of the King to the woman* 2 King. 6. 27.
How can I help, except God help? how can I teach, except the Spirit teach. St.
Gregory upon those words of Gr. M. in Evan. ^om. 30.
our Savior, concerning the Spirit, He shall lead you into all truth,
inlargeth very excellently to this purpose, Unless that Divine Spirit be
present to the heart of the Joh. 14. 26.
Hearer, the Word of the Teacher is to no purpose, Let therefore no man
attribute it to the man, who teaches, that he understands what he says,
because, nisi intus sit qui doceat, doctoris lingua exterius in vacuum laborat,
Except there be a Teacher within, the Preachers Tongue labors outwardly in
vain; Behold (says that Father) you all alike hear the same voice of him that
speaks, and yet you do not alike perceive the sense of what is spoken, cum
ergo vox dispar non sit, cur in cordibus vestris dispar est vocis
intelligentia? seeing therefore the same voice sounds in all your ears, why is
there not the same reception into all your hearts? were it not that there is a
master within, who is pleased peculiarly to teach some the understanding of
what is generally spoken to all. Whereupon he quoteth this very Text with this
gloss, per vocem non instruitur, quando men's per Spiritum non ungitur, When
the mind is not anointed by the Spirit, it is not instructed by the voice. To
the same pupose, and no less full, is that discourse of St. Austin upon this
Aug. in loc.
place, Behold, my brethren, a great mystery, the sound of our words beats
the ear, the Master is within. Do not think that any man learneth any thing
from any man, we may admonish by the noise of our voice, but in vain, if the
Spirit teach not inwardly; you all now hear my Sermon, and yet alas how many go
away untaught? Quantum ad me pertinet omnibus locutus sum, sed quibus unctio
illa intus non loquitur, quos Spiritus sanctus intus non docet, indocti
redeunt, so far as concerns me I have done my part in Preaching to all, but
to whom the unction does not speak, whom the Spirit does not teach, they go
home untaught. The Instructions and admonitions of men are extrinsical helps,
Cathedram in coelo habet qui docet cor, his Chair is in heaven who teaches the
heart, therefore he himself says in the Gospel, Call no man your Mat. 23. 10.
master on earth, one is your Master, Christ. And a little after, The words
which we speak outwardly, are to you as the Husbandman to the tree, who
planteth, and waters, and pruneth it, but does he form the fruit, or cover
the Tree with leaves? who does that? Hear that Husbandman 1 Cor. 3. 6
St. Paul, and see what we are, and hear who is the internal Master; I
planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase; neither is he that
planteth any thing, nor he that waters any thing but he that gives the
increase is God, that is, his Unction teaches you of all things. Thus as the
Prophets staff could not revive the Child, but the Prophet must come himself:
so man's teaching cannot instruct, but this Unction must teach us; and
therefore, whenever we come to hear the word, let us withal pray for the
Spirit, that the ministration of the one may be accompanied with the operation
of the other; that of Ferus being most Fer. in loc.
true, Docet Spiritus sanctus, sed per verbum, docent Apostoli, sed per
co-operationem Spiritus sancti. The Spirit teaches, but by the Word, and the
Apostles taught not but by the co-working of the blessed Spirit.

2 On the other hand, it cannot be denied, but that as man's teaching is
nothing without this unction, so this unction can, nay, has taught without the
help of man. There is no question, but that he who at first created man after
his own Image, could have repaired the decaies of that Image in man without the
ministry of man. Humane teaching is not a necessary, but arbitrary Instrument
of the Spirit, not without which he cannot, but ordinarily he will not teach
us. This unction needs not the teaching of any man to join with it. Those first
planters of the Gospel were immediately taught by this unction, and had it s^
pleas^d God, all Christians might still have been taught by an inward
inspiration, without any outward instruction; look as in governing the World,
God vouchsafed to make use of second causes, but not out of any necessity, as
if he could not govern without them; so in teaching the Church, the Spirit of
God makes use of men as his ministers, but not as if he could not teach
without them.

2 These things being premised, that which I shall by way of confutation,
assert and prove, is, that this unction does not, will not ordinarily teach
Christians, so as that whilst they are in this world, they shall not need the
help of man's teaching. Though man's teaching is ineffectual without the presence
of the unction, yet the unction does not exclude the presence of man's teaching.

For the clearing whereof, in few words, you must know,

1 In General.

1 That our Lord Christ has instituted a certain order of men in the Church,
whose office it is to teach and instruct men in the faith. This is plainly
employed in that Commission given by Christ to his Apostles, of discipling all
Nations, by baptizing and teaching them, to Mat. 28. 19. 20
which is annexed a Promise of being with them always even to the end of the
World; both which considered together, inform us, that that Commission was not
to expire with the Apostles, but that they should have successors in those
sacred offices, to the end of the World, with whom Christ would be present by
his Spirit. Congruous hereunto it is, that St. Paul expressly says, faith
comes Romans 10. 16.
by hearing of the Word of God, and that from a Preacher who is sent for that
end. But most apposite and clear is that of the same Apostle to the Ephesians,
where he says, Christ Ephesians 4. 11.
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers, which surely he would not have given, had there been no need of
them. Very observable to this purpose it is, that at the conversion of
Cornelius, in the vision which he had, he was directed Act 10. 5, 6
to send for Peter, that he might tell him what he ^ought to do, and whereas
the Spirit might himself have opened Isaiahs prophecy to the Eunuch, he gives
Philip 8. 29.
command to go, and interpret it, and preach Jesus to him; yea, though Christ
himself converted Saul by an immediate appearing, yet he sent Ananias to the
finishing Act. 9. 1^.
of the work; and surely, if to extraordinary, much more to ordinary
conversion, the teaching of man, of those men whom Christ has for that end
appointed in his Church, is necessary.

2 That the Pastors and Doctors of the Church are not only designed for
initiating, but the perfecting of the Saints, they are St. Paul's own words in
the forementioned place. For this cause it is, that they are resembled, not
only to Fathers who beget, and Mothers who bring forth, but Nurses who bring
up the Children; not only to Planters, but to Waterers, till the Tree come to
its full growth. And they are as so many builders, not only to lay the
foundation, but to rear up the fabric of grace and knowledge in the hearts of
Christians; surely then, till we come to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, which shall not be till we come to heaven, we have need that
man should teach us.

2 In particular, As to this Scripture, it cannot be St. John's intention, by
these words, how express soever they may seem; to exclude man's teaching.
Excellently St. Austin to this purpose, If this be true you need not that Aug.
in loc.
any man teach you, why do we teach you? if that Anointing teach you all
things, we labor as it were without cause; why do we not leave you to that
unction, that it may teach you? But now I put the Question to my self, Et illi
ipsi Apostolo facio, I may put it to the Apostle himself, Let the Holy Apostle
vouchsafe to hear a little one inquiring of him. They to whom thou writest, had
this unction, thou have said it, The unction which you have received teaches
you of all things, ut quid talem Epistolam fecisti? quid illos tu docebas? quid
instruebas? quid aedificabas? why have thou written this Epistle to them? why
do thou instruct and edify them? Indeed it cannot be imagined that St. John
should teach them by writing to them, if he did intend by these words, to
assert all man's teaching useless.

And therefore Caveamus tales tentationes superbissimas take we heed of
spiritual pride, in fancying to our D^^. in loc.
selves such a measure of the Spirits unction, that we need not the Ministers
instruction. Our blessed Lord himself, who had the Spirit above measure, was
very lowly, and bids us to learn this virtue of him; surely then, the greater
measure we have of this unction, we should be so much the less conceited of
our selves. The good Spirit does aff^are, breathe grace into us, but it is the
evil spirit which does inflare, puff men up with the wind of pride; it is the
poison of the Serpent swells us, not the Oil of the Spirit of God; and truly,
there cannot be an higher degree of pride, than to undervalue the means of
instruction. He who is thus arrogant, argues himself greatly ignorant of the
delusions of Satan, and the deceitfulness of his own heart. It is very
observable, how St. Paul joyneth those two caveats 1 These. 5. 20, 21
together, Quench not the Spirit, despise not prophesying, the latter being the
ready way to the former. If thou have received this unction, it is, as that
Apostle tells the Galatians, by the hearing of Faith, and by the same G^. 3. 2
means it abides with, and is increased in, that it was first conveyed to us.
The plain truth is, he that is above ordinances, is below grace; nor can there
be a worse fool than he who thinks himself so wise, as not to need the
Ministers teaching. Nor would it be passed by, that those very Sectaries who
deny the Ministry and scriptures, do yet teach one another, all the rest
attending, whilst any one of them who pretends to a Revelation, speaks, and
therefore I shall not need to spend time in confuting them, who by their own
practice confute themselves.

2 Having in some measure cleared the Quid non, what is not, cannot be the
meaning of this clause, it now remains, that I endeavor to unfold the Quid
est, what is the genuine sense of it; and since by what has been already said,
it appears that it must be interpreted. (...), with limitation, that which
is to be inquired and resolved, is, in what respects this is true, that he
who is taught by the unction, need not be taught by any man.

For the unfolding whereof, there is a double way proposed, both of which are
very rational and satisfactory.

1 The Particle of denying Not, is not to be taken absolutely, but
comparatively, not that they did not need any man to teach them at all, but
they did not need it so much as others.

For the further clearing of this, it would be observed, that in several
Scriptures this particle not, is a note, not of irrespective, but comparative
negation. When God says by his Prophet, I will have mercy and not sacrifice,
Hos. 6. 6.
he cannot mean that he would not have Sacrifice at all, for then it was a
part of his Worship, but yet then he would not have it in comparison of mercy.
When St. Paul says, I am sent, not to baptize, but to 1 Cor. 1. 17
Preach; he cannot mean a denial, for he was sent to baptize, his Commission
was the same with the rest of the Apostles, which was to Baptize all Nations;
but he was rather sent to Preach than Baptize. That of our blessed Joh. 6. ^7
Savior, Labor not for the meat that perishes, if taken Negatively, will
contradict St. Paul, where he says, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10
He that will not work let him not eat, and therefore no doubt only means,
that we should chiefly labor for the meat that indureth to eternal life; and
yet once more, that saying of his in another place, my doctrine is not mine, but
his Joh. 7. 16
that sent me, should we take it as a direct denial, would be contradictory to
it self, my Doctrine, and yet not mine, and therefore is to be construed, it is
not mine so much as his whose I am, and whose my Doctrine is, his that sent me.
Agreeable hereunto it is, that we expound this of S. John, (...), you have no
need, that is, not so much need that any man teach you.

According to this Interpretation, it would further be inquired, in comparison
of whom this negation is to be understood, to which a double Answer may be
returned.

1 In comparison of the Jews before the coming of Christ, it is true of all
Christians, they need not so much as those Jews did, That any man should teach
them. This is that which I look upon as the most genuine construction of
Jeremiahs Prophecy concerning the Church of the New Testament, for though the
Precepts are express in several Epistles, of Teaching and admonishing one
another, of Exhorting one another, and of provoking one another to Col. 3. 12
Heb. 3. 14 10. 24
love and to good works, yet the Christians need not Teach one another, as the
Jews of Old needed: for whereas the Worship of God under the law was so
Ceremonial, and obscure, that Children needed to ask their Parents, and every
man his Neighbor, what was the meaning of this or that Rite, that so he might
know the Lord, the Precepts of the Gospel are so plain and rational, that every
one may understand them; and whereas this unction was then but sparingly given,
both in regard of latitude, as to the subject, and fullness, as to the degree,
(some few extraordinary persons excepted) it is now so universally poured out,
and that in so far a greater measure, that in respect of them, the Christians
now need not that any man teach them.

A Consideration which should lay upon us Christians so much the greater
obligation of gratitude. Time was, when the Jews could say, He has not dealt
so with any Nation, as he has done with us, neither have the Heathen the
knowledge of his Law, but now we may say, he psalm. 147. 19
did not deal so with the Jews, as he has with us, neither had they either
such clear Prescripts for Gods Worship, or such a plentiful effusion of his
Spirit, and oh that we would so thankfully consider this, as withal, to
remember that to whom much is given, of them much shall be required.

2 More Congruously to this present Scripture, These Christians to whom St.
John wrote, did not need that any man should teach them, in comparison of these
who either were but newly initiated into, or had been seduced from the Doctrine
of Christianity. To this purpose is that Gloss of Beza's, Ha^ res non tanquam
ignot as proponit, sed Beza in loc.
tanquam cognitas inculcat. The Ignorant must be taught what they knew not
before, and the seduced must be taught, to return from whence they have
Apostatized, but these Christians, being neither Ignorant nor seduced, had no
need so be so taught, though still as to their confirmation, and growth in
Grace, and the knowledge of Christ, they needed instruction. We may very well
construe this (...), in opposition to that, Heb. 5. ^^.
(...) of St. Paul. As he chiding the Hebrews says, When for the time you
ought to be Teachers, you have need that one teach you again, which be the
first Principles of the Oracles of God; So our Apostle commending these
Christians, says, You need not that any man teach you; So that as Cameron well
glosseth it is Hyperbolica loc^tio, an Hyperbolical Expression, in way of
Commendation, and so the design of it the same with that Complement he uses a
little before, I have not written to you because you know not the Truth, but
Verse. 21
because you know it. Very Observable to this purpose is that of the Apostle
Paul to the Thessalonians, where he says Touching Brotherly Love, You have no
need that I write unto you, for you your selves are taught of God to love one
another, yet in the very next verse there follows, We beseech you Brethren
to increase more 1* These. 4* 9, 10
and more. By which it plainly appears, he did not intend that there was no
need at all to write to them, but that they did not need it so much as others,
having in a good measure learned that lesson already. Suitable to this is that
of the same Apostle to the Corinthians, where he says, as touching the
Ministering to the Saints, it is superfluous for me to write to you, when as in
that very Chapter he uses many Arguments to encourage them to that very duty,
and therefore cannot be supposed to mean, that it was altogether superfluous.
And surely as the design of St. Paul in bespeaking the Thessalonians and the
Corinthians 2 Cor. 9. 1
after this manner, was to stir them up to a ready performance of those duties,
by taking notice of, and commending them for what they had done in that kind
already, so no doubt the scope of our Apostle was to animate them against
Antichristian Seducers, by praising them for their proficiency in the Orthodox
Faith.

That which we may learn from hence is, that provided it be not out of
flattery, and for base ends, we may upon just occasion, not only commend, but
enlarge, and as it were Hyperbolize in the Commendations of them that are good.
Indeed, to flourish with Rhetorical exaggerations, in laying open the faults of
others (except of such crimes as are very open and heinous) is uncharitable,
but to expatiate (though it be with Hyperboles) in the praises of others for
their virtues, is very allowable, as being that which this Holy Apostle gives
as a pattern of in this high E^comium, you need not that any man teach you.

2 There is yet another way of giving the sense of this clause, which to me
seems most genuine, and that is, by construing those words, you need not that
any man teach you, with the following, but as the sum Anointing teaches you
of all things, which being put together, do only deny any need that any man
should teach them any other Doctrine than what this Anointing had taught them.
All things (to wit) necessary to Salvation, this Unction had taught them, and
therefore no need of any man to teach them any thing besides these all things.
Heins. in loc. L^rin. in loc. S^^r^. in loc. Aret. in loc.
To this purpose is that gloss of Heinsius, who conceives, that the
conjunction But is to be here taken in the same notion, in which it is used by
the Chaldee and Syriack; Those words, there is no God besides me, are read by
the Chaldee, There is no God but I. Thus in this place (...), is as much as
(...), you need not that any man teach you, but as, that is, except those
things which the same Anointing teaches you. With this sense that gloss
agrees in effect, which I find among some Expositors, who refer the man here
mentioned to the Seducers before spoken of. There is no need of any new
Masters, that any of those seducers concerning whom the Apostle had discoursed
should teach them any new Doctrine. Very Apposite to this purpose is that
excellent saying of Tertu. Nob is curiositate opus non est post Jesum Christum,
nec inquisition^ post Evangelium, nil desideramus ultra credere, hoc Tertul. de
^^^. script ad v. ^^^. c. S.
enim prius credimus, nil esse quod ultra credere debemus, Christ being now
revealed in his Gospel, it is curiosity to make further inquiry, we desire not
to believe any thing more, for this we first believe, that there is nothing
more to be believed. There is need indeed that the Orthodox teachers should
inculcate upon the people what this Unction teaches, but as for any Doctrine
besides, there is no need of, nor regard to be had to it, or him that brings
it. It is very probable, that those Seducers did teach their new Doctrins as
things necessary to be known and believed, in reference to whom our Apostle
assures them, that whatever those Heretics might pretend, they were already
sufficiently instructed in all things needful for them to know. According to
this notion, this very Scripture, which is made use of by Euthusiasts, as a
buckler to defend, proves a Sword to cut asunder their opinion; for what other
must their pretended Revelations be, but vain and foolish? if there be no
need of any thing to be taught us by any man, but what this Unction teaches
(to wit, as it has been already explained) outwardly by the Word, and inwardly
by Grace. The truth is, we need not that any man, no nor yet any Angel should
teach us, and if any Angel from Heaven should come and teach any other
doctrine, than what this unction has already taught the holy Apostles, and by
them us, let him be accursed; nor is this more than what St. Paul has given
us warrant for; and let this Gal. 1. 8.
suffice to have been spoken of the sufficiency of this Schoolmaster. Pass we
on to the

3 Next Character, which is his Fidelity, as it is set down in those words, and
is truth, and is no lie: The first, which is the affirmative expression
according to the Greek, is to be read in the Concrete, and is true; and the
latter, which is the negative, in the abstract, and is no lie; our Translators
finding the latter to be the abstract, read the former so too, though it may
seem more rational to read the latter, as if it were a Concrete, finding the
former to be so. But as to the rendering it, it is not much material, whilst
the sense is the same; which is, that this annoynting is true, without the
mixture of any falsehood in his teaching. The more fully to express this, it is
that our Apostle speaks the same thing twice, first by affirming, and then by
denying the contrary, that look as when in the former Chapter he would set
forth Gods purity to the full, as being free from the least pollution, he
says, He is light, and in him is no darkness: so here, 1 John 1. 5
that he might express the veracity of the Spirits dictates, as being without
the least error, he says, it is truth, and is no lie. The Devils answers
which he gave those who consulted him, were so dubious, that they could not
tell which way to construe them, and so were deluded by them; but the Spirits
dictates are certain and infallible. The Devil is a lying Spirit, the Father of
Lies, and his suggestions are lies, and no truth, but the Spirit of God is a
Spirit of truth; so our Savior calls him once and again, yea he is truth and
no lie. True it is, Heretics the Devils instruments, do sometimes speak
truth, but Iren. prae^at. adv. haer.
it is in order to the advancing of some lie; yea, it is usually mixed with
lies. But the Spirits Penmen deliver truth, and nothing but the truth, so that
we may venture our souls upon their writings. Indeed, it is not so with us,
who expound and preach upon their writings, since we have not so full a measure
of this unction as they had; in which respect St. Hier ome says, Aliter habere
Apostolos, aliter reliquot tractatores, illos, semper vera Hieron. ad Theo.
dicere, istos, ut homines in quibusdam aberrare, that there is a great deal of
difference between the Apostles and other Preachers, those always write truth,
but these err in many things; but withal, it is then when they are not led by
the Spirit, who being wisdom cannot be deceived, and being truth cannot
deceive. Keep we therefore close to the dictates of this unction, and that as
they are set down in the Word. Since they are truth, and no lie; let us
believe, and not doubt; trust, and not waver; left if we receive not the truth
in the love of it, God give us over to believe a lie, it being just that they
who will not be taught by this unction, which is truth, and no lie, should be
fooled by delusions, which are lies, and no truth.

4 There is only one clause of the verse to be dispatched, in those words, and
even as it has taught you, you shall abide in him, where the verb abide
according to the different Greek Copies is in the future tense of the
indicative, and so rendered you shall abide, and in the imperative mood, and
rendered abide in him, and accordingly it may be looked upon, either as a
promise, or a precept, according to the former, it lets us see the efficiency
of the School master, and according to the latter the duty of the Scholar; but
because I find this given as a precept, in the very next verse, I shall here
only consider it as a promise, and so a further commendation of this unction.

Those words you shall abide, are conceived by some to be only verba sperantis,
words of one that hops well concerning them; but I rather take them to be a
promise, assuring them of the virtue of this unction, which being received by,
and abiding in them, would enable them to abide as it had taught them. The
pronoun (...), in the end of the verse, may be construed in a double reference,
either to the (...), or to (...), to the thing, or the person, and so may be
read, you shall abide in it, that is, in the unction, or you shall abide in
him, that is, in Christ, from whom you received the unction. Indeed, in the
next verse it is manifestly belonging to the person, the (...), being no doubt
the same with the (...), he that shall appear; but here it may very rationally
be referred to both, and accordingly I shall speak a word of each.

1 Even as it has taught you, you shall abide in him. That which this unction
chiefly teaches, is to abide in Christ; suitably the Arabic reads it, as it
has taught you to abide in him, and in this sense it lets us see the
excellency of this Schoolmaster, above all others; they may teach what to do,
but cannot enable to do what they teach; but this unction, as it has taught
you, so you shall do; it has taught you to abide, and you shall abide in him;
this voice says behind us, This is the way, walk in it; and it withal gives
us feet to walk in that way. Look as when our blessed Savior said to Lazarus,
Come forth, there was a power accompanying that voice, which enabled him to
come forth: so when this unction, as it were, says to us, abide in him, there
is grace communicated, strengthening us to abide in him. Very congruous to this
purpose is that Discourse of St. Austin against Pelagius and Aug. l. 1. de
great. Christi contr. Pelag. c. 13, 14.
Celestius, Sic docet Deus eos qui secundum propositum vocati sunt, simul
donans quid agant scire, and quod sciunt agere, God so teaches those who are
called according to his purpose, that they both know what to do, and do what
they know; whence St. Paul thus speaks to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 9, 10
You are taught of God to love one another; and that he might prove they were
taught of God, he presently adds, for indeed you do it toward all the
brethren; Tanquam hoc sit certissimum signum quod a Deo didiceritis, si id quod
didiceritis feceritis, as if this were the most sure sign of being taught of
God, to do what they were taught; after this manner were all the called
according to purpose, as it is written in the Prophets, taught of God; but he
that knows what he ought to do, and does it not, has not yet learned of God
according to grace, but to the law, not according to the Spirit, but the
letter; and a little after be adds, Of this manner of teaching our Lord
says, Whosoever has heard and learned of the Father, Joh. 6. 4, 5
comes to me, he therefore that does not come to him, it is not truly said he
has heard and learned, for if, as he who is the truth says, Every one who
has learned comes, he that comes not has not learned; so that as he
presently adds, not only the power, but the will is assisted by this
teaching; for if it had been only an ability were conferred, our Lord would
have said, Every one that has heard, and has learned of the Father, can or
may come to me, but it is he comes, Ubi jam and possibilitatis profectus, and
voluntatis affectus, and actionis effectus est, by which is intimated, a
c^llation of power, an affection of the will, and the effect of the action.
Hitherto the words of St. Austine, whose expressions both here, and a little
before in this Discourse (as also St. Gregory's) I have the more largely
rehearsed, that the Doctrine of the necessity and efficacy of the Spirits grace
may appear to be no new doctrine; nor shall I need to add much more in this
particular. Indeed, that prayer of the Spouse would not be omitted, Draw me,
and we will run after thee; whereby Cant. 1. 4
is intimated, that when the Spirit of Christ draws, though it be not a
forcible, yet it is an effectual operation, it is not such a drawing as makes
us go whether we will or no, but as makes us of unwilling, willing, not only
to go, but run the way of Gods Commandments. Agreeable to which, it is here
not only said you may, but you shall abide in him.

2 Nor would the other reading be left out, even as it has taught you, you
shall abide in it, that is, in the Doctrine which this Unction has taught you,
whereby is intimated, that the grace of this Unction is not only i^uminating,
but corroberating, and as it teaches us, so it strengthens us to continue in
what it teaches. As oyled Paper does not only let in the light of the Sun, but
beat back the violence of the Wind; so does this Unction, not only enlighten
its Scholars, whereby they understand the truth, but also enable them to
withstand the opposition of errors. This confirming energie of the Spirit, St.
Paul has elegantly set forth by several Metaphors, where he says, He which
est ablisheth 2 Cor. 3. 21, 22
us with you in Christ, and annoynteth us, is God, who has also sealed us, and
given the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts, manifestly comparing the Spirit
to an earnest, to a seal, to an ointment; and as the earnest assures the
bargain, the seal confirms the grant, and the ointment strengthens the
part: so does the Spirit stablish the heart in a firm expectation of Divine
promises, assurance of Divine love, and a steadfast adherence to Divine truth.

And now putting all together, what great cause of gratulation, and ground of
consolation does this verse afford us? we are infinitely beholding to our
blessed Jesus, in that he shed his blood for us; and we are no less engaged
to him for giving his Spirit to us, since as by the one he purchased Salvation
for us, so by the other it is he preserves us to salvation. Had not this
Unction revealed the things we are to know in order to Salvation, we must
have continued ignorant; but blessed be God, this Unction teaches us of all
things. Though we be instructed in the things of our peace, yet we are very
apt to be withdrawn from them, especially by the cunning of Seducers; but
blessed be God, this Unction abides with us, and enableth us to abide. Oh let
us herein rejoice, that the wisdom of our Savior has so fully provided for
our safety, and let it be our daily prayer, that this holy Unction would still
vouchsafe to remain with us, so as we may be instructed, confirmed, and
preserved by it to everlasting life.

Amen.
THE FIRST EPISTLE OF St. JOHN.
CHAP. 2. VERSE. 28. And now little Children abide in him, that when he shall
appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
MAny are the Diseases to which the inward, as well as the outward man is
subject. The Fever of Luxury, the Surfeit of Gluttony, Meagrom of Drunkenness,
Lethargy of Sloth, and Ague of Idleness, ( all which are involved in the Lust
of the flesh,) the Itch of Curiosity, and the Dropsy of Covetousness, (which
are the lusts of the Eyes) the Tumor of Arrogance, and the Timpany of Ambition,
(which are the Fride of Life) are not more common than dangerous sicknesses; no
wonder if our Apostle, being a spiritual Physician, cautioneth us, and
prescribes in this Chapter an excellent Antidote against them, of not loving
the World and the things of the World. But besides these, the Consumption of
Envy, the Frenzy of Malice, the Giddiness of Inconstancy, and
Falling Sickness of Apostasy, are no less deadly, and far more spreading;
for this cause it is that our Apostle throughout this whole Epistle, very much
insisteth upon brotherly love, the only cure of malice and envy; and in the
latter part of this Chapter, earnestly persuades a firm adherence to the
Christian Faith, the proper remedy of inconstancy and Apostasy, the close of
which Discourse is in the words of the text, And now little children abide in
him, etc.

In which verse there are three things offer themselves to our observation, ^^e
Manner, the Matter, the Motive; The manner ^^^^et, The matter ser^us, The
motive strong. The manner Rhetorical, The matter Theological, The motive
Logical. The manner vehement, The matter important, The motive urgent. Finally,

The manner in the Compellation, Little Children,

The matter in the Exhortation, And now abide in him.

The motive in the Incitation, That when he shall appear, we may have
confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming; of each of which with
brevity and perspicuity.

1 Begin we with the Compellation, which having had occasion once and again to
handle, shall be quickly passed over, only I cannot but with Ferus, take
notice of the excelleat Artifice of our Apostle, who calls them to whom he
wrote, Little Children, Ut oftensione Fer. in loc.
affect us sui fortius moveat, thatby discovering the dearness of his love
toward them, they might be the more easily persuaded by him. St. Paul writing
to the Romans concerning false Teachers, says, they did deceive the simple by
fair and smooth words. Surely the Ministers of Christ should be no less
artificial in persuading, than they are in deceiving, and to that end use
smooth and fair words. Romans 16. 17
Me thinks those words of our Savior to his Disciples when so many forsook
him, carry in them a great deal of passion, Will you also go away? and no
doubt they ^oh. 6. 67
made a suitable impression on them, witness Peter's answer, Lord, whither
shall we go? what affectionate strains are those of St. Paul, and St. Peter?
I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, so St. Paul; Dearly Romans 12. 1
beloved I beseech you, so St. Peter; and if we well weigh it, we shall find
as much, nay more in this of St. 1 Pet. 2. 10
John, And now little children; the Hebrew (...) which answers to the (...) in
the Greek, is not only an adverb of time, but a particle of beseeching, and
this title, Little children, seems to intimate, that our Apostle beseeches
them, Per eam Paternam benevolentiam, by the love of a Father, yea by the
bowels of a Mother. You that are Parents know with what tender affections you
speak to your Children, when you dissuade them from Est. in loc. Aret. in loc.
evil, or persuade them to good; the same Spirit was in this holy Apostle, Mira
and sollicita de suorum salute cura, it was a strange solicitous care, and
desire, which he had, of their Salvation, which put him upon this earnest way
of exhorting them to perseverance. Oh that all the Ministers of the Word would
learn to fellow this pattern. I told you in the last Lecture, it is only God
that can speak to the heart inwardly, and effectually, but certainly that
Minister shall soonest convey as it were his words into the heart, who speaks
with his heart, yea rather speaks his heart; whose expressions manifest his
affection, as to the things concerning which, so to the persons to whom he
speaks; and this shall suffice for a brief account of the Compellation.

2 Proceed we to the Exhortation, in those words, And now abide in him.

Before I discuss the nature of the duty, it will not be amiss to observe,
that what is assured in the end of the former verse, You shall abide in him, is
prescribed in the beginning of this, abide in him; Abiding in Christ is the
matter of both, a promise, and a precept, it is that which we shall find
verified in other duties as well as this, I will put my fear in their hearts,
so runs the Promise, Fear the Lord, so frequently the Precept. A new heart will
I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you, so God promises; make you
a new heart, and a new spirit, Ier. 32. 40. Psalm. 34. 9 Prove. 3. 5 Ezekiel. 36.
26. 18. 31 Deuteronomy. 30. 6. 16
so he commands. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart to love him,
is the promise, and in the same Chapter, I command thee this day to love the
Lord thy God. Indeed, there may seem some kind of incongruity in this at the
first view, for what need is there of commanding us to do what God promises
he will enable us to do? but in truth there is a sweet harmony between
precepts and promises of this nature, whilst these serve to strengthen our
confidence, and those to quicken our diligence; when on the one hand we are
exhorted to abide in Christ, we may be ready to say, but How shall I be able
to perform this duty? my enemies are so strong, and grace so weak, that I fear
I shall let go my hold, and as David once said, I shall one day fall by the
hands of Saul; so the weak, though willing Christian, is apt to say, I shall
one day fall by the power and policy of the Devil, and notwithstanding all my
resolutions and endeavors, I fear my deceitful heart will be withdrawn from
Christ. But lo, for our comfort and encouragement, here is a promise, that by
the virtue of this Unction we shall abide. On the other hand, when we meet
with these, and such like promises of perseverance, we may be ready to flatter
our selves, as if we cannot miscarry, and once being in Christ, we shall abide,
though we be never so careless and secure, and therefore to prevent this
supine laziness, here is a precept annexed to the promise, which minds us,
that something is to be performed on our part, as well as Gods. This unction
enableth to abide in Christ, but withal we are required to make use of the
grace which this unction gives for that end; and as the Promise assures us of
the one, so the Precept puts us on the other. It is a known saying of St.
Austin, He that made us without our selves, will not save us without our
selves, we can do nothing without him, he will not do it without us. The
Unction teaches, and that so as to give strength to fulfill, yet still our
part is to put forth that strength for that end for which it was given us, and
though it is the grace of this unction which does not only prevent us, by
giving ability, but excite us to, and assist us in actuating that ability, yet
it is incumbent on us, by the help of preventing, exciting, and assisting
grace, to exert those acts of faith, and courage, and constancy, whereby we
abide in him.

This being premised, come we now to consider the Duty to which we are
exhorted, and here we find something substantial, and something
circumstantial; that in the verb, abide; this in the adverb, now. Verbo ma^e^di
gaudet Apostolus. Lap. in loc.


1 The substance of the duty is in the word abide, a word which as Lapide well
observes, our Apostle very much delighted to use, no less than seven times
we meet with it in this Chapter; nor is it any wonder, since it was his
Masters word, and that in his last dying farewell Jo^. 15* 4, 5, 6, 7.
Sermon, if you cast your eyes on the fifteenth Chapter of St. John's Gospel,
you shall find this phrase of abiding in him, used by our Savior five several
times in four verses, and as has been already observed, this holy Apostle
loved to tread in his Masters steps, yea to speak in his Masters language. He
that exhorts to walk as he walked, will not only do so, but talk also as he
talked. No doubt, as he was his Lords darling, so he had a dear affection to
him, and those whom we love, we would resemble, not only in greater, but
lesser matters, in garb, and gesture, in discourse and language. And as for
this reason he makes so frequent use of the phrase, so likewise he so often
inculcateth the duty, because it was his Masters counsel to him, and the rest
of the Disciples. He well knew he could not give better counsel to the people
than Christ had given to him, he followed it himself, and found it good
advice; no wonder if he commanded it to others, Abide in him.

For the unfolding of this duty, know

1 There is a threefold abiding which is required of every Christian, in the
Church of Christ, in the Doctrine of Christ, and in Christ himself; all of
these we meet with in this Chapter; the first in the nineteenth verse, (...),
Verse. 19.
they had continued with us, to wit, the Apostles of Christ, who were then the
Rulers, and Representatives of the Church. The second, in the four and 24.
twentieth verse, (...), Let that which you have heard from the beginning abide
in you, to wit, the 29.
Evangelical Doctrine; and the last in this verse, (...), abide in him. By all
of these, no doubt, one and the same grace of perseverance is meant, yet not
without some difference, one rising higher than the other; the lowest st^p is
abiding in the Church, which is opposed to a Schismatical separation; higher
than that is abiding in the Doctrine, which is opposed to Heretical defection;
the highest, is abiding in Christ himself, which is opposed to an Hypocritical
profession. A man may abide in the Church, and ^et fall from truth to error; he
may abide both in the Church, and in the Doctrine of Christ, so far as to
outward profession, and yet not be really united to, and abide in Christ
himself. But on the other hand, He who spiritually abides in Christ, cannot
but abide in his Doctrine and Church: If you abide in me, and Joh. 15. 6
my words abide in you* says our blessed Savior; where the latter is joined
with the former; Christ's words cannot but abide in them who abide in him; nor
will he who has a real. union with Christ, make a wilful separation from his
Church, since the members which adhere to the head, cannot forsake the body; no
wonder if our Apostle add this to the two former, as that which will both
engage and enable us to them; and accordingly, that we may continue with the
Orthodox Christians, and that which we have heard from the beginning may remain
in us, let us abide in him.

2 In regard of this union and communion which we have with Christ; there is a
threefold phrase, which we meet with very frequently in the New Testament,
coming to him, being in him, and abiding in him; coming to him is St. Peter's
phrase, to whom coming as to a living 1 Pet. 2. 5 2 Cor. 5. 21 1 John 2. 6
stone; Being in him, St. Paul's, If any man be in Christ; Abiding in him, St.
John's, both here and before in this Chapter. And here we may observe a
gradation, coming to him is the beginning; being in him, the progress; and
abiding in him the perfection of Christianity; we must come to him, or we
cannot be in him; we must be in him, else we cannot abide in him; it is not
enough to come to, but we must be in; nor to be in, but we must abide in him.
To come to Christ, is renouncing our selves, to embrace Christ, as our Lord and
Savior; to be in him, is to trust in him (whom we embrace) for salvation; and
to Abide in him, is to persevere in this adhaesion, to the end.

3 If yet you desire a more plain account of the true meaning, and full
latitude of this phrase of abiding in Christ, I answer, it is when as having
received Christ Jesus our Lord, and that both as our Lord and Jesus, we do
not, will not suffer our selves, either by the allurements, or affrightments of
the world, solicitations of the flesh, and temptations of the Devil, to be
withdrawn from the profession of his name, observance of his precepts,
recumbency on his merits, imitation of his graces, and communion with his
person.

2 Having given you this account of the (...), abide in him* it will not be
amiss to cast an eye upon the (...), and now; though it may be looked upon
only as formula concludend^, a winding up of the Discourse, as if he had said,
in Salomons language, this is Eccle. 12 13
the conclusion of the whole matter, yet since the particle (...) is properly
an adverb of time, we shall so consider it, and find a great deal of emphasis
in it, in as much as this now seems to have a double aspect.

1 Upon the Antichrists which then abounded, in which respect there was so much
the more need at that time, to take heed they were not withdrawn from Christ,
and therefore says the Apostle, now abide in him. Here is the faith and
patience of the Saints, says St. John of persecuting Rev. 13. 10
times, Here is the faith and constancy of the Saints, may we say of Heretical
times, then to abide in, when many go from Christ, cannot but be very
acceptable to him; for this he commended the Angel of the Church of Rev. 2. 19
Pergamus, I know thy works, and where thou dwell, where Satan's seat is, and
thou hold fast my name, and have not denied my faith; it is a small matter
to be faithful to Christ in those days, and places, where Christianity
flourishes, but the trial of our faithfulness is, when we are in the midst of
Apostates and Seducers. He is the loyal Subject who is true to his Prince in
Rebellious times, and he is the sound Christian, who abides in Christ in
antichristian times; where Heresy and Tyranny prevail, there is Satan's seat,
or rather throne, and to adhear to Christ as our King, where Satan has his
throne, is constancy indeed. Surely what is said of Pergamus, may too truly be
affirmed of England at this day, it is the place where the Devil plays Rex,
mis-leading by Heretical Seducers multitudes into damnable errors; and now
(beloved) to abide in Christ, and cleave to the truth, will be both his and our
honor.

2 Upon the Christians who had already embraced, and hitherto adhered to him,
whom therefore the Apostle bespeaketh, now abide in him, that is, still
continue faithful, and hold out to the end* He had told them before it is the
last hour, and he would not have them fail at last. That Coat which Joseph had
from his Father, Greg. in Gr.
is called by St. Gregory, Talaris tunica, a Coat down to his heels; such must
the coat of perseverance be, not to the knees or legs only, but to the very
heels. He that begins a race, nay that runs three parts of the way, will yet
lose the prize if he give over before he come to the goal; as St. James says
of patience, so say I of perseverance, Iam. 1. 2
let it have its perfect work. Oh my brethren, I fear it may be said to too
many amongst, us in the language of St. Paul to the Galathians, Have you
suffered Gal. 3. 10
so many things in vain, if it be yet in vain? Have you so long, maugre all
opposition, adhered to the truth, and will you now by a cowardly faintness
lose the glory and reward of all your former services? Know you not, that the
grace of the Theater is the last Scene? and it is the evening that crowns the
day; cast not away therefore your confidence, but as you have hitherto, so now
abide in him; and which would not be passed by, it was not long that this time
of trial should last, it was but for an hour; and since they had been faithful
so long, he would have them hold out a little longer; Could you not watch with
me one hour, said Christ to his Disciples? shall we not abide in Christ one
hour? I have served my Jesus (said Polycarpus) these many years, shall I now
desert him? it is but for a while, a very little while, as here in St. John's
phrase; a moment in St. Paul's, and therefore now abide in him. To bring this
Part of the Text to a period.

1 That we may be enabled constantly to abide in Christ, there is need
especially of two graces, namely a strong faith in, and an ardent love to
Christ. He that is fully assured that Christ, and Christ alone is the root of
all graces, the fountain of all happiness, the foundation Acts 4. 13
of all good, and that as St. Peter expresses, there is no salvation in any
other, will certainly abide in Christ whatever befall him. He that has an
endeared affection to Christ, whose soul cleav^th to him as the soul of
Jonathan did to David, will not leave him, nor suffer himself, either by fair
or foul means, to be withdrawn from him. Where there is a voluntary separation
between man and wife, we may safely conclude there is want of affection to
each other, in both, or either, since love being a desire of union, cannot
admit of a dis-junction, and therefore let our prayer and endeavor be, that
our faith may be strengthened, our love inflamed, and thereby our perseverance
lengthened.

2 Of how great concernment it is that we should abide in Christ, himself has
told us in that forementioned place of the Gospel, where he fully sets before
us the advantage on the one hand, and the damage on the other* If we abide in
him* he will abide in us, if we abide in him, we shall abide in his love, if
we abide in him, we shall be enabled to bring forth the fruit of good works,
to his Fathers glory, and Ioh. 15. 2, 3
consequently our own foelicity. But if we do not abide in him, we shall be
barr^^ and unfruitful, cast out and withered, and our end at last will be to be
burned.

But what need I go further than the Text? wherein we meet with a very strong
and pressing motive, which is the last part, and comes now to be handled, as
it is Part 3.
laid down in those words, That when he shall appear etc.

In which there is something

Supposed, namely, the coming and appearance of Christ, when he shall appear,
and again at his coming.

Employed, namely our appearance at that day, in that it is said, Before him.

Expressed, namely, the confident appearing before Christ, of those who abide
in him, that we may have confidence and not be ashamed before him at his
coming.

1 That which is here supposed by our Apostle, is, that There is another
coming of Christ, when he shall appear. That the He here spoken of is
Christ, is so evident, that it needs no discussion, and that you may know of
what coming and appearance St. John speaks, take notice of a threefold
coming of Christ.

Virtual, Spiritual, Personal, of his Power, of his Spirit, of his Person.

1 Whenever our blessed Lord is pleased to make known his Power in the
deliverance of his Church, and vengeance on his enemies, He is then said to
come and appear; and of this coming, we find mention both in the Gospels,
and Epistles: many places there are which may, and some which must be so
understood. Thus when Christ says, There are some here standing Mat. 16. 28
which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his
Kingdom; and again concerning the beloved Disciple, If I will that he tarry
till I come, what Ioh* 21. 2*
is that to thee? it cannot be rationally construed of any other than his
coming, to destroy the Jews that crucified him, and deliver the Christians
that Worshipped him.

2 Whenever our blessed Jesus is pleased, by his holy Spirit to manifest
himself to the soul of a believer, inlightening the mind, comforting the
conscience, enlarging the affections; he is then said to come and appear: so
runs the Promise in the Gospel, If a man love me, he Ioh. 16. 23
will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and we will come in to him,
and make our abode with him; in the Epistle to the Angel of the Laodicean
Church, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man open the doo^, I will
Rev. 3. 20.
come in to him* and sup with him, and he with me.

3 Besides both these, there is a personal coming of Christ, and this is
double, for so we read, he shall appear Heb. 9. 28*
the second time. Indeed, the Jews fancy two Messiahs, o^e of the Tribe of
Ephraim, the other of the Tribe of Judah, one the Son of Joseph, the other of
David; we no where read of any Messiah, of any other Tribe than that of Judah:
But that which was the occasion of their error* is a certain truth, namely,
that there is a double coming of the Messiah. One of the titles of the
Messiah, is, (...), he that is to come, and it is that, which as it did from
the beginning* so it will till the end of the world, belong to him; for though
the first coming be long since past, in respect of which this very Apostle
says in the next Chapter, The Son of God was manifested, yet there is a
coming to come, in reference Chap. 3. ^. 2.
to which, he says a little before in that Chapter, he shall appear. And
indeed though the late learned Annotatour, refer the appearing in my Text, to
that virtual coming of his, when Jerusalem was overthrown, yet since there is
no reason necessitating to restrain it to that, and so soon after, (namely, in
the second verse of the next chapter) this appearing is mentioned again, where
it must be understood of that second and last coming, I conceive it most
congruous, with the generality of Interpreters, so to understand it here.

This is that coming of Christ which was Prophesied long ago. Enoch, the
seventh from Adam, mentioned this advent, saying, The Lord comes with
thousands of Jude verse. 4.
his Angels; and Daniel, where he speaks of the Son of man's coming with the
Clouds of Heaven. Of this Dan. 7* 13, 14.
coming the New Testament makes frequent mention. It is foretold by Christ
himself, I go, and prepare a place Joh. 14. 3
for you, I will come again. By the Angels, This same Jesus which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like Act. 1. 1^.
manner, as you have seen him gone into heaven. By the Apostles, The Lord
himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangel, and with the 1 Theff. 4. 6.
Trumpet of God, So St. Paul. Be patient Brethren unto the coming of the
Lord. So St. James. Which if immediately Ia^. 1. 7.
it respect the virtual, yet is to be extended to this personal coming.
Finally, There shall come in the last days Scoffers, saying where is the
Promise of his coming, So St. Peter. That he shall come again is an Article ^
Pet. 3. 3^ 4
of our Creed, founded upon many pregnant Testimonies of holy Writ. To
determine the time of his coming, is without the compass of our knowledge,
because not within the sphere of Scripture-Revelation; we have lived to see
those men found Liars, who have audaciously presumed to set the time. Let us
desire to know no more than God has revealed, and that is, that it shall be
the last day. At this coming, whenever it is, be shall appear, to wit, in
splendour and Glory, so it is called by St. Paul, (...), The glorious Tit. 2. 13
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ. And herein lies the
difference, between the first Juan. carnot. Ep. Sermon.
and second coming of Christ, Primus adventus ejus occultus, secundus
manifestus, says an Ancient, his first coming was hidden, his second shall be
manifest, quum conspicuus factus erit; So Beza reads my text, when he shall
appear conspicuously; his first coming was in the form Beza in loc.
of a Servant, his second shall be in the splendour of a King; at his first
coming, he was meek as a Lamb, at his second, he shall be terrible as a
Lion; at his first coming, he was accompanied with mean men, at his second
he shall be attended with mighty Angels; at his first coming he rode upon
an Ass, in his second, he shall ride upon the clouds. Finally, his first
coming was in meanness and ignominy, his second shall be with might and
Majesty.

This coming, I trust beloved, we all believe, and let us all be exhorted
more and more to confirm our faith in it. Indeed, a sure belief of this second
advent, is of urgent necessity, in order to an holy life; since nothing makes
the Servant more diligent in his business, than a certain expectation of his
Lords return: hence it is that one character Heb. 9. 27
of a true Christianin the New Testament, is, to look for Christ's appearing,
which implies a steadfast Phil. 3. 2^
confidence, that he will appear. It is not (...), but (...), si, but cum, If
he shall appear, as if it were a thing dubious, or only probable, he may
come, or he may not come, but when he shall appear, as a thing certain and
indubitable, and taken for granted by our Apostle, that they to whom he wrote
were fully convinced of, and so shall I now charitably judge of you, and
proceed to the

2 Next particular which is implied, and that is our appearance, in those
words, before him. The first coming was to save sinners upon the terms of
faith and repentance, his second shall be both to save and destroy; to destroy
the incredulous and impenitent, to save the believing and penitent sinners. In
order to this, it is, that whereas his first coming was to be judged, and so
condemned and crucified; his second coming shall be to judge, both by
absolving, and condemning. That he may perform this office of a Judge, there
must be a general citation, and consequently appearance of all men before him,
when he shall descend from heaven, all shall ascend out of their Graves. We
shall all stand (so Romans 14. 10
says St. Paul to the Romans) We must all appear (so is his phrase to the
Corinthians) before the judgment Seat of 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Christ; nor is this universallity only in respect of all sorts of men, but of
all persons, Quicquid hominum universis seculis toto orb progenitum, as Leo
has fully expressed Leo Sermon.
it, whatsoever man has been, is, or shall be born in any age, or part, time,
or place of this world, he must necessarily come before this Judge at that
day. Indeed, some shall have boldness, and some shall be ashamed, but all
shall appear before him. He tells us himself, that All nations shall be
gathered before him, both sheep and goats, Mat. 25. 32
good and bad. The wicked indeed shall not stand in the judgment, that is,
they shall fall in their cause, but they Psalm. 1. 5.
shall stand in their persons; desire they will be to be hid, though with the
fall of heavy mountains upon them, but hid they shall not, cannot be. Every
one shall then appear, and that in his own colors, the Hypocrite shall appear,
not as he seemed to be, but as he is, his vizard shall be plucked off, and
his paint melt away, and he shall be stripped of his sheeps clothing.
According to what really we have been and done, so shall we in that day
appear, and so shall we be judged, for he shall reward every man according
to his works.

Oh then (my Brethren) since these things shall be, both that Christ will
appear, and then we must appear, How holy ought we to be in all manner of
Conversation? It will be a sad day with us, if at once it shall be latere
impossible, and apparere intolerabile; impossible to be concealed, and yet
intolerable to appear; if as we shall not be able to hide, so neither to
hold up our heads; in a word, if as we shall have no opportunity of running
away, so we shall have no courage to stand. Oh then! let it be our wisdom
before hand, to make account of, and preparation for that appearance. And if
you would know how it shall be with you then, often examine how it is with you
now. Erect a Court of Judicature in thine own soul, summon thy self before thy
self, if thou be not able to answer thy Conscience, thou will be less able
to appear before this Judge, according as this Apostle tells us in the next
Chapter, If our heart condemn us, God is 1 John ^. 1^.
greater than our heart, and knows all things. Oh then keep a good
Conscience, and lead a good life. Order thy steps according to Gods word, and
gain by faith, an interest in Christ's merits, having begun, continue in the
faith, and obedience to the death; and being in Christ, abide in him to the
end; so shall thou appear with joy, and not with sorrow, with boldness, and not
with shame, before him; and so I am fallen upon the

3 Last particular, which is expressed, namely, The confident appearing before
Christ of those who abide in him, that we may have confidence, and not be
ashamed before him at his coming, wherein we shall more particularly take
notice of the excellency of the Benefit, in those words, Have confidence and
not be ashamed, and the extent of the persons to whom this benefit redounds in
the Pronoun we.

1 The Benefit which comes by abiding in Christ is set down according to our
Apostles usual way of speaking, both Affirmatively and Negatively, nor was it
without a special reason, namely, that he might at once set before us both the
advantage of perseverance, and the danger of Apostasy, inasmuch as here are two
plain assertions, The one, that they who abide in Christ shall have econfidence.
The other, that They who abide not in him shall be ashamed before him at his
coming.

1 On the one hand, The Persevering Christian shall have (...), Confidence
before Christ at his coming. I shall not here trouble you with the various
significations of this word (...), especially, since it is so fully done to my
hand by the late Critical Annotatour. Here it is not unfitly rendered
confidence, or boldness. It is by our Savior expressed in Dr. Ham. Annotat.
on the seventh chapt. of St. John. Luke 21. 28. 36
those two phrases of lifting up the head, and standing before the Son of man;
shame causes a man to hang down his head, but confidence lifts it up, fear
makes a man run away, but boldness encourages him to stand, this confident
boldness shall they then have, who now abide in him.

It may perhaps be here demanded, How can any, yea, the best Christian have
confidence before Christ at his coming? St. Basil weighing the severity of
that day, says, Bas. Hexam. hom. 11.
That even Abraham the Father of the Faithful should then tremble, and indeed
considering the exact inspection of the Judge, and the manifold infirmities of
the strongest Christians, it may very well be wondered how any of the Sons of
men should be able to appear then with boldness; but beloved, notwithstanding
this, there are three things which shall make the persevering Christian,
confident at that day, namely,

1 The Testimony which his own Conscience shall give him of his sincerity, In
die judicii, qualem unusquisque Bern. de modo been viv. Sermon. 71.
habet conscientiam, talem judicem habebit, says St. Bernard truly. One of
the Books, which shall at that day be opened, and according to which we shall
be judged, is that of conscience, and as our Apostle says in the next
Chapter, If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence 1 John 3. 21
toward God. There is no surer Argument of sincerity, than constancy, these
two are joined together, Their heart was not right with him, neither were they
steadfast Psalm. 78. 37
in Covenant; their unstedfastnesse argued their unsoundnesse; surely then the
conscience of a persevering Christian, cannot but bear witness to him of his
uprightness; with what confidence does the Church go to God, when she is bold
to appeal to him in her affliction, and say, all 44. 17, 18.
this is come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt
falsely in thy Covenant, our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps
declined from thy way. Thus can the Faithful Christian plead for himself,
Blessed Jesus, though the World has flattered and affrighted me, the Devil
tempted, and solicited me, yet have I not forgotten nor forsaken thee; I have
had many failings in my course, nor can I acquit my self from infirmities, but
through thy grace my heart has not been turned back, nor have my steps
declined from thy ways. This is our rejoicing (says St. Paul) yea, this shall
be our rejoicing, at that 2 Cor. 1. 12
day, the Testimony of a good conscience. But yet let me tell you, this is the
weakest prop of a Christians confidence, and therefore,

2 That which in the next place will embolden him, is, The right he has to
the Promise, even that Promise which is mentioned a little before of eternal
life, Fidelis est qui promisit, non te fallet, tantum tu noli deficere, sed
expecta promissorem. He is Faithful that has promised, Aug. in loc.
and cannot, will not deceive thee, do not thou faint, and he will not fail
thee; good reason then has he who in some measure fulfilleth the condition by
abiding in Christ now, with confidence to expect the Promise then. Though it is
far from him to say in the Language of that proud Friar, Da Domine quod ego
merui, Lord give me what I have deserved, yet he will say with an humble
boldness, Da Domine quod tu promisisti, Lord give me what thou have promised,
having confidence not in the merit of his own works, but the fidelity of
Christ's word. 3 Add to this in the last place, The interest which he has in
the Judge; He that is to come to Judge the World, is the Head of his Church,
and consequently all who abide in him are his members. He that then shall
appear as the Judge, now appears in Heaven as an Advocate for all believers.
Finally, He that shall be the Judge, is a Friend, a Brother, an Husband; they
that abide in him, are the children of God, and so he and they brethren, are
beloved of him, and so he is their friend, married to him, and so he is their
Husband, well may they with confidence appear before him. Being thus married
to, and abiding in Christ, their sins are washed away in his blood, their
persons are invested with his merits. And thus through him it is, that abiding
in him they have confidence before him.

2 On the other hand, they who do not abide in him, shall be ashamed before
him at his coming. I find among Expositors a threefold gloss upon this,
(...), ashamed before him.

1 Erasmus conceives the sense may be, Ut illum Eras. in loc.
non pudeat nostri, that he may not be ashamed of us. This is that which
himself threatens, by way of retaliation to all them who are ashamed of him,
and his words (and consequently Luke 9. ^6
do not abide in him) that when he shall come in the glory of his Father, he
will be ashamed of them. They who now will not own Christ, at that time would
gladly be owned by him, but he shall dismiss them to their place, with a
N^scio vos, I know you not. But though this be true in it self, yet the phrase
of the text will not well bear it.

2 The Syriac and vulgar Latin read it, as if the preposition Sir. vulg. lat.
Beza, ibid.
were (...), and so the sense is, Ne nos aeternae infamiae damnet, that we may
not be doomed to eternal infamy, with that Ite maledicti, go ye cursed. All
impenitent sinners, and especially Apostates, shall in that day, by Christ, be
put to, and clothed with shame. Thus what they seek to avoid, falls upon them,
and that in a worse kind, Apostates deny Christ to prevent shame, and because
of their Apostasy they suffer perpetual shame.

3 The most genuine notion of the phrase is rendered by Grot. in loc.
Grotius, Ne pudeat no^ ab illo conspici, that we may not be ashamed to be
seen by him. The wicked, especially Apostates, shall be ashamed at that day
before the godly, whom here they despised; so the Author of the Book of Wisd.
5. 3* 4, 5
Wisdom brings them in, saying within themselves, This was he whom we had
sometimes in derision, and a Proverb of reproach, we fools accounted his life
madness, and his end to be without honor, how is he numbered among the
children of God, and his lot is among the Saints? But which is far worse,
they shall be ashamed before Christ whom here they deserted, and not be able
to look him in the face. Thus shall all that for sake Christ be ashamed before
him, in respect of their

1 Odiou^ nakedness. Time was when bodily nakedness was our honor, but now it
is so shameful, that we need garments to cover us; and surely if the
nakedness of the body be shameful, that of the soul is far worse. How can
the Apostate choose then but be ashamed before Christ, whilst by c^sting him
off, he has thrown away that whiteraiment which should cover him, and his
shameful nakedness must needs appear.

2 Gross Hypocrisy. The cheating Impostor when discovered, and brought before
the Judge, is ashamed; the Apostate proclaims to all the world, that his
profession was but a Cheat, his devotion a Lie, and must he not needs be
ashamed when he shall appear before Christ?

3 Vile unfaithfulness. He that has broke his word, is ashamed to look him
in the face, to whom he made the promise; the Servant that has not discharged
his trust, is ashamed to come before his Master; with what face can that woman
look upon her Husband which has been unfaithful to his bed? Apostates are
Spiritual Adulterers, forsaking Christ for other Lovers; false Servants, not
keeping that good thing which is committed to them, yea perfidious in their
promises, renouncing their baptismal vow. Sure they cannot but be ashamed
before Christ.

4 Great unthankfulness; He that having received kindness, returns injury,
may well blush to look his Benefactor in the face, Non refer gratias de
beneficio, turpe est, says Seneca, It is a filthy, and consequently shameful
Sen. l. de benef.
thing, not to render thanks for benefits conferred, much more to repay them
with injuries. No wonder then if the Apostate be ashamed before Christ, whom
he has most ungratefully forsaken, renouncing allegiance to this King of
glory, not only notwithstanding his own oath, but many and great favors
conferred by this King upon him.

5 Manifest folly; All acts of inconsiderate folly are grounds of shame; that
language of the fool, Non putaram, I did not think, may well be uttered with
blushing; what blushing shall then sit upon the faces of Apostates, at that
day, when they shall too late see how they were cheated by the Sophistries of
the Devil, enchantments of the world, and fallacies of their own corrupt
hearts, so as to forsake the fountain of living waters, for a broken cistern,
and to choose death rather than life?

Oh that all backsliding Apostates would think they heard this Judge
upbraiding them at that day, with this or the like language: What did thou
mean, oh thou naked, hypocritical, perfidious, ungrateful, foolish sinner, to
go from me? Did not I offer my self, my merits, my righteousness to cloth
thee? but thou have cast away my righteousness, would have none of me, and
now thou art shamefully naked. Did thou not for a time make a large
profession of my name, and truth? but without any just reason thou have
relinquished it, whereby it appears thou were no other than a whited
Sepulcher. Did thou not by thy Sureties promise at thy Baptism, and
afterward at my table engage thy self to my service? but none of those oaths
have been cords strong enough to hold thee. Could I do more for thee than that
I did, in laying down my life for thee, and is this thy requital, to deny me,
and by that denial to crucify me afresh? Do thou not see what thou have
done, by leaving me to embrace this present world, made a cursed exchange of
gold for dross, pearls for pebbles; thy pleasures are vanished, thy hopes
disappointed, and thy self shamefully deceived. And now, oh that we would all
lay to heart, Quae tunc erit fidei gloria, quae poena perfidiae cum Judicii
dies venerit; to use St. Cyprians language, what shall be the Cypr. ad Demetr.
glory of the faithful, and the ignominy of the perfidious; the honor of
constancy, and the reproach of Apostasy in that day? What a dark, gloomy,
dreadful day it shall be to them that forsake Christ; what a bright, splendid,
joyful day it shall be to them that abide in him; and which is better, Judge
you. It is before Christ himself, and that as sitting on his Throne of glory,
we must then appear; and what a sad thing will it be, to have shame and
confusion then sit upon thy face? If therefore thou would stand then, do not
run away now; if you would then lift up your heads, do not now turn your
backs; now abide in him, that you may have confidence, and not be ashamed
before him at his coming.

2 There is only one thing remains to be dispatched, and that is, the extent
of the Persons, in that the verb is in the first person plural (...) we may
have, I and you, whereby the Apostle intimates, that his confidence or shame
at Christ's coming, did much depend upon their abiding, or not abiding in him.

On the one hand, the Peoples constancy shall then be the Pastors glory, in
which respect St. Paul calls the Philippians, his joy and his crown; and he
says of the Phil. 4. 1 1 These. 2. 19, 20
Thessalonians, For what is our hope, our joy, our crown of rejoicing, are not
even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? for ye are
our glory, and our joy; they were not only his joy, but his glory; not only
his glory, but his crown of glorying (for so the Greek is best rendered) of
whom he should glory at the last day as his crown; Labor discipuli in opere
bono coronam dat Magistro judice Ambrose.
Christo, says St. Ambrose, the Scholars labor shall be the Masters honor
in the Judgment of Christ.

On the other hand, the Peoples Apostasy shall then be the Ministers ignominy;
A foolish Son says the Wise man is a Prove. 19. 13
calamity, (...), so the Septuagint reads it, a disgrace to his Father; so are
a foolish giddy People to their Spiritual Father; indeed if the Minister
discharge his duty, he shall not have any cause of shame as to himself, as if
he had been negligent or unfaithful; but he shall be ashamed of the People, and
as it were unwilling to own them. The barren tree reproacheth the Gardner, the
ignorant Scholar disgraceth his Teacher, and though the righteous Judge will
not lay the Peoples Apostasy to the charge of the faithful Minister, yet
thereby his glorying is made void.

And therefore my dearly beloved, if you have any reverence to the Judge before
whom you must appear, if you have any respect to your Minister, who would
gladly then have cause to boast of you, and if you have any regard to your own
comfort, honor, happiness, in that day when you shall appear before Christ, I
exhort, entreat, beseech you, that you would adhere constantly to, and abide
firmly in him whom you have believed, to the end of your days.

And thus through Divine assistance, I am come to the end of this excellent
period. There is indeed another verse in this Chapter, but as Beza well
glosseth, it is, Transitio Beza in loc.
ad sequentem exhortationem, a passage to the following exhortation, and begins
that Discourse which is prosecuted in several verses of the next Chapter, and
therefore with Cajetan, I shall look upon it, rather as the first verse of
Cajet. in loc.
that, than the last of this. Nothing therefore now remainteh, but that as I
trust you have hitherto, so to beg of you that you would still renew your
prayers to God for me, that (if it be his will, and may be for his glory, and
the Churches good) I may make further progress, and in due time finish this
work of expounding this Epistle. And may both you and I so walk in those steps
of this way, namely, confessing and forsaking our sins, keeping Christ's
commandments, and imitation of his pattern: Love of our Brother, contempt of
the World, and perseverance in the faith of Christ, that when he shall appear,
we may have confidence, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.

Amen, Amen.
An Alphabetical Table of the chiefest things handled in the Book.
A
THE Abuse of a thing is no just reason of a total disus^. Page 229 Abiding in
Christ, See Perseverance. Adultery a lust of the flesh. 347 The Affections are
in themselves indifferent. 325. The Age of man threefold. 214 In what sense Be
leevers know All things. 562 Ambition a great sin. 395. one cause of Heresy.
509 Gods Anger against forgiven sinners is not judicial, but paternal. 246 To
desire what is Another, how lawful, and unlawful. 371 Anointing, See Unction.
Antichrists foretold by Christ. 495. two sorts of them. 497. many of them in
the Apostles time. 499 who is so most properly 492, 493 Antiquity is that which
is from the beginning. 91, 94 99 Apostasy, its causes, 508. how far incident to
the true members of the Church. 528, 529. if total, an argument of hypocrisy.
574. by it men are discovered to be Hypocrites. 578. it is either from the
Faith or Communion of the Church. 507, 508. we should not be much dismayed
although we behold men apostatizing. 527. Apostates shall be ashamed at
Christ's coming. 751, 752. Apparel in it self indifferent. 400. when too
costly, too fashionable, sinful. 401. a base thing to be proud of. 399
Appearing of Christ, see Coming, when he shall appear, we must all appear
before him. 745, 746 Arrogance puffs men up with self-conceit. 392, 393. a
cause of heresy. 510 Assurance a reflex knowledge, 62. is only in respect of
our selves. 63. it is not merely conjectural, nor yet perfect 64, 65. many have
it not who yet are in Christ 66 it is attainable, and being attained exceeding
comfortable. 68, 69. by what means. 71, 72, 73
B.
BOasting of our selves an effect of pride. 398 Blasphemy worse than Atheism.
436 Brother, in what sense all men, and more especially all Christians are
Brethren. 143, 144. more particularly Ministers and People. 79, 80 Brotherly
Love, see Love,
C.
CHildren, how great care ought to be taken for their instruction. 222, 223,
312, 313. ought to know their Heavenly Father, and why. 310, 315. in what
respects we must be like them, and in what not. 206, 207 Christ, a perfect
pattern of grace. 51. in what sense the Image of God. 622. how from the
beginning, 261 to 264. The Holy one. 554, 555. his great Love to us. 118, 119
Christians how said to be in Christ, 40. and to abide in him. 43, 739. the
faelicity of their being and abiding in him, 42. They are in vain so called,
who are not like to Christ. 58. they are of different degrees. 205. b they have
an unction. 553. their state far better than that of the Jews. 7^3. Church,
many in it who are not of it. 524, 525. many in it who depart from it. 504,
505. the degrees of casting out of it. 506. particular Churches have their
periods. 488. multitude no note of a true one. 499 Commands given by Christ as
well as promises. 12. they must be obeyed because they are his. 13, 14. in
what sense impossible to be obeyed. 16. why they are called his word. 31.
Coming of Christ three fold. 743. his personal double. 744. one end of his
first, is to be an example. 52. the difference between his first and second
coming. 745 Company evil to be avoided. 322, 360, 681. especially that of
Heretics. 681 Confidence whence that arises which persevering believers shall
have at the last day. 748 Self-Conceit, see Arrogance. Concupiscence, see Lust.
Confession of Christ when called to it, necessary, and why. 627, 629, 630
Constancy, see Perseverance. Contempt of the world required of Christians. 328.
Contentation with our condition a choice virtue. 385 Covetousnes why called a
lust of the eyes, in what it consists. 374, to 378. an universal disease, 378,
379. insatiable, 380, 381. enslaving, 382, opposed to all the Beatitudes, 383.
breaks all the Commandments, 424, 425. a cause of Heresies. 509 Creatures
all of them may be our teachers. 201. b. Curiosity of knowing of seeing,
condemned. 364. etc. one cause of Heresy. 509
D.
DEath puts an end to all worldly lusts. 449. befalls the righteous as well
as the wicked. 467. ought to be daily meditated on, and that by the youngest.
491 Delights, the difference between spiritual and carnal. 448. they end in
misery. 456 Denial of Christ how many ways. 617, 614. it is a denial of the
whole Trinity. 618. how denied as the Son of God. 626, 627 Desire after the
things of this world when inordinate. 326 The Devil is subtle as well as
malicious. 362, 363. his aim is to hinder us from the word. 293. he takes
advantage against us from our selves. 363. he stirs up evil lusts in men.
437. he is the wicked one, how he came to be so and in what respects he is
so. 277, etc. we ought to fight with him. 287. our best weapon against him is
faith. 289 Doctrines must be examined in their consequences. 620, 621
Drunkenness a lust of the flesh, wherein the sin consists. 350, 351
E.
ENvy, see Hatred. Epicures please all their senses. 366 Epistle the first of
St. John a Touchstone. 1, 2 Eternity puts a value upon things, 477, 704. this
world so much the more transitory when compared with it. 475. Christians of all
others obliged to seek after it. 478 Eternal Life two fold. 657. why that life
must be so. 658. it is the choice excellency of that life. 659. it is the
promise, 665. made by Christ most clearly, 665. to them that persevere. 670
Examination of our selves is that in which we ought to be very serious. 75
Examples, we are apt to follow bad ones. 437 Excelling, when the desire of it
is sinful. 794, 795
F.
FAith why called knowledge. 8, 9. it uniteth us to Christ. 41. it produces
three sorts of effects. 72. in exercising its reflex act we must not neglect
its direct. 77. of great use in resisting the Devil. 290 opposed by the Devil.
634. it comes by hearing. 638. Falling away, see Apostasy. Father, God cannot
be now rightly worshipped but as the Father of Christ, 622. in denying the Son,
the Father is denied. 616. several sorts of Fathers. 208. perfect Christians
compared to Fathers. 204 b. Flesh, a threefold acception of it. 343. several
lusts of the flesh. 344, to 358 Forgiveness of sin takes off the obligation to
punishment. 241, 242. may be considered three ways. 244. a special mercy.
245. a great honor to God. 248. he is engaged to it by promise. 249. it is
for Christ's sake. 250, 251. an obligation to repentance and love. 252, to 254
Fornication a sinful lust of the flesh. 348
G.
GLuttony a sinful lust of the flesh. 349 God from the Beginning. 260 Gospel
has Law in it. 88, 89. the true light, and why. 122, 123. the Truth. 580 of
Divine Original. 583. leads us to Christ, and by him to God. 649 Grace, if
true, cannot consist with the dominion of any sin. 544. it is of great worth.
545. to be preserved and employed by us. 552, 557, 705. we must concur with
it. 7^7. it is not always discerned by them who have it. 76. it may be known
whether true or counterfeit. 71, 72. all graces are connexe. 60, 61. we must
not be proud of it. 405. a little must not content us, nor yet discourage us.
213. we must grow in it. 217, 218
H.
HAppiness of that other life cannot be expressed. 654 Hatred of our Brother
an heinous sin, wherein it consists. 166, to 178. he that is guilty of it may
yet think his estate good, 180. but he is really very bad. 184 Heresy, the
cause of it. 509. those which are fundamental are to be most opposed. 600
Heretics being erroneous themselves, seduce others. 679. they are cunning to
seduce. 682, 683. very tenacious of their errors. 645. they are liars and
Antichrists. 597 Hearing, the sense of knowledge, faith. 637. it must be with
our heart and foot, as well as ear. 639 Humility, we are obliged to it both
as men and Christians. 405 Hypocrites pretend to great measures of
illumination. 21, 22
I.
IDleness a sinful lust of the flesh. 355 Jesus, that such a person there was.
601. that he is the Christ. 602, to 612 Ignorance, several kinds of it. 588,
589. the causes of it. 591. most odious in old men. 269 Illumination of the
mind, no less needful than the outward Revelation. 568, 570 Imitation of Christ
has a Limitation. 45, 46. how far extended. 52. it cannot be exact. 53. ought
to be endeavored. 54, 55. our relation to, and union with Christ, obliges to
it. 56, 57 Imputation of Christ's righteousness to us, how it comes to pass. 42
Incest a sinful lust of the flesh. 346 Inconstancy in Religion bemoaned.
Interpretation of Scripture not to be attempted by every men. 236 Joy, three
things concur to it. 68 Judgments, God gives warning of them, before he sends
them. 501
K.
KIngdoms have their periods. 388 Knowledge very amiable. 19, 590. especially
that of Christ. 20, 266. what it imports to know Christ. 7, 8. twofold. 265,
24. how differenced. 25. if only speculative, it is not right, and will but
aggravate our condemnation. 25, 27. it must be joined with obedience. 23, 24,
463. if right, it is the mother of obedience. 5. puts us on love to Christ. 23,
273. in what sense Christians know all things, and with what knowledge. 564,
565. the means of attaining it. 592. we still need instruction. 593
L.
LAst Times, those from the first to the second comeing of Christ. 484, 485. we
must look upon every day as our last. 491 Law, in comparison of the Gospel,
darkness. 124 Life, why that future bliss so called. 653. that far excels this,
659. this transitory, 450. too much doted on. 659. threefold. 256 Love, the
nature of it in general. 325 Love of God twofold. 28. the effect of a right
knowledge, 29, 30. it renders our obedience acceptable, 32. what perfection of
it is attainable, 33, 34. he is to be loved chiefly as a Father, 415. it
cannot consist with, but casts out the love of the world. 416, 417 Love of our
Brother, the old Commandment, 89, 94. nothing added to it by Christ, 105, to
110. in what sense a new Commandment, 110, to 114. it prevents many sins, and
scandals, 153 to 155. he that loves is in the light, 151. wherein Brotherly
love consists. 140, 143 Love of the World, see World. Lust threefold, 338.
that which was in us by Creation, was not prone to irregularity. 432. forbidden
as well as the outward act, 406. after worldly things many times disappointed,
and if fulfilled soon glutted. 448 Lie, threefold. 23, 580. Liars the vilest
of men. 597
M.
MAlice, see Hatred. Marriage may be unlawfully used. 348 Memory apt to forget
Divine things. 593. we must not only hear ^ut remember. 640 Ministers, how
they and the people brethren, 79, 286. must have a futherly affection to the
people, 203, etc. they are watchmen, and shepherds, 200. must be faithful and
prudent, 274. must preach particularly, 220, 220, 387. seasonably, suitably to
their Auditors conditions, capacities. 275. make a distinction between hearers,
593. warn the people of seducers, 597, 690. commend what is good in their
people, 134. must win upon them by expressing love, 735. their endeavor shall
be accepted, 677. no need of them in Heaven, 716. they are instituted by
Christ to continue in the Church to the end of the world, 719. their teaching
cannot avail without the Spirit, 717. they must be constant in the faith, 644.
their peoples constancy their honor at the last day, 753. they must live their
Sermons. 120, 121 Miracles, by true ones the Gospel was confirmed, 580. the
show of them made a prop of heresy. 686 Multitude no note of a true Church. 499
N.
NAme, its several acceptions, 249. when changed in Scripture, some spiritual
gift conferd, 615 the names of those whom we reprove, not to be mentioned.
257, 673 Necessity twofold. 647 Neutrality, and lukewarmness condemned. 425
Novelty a badge of error, affecting it dangerous. 91, to 94, 100, 101
O.
OBedience cannot be without knowledge, 22. the way to increase knowledge, 4,
5. it is according to our knowledge. 17. Negative not sufficient, 11, 474. must
be universal, 14, 15, 464. cheerful, 465. by it we know our interest in
Christ, 71, 72. it cannot be exact, 16. a bare command should be enough to
oblige to it, 429. it is the best trial of our love to God, 472, 473. and
perfects it. 33, 35 Old-men, why called Fathers, 208. to be reverenced, 209.
they had need to be good, 212. not too old to learn, 221. ignorance in them
inexcusable, 269. they must labor to know Christ. 267, 268 tOvercome, in what
sense we are said to overcome the Devil now, 285. we are not complete victors
in this life, 286. how it is to be done. 283, 284
P.
PArdon of sin, see Forgiveness. Perfection twofold. 33. perfect Christians
compared to Fathers. 204. b. Perseverance in adhering to Christ, the Church,
the truth received, 641, 738. it must be to the end, 740. most commendable in
Apostatizing times, 635. it is not by our selves but Gods sustentation, 529.
the doctrine of it upon what grounds built, 531, 532. no true cause of
security, 535. an attendant of true grace. 633 Play how unlawful. 356 Polygamy
a lust of the flesh. 347 Praise due to Virtue. 134, 259, 578 Preacher, see
Minister. Predictions, the verity of those which are Divine, 496. especially
concerning Christ. 603, 604 Presumption of an interest in Christ, 74, 75. of
our own abilities. 394 Privileges, the enjoyment of them should not content
us. 526 Pride loves to show it self. 389. why called pride of life, 390. its
several kinds, 390, to 394 a general sin, 402. makes a man like the Devil.
404. it is attended with shame. 405 Promises Divine are sometimes matter of
precept, 736. suitable to our necessities, 648. most faithful. 666. The promise
is Eternal life, 663. first promised and then given, 665. to them that
persevere, 670. promised before Christ, but not so clearly as by him. 665.
Humane oft-times larger than their performances. 399, 661 Protestants injustly
charged by the Papists as Schismatics. 512, 513
Q.
QUakers how irrationally they decry the Ministry, and blasphemously they wrest
Scripture. 721, 722
R.
REason, of what use in Divine things. 577 insufficient without an higher
light, 575. pretended to by Heretics. 686 Regeneration compared to light. 131
Remission of sin, see Forgiveness. Repentance abstaineth from all sort of
lusts, 406, 407. the delay of it dangerous. 304 Repetition of one and the same
thing frequently used in Holy Writ, and why. 131, to 135 Reproof ought to be
with expression of love, 205. a. and yet sharp against notorious sinners, 599.
but yet without naming the persons. 257, 673 Resolution necessary in a
Christian, to his combat with the Devil. 290 Riches, when got and kept
sinfully. 376, to 381
S.
SAcrament of the Lords Supper, what gesture was used by Christ is not certain,
if it were, we are not bound to follow it. 49, 50 Saints, their security,
dignity, and felicity, by reason of the Anointing. 550 Schism, the causes of
it, 508. a great sin, 518. un ustly charged upon the Protestants by the
Papists, 512. justly by us upon the Sectaries. 514 Scripture, why God would
have his Word written, 216. man the Penman, Gods Spirit the Author, 219. to
be read by and to all, 224, 225. with reverence, 220. quoted and wrested by
the Devil, 299. by Heretics, 589, 722. a special weapon against seducers. 689
Sectaries justly accused as Schismatics. 514 Security greatest, when Judgment
is nearest. 490 Seducers, they often prove such who should be Teachers, 675.
the several ways of seducing. 689. etc. Sights wanton forbidden, 363. as also
such as curiosity prompts to. 367, 368 Signs, three sorts of them. 499 Sin,
God cannot be the Author of it, 433, 434. men are apt to transfer it on God,
436. it makes us like the Devil, 282, 484. it ruineth Churches, and Kingdoms.
489. How many ways to be considered. 237, 238 Sleep, when a lust of the
flesh. 355 Soul, no proportion between it and the world, 454. has its diseases
as well as the Body. 733 Son of God, Christ was in such a way as proves him
higher than men, nay Angels, yea the high God. 625, 626. he that denies
Christ, denies Gods Son, 617. how much God is offended with it. 624, 625
Spirit of God compared to Oil, and why, 514, etc. given by Christ, 557, 701.
the Author of Scripture, 219. is not only illuminating but confirming. 731.
his grace needful to overcome the Devil* 91 his teaching extraordinary and
ordinary, internal and external, 707, 708. his inward teaching agreeeth with
that in the word, 709. it is faithful, 727. effectual, 729. how he concurreth
to assurance. 73, 74 Strength spiritual, needful to our fight with the Devil,
288. wherein it consists, 290 strong Christians compared to young men. 210, 211
Superfluity, what measure of Riches is so. 372, 373 Superiors ought to be
exemplary. 38
T.
TEaching, see Spirit. Ministers. Tempting God a great sin. 367 Types fulfilled
in Christ. 579 Truth of the Gospel proved. 580, 581
V.
Vainglory a branch of pride. 396 Victory, see Overcome. Unction of the sick
in the primitive times, for another end than that of the Papists, 696. in
Baptism, ancient but not Apostolical, 695. Spiritual is not of our selves, 700
abides in the Church and every true member. 707 Union with Christ intimate and
indissoluble, 41, to 44. expressed by three phrases. 739 Unregeneracy a state
of darkness. 130. of walking in darkness. 187
W.
WEak Christians, in what respects compared to little Children. 209, 210 Will
both in good and evil is looked upon, though there be no deed, 287, 465, 677.
of Gods decree done by wicked men against their will. 460. of his command ought
to be done by us willingly. 464, 466 Wisdom divine teaches the vanity of the
world. 452 World taken two ways. 320. a Book, 713. it passes away. 441. an
Impostor, 443. it seems permanent in our eye, 451. a dangerous enemy. 481
Worldly things, the having them dangerous. 413. occasions of lust. 438. to be
used, not loved, 324. they pass away in themselves from their owners, and that
suddenly 444 to 447 they leave us when most need, 455. how of God, how not.
431 Worldly love, wherein it consists, 323. how discovered. 329, to 332. an
epidemical disease, 328. unsuitable to a Christian, 439. cannot consist with
the love of God, 416. hardly subdued, 411. hinders the efficacy of the Word,
420. a cause of Apostasy, profaneness. 421 Word of God, consists of three
parts, 295. it must abide in us, and how we may know whether it do, 296.
overcomes the Devil. 298 Writings, what commends them, 214, 215. why God
would have his Word written. 216
Y.
YEars, there are members of the Church of all years. 212 Young Men, the Devil
a great enemy to them, 301. prone to many lusts, 302. put off the serving of
God, 304. persuaded to resist the Devil. 305, 306
FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by, Joseph Cranford, at the Sign of the Kings Head
and Bible in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Books in Fol.
THe Works of Joseph Hall, Bishop of Norwich. Dubart as's Divine Weeks and
Works.

Lexicon Anglo-Graeco-Latinum, Nov. Test. or a complete Alphabetical
Concordance of all the words contained in the New Testament, both English,
Greek, and Latin, in three distinct Tables, viz.

The
1 English, whereby any Greek and Latin, 2 Greek, word may be English and
Latin, 3 Latin, rendered into Greek and English.
Together with the several significations, etymons, derivations, force, and
empha^is, and diverse acceptations in Scripture of each word, as also the
diverse readings in English, Greek, and Latin, each annexed to their proper
tables. By Andrew Sympson.

(...), or Divine Characters, in two parts, accutely distinguishing the more
secret and undiscerned differences, between

1 The Hypocrite in his best dress of seeming Virtues, and formal Duties, and
the true Christian in his real grace, and sincere Obedience; as also between

2 The blackest weeds of daily infirmities of the truly godly, eclipsing saving
grace, and the reigning sins of the unregenerate, that pretend to that
godliness they never had. By Samuel Crook, B. D. late Pastor of Wringeton in
Somersetshire, the author of The Guide to true Blessedness.

Remains of the Reverend Mr. William Fenner, Minister of Rochford in Essex,
being

1 A continuation of his Alarm to drowsy Saints. 2 A Treatise of effectual
calling. 3 The killing power of the Law. 4 The Spiritual Watch. 5 The New
Birth. 6 A Christians ingrafting into Christ. 7 A Treatise of the Sabbath.
In Quarto.
Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici, or the Divine Right of the Gospel Ministry*
by the Provincial Assembly of London.

Bethshemesh clouded, or Animadversions on the Rabinical Talmud of Rabbi John
Rogers, wherein you have his Spirit Anatomized, Principles examined, and
reasons in some measure refuted. By Zachariah Crofton, Minister of the Word at
Buttolphs Algate, London.

^efreshing streams flowing from the fullness of Jesus Christ, in several
Sermons. By William Colvit, Minister of Gods Word in Edenburge.

The Husbands Authority unveiled, wherein is moderately discussed, whether or
no it be lawful for a good man to beat his bad Wife.

Crucifying of the World by the Cross of Christ. By Richard Baxter.

A Treatise of Self-denial. By Tho. Wilson.

The Crown of Righteousness, a Sermon at the Funeral of Tho. Hedges Esquire By The.
Watson.

A late great Shipwreck of faith, a Sermon preached by Daniel Cawdry, of Great
Billing in Northamtonshire.

A sad Prognostic of approaching judgment, a Sermon preached at St.
Gregory's. By Nathanael Hardy, Minister of St. Dionys. Back-Church.

Self-denial, a Sermon preached to the Assembly of Divines. By Edward Reynolds
D. D.

Peace of Church, a Visitation Sermon. By Edward Reynolds D. D.

Animalis Homo, sive concio lat. habita ad Academicos Oxonienses. Edwardo
Reynolds.

The Quakers Jesus, or the unswadling of that Babe James Naylor, which a wicked
Tolleration has Midwiv'd into the world, discovering the Principles of the
Quakers in general; a Narrative of the substance of his Examinations, and his
Disciples, as it was taken from his own mouth in their answer before the
Magistrates of Bristol, also the management of it in Parliament. By William
Grigg^, Citizen of Bristol.

An Exposition, with practical Observations on the eighteenth, nineteenth,
twentieth, and one and twentieth Chapters of the Book of Job, being forty two
Lectures delivered in Magnus Church near the Bridge. By Jos. Caryl preacher of
the Word, and Pastor of the Congregation* there.

A Dispute between Walter Roswel and Richard Coppin.

Large Octavo.
Enchyridion Medicum, containing the causes, signs, and cures of all those
Diseases which do daily afflict the body of man, together with a Treatise, De
facultatibus medicamentorum and dosibus.

(...), or the sum of Practical Divinity preached in the Wilderness, and
delivered by our Savior in his Sermon on the Mount, being observations on the
fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh Chapters of St. Matthew, to which is prefixed
Prolegomen^, or a Preface by way of Dialogue, wherein the perfection and
perspicuity of the Scriptures is vindicated from the calumnies of Anabaptists,
and Papists. By Tho. White, Preacher of Gods Word.

Pis^at^r i^ omnes Pauli Epistolas.

Gods Fearers are Gods Favorites, several Sermons. By Antho. Tucker.

A practical Discourse of Prayer. By Tho. ^obb^^. Records Arithmetic.

Small Octav.
A Treatise of the power of godliness, consisting of three parts.

1 Wherein it consists.

2 Cautions against, and discovery of several mistakes and hindrances most
common to the people of God.

3 Several means and helps for the attaining of it. By Tho. White.

Directions and persuasions to a sound conversion, for prevention of that
deceit, and d^mnation of Souls, and of those Scandals, Heresies, and desperate
Apostacies, which are the consequents of a counterfeit and superficial change,
being the first of those Books mentioned in the Call to the unconverted. By
Richard Baxter.

Confirmation and Restoration the necessary means of Reformation and
Reconciliation, for healing of the corruptions and divisions of the Churches,
sub^issively, but earnestly tendered to the consideration of the Sovereign
Powers, Magistrates, Ministers, and People, that they may awake, and be up and
doing in the execution of so much as appears to be necessary, as they are true
to Christ, his Church, and Gospel, and to their own and others Souls, and to
the peace and welfare of these, and as they will answer the neglect to, etc. at
their peril. By Richard Baxter.

A Prospect of Eternity, or man's everlasting condition, opened and applied. By
John Wells, Minister of Ol^ves J^wry, London.

Ovids Festivals.

The Arcadian Princess. By Rich. Brathwait Esquire

Truths manifest.

The Golden mean, or some serious considerations for a more full and frequent
administration of, though not free admission unto the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. By Stephen Geere, Minister of Abinger in Surrey.

In large twelves.
B^ccace's Tales, or the Quintessence of Wit, Mirth, Eloquence, and
conversation, framed in ten days out of an hundred curious Pieces, by seven
Honorable Ladies, and three Noble Gentlemen, preserved to posterity by the
renowned John Boccacio, the first refiner of the Italian prose.

A Pattern of patienc^ in the example of holy Job, being a Paraphrase on the
whole Book, as an expedient to sweeten the miseries of these never enough to
be lamented times.

The Abridgement of Christian Divinity. By Wolleb* englished and enlarged by
Alexander Rosse.

The Vanity of the Creature. By Edward Reynolds.

In small twelves.
A Call to the unconverted, to turn and live, and to accept of Mercy whilst
mercy may be had, as ever they will find mercy in the day of their extremity,
from the living God. By Rich. Baxter.

Souls solace. The sum of all. By Chibbal. Helvius Colloquies.
Protestants practice, or the Complete Christian, being the true and perfect
way to the Celestial Canaan, necessary for the bringing up of Youth, and
establishing the Old Christians in the faith of the Gospel. By a reverend
Father of the Church of England.

A method and instruction for the Art of Divine Meditation, together with
instances of the several kinds of solemn meditation. By Tho. White.

There is now in the Press a Practical Commentary on the whole seventeenth
Chapter of St. John, by Master George Newton of Taunton, in Somersetshire.

Errata.
PAge 7. Line 1^. r. the, p. 23. l. 1. r. (...), p. 26. l, 24. r. the, p. 35.
l. 27. blot out is that, p. 39. l. 10. blot out en, l. 28. r. considerat: p.
90. l. 35. r. intimate, p. 155. l. 17. after offended r. at, p. 182. l. 20. r.
tas, los, p. 202. l. 26. after genuine a (.) and add My, p. 201. b. l. 21. ^.
(...), l. 22 r. (...), l. 26. r. differentem, 20^. l. ^^, after Christ, r.
says, p. 219. l. 33. r. (...), p. 223 l. 32. r ding, p. 228. l. 35. r. that
they, p. 237. l. 36. for the r. a, p. 242. l. 24. r. unprofitable, p. 244. l.
15. r. reputemus, p. 258 l. ^. r. most, l. 9. r. grown, p. 259. l 18. r. in
which respect, p. 260. l. 20. r. (...). 261. l. 22. for which, r. wit. 264. l.
4. blo^ out to, 266. l. 31. r. non, 2^1. l. 8. after that, r. your, 287. l. 30.
r. (...), 290. l. 2. r. single, 292. l. 7. r. assists, 301. l. 33 blot out on,
304 l. 24. after by, r. this, 307. l. ^. r. adverb, 310. l. 18. r. no less,
320. l 8. r. heart, 324. l. 12. for should, r. shall, 330. l. 7. for if r. of,
332. l. 13. r. ois, l. 14. r sensual, 336. l. 17. r. up those trees, 339. l. 8.
blot out it is, 345. l. 8. r. teachers. 371. l. 10. blot out as, 391* l. 29,
for to r. of, 39^. l. 34. r. she, 398. l. 18. for ^ r. ^, 400. l. 6. ^ for ^,
414. l. ^^. ins: not, 416. l. 35. r. left for, 426. l. 31, make a (,) after
one, and blot out the (,) after out, 4^3. l. ^. r. rationis, l. 2. blot out ra,
l. 9. r. (...), 440. l. 12. r. then, 442. l. 14. r. controversy, 446. l. 28. r.
Spanish, 465. l. 18. r. looks, l. 27. r. affect, 466. l. 9. r. pater non, l.
14. r. arbitrio, 569. l. 1^. r. even. 582. l. 19. for type r. title. 600. l.
21. r. Marcion. 622. l. 4. for a (.) make a (,) 631 l. 7. after sin ins. and*
637. l. 36. r. os. 644. l. 27. r. which they, 655. l. 34. r. ma. 657. l. 33.
after Saints insert as, 671. l. 18. r. is, 673. l. 13. r. what.

Take notice, that the Pages 201, 204, 205* are double, the latter of which
have a b. annexed to them in the Table. As also that the figures 545, 54^, etc.
to the end of that sheet^ should be 481, 482, etc to 489.


