The Soldiers sad Complaint.
IS this the upshot then? We that have spent
Our best of Fortunes for a PARLIAMENT?
We that have sweat in blood, marched over the Land,
And where our feet did tread, our Swords command?
We that like burning Comets did appear,
Striking astonishment with pallid fear,
Upon the daring aspect of our Foes,
Forcing even Death, under our dreadful blows
To flagg his fatal Standard? We that have
Been (as of Banquets) greedy of a grave?
When through the rivlets of our purple gore
Flowed streams of Victory unto the door
Of our high palmed STATE, made GODS: no less;
And only happy through our wretchedness.
When in our calmed postures we draw near
Creeping addresses to that Lofty SPHERE
In naked Bodies, broken Legs, and Arms,
In carved Limbs, which were ere while as Charms
To quiet Death, and make the Furies hushed,
That we should suffer? that we should be crushed
With those iron hands (though gilded with our blood,
Not seeking others, but their own selfe-good)
We have upheld? when we make humble plea
With empty entrails, for our dear earned pay,
(Whilst your enlarded guts, and brawny sides
Swine it with Epicurus, stretch your hydes
With glorry morsells) are we kicked away,
As if each Wight had turned Apostata?
Is this true Valors pay? coined out of air
And envy? Tyranny? that does out-dare
The very front of Hell. What, Soldiers? and thus slighted?
The best of actions are the worst requited.
It Is thought, and feared, your eyes that pity want,
Ere long will turn the world all Adamant:
And every object by reflection,
Be turned into, what you are, a Stone;
Should but your curious, wanton pallats share
As formerly our Fortunes, now our fare,
(Who once lay lugging at that Ladies Papp
As full of plenty then, as now, mishap)
A two days sad experience, would condemn
Your great ingratitude; make you contemn
Your cruelties; and bring home to your Gate
As much of love, as hitherto of hate.
Who gave your SENATE being? the Laws their breath?
Was It not our blood? our hazzarding of death?
And will you counsel murder? sit to slay
Even those by whom you sit, or whom, you stay?
From your full stores, then reach unto poor souls,
Of what is their due: Necessity controules
The sharpest Laws. Oh hear their groans and cries
Who hapless lives, and as yet hopeless dies.
Per I. H.

FINIS.

