THE WORLDS Timely Warning-piece.

depiction of Last Judgment Behold I come quickly and my reward is with me.


Aris ye Dead and


Com to Judgment.


F.G


A pourfull Judge is coming, that will spare
No Kings nor States, then let them have a care:
He Will have account how they have ruled his people here,
Their Armies nor their Fleets he does not fear.
Licensed, and entered according to Order.

London, Printed for Fr. Grove near the Sarazen's Head on Snow-hill: 1660.

THE WORLDS Timely Warning-peece, newly corrected and amended.

This being the third time presented or sent to these three Nations, England,
Scotland, and Ireland; describing the nearness of the Day of the Lord, by the
signs and tokens that our Savior told his Disciples should come to pass,
before the last Day.

Being a dismal Looking-glass for the false Prophets of these times to look
into, which invent false imaginations, out of their own proud fantastical
brains, to deceive the simple.

Written by Charles Hammond.

These. 5. verse. 2, 3. For you your selves know perfectly, that the day of the
Lord shall come even as a thief in the night. For when they shall cry peace and
safety, then shall come upon them sudden destruction, at the travail upon a
woman with child, and they shall not escape: London, Printed for Fr. Grove, at
his shop on Snow-hill, near the Sarazen's head, 1660.

The Worlds timely Warning-Peece.
THe end of all things is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7. But of that day and hour knows
no man, Mat. 24.36. Their last words were the words of our Savior: but if you
read the ensuing verss, you shall find our Savior, as it were; points out the
time to us, how we shall know when the time is near: For, says he, as the
days of Noah were so likewise shall the coming of the Son of man be. For as
in the days before the flood, they did eat and drink, marry, and give in
marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew nothing till
the flood came, and took them all away: So shall the com^ming of the Son of man
be. Noah knew not the day nor hour when the flood should come, but he was
commanded to build the Ark; but yet he knew partly the time when it would come,
partly by signs, and then by the ripeness o^ sin, that the time was near at
hand. So by the same similitude, and the fulfilling of the Scriptures, which
our Savior left for u^ all to take notice, how near the time w^ come: we may
all easily conjecture, that t^ day of the Lord is near at haud; our LORD gives
us, by a similitude or parable of t^ fig tree, saying, When the bough is yet
tend^ and it brings forth leaves, you know that summer is near: so likewise
ye, when you see all the^ hings, know that the Kingdom of God is nea^ even at
the doors, Mat. 24. If we take that saying, that as the days of Noah was, so
shall the coming of the Son of man be.

From Adam to the end of the flood was, 1656 years: so from the first coming
of Christ, to the second coming to judgment should then be near 1656, which
time is past two years. And if you look into the Writings of men, who formerly
writ concerning this day of the Lord, you shall find many notable things is
prove, that it is near the time. But I Will pass by these uncertain things, and
invite you to look into the Scriptures, concerning this matter, where you shall
find proof enough, that it is near at hand: if you please to read the 24 of
Matthew all over, and compare it with these latter times, you will conclude the
dissolution of time is near at hand, And likewise the 21 of Luke: And they
asked him, saying, Master, when shall these things be? But in the first place
take notice, he spoke concerning the Temple, some were wondering at the beauty
of it: Then says he the days will come, wherein a stone shall not be left
upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down. Take notice, I desire you of this,
that the first sign was the de^truction of the Temple, and the house of God and
his Ordinances shall be abused, for then ^s the beg^ing of sorrows; when the
Lord shall say, Behold, the days come, that I will send famine in the land;
not a famine of bread, nor a ^hirst for water, but of hearing the word of the
Lord, Amos. 8.11. Then Christ said, Take heed ^at ye be not deceived; for many
will come in my name, saying, I am Christ; and the time draws near. Follow
ye not them. Therefore, as if he should say, when my House is destroyed, my
Ordinances despised, my Prophets abused; then is the time for false Prophets to
come and deceive you, and make you believe they are new lights; but they are
but shadows; For, as the Apostle says, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a show of
Godliness, but denying the power thereof; turn away therefore from such. For of
this sort are they which creep into houses, and lead captive simple women,
laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts. I desire you all to take
notice of this, and consider, whether these things are not come to pass in our
age, which the like was never known before. And in the next verse, says our
Savior, And when you hear of wars and seditions, be not afraid; for these
things must first come, but the end follows not by and by. Pray, did we not
hear of Wars round about us, before we felt it, in Germany, France, Spain,
Ireland? Then, says he, Nation shall rise against Nation; and Kingdom against
Kingdom. For this we now see, for nation against naon way justly be meant,
between Holland and us; for all the rest of the World are Kingdoms and under
the government of Monarchy; yet all in a posture of War one against another, and
like to coutinue, except the Lord be more merciful to us. Then, says he,
Great earthquake shall be in diverse places, which have been of late as for
example: Many thousands were destroyed of the late earthquake, in the Summe^
Islands, and in other places.

Hunger, and pestilence, and fearful things; and great signs shall there be
from Heaven: Hunger and Pestilence we feel not yet, but other nations have
felt it, as Germany, in a most sad manner, and in Ireland, amongst the natives,
and wild Irish, both plague and famine destroyed many of them in the year,
1652. Therefore let us consider with our selves, how merciful the Lord has
been to us, and is now, that in the midst of judgment he is merciful. First,
he sent us the Pestilence, then the sword; but he has still kept famine from
us, though we have had some scarcity in the Wars. I pray God our
plentifulnesse, which we enjoyed of late years, be not a cause to provoke the
Lord to send the famine amongst us: for many murmured when Corn was cheap, and
said, they should be undone. Let them take heed, so they may to soon, both in
this life, and in the World to come, if the Lord leaves them to themselves. But
if you be rich and mighty men, will not return thanks unto God for plenty, let
the poor of this Nation bless God for his mercies to them, and let their
Prayers be to continue it: For Christ says; In the latter days, because
iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold. And so does the love of
the rich grow cold to the poor, as some for example hanged themselves,
dispairing at the bountifulness and plenty that the Lord sent. But the Lord
will love them that put their trust in him, says David. Psalm. 9.18. For the
poor shall not always forgotten the hope of the afflicted shall not perish for
ever. But to go forward, concerning the signs of the latter day. Christ told,
there should be signs from Heaven. I am sure this land, and other Nations too,
has both seen and felt most strange sights from Heaven: Here in our nation,
was there not great and strange things done, by thunder and lightning in 1652,
in June and July, and many people destroyed by it, and houles and Churches
fired and consumed by it, in several parts of this land, And likewise it
rained blood the twentieth of June 1653. at a place called Pool in
Dorset-shire, which may fulfill the words of the Lord, which he speaks by the
mouth of his Prophet Joel: I will show wonders in the Heavens, and in the earth,
blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke, as you may read, Joel. 3.2. where he
speaks of the signs of the last day. The great Eclipses that have hapn^, you
will say, are natural; but so many, one after another, has been seldom seen
or heard of. Moreover, it is said, We shall not know the winter from the summer,
but by the leaves of the trees, and if you have noted for this five years
together, here in England, it has been partly fulfilled; for in the midst of
Winter, mornings and evenings were like May-mornings, and more warmer: But in
Scotland it was certified, that there was green pease and birds built their
nests in the midst of winter, and the season not known, but by the shortness
of the dates, in 1653. Moreover, There shall be in those days such
tribulation, as was not from the beginning of the Creation which God created
unto this time, neither shall be. And truly I think, there was never the like
since the creation, as has of late been, and is now, both for Wars and
rumors, seditions, heresies, destruction, hipocriffe, false Prophets, envy and
malice; the brother betraying the brother, the Father the son, the Son the
Father: Will not one friend sell the life of another now adays? When was ever
the like heard or read of, in any age before? I desire you all that hear this
book, consider it, and slight it out; for this is no false Prophecy that you
hear, this is Christ's Prophecy, which he left us to look into, that we may not
be deluded in these times, as, I am afraid, too many are, and run after their
own inventions, and will take upon them to prophecy, and to teach others,
when, alas poor souls, they are ignorant of what they do, and out of a proud
opinion, and out of a false delusion, seek to bring swift destruction upon
themselves, and others: such as despise the learned Ministers of the Gospel,
and think none so worthy as themselves, to handle the word of God: that can
scarce read true English, yet will take upon them to interpret the Scriptures.
Christ says, that the Gospel must be published in all natious, before this
time come. I would fain know of these men, whether they must do it, or the
learned Ministry: Have they their Greek, Latin, or Hebrew tongue, to Travel all
over the world to preach this Gospel? in other nations, their English tongue
will not serve; but in all nations of the World, either Latin, Greek, or Hebrew
will be undestood. Therefore, whether you are the men, to finish this great
work of the Lord, or Scholars, I leave it to yourselves to judge of it. I
leave you this place of Scripture, 2 Pet. 3. if you read the Chapter before,
you shall read what shall come in these last days. Now you that read those
places, consider seriously on them, and desire God to direct your hearts, in
true knowledge and interpretation of these Scriptures, and no doubt, but you
shall find the true sense of it,

I would masters and parents would instruct their children and servants more
than they do, they would not be so disobedient as they be, both to their
masters and parents, and to their elders and superiors. Nor will I not be
partial, but with reverence may tell some of the Clergy, that it is long of
them, that the word of God, and his Ordinance too, is evil spoken of, Titus
Chap. 2. shows you what you ought to be, and what you ought to do; for indeed,
the eyes of the people are upon the Ministers. I and just cause they have had
indeed, for it is a gallant thing to see one of that coat, that can say, he
has been no time-server, he has been no breeder of divisions, he has been no
covetous person, who would leave his flock, if they were little, to get a
greater, so he might get the bigger fleece. But because there are such, are
there none that does the work of the Lord faithfully? Yes, the Lord be praised
there be, and I pray God continue them amongst us, and let us be sure to
hearken unto them: For he that preaches the word of God boldly, not fearing
man, but God, whose messenger he is, not meddling with these frivolous things,
that happens in these last days, which must come to pass: For when Christ told
his Disciples of these latter days, and what should come to pass, he says,
Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. So having,
with that small understanding that I have, told you the possibility and
certainty of the dissolution of time, or day of doom, which if you please, by
the prophesy of our Savior, as you shall find it in the 24. of Matthew, 13 of
Mark, and the 21 of Luke, which you may read at your leisure, and you shall
find it all agree as one-doctrine, which was writ by the three Evangelists.
Therefore let me desire you to prepare for it, for it will come unlooked for to
a great many, I am afraid, as a thief in the night, or as a snare, wherein it
will catch us at unawares. Perhaps some may scoff at this Book, and say, How
can he tell more than another, and this was a long time ago writ, and still all
things remain as it did many hundred years: Yet I must answer such as these in
the 2 Pet. 2.3. to the end of the Chapter, where you find the Apostle tells you
of these men, which I desire you to read, and it will give you full
satisfaction. Now to invite you for preparation for this day of the Lord, I
shall give you a word or two more, which will terrify the ungodly, and be
joyful tidings to those, that are prepared to meet the Lord at that day. Let
the terrablenesse of this day awaken us all from our grievous Sins and
Transgressions: if we must give account for every idle word, what account shall
we give for every idle oath, nay, for every false oath that we have taken. With
Righteousness will he judge the World, and the people with equity, Psalm. 58.9.
Brides, friends, mireaties, houlings, cries, lamentations, nothing will then
prevail, but a pure heart, and a spirit upright. St. Jerome says, whether I
eat or drink, or whatsoever I do else, methinks I hear this saying sounding in
my ears, Arise you Dead, and come to Judgment; I with the like consideration
were in us all. The Lord grant to all (...) one with another, his grace, that
they (...) this Scripture sounding in their ears, Of every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an accoun^ thereof at the day of judgment. It is
the duty of every Christian, (...) that vigilant person, that carred always in
his pocket a little clock, and when he heard it sound, he would instantly
examine himself, how he had spent that hour. Thu^ should Christians examine
themselves, that they may not be examined of the Lord; for Christ must be the
judge at the last day, and he will use no partiality, but the Lord will reward
every man according to his works: He is a judge, that has no respect of
persons, This World may fitly be compared to a stage play, wherein they act
several parts; one acts the part of a King, another a Noble man, another a
Magistrate, another a Countryman, another a servant, another a beggar; and so
lang as they are upon the stage, so long there is report to their parts, they
play one of another amongst them; but when the play is ended, and the stage
pulled down, there is no respect amongst them yea, many times, he that played
the basest part is the best man. So it is here on earth, every man has
respect, according to the honor and vocation he has: but when the Comedy
shall be ended; that is, the day of doom shall come upon all men, and the
earth, which is the stage, pulled down, there shall be no respect of persons
among men; yea, it may be, the poor man shall be greater before God, than the
honorable or rich man. Consider this you poor and rich. Then shall the book be
opened the evidence of thy works in this life, and thy sins set in order before
thy eyes. Heaven and earth shall witness against thee, yea, thy own conscience
shall condemn^. O it will be a terror to thee, when thou shall see the judge
angry with thee for thy sins; and the blessed Angels laughing at thy
destruction; on thy right hand shall be thy sins accusing thee; on thy left
hand, Devils ready to execute Gods vengeance upon thee; within thee shalile
thy conscience gnawing, without thee the damned crew bewailing: And then shall
thou receive that lamentable sentence, Go from me ye cursed into everlasting
fire, which is prepared for the devil and his angels. These words will cut thy
heart in sunder, Go from me. Hitherto I have been a father to thee, I have
bestowed many comfortable benefits upon thee, I have had great care over thee:
But now go from me into torments unexpressable, where thou shall cry unto me:
But I will not hear thee. Good people, that hear this Book take timely warning.
O that men would remember their end, then they would never offend. Oh that men
would set always before their eyes the day of death, the day of judgment, the
joy^s of Heaven, the torments of Hell; then men would not live so loosly as
they do. St. Paul says in the Corinthians, they were them, upon whom the ends
of the World should come. If therefore the end of the World were come upon
them, that lived above 1580 and odd years ago, then surely doomsday cannot
be far off. 1 Corinthians. 20.11. Behold the judge stands before the door, Jain.
5, 6. So by these two places of Scripture we see, that the General day of
judgment is at hand, as also by the signs and tokens which should go before
this day, of which many, yea almost all, are already fulfilled. But put the
case, the time were not so near as it is imagined, yet death is the day of doom
to thee. Many in their youth delay their repentance till their age, thinking
this place of Scripture sufficient, Ezekiel. 17.21, 22. At what time soever a
sinner, etc. Or say as Augustine said before his conversion, Forgive me my
sins, but not now; let me sin in my youth and pardon me in my age. They
would die the death of the righteous, but they would not live the life of the
righteous. But let these graceless persons beware of these two things: first,
let them beware of sudden death, let them take heed they be not cut off in the
midst of their sins, as Job's Children wer^^^^ the midst of their
banqueting, and as the flood came unlooked for, and devoured the whole World;
as of fate sudden death has seized on many, both in London, and in the
Country, by strange sicknesses and diseases. Consider I pray, how many families
has there been shattered last year, and still continues, taking the young as
well as the old, the strong as well as the weak: Nay, as I may say, the strong
Oaks, and tall Cedars has been cut down, and the low shrubs standing.
Therefore I desire you all to take heed, to live today, as you may be ready to
die to morrow. The old World had 120 years to repent in, Ninevey had 40 days,
Israel had 40 years to repent in: But thou, O man, know not how long thou
have to live, thou have no lease of thy life, thou art here to day, and gone to
morrow; death waits for thee at all times, therefore wait thou for it.
Therefore to conclude, I desire you, to let this book be a looking-glass, in
these dangerous and last times, and resolve with St. Jerome's resolution, who
said, If my mother were hanging about my neck, if my brother were on every side
houling and crying, and if my father were on his bare knees kneeling before me,
to detain me in their wicked and sinful course of life: What would I do? shake
off my mother on the ground, I would hate all my Kindred and Kinsfolks, and I
would tread and trample my father under feet, thereby to flys to Christ when he
calls me. So the Lord enable us to do, that so we may run that race here that
we may receive the crown of glory here after; that we may fight that good
fight, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: that we may be received
into that heavealy Army of Saints, and follow that General, Christ Jesus which
conquered sin, death and hell, being clothed with the white robes of peace
and righteousness: Then with joy and comfort shall we hear that blessed voice,
as Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit the Kingdom which was
prepared for you before the beginning of the World. Grant this dear Father, for
thy dear Son's sake Christ Jesus, our only Lord and Savior; to whom be
asceived all honor and praise, both now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

