The last PROCEEDINGS OF THE SCOTS, BEING A Report by a Messenger sent from the
English Commissioners at Sunderland, with Letters to the Lord Wharton, Sir
Henry Vain, etc.

Delivered to the Parliament on Saturdry, April 6. 1644. by Master John Hardy.

With a Warrant signed, By William Row. Secretary to the Commissionets.

LONDON Printed by Andrew Coe, and published according to Order, MDCXLIV.

The last proceedings from the Scots Army
MAach the 25 and 26 there was a great fight near Sunderland, there was of the
Scots about 300 wounded, some of them slain, and others since dead to the
number of about 60, this was all the loss we sustained in that fight, which
was within some 2 miles of the north of Sunderland: But of the Earl of
Newcastles men there were slain at the least 1500 amongst which were diverse of
great quality: Sir Marmaduke Langdale was slain and diverse of great note, some
of them his Excellency General Lesley gave them the credit of an honorable
burial according to their degree a,among which were at the least 30 Colonels,
Majors, Captains, and Lievtenants, besides other Officers, and there were taken
prisoners from the enemy almost a hundred. They retreated toward Newcastle,
the Scots pursued them very close, Then the Earl of Newcastles Forces spread
themselves and disperced toward Chestry street and so to Durham, and
quartered toward Bishop Auckland, and Branspith to see it they could rally
their men, but the Scots still pursued them, clearing the way up the River as
they went.

March the twenty seventh, the Scots marched toward Lumley Castle to clear
the River for Coals, his Excellency the Lord General having then eight pieces
of Ordnance carried from the ships, for before he had only two pieces, save
only his small pieces wherewith good execution was done.

From the twenty seventh of March, to the end of the month, the Scots were
and so are still in pursuit of the enemy: the Earl of Newcastle all this
while: not having taken a man of the Scots Army to my knowledge, but there are
daily many that desert the enemy, and come into us both from Newcastle, and
also from the Army, seven or eight every day: some days more, who take the
Covenant and join with our forces: there has thus come in at the least 200 and
more come in daily: declaring that they were forced against their wills to fight
under the Earl of Newcastle, and that in the fight the Earl of Newcastles horse
did force them to fight, and kept them in with their Canes and Swords: and
hurt, pistold, and slew many that retreated: and they do also affirm, that
there are many more in the Earl of Newcastles Army that would feign come
away, if they had an opportunity.

Since there has been many skirmishes, but none considerable before the date
hereof, but the Scots still pursue the enemy to prevent them as much as they
can from Rallying.

The Commissioners are come from Morpeth, and are all at Sunderland. The last
of the Commissioners came to Sunderland this present Monday, being the first of
April: which is a place where is great store of provision, so that from thence
Thursday before, General Leshley removed his Quarters, and carried away bag
and baggage: only 3000 he left for that Garrison, and another near it, and
has fortified the Town very well, and secured all places as he leaves them.
But another part of the enemy lying toward Lumly Castle; has hindered the
Lighters from carrying the Coals to the ships; but there was a Convoy to have
gone with them to the ships, had not the battle prevented, but there is no
doubt but the enemy will be removed suddenly, and Coals sent speedily to
London: There are about 120 ships that ride in Sunderland Harbor for Coals,
and there is so great a quantity of Coals already above the ground at the
Pits ready to be taken away, that they are not to be valued: there is so vast
a quantity: and the Commissioners are resolved upon this course, to serve
those ships first with Coals that bring provision; which is but reason, their
being such want of provision amongst our men, not only to supply the Army; but
also to encourage others that come for coals thither to bring provision with
them.

Sir Tho: Glenham is in Newcastle, but few co^siderable men of note, nor as
some that come out from thence to our men, certify not above 120 Soldiers
besides the Inhabitants, and they have denied the Earl of Newcastle to come in
or any of his Forcrs: more then what are in the Town already, till they see who
shall win the field.

The Town begins to be much straightened of provision, and are out of hope to have
any reliese, especially since the Earl of Newcastle is driven Southward, and
the Scots compass the Town both by Sea and Land, in Northumberland and in the
Bishodrick, and they are blockt up by water, our Forces commanding the River.

The Scots are every day at Gatehead; which they take great care to prevent the
enemy from burning themselves being possessed thereof, but the enemies Works
there are all pulled down and demolished, only a party are placed to prevent
the enemy from issuing out of the Town to destroy those Suburbs, and houses at
Gatehead.

By all probability, it is not any ways likely that Newcastle can hold out
long; and the Scots do daily expect when they will found a parley about the
delivering up thereof.

General Leshley is marched toward Durham, and the Maquesse of Argile goes
along with him, and many of the Nobility: pursuing the Earl of Newcastle. A
Regiment lies at Blyth, and two Regiments at Morpeth, who do often issue out
to face Newcastle, and to keep the Country from being further wasted and
spoiled by the enemy.

There are two Regiments that lie at Sunderland, and a Regiment about a mile
off: In Sunderland are about 100 prisoners of the Earl of Newcastles Forces,
Colonels, Captains and other Officers, for common men, they turn them away and
will not charge themselves with keeping of such only those of note.

General Leshley is still in pursuit of the Enemy, not permitting them to
rally.

Thus far the report of John Hardy.
(There is a report that the Earl of Newcastle should fall upon the Scots on
Sunday last near Sunderland, and that the Scots gave them a repulse, slew and
took prisoners a numerous company of them, and utterly routed them, but this
the Messenger reports not, nor knows of it.)

By the Committees and Commissioners of the honorable houses of the Parliament
of England.
To all Commanders and Officers in the Parliament service both by sea and land.
WHereas the bearer hereof John Hardy was sent from the Parliament to us in
Scotland, and has since continued with us until now that he is to return to
London, these are there fore to require all Commanders, Officers, and
Soldiers, both by sea and land, to suffer him to pass quietly without let or
molestation. And Francis Dobson Mr of the willing Mind of Hull, is hereby
desired to give him free passage for London.

William Row, Secretary to the Commissioners.

Publishied according to Order.


