A Happy VICTORY Obtained by the Trained Band of OXFORD, Against 400. Cavaleers
that had intrencht themselves near the said City. Sept. 7. 1642.

With the manner how the Battle was fought, and the number of those that were
slain on both sides.

Whereunto is annexed The Resolution of the Earl of Essex, Lord General of
the Parliaments Army, who is set forth from London on Friday, September. 9.
Declaring the places where he is now reported to march. With the coming of
1400. Welchmen to the Standard at Nottingham.

Signified to the House of Commons, Sep. 8.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cook. Sept. 10.

True News from The City of Oxford.
FRom Oxford it is credibly informed and reported to both the Honorable Houses
of Parliament, that the Cavaleers have entered the City, and are made
extraordinary welcome by the Scholars and a great part of the Town, insomuch
that they take much courage thereby, and have also begun to entrench themselves
very strongly, regaining the walls, and making Bulwarks and Fortifications for
the safety and security of them; and they are much encouraged to hear that
Prince Robert is resolved to march to them with all possible speed to aid and
assist them, they having already received great store of Ammunition and
Provision from many of the Malignant party thereabouts, and that Prince Robert
has sent them two or three hundred Horse, and is resolved to come in person to
them with all expedition, who having received this glad tidings from his
Highness, they begin to take courage and do daily execute many tyrannical
actions upon all those that stands well-affected to the Parliament, to the
great damage of all the County thereabouts, where having continued in these
their bloody and tyrannical actions some certain while, the Trained Band of
that County immediately arose, to the number of 600. and marched to the
Cavaleers quarters near Oxford, who coming there. the Cavaleers demanded their
intentions, and what their business were they came about; They answered, to
hinder their evil proceedings, and that since they came into their County,
they were much overburthened by them; whereupon the foremost Troop of the
Cavaleers marched 6. abreast and gave fire against them, but they received as
good as they brought, for the Trained Band fell upon the Cavaleers marching up,
discharged a brave shot against them, and cut off 3. of them, where the Trained
Band behaved themselves very courageously, and discharged very thick against
them, and after some three hours fight they obtained the Victory, taking 4. or
5. of the chiefest prisoners, and putting many to the Sword with very little
loss of our side, praised be the Almighty, and made most of the Cavaleers
retreat back and betook themselves to their quarters where they are now
strongly entrenched, and every man stands upon his own guard, but it is
thought that they would be suddenly cut off, if Forces come down as shall be
thought meet by the High Court of Parliament do but send speedy aid, for the
Trained Band stands wellaffected to the Parliament, and are resolved to lose
their lives in the defense of His Majesty and both Houses of Parliament.

These are credible tidings, being sent sent from an eyewitness of the
Battle;

Likewise the Marquess of Hertford has had a great overthrow, for upon the
sixth day of this present Month the Volunteers that came out of Devonshire
assaulted the foresaid Castle, the Cavaleers playing very courageously against
them, but they were answered from the Volunteers again with many Musket
Bullets, then the Earl of Bedfords Forces gave them a brave onset on the other
side of the Castle, slaying many of the Cavaleers; and although Lunsford with
his Fire works played against our Forces, yet there was not above 6. men slain
and 12 wounded, and after some continuance of fight, the Marquess caused a
Drum to beat for a parley, and propounded many Propositions to the Lord
General, desiring that he might have Quarter, but they would not consent
thereunto, so that it is thought that much blood will be shed in the winning of
the said Castle: The Marquess also caused a great meeting in the Town, where
was read a Declaration of his, signifying that the Forces which was raised by
him, were only to maintain the true Religion, the Laws of the Land, and to
oppose all Brownists, and other Sects, that seeks to bring this Land to
confusion, and that the Parliament intends to change Religion, and distract the
peace of the Kingdom, the said Declaration casting many foul aspersions upon
the Parliament, and was transcribed by the Marquess, the Lord Seymor, Lord
Paulet, Sir John Paulet and Captain John Digby, as it was signified to the
Honorable Assembly of Parliament, September. 7.

The thrice Noble Robert Devoreux Earl of Essex, being appointed Lord General
by the consent of both Houses of Parliament, set forward on Friday, being the
9. of this present August, and has set down his Resolution to perform the
Trust that is reposed in him by both Houses, being resolved to lose his life in
the said great Assembly, and to that end has took his journey (as is thought)
toward Nottingham, where his Majesty has now set up his Standard; there is
come from Wales about the number of 1100. men, and is there with the Kings
Majesty, it being redorted and signified to both Houses of Parliament, upon
Thursday Sept. 8.

FINIS.

