DEATH'S ALARM: OR, SECVRITY'S WARNING-PIECE.

A Sermon preached in S. Dionis Back-Church, at the Funeral of Mrs. Mary Smith
(Daughter of Mr. Isaac Colfe, formerly Minister of Gods Word at Chadwell in
Essex, and late Wife of Mr. Richard Smith of London, Draper) who dyed the 9th.
day of November. 1653. and was buried the 16th. of the same MONTH.

By NATH: HARDY, Mr. of Arts, and Preacher to that PARISH.

Revelat. 16. 15. Behold I come as a Thief, Blessed is he that watches and
keeps his garments, lest be walk naked, and they see his shame. Greg. Mag.
Hom. 13. in Evang. Horam ultimam dominus noster idcirco voluit nobis esse
incognitam, ut semper possit esse suspecta, ut dum illam praevidere non
possumus, ad illam sinc intermissione praeparemur. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for
Nath: Web, and Will: Grantham at the sign of the Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard
near the little North Door. 1654.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 22. read from, p. 8. l. 14. blot out the fig. 5. l. 25. for
foremarning r. forearming, in marg. bl. out est. p. 12. l. 30. for souls r.
skulls, p. 14. l. 2. for so r. to, l. 14. for (...) r. (...), p. 15. l. 16.
after readiness add consists, p. 24. l. 11. before sense r. high, l. 12.
blot out high.

To the Reverend Mr. Abraham Colfe, Minister of Lewisham in Kent: After the
numbering of many years on EARTH, years without number in HEAVEN.
Worthy SIR,
UPon your first motion of publishing this Sermon, I took it into a serious
review, and finding the notions very common, and the expressions homespun, I
adjudged it unworthy to survive ( except in the memories of the Auditors) that
hour wherein it was preached: But being loath to deny your desire, I resolved
to deny my own judgment, and withal, hoping it may prove useful ( though
not to inform the judgment, yet) to awaken the conscience of the Reader, I am
willing to hazard my own reputation, if I may advance the edification of
others.

That which (Reverend Sir) I conceive to be a subordinate end in your
intention, is to testify your abundant (yet deserved) respects to your
deceased Niece, in taking care that whilst her body rots her name might live;
and surely, since the memory of the just is blessed, an endeavor Prove. 10* 7.
to perpetuate it is pious. Praiseworthy then is your regard of her memory,
but much more commendable is that course which you have taken for preserving
your own, by an eminent and lasting The building and endowing a free Grammar
School by, and Writing-School in the Town of Lewisham, together with an annual
Maintenance for 7. Scholars to be sent from thence to the University.
act of charity, for which the generations to come shall call you blessed.

Indeed by this worthy work you have honored the Parish whereof you have been,
and are a careful watchman; the Church of England, to which you have been an
obedient Son; the Gospel, of which you have been a laborious Preacher; and
Protestant Religion, of which (I trust) you are a sincere Professor. And truly,
both the present and future ages will be very ungrateful, if they shall not
highly honor so munificent a Benefactor.

However (I hope) you have so learned Christ, as not to make men's applause the
scope at which you aim, or mark whereat you shoot, well knowing that
vainglory sullyeth the splendor, and evacatueth the reward of our best
actions, turning Christian charity into pharisaicall hypocrisy.

To Gods merciful acceptance* and gracious remuneration (I doubt not, good
Sir) but you commend your pious and charitable design, who (though men should)
Hebr. 6. 10.
will not be unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love. To his
powerful protection and most wise direction, I commend both you and your
endeavors, who will not forsake you now you are aged, but preserve 2 Timothy 4.
18.
you to his heavenly Kingdom. To whom be glory for ever and ever.

AMEN.
I subscribe my self (Sir) A cordial honourer of your Virtues, NATH: HARDY.

MATH: 24. 44. Therefore be ye also ready, for in such an hour as you think
not, the Son of Man comes.
THis Chapter is a Sermon, The Preacher whereof was no other than the Lord of
Preachers and great Prophet of his Church: The Theme whereabout it is
conversant is his coming, and that in a way of Judgment. And those two genuine
parts of a Sermon, Explication and Application divide the Chapter: The former
describes the signs and manner of his advent, from the first verse to the 42.
The latter prescribes an expectation of, and preparation for it, from the 42.
to the end. The Text I am now to handle lies within the compass of the latter
and most practical part of the Sermon: in which, (the design of our blessed
Savior being to urge a watchful readiness for his coming) he pursues a
double Metaphor (couching logical reasons under rhetorical allusions) the one
in the following verses, the other in the foregoing.

The subsequent similitude is borrowed from a servants behavior in reference
to the coming of his Lord. No Topics more prevailing, especially with vulgar
judgments, than those which are drawn a commodo and Salust. Bell. Catilin.
incommodo, from the danger or benefit, detriment or emolument that accrueth by
the neglect or performance of that to which we persuade, upon which account it
was that Catiline said to his Soldiers, Quem neque gloria neque pericula
movent, nequicquam hortere, That man is unperswadable who can neither be
affrighted nor allured: both these arguments Christ is here pleased to make use
of, at once representing the comfortable felicity of a vigilant, and the
doleful, nay dismal misery of a secure servant, when their Lord shall come.

The precedent resemblance is seemingly very harsh, and yet really very fit,
wherein you find mention made of an Householder and a Thief, yea (which is the
Riddle) Christ compared to the Thief, and his Disciples to the Householders.
That those who are (most justly) afterward called servants, should here be
termed Householders, is somewhat strange, and yet this in some respect is very
congruous; since every man's body is an house wherein he dwells, his thoughts,
words, and actions, are as his family, which he must govern, and his soul,
more worth than a world, the treasure which he is to take care of.

But though this part of the comparison may admit of a favorable construction,
yet the other seems altogether incompatible. Methinks when I read Christ
resembling himself to a Thief, I am ready to say, as once Math. 16. 22.
S. Peter in another case, Be it far from thee, Lord, this Phil. 2. 6.
shall not be unto thee. Blessed Jesus, thou think it no robbery to be
equal with God, and do thou here, as it were, equalize thy self to a
robber? thou call thy self, and not without good reason, a little after
this, Lord, and can the Lord of the house become a Thief, the Owner a Robber?
Thou did tax the Multitude for coming against thee as a Thief, and do thou
here speak of thy self Mat. 26. ^. 27. 38.
as if thou were a Thief? It was an high affront, when the Jews numbered thee
with Thieves, nay preferred a Thief before thee, and art thou so injurious to
thy self, as to cloth thy self under the appellation of a Thief? Rather Romans
3. 4.
(to allude to S. Paul's expression) Let Christ be true, and every Man a thief.
Indeed, well may the thief lie at our doors; our first Parents were robbers in
eating the forbidden fruit, and we, their unhappy Progeny, are no less
guilty, not only in their loins, but in our own persons, by
uncharitableness, by sacrilege, by idleness, and profaneness: but as for
the innocent Messiah, what has he done that may deserve the title of a Thief?

To all this the answer is easy, if we consider that it is not a charge or
accusation, but only an allusion or comparison. Christ does not make himself
the same with, because he likens himself to a thief, nor indeed, is it
himself* but rather his advent, which is here compared to the coming of a
Thief.

But it will still be objected, how can this be verified? We elsewhere find
Christ plainly opposing his to a thiefe's coming, The thief comes not but to
kill and John 10. 10.
steal, and destroy, but I come, says Christ, that they may have life. True,
but that is spoken of his first coming, which was in mercy. It may be replied,
this cannot be asserted of his coming in displeasure, since the coming of a
thief is to take from men their own, to do wrong, to injure the innocent;
whereas the coming of Christ is, like that of a Judge, to give every man his
own, to do right, to punish the nocent; and these two are so far from being
like, that they are directly contrary.

To unfold this riddle, therefore, you must know, that this expression is
parabolicall; and parables, like knives, cut only in the edge, to wit, the
scope: now his aim in likening this advent ^o that of a thief is only to take
in the consideration of the time. Excellent to this purpose is that of Simon de
Cass^a, Similitudo Christi Cass l. 6. c. 28.
ad furem non est personae ad personam, nec negotii ad negotium, sed temporis
ad tempus, The parallel here holds not between person and person, or
business and business, but between time and time; and therefore the
Apostles, Paul and Peter, though (after Christ's 1 These. 52. 2. Pet. 3. 10.
example) they are bold to use this allusion, yet with an explicatory addition,
where they say, The Lord comes as a thief in the night; and thus it fitly
agrees, since as the coming of a thief in the night is unexpected, because the
good man of the house is then asleep, and thinks not of it; so is often times,
especially to wicked men, the coming of Christ; and that this is the meaning of
the Protasis in the former, appears by the Apodosis, or reddition of the
similitude in this verse which requires our constant preparedness, because of
his sudden coming, Be you therefore ready, for in an hour, etc.

The words (if taken in their fullest latitude) present us with four
considerables: Here is,

1. An Advent supposed in the last word Come, and what coming of Christ is here
intended would be a little enquired into: To clear which we must distinguish
of those several comings which are attributed to him in Scripture, nor can
they (in my weak capacity) be more clearly differenced, than by considering a
salvificall and a judicial advent of Christ, and each of these as both visible
and invisible.

Christ's coming to save is either in the flesh, or in the spirit; his first
coming into the world, and his daily coming into our hearts, are in their prime
intention salvfiicall; his visible coming was to be the Son of Man, that in
our nature he might purchase salvation for us; his invisible is by his spirit,
to make us the Sons of God, and thereby apply this salvation to us; but
neither of these can be here meant, since his coming in the flesh was already
past, whereas he speaks of a future advent; nor can we make our selves ready
against his coming in the spirit, but it is the coming of the spirit which must
enable us to make our selves ready.

Pass we on therefore to his judicial coming, which is either general or
special, personal or virtuall, and so visible or invisible. There shall be at
the end of the world, a glorious coming of Christ in person, to execute a
manifest and righteous judgment upon all mankind, rewarding every man
according to his works; in the mean time, Christ comes in his power by
secondary instruments to every particular man, and sometimes to whole nations:
in which respect, when by plague, famine, and war, Kingdoms are destroyed,
and when by casualties, or sickness, persons are cut off, Christ is said
judicially to come to them: Now all these, after a sort, and in some sense, may
be here understood, That coming of Christ, which is literally and most properly
meant, is, doubtless, his coming by Titus Vespasian against Jerusalem, to
overthrow it, and thereby bring vengeance on the Jews, for their most unjust
and ungrateful murder of him. But though this be the literal and primary
sense, yet it will not (I conceive) be denied by any, but that many of the
things mentioned in this Chapter are, or at least, may be applied to that last
coming of Christ, since we may look upon that destruction of Jerusalem as an
Emblem of the worlds judgment; and yet (to draw nearer this present occasion)
the latter part of this chapter, and so this verse may morally be accomodated
to the particular coming of Christ, by death, to every person: in reference to
which, the counsels here given are very pregnant and apposite.

2. Next to the advent supposed, is observable, the person characterised, by
this appellation, the Son of Man, a title which our blessed Savior very often
gives to him self, thereby setting us a pattern of humility, in having low
conceits, and using mean expressions concerning our selves. But that which
would here be considered, is upon what account he calls himself by so mean a
title, when he speaks of so glorious a coming. If you cast your eyes on the
42. verse, you shall there find him using the magnificent title of a Lord, a
term, as most truly agreeing to him, so best fitting his advent, wherein he
manifested himself as a Lord punishing his Rebels; but yet it is not without a
reason, that having called himself Lord, before, he styles himself, the
Son of Man; here, namely, to prevent the scandal which might be taken at the
meannesse of his present condition: likely it is that the tenuity of his
external aspect rendered his prediction contemptible. What need we regard the
words, or fear the threats of this Carpenters Son? might the Jews say, at
least within themselves. To prevent which, Christ is pleased to call him self
the Son of Man, as if he would say, in answer to such an objection. However, I
am a poor weak man, yet the day is at hand when I will come in might and
power, to avenge my self upon my enemies.

3. The third observable is the time of this persons advent specified, and that
to be both speedy, and sudden, in an hour when you think not; speedy, because
in an hour, one of the shortest dimensions of time; it may be long before
Christ come, but when he comes he will not be long about it, and therefore he
says, not in a year, or a month, or a day, but an hour; nor is it only
speedy, but sudden, because in an hour men think not of, and by this, an
addition is made to the preceding expression, in that parallel verse, there it
is, you know not in what hour, and that lets us see how secret death is from,
and therefore how uncertain it is to all men; here it is in an hour you
think not, which lets us see how sudden, and therefore unexpected it is to
many men.

4. The last particular (according to this Retrograde, yet Logical order)
considerable is, the inference deduced, what conclusions must be drawn from
these premises, what effect these considerations of the thing, person, and
time, ought to work upon us, and that is in these words, be ye therefore ready,
namely, to have all things fitted before Christ comes, that we may have
nothing to do when he comes, but to meet him. Cum infer de be^et vi^ilare
^ontim o id omi^it ne intolerabile quid praecipere videretur sed estote parati,
ad significandum continuam vigilantiam esse paratam. Avendan: in Math. Quod
superius dix^rat (...) illud jam exponit per (...) ille enim vere vigilat qui
semper paratus est. Gerard* Contin.
That which he calls for in the forementioned verse, is watching, that which
he requires here is readiness; two phrases, one whereof explaines the other.
On the one hand, lest the command of watching always might seem impossible,
Christ shows, that the continual watching he expects, is only so far as
to put our selves in a ready posture, that we may not have grace to get when we
should spend it. On the other, lest we should think it enough to watch, that
is, think of his coming; he calls upon us not only to watch, but to be
ready, injoyning such an expectation of, as leads us to preparation for his
coming.

5. Time will not give me leave to insist on each of these particulars, and
therefore I shall contract the four to two, and dichotomizing the Text, here
is observable in it,

Praedictio eventus, A Prediction of something to come to pass, In an hour
you think not, etc. Praescriptio operis, A Prescription of something to be
done, Be you therefore ready: Or, if you will, here is
Praemonitio periculi, A Danger forewarned, In an hour you think not, etc.
Admonitio officii, A Forewarning advised, Be you therefore ready: Yet once
more,
The two important truths of this Scripture, are,
Inopinatus Christi adventus, The sodainnesse of Christ's coming, In an hour you
think not, etc. Necessarius Christiani apparatus, The necessity of the
Christians preparing, Be you therefore ready.
Between these two I shall divide the following discourse, beseeching this Son
of man that he would in this hour, by his spirit, come into our hearts, that
every one of us may be swift to hear, and ready to receive these divine
Lessons: And so I begin with the

Sodainesse of Christ's coming, in an hour which you 1st. Genesis
think not the Son of Man will come: This is that truth which S. Paul
excellently exemplifieth, When they 1 These. 5. ^.
shall say peace and safety, then sudden destruction comes upon them, as
Travel upon a Woman with Child; when men say peace and safety, they little
dream of war and ruin, pain comes oft-times upon the woman in the street,
at the table, in an hour when she least thinks on Je^. 19. ^^. Significatur
inextectata and im provisa Chald^^orum in Jerusalem irrup^io ^^* pot^ qui n^^
per portas, in quibu^ sunt vigiles, fed per ^urorum foenestras clan* culum
instar furis irrumpant Lapid in H^er. Luke 21. 35.
it. Such is Christ's coming, especially to careless and secure sinners: That
expression of the Prophet Jeremy may not unfitly be made use of to this
purpose, by way of illustration, when he says, death is come up into our
windows; the true man comes in at the door, but the thief at the window;
coming in at the door is usual, but coming in at the window is unexpected; So
is Christ's coming to men by death in such a way, at such a time as is unlooked
for; This truth is that which our Lord himself elsewhere illustrateth by the
metaphor of a snare, and that day is said so to come, for its secrecy and
Tanqua^ laqu^us ^cil. propter non apparentiam and impraemeditationem. Eu^h. in
Ma^h.
unexpectedness; Agag flattereth himself, that the bitterness of death is
past, and then Samuel gives order to hew him in pieces before the Lord in
Gilgal: and usually, when men think death the farthest off, it is the nearest
to them.

To enlarge this more particularly, be pleased to take notice, that there is a
fourfold hour wherein men usually make no account of Christ's coming by death,
and yet in which Christ frequently comes to men, to wit, hora carnalis
voluptatis, mundanae prosperitatis, corporalis sanitatis and juvenilis aetatis,
the hour of carnal pleasure, of worldly prosperity, bodily health, and
youthful age.

1. The hour of carnal pleasure is a time wherein death is scarce at all
thought upon. While the ambitious Statist is climbing high, he dreameth not of
falling low into a grave; whilst covetous Mammonists are heaping up thick clay,
they think not of being themselves made an heap of dust; and whilst voluptuous
Epicures are feeding on dainties, and dallying with Dallilah's, they seldom
make account of conversing with, and being fed upon by Worms; in this respect,
no doubt it is, that our Savior warns his Disciples, Take heed to your Luke
21. 34.
selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so that day come upon you unawares,
thereby intimating that this day comes unawares upon them, who are plunged
into the cares and delights of this life, and yet even in this hour the Son
of Man is pleased to come and arrest presumptuous sinners. Belshazzar is
quaffing Dan. 6. 5.
in his Cups, carousing with his Companions, when as in that selfsame hour
came forth the fingers of a man writing upon the wall the destruction of him
and his Kingdoms. Herod is glutting his aspiring humor with popular applause
(forgetting in the pride of his heart, both God and himself) when as by a
strange Acts 12. 23.
judgment he is immediately devoured by worms alive, and gives up the Ghost.
Finally, worldly men spend Job 21. 13.
their days in getting wealth, and in a moment they go down to the grave.
The coming of the Flood upon the old World is a litttle before made an Emblem
by Christ Verse 38.
of his coming, and (that as the amplification demonstrateth) in this very
particular, as the Flood came upon the old World, when they were so far from
fearing ruin, that they were eating, and drinking, and giving in marriage: So
does Christ seize upon sinners in the midst of their delights, whilst they are
indulging to their lusts.

2. The hour of worldly prosperity is a time wherein men are very regardlesse
of Christ's coming: in affliction and misery many wish for death, but in
enjoyments and prosperity they scarce think of it; when the Sun shone so bright
upon Sodom in the Morning, they little expected to be consumed by a dismal
fire from heaven before Evening: when the world is flowing in upon a man, it is
very hard to intertaine thoughts of going out of the world. If the Mountain be
strong, even Psalm. 30. 6.
David is ready to say, I shall never be moved: no mervail if presumptuous
Babylon being in her chair of Revel. 18. 21.
state, say, I sit a Queen and am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow. But yet
very frequently, this is the hour wherein Christ comes; so the threatening
runs against Isa. 47. 7, 8, 9.
both literal and mystical Babylon, Evil shall come upon her in a moment, in
one day: and so it was verified in the rich Fool, who bidding his soul to take
its Revel. 18. 9.
^ase, by reason of his worldly abundance, had that Luke 12* 19* 20.
very night his soul required of him, and carried to torment.

3. The hour of bodily health and strength is a time in which men cast the
thought of death behind them, whilst they have color in their faces, agility
in their joints, appetite in their stomachs, health in their bodies, How rare
are their Meditations on Death? Go preach your Lectures of Mortality (say they)
to the weak, and the lame, and the sick; as for us, we have no reason to
trouble our selves with such melancholy thoughts: What do you tell us of dying
and rotting in the grave? whilst our bones are moystned with marrow? We feel
no infirmity, and therefore fear not mortality: And yet how often does Christ
come by death in such an hour? one dies (says Job) in his full strength,
being wholly at ^ase ^ob 21. 23, 24.
and quiet, his breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moystned with
marrow: How many valiant and stout men has death laid upon their backs, on a
sudden tripping up their heels? Have you not sometimes seen a sturdy Oak
quickly blown down by a violent wind? a strong and tall Vessel presently
sunk by a leake? So are oft-times men snatched away in the strength and vigor
of their body, by death.

4. The hour of Youthful age is a time wherein few Eccles. 12. 3, 4.
make account of dying; It is soon enough (say young men) to think of our
death in the day when desire shall fail, to look for a grave, when they that
look out at the windows are darkened, and to fear the approach of both when
the keepers of the house shall tremble: these gravecloths are too sad for the
freshness of our life, we are young, and may see many a fair year pass over
our heads before death comes, and therefore think not that like the mad man in
the Gospel we will spend our life among the tombs. But alas! how frequently,
even in this hour, does the Son of Man come: In Golgotha (says the Hebrew
Proverb) there are souls of all sizes, and our weekly bills, for the most
part, afford a greater numbers of dead Children than aged men. The Poets have a
fable, that Death and Cupid lodging together at an Inn, exchanged their
arrows, whereby it has since come to Sic mo^itur juvenis sic moribundus ama^.
pass, that many times Old men dote, and Young men dye. The truth is, death
does not summon us according to our years, even the blossom is subject to
nipping as well as the flower to withering. That threat which Almighty God
denounces by the Prophet Amos, is very often in this moral sense made good,
Dices ^u qui ^^ juvenis kondu^ ^^n^c^ui, noki ergo decip^, non d^^^^itur mors
ce^to tempore aetatis, neque ^i^^t co^ qui sunt in ipso fine ^tatis. G^^g
Nys^ad^* e^s qui ciff. Bapt. orat.
I will cause the Sun to go down at noone; nay, not only so, but even in the
morning of youth does the Sun of many a man's life go down.

To apply this, let it then be the care of every one of us that Christ's coming
may not be to us in an hour we think not of, and to that end, let no hour,
at least, day of our life pass without a serious thought of the day and hour
of our death; Larkes in Theocritus are called (...) because they carry the
form of a Sepulcher upon their heads. Such should all Christians be, having
permanent impressions of death, not on but in their heads and hearts. The
Indian Gymnosophists were so much in love with these thoughts, that they caused
their graves to be made before their gates, so as both at their going out and
coming in they might be put in mind of their death: and truly, however the
most men in the days of their vanity, account a life spent in meditation of
death to be a miserable life, a death rather than a life; yet when the time of
their death approache^h, they will change their note, and say as dying
Theophilus did of devout Arsenius, Beatus es Abba Arseni, qui semper hanc horam
ante oculoshabuisti, They are happy men who set death daily before their eyes.
Indeed, by Bibl. patr. T. 9* Ap^th^g^.
this means the coming of Christ, as it will not be altogether sudden, so
neither terrible to us, nor can any man Nec dignus est in morte acc^p^re
solatium qui s^ non cogitavit esse moriturum. Cypr. Ep. 5 2.
(so use S. Cyprians words) receive comfort at his death, who did not before
make account of dying. A late writer has, in this respect, piously fancyed,
that Clocks were invented to mind us not so much of the Sunne's motion in the
Heavens, as the passing of our life here on Chrefol. Mystagog.
Earth: Since the sounding of the clock tells us that the past hour is as it
were dead and buried, which at some time, or hour of some day or other, must be
our lot.

Oh then, what ever our present condition is, let us still entertain thoughts
of our latter end: Art thou in health and strength, remember, a wise and good
man, even then (as Gregory Nazian. says) (...) Greg. Naz. Orat. 28.
will look both upwards to heaven, and downwards to his grave. Do thou
enjoy the pleasures of life? learn of Joseph of Arimathea to make a tomb in
thy garden, and season thy delights with thoughts of thy dissolution. Finally,
art thou advanced to an high estate in this world? forget not how low thy
highness must come ere long, and what one was appointed to have in his hands
at the inauguration of the Grecian Emperors, namely, in the one a burning
firebrand presently consumed, and in the other a vessel full of ashes, and
dead men's bones, have thou in thy heart by renewed meditations of thy mortality.

To close up this part, It is reported concerning the Maids in the Isle of Man,
that the first thing they spin is their winding-sheete, which they wear about
them as a girdle at their feasts: well were it, if we would in the midst of all
our enjoyments, gird our selves about with our winding-sheets, fixing our
thoughts upon our end, that so by this means we may not have cause at last to
sigh forth the foole's words, Non putaram, I did not think my death had been so
near: Blessed is that man, whom Christ, when he comes by death, shall find,
not as Jaell did Siserah, asleep, but as Jonathan's arrow came to David
standing in the field, and looking for it, yea, so looking, as to be fitting
himself, which leads to the

Preparedness required in every Christian for this coming, 2d. Genesis
Be you therefore ready. For the better and clearer dispatch of this, I shall
endeavor both to unfold the nature, and press the practice of this duty.

1. To illustrate the nature of this preparation, be pleased to observe both
the intent of the thing, and the extent of the time; by the former we shall see
wherein this readiness, and by the latter when it ought to be performed.

1. The duty it self being of very weighty importance, It should be a little
inquired into, what things are requisite to denominate a man ready for Christ's
coming.

The several metaphors of a Bridegroom, of a Lord, and of a Thief, under
which the coming of Christ is represented to us, may very fitly be made use of
to this end and purpose.

1. They are ready for the coming of the Bridegroom, who have on their wedding
garment. And this is no other in a spiritual sense than that white raiment, to
wit, of Christ's righteousness, apprehended by faith, which our blessed Lord
advises the Church to buy of Revel. 3. 1^.
him: indeed, when death* comes it will strip us of all other induments; Job
says of himself (and it is no more than what every man shall find true)
Naked J^b 1. 21.
came I forth of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither, only of
this garment it cannot bereave us; and he alone, who is thus clothed, may, with
comfort, look death in the face.

2. Again, he is ready for the coming of his Lord, who has discharged the
trust reposed in, and improved the stock left with him by his Lord. Indeed,
thus to do in reference to God exactly, is impossible, but yet this to
endeavor is necessary: and he only is fit for death, who has been careful
in life to employ his talents for Gods glory, and to keep a good conscience in
all things. When the Lord comes he expects an account of the Servants
receipts, and disbursments, and how unfit will the idle or wastfull servant be
to make up his account? That life must needs render a man unprepared for death,
which is spent in doing nothing, or that which is worse than nothing, in
abusing the mercies we receive, to the dishonor of him, who has bestowed them
on us.

Finally, he is ready for the coming of a Thief, who keeps himself and his
family waking, has his door locked, bolted, and barred, and is furnished with
weapons both of defense and resistance; So must we prepare our selves for
Christ's coming, by awaking our souls out of carnal and sensual security, by
keeping our hearts with all diligence, and by putting on the whole armor of
God; the condition of that man will be very sad, whom death finds asleep in
sin, without a spiritual guard, and destitute of those graces, which should
arm him against its venomous sting.

If you desire a more distinct explication of this preparation, let Christ be
his own expositor in that elegant Scripture, where he advises his Disciples
to have their Loins girt, and their Lamps burning; The work of Per primum
prae^^pium jubemur c^hibere nos a malo and impedimenta removere: per sccundum
excitamur ad been operandum. Tole^ in Luc. Quid est lumbos ac incto^? declina a
malo: quid lu^^rnas ardentes habere, hoc est and fac bonum. Aug. Sermon. 39. de
verb. dom.
preparation for death is both privative and positive, in removing what may
hinder us, and procuring what may enable us to meet Christ at our death, with
comfort. Both these we are taught under those metaphorical allusions, the
former in the girding of our Loins, the latter in the burning of our Lamps.

1. To be ready, is to have our Loins girt* where by Loins we may very well
understand, our affections and lusts, which are to be girt, by repentance and
mortification. The sting of death, says S. Paul, is sin, so that we are
never fit to dye till we have taken out the sting by subduing sin; he that
lives in any lust is so far from being armed for death, that he armeth
Succ^^gere debemus lumbos id est expediti esse ab impedimentis lasciviosae
vi^ae and implicitae. Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 4. 29.
death against himself; death is a journey, called therefore a going to our
long home; but how shall he be fit to go this journey, who has not laid aside
the weight of sin, and girded up his loins, which will be a sore impediment
to him? More especially, this girding of Loins may refer to the expelling of
worldly love out Ut divinum illud moriendi exemplum nos admonere^, humanarum
rerum contemptum and amaritudinem morti praeire debere ut consumma^i ad mortem
obeundam esse videamur. Velasq. in Phil. c. 1. v. 21. Annot. 3^. Sen. Epist. 26.
of our hearts. To this purpose, both that action of Christ's drinking Vinegar,
and those words of his, It is finished, immediately before his death, are not
unfitly moraliz'd, to teach us that by despising the world as vain and bitter,
we are more prepared for the finishing of our life. Oh how unwilling is he to
go out of the world, whose heart is glued to it? And therefore let it be our
wisdom to hang loose in our affections from all earthly relations, that as
Seneca divinely, if we be called to it; Nihil nos detineat, nec impediat quo
minus parati simus, quod quand^que faciendum, statim facere, no worldly thing
may hinder us from being ready to do that presently, which must be done at some
time.

2. To be ready, is to have our Lamps burning, to wit, the Lamp of our Soul,
burning with the graces of Gods spirit; the Lamp of our Life, burning in the
Lucernas ardentes habere, id est mentes a fide accensas and operibu^ veri^atis
relucentes. Tertul. contr. Marc. l. 4. c. 29.
exercise of good works toward God and man. Certainly he is very unfit to dye,
who has not yet begun to live; thy condition must needs be desperate, if the
lamp of thy life be put out before the lamp of grace be kindled: S. John says
of them who dye in the Lord, their works follow them, to wit, those good works
which have gone before their death in the course of their lives; Rev. 14. 13.
he only is fit to meet Christ in death, who can say to him in Hezekiah's
words, Remember, Lord, how I have Isaiah 38. 3.
walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart: a renewed nature, and a
reformed life are the best preparatives to a comfortable and happy death.

2. You see the duty it self: The next thing to be considered is, the time
when we should make our selves thus ready; it is that which must by no means
be left out, since though we all agree about the thing, yet we differ about the
time, we must be ready for Christ's coming, that is acknowledged, but when we
should go about it, is not so easily determined. The answer to this is not
expressly given in the text, but yet manifestly employed in the context, since
the householder no^ knowing when the thief will come, and knowing he will come,
is always expecting and providing for him: and indeed this we shall find in
the ^parallel Scripture expressly supplied, where our Savior bids his Disciples
to watch and pray (...) always. It is that then Luke 21. 36.
which ought to be the wisdom of every Christian, always to be in a readiness
for the coming of Christ: suitable to this is that resolve of holy Job, when
he says, All the days of my appointed time I will wait till Job 14. 14.
my change come; not only one, or a few, or some, but all his days were days
of watching for the approach of his change, according to which is that counsel
of S. Basil, (...), Bas. hom. 2^.
we must every day of our life be in a posture ready to go out of this life,
if our Lord require us.

To clear this more fully in two particulars:

1. We must begin betimes to make our selves ready. It is an undoubted maxim,
in re necessaria non d^u deliberandum, where the matter is clearly necessary to
dispute much, or deliberate long about it, is both needless and dangerous;
nothing of more needful concernment or greater importance to every one of us,
than the being ready for Christ's coming: surely then, just it is we should set
about it presently, and make it our first business. Almighty God in his
sublime speech to Job, says, concerning the warlike horse, that he smells
the Job 39. 25.
battle afar off; what nature teaches him, let grace us, to smell that
encounter we must have with death afar off long before (at least in
probability) it will come, and that is, in the days of our youth. The life of
man is not without good reason compared to a night: Now among the Jews there
were four watches in the night, the first was called Conticinium, when all
things are silent; the second Intempestum, the unseasonable time of midnight;
the third Gallicinium, which began at the Cock crowing; the last Antelucanum,
about break of day: by these four watches of the night are morally resembled,
the four ages of man's life, Childhood, Youth, Manhood* Old age, and it is
worth our observation, that when Christ speaks of our being ready for his
coming, he mentions only the second and the third watch: Thophilact's
reason, (...), etc. Theoph. in Luc.
I confess, is most probable, because the second and third watches are, as it
were; the dead time of night, when most men are in their soundest sleep, so
that he that is wakefull in those watches, may be presumed not to sleep in the
first and fourth, and so to be ready in the second and third, is as much as to
be always ready; but there may be another apt allusion to our particular
purpose; as for the first watch he mentions it not, because Child hood is in
no capacity of performing this duty (though even then it concerns Parents to
make their Children ready, by bringing them to the Holy Sacrament of Baptism:)
and as for the fourth watch of Old age, he specifieth not that neither, because
Rarissimi sunt qui ad extremum vitae differentes been operari, Tolet ibid.
inveniuntur ita facientes, They are very rare who are found ready at Christ's
coming, and yet have not begun before the fourth watch: Let it then be our care
to begin at the third watch of Man hood, nay, sooner* at the second watch of
Youth, to prepare and provide for Christ's coming. Happy is that man who fitteth
himself for dying, so soon as he comes to know that he lives, and
consecrateth the beginning of his rational life to a religious Meditation of
his mortal end.

2. We must hold out to the end of our days in this ready posture, daily
endeavoring greater measure* of preparation. Those two excuses will be found
alike invalid whenever Christ comes, Fuisse and futurum esse, I resolved to
be ready hereafter, and I was ready heretofore; since it is neither what thou
would be, nor what thou have been, but what thou art; when death comes
Unbend not then the bow of thy pious endevor, till the string of thy life
break; cease not running the race of piety till thou art put out of breath; be
always preparing to meet Christ till he come to thee. It is to this purpose
well observed, what a difference there is between the other life and this; as
to that life, it will be Ho^ diff^rt vitapraesens ab illa quam expectamus,
quo^a^ totum bonum futurae vitae consistit in hoc quod est recte illam incipe^e
praes^ntis vitae bonum: e contra consisti^ in rect^ finiendo illam, etc. Avend.
in Mat. cap. 24. Greg. Mag.
sufficient, been incipere, to begin well; if we can but enter into that joy of
our Lord, it is enough; he that is once entered into a possession of that
bliss, shall go no more out, but as to this present life, the great care is
been finire, to end well, since incassum bonum agitur si ante vitae terminum
deseratur, That work is begun to no purpose, which is left off before it is
finished; no^ can this work of preparation be finished, till life be ended.

But it may, perhaps, and not improbably, be objected, even by good Christians:
Alas, the practice of this duty in this extent, is impossible; who is there
that can at all times so order his conversation, as to be ready for his
dissolution? We meet with many remora's to stop us in, many avocations to turn
us aside from this work, the labor of our callings, the care of our families,
lawful recreations, many worldly businesses take up our time, so that we
cannot always be at leisure to think of, and so provide for Christ's coming.

To resolve which doubt, be pleased to take notice of a double preparation for
the coming of Christ, to wit, habitual and actual.

Actual readiness consists in the exercise of those spiritual graces, and
practice, of those religious duties, which are fit for us to be conversant in
at the time of our death, such as are self examination, penitent humiliation,
believing invocation, charitable condonation, and the like; and truly thus to
be always ready, is not possible, nor requisite: It is not possible, for our
natures, which at best are but in part renewed, to be wholly taken up with
divine performances; nor indeed is it requisite, since God has given us time
for secular as well as spiritual businesses, yea, for recreation as well as
devotion; and if Christ shall come by death to us when about our civil
callings, or lawful refreshings, our condition were not therefore to be
adjudged desperate. Indeed, on the one hand, because death may come at such
times, it should be our endeavor, as much as may be, to carry about us
heavenly hearts in our earthly employments; and on the other hand, because the
best of us are too deficient in this kind, we may, nay ought to beg of God (if
it be his will) that death may rather find us praying, than playing; in our
chambers, than in our shops; about devout exercises, than worldly businesses.
In this respect, that prayer of the Church (From sudden death good Lord
deliver us) which by our arrogant novelists, among other passages of the
lyturgie, is causelessly denied, is fit to be made, not only by the worst, but
by the best of men, to whom death may be, and many times is so sudden, that
they cannot be in an actual readiness for it, and therefore if it be (as
doubtless it is) a very desirable thing to have space before our death of
renewing our faith, repentance, and charity, yea, and of expressing all these
for the comfort and benefit of others that belong to us, it must needs be a
fit request for all Christians to put up, that they may be delivered from
sudden death.

But besides this actual, there is an habitual readiness, which referres not
to the action but the disposition; the exercise, but the state of the person;
so that he, who is by faith engrafted into Christ, and by the spirit
regenerated to a lively hope, and so in a state of grace, is habitually ready
for the coming of Christ, according to this sense Brugensis with others gives
the interpretation of this text, Paratus est qui semper eo statu consistit,
Brugens. in loc.
quem dominus requirit, qui semper eum vitae tenet statum qui deo gratus, He is
ready, who is in that estate which is required by, and will be acceptable to
Christ when he comes to call him. And thus it is our duty to be always ready,
not daring to live in a state of impenitency, yea, to give God and our selves
no rest, till we have in some measure made our peace with him, through Christ:
Look as when we are enjoined to pray continually, the meaning is, not that we
should be always upon our knees in the continued exercise of that duty, but
that we should be frequent in Qui rogat semper roge^, etsi non semper precatu^,
paratum semper habeat precantis affectum. Ambr. in Ps. 118. Sermon. 19.
the work, and have a mind disposed to pray upon all occasions; so when we are
enjoined to be always ready for death, it is not that we should be continually
in the practice of those duties, which are proper for a dying man, but that we
should every day set some time apart for those exercises, and always be in a
regenerate condition, having the graces of faith and repentance really wrought
in our souls.

By this time, I hope, you see what the duty is, which here our blessed Lord
calls upon his Disciples to perform, what remains, but that I now, after
Christ's example, endeavor to press the practice of it upon you: And indeed,
so much the rather, because it is that wherein I fear the most of us are
miserably deficient.

It was Tertullian's Character of the Christians in his time, that they were
expeditum morti genus, a sort of Tertul ^^de spectac. cap. 1.
people prepared for death, and that not only natural, but violent, and so in
that sense which S. Paul speaks of high concerning himself, when he tells his
disconsolate friends that he was ready, not only to be bound, but to die for
the name of Jesus, Act. 21. 13. But alas, of how few Christians in our days
can this be truly said, and that in the lowest sense, the most being so far
from a readiness to lay down their lives in suffering for Christ, that they
are not in a readiness to meet Christ, if he should come in an ordinary way to
take away their lives. Alexander cashiered that soldier, who had his weapons
to sharpen when he was to go to fight: But Lord, how many Christians (in name)
have the work of preparation to begin, when their lives are almost at an end,
never thinking of doing good, till the opportunity Impii runquam didicerunt
bona facere, nisi c^m jam non est tempus faciendi. O* cast.
of doing it be past. Suppose, beloved, our Lord Christ should now come against
this City, as he did once against Jerusalem, to take vengeance on it and
destroy it, in what an unprepared condition should he find the greatest part
of the inhabitants? some sporting with their wantons, others burying themselves
in their chests of gold, some quaffing in their riotous bowls, others belching
out blasphemous oaths, the most wallowing in some wickedness or other? Nay,
to come nearer, suppose Christ should come by death to any of us here present,
this night, this evening, this hour, are we ready for him? could we give up
our accounts with joy, and look him in the face with comfort? I fear the most
of our Consciences tell us we should not be able to do it.

Receive then (I beseech you) a seasonable word of advice, and think (for so
indeed it is) that what Christ here says to his Disciples, he says to all,
Be you ready, And (which should render this duty so much the more acceptable
to us) it wants not a therefore to enforce it, indeed there are many and those
weighty motives, which may very well infer the performance of this duty, as
not only useful, but needful to be done, and that at all times. For, consider

1. The Son of Man will certainly come at some hour or other; Be you
therefore ready. In other matters we provide for those things whereof we have
at most but a probability, no certainty. The Husbandman plougheth, Multi domos
aedifican^, cum tamen n^sciant an per unicum diem ea debeans colere, ad
incertam vitam parantur, certam mortem non curantes. Stella in Lu^*
and tilleth, and sows his ground against the next year, when yet he is not
sure to reap the fruit of his labor; Parents lay up Riches, purchase Lands,
build Houses for their Children, though they are not sure they shall enjoy
them; shall we provide for what only may be, or at most, is but likely to be,
and take no care to prepare for what shall certainly be? That rich man in the
Gospel might well be called a fool, when as he took so much care to build
large Barnes, and lay up Goods in those barns as a provision for the uncertain
years of his life, but regarded not to make ready for his grave, which he knew
to be certain, and proved to be so near. Oh let not us incur this brand of
folly by the like incogitancy.

2. At what hour the Son of Man will come, you cannot certainly know; Be you
therefore ready; nay, always ready. It is true, Christ will come; nay, he has
told us he will come (no doubt for this reason) that being praemoniti we may be
praemuniti, having notice of, we may provide for it; but when he will come he
has concealed from us (and doubtless for this cause) that we might always
stand upon our guard, and be ready Si inimicus tuus fic tibi minaretur in tali
bora te expecto, sufficeret tibi usque ad illam horam quiescer^: tamen si sic
dixisset observa me, nam ubicunque te inv^n^ro te totis viribus invadam ^am
tunc nullum tibi qui^tis dabatur tempus Avend. in Math.
for him. If thy enemy shall say to thee, at such a time, in such a place, I
will meet you; it were enough to be ready at that time; but if he say, where,
or whenever I meet you, I will set upon you, it concerns to be always
armed for him: Such indeed is both the wisdom and goodness of our blessed
Lord, that he has forewarned us of the thing, not of the time, that knowing he
will come, and not knowing when, we may be continually prepared. It was the
policy of Julius Caesar, never to acquaint his Army beforehand with the time
of their march, Ut paratum, momentis omnibus, quo vellet, subito educeret, that
they might be ready to march upon all occasions: Such is the wise dealing of
Christ with us, and that for our good, not revealing to us the time of our
death, that we may never be secure. And therefore (to use Aulus Gellius his
comparison) as a fencer Aul. Gell l. 13. c. 26.
not knowing at what part of his body the Antagonist will aim, composeth his
body and holds his weapon, so as he may readily defend any part; so must we,
not knowing in what day of our life Christ will come, so order our ways, that
we may be fitted whenever he shall come unto us.

3. There is no hour of your life wherein you can assure your selves that the
Son of Man will not come: Indeed, as no place can exempt from death's approach,
it may come to thee in the Church, in the Street, in the Shop; in the Field, as
well as in the Bed; so no time can privilege from death's arrest, in the night
as well as in the day, in youth and manhood, as well as old age, Christ may
send it to seize upon thee: Have thou not need then to be every where, and at
all times prepared? Consider this (oh vain man, whoever thou art) that put
off thy preparation in hope that Christ will delay his visitation; thou
purposest to be ready when thou art old; I, but what if Christ come whilst yet
thou art young? Thou promisest to prepare thy self to morrow; but what if thou
die to day? Oh beware that thy promises bear not a date far longer than thy
life. It is storied (...). Bas. hom. 13.
of ambitious Archyas, that having by fraudulent and unjust courses, at length
compassed the government of Thebes; he with his accomplices kept a riotous feast,
in the midst of his intemperance a messenger comes to him with a letter from a
friend, importuning him speedily to peruse it, but he slighting the admonition,
and putting Plurarch. in Pelopid.
it under his pillow, said, (...) serious things to morrow, when as the thing,
which the letter concerned* was effected that night, to wit, deprivation at
once, both of his life and dignity, by a combination of the Citizens. This,
this (my Brethren) is, I fear, the doleful case of too many who purposing to
be serious and pious hereafter, are snatched away before that hereafter come.
Could thou, oh man, assure thy self* the continuance of thy life for a day,
a month, a year, thou might with more pretense of reason defer thy
preparation so long; but Cui sit exploratum Ci^. de S^nect
se ad vesperum esse victurum, says the heathen Orator truly, who can assure
himself he shall live till evening? nay, who can justly promise to himself
the next moment? Be not then so foolish, nay mad, nay Stultum in tali ^ta^u
vivere in quo quis non aud^^ mori. Aug
brutish, as ^o live an hour, a moment in the estate wherein thou would be
loath to dye.

4. That hour, in which men make least account, is commonly the time of the Son
of Man's coming, Be ye therefore ready. Whilst the Croc^dil being asleep
opens his mouth the Indian Rat gets in and cateth up his bowels; whilst
the Theban Sentinel was nodding, Epaminondas came and thrust him through; when
men are secure in their sins, death steals upon them unawares. At what gate
there is the least guard, smallest strength, the besieger makes his onset, and
endeavors entrance: Oh fear, lest in that day death approach to thee,
wherein thou art most regardlesse of death.

5. All the time allotted you before Christ's coming, is little enough for this
great work; Be you therefore always endeavoring to make your selves ready.
Tota vita discendum est vivere, said the Philosopher, we scarce learn to live
well in the whole space of our lives; nay, Tota vita discendum est mori, says
the Divine, our whole life is scarce sufficient to learn the art of dying
well. Were a short prayer, or a single sigh, a God forgive me, or Lord have
mercy upon me, a valid preparation for Christ's coming, the work were easy, and
a little time might dispatch it; but be not deceived, God is not mocked. This
great work is not so facile a task. Do but ask the servants of God, who have
taken much pains, and spent many years in this work, and you shall hear them
complain, that to this day, notwithstanding all their prayers, tears,
fastings, watchings, and struglings, they find themselves very unready for
death; and is it not a wretched presumption in any man, to think he can fit
himself for death, as it were at an hours warning?

6. When the Son of man comes, there will bo no opportunity for the doing of
this work: Be you therefore ready. Likely it is, at the approach of death, many
men w^ll be earnest suitors, in David's words, Oh spare me a little, Psalm. 39.
13.
one month, one week longer; but in vain; their request cannot be granted,
nor the time delayed. Very apt to this purpose is the story of S. Gregory
concerning Greg Dialog. l. 4. c. 38.
and Chrysorius, a man as full of sin as he was of wealth, who on his dying
bed, in a bitter agony of spirit, cried out, Inducias vel usque mane, inducias
vel usque mane, Truce but till the morning, stay but till to morrow; but with
these very words he breathed his last. Christ may sometimes stay long before he
comes, but when he comes he will not stay (...) -- says S. Basil excellently,
learn to be wise by the foolish Virgins Bas. ^om. ^3.
example, for whom the Bridegroom being come, would not stay a moment, and
only they that were ready went in with him to the Marriage.

7. Your preparation for, will be no acceleration of Christ's Math. 25. 10.
coming; and therefore be you ready. It is the fond conceit of many, that if
they think of, and prepare for death, death will presently come to them; upon
which ground it is, that they put off the setting both their house and soul in
order; but let not vain fears beguile thee, thy death is not the nearer, but
only it will be the sweeter, graemeditati mali mollis ictus, the blow will not
come the sooner, but it will be the easier; nay, indeed, by being ready to die,
thou art the fitter to live, and both thy life and thy death will be the more
comfortable.

8. Finally, the Son of Man's coming will be most dismal and exitiall to all
unprepared persons; Be you therefore ready. S. Chrysostom, upon these words
conceives, (...). Chrysostom. in loc. Math. 25. 7. 22. 13.
that Christ representing his coming under the resemblance of a thief, checketh
our ^luggishness, who are less careful to be ready against Christ's, than the
Householders is against the Thiefe's coming, whereas the Housholder's danger is
only the loss of his goods, or money, or jewels, but ours of our precious
souls: Oh, my Brethren, if Christ, when he comes by death, find us
unprepared, woe to us that we were born, our case will be like that of the
foolish Virgins, against whom the door of Heaven was shut, and no entreaty
could prevail for the opening of them; nay, like that of the man, whom when
the King came in, he found at the feast without a wedding garment, who was
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness; yea, like that of the evil
servant in the end of this chapter, when his Lord coming, cut asunder, and
appointed him his portion with the hypocrites, Ver. 15.
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And oh that any, or all of these considerations, might awaken our security,
and quicken our industry. This Son of Man has been pleased to call upon us
often for the performance of this duty: perhaps he will come to some of us
before the next call: Oh then, delay no longer, but be we ready whilst it is
called to day, and whilst this day he vouchsafes to call upon us. It was an
excellent saying of an ancient, when his corrupt heart tempted him to
procrastination, I will make use of the day to repent in, and leave the morrow
to God, so do thou say, Hodie poenitentiam ago, craft^num Deo relinquo.
Apothegm. in Bibl. pat.
Christ may come to morrow, I will be ready for him to day. Thus let the
remainder of out mortal life be a preparation for death, and then our death
shall be a preparation of us for an immortal life.

To close up all, with reference to this doleful occasion, the interring of
our diseased Sisters Corpse.

In respect of her dear friends, I may very well take up the latter part of
this verse, in an hour when they thought not, the Son of Man came to her; yea,
even then, when they seemed to hope and say, the bitterness of death is past,
the danger of her childbearing is over, death seized upon her: But though her
dissolution was at this time unthought of by them, yet I have good reason to
believe it was neither unlooked nor unprepared for by her, partly because as
she, many months before, knew what an hazardous condition she was to pass
through; so charity bids me hope that she made use of that time to provide for
the worst, chiefly because her foregoing life, as to the general tenure of it
was unblameable and virtuous, Et illi mors improvisa, cujus vita f^it provida,
even sudden death cannot be a sad consequent, when a good life was the
antecedent: Her education, no doubt, was religious, being the Daughter of a
reverend Minister, M. Isaac Col^e.
now with God, and her conversation every way corresponding to that education:
Much of her time she employed in the pious services of reading, meditation, and
prayer, not neglecting the public Ordinances, those duties which belonged to
the relations in which God had set her, of a Daughter, a Wife, a Mother, a
Mistress, Sister, Neighbor, Friend, she did not more intelligently know, than
conscienciously perform. In a word, like good Mary, she chose that good part,
whilst her adorning was Luke 10. 4^. ^ Pet. 3. 3, 4.
not that outward adorning of plaiting the hair, wearing of gold, putting on of
apparel, (in which she only regarded decency, not affecting curiosity:) but
to use Tertullian's allusions, Sericum pietatis, byssinum sauctiatis, purpura
pudicitiae, The fine linen of purity, the silk of sanctity, the purple of
modesty; or to follow S. Peter's expressions, The hidden man of the heart, and
the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which as in the sight of God is of
great price; so it was the grace wherein she surpassed most of her sex.

Thus she both lived and dyed like a lamb, lived meekly, and dyed quietly,
lived obediently (in some measure) to Gods commands, and dyed submissively to
Gods decree. Let not then her affectionate consort, and loving allies, mourn
over her grave inordinately: She dyed young indeed, but yet not before her
time, because not before she was ready for death; she was cut down betimes, but
yet not before she was ripe for the harvest. Rather then do you, nay let all of
us here present, think with our selves (to imitate S. Peter's words to
Sapphira) that the feet of them which has brought her to her long home, Acts 5.
9.
are at the door of our houses, to carry us out also, and therefore every one
so to lead our lives, and order our conversations aright, that at what time
soever Christ shall by death approach unto us, his coming may not be unexpected
to us, nor we unprepared for his coming. Amen.

FINIS.

