DIVINITY IN MORTALITY, OR THE GOSPELS EXCELLENCY AND The PREACHERS frailty,
Represented in a SERMON Preached at the Funerals of Mr RICHARD GODDARD late
Minister of the Parish of St GREGORY'S by Paul's; Who died on Thursday the 12th
of May 1653. and was buried on Moonday the 16th day of the same Month.

By NATH. HARDY Master of Arts, and Preacher to the Parish of St Dyonis
Back-Church.

MATTHEW. 13. 52. Every Scribe instructed for the Kingdom of Heaven, is like unto
a man that is an householder, which brings forth out of the Treasure things
new and old. 2 PET. 1. 14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my
Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me. Sacra Scriptura
utilitas Christianorum, Thesaurus Ecclesiae lumen animarum. Ubique in eis
veritas regnat ubique divina virtus irradiat, ubique panduntur humano generi
profutura. Cassiod. div. lect. c. 15, and 16. London, Printed by A.M. for
Nathanael Webb and William Grantham, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Black Bear in St Paul's Churchyard near the little North door. 1653.

Errata.
Page 6. in marg. after (...) read (...). p. 13. in m. for (...) r. (...). p.
15. in m. for prefectam r. productam. p. 17. line 20. after denominateth dele
te. p. 18. l. 5. before Viles, pauperes censu loco humiles, for vitae r. vita.
after labor add communes, men of low estates, mean trades, obscure and
laborious lives. where in the marg. supply Chrysol. c. 28. p. 19. l. 16. r. are
after mentioned. p. 27. l. 28. for innocentia r. innocenter. p. 28. l. 1. pudet
r. pudeat. p. 29. marg. for (...) r. (...). and for (...) r. (...).

To the Worshipful ROGER PRICE Esquire, The upper and the nether Springs of the
Water of Life.
Worthy Sir,
I Well know how unworthy this slender Discourse was of those judicious ears
which vouchsafed it the hearing; and surely cannot but much more judge it
undeserving a public view: So that if (besides friends importunity
persuading) the fear of an abortive birth to have been brought forth by some
unskilful Notary, had not enforced me, it should have been buried in privacy.

Being thus necessitated, and thereupon advised by you and others to this
unwelcome task, I knew not any fitter then your self to whom I should present
this Dedication.

How cordial a welwisher, and forward an incourager you have always been of
the Orthodox Clergy, all that know you will assert, and in particular, what an
ardent affection lodged in your bosom and flamed forth in your expressions
toward your Reverend Minister was abundantly testified both in his life and at
his death, whilst in his life you were one of the first in providing for his
comfortable subsistence, and at his death you took care for his decent burial,
desiring that your house might receive him when dead (which had so often
entertained him alive) from whence he was honorably attended to his grave.

I doubt not but there were many other worthy Gentlemen of your Parish, to whom
this deceased servant of Christ was much engaged; but I hope my ignorance of
their persons will be a sufficient Apology for my silence. With you (Esteemed
Sir) I have had by his means the honor to be acquainted, of whom therefore I
am bold (especially for his sake) to desire the Patronage of this Sermon.

What has suspended the Publication since I last saw you, I am confident you
have already heard; a disease not much unlike that which snatched away our dear
friend, but from which God was graciously pleased to deliver me: Thus is his
wisdom sometimes pleased to let the barren Figtree stand, whilst he plucketh
up the fruitful Vine.

His race is now run, and he is gone to Rest; his work is finished, and he has
in part received his Wages; Weep not for him who is already entered into joy,
rather rejoice, that though he be gone, God has sent you another, one eminent
both for Piety and Learning, in whose converse I doubt not but you will find
much content, and by whose labors I hope you will reap much profit.

And now Sir, I commend you to God, earnestly imploring the continuance and
increase of all external and internal blessings upon you, in your own person,
your dear Consort, aged Father, hopeful children, till at last he crown you
all with eternal happiness. I take my leave and subscribe my self,

Your cordial Friend and Servant, NATH. HARDY.

The Text.
2 COR. 4. the former part of the 7th verse. But we have this Treasure in
earthen Vessels.
(...). Bas. Mag. in Isa. c. 3.
(...). Isid. Pel. 1. ep. 32.
THe loss of a good man, especially a good Minister, and most especially in
bad times, is a just ground of deep sorrow. A faithful Ambassador of Christ is
a common Stock, in which many have a share, a burning Lamp by which many are
enlightened, good reason the exhausting of such a treasury, the quenching of
such a Light, should be matter of doleful complaint. Besides, when Gods wrath
is flaming, who but a Moses should stand in the gap? When horrid impieties are
reigning, who but an Ezekiel should warn the people? And when heresies are
raging, who but a John should defend the truth? And shall it not affect our
hearts with grief, when such as these are taken away? No wonder then if when
Elisha sees Elijah carried away from the earth in a fiery Chariot by a
whirlwinde, he cries out, My Father, my Father, the Charists and the horsemen
of Israel: 2 Kin. 2. 11, 12
Per tales Deus placatur populo populus instruitur Deo Prosp. de vit contempl.
c. ult.
If when Samuel dies all Israel gather together and lament for him: 1 Samuel 25.
1.
Finally, if when the Priests gave up the ghost in Jerusalem, Lam. 1. 19, 20.
the Church utters that mournful sigh, Behold, O Lord, for I am in distress.

This This (Men, Fathers and Brethren) is the sad occasion of this solemn and
sorrowful Assembly. A Cedar is fallen, Zech. 11. 2.
well may the Fir-trees howl; a bright Star is removed from our Horizon, well
may darkness cover this Hemisphere: I could willingly now give scope to mine
and your passion that we might sit down awhile in silence, and only by the
language of our tears speak our sense of this heavy loss. But all passions,
especially that of grief, need rather a Bridle then a Spur. Affected we may,
we ought to be with his death, but as a public, not as a private detriment,
and that not in an extreme but moderate measure. And so much the rather,
considering that it is no new nor rare thing. Your Fathers, where are they? and
the Prophets do they live for ever? is the Prophet Zecharie's Question, putting
it out of Question, Zech. 1. 5.
they do not always live, but are alike with others, subject to mortality, nor
have the Ministers of the New Testament, though employed about a more excellent
Ministration, any greater privilege as to exemption from death then those of
the old, Apostles as well as Prophets are under deaths tyranny: So much St Paul
here intimates, when he says, But we have this Treasure, etc.

Facit hoc propter pseudapostolos quibus hoc erat (...) consueto, ut ex
afflictionibus ipsius argumentum experent vilipendendi ipsius ministerium.
Musc. in loc.
The first word of this Text is But, a But which the Apostle puts upon himself
and fellow-Apostles, yea and all the Ministers of the Gospel. In the foregoing
verses we find him extolling his Ministry, and vindicating his fidelity in
the discharge of it, here he interposeth a But, not a But of scandalous
impiety, this could not be charged upon him by any. Oh that all Ministers lives
were so ordered, as no But of this nature might be deservedly cast upon them.
The But here intended is only a But of natural frailty, humane imbecility, and
the worlds unjust ignominy. These were the things the Apostle well knew the
false teachers would upbraid him and his brethren with, and therefore he
prevents them by a voluntary Concession that so it was, yea fit it was that so
it should be for the advancing of Gods glory, that whilst their message was
honorable themselves should be contemptible, But we have this Treasure in
earthen vessels.

In which words we have a brief yet exact Delineation both of the Gospel and
the Preachers of it, and both by a double Character,

The Gospel is characterized by A Metaphor commending, in the Noun Treasure. A
Term discriminating, in the Pronoun This.
The Preachers of the Gospel are represented by A word of description, in the
Substantive Vessels. A word of diminution, in the Adjective Earthen.

These are as four Keys by which I shall endeavor to unlock the Treasure of
this Text, as four Vents by which the Vessel of this Scripture emptieth its
divine liquor. In the opening of which I shall strive that my Discourse may
keep even pace with the time, I hope your Attention will keep even pace with my
Discourse, and then I doubt not but that through Gods grace we shall be richer
by this Treasure, and these earthen Vessels will help us somewhat nearer to
Heaven. And so I begin with the

Delineation of the Gospel, and therein the

Gener. 1. Partic. 1. Verse. 6. Thesauro Sacramentum significatur, Dei in
Christo, quod fidelibus erogatur, incredulis absconditur. Ambros. and Anselm.
in loc.
De lumine quod illuxerit Deus in cordibus nostris ad illuminatione^ agnitionis
gloriae suae in personae Christi dicit habere nos thesaurum. Tertul. de Resur.
carnis, c. 44.
Metaphor commending, Treasure. To find out the Kernel enclosed in the shell
of this Metaphor, we must consider a threefold reference that may be made of
this word to the preceding.

Some refer it to the end of the former verse, and understand by this
treasure The knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. This is
that which there he compares to Light, and here to Treasure, two Metaphors
though different yet consonant, Light being a most precious Treasure, and as
Treasures are kept, so Lights were wont to be carried in earthen Vessels. And
well may the knowledge of God in Christ be compared to both, for its
resplendency a Light, for its opulency a Treasure, such a Treasure as must be a
Light not locked up in our own breasts, but shining forth to others, such a Light
as is a Treasure of invaluable and incomparable worth. Our Apostle elsewhere
expresses so high an estimation of this knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3. 8.
that he accounts all other things, whether worldly fruitions or Jewish
observances to be (...), not only useless but hurtful so far as they kept him
from Christ, and (...), Suid.
as offals which we throw to our dogs, or (...) quasi (...) those base
excrements which Physicians force out of the body by their purging: things not
to be valued but despised and loathed in comparison of this. And no less is
that value which our blessed Savior himself puts upon it, where he says, This
is life eternal to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have
sent. John 17. 3.
Life is the best Treasure in Nature, Eternal is the best of lives, how great a
Treasure must the knowledge of Christ be which is Life eternal?

verse. 1. Thesaurum vocat munus sibi creditum a Deo hoc est ipsum ministerium
Evangelii. Est. in loc.
Secondly, Others take the reference of Treasure here as remote as that (...)
Ministry, mentioned in the first verse. Indeed the Ministry and Dispensation
of the Gospel is a choice and precious Treasure, upon which account the Apostle
elsewhere calls it, (...) a worthy work. 1 Timothy 3. 1.
A work it is to which is required both Authority and Ability, and therefore in
respect of the former it is an Honor, of the later a Treasure. The old verse
tells us, Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus honores. The Law brings Honor, and
Physic Wealth, but in a divine sense the Ministry has both. A Burden it is
indeed, but withal an Honor. A Labor it is, but withal a Treasure for the
edifying and enriching of the Church. This Treasure Christ keeps under Lock and
Key, only intrusting those with it whom he calls to, and furnishes for it. As
it was the privilege of the Jews above other Nations, that to them were the
Oracles of God committed, Romans 3. 2.
so it is the Prerogative of the Ministers above all other persons, that to
them is committed the Dispensation of these Oracles. By which it appears, that
they are no better then thieves, nay sacrilegious robbers who without immediate
or mediate warrant from Christ assume this trust and break open this treasure.

ver. 3.
Thirdly, I conceive we shall best understand the prime intent and full extent
of this Metaphor, by referring it not so near as the sixth, nor so far as the
first, but to (...) the Gospel, mentioned in the third verse.

Indeed both the other Interpretations are fully included, and may be fitly
reduced to this, since on the one hand that Ministry is principally in respect
of the Gospel: Hence it is that we are called the Ministers of the New
Testament, 2 Cor. 3. 6.
and our Commission is to preach the Gospel, Mark 16. 15.
and the English Tran^lators have not unfitly at once rendered and unfolded
that (...) St Paul speaks of to be the dispensation of the Go^pel, 1 Cor. 9.
17.
for though since Christ came not to destroy but to fulfill, Mat. 5. 17.
we must not suppress but publish the Law, yet our chief errand is to promulge
the glad tidings of Salvation in the Gospel. And on the other hand, it is the
Gospel only that reveals the knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, (...), Gr.
Thaumat. Sermon. 2. in Aununt. B.M.V.
To them that search into the Mine of holy Writ is opened the treasure of the
knowledge of God: And whereas the Creatures lead us to the knowledge of God
the Creator, and the Law declares him as a Judge, only the Gospel manifests
him as a Redeemer, to wit, God in Christ.

The Gospel then is that which St Paul here primarily calls a Treasure. It is
that Metaphor by which Christ himself represents it when he compares the
Kingdom of Heaven to a Treasure hid in a field, Mat. 13. 44.
as it is said to be hid for its mysteriousnesse, so a Treasure for its
preciousnesse. That we may see the fitness of the Metaphor, be pleased to take
a view of the Analogy, and that in two particulars, to wit, the Nature and the
Efficacy of a Treasure, what it is, and what it does.

First, If you enquire into the Nature of a Treasure, that definition may be a
full answer, Thesaurus dicitur multarum rerum pretiosarum cumulatio, A Treasure
is an accumulation of many precious things, Avend. in Mat.
so that there are two things concur to a Treasure, to wit, pretium and copia,
value and plenty, worth in the quality, abundance in the quantity. It is not an
heap of straw or rubbish that makes a Treasure, since though there is plenty,
there is no value; nor is it a single piece of silver or gold that makes a
Treasure; since though there is value there is not plenty, but many bags of
gold and silver, or things of like worth fill up a Treasure. Both of these we
find and meet with in the Gospel, no wonder it is set forth by this
appellation.

1. The Truths and Doctrines contained in it are choice and excellent, as much
worth as our Souls, as Heaven, as Salvation is, nay shall I go higher? look
what worth there is in the riches of Gods grace, Ephesians. 1. 7.
the precious blood of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
that may secondarily be ascribed to the Gospel, which discovers and offers
both to us: no wonder that the Greek Fathers compare the verities of the Gospel
to precious stones, and our Savior to a Pearl of great price, and the Minister
in this respect is called a Merchant of invaluable Jewels. (...). Athan. de
virg. (...) Chrysostom. hom. in Genesis 15. (...). Isid. Pel. l. 1. ep. 146.
If you please to take a view of those several things to which Gods word in
general is compared, and which may much more be applied to the Gospel in
particular, you shall find its worth set forth by a very observable gradation.
The basest metal to which it is compared is silver, and yet that is precious in
comparison of lead or brass or iron; silver refined from its dross is of
far more worth then as it is taken out of the Mine; and it is resembled not
only to silver, but silver purified in the fire seven times; Psalm. 12. 6.
Gold is yet of more value by far then the most purified silver; many pieces
of silver are not aequivalent to one of gold, and yet all gold is not of a like
worth, but this is more desirable then gold, yea then fine gold; Psalm. 12. 6.
19. 10.
Rubies are of more account then gold, and yet the wisdom of this word is more
precious then rubies, nay that whatsoever else is accounted precious, as
Pearls, Diamonds and the like may not be left out, there is annexed a
comprehensive expression, All the things thou can desire are not to be
compared to her. Prove. 3. 14, 15.


2. There is no less variety then excellency in the Gospel, (...); Basil. in
Ps. 44.
the doctrines of it are manifold, and of diverse kinds, yet all profitable:
whatsoever is to be known by us concerning God, Christ, our selves, sin,
Righteousness, Happiness, is here delivered, here are wholesome Counsels of
virtue, righteous precepts of duty, the precious promises of mercy, and the
sweet comforts of the Holy Ghost presented to us. In respect of its Counsels
and Precepts, I may well call it (to use Saint Basils phrase) (...), a
plentiful promptuary of good documents. Basil. in Psalm. 1. (...); Bas. ibid.
(...). Isid. Pol. l. 3. Epist. 338.
What is it (oh Christian, to follow his expressions) thou may not learn
hence? the measure of patience, the manner of penitence, perfection of
prudence, sweetness of temperance, exactness of Justice, and magnanimity of
fortitude? All moral virtues, and all theological graces are both described and
prescribed in the Gospel. In respect of its comforts and promises, I may well
(to use Isidor's comparison) resemble it to a large and pleasant Garden,
replenished with variety of fragrant flowers, yielding as it were an heavenly
Nectar, which will revive the soul in the saddest distress. Whatsoever
Relations of life thou art placed in, here are fit directions to guide thee.
Whatsoever condition of misery thou may be cast into, here are full
consolations to support thee. Well might St Chrysostom say, (...), Chrysostom.
hom. 3. in Genesis
the holy Scripture is an ever overflowing fountain that cannot be drawn dry,
and an inexhausted Treasure that cannot be emptied. To this purpose tend those
resemblances of the Law, made use of by David, and no less justly applicable
to the Gospel, it is not only better then gold and silver, Psalm. 119. 72.
which are things of value, but thousands, which implies abundance, and again
comparing it to all riches 14
and great spoil, 162.
both which contain in them Multiplex genus, all sorts of valuable Commodities,
Sheep, Oxen, Lands, Houses, Garments, Goods, Moneys, and the like; Avend. ibid.
thus are all sorts of spiritual Riches, yea abundance of each sort to be had,
as in the Law, so in the Gospel.

Secondly, As to the Efficacy of a Treasure, what will it not do? The Latin
and our English Proverb both assert this, Pecuniae omnia obediunt, Money
answers all things, especially where there is plenty of it, Food, Raiment,
Lights, Physic, Armor, are all to be purchased by a Treasure. All this is
most true of the Gospel. The Spouse speaking of Christ's lips, says, Cant. 4.
11. Ph. Carpath.
They drop as the honeycomb, In favomel and cera latent, quorum altero
pascimur altera lumen accendimus, sic in sacris literis suavissimus cibus animi
and lumen mentis insunt, As in the honeycomb there is honey to yield nutriment
and wax to give light: So in the Scriptures (chiefly the Evangelical) the soul
has food and the mind light. What an Egyptian King caused to be writ on the
door of a well-furnished Library, (...) is fully verified of the Gospel, whence
may be selected the best, nay the only Receipts to cure a sin-sick person.
Finally, no such Wardrobe as this wherein are to be had the Robes of Christ's
Righteousness, and the Ornaments of the Spirits Graces: no Armoury like to
this, where all both offensive and defensive weapons against our spiritual
enemies are to be found. In a word, what ever the wants of a Christian are he
may by the Gospel find a suitable supply, very justly then does this Metaphor
of a Treasure belong to it. But yet this is not all that concerns the Gospels
excellency: as there is an Analogy, so there is a Discrepancy, as in these the
Gospel and a Treasure do agree, so there want not other things wherein the
Gospel does far exceed all Treasures; to which end cast your eyes on the

2. Term discriminating, Non simpliciter thesaurum, sed hunc inquit thesaurum
habemus, Musc. in loc.
he does not barely say, we have [ A] but emphatically [ This] Treasure, to
intimate that the Treasure of the Gospel is far different from and
transcendent above all other Treasures, which that it may the better appear,
take notice of the Antithesis in these several particulars.

1. Other Treasures are from below, this is from above, those are dig'd out of
the Bowels of the Earth, this is sent from Heaven; what are gold and silver but
white and yellow earth? the sands and the rocks are the habitation of pearls
and jewels, but the things of the Gospel are, and therefore so fitly called by
our Savior heavenly things. Joh. 3. 12.


2. Other Treasures are transient and perishing; St Peter's epithete is,
corruptible gold and silver; 1 Pet. 1. 18.
Solomon's observation is, that riches take them wings and flee away; Prove. 23.
5.
and therefore as they are got with care and kept with fear, so many times lost
with grief; but this Treasure is lasting and permanent, the truth of it
inalterable, the goodness of it unchangeable, hence it is called the good part
which cannot be taken away, Luke 10. 42.
the meat which perishes not; John 6. 27.
and the word of the Lord that endures for ever. 1 Pet. 1. 25.


3. Other Treasures are only of corporal use for the profit, comfort and
support of the Body, and therefore it is they cannot make the possessour either
wise or holy or happy. But this Treasure enricheth the soul with wisdom and
knowledge, grace and holiness, whereby it becomes a means of happiness to
him that enjoys it, by this it is the mind is enlightened, the will
inclined, the affections composed, the conscience quieted, and the inward man
renewed.

4. Other Treasures though virtually they procure several comforts, yet
formally and in their own nature they are but a remedy against poverty. Gold
and silver in themselves have no feeding or clothing or defending virtue, nor
do they certainly and constantly procure those necessaries: Sometimes food is
not to be had for money, nor is silver always a defense. And yet further
though it may get the things, yet it cannot give an efficacy to them, it may
buy food but not a stomach, Physic but not health, Clothes but not warmth,
Armor but not safety, Lights but not eyes: Whereas this Treasure is in its own
nature all these, and assuredly brings strength, wealth, ease, safety, and
all spiritual blessings to them that enjoy it, it is such a Treasure as is
withal an oracle in doubts, a shield against assaults, a Counselor in
prosperity, a Comforter in adversity, a light in darkness, and a refuge in
danger.

5. Other Treasures often times become destructive to the possessors, it was a
sore evil Solomon saw under the Sun, namely riches kept for the owners thereof
to their hurt, Eccles. 5. 13.
indeed both temporal and spiritual hurt accrueth frequently to men by their
treasure; the golden Ring has sometimes lost the finger, and the bag of money
exposed the traveller to danger; yet more often do treasures become nurses of
vice, panders to lust, incentives of wickedness, and the mammon of
unrighteousness, whereby they ruin the soul, and take away the life of the
owners; Prove. 1. 19.
in this respect it is that Salvian says excellently of covetous men,
perituris simul atque perdentibus student nundinis, Salv. contr. Avarit. l. 1.
they eagerly busy themselves in those merchandises which are not only
perishing in their own nature, but destroy the possessors, whereas this
Treasure is altogether beneficial to them that enjoy it; indeed accidentally
it proves pernicious, becoming to some a savor of death, 2 Cor. 2. 16.
but this is only to the rejecters and contemners, not to the receivers and
possessors of it; If our Gospel be hid, says the Apostle in this Chapter, it
is hid to them that are lost, verse. 3.
and if any be lost to whom the Gospel comes, its they from whom its hid by
the devil and their own corruption blinding their eyes that they see not its
worth, and thereby perverting their wills that they refuse its embraces; but to
them that believe and do it, it is a savor of life, a wellspring of comfort, a
means of their eternal welfare.

Finally, Other Treasures may have the image of a King stamped upon them, such
that coin which had Caesar's superscription, but this has the image of God and
Christ imprinted on it, being therefore called the Gospel of God, Romans 1. 1.
and the Word of Christ, Col. 3. 16.
other Treasures are the blessings of Gods left hand; so it is said of riches
and honors, but this is a blessing of Gods right hand; Prove. 3. 16.
so it is said of the fiery Law, Deuteronomy. 33.
and much more is it true of the Gospel: How much the right hand excels the
left, so much this surpasses all riches. In a word, other Treasures make the
poor rich, but this (...), makes of mortal immortal, of men in some sense
Gods. Just. Mart. ad ^u. adhort. 2^.
And now upon all these considerations the surpassing worth of this Treasure
cannot but appear: So as we may truly say, Not all the Silks of Persia, Linen
of Egypt, Spices of Arabia, Silver of the West, Gold of the East, Precious
stones of both the Indies, are severally, nay jointly able to equalize it. Well
may this note of difference be annexed This treasure.

What therefore remains but that every one of us labor to have the same
esteem of the Gospel, which St Paul had, and which indeed it deserves?

1. Let us account it our Treasure, and let that appear by doing in reference
to the Gospel, as men do by Treasure.

How vehement and active are covetous men's desires after Treasure! they spare
no pains to get, nor have they ever enough of it, in their longings they are
unsatiable, in their labors indefatigable. Such let our desires be after the
knowledge of, and acquaintance with Evangelicall truths: Let us not be
satisfied without, no nor yet with the Gospel, but as we have it let us strive
to have it more abundantly, according to that Apostolical precept, Let the
Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all knowledge and wisdom. Col. 3. 16.


Besides, what care have men to lay up their Treasure, when they have got it?
The Greek word in its Etimology signifies as much, (...) quasi (...), and in
the Hebrew (...) a (...) abscondit, the nown for Treasure comes from a verb
that signifies to hide, there being nothing men more secretly and carefully
lay up then their Treasures, yea what content do they take in viewing and
recounting their bags, Populus me sibilat at mihi plaudo ipse domi, said he in
the Poet, The covetous wretch whilst scorned abroad pleases himself at home
in his heaps of wealth. So let us lay up the Gospel in the Cabinet of our
souls, and take delight in meditating upon the divine Truths contained in it,
yea whilst we meet with reproach and persecution from the world, let us solace
our selves in the fruition of this Treasure. Herein let David's practice toward
the Law of the Lord be our pattern in that excellent Psalm, wherein he
expresses a singular regard to Gods testimonies, The words of thy mouth are
better to me then thousands of gold and silver: Psalm. 119. verse. 72.
and again, My hands will I lift up to thy Commandments which I have loved, and
I will meditate on thy Statutes: 48.
and again, I have hid thy word in my heart, that I might not sin against thee:
11.
and once more, I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in
all riches. 14.


2. Since the Gospel is not only comparatively a Treasure, but superlatively
this Treasure, let our estimation and affection toward it have a This upon it,
beyond that we have or any can have to other Treasures. Indeed beloved, though
this Treasure so far exceed all others, yet well were it if our love to it did
equalize that to others; the truth is, though it is far beyond, yet the most
men's valuation of it is far short. What a shame is it that by us who call our
selves Christians, earth should be preferred before Heaven, the world before
Christ, gold before the Gospel? Oh let us blow up the fire, whet the edge,
quicken the dullness of our spiritual affection, that if possible, it may not
only parallel, but outvie our earthly desires, and with that wise Merchant in
the Gospel, we may sell all we have to buy this Pearl.

And so much be spoken of the first part, the Character here given to the
Gospel: I now pass on to those by which

Gener. 2. Party. 1. (...) (...). Vox apud Hebraeos and Graecos ponitur pro
quovis instrumento. Loc. in Act. 9. 15.
The Preachers of the Gospel are represented, and therein the Word of
description, Vessels.

The word both in Hebrew and Greek is many times taken in a large acception for
Instrumentum an utensill in an house, or any thing that is used as the
instrument of accomplishing any work, and so the Hebrew word is rendered, where
we read of the instruments of cruelty, and the instruments of death, Genesis 45.
5. Psalm. 7. 13.
and in this sense it is true of the Ministers, they are instruments in the
hand of Christ for the great work of gathering his Church; but most properly it
signifies receptaculum, an instrument of containing any thing, and in this
sense it may be here fitly construed, nor do there want fit resemblances in
which the messengers of Christ are like to Vessels: More particularly in these
four respects.

1. Vessels are not natural but artificial instruments: Nature affords the
materials, but Art and Industry produce the Form by which it has the Capacity
of a Vessel. It is no less true of Ministers, Nemo nascitur Christianus, no man
is born a Christian, much less a Minister: Indeed ex quovis ligno non fit
Mercurius, there must be natural parts in them that undertake this Function,
but those are not sufficient: And therefore in the first Plantation of the
Church, God did by immediate Inspiration, and the Collation of extraordinary
gifts, enable men for the discharge of this Office, and afterward in the
growth and progress of the Church; That Inspiration ceasing, so as no more to
be expected, there was and still ought to be a training up of youth in the
Tongues, Arts and Sciences, and after that a great deal of Industry (joined
with ardent Prayer) in the study of the Scriptures and Theological verities by
them that take upon them this sacred Calling. The truth is, whatever account
the men of this age make of a Ministers work, yet it is so weighty and divine
an employment, that no small time and pains must be spent in preparation for
it. And if St Paul, whom Christ calls a chosen vessel, Act. 9. 15.
and accordingly in a singular measure, not only above other Ministers, but
Apostles, fitted for this service, cried out, (...); Who is sufficient for
these things? 2 Cor. 2. 16.
How justly reprovable is their rashness, who whilst they can lay no just
claim to an immediate inspiration, suddenly and unpreparedly enter upon this
high employment? Indeed such as these there have been in former times, who are
called by Leo, Momentanei Sacerdotes, Leo apud Great. did. 48.
and Gregory Nazianzen styles (...), Gr. Naz. or. 29 Justinian.
such as in a day, a moment turned Priests. Modo idiota mox Clericus, now
Laics and anon Clerks. But what swarms of such extemporary and illiterate
Preachers abound in this age, who to use that elegant Fathers expression, Owe
more sacrifices for their own, then the peoples ignorances; and as those Romans
of old called Cincinnati were advanced A stiva and aratro ad dictatores, from
the plough to be Dictators, so these skip from the shopboard to the Pulpit.
(...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 21.


It was a sad but just complaint, and too suitable to our times that Gregory
Nazianzen took up in his days, (...). Gr. Naz. Orat. 20.
No man is accounted a Physician that has not first studied the natures of
diseases, nor a Painter that has not been exercised in drawing of lineaments,
and laying on of colors, but Preachers are found easily such as have never
bestowed time or taken pains in preparing themselves for that service. Oh how
shall the very Heathen rise up at the last day and condemn the men of this
generation! Plutarch tells us that the Virgins which were to attend Diana's
Temple, were for many years brought up as it were in a School, and called
(...), such as should administer sacred Rites, and then being sufficiently
instructed they were called (...), admitted to their divine mysteries, and
afterward they became (...) Instructers of others. Surely if the light of
nature taught them to use so much care in educating those who were to perform
the worship of a false Goddess, how shameful is the blindness of those
Christians who think some natural abilities of memory and elocution sufficient
to qualify a Priest of the true and most high God.

2. Vessels are not all of equal capacity, some are less, others greater;
several trades have vessels of diverse sizes: So is it among Ministers, both in
respect of Offices and Gifts. In the beginning of Christianity there were some
Apostles, some Prophers, some Evangelists, and soon after there were some
Bishops, some Priests, some Deacons, and this variety of Orders has ever
conduced much to the unity, harmony and beauty of the Church. This diversity is
no less apparent in regard of gifts, all have not alike abilities, nor are
equally fitted for this sacred Employment; there is indeed a (...) competency
of gifts which every one attaineth to whom God calls to this Work: but though
all have some yet not the same gifts, as St Paul puts the question, intending
thereby a negation, Are all Apostles, are all Prophets? 1 Cor. 12. 29.
So may I say in this, All are not Chrysostom's and Chrysologuse's for golden
mouthed Oratory, all are not Epiphaniuse's and Augustine's for Confutation of
Heresies; all are not like Hierome for skill in languages, and Athanasius for
profound knowledge: God who is a most free Agent dispenses endowments
variously according to the pleasure of his own Will: Some with Elisha have a
double portion of Eliah's spirit, yea with Benjamin, their mess is five times
bigger then their brethren, whilst he gives to others with a more sparing and
narrow hand. The Ministers of the Gospel are elsewhere resembled to Stars, Rev.
1. 20.
and among others for this reason, as all Stars are not of the same magnitude
nor of the same luster, so is it in the Firmament of the Church, One Star
differs from another in glory, 1 Cor. 15. 41.
and one Minister from another in Gifts. Cant. 3. 7. 10.
I shut up this with Gregory Nissen his observation concerning Solomon's
Chariot, the pillars whereof were silver, the botome gold, and the covering
purple; Gr. Niss. hom. 7 in Cant.
which that Father applies to the Church, and by the several parts thereof
understands (...) the Preachers of the Word, some whereof have golden, others
silver, others purple Gifts, of different degrees and excellencies.

3. Vessels are not the originals of what they have, but it is poured into and
received by them. The Well has a Spring in it that yields the water, but the
Cistern must have it conveyed into it. The Mines have the Treasure in their own
bowels, but it is put into the Chest. The parallel holds in the Preachers of
the Gospel, who are not the Authors but only the Receivers of those Truths they
publish* What St Paul says of himself, is true of every faithful Minister, I
have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you. 1 Cor. 11. 23.
To this purpose it is observable that the Hebrew word which we render report
(...) Isa. 53. 1.
properly signifies hearing, intimating that we must first hear from God
before we speak to men, and speak nothing but what we hear. In reference to
this it is that the Bishops in Clements Constitutions are called (...) the
Receivers and Proclaimers of Gods Word. Non a seipso sed ab eo qui cum mittit
legatus loquitur. Velacq. in Phil.
Among other resemblances Preachers are compared to Ambassadors, 2 Cor. 5. 20.
and as the Ambassador speaks not from himself, but that message his Prince
puts into his mouth, so must every Messenger of God. Excellently to this effect
Vincentius Lirenensis occasionally treating of that of St Paul to Timothy, Keep
the good thing committed to thee. 2 Timothy 1. 14.
It is committed to thee, not to be invented by thee, What thou have received,
not what thou have fancied. Not framed by thy own wit, but taught by another;
of which thou art not an author but a keeper, in which not a leader but a
follower; Quid est depositum, id est, quod tibi creditum est non quod a te
inventum, quod accepisti non quod excogitasti, rem non ingenii sed doctrinae,
non usurpationis privatae sed publicae traditionis, rem, ad te profectam non a
te prolata^, in qua non author debes esse sed custos, non institutor sed
sectator non ducens sed sequens. Vinc. Lyr. adv. haer cap. 27.
so was Timothy, so is every Minister in respect of divine truths. I close up
this with that expression of the Apostle to the Corinthians, God makes
manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place: 2 Cor. 2. 14.
We manifest the savor, but it is of his knowledge, to wit that knowledge we
receive from him, (...), Occumen. in loc.
says Oecumenius aptly upon the place. The incense is heavenly, we are only as
the Censors that contain it, and carry about the savor of it.

4. Vessels are not only for reception, but effusion, as they receive and
retain, so they let out what is put into them; yea the vessel receives for
this end, not only that it may keep, but that it may part with its liquor; such
ought the Ministers of the Gospel to be, not only conchae, but canales, Condi,
but Promi shells to retain, but Pipes to convey the divine Nectar, Layers up but
layers out of this heavenly treasure. The Apostle speaking of the ordinary
Ministers, describes them by two Titles, the one metaphorical, the other
proper, to wit Pastors and Teachers, the latter of which, says St Augustine,
is annexed, Vt intelligerent Pastores ad Officium suum pertinere doctrinam,
Aug. Ep. 59.
that Pastors may know it is a chief part of their Office to teach and instruct
the people. The stomach receives not food for it self, but to nourish the
body, The Steward money to employ for his own use only, but to provide for the
family; and the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man, especially
Ministers, to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12. 7.
This Treasure is a depositum, a trust committed, and that for uses, and those
not private but public; this light is communicated not to be hid under a
bushel, but for the illumination and consolation of them that are in the
house. It was Christ's promise to his Apostles to give them os and sapientiam, a
mouth and wisdom: Luc. 21. 15.
What a vessel is without a vent, that is wisdom without a mouth. Wisdom that
is hid and a treasure not seen, what profit is in them both? Wisd. 20. 30.
Indeed a mouth without wisdom may prove pernicious, and wisdom without a mouth
cannot be profitable, Christ's Ministers have both, Wisdom in themselves, and a
mouth to instruct others.

And so much the more reason have those vessels to communicate this treasure,
because it is not impaired by imparting. Indeed this is another excellency
wherein this treasure transcends all earthly treasures; these waste by
spending, this is not at all diminished by distributing. As the seal makes an
impression on the wax. The fire conveyeth the heat into iron. One candle
lights many without any loss of figure, heat or light; so the communicating
of this treasure will enrich others without impoverishing our selves: Here is
no place for that allegation of the Virgins, Not so, least there be not enough
for you and us: Matthew. 25. 9.
Never any had the less knowledge himself, by teaching others: Nay the truth
is this Treasure absconsione minuitur, communicatione multiplicatur, Cassiod.
in Ep.
is lessened by hiding, multiplied by imparting; like the widows oil in the
vessel, that increased by pouring out, that being ever verified, To him that
has shall be given. Matthew. 25. 29.
And thus in all these respects are Preachers fitly compared unto vessels.

Quo in plures diffunditur eo redundantior manat. Ambr. 2. Offic. cap. 15.
The Use of this particular is that which concerns my Reverend Brethren of
the Clergy, that they seek by prayer, and labor to be more and more fitted for
their Function, that those of meaner gifts do not envy them that have greater,
nor they that have greater, despise those that have meaner; that they deliver
nothing but what they have received from above. Ambr. 2. off. cap. 15.
Finally, that they hide not their talents in a napkin, but lay out their parts
and strength for the peoples good.

But it is not fit for me, who am minimus Apostolorum, to be your instructor,
besides I doubt not your piety and wisdom has already prevented my discourse
in your meditations, and therefore I pass on to the

Partic. 2.
Word of diminution, Earthly, One has well observed the elegancy of the
Antithesis, Thesauri pretium opponit vilitati involucri, What more precious
then this treasure? What more vile then earthen vessels? Indeed the
Candlesticks by which as generally the Churches, so eminently the Bishops of
those Churches are to be understood, are said to be golden, and yet here these
vessels are called earthen; both may well stand together, Golden in respect of
the solidity of their doctrine, purity of their conversation, and yet earthen
in regard of the frailty of their condition.

The chief Question to be discussed is, Upon what grounds the Apostle thus
denominateth to himself and his fellow labors. To which a threefold Answer
may well be and is returned by Interpreters.

The term of earthen is fastened by St Paul upon the Ministers, Respectu
status, personae, corporis, in respect of their state, persons and bodies, the
two former more special relating to the Apostles, though too often verified in
several ages of their Successors; the last more general, as being common to
all the Messengers of God, that have been are or shall be.

Non illustres sed humiles, and nullis humanae potentiae, fortunae,
praerogativis spectabiles. Musc. in loc.
In regard of their state, which is for the most part mean and low in the
world, Golden and Silver vessels are of worth and price, but earthen are of
little or no value, such is the usual condition of Gods Messengers who are
frequently exposed to want and penury. Instances in this kind are numerous,
and that in most eminent Worthies, Gregory Nazianzen says of St Basil, that
he had only what was necessary for his sustentation, and (...), his riches was
to have nothing. St Augustine who was rich to Religion, to the Church, yet was
poor to himself, and therefore when he died, he made (...). Gr. Naz. or. 20
no Will, since as Possidius says of him, Vnde conderet pauper Christi non
habebat, The poor Saint had nothing whence he should lay up an estate. St
Cyprian whose life was golden, death purple, manners precious, yet his estate
was low. Christ's own Disciples were poor Fishermen, Viles art, obscuri vitae
labor. Nay St Paul himself was no other then a Tent-maker, a Trade that could
not enrich him, yea beholding to alms for his supply. Thus as the poor receive
the Gospel, so they that publish it are many times poor and low; not that thus
it ought to be, as the opinion of too many in our days is, who would have
Ministers live like beggars, upon benevolence, and account it a prudent policy
to keep them poor. St Paul (though upon special grounds he was pleased to
condescend to that way of livelihood) yet asserts maintenance to be the
Ministers due, and this not narrow, but ample and honorable; what else means
that character, which, among others, he gives of the Ministers in the
Epistles, both to Timothy and Titus, that they should be lovers of, 2 Timothy 3. 2.
yea given to hospitality, Tit. 1. 8.
since it is no small competency of estate, which besides both the present and
future provision for his family, will enable a man to be hospitable. But yet
thus most usually it falls out, through the impiety and iniquity of men, that
the Preachers of the Gospel are necessitous and indigent, earthen vessels. It
is that therefore which they should make account of, not to be great or rich in
this world, comforting themselves with this meditation, that their reward is
with the Lord.

2. In regard of their Persons: Earthen vessels being little worth are light
set by, whiles golden and silver vessels are locked up safely, and only used
for the entertainment of special guests: Earthen vessels stand in open places,
are used by every servant, nay many times are trampled under foot; so is it
with the Preachers of the Gospel, they are viles, abjecti hominum estimatione,
base and despised in the eyes of wicked men. Est. in loc. Lap. in loc.
Our blessed Savior speaking to his Disciples, calls them a little flock,
though they were to be Shepherds of the people, yet they were a flock in
respect of Christ. But why a little flock? Surely not only in respect of
quantity but quality; let Chrysologus give the reason, Chrysolog. Sermon. 22.
Grex pusillus mundo, magnus Deo. A Flock great indeed in Christ's, but little
in man's eyes. Chosen vessels they are by God, but rejected by the world; and to
use the Prophet Jeremies expression, Vessels wherein there is no pleasure. Jer.
22. 11.
What that Emperor Fredrick the 3d said concerning Kings, An nescitis
principes quasi signum populo expositos? do you not know that they are often
times as a gazing stock to the people? may as truly be affirmed of Ministers.
The Prophet Isaiah uses an expression not much unlike, concerning himself and
the children God gave him, that they were for signs and wonders in Israel:
Isa. 8. 18.
Nor did Eliah, Elisha, Micaiah, Jeremy and the other Prophets fare any better
then he, in the places where they prophesied, but were mocked, misused and
despised by the sons of Belial among whom they lived. What entertainment the
Apostles found let St Paul speak, We are made as the filth of the world, and
are the offscouring of all things to this day. (...). 1 Cor. 4. 13.
Both the words there are mentioned by the late learned Expositor, Dr Hammond
on the New Testament.
referred to the same thing, and were used among the Grecians, concerning that
refuse, vile person which was picked out to be a lustration for a City in a
public calamity, of whom they said when they had burnt him, and cast the
ashes into the sea, (...); thus contemptible and odious was St Paul and the
other faithful messengers of Christ in the Jews and Heathens esteem. Should I
trace the footsteps of Ecclesiastical History, I might tell you how Cyprian
was nicknamed Coprian, Athanasius Sathanasius, and still they that have been
most Orthodox and zealous Preachers, have met with the greatest despite and
opposition from heretical, schismatic and profane persons. But I need not
seek for instances abroad, when there are so many at home. Indeed we may
remember those Halcion days when both Wealth and Honor attended those who
serve at the Altar, and the Clergy (as they ought to be) were accounted worthy
of, and accordingly received double honor. But at this day how does sad
experience verify, that the Priests are made the lowest of the people! That
complaint of the Church may most justly now be taken up, They regard not the
person of the Priests. Lam. 4. 16.
Yea, as if some new Cadmus had sown the earth with Saul's teeth, and Shimei's
tongue, they belch out contumelies against Gods Ministers. Many of these
Vessels, and those most accomplished for this sacred service, are laid aside
as useless, rejected as worthless, and tantum non only not dashed in pieces.
Nay to that height of impiety are many come, that not only our persons are
despicable, but our very Function is contemptible in their eyes. Oh that such
would consider how near they strike at God himself. (...), Ignat. Epist. ad
Smyrn.
says Ignatius truly, which we may English by that of our Savior, He that
despises you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent
me. Luc. 10. 16.
Nor let my Brethren of the Clergy be too much discouraged because
disregarded: It was a notable speech of the Philosopher Aristippus.
to one that reproached him, Tu proferendis ego perferendis injuriis idoneus,
let us be as ready to bear, as they forward to cast disgrace upon us. Cast your
eyes on the two next verses to my text, verse. 8, 9.
and observe St Paul's heroical expressions, such indeed as well befit a
Minister of the Gospel, We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed,
perplexed, but not in despair, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down, but not
discouraged: Though our persons be as earthen vessels in the worlds estimation,
and so used or rather abused, yet let not our spirits like earthen vessels be
broken by any affliction, nay rather remember what Christ said to his Disciples
in the like case, Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
heaven, and so persecuted they the Prophets which were before, Matthew. 5. 12.
you are come in their stead, and therefore must expect their usage, and it is
a comfort you do but pledge them in that cup of which they have drank to you
before, you do but follow them in that way which they have tracked already, so
persecuted they the Prophets, yea and the Apostles too, in which regard they
are here called Earthen vessels.

3. Lastly, This Epithete earthen is annexed to these vessels, the Preachers of
the Word, in reference to their bodies, as their mean condition, base
estimation; so their bodily constitution proclaims them earthen, this is that
which is common to Ministers with the people, since though in regard of their
Calling they are prae aliis far before others, yet in this respect they are
sicut caeteri, such as others.

1. Thus their bodies are earthen because formed of the dust of the earth,
Testacea secundum originem, Tertull.
so Tertullian, Earthly in their Original, upon which ground they are called
houses of clay, Job 4. 19.
the inhabitant indeed is heavenly, but the body earthy: Vas fictile nil aliud
quam lutum igne coctum, as earthen vessels, so are our bodies fashioned out of
clay. Lap. in loc.


2. Again, as earthen vessels are subject to flaws and cracks, yea to breaking
in pieces, so are our bodies liable to sicknesses, diseases, till at last by
death they fall and are broken in pieces. In this respect the Apostle Paul,
calling the body an earthen house, 2 Cor. 5. 1.
adds presently, be dissolved. To this purpose is Grotius his Paraphrase, In
corpore multis malis obnoxio quod facile frangitur, Grot. in loc.
we have this Treasure in bodies subject to many evils, and at last to a
dissolution. This construction is that which both the Greek and Latin Fathers
generally take it in. Among the Greeks, St Chrysostom speaks very fully to
this sense, (...), Chrysostom. in loc.
he uses this term of earthen to denote the mortality of our nature, infirmity
of our flesh, which by diseases and a thousand other accidents is exposed to
death, and so dissolution. Among the Latins St Ambrose speaks to the same
effect, Fictilia vasa dicens infirmitatem naturae significat, Hier. and Theoph.
in loc.
the weakness of our nature is signified by the earthen vessel, and therefore
St Jerome explaineth it by the term fragilis; and Theophylact by the word (...)
they are frail mortal bodies we carry about with us: and as earthen vessels
are easily, suddenly broken asunder, one fall on the ground in a moment dasheth
them in pieces; so are the bodies of Gods Ministers subject to a speedy and
sudden dissolution, whereby they become unserviceable to the Church. Indeed in
one thy ng there is a difference, earthen vessels when they break, break
irrecoverably, so as the pieces cannot be reunited; but the bodies of the
Saints and faithful Ministers of Christ, though they moulder into dust, shall
at the last day be repaired, refined and made gloriously beautiful. They
differ then in the consequent of the breaking, but in the breaking it self they
agree, and therefore fitly are our bodies called earthen vessels.

The Greek word here used (...) is derived from (...), which properly
signifies the shell of a fish, and in this sense (as critical Interpreters
observe) Grot. in loc Dr Hammond in loc
it agrees with the matter in hand, it being ordinary to lay up those things we
value in shells or boxes and cabinets made of such: and withal those shells in
regard of there brittleness are apt resemblances of our bodies. The Platonists
who fancy two bodies, one more spiritual, which they call (...) the Chariot
that carries the soul in it; the other more gross, that which we see and
feel, call this latter (...), because it is in their opinion as a shell which
has a finer body within it: This being but a fancy I leave it, the true reason
of this expression, whether you render it shells or earthen vessels is, because
as these so the body is of a frail nature, easily and quickly destroyed, nor
have the bodies of Ministers any greater privilege then others: We that preach
eternal life are dying men, yea whilst the word of life is in our mouths, many
times death is in our faces. This Wolf will not only worry the sheep but the
shepherd: This enemy will not only set upon the soldiers but the Captain: This
Plunderer will seize upon the Crown and the Mitre, the Scarlet and the Rochet:
and as at Chess when the game is done not only the pawns, but the Bishops, yea
King and Queen are tumbled down and put into the bag: so not only mean and
vulgar persons, but Princes and Priests fall down by death into the grave; and
as Judges, though they be shields of the earth, are but earthen shields; Psalm.
47. 9.
so Ministers though vessels that carry this Treasure, yet are but earthen
vessels.

1. A necessary Caution.
To wind up this in a word of Caution and Exhortation.

Do not think the worse of, or value the Treasure the less because brought in
an earthen vessel. It is that folly, yea wickedness of which too many are
guilty, who because they are men that speak to them, think the message is not
Gods, measureing the worth of the treasure by the meanness of that which
conveyeth it; But tell me, I beseech you, will any man value gold the less,
because brought to him in a leathern purse; or slight a precious pearl, because
found on a dirty dunghill? and why then should the Gospel be undervalued
because they are mortal men that Preach it?

The truth is we have cause to admire and bless both the power and the goodness
of God, his power which by such weak means accomplisheth so great a work;
indeed as the Apostle here tells us for this reason the treasure is in such
vessels, that the excellency of the power might be of God, his goodness which
is pleased to lay it up in such vessels that it may be the easier come by, to
speak to us by men like our selves with whom we familiarly converse; he could
if he had pleased have put this treasure in heavenly vessels, used the Ministry
of Angels, but we could not have received it so comfortably from them; so that
in reference to us God is pleased to make men the instruments of publishing the
Gospels mysteries, and as it is his merciful condescension that he is pleased
to deliver heavenly truths in earthly similitudes, so is it no less that he
makes them known by earthly men.

And to carry it a little further, let us be so far from despising this
treasure because of the vessel, as not only to bless God who has put it into
such vessels, but to honor the vessel because of the treasure. Vtrumne quia
testacea est secundum originem scilicet ex limo destruetur, an quia divini
thesauri conditorium est extolletur? Tertull. de Resur. cor. c. 44.
says Tertullian rationally. Shall the vessel be cast by because it is
earthly, or shall it not rather be preferred because it is the repository of a
choice treasure? Let me therefore beseech you in St Paul's words to the
Thessalonians, to know them which labor among you and to esteem them very
highly in love for their works sake, 1 These. 5. 12, 13.
measure them not by their frail natures but their honorable employment, not
by what they find from the world, but by what they deserve; they are earthen,
adore them not as Gods, but the treasure they bring is heavenly, honor them as
men of God, let not the treasure be contemned for the vessels sake, but the
vessels be esteemed for the treasures sake.

2. The word of exhortation concerns

1. Partly us who are of the Clergy, that we follow the pattern which our Lord
and Master has set us where he says, I must work the work of him that sent me
whilst it is day, the night comes when no man can work. Jo. 9. 4.
Oh let us break this bread of life before we be broken by death, burn and
shine in doctrine and conversation before our Lamp be put out; do all the good
we can by imparting this treasure, before our earthly house of this Tabernacle
be dissolved, But I hope there is not much need to enlarge in this.

2. Partly you who are of the Laity, that you learn

1. To make much of your conscientious painful Ministers: the more precious
the liquor, and the more brittle the vessel, the more chary are men of it. Oh
how tender should you be of them who, though weak creatures, bring the glad
tidings of salvation to you? A friend that comes to us but cannot stay long
with us, how much is he made of, and how freely entertained by us, and will you
have no regard of those who are both yours and the bridegrooms friends? and ere
long must be taken from you? Nay let me tell you, no readier way to hasten
their removal then your disregard, nor will God long continue his Candlesticks
among that people, who do not prize them and their light.

2. Make use of them, and get all the good you can from them whilst they live:
If one have borrowed a book which ere long must be returned to the owner, how
diligent is he in picking and transcribing what notes he can out of it: We are
but lent you for a time, and that during the good pleasure of God. As Christ
said to his Disciples, so may we to you, Us you shall not have always with
you: Mar. 4. 17.
Oh suck all the knowledge you can from our lips whilst we are able to speak
to you, and hear us every day as if it were to be the last day you should hear
us.

And truly never more need of practicing this duty then now, not only because
Ministers are earthen vessels, that is subject to mortality, but because they
are earthen, that is despised in these times, and who knows how far God may
permit the malice of wicked men to proceed, it may be to the breaking, or if
not, yet to stopping the vent of these vessels. The mouths of your Ministers
must in a few years be stopped with dust when they are laid in the grave, it
may be before that they may be silenced from public Preaching the Gospel: Oh
therefore be wise to improve the present opportunities God puts into your
hands! Suck the milk of instruction from the breasts of these nurses, whilst
they are able to give it you: Buy the oil of consolation from these spiritual
Merchants, whilst they can sell it you; do as the Egyptians, who when Nilus
overfloweth the banks, dig pits to put water in, that they may have supply when
it shall return to its channel. Do as the shellfish, which takes in moisture
whilst the tides flow in upon them, that may preserve them when it ebbeth, and
leaves them dry. Finally, do as Joseph, who in the years of plenty laid up
store against the famine came. Oh be diligent to fill the vessel of your hearts
with that divine treasure which these vessels yield, against the time when you
may, nay must be deprived of them; they can instruct, exhort and comfort no
longer then life, you have no assurance of their lives, they have none of their
own, how long they shall continue; nay indeed, both they and you are assured
they cannot continue long, being but earthen vessels, mortal men.

But we have this Treasure in earthen vessels.

A doleful instance of this Scriptures verity we have in the sad occasion of
this days solemnity: the death of this faithful Minister of Christ,
affectionate Son of the Church, vigilant Shepherd of his people, Mr Richard
Goddard, whose livelesse dust lies before us, and now my Discourse like a
circle is returned to the Point where I began, our deceased brother, whose
loss is deservedly to be lamented, and Worth highly to be commended.

Indeed should I have fulfilled his modest desire, his name and virtues must
have been buried in oblivion as well as his body in a grave: But had I in this
satisfied his will, I must have been at once injurious to Gods honor, his
memory, and others profit, since by paying the tribute of praise to Gods dear
servants, we advance Gods glory, perpetuate their remembrance, and add spurs
to the pious endeavors of those who survive.

I could heartily have wished that this double task both of speaking to so
Reverend and Worthy an Assembly, and of so choice and eminent a person, had
been imposed on some one of these many silver Trumpets whom I have now in my
eye; but the undeserved respects of my dear friend by Will put me upon the one,
and his superlative merit and my due regard to his Name, though it be against
his will, obliges me to the other.

I shall not expatiate in his just and due Character, and therein somewhat
correspond to his desire: Indeed I need not, his Worth being so well known
already, both in City and Country, he is gone out not like a common candle in
a snuff or stink, but like a Taper, has left a sweet savor behind him in
the Nostrils of all that know him.

That I may the more both sutably and succinctly delineate those graces (which
though they are gone with him for his comfort, do yet stay behind him for his
honor and our imitation.) I shall make use of the Metaphor of a vessel which
we meet with here in the Text.

A Vessel indeed he was a choice Vessel: What Eusebius calls St Hierome, I
may well apply to him, he was Vas virtutum admirabile, a Vessel adorned with
an admirable variety of natural abilities, moral virtues, and spiritual
graces, every way fitted and furnished for that Divine employment to which God
had called him. What St Basil said of Gregory Nazianzen, I may say of him,
(...), he was a deep Well, an elect Vessel, and as it were the mouth of Christ.

To say much in a few words, For knowledge and wisdom he was a Vessel of gold,
for purity and innocence a Vessel of silver, for uprightness and integrity, a
Vessel of transparent glass; for resolution and courage in suffering (of
which he had his share) a Vessel of brass; for perseverance and constancy in
the Orthodox Faith, a Vessel of stone; and which was the Crown of all, for
lowliness and humility an earthen Vessel; since whilst he was glorious in the
eyes of others, he was contemptible in his own.

A Vessel he was full of all sorts of precious liquor, the wine of zealous
devotion, the oil of pitiful compassion, the honey of a sweet disposition,
the water of penitent contrition, and the milk of spiritual consolation.

To come nearer to the Text and Him, He was a Vessel to whom this Treasure of
the Gospel, and the dispensation of it was committed, which how conscionably,
diligently, faithfully, frequently (as far as the weakness of his body would
permit) he discharged, I doubt not but many here can and will attest: He was a
Vessel not closed but open, not with a narrow but a large vent. That worldly
treasure of estate he had, he was continually imparting to his distressed
brethren in his life, and at his death bequeathed a full fifth of his estate to
them who can hardly obtain a fifth of their own. And this heavenly treasure of
the Gospel he did with no less alacrity distribute among his people; how many
of all degrees from all parts, golden, silver, earthen vessels were filled at
his! Noble, rich, poor persons, all enriched their souls with the treasure that
was dispensed by his lips. Methinks many of you are now calling to mind in
what a clear method, choice words and fit phrases, with what pregnant
similitudes, plentiful illustrations, pithy persuasions, sweet insinuations,
powerful inducements, allegations of antiquity, and variety of good literature
(so as both the Learned may receive satisfaction, and the meanest reap benefit)
he did Preach the Word amongst you.

Finally, That which compleateth his Character, This Vessel retained the sent,
the virtue of that himself which he poured out to others: The course of his
life was consonant to the tenor of his Preaching, (...), as Gregory Nazianzen
says of St Basil, He spoke what was to be done, and did what he spoke, he did
not only (...) but (...), scienter praedicare, but innocentia agere, order his
Preaching, but conversation aright.

That sickness which occasioned the breaking of this precious Vessel was indeed
sharp and short, but as himself expressed to me at the beginning of it, he did
not fear, because already prepared for death. And though the violence of the
disease oppressing his spirits, suppressed the freedom of his speech, yet
(blessed be God) it did not bereave him of his senses, nor wholly of his
speech, in so much that not many hours before his death he made to a loving
friend of his there present, a pious Confession of his faith and hope, so that
what St Ambrose said of himself, Non sic vixi ut me pudeat vivere, nec mori
timeo quia bonum, Dominum habemus, In vita Ambr.
I may truly affirm of him, He so lived that he was neither ashamed nor afraid
to die.

The Vessel of his body is now broken by the hand that formed it (to which I
desire we may all submit) yea that service which he was made for is now
finished, else he had continued longer. As for the Pearl that was in this
casket, his Soul, I doubt not but it is safe in Abraham's bosom; yea the Vessel
of his body rests in hope of restoring and reinjoying that Pearl, when it shall
be for ever a Vessel of honor, glory and immortality.

I have now only a double word to present,

1. The one to the Reverend Clergy of this City here present, those
particularly who have yet the liberty of their Function, that according to our
several abilites we would endeavor as much as may be by our diligent
Preaching, exemplary living, to make up the loss of this our Brother. Methinks
God speaks to us this day, as he did to Joshuah in another case, Moses my
servant is dead, be strong and of a good courage, Josh. 1. 2, 6.
ever remembering that such a pillar being taken away, the greater burden lies
upon our shoulders.

2. The other to his Religious Auditors, and especially his well-affected
Parishioners. He that stood in this place like a Jacob to roll away the stone
from the well, open the difficult places of Scripture to you, is now removed
from you; he that stood like a careful watchman to awake and warn you, is now
by death put to silence: Finally, he that like a sun shined with the beams of
instruction and consolation among you in this horizon, is now gone down, and
which is the more sad, Your eyes shall see him no more till the last day the
morning of the resurrection. The bottle which filled you is now emptied, the
vessel which enriched you is now broken, the gourd whose shadow refreshed you
is now withered; and I am confident, so ardent was the love toward him, so
great the benefit you received by him, that I need not bid you be sensible of
the loss. The more needful counsel is to be content with, and patient under
it; and so much the rather, because it is no more then what you ought to
expect, and especially in regard of him who was not only an earthen vessel,
but one that had such a flaw, I mean disease, which would ere long have broken
him. And now Beloved, though the vessel be broken, yet let not the treasure be
lost; do you by him as Ireneus did by Polycarpus, keep fresh in his memory his
Sermons, his Discourses, his goings out and comings in. This is the best way to
remember him, by remembering his counsels; to mourn for him, by mourning for
your unfruitfulness under his labors, to honor him by expressing the efficacy
of his doctrine in your hearts and lives.

Nor let it be an unwelcome admonition to you (with which I will close) be
careful whom you choose to succeed this our Reverend Brother: not one that
shall pull down what he has built, but rear up what he has laid; pluck up
what he has planted, but water what he has sown; not one that shall succeed
him (to use Gregory Nazianzen's expression) (...). Gr. Naz. or. 21
as night after day, a disease after health, a frenzy after use of reason, and
a storm after a calm; but rather as a sweet shower after a warm sunshine, and
a ripening summer after a budding spring. To this end, as when Joshuah was dead
the children of Israel asked of the Lord, Who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites, Judge. 1. 1.
so do you now the Captain is dead, consult with God, beg of him to direct you
in the election of one who may lead you in the battle against your spiritual
enemies: And withal as you seek to God, so look into his Word, and let those
directions which are there given be the rule of your election; so may you
expect and shall obtain such an one by whom your faith shall be edified, and
thereby (that which was his earnest desire) the salvation of your souls
accomplished.

FINIS.
Sermons Preached and Printed by Mr Nathanaell Hardy M. A. and Preacher to the
Parish of St Dyonis Back-Church.
Justice Triumphing, or The Spoilers spoiled: A Sermon preached on the 5th of
November in the Cathedral Church of St Paul's. The Arraignment of licentious
Liberty and oppressing Tyranny, in a Sermon at a Fast before the Lords in
Parliament; In the Abbey-Church at Westminster. Faiths Victory over Nature, A
Sermon preached at the Funerals of Mr John Rushout Junior. The safest Convoy or
The strongest Helper, A Valedictory Sermon before the Right Honorable Sr
Thomas Bendish Barronet, his Majesty's Ambassador to the grand Seigniour at
Constantinople. A Divine Prospective representing the Just man's peaceful End,
A Sermon at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful Sr John Gayr Knight. Love and
Fear the inseparable Twins of a blessed Matrimony, A Sermon occasioned by the
Nuptials between Mr William Christmas and Mrs Elizabeth Adams. Divinity in
Mortality, or The Gospels excellency and the Preachers frailty, A Sermon at the
Funerals of Mr Richard Goddard Minister of the Parish of St Gregory's by Paul's.
Printed, and are to be sold by Nathanaell Webb and William Grantham at the
black Bear in St Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door, 1653.


