A STRANGE VVONDER OR A WONDER IN A Woman, Wherein is plainly expressed the
true nature of most Women.

Especially of some emminent Women in this City.

Likewise a plain description of many mad tricks and slights lately performed
by a Zealous Sister which was overcome with the Spirit.

Written by I. H. Gentleman.

London, Printed for I. T. 1642.

A Strange VVonder, OR A VVonder in a WOMAN.
Wherein is plainly expressed the true nature of most Women.
Women are admirable Angels, if they would not be drawn with Angels to be
come Devils, but to the purpose gentle eader, I intend to give you a true
description of a Woeman in particular, of all Weoman in General, desiring all
Judicious men Silent, Virtuous Modest, and discreet Woeman to censure of me
according to my desert, As for the rest though they let loose their Tippets,
Yea and their Toungs too, I vallue it not, For I know that every Galled Horse
will kick and winch. As I am Tom-tell-troth, I mean to set the Sadle upon the
right Mare, And as for the first, to wit, Mayds when they are courted by their
Sweet Hearts.

As thus, a Handsome Young Man comes to them, and after a Salutation, begin to
make known his Amorous Suit as follows.

Sweet Mistress (or fair Virgin) think it not strange that your all Commanding
Beuty, has made me become a willing Bondslave, to your Sweet self, The
Sparkling lusture of your Stare like Eyes, has kindled in me such an ardent
love. That I am a fire to -- kiss you.

Then forsooth, my Squeamish, Maid, puts one a counterfit coyness and in stead
of a Kiss flapps him in the Mouth with -- pish fie away Sir, indeed I scorn
to Kiss, On my Virginity, I cannot enduer this fooling and so forth, when
inwardly she longs for it, And were she in a Corner in the Dark she would
Kiss; and Kiss, and Clipp, and melt into all the forms of Venery that art
can devise, And there is her Honesty.

Then for the Wives, There Is scarce one good of twenty, if I should say Forty, I
think I should not lie, for one Scoulds, another Powts, one is Lazy, another
Sluttish, a third Proud, a fourth a down right Drunkerd, a fifth a Title-tatle
Goshopp, and so from one to a Hundred, from a Hundred, to a Thousand, from a
Thousand to many Thousands: You shall scarce find one that is not Giulty of one
abominable Crime or other.

And yet let them get to the Tavern Half a Douzen of them, They in the hight
of their Cupps, shall like so many Proud she Pharisees, Every one Justify
themselves as thus, I thank GOD I never called my husband Knave, nor Drunkard,
I never strove to wear the Breeches, and many such things, When to my
Knowledge she has called him Rouge and Rascal, And made him wear the Horn,
Then says a Second truly Goshopp I commend you for my own part, I must
confess I am a little to hasty, And oftentimes use my Tongue more then I have
thank for my Labors especially of my Husband. Likewise a third gives her
Verdict, Truly Goshopp quoth she the Tongue is an unruly Member, Besides you
know that Woman are the weaker Vessels, and men ought to bear with our
infermities (as we bear them) And you know neighbor that the vprightest man
falls Seven times a DAY, Then we Woman may very well fall Fourteen times a
Night, being the weaksr Vessels, as I told you before.

This is their Discourse some two Hours or perhaps three, In which time they
Arrive at a Reckoning of some Fourteen or Fifteen Shillings, which being
paid, down Stayers they go, And being come into the Street, They express
their weakness, being scarce able to stand on their Legs: At length
staggering each, to her House, If any of their Husbands happen to be at Home
and demand where they have been, They look presently on their Apron Strings
which inspires them with a Lie, With which they flapp their too credulous
Husbands in the Mouth. Thirdly (...) Truly Sweet Heart I have been to see such
an Aunt, Or I have been at a Gentle woemans Labor, and I am so weary and the
like, Which the good Man believes. Thus they make their Husbands Honest
Credulitye, The Subject of their ill Huswifery.

Then you shall have Another; Nay many that seem to love their Husbands well,
But yet Love another Woemans Husband better, And that is the Trick of a
disembling WHORE, But yet of all WHORES there is no WHORE to a Holy WHORE,
which when she turns up the White of her Eye, And the Black of her Tail when
she falls flat of her Back, According as the Spirit moves her, The Fire of her
Zeal, Kindles such a Flame, that the Devil cannot withstand her, Besides she
can fit a man with such a Cloak for her Knavery she can cover her Lust with
Religion, O! these Lasses that can rise and get them ready by Six a Cloak in
the Morning to go to Christ Church, And then in the Afternoon to go to Saint
Autholing O! how they listen for that Tinckle tanckle bell that rovses them in
a morning to a stirring excecise, but I am afraid that a great many of them
love the bell for the Clapper sak^, they love the smock though they hate the
surplis, so much for that.

But least I should incur the displeasure of all women for laying open the
erorrs of some, I will now begin to turn the Catt in the Pan as the old
saying i^, and leaving these, Goss^p to amend. I will now say alitle concerning
good women, if there be any such as sure there are, though scarce, and I
verily believe if every one would, amend one, we should have a great many more
then we have, but I am afraid they will be so far from taking my council
that they will sooner reward me with a scratcht Crown, then with any oth^^
reward, for my friendly admonition. As for the good women (...) need spend no
time to praise them their works will saint-like declare their worths and their
virtues sha^^ ^^ine on earth much, more in Heaven divine.

Good Women are like stars in darkest night,
Their virtuous actions shining as a light.
To guide their Ignoraent sex which often times fall,
And falling often turns Diabolical.
Their good examples often times does persuade,
A zealous Sister from her falling trade.
Good weomen sure are Angels on the earth,
Of these good Angels we have had a darth.
And therefore all you men that have good wives
Respect their virtues equal with your lives.
FINIS

