VIRTUE AND VALOR VINDICATED Or, the late Hugh and Cry sent after General
Massy, Pointz, etc. retorted in the teeth of that scandalous Libeller, who
being ashamed to show his name, has discovered his Nature.

An Enemy to honesty and all honor, and a living Character of inhumanity.

By I. H.

Non opus aliquod, aliud operatur nisi ut subvertat.

Chrysostom. LONDON. Printed for T. W. 1647.

Virtue and valor Vindicated.
Goodness seldom meets with friends, and Greatness never wants enemies, It
is the ambition of a coward to overvalue where he dares not, to undervalue
where he cannot equalize. Many cares not to crush themselves in the ruins of
another, and being demanded by whose hand: it is answered, the envious man has
done it. But Asses will be braying, and Dogs will be barking. O what an
ungrateful piece of time are we pitched upon! that worthiest actions should
have the worst requizals; when those, (to whose conquering swords the honor,
and happiness of a Kingdom becomes tributary) shall be reckt in pieces on the
black tenter-hookes of Malice, and lie exposed to all aspersions division can
invent, or detraction accumulate, Those Worthies (whose very memori^ll is of
force to make all future ages active unto honor) to save their names and
reputations blasted by such airs gript by those tallons, that breath nothing
but dish^nour, drop nothing but infamy, and that without control (as if it
wear an offense to be good, whilst sin is tolerated) speaks the loudest Law
invalid, and that Power wherein they sympathize of noe effect.

And therefore (unworthy Libeller) had thou conteind thy self at home, thou
had been looked on as a creature unworthy the vindication of the meanest pen;
but to belch in public, and thus to print thy self in gall, expect to reapeas
thou have sowed, and like a Dog to lick up that vomit which thou have spued
into the world.

The fair deportment military and civil of those Noble Members has been such
(as the major part of the Land can witness) that should I streine a Character
on the candor of their actions, the integrity, and immutability of their
affections I should but Aureum annulum ferreis stellis, corrodere, set diamonds
in Ieat, or enamile gold with studds of iron; no, let their own works Praise
them in the gates, and the great Historian Fame with his goulden pensill blazon
their high demerits to posterity, whilst my ambition shall be, to sit down and
admire their Loyalty, practice their fidelity.

For my own part, I am not engaged to any of them, (except one) neither has my
acquaintance with them as yet extended, further then the eye: but their
full-blowne virtues are the Adamants to attract, their triumphant victories,
together with their most indeleble patience, carried on with constancy, the
poles to direct me to a just and necessary vindication.

And first, I disire all whose hearts were never tainted with d^sloyalty) to
view them not only as men, but Gentlemen; not as scharrabs bred upon a
dunghill, not as vapors or wandering Meteors tossed by every wind to seek an
inconstant being; nor sprung from thd loins of some channel raker, or skipt
our of a rat-trap or tinder-box, (as Rabshecah railes it zealously in his 3
page) to be a Common Council man of the City; but descended from the bed of
Honor famous in their generations, but as Ignorance is the only Antagonist to
knowledge; So true Nobility has no enemy but Rusticity, and the best of birth
are ever vilified by the worst of baseness; which proves the black-mouthed
Libeller, his greatness equal with his goodness, his birth answerable to his
breeding, his nature servile, as his Name obscure.

Secondly, Look upon them, many of them who have adventured (next unto heaven)
what is dea^est to them, their lives and livelihoods, for the public good.
Whet had become of Parliament, City, Kingdom, nay Religion, Laws, Liberties,
all, had not that renowned Impe of War taken Mars himself by the beard and
stopped that Imperial Army in their full carreere; whose vast bulk covered the
deelining West, and stroke terror at a distance to the utmost corners of the
Kingdom; Who was he that preserved that Mayden-City from ravishing, which then
lay panting to the death, through the fierce assaults of a bloody foe? who was
that sublunary engine, that dissipated and defeated all their fatal
stratagems, was it not Massy who was he that in the compass of one month
with vnequalled service, overcame and dispossessed nine royal Garrisons, as
scorning to live within the breath of such bad neighbors, was it not Massy
with his handful of Myrmidons?

Who was he that laid the famous Mynn his honor in the dust, (who a little
before threatened to set his insulting foot upon the neck of that fair Damosel
Gloucster) and delivered him dead, with above an hundred more, at her feet, as
the tribute of his virgin love unto her, with hundreds more of (lately crying
conquest) Captives? was it not Massy? Who was that thunderbolt that thrilld
astonishment in the Danish forest through the popish Army; that broke like a
cloud upon them, flashing death in the faces of the Winterian power,
confounding all their force, breaking their designs, and returned laden with
the spoils of war, and with victorious trophes? Was it not Massy.

Who was he that went out (from that Command) in such a blaze to add glory
unto conquest, and crown his actions with a never-dying honor; when he took
the strong Garrisond Evesham, in a storm of fire and leaden hail, the loss
whereof did make a King shed tears? was it not Massy?

And having showed himself a faithful Patriot to an ungrateful people,
leaving them secure under their own vines, being departed (as called forth to
greater actions and commands) who was he that goared great Gorings Body through
with his horse, on that day, that fatal day at Langport, dashing thereby in
pieces all the Western powers, that they durst never after show their faces in
the field; one of the great blows that cut off the neck of this unnatural
war? was it not Massy?

Who was he that led the Armies of England's Israel through the bowels of the
land, routed the Hoptonias strength, and with his armed Troops made his proud
foes to tremble with their thunder, hunting them in a warlike sport as the
fearful Partridges in the Mountains? Was it not Waller? who even of his very
enemies purchased that glorious title of William the Conqueror?

What shall I say? they are men, therefore subject to Times standard,
Mutability; ever upon the wheel, uncertain, they are valiant Commanders,
therefore hated by degenerous cowards, they are eminent and honorable persons,
therefore subject unto censure and malice. But yet in spite of envy and all
her snaky worms, their names and fames shall our-vie a century of ages. Nec
imber edax, nec Aquilo, nec innumerabiles annorum series diruere.

And now after all their traveling in sweat and blood, to be contemned, and
condemned, as traitors (as if it were treason to be faithful) by an inferior
and unworthy vassal, whose contagious breath is able to do more hurt then a
general plague, and yet to pass without correction as if our laws were dumb,
and the executioners without life, shall not this brand the suporters of a
State with obloquy, and at last mold us into that slavery, that we shall account
it happiness to be miserable? and when such tongues without restraint are let
loose, who shall avoid the tyranny of their lash? Kings and Commons shall share
alike; yet it is some honor for the servant to suffer with his Lord, and the
desciple is not above his master.

Thirdly, consider their dignity as Members of Parliament made so by free
Election, according to the fundamental Laws and customs of the Kingdom,
never by order or vote erected (but rather approved of) the House; never
detected, for any by secret or contrarious workings, in the house; nor ever for
any pretended enemies general or special by any prosecuted before the house:
although this licentious piece of barbarism, out of an ambitious zeal to his
own ends, has already presumed to sit in indgment upon them, himself both
witness, Jury, judge, and excecutioner, the poison of this Scorpion being the
potion they must drink, as seditious state-theeves, murderers and Traitors:
and if his physic will not work, then has he sentenced them to that easy
death (as the Jshmael scoffs it) of hanging drawing and quartering (which no
doubt) will return upon himself.

For being members of that high Court (which is the only visible and collective
Body politic of the kingdom and having motion and influence in all their
public agitations from the said body, acting nothing but by vote and virtue
from the House, as well in the late City procedings as other wise; whatsoever
violence opposing or dishonor falls one them, must needs reflect upon the whole
Body natural, one or some members suffering all the Members vnitely do
condole.

Therefore now, that either part or the whole collecting Body of a kingdom;
some and consequently all the Members of Parliament by an injurious libeller a
snarling Hell hound, should be sentenced, Judged, condemned and excecuted, at
one breath, at one blow comes under no less honor then that infernal piece
engeny of the powder plot; the Cavaleers Rashness, the apprentices rudenes were,
motes to this catarrhe, molehils to this mountain; time cannot produce a
parallel (since first this Nation became a Monarchy.) of such an intrenchment
upon, such an impeachment of, such a treason committed against a Parliament, to
the utter abolition of all authorit violation of true honor, and perpetual
infamy of the highest ^VDICATORY in this Kingdom under heaven.

Neither does this traitor alone impugn and destroy our State, but endeavor
the ruin of religion also in casting dirt in the face, and making a ludibry of
the daughter of Sion: and of her shepherds, whose very feet are beautiful; as
if that Government established by public authority, were but made as a lack
of Lent for iniquity to play withal, or raised as a Butt to shoot his tongue
at. But as if England were (...) narrow to restrain his malice, to slight a
morsel for this all devouring Dragon, Scotland also must share his calumny, in
his nasty Epithi^es, and be made the object of his malice, which h^vv they
will endure I leave to the future to discourse. Appealing unto all, that are
tender of the Kingdoms peace, to judge hereof, and especially to the high court
of Parliament (whom it most concerns) for justice against this grand e^em to
the common good; this Scandalum Magnatum, that he may receive revvard according
to the Laws and his deserts, that such obstructions and abominations being
removed, all sound of war may be stroke dumb and mufled peace established,
unity continued, his Maj. person and just rights protected, the Parl: honored,
and confirmed, the Church enlarged and God Almighty glorified.

FINIS.

