To the Right Honorable the High Court of PARLIAMENT.
The humble Petition of Edward Hanchett, Usher of the late Court of Wards and
Liveries.
HUmbly shows unto your Honors, That your Petitioner did purchase the Office
of Usher to the Court, to him and his Heirs for ever, at the rate of 4000 l. it
being an Office of inheritance granted by Letters Patents under the great Seal
of England.

About 4. years after that your Petitioner was possessed of the said Office,
the High Court of Parliament were pleased to take away the said Court, but in
their justice thought fit, that the Officers of the Court which had their
places by Letters Patents under the great Seal of England, should have a
competent satisfaction for the loss of their Offices, and in order thereunto,
referred it to a Committee of their own Members to consider and make allowances
to the several Officers, who did upon serious consideration allow to your
Petitioner the sum of 3500 l. for the loss of his said Office.

The great Officers of the said Court were Members of Parliament, and did
procure the satisfaction allotted to them; your Petitioner had the same Justice
for him, but not the same Friends.

Notwithstanding the said Order and Vote of the House, and your Petitioners
constant, and faithful adhering to the Cause and Interest of the Parliament,
even in their greatest extremities, your Petitioner being sent for by the late
King to execute his Office at Oxford, upon pain of losing it, and refused to
go, to the hazard of his utter undoing, if the King had prevailed, and your
Petitioner as yet has had no recompense.

Your Petitioner borrowed a great part of the money that purchased the said
Office; upon the dissolution of the Court your Petitioner was disabled to pay
his Debts, and was soon after clapped up Prisoner in the Upper Bench, and there
has remained ever since, to his utter ruin and destruction, having sold all
his goods and personal Estate to maintain himself and his Wife, and satisfy
his Creditors what he could, that now your Petitioner is in a very said
condition, not able to subsist, his friends having been wearied with so long
supplying his great wants and necessities, unless this honorable Parliament
be pleased to consider his Cause that cries for their Justice, and afford him
such relief as their Wisdoms shall think convenient.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.

