DIVI ARMINIJ

MACTATORVM RENATA, ET RENOVATA PETITIO.

OR THE ARMINIAN PRIESTS LAST PETITION for their former formalitie, and ancient
Innovation, both in Church and Commonweal; returned from all parts, with the
numerall subscription of 6666. AND Therein their intentions are lively
expressed by an accommodate and meet Emblem, and made plain to the ingenuous
Reader.

Vis unita fortior.

Importunity redoubled (where many combinde) will doubtless prevail.

By THOMAS HARBIR, Gent.

LONDON Printed by Matthew Simmons in Goldsmiths Alley. 1642.

Proffluit ex verbo divince Spiritus aureo.

ALTAR

Et tantes audetis tollere molar. Rev: 7.1.


Praelia Hierarchica

Hic muri fisis ahoni.




Bellum Episcopale

They are as the stuble before the wind and as the chafe which i^ storms
carries away. Job 22:2^.

Quadra Senatus.

Nitun^r in Vetitum sed quo rapit impetus aurio Pellimar hand vallant niti
fugimiisq retrorsum.



THE ARMINIAN-PRIESTS last Petition for their former formalitie, and ancient
innovation, both in Church and Commonweal; returned from all parts, with the
numerall subscription of 6000 and 666.
VOuchsafe great Lords your favor but to hear,
Our just requests by us presented here.
Our Churches open errors, some do say,
You would (how e're we brook it) take away;
And wholesome Truths establish in their room;
Such as the way of Truth may well become.
Yet some do doubt, and you perhaps may deem
What you appoint as fit, will not so seem
To us; nor that we ever will endure
So great a change; but rest your Honors sure,
That we our selves shall now both fully clear
From all Such stain and fault, and you from fear.
And t'extinguish doubt, our duties you shall see
In ages past, both what they were, and be
Even now; while Edward many rites refused,
He Mass put down, and this our service chused:
We then the Clergic of the Land were strict,
The last to keep; not Mass, against it we kicked:
But this Queen Mary had no sooner staid,
And Mass again enjoynde, but we obaid.
And now her sister ( Mary having paid
Frail natures debt) no sooner Queen is made,
But she again puts down that Idol Mass;
Our Rites restores, and Service as it was:
To these our Father-Priests did then submit,
Though most (perhaps) did mind it was not fit:
Yet what the State adjudgeth to be best,
They question not, but doote, and therein rest.
Now what our Fathers did, we mean to do,
Conform our selves to things confirmde by you.
Like Weavers Shuttles that do forwards spring,
As thriddes rise up, or fall; then straight begin
A swift Retreat: so we proceed, and prise,
And straight run back as States do fall or rise.
We are not so unlearned, but we our duties know,
Which first to man, and then to God we owe.
What Ceremonies in Gods worship be?
Or how from Truth they differ, what care we?
Our vain devices; which if you decent call,
As we were wont, our due observance shall
Meet honor add, our Tapers holy The real presence turns Al^ars especially
into Shrines.
Shrines,
So well beseem; things, persons, places holy,
Consecrate, (Impostours sacred folly)
Quaint gestures, Anthems antic coynd and made,
Instead of Gods true worship, forged by the trade
And art of men's new vain devising wits;
Our fruitless moulds that forms these apish tricks.
Though some be stubborn, we are content alas,
This copper-coyne and counterfeit should pass
Divinely current; we to all submit.
Not to what God, but man thinks fit:
And for this cause we cannot doubt that favor,
As well may suite with this our meek behavior:
And first that we may from this storm be freed,
Which hurrieth back upon our frighted head,
Our holy-handy-workes; we all our force.
And might oppose, yet cannot stop the sourse;
As Apocal. 1.15.
Nilus rushing Catarrhacts amase
Th'astonisht care; even so these tempests raise
A sevenfold dread, which rightly might infer,
The wrathful blasts of a mighty thunderer.
Now aid in this extremity of need,
A little aid (alas) will do the deed.
If you but us sustain, and but advance
Our holy Patriarchs, their praise inhance;
And shall submit them but their former state
And lofty chare, that grace and happy fate,
Shall jointly bind us firmly to fulfill,
Orebeare, crush, sway, and do even what we will.
And first (to show cur gratitude) we would
Gods Sanctuary build, though not of gold,
Nor stone, nor silver; but yet his House compile
Of stubble, straw, or hay; or (if more vile)
Embased refuse metal; which if tried,
Nor trial may, nor fires hear abide:
Then wisely fix our Fortress on the Sands,
And fabric raise where no foundation stands:
As learned Geometricians use to square,
Their narrow bottomed basis, fixed on air
By rule of Art, not Reason; so you shall see,
A Towering Architecture fram'de of vanity.
From form and matter though all things being take,
No matter we of form or matter make;
As Master Builders, we will not care for stuff,
Nor form, nor order; yet build strong enough.
'T will well beseem as meetly worth our having,
Instead of Bethel though we build Bethaven.
Then even in trifles, you our zeal shall see
Exceed our knowledge, and our knowledge be
In matters serious slightest; but most slight
Our zeal in things of moment and of weight.
Where sins turn floods, and as a Deluge roar,
Whose billows proudly do disdain a shore
Of finite limits; there we will straight hold forth
The Olive Branch from out our peaceful mouth:
But where right words, or works, or ways are found,
Or but so seem, we will forthwith frame our sound
Of shrill voice Trumpetts; and (to keep them under)
Our words of lightnings, and our voice of thunder.
Then raise our lifting State, as may beseem
Our selves of us to think, and others deem.
Then man's devices, in despite of those
Again advance, that shall or dare oppose;
And teach for Doctrine what our Fathers did,
Though men's Traditions, and Gods Word forbid
Then we will protest against by joint consent.
The right advice of prudent PARLIAMENT;
And teach our senseless faction not to fly,
Till State and Church they drench in Tyrian dye.
Then all to expedit, unite, and raise
Our inward energitticke Forces; no delays
Digest, or brook; but even calcine our Arts,
And teach our skill's to improve their better parts.
Thus from each Duty we will not err one whit,
Not caring how to know, but do what is fit.
So we these weighty matters well observe,
From petty Rites we pass not how we swerve
For Tapers, Crosses, Tippitts, what care we?
Our Linen Ephods, Copes, or bended Knee
To Altars Eastward standing (nice ones fear)
Or Jesus named, though no Scriptures bear
Such Byards blameless; that his Word profane,
These, as you brook, we like; or else count vain.
We speak of those, to which they now amount,
Their present worth; though sacred, we account
Such decent Rites: we prise, and much approve
Those Rites; but these are times to hide our love:
All these and more, and what we fai^^e would have;
But none of these is that which now we crave;
To stint this storm, is now our sole desire,
Against which we cannot stand; nor will retire
T'immure this Wind, we count our greatest gains
Which well effect, were labor worth our pains.
This adds death to dread, (...) deadly fears
To cruel woes; wrecks out comforts, works our cares.
All our sorrows are unto this but flight,
No woes compared to this have wight:
The higher powers, and mighty States (alas)
Of old have been our wonted walls of brass.
You see our restless pains; we throng and press
T'impale this wind; but yet find no redress:
You see we are to industry inclinde,
Nor do desist, let us help and harbor find:
It strikes our Altars, and blows out our Tapours;
It wastes our strength, as if it were but vapors;
It ruinates our might, our Rites it raceth;
It smites all our pomp, our pride defaceth;
Our works it scatters, but this does work our toil,
Our Cannons blasts this tempest makes recoyle,
Our grace does wither, and our glories cease;
Our cares do more abound, our fears increase;
Our honors fade, our high Commissions fly;
Our fraud's defeated, our secular pow'res dye.
It rends our Rochetts, and our Tippitts tears,
And puts our mortal hearts to mighty fears:
Our swords and keys it snatcheth; blasts our name;
It dissipates our structure; breaks our frame.
If ever we obtain our meet demands;
And herein purchase but your helping hands:
We Will not be sluggish loggs which no man dreads;
But wisely will bestirre our working heads,
To get our pride, and profit, (that is our thirst,)
Then idleness; all which to purchase, first
The weapons of our warfare we will once more,
Embellish, brighten, scour, and burnish over;
And first our secular power so refine,
As all that see it shall say, it is right divine.
Our crosse-keyes thus quartered with our sword,
Both triple gain, and glory will afford:
Then we our Cannons fairly will display,
Taffright and chase the Puritan away:
And then our Crosier-staves shall countermand,
The highest powers that can or dare withstand.
But now more bravely to perform our parts,
We Will join our force, and fraud both Mars and Arts;
These storms by slight subdue, take speedy course
To curb their might, break their rage, and race the sourse.
Then shall our might that goodly mass sustain
Of man's Traditions ever to remain
To ages sacred; that shall our holy heap
Of Ceremonies sacred keep; we thereby reap
Our full content: thus ord'red, these things are
Our weapons to maintain our holy war.
By your sole might (if you your aspect give)
Our Rites shall prosper, and our labors live;
If not, they dye; we must be disesteem'd;
Strict Priests be prised, and praiseworthy deemed:
Who men's devices scorn, who neither know,
What they to Rites, nor to Traditions owe;
If man prescribes; but must forsooth be ruled
By Gods Word only, or will nothing build:
But as for us, we like no such like doing,
If gain bids go we will run, we brook not woeing;
There Is nothing good or bad that we will withstand,
If you prescribe it, or it State command:
And hereby hope that grace we shall acquire,
Which freely may effect our full desire.
And first our Liturgic, and Courts restore,
And higher lift our heads than heretofore;
That we may be Non-residents at will,
Our Rites observe, and keep our Tot-quots still.
But were this wind but laid, these would redound,
And all that we could wish besides abound:
We therefore seek to stop these storms with speed,
We nothing ask but this; it is that we need:
This spoils our sport, this makes us loose the game;
This makes our feet so feeble, makes us lame:
This dissipates our union; it scatters
Our cunning drifts; it all our juncture shatters:
It shakes our Basis, makes our building fall;
It batters down our Towers, breaks our wall.
Alas, that it should blast what we invent,
And did devise out of a good intent,
To have the earth our own, the world at will,
Our works to stand, our Laws and lusts fulfill.
This blasting Wind blows on us, there is our pain;
These blasts break in upon us, that is our bane.
The barbarous A people at the South of Barbary by Lybia, Herodotus reports
the Story.
Psylli against the Wind did war;
We thrice more barbarous, and more silly are:
Their winds Host was dust, its weapons sand:
Our storms are sent from out the Almighties hand:
They fought, they feared, and fled; yet suffered death
By feeble Blasts; our storms immortal breath
We fear, and fight against; but do disdain to fly
Until immortal fury force to dye:
Yea, we conceive we may it countermand,
By sole might of man's pu'sant powerful hand;
And well enough (so we but hit our aim)
Both us and ours quitte; and raise our name.
But first with subtle skill and cunning Art,
We Will play the wise and prudent Serpents part.
She hurt is straight way healed, if sick does fly,
Or weak; if young declineth enmity.
Not shrill but silent is; recurved bends
Her submisse body any way; she tends
Through every strait and clift; so slips her skin;
Her age renues; coucht creepes; unseene with sting
And teeth contests against her foes: Thus we
Both wisely meek, and serpentitle will be:
Not fight at first; but fly; not break,
But how; and what may please be sure to speak:
Seem meek, be out-side-Saints, and show submisse;
What Is right or reason, not rail against, but hiss,
If soul and sordide faults deface our hew,
We Will slip out slough, and so our age renew;
And spirits of error so refine and fearce,
As they may secretly and unseene pearce.
Then men elude, like Stellious, with our stars
Of painted piety to fight our wars.
Add strength to years; to both add foulds and wiles,
And sparkling luster; all which the world beguiles:
And thus get strength, and sinew; teeth, and sting;
And not till now to go to work begin;
Then strike the stroke, and freese our foes to ice,
By pale narcotick poisons; then our eyes
And every part shall deadly venom vent,
And dart it forth, 'ast were from Serpents sent.
Which once dispersed, shall penetrate each part;
Both stupifie the head, and strike the heart:
There Is none shall fall by Sword, there is none shall fight,
Nor strike a stroke, but by our subtle slight:
But then like silent shadows swiftly glide
Unseene in secret, and so pass unspide:
Thus wise as Serpents are we will be; but then
Assume the show of Saints; to view be men
Submisse, and meek; hold fast; but first exquire
What man prescribes (that is even our wished desire)
Man's ancient ways, yet like not that way best,
That Is first, a golden meane's the way to rest:
But new or old, we will stoop injoynde to any
By man; be it fair, or foul, or few or many.
For inward truth we pass not, so we be
Profound in Hos 5.1. That is abundant in the sacrifices of their own devices.
slaughters; and our sanctity
In specious seeming forms and shows appear;
Not be indeed, this had, it is all our care.
On all that man prescribes we scruple not to build,
Save only making conscience unto what we yield.
Thus hating stubbornness, we will straight begin,
T'inflame our fiery zeal against vice and sin:
Like muffled Cupid take our aim and hit
Man's sin unseene; though not distinguish it,
Nor yet define what exactly it is
We smite, yet hit our mark, our aim not miss;
Then preach pure faction to uphold our cause,
And stand for us (though it withstand Gods laws)
And proselytes teach (although they swim in blood)
To take our part, and thereby raise a flood;
So to our wills our vassalls frame the lay,
As Potters form their veslells made of clay;
And teach them soundly how to draw their sword,
Against this raging Wind, we mean the Word.
Then set the earth at odds, enwrapp in wars
The woeful world, the State with mortal jarres
Inflame, exterminate, and wrath excite,
And all this work by unseene subtle might.
But what is this? (if you assent unto it)
It Is nothing? this? were five times more we will do it.
And first that we more firmly may endure,
We Will seem submisse to make our standing sure:
Then errors mystical, abstruse, and hid,
Elixit raise; then secretly forbid
The war eye of man to see, the care
Our deep devised drifts and plots to hear:
Be yet more meek, then faithfully we will tender
Most fained words; so make and render
Great persons servile to our faction,
And Laity our vassals of transaction.
Then will we might o're-master, right o're-beare,
Law curb, Religion stab, nor stint we here:
But discord filde from Two Hydraes (that is, water-serpents) are muchtreated
of in History; one slain by Hercules, which had fifty, some write an hu'dred
heads; ever as he cut off one head, two sprang up in its room: the other
slain by Cadmus, he filled out her teeth and sowed them, whereof an huge Army of
men at once sprang up, and slew each other.
Hydraes teeth we will scatter,
And all the world into dissension shatter:
As lightnings glance from sourse unseene, so we
From Spisseous clouds will strike, that none may see
Our deadly darts, sow jarres, make mortals wroth,
And bloody wars (our selves unseene) hold forth:
Nor stint we here, yet more our worth to show,
Even at our beck we will make the proudest bow:
We Will cloth the world in darkness, blind the light,
That none may know for whom or what they fight.
Then manicles upon that raging Wind
We Will cast, check, chide, with gives and fetters bind
Those sturdie storms, those rushing tempests lay,
And make those mighty Winds our wills obey.
Then cherish vice, against virtue be severe,
Rebellion foster, to Antichrist adhere;
What Is vile advance, what is Orthodoxe reprove,
From peace dehort, by pride sedition move;
Turn double diligent, and multiply our pains,
So we by it may but augment our gains.
Thus to your Honors we our hearts disclose,
Our inward thoughts make known, and do repose
Herein that trust, as that we hope to have,
Or what we ask, or what we ought to crave.
Democrite quid rides quin luge Heraclite.

The Authors Epilogue.
KNow Reader, and you for whose sakes I am become your Secretary, that two
Scriptures concern this subject, and your selves, viz. Amos 5.5.
But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal; the second is Amos the 4. and the
4. Come to Bethel and transgress, to Gilgal and multiply transgression, etc.
In the first, he dehorts Israel; in the second, plainly derides and laughes
them to scorn: their strange fires (like those of Nadab and Abihu) were the
cause of this contempt: All Scriptures have abundantly dehorted you from like
oblations, wherewith God has been sacrificed unto near this 1600. years: in
Isreal's punishment this also is added, that God laughes them to scorn: his
derision antecedes the execution of his fierce wrath: God when he laughes he
strikes, what was that contempt but the hight of reprehension, the depth of
reproof, and not altogether evil and useless (as some vainly imagine) when
limited by a right rule, nor am I (though I am not confident of an
infallibility) any ways conscious of aggravation or falsehood in this
Treatise. Si in hac re erro libenter erro, it is Tullyes saying not mine: in
this only I am confident, Si in hac re erro, it is nec lubens nec libenter,
more than I know or desire to justify. As faithful Ministers were always few
in number, and weak in power; so this in no wise reflects upon such, but upon
those only that have been the workers of this their paucitie and poverty: if
you think this measure meets not, but outstrips their desert: I answer, it is
Toga potius concinna, quam longa; yea, I fear it will prove a great deal too
short. Whereas thou see in the Emblem the Winds striking and dispersing the
Clouds of darkness, and ignorance, which enclose the Earth, and the Ministers
of that darkness, the corrupt Clergy, and the instruments of those Ministers,
the Altars, Tapours, Crosse-Keyes, with Sword, and Crosier-staves, etc. Which
shadow forth the whole lump and heap of Traditions, and devices of man in an.
Antithesis and opposition to the free course of the Word; Know, that some
Interpreters have expounded these four Angels there expressed, Revel. 7.1. to be
four chief and cardinal sins of the universal corrupt Clergy; which may
be pride, idolatry, cruelty, and covetousness: for their pride, to show how
they exalt themselves above and against the higher powers, even the Laws of
Christ's Church and civil State I Need not to insist. For cruelty, the most
unparralleld Story that I remember, was betwixt two Spaniards; the one a
Christian, the other (though convicted in judgment) an Heathen, they challenge
the field, the Heathen gets the upper hand, promises life if he would renounce
his faith; he accepts the condition, abjures it: the Heathen stabs him saying,
he would now be revenged of him eternally, body and soul their cruelty
extends beyond this, even to men's temporal estates and liberties whiles they
live, and posterity after; his but to one, theirs to all. For idolatry the
Papists have out stripped in that all the earth in all ages: their master-peice
is their idolatry of the Alter; but yet they presuppose the real presence
there: our corrupt Priests worship and bow unto (without presupposing any real
presence as themselves confess) to the bare wood and stone, and therein out
strip the Papish. For. thein covetousness I cannot say much, perhaps they are
free from this fault: wherefore I refer it to every man's judgment and
censure taught him by his own experience. But what were these petty offenses
of Aarons sons, or the Israelites compared with those of the Papists or
yours? Nadab and Abihu offered but once strange fires, And fire went out from
the Lord and consumed them. This also was the cause of Isreal's scattering and
captivity: Now I ask this question (it skills not who or what the instrument
be) whether it be more necessary or charitable to cast scorn and contempt upon
your sevenfold more stubborn perseverance in sowing the seeds of a far more
deadly and consuming flame: there may be a right and an happy use made of
this, though it is usually Gods last and sharpest rebuke in this life; and
sometime Ne plusultra be the inscription upon it: God laughes, and the Genesis
3.17.
earth and Adams posterity are accursed: Genesis 11.6.
Babel confounded: 1 Kings 18.27.40.
Baals Priests slain: Israel scattered and brought to captivity: Pa^l. 3.2.
the Jews to a durable and fearful dissertion and desolation: do not you
arride your selves, whiles God from heaven derides you: Cum illudit Deus
destruit, he has begun to laugh at all your labors, and mock your hopes, and
will (we trust) as he has begun) still cement these wise-hearted and noble
members of that honorable body in a firm, intermutuall, and right
understanding of each other; and communicate the same (with them) to their
royal head. But ye boast your success: your pregnant seeds of discord shoot
up and sprout; they spring and prosper, Et jam proximus arder, why does
illusion deceive you? those flames, with the hopes of your wished harvest may
shortly exterminate in your ruin. These things see and consider, least ye
draw desolation, and swift destruction upon your selves and others: I rest

Yours (though corrosive) in all necessary, and faithful offices. THO. HARBIA.

FINIS.

