The HAPPY SUCCESS Of the PARLIAMENTS Army at NEVVPORT And some other places.

Who with the Northamptonshire Forces this last week at several times, have
slain and taken Prisoners near upon a hundred of the Enemies, 2. Captains, 3.
Cornets, and a Trumpeter, and taken diverse of their Horses, with the loss of
6. men and 15. Prisoners.

As it was sent in a Letter from the Army, and published for the satisfaction
of all those that have any Friends in the Service, and would willingly be
informed of the Truth and nothing else.

This is Licenced, and entered into the Hall Book according to Order.

London printed for John Wright in the Oldbailey. November. 10. 1643.

The happy Success of the Parliaments Army, at Newport and other places.
THat you may be mindful to send me the Printed news, I will as often as I can
acquaint you with what is material that I know to be truth, for we have too
many Lies abroad in this licencious age: Nothing remarkable has passed
between the two armies in Northamptonshire until Thursday November 2. when
betimes in the morning by order from Major General Skipton, the Horse forces
in Northampton, or rather some troops of them were drawn forth to fall on the
enemies Quarter that lay most remote to the North, while 3. regiments of his
Horse, viz. Colonel Midletons Regiment, Colonel Harvies, and Colonel Turners
were sent out to fall on the South East part of their Quarters, for the Kings
Armylyes quartered at the least 10. miles in distance one from another, the
Northampton Forces happened on the Lord of Northamptons Regiment about Stowes, 6.
miles from the Town, set on them by break of day, and slew 3. or 4. of them,
and took 14. prisoners all horsemen, one a Coronet to the Earl of Northampton,
and lost not one of their own: the London Regiments assaulted them at the same
hour at Alderton, a mile from Geaston, they slew 15 on the ground, took 22
prisoners, and many horses which were left behind, the riders shifting for
themselves better on foot into Geaston Park and other hedges, so that a
horse-Fayre was kept at Newport that day, and horses sold good cheap for ready
money, we lost but one man in this service. The Enemy to revenge this, did march
all Friday night, and on Saturday morning, November. 4. did set on our Quarters
at Oulny, we first took 2. of their Scouts, by which we perceived the approach
of our danger: for their body of horse, a very strong one too fell into the
Town upon us, and charged us resolutely, and were received as stoutly by our
men, until we could orderly retreat to the Bridge, which with ease we made
good against them, intending to keep them in play until our body came up to
us from Newport 3 miles off, but they had no list to stay so long but some few
faced us at the Bridge, whilst the rest retreated back, and by the way some of
them were met by the Northampton forces, who hearing they were gone toward our
quarters sent out 7 or 8 troops of horse and about 500 foot they took of the
enemy a Capt of a Troop of horse, one Cap. Geerye a Huntingtonshire man and a
great malignant, his cornet, but not his colors (they have the trick to pull
them of and throw the staff one way, and the Colors an other) they took also
his trumpeter and 9 other troopers which are all Prisoners in the town.

Post script.
THe Enemy falling on our Quarters, at Oulny, had a purpose to have charged
resolutely through the Town, and bin Mrs. of the Bridge, at the south end next
Newport, but our Musketers were before them, and saluted them with two volley
of shot, which drove them back, and by this time Colonel Harvey, had drawn an
indifferent body of Horse together, who came bravely on the Enemy, but were by
the great numbers driven back, we slew of them on the place, about 8 or 9 and
they slew 5 of ours, many wounded on both sides; It being a very hot encounter
for the time not exceeding half an hour, they got into the Town, and in
their lodgings took two Foot Colors, and two Drums, we slew of theirs
besides the other, a Captain of a Troop of Horse, and took his Cornet with
his Colors, the Cornet desperately wounded, cannot live if he be not dead;
They took of ours 15 Footmen, and we twelve Horsemen of theirs, the loss was
something equal, and there was much mercy in it, that they were stopped
before they came to the Bridge, for had they bin Mrs. of it, they had divided
us from our Army at Newport as they did. a Troop of our Regiment that lay in a
village and could not come at us, but were constrained to get to Northampton,
so that ours and the Northampton forces have taken and slain near 100 of
others this week with the loss of 6 men, and 15 Prisoners, no Officer as I
can hereof; The Enemy retreated to Towcester, where they are with the greatest
body, they have both horse and foot; if more company comes down we shall give
them another visit I hope, for we have good incouragment to action. God not
being wanting to our weak endeavors, but hat followed us with his Blessings,
the continuation whereof is the Prayer of

Yours etc.

FINIS.

