The Hang-mans Lamentation For the loss of Sir Arthur Haslerigge, dying in the
TOWER.

Being a Dialogue between Esquire Dun, and Sir Arthur Haslerig

With their last Conference in the Tower of London a little before sit Arthurs
DEATH.

rinted for Tho V^re and VV. G^l^e^^son. 1660

A Discouse between Esquire DVN AND Sir ARTHUR HASLERIG.
Enter Esquire DVN. O The Lamentation of a bad Maket Sir Arthur, I am Dun and
undone?


Hazelrig. Why noble Esquire thou art a man of parts, and of brave dexterity.


Dun. Yes I warrant you, and you had been a man of parts too, had I but had my
own will according to expecta^ton


Hazel, Nay doubtless thou art a man of the times and counts all fish that
comes to net with thee.


Dun. I, I sir Arthur if I had caught you in my net you had be^n a fine fish,
had you not do you think.


Ha^el. Yes for you to have served me as the Fishermen do Herrings.


Dun. Why how is that sir Arthur.


Ha. Truly hang them in a string, but I think I was a little more cunning
then the rest for I slip my neck out of the co^er as the saying is in pvdding
time.


D. Did ye so, gad it I had caught you there, I would have known how you got
out a^^^^.


Ha^ I Dun you are a man of your hands it is (...).


Dun. Yes sir Arthur for rick and sl^p with the ^e^^.


Ha. Nick and ship Dun what does that mean?


D. I that is well remembered sir Arthur; 'twas my desire bad you come to Charing
Cross I had taught you what it meant.


Ha. W^ll Dun thou do but jest I am s^^e on it.


D. It is your pleasure to say so fir, but I must tell you all that were there
did be^^y believe that I were in carrest.


Ha. Nay if it be so let me tell you Esquier, your Angle was too short to catch
me with your bait.


D. Nay nay sir Arthur had you been once on the hook, my Line was so strong ye
had been hanged ere ye'd broke it.


H. Faith Dun I believe thou'st have given any thing I had been there.


D. In troth sir Arthur I must deal p^ainly with you, I would have given you a
slip for a tester, and that had been sufficient for a man of your Coat one
would think.


H. I that is true Dun, a great many more thought so besides thee, that my
deserts did merit as great a thing as that.


D. I Sir, and a great many did think 'twas pity but you had it too.


H. Why Dun think thou I had no more guts in my brains to act a Traitors
part, but to come under thy hands.


D. Nay sir Arthur I know you are a running Sophister, the Mines, and the
Colepits were not come by with nothing.


H. Why truly Dun I must confess all the lands, parks, livings, and spacious
places seemed no more to me then a mol^ in my glad.


Dun. Why I Sir Arthur, you were like the glatton expressed in the Proverbs, your
eyes were bigger then your belly.


Ha. No no Dun thou art mistaken, for when I had got all these Revenues I was
like the Dog in Esors Fables, even at Porchmouth I left the flesh, and lept at
the shadow.


Dun. I that was when you were so hungry and ravening after great Estates, that
a Town or a Castle could but give you a breakfast.


Hazel. Why truly Dun I must confess again to thee, I never slept contentedly,
no longer then I had purchased either parks or Livings.


Dun. Why I Sir Arthur that all the world knows, but what would you have done
with the Abbey at Westminster had you ass^^m'd the height of your ambition.


Hazel. I would have pulled it down to have built me stables.


Dun. Then what would you have done ^^i^^ the Parliament house, the meeting^
ace of your mischie^s.


Ha. I would have bound it about with a band of brafs, that when I dyed I would
have laid my bones there, that so long as the dusty Relics did remain, they
should never want a Rump Hazelrig to make up their ambitious number.


Dun. What, then you would have willingly sat in the house alive or dead.


Ha. Yes faith Dun as willing as ever I went to bed.


Dun. I but what would you have made the Nation to have been (...).


Ha. What should it have been then, an everlasting Commonwealth I tell thee.


Dun. A Common wealth do you say, in troth so the people believed you, for you
made every ones wealth common to your self.


Ha. Alas Dun I could not help it, for Covetousness so oversway'd me, I thought
I could have swallowed Mountains, for England was too little for my horses to
run in.


Dun. What the^ it seems it was the nature of the beast was it.


Ha. I truly Dun, or the nature of my prone ambion, for all my delight was in
money, land, and horses.


D. I and all my hopes was at last I should have horst you too, but now I think
to the contrary.


H. You find to the contrary, why are you any looser by me?


D. You know I am sir Arthur, and a great sufferer too.


H. Wherein I marvel, speak it plainly.


D. Sir Arthur the City can justify how long I have waited for you, from time
to time, from Sessions to Sessions, and wiring at all times to do my ^nty, now
you go about to depri^^ me of my Fees, which you know have been my ^ue for
these many years.


H. Nay Dun that's nothing, I did not require you to wait for me.


D. Nay sir Arthur that's nothing to the purpose for I did it out of tender
respects so you which was according to my duty sir Arthur.


H. Why Mr. Dun where did you wait then?


Dun. Why I watted at the Sessions house ^ndee^ Sir Arthur, with my Slip and
other Instruments about me for the work.


Ha. Nay now understand your mind Esquire; ha ha you wait for the velvet coare
and the breeches.


D. Hold good Sir Arthur, hear we once more, I have got many a fair pound with
velvet Coals and Breeches not long ago from sveral of your friends, therefore
I pray you Sir Arthur deny me not the same ^avour from your self.


H. Why I tell-thee Dun once again that they are not thy fees nor thy due
except I were hanged.


D. Alas Sir that's a thing quickly done you shall nere be troubled with that,
^le do it while you stand still.


H. O fie fie was ever a man troubled with such a fellow as thou art.


D. I a hundred in their times, Sir Arthur.


H. Why I ^^ll thee Dun for the luckre of my velve^ Cote and Breeches, thou would
persuade me to be hanged whether I will or no.


D. Indeed Sir let me tell you, there were eight hanged at ^haring Cross
whether they would or no, and I hope your worship will no refuse it to hinder
me of a small Fee.


H. Why man thou talkest as if hanging was nothing.


D. Indeed no more it is not Sir Arthur for choking is all.


H. But I am not prepared for thee yet.


D. That's nothing Sir Arthur, so long as I am ready for you.


H. But what shall I do with my Parks, and my Cole-pits.


D. Why I tell thee Sir Arthur, I can ease you of that care in a moment, which
none else can do, except they do as I do.


H. O Dun I Will not believe thee, thou look so like a hangman.


D. I Sir Arthur, like to like as the Di^el said to the Collier.


Ha. Dun you must not look a gift horse in the mouth.


D. Sir I look for nothing but my due.


Ha. Dun be ingenious to me.


D. I Will be ingenious with you as the rest.


Ha. Then tell me what you have done for me.


D. Sir, I have waited a long time at the Sessions for you, I have laid out
money for a (...) other things to do the work.


H^. Truly Dun they must lie on your hand.


D. Sir, I bad rather they shoud lie ^n your neck.


Ha. Dun thou art of a strange opinion, thou will speak fair, when thou art
ready to hang a man.


D, I sir, what is a man but's trade.


Ha Dun thou do not care if thou usest thy trade every day in the week.


D. Not I Sir Arthur so long as I get velvet Iackets so cheap.


Ha. You never knew the price of them.


D. That's no mattar sir Arthur, but some of your friends have been good
customers to me I thank them for it.


Ha. I dun, not with their will, for needs must go whom the Devil drives.


D. Why sir Arthur they had all their end, and I wish you had yours.


H. Why then Dun would persuade me hanging is the best death.


D. I tell thee no more then what be bodes me to do.


H. I, I Dun, if thou wast on the Gallows to hang me, you will say it behooves you
to do so.


D. In Troth sir every man must follow his trade, and I think nous will take
mine out of my hand.


H. Dun I would fain be rid of thee.


D. Sir, I would willingly dispatch ye.


H. Dun you want breeding.


D. Sir Arthur you want a Truss.


H. Dun have a care you are not kick.


D. Have a care you are not hanged sir.


H. Dun are not you the Hangman.


D. Sir are not you a Traitor.


H. Dun I do hate such language as this.


D. Sir I desir^ no more then my sees.


H. Dun I cannot endure thy sight.


D. Sir, pray grant me my right.


H. Dun thou are of a base profession.


D. Sir, you are in a worse condition.


H. Dun thou are talk of all the Town.


D. You are a Traitor against ye Crown.


H. Dun you are Newgates waiter.


D. Sir, You are Englands Traitor.


H. Dun I wonder you are not bing'd.


D. Sir, I long while you are hanged.


H. Dun I speak ingeniously to thee, as the old Proverb is, give the hangman
his due.


D. I there you lay very well Sir Arthar, give the Hangman his due, and it will
soon end the controversse between you and I.


Ha. What you mean the velvet Cote, and the Breeches.


D. Yes and the other ingredients belonging to them, then farewell to the old
Bullies of England.


H. I there one may see, what care you when your turn is served.


D. Sir Arthur you may believe me, I should be as willing to serve your turn as
any one, I hare been vstherto.


H. Yes for what I wonder?


D. For what, for the velvet Cote and Breeches I tell thee.


H. Yes and for that you would give me a slip I believe.


D. I Will give you an end that shall hold be sure on it, for we must consider you
are a person of worth.


H. Nay Dun that is very true, for I am worth a great deal more then I am
willing to part withal for I would willingly en joy it longer.


D. Why I tell thee Sir Arthur; you are constrained to part with your treasury
which you so dearly love and so much rejoice in, but be content with the old
proverb, needs must go the Devil drives.


Ha. O but I tell thee, could I but keep my estate, I care not if I took a
chamber in hell, so I could get my rack rents yearly,


D. Alas sir, without question you shall receive your wages accoring to your
desert


H. O but Dun when I am dead, thou wile und the Bishopric of Durham printed in
my heart.


D. I wist I may sir, then I shall be in hopes of ye breeches too, but when I
rip you up I shall think of ye voice at mount Atne.


H. What was that prithee Dun tell me.


D When the great rich Antonia dyed the D^vel cryth out at the mouth of the
fiery Zone prepare prepare, for the great Antonia is coming.


H Nay if it be so with great Antonia, I Will curse fortune for parting me and my
estate so soon.


D. I sir Arthur remember how easily you usurpt it for lightly come lightly
goes.


H. Let it go and behangd, for as the Fox says, some goes up, and some goes
down.


D. Truly sir that's my trade, for when your honor comes under my hand I Will use
you as kindly as the rest.


H. In troth thou look like a man that would do it.


D. I am as likely as any man, and I fain would show your honor my skill, and
if I do it not well, I Will never erpect your custom more.


H. Thou art a fellow that exceeds all men, thou wilt hang a man for his Cloak.


D. Truly sir I had rather hang a man for his Cloak than his body.


H. I so the people say, but I desire not to be troublesome to you Mr. Dun.


D. Nay siir mind not that, for had I you but up the Ladder you should not much
trouble me I Will warrant you.


H. I think thou wilt never leave hanging.


D. Good sir Arthur it is my trade, and your worship knows my occasions for I
have lost a great deal of time, and spent a great deal of money in waiting for
this small job of yours which if I lose my labor and my fees, I wish the Devil
had setch't you seven year sooner.


H. Why Dun what art thou afraid of thou seem to be so hasty.


D. Truly sir, I am afraid that you will not live to be hanged, which makes me
so ^ry the lamentation of a bad market.


H. Ah Dun if thou knew'st bu^ what strrange sights which I beheld, for I tell
thee, not long ago I beheld my dear Captain and Negromance Hugh Peter's head on
London Bridge, with many of my old companions.


D. Well and what was that all.


H. No, but when I had looked upon the top of the Tower, every corner had put up
in gold Charles Rex, Charles Rex, which sight so much astonished my spirit,
tha^ I shall never hold up my head again.


D. Ha, ha great Haselrig is this the cause ont let me addise you make your
will and bequeath thy lands to the right owners again.


H. Dun I thank thee for thy advice and I shall remember thee with a Legacy,
choose any man's estate in England I Will give it thee, but keep it how thou can.


D. Ha godamercy thou great A^tona, thou have not forgot thy old rules before
thou will let thy liberality fall, thou will make use of another man's goods, so
farewell fir Arthur, follow my advice, but give me thy hand though I cannot
have thy heart, and for your sake I will never be so backward in my duty to any
of your fr^^^ ds hereafter.


FINIS.

