ENGLANDS JOY, Expressed in an PINKION, To the most Renowned Man of Honor, and
Temporal Redeemer of the PRINCE, PEERS, and PEOPLE of this Land, HIS EXCELLENCY
The Lord General Monck.
SO then Victorious General George, go on,
To perfect thy A R^yal Present.
(...).
Thus that great Nevil Earl of Warwick
Make-King Warwick, thou wilt outdo,
And all the Worthies of past Ages too:
As He Is Proclaimed, so Crown, and set Charles right,
Then let The Devil and old Oliver.
old Nick and Nol do their worst spite.
So Kings may reign, by Jus Postliminii in the Civil Law.
Postliminial Rights,
And Suns come out o'th Sea, make new Those Knights usually made at Coronations.
Bath Knights,
Which must dispel all Mists; all Mischiefs yield
To Royal Virtue, Patience wins the Field:
Field without Sweat or Blood; the Cause so just,
It need not stir one Grain of English dust.
Which were the Beasts thou conquer'dst, tame, would be
Thought but an easy humane Victory.
But they were savage, hungry, fierce, and fell
As Lybian Lions, or those Beasts that dwell
In Indian Dens, my Men worse than Devils,
What Hand but Sacred could er'e cure such The Kings Evil cured by his touch.
Evils?
And only with a touch, by which we see,
Thou can outdoe Veni, vidi vici.
Cesarean Chevalry.
Indeed we were afraid, Good people all
Expected more a Royal Funeral,
Than such a Coronation, Rather his head to be cut off then anointed.
and to feel
The dismal dint of Parricidal steel,
Rather than Unction on his Sacred Head:
But He Is delivered, and we are brought to Bed.
So now He Is ours again, Great George, and who
But thee, shall we sing Jo. Paeans to?
To thee Great Soul of Honor, who were borne
To be Restorer of thy Prince forlorn.
The Great Redeemer of thy Countries Laws,
And brave Assertor of the true Old Cause. Kings are the true Suns, and all
Usurpers but Meteors or falling Stars.

Thou'st given our Sun to England, without Wars,
O'rthrown Phanatick Meteors falling Stars.
Those proud usurping Phaetons, that durst
Sit in the Chair of Fire, till it burst,
And singed all Earth and Sea it touched upon.
Leaving us dark, The Protectorians.
in conflagration.
Prodigious things were done, but all in vain,
They mounted Cromwels Cart, thou Charles his Wain.
But yet the Herculean Labors found no end,
New work was cut out for thee, The Fagg end of the late Long Parliament
by the Fiend.
More Monsters still arise, a Rebel Rump,
So often stripped and whipped, and dock't toth' Stump,
Must needs start up again, O cursed Flemish for Tail.
Stert,
How could thou still hold up so malapert?
After so many Regicidal Acts,
O'rwhelming all, with bloody The overflowing of Nile.
Cataracts,
To play Rex yet upon our heads, and be
Our Commonwealth, nay common Misery?
Others have often attempted to defeat,
This many headed Hydra, So Hercules was called for his destroying of noxious
Monsters.
but the cheat
Of The Good old Cause, revived it is heads, and we
Could hope no * (...) but thee.
So Dragon like, it dealth about it is blows,
None could withstand its Fury, no not those
That were immured, and fenced with Iron chains,
Posts, The City Gates, Posts, Portcullices, were beat down by the Rumps order.
and Portcullices: The City Veins
Were bloodless grown, to see their Ports beat down,
And Tails with many Heads usurp a Crown.
But thou have delivered them and us, who'rt borne
To be Redeemer of thy Country torn,
By such inhumane Miscreants; Thy hand
H^s from that creeping vermin cleared the Land.
Thou can as easily kill such Snakes as Hercules.
He,
That in his Cradle, strangled two or three.
None but our St. George in Story killed the Dragon.
George, could kill this Dragon dead,
And make Romance for History be read.
Against thy mighty Arm, what force prevails,
Who kill'st all monstrous Heads, as well as Tayls?
Proceed and Prosper so great George, and where
Thou please for to make thy Hemisphere,
You Are still our Constellation, lead us forth,
And th'inspired Needle's not more true to th'North,
Nor Rivers to the Sea, than we will be,
To our Dread Sovereign Lord, King Charles, and thee.
Nor shall we fear success in Peace, or War,
Whilst He is thine, and thou, our Northern Star.
J. H.

LONDON, Printed for M. B. 1660.


