The Levites Lamentation.
IF ever Persecution merited a remembrancer, Protestant blood a condoler, or
cruel Rebellion a reprover, this Irish cruelty, and English calamity (both
which exceed the belief of any but the Actors and Sufferers) might justly
awake the pens of Eusebius, Fox, or the most famous Martirologers to record,
Jeremy to bewail, or the sharpest Satyrist to reprove.

Even now my heart bleeds for the blood I saw, and my ink seems not black,
but sanguine; the horrid cries afresh awake, affright, astonish, whilst I see
the purple robe and hat wreaking in the blood of the Lamb offered, but Christ
crucified; to see the Popes Bull goring, and men borne blind, cruelly massacre
the sons of illumination; the big-bond sinewy, and grisly tyrant trampling on
the feeble woman, and unborne Embrio. It drew tears from holy Elisha, to see
cruelty charactered in the face of Hazael, 2 Kings 8.12. which makes him break
out, Because I know the evil that thou shall do unto the children of Israel,
for their strong Cities shall thou set on fire, and their young men shall thou
slay with the sword and shall dash their infants against the stones, and rent
in pieces their women with child. This day by the Romish Aramite was this
Prophecy fulfilled. Now is the greatest murderer held the most valiant, as if
valor consisted in a bel^ine horridness, and fortitude were the eldest son of
fury.

Me thinks Nero (the depraver of the Cesarian Monarchy) at sight of this bloody
banquet should appeal to all Historians no more to list him for the Monster of
men, nay the bloudiest of Monsters: for indeed the sight of other crimes,
makes us often to lessen, but not leave our own. The common stature exults at
the sight of a Dwarf, as a Dwarf would do at Pigmies. Satan having infused
this poisonous a^our into the souls of men, that our ills are extenuated by
the ills of others This I call pharisaicall frenzy. You shall see the Popes
doctrine as dangerous as the Devils. Religion must now be the Irish mantle for
Rebellion. A pretended plot of ours for their conversion or correction, is by
this counterplot of theirs made both our subversion and destruction. This was
the cursed pretend of those more accursed pretenders, to stick the Ravens
plumes in the wings of the Dove. To make the mournings of that harmless
olive-bringer, the croaking omens of the Arke-deserting-Raven. For such is the
deformity of sin that none desires to be the ill he seems. Saul at the
threshold of his accursednesse begins with a blessing, 1 Samuel 15.13. by a
J^suiticall policy do they wear piety like a perriwig trimly curld and combd
on the deformed head of Rebellion, and murder. It Is true that once Jacob desired
to seem Esau, but ever since sin like Rebecca has taught the Esaus to seem
Jacobs. Judas learnt this not from so many, as he has taught it. Our Savior
tells that under a pretense of long prayers we swallow widows houses. O God,
since I cannot be what I would, give me grace not to varnish my ills, or cheat
my salvation with a seeming sanctity. How hardly is my pen drawn to this
inundation of blood? I find in my eyes the same stoppage that Basil the Great
did, who after he had read his text could not proceed for weeping, my mind
would gladly deviate from my intentions, and they digress from a more
peaceable subject. 1643. The Climatericall year of the English Nation in
Ireland, some well affected Christians sent diverse abroad with Petitions for
subscriptions to supplicate from the honorable Houses of Parliament (which are
the refiners of Religion and Laws) a general Reformation, which was an
Apostolical act. This net was not cast out by any, save those that were truly
Piscatores hominum. Satan and Antichrist his firstborn as maliciously suggest
that this arrow was shot not only at their spiritual good, but temporal
goods. The man of sin employing his Sodomiticall Seminaries, Papisticall
Prelates, and Jesuiticall Incendiaries to sow these tares, firebrands in the
womb of their Hecuba, borne for the destruction or disquiet of their natural
parents, and native Country. Men borne in antipathy to Prometheus, for as he
was fained to have stolen fire from heaven to restore life into dead bodies,
they fetch fire from hell to bring death to the living, not only by murdering
the Religious, but Religion; as if the death of the spiritual life, as well as
the temporal were in one balance or line with them that observe neither
weight nor measure. The Romish Salamander lives not but in fire, nor can less
flames then a Kingdom keep him surviving. Now was it that God for our sins
determined the English prosperity, should be like Joshua's Sun be a day
permanent, but retrograde like Hezechiahs, it being the miraculous expression
of his justice in ruining either the forgetters, or contemners of his
blessings. Then began the despised blasts of Irish Rams-hornes to demolish the
walls of British Jericho's, when by a judgment as terrible as their cruelty;
armed forts were surprised by unarmed men; then ran the Lion from the Hare;
the shaking leaf and trembling Partridge now terrify the Oak, and hawke the
thistle, and beards the cedar; the base Lackey not running by, but away with
his mistress, whilst innocence and chastity become the reprovers of that life
they would lose but cannot. Judge of that great contestation between honor and
life, beauty and deformity, and resolve me in this blanke list (...) for thy
opinion if God ever showed, or Nation ever suffered a greater judgment.

Acteon ruined, and ravined by his pack of pleasures, for indeed we had too
much (...) Diana of Ephesus (not the piety but the pomp of a church) the silver
shrines had too many Advocates most men exclayming, but few besides profitable
respects either desired a reformation, or knew what a one to desire. Thus was
the golden Calfe prefferred to Moses, Barrabas to Christ, Garlic to Manna.
Nature a prompt master having taught us to advance politic ends, before pious.
As a period to our civil distractions fell these public, and whilst many
were distasting the present government, God took away all: the rejection of
Samuel that made his public vindication cannot prejudice the election of Saul
whom God deserted. Thus God makes our curiosity our scourge. Midas his wish
shall be his famine. Phaeton^ desire his death, and Jupiters diety the consumer
of his concubine. Them that would not quietly enjoy what they had, shall
unquietly dispose of what they had, or would enjoy. Civil dissentions, and
dislikes being terminated by a martial (or shall I say an impartial sword.)

The Church like Dianah is ravished by lustful Shechem as a punishment of her
roving, had she kept the tents of Jacob, she had been free from his rage, had
we not like her erred from our paternall protection, we had not endured their
rapines. It Is just with God to expose them to all malediction, that out of
wandering fancy leave the ranges of the sanctuary. Athaliah was there slain
for destroying the seed ^oyall, which I spiritually conceive to be the
integrity of a Church, born and continued without the milk, or meat of
Canaanitish, and adulterous traditions, which being spurious slips cannot
flourish, nor have a longer prosperity then the gourd of Jonahs, or the
unfortunate, and earthy womb that gave them conception.

Sin ripened like the pride of Gath, defies the Host of the Lord of Hosts,
bathing the monstrous spearhead of his rage, in the blood of the chosen: how
feeble has the fall of Adam made his hapless posterity? the glorious English
long clad in the victorious spoils of that barbarous people, become the
rebaters of their skeins, but not of their rage; finding now how dearly the
Israelites paid for their cruel mercy in not extirpating the Idolatrous
Canaanites, those that policy left, for hewers of wood, and drawers of water,
hew the flesh, and draw the blood of their masters: thus humane policy is
punished by inhumane impiety, teaching us that all the purposes of flesh and
blood, having not godliness for their basis, have sandy foundations, and that
policy without piety is a damnable discretion. The Dove and the Serpent should
like those two kine of Bethshemesh at once be yoked to draw the Ark of God,
from the possession of the heathens to the people of God; or like Cleobis and
Biton to draw their mother to the Temple: where observe the kine, and brethren
were rewarded by death; the kine sacrificed to the true God, the brethren to
the false. O God, so bless my pilgrimage that at my termination my last act
may be best, that so I may like Manoahs sacrifice ascend up unto thee by an
Angelical convoy.

Those that sacrificed up the calves of their lips, are now like beasts
sacrificed. The rude reed runs through the hand that sustained it, whilst the
hoofes of untamed and untaught monsters trample on those heads that shod them;
all alliance turning rebel either to civil, or legal contracts. Those
National ties held sacred, and Gordian, of gossip, or fosterer are denied by
the brutish, to the British Hazael and Zimri murdering their Masters, the act
not disavowed, but countenanced, pardoned, and applauded by depicted Jezabel
that Romish harlot. Solomon's great sacrifice at the Temples dedication was here
outvied in number, but not nature, the Beast was not offered, but preserved;
for here the Minister was the chief sacrifice, the Beast the sacrificer. The
Ram was not offered for Isaac, but he for the Ram, as if the gold had been more
holy then the Temple, or sacrifice then Altar. Eliahs once slew the priests of
Baal, but now Baals priests slaughter the sons of the Prophets; nor place,
nor person is regarded, but the Protestants are murdered in the very Churches,
as if Protestant blood were only the hallowed water to sanctify those places
for their Idolatrous, profane, damned, and accursed Masses. Certainly it may
be feared that we did something that displeased God, which justly called for
his exploding.

Now are the fountains of living waters, the balm of Gilead, the holy seals
of the Covenant, the sacred columns of Gods word made the derision of the
ungodly, whilst they are rent in pieces and dashed about the heads of the
owners, till they drew blood on their heads and faces; with these, and the like
opprobrious and impious speeches, here you English dogs and heretics, you
shall have Bibles enough: Surely had not those holy legacies or the blessed
Spirit, been first by our selves undervalued, it had not been in the power of
those reprobates, thus to have profaned the holy food, or the feeders thereon.

Their first expressions began in the ruin of our estates, having first
published all correspondence with the Scottish our brethren, whether out of an
intent not to awaken their dislikes of these new insolences, or perchance
conceiving they had not forgot our hostil preparations against them the
foregoing years, and therefore might hope to make them Newters: at all which
conceits I admire had they but conceived the irreconciliable distance between
their Religions; yet their divelish pretense and disguised affection, too much
wrought in those dismal days (in which every head was perplexed, if not
darkened with distractions) on that valia^ Nation; insomuch, that one Barhome
by title, but by name John Mac. Culloh, Captain of a foot company, with
others, advised me (when I had kept my house seven weeks after the Rebellion
began) to fly for my life, adding they were reasonably well secured by a
Proclamation published by the Rebels by direction of their chief, for the
Scottish protection, in return of a favor done him in his infancy by a
Scottish Gentlewoman, who either saved his life, or liberty in his swathing
bands. And but that God determined they should mingle with us in that great
confusion. and effusion of estates, and blood: I admire so wise a people, and
perspicuous in the darkest aenigmas, should be so deluded: but where God
intends an infatuation all humane wisdom is emerged. The deepest reaches of
earthly knowledge, have had as deep precipices; none had a fearfuller fall then
him the Scripture styles as an oracle of God, we the defeats of those great
projects of Pharaoh and Herod, that neither of their designs, or wise
intendments could suffocate the type or substance, the penner of the law, or
publisher of the Gospel the Scribe of the sacrifices, or him sacrificed by the
Scribes. But this Romish Machiavilian plot took effect, so the prevention of
bloody and helborne projects are seldom prevented, nay nor suspected by those
of a holy and an upright conversation. It Is for the sons of darkness to bring
those things to light. But our brethren paid dearly for the cruel mercy of the
Irish, for they staying after the English, of which some were slain, some
stripped, and sent away, were most of them, man, woman, and child cruelly
massacred.

The English are now left, as God left his, when they had first left him; some
flying when none pursued, sin adds to the stature of our fears, for nothing
makes men terrible even to themselves but their transgressions, whilst the
greedy pursuers seem like Mercury with winged feet to fly with a devouring
sword to kill them already near death, with the expectation of death, whilst
the enemies swords are as drunk with our blood, as they with our drink, of
both which they seem insatiable: the thirsty earth not more greedily receives
the early, and latter rain then they of both liquors, insomuch that one (...)
O Mallon was heard to boast inhumanely that he with his own hands had murdered
six and twenty English and Scotch in two days, whereof there were twenty five
Scottish: O unheard of cruelty, it is a wonder to me that this man should be
borne by the common course of generation, for certainly his sire or dam must
needs be an Irish wolf, in whose bosom was harbored, so little humanity.

Now do these like those Philistims, inflamed with rage, and drink, their
souls intoxicated more then their bodies with the cup of the Whores
Fornications, Revelat. 17.2. draw out the poor Captives to death, as if the
best banquet were the bloudiest. The son of Hagar now abuses the heir of the
Promise, now is disoculated Sampson that grindes his abused soul more then
their meal brought forth to make pastime to the Philistims.

I knew one Bell of Muckamore near Antrim, whose eyes they stubbed out to make
him confess his money, then abused him, and lastly murdered him, that death
which is terrible to our selves, afford us delight if inflicted on others. With
what delight and pleasure can we read those cruel persecutions of Nero,
Domitian, Trajan, Adrian, Marcus Aurelius, Severus, and the rest: nay, the
bloudiest of our murdering Mary, who drew the blood in stead of milk from the
paps of her Nurse, having such a Catholic Spanish heat in her veins, that
the blood of many English Martyrs could not allay.

The cruelties exercised at Merindol, and Cabriers, where the craggy mountains
expressed more mercy to the hunted martyrs, then the flinty souls of their
persecuters.

That damned massacre of Charles the ninth anno 1572. whose blood issuing from
several parts of his body (at his death) fully expressed his belluine
disposition. Not King themselves profusely wasting, or unmercifull exhausting
the blood of their Subjects, shall find exemption at that great and just Audit
kept by Jehovah. The highest deputations have the heaviest cares. How soon is
Saul lost in his new Monarchy? These I say could we peruse with patience, and
pleasure.

The Spanish cruelty more heathenish then those on whom it was exercised in the
Indies, which were till now the grand patterns of abused hostility, invasion,
and victory are so far unfit to parallel with the Irish inhumanity, as they
have lost our wonder.

The horse-leeches of Rome bloudily conceiving that Protestant blood is the
marle of their Religion, and that nothing produces so rathe a spring to the
Catholic cause as the carcasses of purer professors: when as it is the
general assent that the blood of martyrs is the seed of the Church. Sacks of
wool are held the best foundations for bridges in the strongest currents, as on
those were built upon the martyred carcasses of our predecessors (the
Protestant Religion so surely) that all those great inundations from the
Apostolical, or rather diabolical sea, could never overwhelme, yet then was
our profession but like to Mephibosheth who though he was of the seed royal,
had Saul's possessions, and eat bread at the Kings table, yet was he lame in his
feet, 2 Samuel 9.3. and I suppose his cure would have been more needful, and
acceptable to him (could it have been effected) then either his possessions or
honor.

God always preserved his Church, of which the Arc was a type which shall
float over the world-drowned-shores to preserve a holy remnant; and the earth
swallow up those streams of poisonous malice, vomited by the serpent against
his love, his dove, his fair one; all these persecutions could not so much as
startle the English lethargy; the evils that we expect are lessened, if not
prevented, when as sudden alarms not only awake, but astonish.

The great battles of Canna, Marathon, and those two daughtes of Epaminondas,
Mantinea, and Leuctra, with those more famous where the Stars fought in their
order, and Kishon like a besome swept them away: (even so let thine enemies
perish, O Lord) those great defeats given and received by the Turk, and
Christian, the sword, fire, famine, pestilence, and desolation of the Jews,
with what other horrors have eradicated the Roman and Gretian Empires; were by
us perused with pleasure, and yet now that a destructive insurrecton, draws
his daggar at our throats death walking over our own thresholds, famine having
entered to cling up our bowels, fire to dissolve our beings, and unkind exile
to shoulder us from our abodes, poverty rushing like an armed man, meager and
pined visages meeting us at every pace, wounded and mangled carcasses peeping
out of bushes like ghosts from the grave, Christians exposed naked to
unmercifull cold, and mountainous ways, with not a fig leaf to hide their
nakedness, poor women with child brought a bed, and dead in woods, and
caves, in that unchristian manner that my pen dares not express: but leaves
their miserable condition to the consideration and commiseration of those that
expect a happy deliverance: heaps of slaughtered Christians, to part of which
the dogs had given sepulcher, many hanged upon trees and boughs, part of which
we could perceive had been burnt before: at these sights, and many more horrid,
how are our resolves amated? our courages que^d? our resolutions daunted? now
does poor Germany, and our slight neglect of their calamities deeply possess
us, the afflictions of Joseph are afresh bemoaned, and the martyrdomes of the
Apostles are now lamented, and what is more the poverty of our Messiah, his
tears, pilgrimages, s^ripes, spittings, contempt revilings, agony, and bloody
passion, which before was read over as an ordinary story of Scripture, and if
read, not remembered, if remembered, not lamented, if lamented, it was but a qualme
of sorrow, now are we sufferers in his sufferings: Oh bitter misery, how sweet
are thy lectures? teaching sorrows are cordial griefs, and it is a blessed maim
that heals the soul; give me those wounds, O God, through which as a glorious
mirror, I may behold the mirror of glory.

Now began the famine of some to conclude that the violentest death was the
best, and the lengthned life the only miserable, that the shortest way to the
grave was the sweetest, and that the last gasp was most comfortable, many
searching for the pangs of death as the only Elixar to cure all diseases, the
feared winding sheet, and insatiable grave proving now desired, which was
before horrid.

That heaven the seat of God under which we regardlessely walked is all the
canopy is left the English, the humble earth the footstool of God, and mother
of us all, on which we proudly trampled, lets her woeful children lie on her
bosom, that fain would lie within it; the woods and bogs becoming either out
shelter or sepulcher, the contemned food of the Irish, sorrel, watergrasse,
three leaved grass, weeds, and water is now made our delicates. The tender and
loving wife repines at the nourishment eaten by the husband of her bosom,
whilst the infants complaints begets fresh throws in that breast which used,
but could not nourish it, the mothers tears showing a compassion, but not a
redress, happy were the infant could it have been cherished with tears, as
before with milk, for the eye was wet to see the breast so dry: fruitfulness
is now held a greater curse to the forlorn English, then sterility was to the
Jews. Jeremy thou mourning turtle of Sions sorrows, I wish not a double portion
of thy spirit, but thy sorrow, that I might be that silver trumpet that should
publish to all posterity the calamities of those our brethren, that did, and do
want those succors our luxury devours. She is no Niobe that cannot find one
tear to cast into our Ocean of brine, and lend a sigh to those broken hearts
that sorrow has rather made statues, then men. Suffer not the afflicted of the
Lord to tread the winepresse alone, lest when thy aloes are given thee to
drink thou find none of Elishas salt to cure the brackishnesse. Partnership
in sorrow has the power of mitigation, and thou shall have the praise if not
to have relieved, to have eased our pangs.

But whither am I transported? Summons to grief find but deaf cares, and a
dead welcome: every man desiring rather to go to a theater, then a tribunal,
mirth having as many assistants too many, as tribulation too few. Solomon is as
little followed in these two Proverbs, as in any, better is the house of
mourning then the house of mirth, and the day of death then the day of ones
birth; but when be comes with an inviting exultation Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice O
young man, in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes,
he shall have more followers then Darius or Xerxes: this gripe of pleasure has
gotten Rome so many Proselites, when Religion complies with Nature, our
corruptions are wooed, and wedded to a glowe wormy happiness.

The great Belshazzers in their greatest elevations, find their knees
knocking, and discern the hand writing of death on their walls, and those
Nebuchadnezzars that prided themselves in their spacious structures (as many
there were that built with marble which contemned the corner stone) are now
sent amongst the beasts of the field, not only for their abode, but sustenance.
Those holy duties before neglected are now with a compulsive trepidation
observed. It Is a miserable thing for a soul inured to sin, to be hurried into
his devotions, death at the heels and hell in the eyes, seldom produce any
but distracted supplications: when as he that dies daily has wrested the iron
scepters out of the power of death and hell; having an infallible interest in
him, that not only got the conquest, but sung the comfortable soule-cheering
insultation over both these, till then indomitable tyrants. Oh death, where is
thy sting? Oh grave where is thy victory? Therefore, Quid retribuam? but
thanks be unto God, which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,
1. Cor. 15.55.57.

Now would those that had consumed a patrimony, rejoice to find those husks
that none shall give them. How gladly would the gripple hand receive that alms
it has detayned? finding a sad return of his uncharitable repulses. That
Dives that would not give a crumme demanded, shall find a drop denied. O God so
enlarge my heart, that I may give what I can, and so enlarge thy mercies, I may
receive what I would.

It was no single arrow God shot in that Nation, or us poor English; for as if
the sword had been too blunt a sith, or sickle, to mow both the wheat and
darnell, and a single punishment too favorable a scourge, God sent the fire,
and lest that should be too sparing in consuming our sins that made us so
combustible, and not fully refine the oar from the dross: God sent the famine
to devour those that had nothing to eat; and lest that should leave any
gleanings in this Irish Aceldama, the Lord sent a pestilent Fever, that swept
away innumerable people: insomuch that in Colerane there died in four months
by computation six thousand, in Carickfergus two thousand and five hundred, in
Belfast and Melone above two thousand, in Lis^ygarvi eight hundred, and in
Antrym and other places a proportionable number. So that here the chariot of
Gods justice was drawn by those four horses Rev. 6. a white, a red, a black,
and a pale horse; this disease augmented our miseries, the Fevers being so
contagious, that the living durst not see them sick, nor bury them dead; that
I have seen the husband carry his dead wife to the Churchyard, and borrowing
a spade, dig a grave for her that living was his life: and the same man have
I seen the next day die in the same Churchyard: the like affection have I
seen the wife express toward her departed husband, the son to the father,
father to the son, and the like. Here were the words of our Savior, not only
metaphorically, but verbally true: for the dead did not only bury the dead, but
the dying buried the dead also. Not any that escaped this Fever but lost all
their hair: I had it in the Newry seven weeks, where not only without, but
contrary to means, my God preserved me, to whom on my bended knees I give all
possible thanks. This sickness beyond the power of persuasive Divinity,
showed me God thwarting Nature, preserving in the grave, quenching the flames
of my sickness, even with what Physicians say it is inflamed; my cordialls and
julips, were running water, in stead of barley, and sometimes a little milk,
salt beef, or porke, oaten bread and cheese, the allayes to my heat and
hunger. Thus from the jaws of death and brims of the grave has God delivered
me, to lament and publish the death of those of my own Tribe. For on them fell
the brunt of this martyrdom: they were those appointed to slaughter at the
birth of this design: they could expect no quarter; others might ransom their
lives with their hidden goods: but this profession was sure to cope with death
in the horridst shape, as if Iaacobs curse were renovated, for they met with a
wrath more fierce, a rage more cruel then they used to Shechem, and found a
division in Iaacob, and a scattering in Israel, Genesis 49.7.

Which I the rather undertake, because some ill affected to the condolements of
the Irish Clergy here distressed, and by some harsh tongues depraved, have
lightly run over the miseries of that despised, and dispersed Ministry, to whom
I owe that little I have left, as being of the same mess with those sons of
the Prophets, that find More in olla.

I shall but in two passages digress from the Martyrology of the Ministry in
the Province of Ulster, and the one is my engagement that I ought to Mr. Morgan
Aubry Esquire, my honored friend, and his Man, to this I am drawn by my love,
the other is the unmanly and unchristian asage showed to Mrs. Smithson, a
Ministers wife, and her maid, that lived within four miles of Dublin, to this
I am drawn by my wonder, and these two I shall transfer to the last.

The first on whom their unsanctified hands were fastened, was Master Madder, of
Donnamoore, Rector, who in a most cruel and bloody manner, they cut in pieces,
and left unburied.

Secondly, Mr. Blithe, Minister of Dungannon, whom they hanged, whose wife with
3 small children, after 8 months miserable captivity, I saw in the Newry, great
with child, stripped naked, and ready to perish for want of relief.

Then Mr. Fullerton of Loughgall, Rector, to whom Sir Phelsmy o Neale, owed at
least six hundred pounds, upon mortgages, who though he and Mr. Aubry
abovesaid, had his Pass and Convoy for their safe conduct, was paid that debt,
by his paying his debt to Nature: for he at a bogges side was stripped,
murdered, and left unburied. With this coin has that flaming firebrand paid
his debts, such cancelling of bonds must they all expect that traffic with
the progeny of the Babilonish whore.

Mrs. Fullerton with two children, and great with child, came to the Newry
after eight months imprisonment, with sevenscore women and children in her
company, her self having not to hide her nakedness, nor no thing to keep her
feet from the ground, but two pieces of a raw cow hide tied upon her feet with
pieces of packthred, and what was more miserable, she was constrained to leave
two of her children upon the mountains, to the mercy of their Fathers
murderers: judge now, you that tie your lives upon the prosperity of your
infants, of the agonies of this distressed Gentlewoman, which made me call to
mind that mination of God, Deuteronomy. 28, 56.57. The tender and delicate woman
amongst you, which never would venture to set the sole of her foot on the ground
(for the softness and tenderness) shall be grieved at her husband, that lies
in her bosom, and at her son, and at her daughter, and at her after birth
(that shall come out between her feet) and at her children which she shall
bear: for when all things lack, she shall eat them secretly, during the siege
and straitnes where with thine enemies shall besiege thee in thy strong Cities.

Mr. Matchett Minister of Maharafelt, was after long imprisonment and extreme
hard usage, the Lord having given him the bread of tears, and ashes to drink,
he being an aged and reverend Gentleman, was most cruelly murdered at
Lieutenant Thurshies in the County of Londonderry, the Lieutenant and his
wife being both Recusants, could not by any means or entreaties, either save
or respite him from death, such favor found the English Papists amongst the
Irish, and such find the English revolters with the Spaniard, between whom is
as great correspondence, as between the Scotch and French Nations.

Mr. Hudson, Minister or Desert Martin, after many troubles, and calamities,
was taken from between two fetherbeds, out of Mr. Chapels house, where that
virtuous Gentle woman had long fed, and concealed him, but at length the Rebels
gave a date to her charity to him, and to his life, for the Rebels in a most
cruel and most barbarous manner murdered him.

Mr. Campion of Kilowen, being at the battle of Ballemony, which the English
in regard of the fatability of the day, call Blacke-Friday, having received a
great overthrow, which in all possibility had been the loss of Colerane, and
a dismal day to all the poor Protestants within it, had not God infatuated
either the wisdom, or daunted the courage of those Rebels, under the command
of Colkittoes sons, there did this Gentleman seal his love to the Gospel
with his blood, like Zuinglius in the head of his Company, honorably expiring
amongst his slaughtered Brethren.

In the same cause and manner was slain a Scottish Minister, (whose name I
cannot remember, though I was then in the same County) who took his leave, and
showed his love to the cause, (in which to their honors, that Nation is
forwardly zealous) under the command of Colonel Archibald Steward, late Agent
to the Earl of Antrym.

Mr. Tudge Minister of the Newry, after long imprisonment, and many perfidious
promises from the Lord Magenis, Sir Con Magenis, Governor of the Newry, and
the rest, was with thirteen more, under a pretense to be exchanged for other
prisoners at Downe-Patricke cruelly put to death, of which none but one Green
a Tapster to Mr. Butterfield of the Newry escaped, ransoming his life for forty
shillings: this Green brought me this Relation in May 1642. and as they were
leading to their slaughter, the poor Gentleman called upon Sir Con Magenis for
mercy, and performance of his promise; but the perfidious tyrant stopped his
ears, to his and their complaints; upon which Mr. Tudge, in the bitterness of
his soul desired God to require his blood at their hands, with these words of
the Psalmist; (Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord) then he with his fellow
Martyrs, taking the Communion in a little running water, in stead of the blood,
and a piece of an oaten strowen, in stead of the body of their Savior,
commending themselves, and their vile bodies into his hands that was able to
translate them into glory, yielded their lives to the stroke of the bloody
executioners, by whom he was hanged: but Lieutenant Trever and his wife with
some of the rest, which were diverse were cut to pieces.

Soon after, as all the English Inhabitants of that place often affirmed, Sir
Con Magenis was by the strange judgment of God, stricken with a strong frenzy,
running home to his own house on foot, the Lord taught him by the way, as
Gideon taught the men of Succoth and Penuel, his clothes and skin being justly
torn by the bushes and briers, in those uncouth ways his madness made choice
of, raving on his death bed, Take away Tudge, take away Tudge, do you not see
how he pursues me for his blood? in which desperate condition he died.

Thus God made this Rebel and merciless beast, by the lash of his Divine
Justice, acknowledge his transgression in taking away the lives of the
innocent. The same Sir Con having besides innumerable other murders, at one
time between Green Castle, and Carlingford, drowned sixty and eight
Protestants, to which he had promised quarter, affirmed by Mr. Holland, who
with some others, in a boat miraculously escaped to Dublin at that time, by
which means he and the rest escaped from tasting Sir Cons holy water.

Mr. Hastings Minister, endowed into a living of Mr. Fairfax being Schoolmaster
in Ballisegart a house belonging to my honored friend the virtuous Mrs.
Clotworthy, for which deliverance after a grievous thraldom, my heart
rejoices. Him they caused to swim in the Lough till he was drowned.

Mr. Dorrah, my Lord Canlfields Chaplain killed. Mr. Fleming Minister of
Clanfeckle, murdered. Mr. Mercer ^inster of Mulifr^k, murdered. Mr. Burns
Curate of Loughgilly, murdered.
Mr. Bradlyes Curate of Artray, Mr. New killed.

Mr. Wilkingson of Clovins, killed at the Cavan, he coming to the Crosse-keyes
Inn, desired a lodging, to whom an Irish mantendred himself, telling if he
walked into the garden, he would provide him one, the innocent Gentleman was no
sooner in the garden, but the Serpent betrayed him, asking him do you want a
lodging? yes, replied he, I have says Judas provided you one, and with that
drew his Skeane, and stroke him so violently on the head that his brains fell
out: this lodging was intended for the whole Clergy, had not God miraculously
defeated the purposes of these bloody hel-bounds; children whose mothers have
sore breasts, do sometimes draw blood as well as milk, which makes me believe
that the breasts of the Church of Rome, are sore, and full of corruption, that
her children draw so much blood amongst their milk (if any) that they
generally during their whole time thirst after it.

Mr. Thomas Traford killed by the Rebels after quarter was promised.

Mr. Mongommery hanged by the Rebels, he was of Dunamain Parish.

Mr. Paulmaster that once lived at Carickfergus Minister there, (was as his
wife informed me) hanged at his Church door.

Mr. Flack of Fermannah, a Minister of special note, was with two of his sons
taken out of Castle Crevenish, and also offered up to God as a sacrifice.

Mr. Michart Berket of Salters Town flying for safety with his wife, and seven
small children to Carickfergus, where his wife, and all his poor children died
most miserably for want of ordinary nourishment, himself being famished to the
point of death, finding the pangs strong upon him, got leave to go into the
Church of Carickfergus, where he had not long stayed, fitting himself for the
reward promised to them that made their long robes white in the blood of the
Lamb, to that land of Goshen, where they shall hunger no more, neither thirst
any more, neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat, Rev. 7.16. did
there depart this life.

Mr. Griffin, All of Ardmah, and murdered by those blood suckers on the sixth of
May. Mr. Bartly All of Ardmah, and murdered by those blood suckers on the sixth
of May. Mr. Starkey Curat, All of Ardmah, and murdered by those blood suckers
on the sixth of May.
For about the fourth of May, as I take it, we put near forty of them to death
upon the bridge of the Newry, amongst which, were two of the Popes Pedlers, two
Seminary Priests, in return of which, they slaughtered many prisoners in their
custody, where of these three were part,

Mr. Bev^r^ge a of Killa^an, Ministers of the same County, were sufferers in
this massacre. Mr. Robinson of Kilmoore, Ministers of the same County, were
sufferes in this massacre.
Mr. Lutfoot oof Castle Blany, tasted of the same mercy, being cruelly murdered.

Romulus the first founder of that City, is faind to be fosterd by a Wolf, and
was the murderer of his brother Rhemus, a presage of the cruelties should
proceed from that foundation, certainly there was some blood (which is a great
cementer) mingled in the mortar, for I am assured both the Empire, and
Hierarchy, the temporal and anti-spirituall dignity, have been supported by
cruel massacres, or bloody machinations, no act of hostility, conspiracy,
treachery, murder, symony, or what ever is accounted detestable amongst mere
moralists, but has been columns to uphold that grand bawdy house, wherein not
only corporal whoredoms, but spiritual are tolerated, from thence was
fined, and on the grindstone of Rome was this sacrificing knife ground that
cruelly cut off these Martyrs. Thus have I showed the unhappiness of the Irish,
who perchance are yet living, the happiness of them that are slain, but yet
alive. Well did the Jews call the grave domus viventia, from thence did arise
that life that assures us of the resurrecton to life, whereas the wicked man is
accursed in his grave, Esaias 14.19.

These are but a remnant of them that could not escape the Rebels tyranny or
my intelligence: many more must needs suffer that never came my care, for the
Inland Countries of whose passages I am not informed so credibly, I dare report
it, must needs afford great slaughters being remote from those garrison Towns
upon the coast, where many (God be praised) spared their lives.

Besides these that were thus massacred, there dyed of the pestilent fever,
who chiefly miscarried through poverty, famine, and succors in their sickness.

The reverend, learned and famous Martyr Bedle Bishop of Kilmore, who
suppported many distressed English, and was kept in restraint at Clowater, and
died at Mr. S^rednies house after some five months imprisonment, where like
Paul, he spent his time in converting his jailors, making his prison his
pulpit; wicked tyrants may bar Gods people from the congregation of the
righteous, but not God from the habitations of his people.

M. Pierce Minister of the Lurgan at Carickfargus. Mr. Simon Chichester
Minister of Belfast. Mr. Ducket Curate of Lisnigarvy. Mr. Redshaw Minister of
Colerane. Mr. Collins Minister of Kilrae And three Ministers more, whose names
I cannot learn, but was informed of their deaths by Anne Jackson, Francis
Barnaby, and Wentworth Moulsworth that came from thence, and are now all in
this City. Mr. Tailor of Carlingford.
All these dyed in Colerane. Mr. Chesman of Moninmoore Minister. All these dyed
in Colerane. Mr. Winter of Astra Minister. Mr. Luke Astrie Minister of
Ballekelly. Mr. Farwood Deane of Drummoore. Mr. Edward Stanhop Archdeacon. Mr.
Backster of Kildallon dyed in Castle Crag. Mr. Edward Livesly. Mr. Erskin of
Fermanah who took his sickness in Derry, but dyed in Scotland at Antrim.
Captain John Kilner of Jaughen-vale, having a Commission from His Majesty's
Commissioners for a foot Company, issued out in December. 1641. as also a
Commission from the Lords Justices, to be Provost Marshall of the City and
County of Londonderry, in both which, his son being a Minister, became his
Lieutenant and Deputy, being a preaching Soldier, and a military Minister, who
preached to his Soldiers when they were not in fight, and fought when he could
not preach, showing at once his love to Christ, and hate to Antichrist, who
having done exceeding good service, he being a forward and well qualified
Gentleman, but striving above nature to show his zeal in that holy war, by
many heats, colds, and other sufferings contracted that sickness which ended
his days, having time to apply that Swan-like song of Paul, the second of
Timothy, the 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. verses, which a legacy to his brethren, and
cordial to himself, was his last antheme, But watch thou in all things:
suffer adversity: do the work of an Evangelist: make thy Ministry fully
known. For now I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departing is at
hand. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the
faith. For henceforth is laid up for me the Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but to
all them that love his appearing. I have seen a large certificate of his
fathers unparalled services, in which he ought to be a partner, as being an
assistant, all which is subscribed under the hands of Sir John Vaughan, Knight,
governor of the City of Londonderry, and one of the Privy Council of that
Kingdom, Robert Thornton Major of that City, Henry Vaughan, Simon Pits, Henry
Finch, Henry Osborne Aldermen.

Mr. Newcomen Minister of Fawn, at Fawn.

Mr. Richard Walker Minister of Lifford, at Lifford.

Now you have seen Steven stoned, you shall see Peter and John, Paul and Silas
in interiorem carcerem, you shall see Jeremiah in the stocks, Jer. 20.2. You
shall behold Pashur putting him down into the dungeon with cords, where the
poor Prophet is not only fast in prison, but in mire, Jer. 38.6. for as they
held the Ministers the basest of men, so they provided for them the basest of
prisons: should we return their cruelties, we should put their Priests and
Jesuits into our common shoares. 'Dignum pattella operculum, those not marked
with the letter (T) for destruction, or on the lintells of whose doors the
Angel had sprinkled the marks of deliverance, found the protraction of life a
death; the taskmasters of Ireland, being more cruel then those of Egypt, and
enjoining more cruel conditions; for what can be more horrid then for an
Apostle, to be urged to be an Apostate, to be constrained to leave the way, the
truth, and the life, to walk in the labyrinths of falsehood, and death? I shall
show you some of the Lords captives in that Province.

Mr. Archdeacon Price of Drumlane, Mr. Adam Watson of Kilshanar both of the
County of Cavan, besieged in Castle Crag eight months, getting off by quarter.

Mr. Creighton of Virginia kept in misery eleven months.

Mr. Fitzgarret Minister, in hard and cruel restraint till the sixth of May
1642. who though a native, and next to the Primate of Armagh, a man of the
greatest splendour for Urim and Thummim of that Nation.

Mr. Boil of Carickmaharosse Minister, in bondage five months.

Mr. Gil Minister of Killally of the County of Monahan imprisoned five months.

Mr. Edward How Curate of Dartrie in bonds six weeks.

Mr. Ferchar Parson of C^nish County Fermanah two months.

Mr. Francis Sympson of Kilmore, County Monahan imprisoned eight months.

Mr. James Fethie Minister, kept in restraint eight months, having been
preserved from famine by M. Fitzgarrets goodness, who for his County take
found a little more cruel favor then other of his brethren.

Mr. Bradly Minister of Artra, imprisoned eight months, being often brought out
to be hanged, but next unto God preserved by the unmatchable goodness of Mrs.
Chapel now in the City finding save from one friend raised up for her by
Almighty God, a small return of that talent of charity, which she in those
days of blood and famine extended to many, especially the Ministry, which
sometimes brought her own life in hazard.

Mr. Archdeacon Maxfield of Glaslough, or if you will Buchamon junior for his
elegant, and smooth expressions in divine posies, kept in restraint by the
Ovendens, half bothers to Nero junior. Sir Philomy o Neal nine months.

A Scotch Minister, that after long imprisonment made a miraculous escape, with
Lieutenant Smith, Lieutenant to Captain George Blunt of Montjoy, and some
others in a small boat and oars, hackled out with their knives, over Lough
Neaugh to Antrym, it being above twenty miles by water, in the Winter season, a
dengerous passage: whose name I have forgotten, yet I heard him preach in
Belfast, upon this portion of Scripture, Jer. 4.4. Thus we see as Antichrist
strives to drowned, kill, and famish the elect, even so Christ by a Divine
providence, sowes up the mouths of these ravening elements, and preserves his
own Paul in spite of the whistling Euroclydon, and angry Adriaticke, he shall
have his Angel aboard, to bring him blessed tidings of his life and his
companions, Act. 27.23. That passage of Esaias 43.2. Fear not: for I have
redeemed thee: I have called thee by thy name, thou art mine, when thou passest
through the waters. I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do
not overflow thee, was fulfilled on these distressed escapers.

Mr. George Cottingham Rector of Monahan was put into a close dungeon, where
his frankiscense was the excrements of men in heaps, it being the dungeon
belonging to the goal, where five days he was detained, obscured, living
himself unrelieved with any kind of nourishment having his wife and four
children in the same misery.

Mr. Beale prisoner at Clowater, and in restraint nine months.

Mr. Dennis Serreduie an Irish man, but a minister, still in restraint.

Mr. Henry Steel minister of Clautubeit was the space of nine weeks sometimes
in the dungeon, and sometimes in the jail, having a young child to keep, not
above a quarter old, which he cherisht sometimes with milk, and sometimes with
water out of a sucking bottle, that now those that wanted tongues or language
to call for gengeance on these homicides, make their blood louder orators to
implore justice, he was at last deprived of his child, himself being
stripped, escaped to Dublin, where, and here he has endured by the flux, and
other sickness extreme misery.

Mr. Dennison minister of Tedawnet, was stripped naked, and beaten worse the a
Turkish gallyslave, lying naked in a ditch all night, and brought from thence
to Monahan Castle, where he lay long half dead, and benumed. Thus is poor
Joseph because he will not lie with Potiphars wife unjustly condemned to a
miserable bondage, because we were betrothed to the Spouse of Christ, and would
not mingle our selves with the harlot of Rome, therefore is the lap of our
garment (our profession) made our destruction. But these resolved martyrs
though tempted with the beauty of that Romish Thais, upon a holy consideration,
ponder Joseph's consultation, and with that armed themselves against their
temptations, and their own persecutions, saying with him, Genesis 39.89. Behold
my master knows not what he has in the house with me, but has committed
that he has to mine hand, there is no man greater in this house then I:
neither has he kept any thing from me, but only thee, because thou art his
wife, how then can I do this great wickedness, and so sin against God?
mistake me not, I intend not to have that application hold in all the
particulars, for I dare not derogate from Gods presence, so will I not arrogate
to our Ministry giving them any thing that may more honor them, then that
which will be onerous to them (the weightinesse of their charge) so great, that
he is like unto Issacar, or so made. Thus far of the slaughters, deaths by the
fever, and cruel thraldomes of the Ministry. I come now to render an account
of such as I left in Carickfergus, Belfast, Newry, Lisnygarvy, and the
neighboring parts, in so unfathomed a misery as my plum and line is to light
and short to express their indigencies.

Mr. Cloggir of Dean Parish, Co. Cavan. Mr. Doctor Tate of Ballihaire, In
Cavan. Mr. White of Kilmore. In Cavan. Mr. Moss of Newtowene in Fermanah. Mr.
Commin of Clankee in the Co. of Cavan. Mr. Jenton senior Cou. Down. Mr. Jenton
junior Coun. Antrim. Mr. Slack of Callee hill Cou. Cavan. Mr. Hudson of
Belturbutt Co. Cavan.
Mr. Henry Fethy, mr. James Fethy, mr. Lutefoot of Strangford, mr. Patrick Gar,
thee three Watsons the father, son and nephew, mr. Massy, mr. Jones, mr. Jues,
and mr. Paul Read of Blackstaffe, both which were compelled to lead a horse and
a carre, with either hay or wood, for a groat or six pence a day to keep
themselves from famishing, mr. Wilson of Enver, mr. John Dunbar, mr. George
Lesly, mr. Andrew Law, mr. Craford, mr. Ogleby, mr. Laurence Tompson, mr. Durry
of Ballimenah, mr. James Tracy, mr. Hardir, mr. Walter Lamont, mr. Jorrest of
Dumagur, mr. Robert mc. Neal, mr. mc. Neale, mr. Dr. O Neale, mr. Veazy, mr.
Major, mr. Backster, mr. Charles Vaughan; mr. Cade, mr. Hollana, mr. Dean
Rhodes, mr. James Stewart of Garvahir, mr. David Roven of Redbay, mr. Nichol^s
Todd, mr. John Michel of Ana Clowen, mr. Hugh mc. Lecinan late of Leakin-larke,
mr. James Creighton, mr. James Melvin of Down-Patrick, mr. Johnson, mr.
Fullerton, for distinction sake called red Fullerton, mr. Monopeny, mr. James
Portus, mr. Downs, mr. James Downham, mr. Lambert, mr. Brooks, mr. Patrick
Doncan, mr. Dr. Blare, mr. Joster, mr. Hamilton, mr. Travis mr. Thomas Stewart,
mr. Bell, mr. Wallet, mr. Woodridge. These with some others that escaped like
Jobs messengers to bring sad tidings of their brethrens deaths, but not
intermits, and are now on the dunghills of calamity with holy Job, finding as
ill comfort as comforters, and still hangs at the bloody and dry paps of the
Church in Ireland, whence they can draw nothing but wind, and that may be
heard from their full souls (though empty bellies) in their sighs and
groans, the silent interpreters speaking sorrows, so that there needs no wind
but that to overthrow their houses of clay.

Now if you please survey with a commiserating eye those whose wearied steps,
fainting bodies, and wounded souls, have repaired to the Bethesda of England
for cure of their heart-rending sorrows, where in all acknowledgements of
grateful humility, some of them have found the Angel stirring the sovereigne
balm water of your charities to their relief, which many of the feebler sort,
either through weakness of friends, abilities of expressions, or a
selfe-killing modesty lie at the brinke unremied to them, divine Charity open
the doors of thy Physic, and Chyrurgery, and into their bleeding wounds
pour thy oil and thy wine, Samaritan-like eye the robbed and bleeding Levite,
pay thy penny for his present harbor, and promise for a slender remainder
these undertakings, Angelical virtue shall make thee be translated with Enoch
or Eliahs in a fiery chariot, thy own immortality will guide thee to the
preservation of us mortal men.

Mr. Mors of Fermanah, and Parish of Rammullie after he had been robbed, and
stripped, was constrained being stark naked to carry his two children twelve
miles upon his back, by which time she grew so ^urbated that his uxoriousnesse
prevailed beyond his paternall love to his children, so in that a great agony
of spirit, he was forced to leave the fruit to the mercy of the enemies, and to
preserve the tree carried his wife above eight miles upon his back, they being
both naked, Eneas could not out pattern this affection to aged Anchises.

From that Province are here under thy wings, as chickings fearing famine that
predatory Kite, Mr. Richard Bu^rowes, Mr. Baker, Mr. George Walker, Mr. Bedle,
Mr. Dr. Bailey of the Cou.Cavan, the two Sings of Ahaderick, the other of
Dundalke; mr. John Freeman, mr. Hammond, mr. Bunburie, and as I hear his
brother, mr. Boil. mr. Cottingham, mr. Nathaniel Draiton, mr. William Green,
mr. Francis Sympson, mr. Gabreath, mr. Cohun, mr. Henry Steel, mr. Edward
Carter, mr. Clearke, mr. Sempil, mr. Anthony, mr. Harrocks mr. Philip Tandy,
mr. Tinly, mr. Richard Head, mr. Kean, mr. Bradley, my unworthy self, mr.
James Reynolds, mr. Steer, mr. Leigh, mr. Diggery Holman, mr. Waterhouse.
These stars show in the lower orb, of the higher, is that famous, learned, and
studious ingrosser of learning, the late Lord Primate or Ardamgh Usher, the
fluent and elegant Seneca of Rapho, the solid and grave Buchworth of Deummoore,
quick and Eagle eyed Singe of Cloyne. The learned, prompt, politic, and
engine headed Bramhal of Derry. Lastly, one Clergy man more I find whose names
sake promises a sudden termination of all our sorrows (without speedy succors)
and that is Mr. Death, Minister of Seapatrick. Thus you find amongst the
distressed Clergy, an Usher and a Voyder, but no meat on their tables; these
with their charges are fit objects for Dorcas to cloth, the Sarepthan widow,
or good Obadiahs to feed, and the Shunnamite to lodge, the prayers of which
will revive thy dying or dead hopes, increase thy decaying store, being rain
to thine inheritance, and restore thy hurt, mained or dead issue. Lastly, as
thou have opened thy bowels of compassion, they shall open to thee the gate
called beautiful, that leads into our elder Brothers Fathers, where are many
mansions, for the poor for Christ, and of Christ's are janitores Coeli. And now
I come to the two digressions specified before.

The first digression is from the subject. With Mr. Fullerton was murdered Mr.
Morgan Aubrey Esquire, and his man (who though no Minister) I have thought good
to mention in regard of those many dear ties of love and friendship between
us, to whose disastrous death I dedicate this tragic remembrance as a monument
of his sufferings, and my sorrow, a Gentleman of an active, brave, and Roman
spirit, whose breast was not only filled with pleasing flames of learned
Poetry, but the more heroic fire of resolution, sweetly allayed with a modelt
and well tempered disposition; a man that had merited as much from that laethe
drinker Sir Phelomy O Neal, as a Gentleman could, having effectually negotiated
for him in many particulars of consequence with the late Lord Strafford, to
whose Countess he had been Gentleman usher, yet was he all engagements waved,
betrayed by letters of safe conduct to a cruel and merciless but chery, first
stripping him, then killing him at a bogs side. But en his servant Henry
Lawrence (whom I have heard to be of a mighty stature and valor) a
Warwickshire man, who by surprising one of the Rebels swords, having slain
four or five before he was seized on, was showed that cruelty which was
forborne to ravilliac the parricide of Henry the fourth, that Caelar of the the
Flower du liz and was only exercised by Cambises upon one of his unjust judges
whose skin he flaied off, and nailed it to the tribunal, as a terror to his
son that succeeded him, had but some of ours been made so exemplar, unjust
votes had not laden our Kingdom with these bloody contestations. The Judges of
Israel rid on their white Asses, to show I think as well their purity and
innocence, as their patient undergoing the insupportable weight of their
callings; but it is feared some of them have not only cast off that integrity,
but purity and constancy also, this Laurence after many wounds received, they
flead some part of him, and so left him cruelly murdered.

The second digression is from the Province, but something adhering to the
Subject. But above all barbarous, inhumane, hethenish, and unheard of murders,
was that of Mrs. Smithson a ministers wife living at the Kilne of the Grange
within four miles of Dublin, who being persuaded to return to her house, in
hope to have the Communion cup, and a barrel of wheat given her, all which was
promised by her satanicall seducer, her poverty having made her too credulous,
she went along with her maid servant, no sooner had they gotten this
unfortunate Gentlewoman in their power, but they stripped her of her apparel,
setting her naked a stride upon a lean jade, tying heavy weights at her
heels, then with stripes forced they the horse to run through waters, and
leap over ditches, and to travel in the most uneasy passages till they brougt
her into their army, that so they might not seek for any other then
Papisticall evidence of this their bestiality; this usage she had until her
body was torn in a unheard of manner, feeding her with bread and water, which
was rather affoarded to protract the miseries they intended her then to
preserve or reprive a life, and when that her body could not any more be made a
spectacle of their shame, she was restrained, where first they cut off one
ear, boyld it, and rubbed it about her mouth, then the other, after that her
nose, using them in the same manner, had Zopieus been here to have seen this
picture in her face, he would have declined his notable resolution; at last
they put out her eyes, and when they saw nature willing to ease her torments by
dissolution, and that merciful death would set a period to their butcheries,
they hanged her and her maid upon one bough, Her husband as before she went
having used all possible persuasions to keep her from going, so used all manner
of diligence to procure her return, after he perceived she had outstaied her
intentions, bomplained to the State that she was gone to Justice Wolverstons,
whose brother was then in Dublin (being both obstinate Papists) who being sent
for to the State, and admonished of their jealousies of the woman's miscarriage,
prevailed to be sent thither for her delivery and restoration, but finding her
past recover, deserted Dublin, his estate which was great, and obedience which
was little, and turned Rebel, which was no marvel; thus these cruel
Benjamites for doubtless they were so in that other act of unseemlinesse, did
not abuse the Concubine, but the virtuous wife of a Levite, the story of whose
mangled and macerated carcass I transfer to the eleven Tribes of our English
Israel, knowing they will conclude, having seen this sad and dismal spectacle,
as they did, Judges 19.30. And all that saw it, said, there was no such thing
done nor seen since the time that the children of Israel came up from the land
of Egypt unto this day.

Consider the matter, and consult and give sentence, then shall we all
domestic intestines laid apart, join with Israel, to punish this damnable,
and other facts of unpattern'd cruelty like them in the 20. of Judges 48. then
ye men of Israel returned unto the children of Benjamin, and smote them with
the edge of the sword, from the men of the City unto the beasts and all that
came to hand: also they set on fire all the Cities that they could come by,
moreover the men of Israel swear in Mi^peh, saying, none of us shall give his
daughter to the Benjamite, to wife: thus fa^re have I floated in the blood and
brine, of the tribe of Levy, a subject so terrible that I could not but mingle
my incke with tears for whom I close up to the tragical discourse with that
lamentation of holy David for his friend Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.25.26. How were the
mighty slain in the midst of the battle? O Jonathan thou wast slain in thine
high places. Woe is me for thee my brother Jonathan: very kind have thou been
unto me; thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women: how are the
mighty men over-throwne, and the weapons of war destroyed.

This martirologer of part of that Ministry, I was the rather induced to
publish, in regard some calumnious tongues have charged the Irish English
Clergy to adhere to the Romish faction and fictions, which had they done they
had saved their lives and estates, with the loss of their souls, but they
with holy Philpot have sealed their zeal to the Gospel, by the effusion of
their bloods, confusion of estates, taking a miserable exile with John to
Pathmos, where I hope God will reveal himself to them in their straightness
to their comfort, and his glory, to whom be ascribed all honor, and glory, now
and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

