March 18. A LETTER SENT FROM Sr. Simon Harcourt, To a worthy Member of the
House of COMMONS.

With a true Relation of the proceedings of the English Army, under his
command, to this present March.

Whereunto is added the many miraculous deliverances, in the Relieving and
Defending the City of Tredagh, by the providence of God.

Exactly Related, by the Minister of the same Town, who was an eye witness
thereof, and is still resident there.

LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hunscott. 1641.

A Letter.
SIR,
I Hope by this time, you are fully satsfied by the receipt of my Letters, that
I have made it my care to uphold my self in your good opinion, which I shall
ever value at a high rate: Therefore I will never prove so great an enemy unto
my self, as to loose by the neglect and omission of the tender of my due
respects, which shall on all oppertunities attend you in a most affectionate
manner. And now give me leave to give you a brief account of a piece of
service which has lately bin acted on the Rebels, at a place called
Killshaughall, some seven or eight miles from Dublin, where lodged near upon
2000. as we had intelligence. The situation of the place as naturally strong
as I have seen any Castle in Ireland, having moorish an^ boggy ground on the
one side, the other environed with thick Woods, quick-set heages, high bancks,
and deep Ditches (inaccessible) but as we forced our way by Pyoners (under the
favor of our Musketeers) in the middle of which Woods stood the Castle, which
had but one Aveneu unto it; on that side we approached it, on which they had
(...) a reverse or Barricadoe, which we beat them from. That done, I sent
Capta^ne Congrave with 100. Musketeers, to fall on them in the, Churchyard in
which they were (...) and stood opposite unto the Castle gate, he found the^
(...) all resc^t^ce; and then in great disorder fled, taking their way
((...)) unto the bogge ground; Those which betook themselves unto the (...)
Borlasles Troop in chase of them, who had the cutting of some 60 or 70; of
(...) and about as many more were killed in the in the W^^^ by the (...). The
Castle was maintained against us (some of their best men have (...) o^fer
Sanctuary.) And we having no pieces of Battery, were forced to leave it. In
this expedition was my Lord of Ormond, the Lord Lambert, in Charles Coote, and
my self having with us 500. foot, and 300 Horse, (...) lest one Captain
Rochford, who led the forlorn hope, being of Sir Charles Coote his Regiment,
with some five or six of my Rigiment, and as many bu^. And this is all that for
the present I can acquint you with, only that to morrow we make a visit unto
the Lords and Gentry of the Pale with 3000. Foot, and between, 5. and 600
Horse, and this we are forced to do for the reliese of our Soldiers who have
bin kept this ten weeks upon a mean allowance of salt Beef, and Herring,
which had caused great sickness and mortality amongst them; But I hope that
your care of this poor Army here, will be such, that the may be speeddy supplied
with M^ney Clothes and Victuals for them. I speak of their misery as briefly
as I can, but the Lord Justices better will more (...) inform you. I am
confident you will do all the friendly offices (in your power, (...) Soldiers
here, whereby you shall ing^ge t^em and me, most faithfully and affectionately
to remain,

Dubl^n 6. Martii. 1641. Sir, your humble Servant, HARCOURT.

An Abstract of News Since our relief January. 11. to the 20th of February.
AFter much misery we were relieved by the Pinnace with some Bisquet and
Ammunition, extremity of want drawing on of both, that it was not unobserved,
that where we had bin solemly praying for it. The Rebels had sunck a Barque in
the Channel, but two or three days before the wind and tide had driven her
out to Sea, they had hoysted an iron chain, but that hindered not her passage
over it 1000 shot were sent from either side the River, and had double returns
from ours, yet not one of our men lost, with what joyful acclamations the
Pinace and her Shallope were received within the Bay, what mutual salutations
of shot were given and answered; how the Streets rang again with thanks and
Prayers to God from all sorts, those who were eye and ear witnesses can never
forget, at this relief the countenances of the Townsmen told as much, upon
second thoughts toward night, they seemed to be very glad, and for an
expression were very kind to the Soldiers, offering them drink upon every
guard on free cost; the poor men not using to receive so liberally without
their Officers knowledge, two parts of the Watch were drunk, about midnight,
(most being asleep) a breach was made in the wall, in an our orchard betwixt
St. James gate, and the water, in which, as was confessed by one hanged the
next day, an Officer had a chief hand in; about 3 of the clock 500 entered and
continued an hour or two undiscovered, till being marched upon the key they
shouted, which was either for asureance of victory, or to invite the Town to
their promised assistance, some of them had adventured up to the Millmount, and
killed the first Centinell, others had entered the Bridge. This shout being our
first Allarum, the Governor ran out unarmed, and was the first that caused a
Drum to beat, and in that have, was compelled to take the maine guard, who were
his own company, and commanded men from by-guards, these were his present
strength, first posted down some Pikes commanded by his Ensign, to make good
the Bridge, until the Musqueteeres could make ready; we met the enemy upon the
first entry, and finding them resisted by a guatd of ours charged home, and
soon compelled them to retreat, the Governor immediately relieved his Ensign
with Musqueteeres, who met not far from the Bridge, another company of the
Rebels, but being in the dark, took them by their an swear to be friends,
until he found the contrary by a shot made at him, which went throw the brims
of another hat next him. As soon as we gave fire it proved so effectual, that
they instantly scattered and were chased through the strees, leaving their dead
bodies as stumbling blocks in our way. And now my Lord Moore with what Horse he
could make ready, came to his assistance, who chased the residue of them up the
Hill, where they dropped a pase, but where the breach was, could not yet be
found, till they directed us by their flight, through which 100 escaped: and
now each Captain had got together Forces, and environed them in each quarter
and with ease laid them on heaps in every corner, so that the slain within the
walls and prisoners taken without, were 200. This deliverance the worst of men
acknowledge to be the hand of God, for had they marched toward the next Port,
and cut the guard off there, who were most sleeping: one thousand of their own
men were there ready to enter, and we had bin lost. 'Twas Gods hand that their
shouts gave us the first Allarum to our safety and their destruction. In this
hot skirmish we lost but few, the most being butchered by them at their first
entrance unarmed to prevent their giving ^ice, only three were lost in fight.
This was the only night (of any neglected) which the joy of the present relief
occasioned, but for the future doubled our Watches, forty Horse in several
Divislons still riding the Rounds, and by their often visits, a Sentinel has
scarce time to wink. My Lord Moore one night, and the Governor another (as
supervisors of the whole) have not failed since, constantly to watch in their
own persons. The enemy without, on the South Side of the Town, seemed to be
about 3000 who in several bodies stayed one hour or two after day, believing
the Town to be taken, expecting the opening of a Port, which we perceiving,
and having taken, a Piper of theirs, caused him to play very merrily on one of
the Plat-formes, and to call out in Irish, that the Town was theirs. It was
good sport to see them shorten the way by leaping ditches, and running
themselves out of breath, who should be first taken, and so were brought in by
tens. This extraordinary blessing, I conceive, deserved a special solemn
thankes-giving, which we performed two days after. A fair wind inviting the
Pinnace next day to return, past with as many prayers for safety by the
Soldiers on the walls, as she had bin received with praises. But a small
Fisher-boate, as a full judgment of God for the former nights work, by the
unskillfulnesse of the Pilate, ran aground, and that nigh^ was taken by the
enemy, with fourteen Prisoners: also about three miles off, at Alermine
Town, the Pinnace fell into the like hazard, being most falsely left by the
Shallopes, to the mercy of the enemy, who played upon her on both sides, 100 of
the Rebels, under the shelter of Carre-loads of Furs, desperately approached so
near, that they got under the Stern, and with Crows and Pike-axes began to
bulge her, neither Pike nor Musket could offend them: in this straight
Captain Stutvile (who has much deserved) in the adventure of relieving us
twice, threw some Grenades amongst them; they endured the breaking of six, but
when the seventh was thrown, they ran away and never attempted their design
after.

The number of the slain is uncertain, but by the mighty stream of blood it
is conjectured 60. Whilst we saw this danger we ceased not in public to pray
for her safety, whose loss was likely to be our ruin: That night she was
freed into the Poole, and one the Monday with a fair wind bid us farewell; We
had another friggat which asisting the Pinnace in burning some Barques ran
the same casualitie and lay under the same advantage to the Enemy. Who having
made a breast work played on her all night, but returned with our any harm
save the loss of one man.

Many Drums were sent by the Rebels for exchange of Prisoners, till theirs here
being spent, they were forced to send for more to Amagh, who have been
cherished by the Townes-men. as if they had been Martyrs. they giving them
good Victuals Caddoes and Capps, so that they make no suit to be realeased. In
14. days our former supplies were wasted and a great Scarcity began to grow
among us: The whole design of the Rebels we saw was to starve us, by burning
all the Corn and Hay within two Miles of us, they drew often nigh us, in the
dark Nights, and in mockery asked our Sentinall, if we had yet eaten up our
Cabidge stalks, and Horse hides, and indeed the Famine was such at length with
the common Soldiers that Horses, Catts and Dogs were good meat. Some
provisions by searching were found hid in Cellors this sufficed not but we were
forced to Sallie out which was always blessed with some releife and without the
loss of any Soldiers February the 7th. we sallied out 40. musketeers and 25.
Horse to secure others, appointed to bring in provision, who were unexpectedly
set upon by 400. newly come out of the North; we instantly charged them, killed
80. took two of their Colors killed a Lieutenant, and on ensign and took
another, and 9. Prisoners, one dyed as soon as he came to Town, and being
unbuttoned he was begirt with a Saint. Francis Girdle next his skin, not one of
our men being hurt: Another time we marched out 100. Foot and a Troop of
Horse, we were set upon by 500. but we having notice by some of their own
Party, of their intention, we made a fair retreat through them and killed
many of them, of ours not one hurt, one was shot through the Dublet and Shirt
and had his skin rased: At length our store failed us, so that from the
hartiest nothing could be heard but intentions of desperate courses, our
Friggatts and our Agents had been long in Dublin but heard nothing of their
return, and by the continuance of contrary winds our hopes we saw were dashed
from thence, also in this extremity (besides our ordinary meeting on Wensday)
we appointed the next Friday as a day extraordinary only to beg our bread of
God for my Subject I took the 4th. Petition of the Lords Prayer, That day we
continued in the Church from morning till evening, which was blessed with much
affection and tears, wherein some confident passages fell in assuring some
present extraordinary answer, it might have seemed to have bin without warrant,
but see the event: That very night, the wind inclined, and the next morning
suddenly changed to as fair a wind and weather as we could wish and so
continued, that evening we received notice that our Supply aproached on Sunday
morning we met at church earlier then we used in the continuance of the same
Subject, aad Petition and at the couclusion of the Sermon, a messenger came
into the Church with the glad tidings of our releif within the bar; it being
so received in Gods house we took it as from God himself: And so with thanks
given to him from whom every good gift descends, we went and saw the
salvation of God, I must not forget another deliverance the same Sunday
morning, the Enemy about four a clock with their whole strength made a bold
atempt with scaling Ladders to the walls, 2 or 3 were fixed in one place and
some were gotten up the sentinall missing fire at one, knocked him down with
the butt end of his Musket, and crying out to the Guard who was nigh my chamber
window I was the first that heard him, and the clattering of the Ladders, we
instantly gave them their fill of Shot, and they left their ladders with some
of their blood, the number of the slain is uncertain they having drawn them
away, but an English boy taking this opportunity escaped from them: said he saw
3 lying in one ditch, by which may be conjectured, what was slain of them, on
our side not one hurt, so that in the word of Psalmist, Psalms. 136. verse 24.
We may praise God for that one day, who gives food to all flesh, and who
delivers us from our enemies, for his mercy endures for ever. And get a
farther deliverance, we are now quitting the Town of the Papists, who have bin
the cause of all this evil, some of the Aldermen are parting, some have
offered to go to Church, but it is thought with the same affection as the
Capernaites (for the Loaves) An Inventory of all their goods are taken and such
of men and women as have bin suspected to side with the Rebels, have their
daily passes to them, some sober souls, and of good fashion have desired to be
informed, in which work shall be glad to be employed all day, and eyery day. A
prize was also taken by the Pinnace laden with herring, Bisquets, and other
provisions, which has added somewhat to our store, we have 4. companies more
so that we have in all 2000. Foot and 200. Horse more I could have writ but
the unexpected haste of your Pinnaces return, who is now ready to weigh Anchor
causes me to break off.

FINIS.

