To the Honorable The Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Assembled in the COMMONS
HOUSE OF PARLIAMENT. The several PETITIONS Of WILLIAM HANSARD and Sir FREDERICK
HAMMILTOUN Knight and Colonel.

Together with the true State of the Case concerning the Lands of Lifford, in
the County of Donnegal within the Kingdom of Ireland.

As also, the several REMONSTRANCES of the Committee at Grocers Hall for Irish
affairs, in the behalf of Sir Frederick Hammiltoun.

With the ORDER of the Honorable House of Commons to the Committee of both
Kingdoms; and their Order thereupon for Sir Arthur Haslerig to make report.

Printed at LONDON, Anno 1646.

To the Honorable the Commons in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of William Hansard,
Shows,
THat Sir Frederick Hammiltoun Knight, above five years since, procured an
Order from this Honorable House, that the Rents and Profits of the Lands of
your Petitioner (at that time an Infant) in and about Lifford in the County of
Donnegal in Ireland, should be detained in the hands of Sir Paul Daviis Knight,
Edward Stanhope and George Walker Gentlemen, upon pretense of an extrajudicial
Decree made by the late Earl of Strafford, in the behalf of your Petitioner;
whereas the said Decree was made in the Chancery of that Kingdom, and the Lord
Chancellor, by the opinions of Sir George Shurley Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench; The Lord Sarsfeild Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas; Sir
Richard Bolton Knight, Chief Baron of the Court of Exchequer; and the Lord
Aunger, then Master of the Rolls, pronounced the same. And after, upon Sir
Frederick Hammiltouns Appeal here into England, the said Decree was ratified
and confirmed in the behalf of your Petitioner by the Lord Keeper of the Great
Seal, and the Chief Justices of the Kings Bench and Common Pleas in this
Kingdom, and by His Majesty ratified accordingly.

Notwithstanding Sir Frederick Hammiltoun by threats, distresses, forceable
entries and bloodsheds, constrained the Tenants to pay the Rents of the said
Manor and Lands unto him; which actions are no way warranted by the said Order
from this Honorable House: and by this means your Petitioner has been thrust
and kept out of his just right and possession above five years as aforesaid
(his estate therein being worth above 500l. per annum) and is now likely to
perish for want of bread.

He therefore humbly prays this Honorable House to take his miserable
condition into serious consideration; and the said Sir Frederick Hammiltoun
being now in Town, to give present Order he may forthwith answer his Contempt
in abusing of your Honorable Order; and that your Petitioner may receive some
Rent our of his said Lands for his present livelihood, until his Cause may be
heard; and also that the said Sir Frederick Hammiltoun may be cited to appear
to answer his said Contempt.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc. WILLIAM HANSARD.


To the Honorable the Commons in Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of Sir Frederick Hammiltoun Knight and Colonel.
Humbly showing,
THat whereas there is a most scandalous Petition exhibited to this Honorable
House against your Petitioner, by and in the name of one William Hansard; who,
as your Petitioner conceives, is animated thereunto by some persons
disaffected to the Petitioner for his former great zeal to the public Service,
and antipathy to their Knavery: in which Petition he alleadges that your
Petitioner, by virtue of an Order of this Honorable House, should detain from
him the rents and profits of certain Lands in and about Lifford in the County
of Donnegal in the Kingdom of Ireland; which Lands he pretends to be his by
Decree of Chancery there, and ratified and confirmed here by His Majesty: And
most falsely suggests to your Honors, That the Petitioner should practice
indirect means to force the Tenants to pay their rents; as in that Petition is
more fully and untruly inserted. And this Petition, that it may take the deeper
impression, is printed, and dispersed abroad, merely to vilisie and disparage
your Petitioner in his Honor and Reputation, thinking your Petitioner had
(that day the papers were dispersed) left the Town, and gone to his Charge
before Newark, as he then intended, not unknown to some of the Honorable
Members of this House; which if the Petitioner had gone without answering,
might have brought a harder opinion of him.

May it please your Honors; your Petitioner has but lately had interest in
the said Lands, only as Heir to Sir John Vaughan late deceased, whose Daughter
your Petitioner married, and in whose favor that Order which Hansard charge
your Petitioner with, was obtained, and in his lifetime received the Rents.
And for that Decree to which he pretends as out of the Chancery, your Honors
may be credibly informed, that it shall be made appear to be no such Decree,
but an extrajudicial proceeding of the late Earl of Strafford, ratified and
confirmed here by the late Lord Keeper Finch (one of Strafford's creatures) and
others, merely upon a bare Reference from His Majesty, and by the Earl of
Strafford's power and greatness; for opposing of whose Tyrannical courses,
your Petitioners losses and sufferings have not been few.

That the Petitioners sufferings and losses, not only before and since the
horrid Rebellion in Ireland, are not unknown to this Honorable House; besides
how that he has ventured life and estate to stand by the just Cause of
Parliamentary proceedings; never as yet having received either preferment or
other reward from the Parliament, nothwithstanding his constant Service, and
great Arrears due to him: And now to be thus used by scandalous papers to be
put in print and dispersed against him, it tends exceedingly not only to the
dishonor of this high Court and the Justice thereof, but to the dejecting of
all faithful generous Spirits who constantly adhere to the Cause and Covenant.

The premises considered, And for that all that might be here alleged to
prove his right and title to the Lands aforesaid, is too much to inseri by way
of Petition; his most humble suit therefore is, That this Honorable House will
be pleased for the present so far to vindicate your own Honor and Order, and
the Petitioners reputation, as to make the said Hansard exemplary to all
scandalous and vilifying persons, by some such ways and means as your Honors
shall think fit. And for the determination of the premises to which he pretends
right, the Petitioner shall most willingly condescend and submit to the justice
and equity of this Honorable House.

Humbly praying, That in the mean time you would be pleased to cast an eye upon
the following Case, as it is truly stated, and the proceedings mentioned.

And he shall pray, etc. FREDERICK HAMMILTOUN.


The true state of the CASE Concerning the Lands of Lifford.
SIR Richard Hansard seized in Fee of the Manor of Lifford in Ireland, and of
diverse Lands thereunto belonging, by his Deed bearing date the 6 of October. 6
Octobr. 16 Jacobi. 29 Septembris, 17 Jacobi.
16 Jacobi, made a Lease to Sir George Marbury and Thomas Perkins, from the
death of the said Sir Richard, for the life of Dame Anne his wife, and for Nine
years after, in trust, to employ the profits to such uses as Sir Richard should
by his last Will appoint.

Sir Richard Hansard having taken some displeasure against William Hansard his
Brother and Heir apparent, made his last Will, and thereby gave diverse yearly
Sums, amounting in the whole to 86 l. per annum to diverse charitable uses; all
which Sums he willed to be paid for ever by his Heirs, out of his
Freehold-Lands, and to begin after his Debts paid, etc. with this further
Clause, ITEM, I give, infeoff, and confirm, after Funerals, Buildings, and
Legacies paid and performed, and two years after the said Dame Hansards
decease, All my estate, right, etc. in all my houses and Freehold-Lands, to the
sole and proper use and behoof of John Hansard the younger, son of John Hansard
the elder of Ouslaby, for life; then to the use of John Hansard his son, and
the Heirs males of their two bodies lawfully begotten: and for want of such
Heirs males, the estate and inheritance shall descend and divolve to the proper
use and behoof of Robert Hansard of London, Gent. and the Heirs males of his
body lawfully begotten; then to the use of William son of Robert Hansard, etc.

Then devises two Acres to Richard Perkins and his heirs; the like to
Mansfield; and the said Land to be allotted out by the Executors, and those
estates to be established by his Executors: and of his said Will, did make his
Wife, Sir George Marbury, Sir John Vaughan and Thomas Perkins Executors; to
whom by the said Will, he gives certain Leasehold-land.

Sir Richard Hansard dies: and inasmuch as there was no Feoffment before to the
uses of his last Will, and the Lands not there deviseable, the Fee and
Inheritance descended to the said William Hansard, brother and heir of the said
Sir Richard.

2 Augusti. 21 Jacobi.
William Hansard, the brother and heir at law, for 1480 l. by Indenture grants
the premises to the said Sir George Marbury and Thomas Perkins, and their
heirs, and to the use of them and their heirs; for 6 Maii.
which they the said Foeffees covenanted to perform the pious Requests of the
said Sir Richard, and were bound to Recognizance so to do.

Sir George Marbury and Thomas Perkins, for the sum of 493 l. -- 6 s. -- 8 d.
grants part of the premises to the said Sir John Vaughan and haered. to the
proper use of the said Sir John and his heirs; Reserving nevertheless
particularly the third part of such payments as by the last Will of the said
Sir Richard were reserved to be paid for the charitable uses, with a Covenant
by Sir John, for the contribution to a third part of the said charitable uses.

All this appearing upon proof in Chancery, a Decree was conceived, but not
drawn up for the purchasers against the pretended devisers of the Inheritance.

John Hansard and his son dies without issue.

Upon Petition preferred to His Majesty on the behalf of William, son and heir
of Robert Hansard, surmising a Feoffment to have been made by Sir Richard to
the said Sir George Marbury and Thomas Perkins, and their heirs, to the use of
the said Sir Richard and his heirs, and of his last Will, and setting forth the
request of these charitable uses; and that as well the Petitioner, who is
thereby supposed to be right heir of the said Sir Richard, as also the pious
uses, were frustrated by the Executors.

The King refers the consideration of the said Cause to the Lord Deputy, to the
end that if the Cause be such as requires relief in this kind, his Lordship
might take further order, etc.

Upon this Reference, the Lord Deputy withdraws and overthrows the proceedings
in Chancery, and with the assistance of the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas
and Chief Baron of Exchequer reciting the Lease, the Will and several passages
between the Executors, and the pretended Devisees, and William Hansard the
heir, and Robert Davies, The presumption and supposition of a Feoffment; and
that the moneys for the purchase were raised by the Executors, and of the
profits of the Land and personal Estate of Sir Richard; and that the said
Executors were as well trusted for Hansard the Devisee, as for the pious uses;
and their breach of trust, by giving notice to William Hansard the Heir, of his
Title; and by compounding with him, Awards that Sir John Vaughan, and the heirs
of the other Executors, receiving the moneys by them paid to William Hansard,
and Robert Davies not satisfied by the profits and personal estate of Sir
Richard, should convey the premises to persons nominated by the said
Petitioner, to the uses limited by the Will; and that the Defendants should be
answerable to the Petitioner for the surplusage of the profits by them received
above such their expenses; and a Commission to issue for the ascertaining
thereof.

By an Order reciting the last mentioned Order, and an Order for the settling of
the possession of the premises, and conveying thereof, and of all the
Defendants estate therein, unto the Complainant, and for the delivering of
Evidences, and for the payment of 465 l. -- 8 s. by Sir John Vaughan to the
Plaintiff, and another Order for the Sequestration of the Rents of the
premises, and reciting the Plaintiffs minority, and several Sums of money
expended and furnished in his behalf in the said Suit, by Robert Bradbury, Sara
his wife, Hercules Geildsland, and Thomas Green; It is by the like assistance
ordered that the premises shall be performed, the Lands conveyed to Edward
Stanhope and George Walker, by a deed thereunto annexed, unto the uses therein
expressed. It is further ordered, that Edward Torleton shall be the Plaintiffs
Steward and Solicitor, cum feod' Anni 10 l. Thomas Green shall be Bailiff,
cum feod' Anni 10 l. Bradbury and his wife shall receive their Bill of
Disburments, viz. 386 l. together with a yearly Pension out of the Lands: Brave
Encouragements for Champetters and Maintainers.
Thomas Green shall receive his Bill of Disbursements, viz. 65 l. -- 18 s. and
also 17 l. Hercules Geildestand shall receive his Bill of Disbursments, viz.
287 l. -- 7 s. and for the recompense of his pains and prosecution, 10 l.
Annuatim during the Plaintiffs minority. The premises to be paid out of the
profits of the premises formerly sequestered, or to be raised by the Feoffees,
the surplusage of the profits to be disposed by the Lord Deputy for the
Plaintiffs benefit.

Now the Deed was expressed to be to the use of Stanhope and Walker for Seven
years, for the performance of the purposes appointed in the Decree; and then to
the use of William the Plaintiff in tail, the Remainders over pront in the Will.

Upon this Case, these things are to be admitted.

1. That there was no Feoffment by Sir Richard to the use of his last Will. 2.
That the Lands at the time of the Devise and death of the deceased, were not
deviseable by Statute or Custom. 3. That upon the Conveyance by William Hansard
to the Executor and his Release, provision is made for the charitable uses in
the Will, but not for the Hansards, or the bequest to them.
The Questions therefore upon the Case will be of two kinds.

1. Concerning the right of the Hansards in Law or equity. 2. Concerning the
Judicial proceeding thereupon.
Upon the Right these several Questions have been propounded.

1. Whether the Devise being void in Law, shall yet charge the Land descended
to the Heir with any trust or equity for the Hansards. 2. Admitting it does;
whether the Executors of Sir John Vaughan, having notice thereof, and
purchasing the Land for a valuable consideration, are charged with that trust.
3. Admitting it does not charge the Land in the hands of the Heir; yet when the
Land comes to the Executors by purchase, being persons entrusted by Sir Richard
for performance of his Will; whether they are chargeable with any trusts for
the Hansards. 4. Admitting they are; who shall be answered for the measne
profits taken by Executors in the lifetime of the predecessor of the
Plaintiff?
Upon the proceeding, these matters have been moved and are enquirable: 1.
Whether upon a Reference from His Majesty, the Lord Deputy and two Judges may
determine a right of Freehold, or any equitable matter concerning the Cause,
without both parties consent, the Suit depending in Chancery. 2. Admit he may;
whether the proceedings of the Lord Deputy be warranted by the Kings Direction
or no.


To the First: As the Devise is void in Law to pass any use already created,
there being no Feoffment to uses, or to pass the Land (the same being not
deviseable:) so it is in it self void to raise or create any trust or use
remediable in equity against the Heir of Sir Richard for the Hansards.

1. Because the intent of the Devisor was by the Will to pass the Land it self
either to the Hansards themselves, or else to the Executors to the use of the
Hansards; and not to raise a use out of the estate descended to the Heir: for
that was not the thing willed by the Devisor, as appears by the Devise: and the
Rule is generally true in all Laws, Si non valeat quod ago ut age, non valebit
ut valere potest. 2. Although it were admitted that the Hansards were of the
blood of the Devisor (which appears not) yet this Devise merely voluntary, and
depended only upon the Will of the Devisor; there being no precedent valuable
consideration on the part of the Hansards, to draw out the estate or use from
the Devisor, but only the bare Will of the Devisor: therefore if the Law be
against the Devisees for the passing of the Land by the Will, which was the
thing intended by the Devisor; Equity will not speak for them to create a trust
for their benefit, which was not intended, unless the Land had passed; for the
equity in this case follows the Law. 3. Although a Will may transfer a use
already in esse, or by transferring the Land where it is deviseable, may create
a use out of the estates transferred; yet it cannot originally and immediately
charge the possession descended to the heir, with a use or trust, especially
upon a mere voluntary act. 1. Because it is no Deed. 2. The heir regularly
cannot originally be charged by the Ancestor with a use or with a trust, if the
Ancestor, or the Land in the life of the Ancestor, were not bound or charged.

Therefore Equity speaks for the heir, to whom both Law and Equity gives the
Land, if not disposed, rather then from the Hansards, to whom the Testator
would have given it, but indeed did not. For these Reasons, but especially the
two former, I conceive the heir not chargeable with any use or trust.

As to the Second Question: If it be admitted that the Lands in the hands of
the heir of Sir Richard be charged with such a trust or use remediable in
equity; then the Executors and Sir John Vaughan having notice thereof, shall be
bound to execute the trust, notwithstanding the money paid by them.

As to the Third: If it be admitted that the heir of Sir Richard, or the Lands
in his hands, are not cha^geable with any trust or use remediable in equity;
then, although the Lands come to the Executors as in the Case, yet they are not
chargeable to execute any trust for the Hansards. My Reasons are these.

1. Because the Executors come to the Land under the heir, who was not
chargeable with any trust; therefore not the Executor, no more then if a mere
stranger had purchased the same. 2. Although their persons were trusted for the
performance of so much as was in their power, viz. for the administration of
his goods, and the disposing of the profits of the Land during the Lease for
nine years, according to the Will of the deceased; yet as to the Inheritance,
they were not entrusted: for as it was not expressly devised to them; so if it
had, yet it passed not to them, but descended to the heir discharged of any
trust. 3. There being no trust or use attaching upon the Land of the Devisor,
but the limitation of the Testator being in all points void, it is impossible
that the Quality of the persons to whom it comes afterward, should create a
trust or use which had never a being before. 4. As they were not trusted by the
Testator with the Land; so there was no trust at all for the Hansards upon the
purchase by the Executors. 1. Although by the express agreement of William
Hansard the heir, they were charged for the pious uses; yet not a word of any
trust for the Hansards. 2. They paid a valuable consideration, which, for any
thing appears, was their own money, and not money raised by them out of the
goods or profits of the land of the deceased. 3. If it were raised of the
profits of the Lands or Goods of the deceased, yet that is nothing to the
Hansards; for they were not entrusted with any the goods or profits during the
Nine years, or otherwise for the benefit of the Hansards: and as they did not,
so had they no reason to employ the Testators goods for the benefit of
Strangers rather then for Themselves. 4. The several Treaties of the Hansards,
receives a sufficient Answer, and does not any way impeach the estate of the
Executors.

For the Fourth: Admitting the Executors were chargeable, yet they are not
bound in Law or equity (as I conceive) to be answerable to the Plaintiff for
any measne profits taken.

1. Before the expiration of the Nine years. 2. Before the death of Jo: Jo: and
Robert Hansard the Plaintiffs father: for they belong not to the heir, because
only Chattels; nor to the Executors, because never rested in the Testator.
Upon the Questions for the Judiciary Proceedings.

1. The determining of matter of Freehold in such an extraordinary Award, upon
a Petition without the consent of both Parties, where the form of proceeding
anciently settled in England or Ireland, as by the Record of those times may
appear. 2. If it were true, yet this Petition and this Answer I conceive to be
no warrant to proceed in this manner.
1. Because it appears that the very ground of the Petition was false
principally in these points.

1. There was no such Feoffment to uses as therein is pretended. 2. There was
no perverting or neglecting of the charitable uses declared by the deceased. 3.
The Petitioner was not heir to the deceased Sir Richard Hansard, as is therein
pretended.
2. Because there was no Commission thereupon given by His Majesty to proceed;
unless the Cause were such as required relief in such a kind which refers to
the truth and quality of the Surmises of the Petition, viz. if false, or
remediable elsewhere, the Answer warrants not the proceeding.

3. Admitting the Cause required relief in this kind, yet upon the last Decree
there is cause of appeal: for besides the inserting of allowances and rewards
for such who were no parties to the Suit and whole prosecution and disbursments
on the Petitioners behalf, were not warranted by Law. The Appellant also is
thereby bound to make a Feoffment to the uses of the Decree during the
Petitioners minority. And if the Appellant should be questioned by the
Petitioner at his full age again for breach of Trust in making such conveyance
to such uses; I see not how the Petitioner should be bound, or the Defendant
secured by this Decree, in respect of the said payments to be made to the
Strangers.

7 Decembris, 1638.
Grocers Hall, 29 October.
To the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms. The humble REMONSTRANCE Of your
SUB-COMMITTEE, Concerning Sir Frederick Hammiltoun Knight.
Showing,
THat by your Order of the 21 of October, 1644, we are commanded to consider of
Sir Frederick Hammiltouns service, and what proportion of the money that is to
come in upon the Assessement for Ireland, shall be assigned unto him. We humbly
inform, that he has given us such an account of his actions in the particular
services done by him and his handful of Forces against those Rebels since the
beginning of the Rebellion in Ireland, that no one man in that Kingdom (in our
opinions) with so small a Force as he has had, can possibly pretend to more
satisfaction from the State then himself; wherein he has behaved himself with
such valor and resolution, and has gone through so many difficulties and
dangers with good success, as in our opinions we think him worthy of all
encouragement, and a person fit to be employed in the Service there, in
whatsoever Charge and Command that shall be conferred upon him. And that men of
his merit may be encouraged to the like Undertakings, you may be pleased to
think of him for the future, to put some Mark of Honor and Acknowledgement
upon him accordingly, as in your Wisedoms you shall think fit. The Committee of
Adventurers in London heretofore have made several Remonstrances in his behalf;
the last of them represented unto your Honors, we crave leave, together with
an Information of his own to us concerning his sufferings and losses, to annex
with these, for your further consideration; which have moved us (amongst many
other things) to inform your Honors, that if you shall so think fit, he may
receive Two thousand pounds out of the Moneys to come in upon the said
Ordinance for raising of Eighty thousand pounds, wherewith to satisfy and
discharge the engagements he has contracted in this time, to supply himself,
family and soldiers withal, in this time of action; he having received no pay
nor helps, but a little pittance which the Committee of Adventurers in London
sent to him heretofore, to relieve him in his great distresses, which is not
worthy Remembrance; all the Officers and Soldiers of the British Regiments in
this time having received far more in proportion: And for the time to come, he
may be thought upon to be provided for, as others that shall have the like
Employments and Commands in which you shall be pleased to put him. All which
nevertheless we humbly leave to your Honors graver Judgments.

D. WATKINS, By direction of the said Sub-committee.


To the Honorable Sub-committee sitting at Grocers Hall for Irish affairs. The
humble REMONSTRANCE OF Sir FREDERICK HAMMILTOUN, Knight and Colonel.
Showing,
THat in the beginning of the bloody Rebellion, and for many years before, he
commanded a Garrison of the old standing Army in Ireland at Manor Hammilton, in
the Province of Connaught and County of Letrim.

That being at Londonderry when the said Rebellion brake out, some Sixty miles
from his Castle and Garrison, he got home with no small hazard of his life.

That immediately he made up his Company of Foot Two hundred, and Fifty Horse,
maintaining them with his own means and provisions.

That he by that small handful of Horse and Foot, has done (by Gods merciful
and powerful assistance) so great services, as he has not only maintained his
Castle to this day, in the midst of many enemies both from Vlster and
Connaught, without aid or relief, but has also hanged and cut off many
principal Rebels, with diverse hundreds of their followers, and amongst them
several ancient and expert Soldiers sent from the King of Spain's Service to
assist that horrid action, as does appear by their several Passes, Papers and
Commissions formerly presented to this worthy Committee.

That by means of his Appeal to His Majesty, and his several other oppositions
to the late Earl of Strafford, late Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, for diverse
unsufferable injuries and extrajudicial proceedings against him and his late
deceased Father-in-law Sir John Vaughan Knight, an ancient Privy Councellor of
that Kingdom, who had honorably and faithfully served the Crown of England in
that Army for above Fifty years together, dying Governor of Londonderry since
this Rebellion, leaving your Petitioner as his Heir and Executor, with a great
burden of Debt, by means of the crosses put upon him by the said Earl of
Strafford; there being in arrear of entertainment due to him and the Petitioner
above Five thousand pounds; as by their Warrants of full pay, signed by the
Deputy and Generals hands, shall be made appear; besides what may be due to us
since this Rebellion, having never since received any.

That ever since this Rebellion brake out, he has lost the Rents of his whole
Lands in Connaught, where he received in peaceable times near Two thousand
pounds per annum; besides the loss of his Stock of Corn and Cattle, with his
breed of Horse and Mares, being near Four hundred young and old; which he so
highly esteemed and valued at that time, as he would not have taken Five
thousand pounds for them.

That he likewise had his whole Town and Garrison, with two sufficient
Corn-Mills, quite burnt down, near to his Castle-walls.

That he likewise has received little or no benefit of near Six hundred pounds
per annum which he enjoyed in the Counties of Donnegal, Londonderry and
Tyrone, in the Province of Vlster, besides the personal Estate of his
Father-in-law likewise destroyed by the Rebels.

That he also has the Broad Seal of England for the Island of Valencia in the
Province of Munster and County of Kerry, conveyed to him from Sir John Airs
Knight, in King James his time, whereof he had the peaceable possession, and
attornament of the Tenants in that Island.

That the Regiment of Sir Robert Steward, and the Troop of Horse which he
commands, has taken up of the Petitioners Rents and his Tenants above Four
thousand pounds since this Rebellion, in money and goods; which he holds hard
measure, himself being a Soldier, and having acted his part in that Kingdoms
Service, that any other should have the benefit of his Rents and Tenants,
having Children and Soldiers of his own to maintain there, and cannot at this
time receive any; which he prays means may be made to the honorable house that
this may be remedied, until they be able to provide better for the Petitioner;
he having in all this time received no relief or supply but what this worthy
Committee was once pleased to send him, out of their own respects: which great
testimony of your favors, in time of distress, shall be ever thankfully
acknowledged.

And being now referred unto you by the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms,
he prays you would be pleased to take him into your speedy consideration,
both for such satisfaction as you shall think fit to advise, toward his great
losses and past services, as for what otherwise you shall think fit and
convenient to be done for him for the future, wherein he shall always
faithfully serve this Cause, and acknowledge your favors.

FREDERICK HAMMILTOUN.


To the Honorable Committee of both Kingdoms. Grocers Hall, 12 Aug. 1644
The humble REMONSTRANCE Of the SUB-COMMITTEE At Grocers-Hall for Irish
affairs, In the behalf of Sir Frederick Hammiltoun.
THey humbly crave leave to recommend unto your Honors Sir Frederick
Hammiltoun Knight, a Gentleman well known to both the Honorable Houses of
Parliament, and who has expressed his good affection to their proceedings, by
the great service which he has done against those Rebels of Ireland since the
Rebellion; being Honorable both by Birth and Acquisition; having been a
Colonel, and commanded a Brigade of more Regiments in the King of Swedland's
Army when he was living; and after that, a Regiment of Horse in Scotland; and
has had some command for a long time in Ireland (though not of such eminency
as he deserves.) He is an Inhabitant within that Kingdom, and as well
understanding that Country and those Rebels, as any other there: That he may
be recommended to the Honorable House of Parliament to be made a Colonel of a
Thousand Foot, and to have the Command of a Troop of Horse; either to be placed
over such Forces whereof the Commanders shall be now displaced and removed
there, or over such other Forces as are now there in the Province of Ulster,
which are not yet Regimented, as those Eleven Companies in Londonderry, and
others the like in that Province; or over those Forces not Regimented in
Connaught, where he has a fair Estate, and may the more engage him in the
Service; or how otherwise the Parliament shall think fit. And if a Governor be
to be appointed in the City of Londonderry, this Committee is informed that no
man is better able to discharge that Trust, where his Father-in-law, Sir John
Vaughan, now deceased, had the Government before, and with which the said Sir
Frederick Hammiltoun is well acquainted, and no doubt but will be well accepted
of the Citizens.

D. WATKINS. Sam. Moyer. Rich. Leader. Hen. Fetherston. James Houblon. John
Dethick. John Kendrick. Sam. Avery. Jerome Alexander. George Thomason.



Die Lunae, 17 Martii, 1644.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the
Remonstrance of the Committee of Adventurers for Ireland concerning Sir
Frederick Hammiltoun, with the Papers annexed, be recommitted to the Committee
of both Kingdoms, to take them, and likewise the Petition in Master Vassals
hand concerning Londonderry, into speedy consideration, and to bring a Report
into the House, with an opinion what is fit to be done upon the whole.

Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

For Sir Arthur Haselrig, to be reported.
At the Committee of both Kingdoms, 24 March, 1644. Ordered,
THat it be reported to the House, That whereas it is referred to this
Committee to give their opinion what is fit to be done for Sir Frederick
Hammiltoun, for his good service done; That in respect it is for Service past,
this Committee cannot do it out of the money of the Ordinance of October last;
and therefore to desire the House to take some other way how to recompense his
service.

That concerning his Troop of Horse, and new-levied Foot, for that they have
not yet been taken on by the Establishment, that there can be no allowance made
them out of this Money, unless the Houses be pleased to give order for it by
some other way.

By command of the same Committee. J. Cheislie.
Which Report has never yet been made, neither has there any thing been done
for the said Sir Frederick in any of these Particulars: which he humbly prays
the Honorable House now at last to give him their speedy Answer what he may
trust to; hoping his service and long sufferings will appear to have deserved
better, then to be made yet more miserable with longer attendance.

FRED. HAMMILTOUN.




ERRATA.
Page 11. line 3. for to, read by.

FINIS.

