A HAPPY DELIVERANCE, OR, A Wonderful Preservation of four Worthy and
Honorable Peers of this Kingdom, and some others.

Who should have been poysoyned at a Supper in St. Martins Lane near
Charing-Crosse, on Tuesday, the 11. of Ian. 1641.

Viz. The Earl of Leicester The Earl of Essex, Lord Chamberlain. The Earl
of Holland. The Earl of Northumberland. With some others.


Whereunto is annexed five Articles preferred by the COMMONS in PARLIAMENT
against Mr. Herbert the Kings Attorney General.

London, Printed for John Thomas, 1641.

A True Relation of a treacherous intention, Practiced by a Frenchman, for the
poisoning of four Noble Peers of this Kingdom at the Earl of Leicesters
house in St. Martins Lane, Jan. 11. 1641.
THe daily and horrible Plots and Enterprises of the Romish Faction practiced
against this Island of Britain, and the test of his Majesty's Dominions, are
not unknown unto us all, and the bloody practices and mischiefs invented and
plotted by them, have much disquieted the peace of this Kingdom, and
distracted the content of King and Subject, had they not been grown most
impudent in their attempts, and audaciously resolute to perform their bloody
intentions, The many Discoveries of their Hellish practizes and inventions,
(with which it has pleased God to bless this Nation) might deter and
affright them from any new prosecution, But they are grown now most desperate,
and their corrupt nature cannot forbear to Act, what is familiar and common to
their Religion, which they seek to propogate by the effusion of blood, for why
should they doubt to put that in execution, which is commended and allowed by
their holy Father, in whom they put their confidence, and from whom they expect
more then Absolution from their sins, a blessing for their pious
undertakings, villainy cannot want instruments to put it in execution, and
wickedness is seldom stifled in the infancy, by the deficiency or scarcity of
Nurses to mature it, and bring it into action, they have labored often by
strong hand and power to subvert and captivate this Kingdom, but the hand of
Heaven has given us the upper hand of them, and turned all their plots to
their own confusion, now of late they have planted their malice in diverse
places of this Realm by private agents, endeavoring to effect that by
policy, which they could not attain and reach too by their Power, amongst
which J shall relate one of a most dangerous consequence, but the Lord that
protected them, brought this wicked and horrid resolution to light.

The Earl of Leicester having invited four Honorable Lords and Peers of this
Kingdom, with some other great personages, to a Supper, which was performed at
his house in St. Martins Lane near the Strand on Tuesday Ian. 11. 1641.

And being all set at Supper, there came in a Hellish and bloody minded fellow,
a Frenchman, (and is conceived) backed unto that wicked intention by some of
the Popish Faction, which may well be conjectured by the Sequel which
follows.

This Frenchman being come into place where these Noble Peers did sup that
night, he privately whispered with the Cook of the Earl of Leicester, who
also was a Frenchman, and could not speak a word of English, and told him in
his own Language, that if he would undertake to poison the second course that
was to be set before these worthy and Honorable personages, he would for his
reward and secrecy therein, give him 3000 l. in ready Gold; The Cook
perceiving this his wicked and bloody intentions, told him that if it might
gain him 1000 worlds, he would not attempt an Act so wicked, and withal told
him that his Treacherous designs he would immediately discover, the which the
Frenchman perceiving (when he saw his opportunity) stole out of doors, for no
man there present could understand French, And this French Cook understanding
no English, whereby to discover this wicked advice, of his Countryman, was the
reason why he did escape, who if he had been as avaricious of lucre as the
other of blood, they had dispatched out of this world these Noble Pillars of
our Realm, this was not discovered till after Supper, the Cook meeting one of
the Earl of Leicesters Chaplains which understood French, who told him the
manner and form of it as is before related, yet was this French Cook
apprehended and sent for to be examined before the Lords in Parliament, and as
yet not acquitted.

Let every christian reader judge what Diabolical, and unparalled intentions
are continually practiced by the Papists in England, against the Pillars of our
Church and Commonwealth.

Five Articles preferred by the House of Commons in PARLIAMENT against Mr.
Herbert the KINGS Attorney General.
I.
WHether he contrived, framed, or advised the Articles exhibited in the House
of Lords, against the Lord Kimbolton, Mr. Hollis, Sir Arthur Haslerig, Mr. Pym,
Mr. Hampden, and Mr. Stroud or whether he knew or had heard who did contrive,
frame or advise the same. To which he answered, That he did none of those
three, and if he was proved so to do, he ^ould be contented to die for it.

II.
Whether he know the truth of those Articles; To which he Answered, That he
knew nothing but what was said to him by his Master the King.

III.
Whether he will make them good when he shall be called thereto, To which he
Answered, he was no way able to make them good farther then his said Master
should enable him.

IV.
From whom be had received them, or by whose advice he did exhibit them, To
which he Answered, That from his Masters hands he received them, and by his
command did exhibit them.

V.
What proof and testimony he had to maintain those Articles, To which he
Answered, That he received the Command from his Master, and had no other proof
or testimony but such as his Master should enable him with. And being pressed
to deal clearly, what testimony that was, He said he was of his Majesty's
Council, and therefore desired further time to consider what answer to make.

Upon all which it was resolved upon the Question, that the exhibiting of those
Articles in the Lords House against Members of the Commons House, was illegal
and a high crime. It was likewise ordered, that a Message should be sent to the
Lords, to desire them to join with the House of Commons, to move the King,
that by Thursday next his Majesty will be pleased to appoint such as have given
information against the foresaid Members, may bring in their charge, or else
they to be freed by such a way as the Parliament shall think fit.

An Order was entered that in regard there was a high breach of the Privileges
of Parliament by Mr. Herbert Mr. Attorney in exhibiting the Articles aforesaid,
in the sealing up their papers and Trunkes, in the demand of the foresaid
Members in the Commons House, and in his Majesty's coming in that manner to
the Commons House, that a Message be sent to the Lords to make a Committee of
Lords to meet with a Committee of the Commons House, to consider how and in
what manner reparation may be made for the breach of Privileges.

Then the Black Rod came to call the Speaker and the Commons House into the
Lords House, where the King by Commission passed the two Acts, 1. For pressing
of Mariners for the ships. 2. For the relief of the Captives taken by the
Pirates of Argiere.

FINIS.

