THE Hangmans joy, OR THE Traitors Sorrow.

BEING, A very merry Dialogue, between the Hangman, and the Haltermaker.

Together with some Verses, found in the Rolls of the pretended High Court of
Justice.

With an Epitapth on those Traitors, that Murdered the King. Delightful and
pleasant, with witty expressions, and if rightly understood.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the white-Lyon near Py-Corner.

THE Hangmans Joy. OR THE Traitors Sorrow. BEING, A very merry Dialogue,
between the Hangman and the Halter-maker.
Hangman. WEll met fellow tradesman, how have you done this long and many a
day, I was very fearful that you had not been in health, for I have not seen
you this long and many a day, what made you for to look so sadly and droopy? so
much prithee tell me.


Halter-maker. Surely I have great cause to be sorry, for trading has been
slack, and no harvest this many years, but I hope for better trading.


Hangman. Yea brother so do I too, for a longtime they have cozened me of my
trading, and would suffer none for to be hanged but for murder only.


Halt. But now I will tell the gallant news, thy trading will now revive, for
where thou had one Jobb now thou will have five


Hang. Why brother what good news do thou hear? tell me, if that I may gain
but one ten pounds by hearing it for to begin the world a new I will give the
one quart of the best Canary.


Halt. Do thou think that I am a Canary-bird, thou fool, they sing in a Cage.


Hangm. Thou Ass traitors sing best in the tower, for they this whole Nation
did devour, Priests, and people did them all obey, which brought three Nations
almost to decay.


Haltm. ho, ho, ho, a horse, a horse, a horse, a thousand pounds for a horse,
to keep head and shoulders together: make room for the number of traitors,
whose breath has infected three Kingdoms, and converted stately Territories
into new vaumpt Comonwealths


Hangm. They have plagued the people to very small purpose, for though they
have taken hold of sanctuary privileges, and cry pecavey for their lives, yet
their extorted Estates must be forfeited to the right owners again.


Halterm. Yea brother and I know that it is a geat grief unto them that
hoodwinckt the Nations under the vale of pretended Religion whilst like that
ravining Harpyes they devoured both men's personal and Real Estates: to be
called to an account after so many years enjoyment of the same, this comes
unexpected


Hangm. Nay brother, they say that if they had gone on with their traiterous
Judas they had escaped a purging, yea and brother they hope to cosen the
hangman, but I hope the contrary.


Haltm. Nay brother more then that they confess that your woofull cry of drive
on carter so terrifies and a frights them the guilty conscience of those poor
black saints.


Hangm. Nay brother, many of those have attained to a pastport to transport
them, from town, to town, till they come to the invisible Isle, where they
hope for to be secure and free from the sword of Justice.


Halt. These count themselves in a far better condition then many of their
brethren, whose impregnable wisdom could never reach to the art of navigation
for to provide flying frigots against this time of trouble if this their
Eutopian Counsel failed them.


Hangm. Truly brother, had they been so wise they might have been transported
to the Comonwealth of old Oceana, and have been carried by Caron over the river
of Stixe for their better security.


Halt. Yea brother but they say that as the case stands they had better be
content with a prison then a hempen halter.


Hangm. Truly these unjust Judges made a just and true confession to, and
before a friend of ours, which from their own mouths was taken, in a high Court
short hand, and so was pressed to go out and to inform the whole Nation of their
actions.


Halterm. Good brother rehearse them unto me, and I will be thankful to you for
your good will.


Hangm. I will rehearse them as I found them Enrolled in the record of their
high Court of Justice.


The Confession of those unjust Jdges:
Our King we murdered, yet the works not don
For then on Holland* Capel, Hambelton
Our pause we laid, by us was Darbys loss,
As by the Scotch Kirk that Noble Earl Montross,
We Garret killed, and valiant Brown Bushel,
Sir Alexander, Carry, and Vowel,
Aston, Stacy, and Hewet who does lie
A martyred Saint, and Noble Slingsby,
Besides to agravate our sins above,
The thoughts of man we Murdered Master Love,
With many more, we took no pity.
Drawn hanged and quartered in fair London City,
There Is none of us but do deserve to dye,
Who for these cruel evils in prison lie,
Where we had better be, our lives to save,
Then (as deserved) the gallow tree to have,
Our brother Barkstead once a man of power,
Is fled whilst we have taken Londons Tower
Like Hectors bold, we did presume to kill
Our King, though it be sore against our will
To answer that pretended good Old Cause,
By which we robbed poor England of just laws
Which would condemn us all, had we our due
To be drawn hanged and then quartered too.
Halt. Brother these inhuman Judges, first killed their K. and then banished his
Q. chased away his sons, slew, and destroyed and Imprisoned all his friends,
made it Treason for to name the King, or once to mention him.


Hang. Nay more then that, they took away all his lands* and gave or sold them
one to another, felling his Timber, destroying his Deer, casting down his
Castles; poleing his Subjects and what not.


Halt* Yea that's two true, but I can certify you that these purchasers must
now nil ye, will ye, deliver up their unjust gotten land unto the right owners.


Hang* Yea I know that Mr. Edwards must deliver up his manner of Old Court
which he purchased for a small sum of money.


Halt. A ye, and Sir George Norton must give up his manor of Richmond, with the
house and materials.


Hang. And Capt. John Blackwel must return his Manor of Eggham that he holds.


Halt. And Col. Okey must now forsake his Manor of Ampthil, and his Manor of
Mill-brook, and betake himself to his old road, oh this fortune is a Jade.


Hang. Col. Wauton and Adrian Scr^op must now for go their Manors at Sumerham
with the Chase and Park, and the Manor of Crowland, with part of the Manner of
Spalding, they must leave these Manors.


Halt. Hey day! what must they part with all these at once I thought something
was the matter, that they horded up all the Manors, that thou and I had so few,
marry come up hear.


Hang. And Mr. Blackwel must leave that part of the Manor, of East-ham, that he
purchased at so easy a rate.


Halt. And Edward whaley must leave his too Manors of the Manor of West-Walton,
and the Manor of Trington, for he purchased them at a very easy rate.


Hang. He showed but little manners, when he bore a house a grudge for many
years together, only because a stranger by chance cast a little piece of a
tobaccopipe out of his hand unawars, hit him him oath head, for this and no
other cause, he sought for to undo all that ever came into that house, since
that time.


Halt. Nay more then that Mr. Dendy purchased the manner of Eye but now he must
throw up his title.


Hang. Non-such great Park then was purchased by Col. Pride from his force they
will the same divide.


Halt. Col. John Lambert purchased Non-such house and park, but his dogs no
more in it must bark.


Hang. That Scot that said he desired no other Epitaph upon his tomb when he
was dead, but only that they should write Here lies Thomas Scot one of the
late Kings Tryers, is now very likely for to come to my hand, then will I show
him as much mercy as he showed his King, and toss him to some purpose.


Halt. I remember on verse more found enrolled in the Court of Injustice, worth
the reciting which is this.


Now Justice does his sword advance,
Good Lord what will betide,
Though some Traitors are gone to France,
Of those here abide,
The Laws will now throughout the Land,
To execution bring.
Those Tyrants great who had a hand,
In Murdring Charles our King.
Hang. A ye! marry I like this well, for now both thou and I shall have good
trading, do thou be sure to make thy Halters very strong, and not too long.


Halt. I Will warrant thee Lad, I Will warrant thee, let me alone, for a plain dance
for I Will spare neither* for stuff nor labor, but be sure that thou do procure
me a good price then.


Hang. I will help the to a very great price or else I will give thee an half
penny out of my fees, then shall I have but just thirteen pence to my self.


Halt. Mary I thank your heartout, you will be at great charges, thank you for
nothing.


Hang. Well, well, I will henceforward save my money and bestow it upon strong
liquor, but if that you will rehearse the other verses that you found in that
unjust Court, the next Beer-tavorn we come at, I will be so generous that I
will give thee half a pint of small beer.


Halt. Oh abominable nigard that will promise me an half penny, to augment my
wages, and put me off with half a pint of small beer.


Hang. Why thou Genosifixe is not that enough to give; away proceed to your
verses.


Haltermaker. Gentry late come out of France, use hospitallity,
The Criples they begin to dance, and vows they shall not dye,
Beggars that ride on horse back they, are surely born to sorrow,
For they that live in pomp to day, may be hanged before to morrow,
Traitors then shall now go down, and tirannize no more,
On such Varlets fortune does frown, and pays them their old score,
Then lets be merry, carous, and prate, good lack what days are these,
To see the change that is so great, the Hangman must us ease.

Hang. O brave I like this well, this pleases my palate exceeding well, for now
I am sure that I shall do more work in one month now, then I have done in
seven years heretofore, for I am credibly informed, that there are twenty
great heavy men to be executed.


Halt. There are many run away beyond the Seas quite out of your reach and
therefore you will be deceived of your purpose for all your have.


Hang. Do thou not think that any Prince whatsoever will not send back those
traitors to receive their due deserved reward?


Halt. Nay Master Sniper-snapar. I consent that it was their own Laws that none
should be hanged except it was for murder, and therefore it is but just, that
they that Murdered their Soveragin should be trust.


Hang. You say true, for they do justly deserve for to be put to death, but
after what manner, that lies not in my power to dispose.


Halt. I tell thee, I would have them all hanged on the trees for the fowls to
feed upon, for truly I think that none but their one confederats will pity
them.


Hang. Thou say true indeed, for my own part I would fain be exercising my
Office upon them, either by beheading or hanging of them all, if they will be
ruled by me.


Haltermaker. It Is time for birds to fly that do expect,
A halter for treason and their base neglect
Of duty to their Soveragine Lord their King
Such birds I wish may all in sorrow sing,
Not in a cage as many birds you see,
But in a rope upon the Gallow tree,
Then shall we have trading and be brave,
For never a one of them I hope they will save,
Those that went beyond Sea may return,
For whose defections all the land did mourn.
The harvest is ripe, their sins are red,
It Is time that they should make a grave their bed
And this is truth that I to thee do tell
And thus in soth I bid adieu farwell.

Hang. Yea marry Sir, better and better still boy, good news for me boys, up
they go if any one of them was the dearest friend that I have, in this present
world, Traitors hang them up all.


Halterman. Our grief was great but now our state, Is well recruted again,
The Wolf of late, is out of date, the Lion he does reign.
Traitors then must come home again, opressions out of season,
Their damnable strain is all in vain, their actions smell of Treason.
Tyranny must down in every Town, for no Traitors here shall be,
Your treason's known and none will own, such Traitors as you be.
Then let these Traitors their desert now have
And post to hell a labor for to save,
For covetousness you kil^d your King I know
As in the weal, so must you share in woe.
Such traitors should be hanged that basely bost
As faring well by shamless crying Roast,
And now you Traitors, pack togethergo,
we shall live happy when your gone I trow.

Hang. Run for the Carpenters, come away, build up the Scaffold at the Tower
hill, and another in the Palace-yard, let us do to them as they did to us, or
it shall hard.

Then hasten Carpenters and let us Gallows have a pace.
To hang up every Traitor yet, that invies Charles his race.

Halt. And this shall be their Epitaph, upon their graves.

Here lies within this barre^ ground
The chief Imposters so profound,
That with the Angels guardian,
Both King and Kingdom did trapan,
Their consciences was so wide, that you
Might coach and horses drive quit through
And they confounded every one,
And called three Nations all their own,
They were Tyrants of the largest size,
Confounding the ignorant and wise,
They did rebel against their King,
And Traitors proved in every thing.
A shameful death God will them send,
And so farwell this is the end.

FINIS.
Harry Martin


