HANNAM'S Last farewell to the WORLD: Being a full and true Relation of the
notorious Life and shamfull Death of Mr. Richard Hannam, the great Robber of
England; with the manner of his apprehension, Examination, Confession and
speech made to the Sheriffs a little before his Execution in the Round in
Smithfield, on Tuesday the 17. of June, 1656,

a man, hanged on gallows

London, Printed for Thomas Vere; and William Gilbertson, 1656.

Truth to gain Credit: OR, A true and impartial Relation of the apprehension,
examination, and execution of Mr. Richard Hannam, on Tuesday the 17. of June
1656.
SO many and various have bin the reports concerning M. Richard Hannam the
grand robber of England, that merely to vindicate the truth, and really to
inform the people of this Nation in each particular circumstance of the
business, I have set Pen to Paper only to testify what I received from his
own Mouth, and heard at his Execution.

He was the Son of M. Richard Hannam a Shoemaker, born in Shafisbury a gallant
Town in Dorsetshire, his parents living in very good repute, and educated him
for a few years honestly, and according to their quality, but his ambitious
spirit and running head, not long brooking to be curbed by the reyns of
unbridled youth, he took occasion to run from his Father and Mother, and came
to London, where he ^ound himself an Apprentice to a Silk-weaver in
Shoreditch; but being soon-out of love with that place also, as a trade too
settled for his wandr^ng mind, he left that also and took upon him a Tapsters
place to draw drink in a common Alehouse, unto which place resorted many
people of sundry dispositions, and amongst the rest a crew of Cutters that
perceiving Dick Hannam to be of a quick ingenious capacity soon invited him to
leave that calling also, and to embrace their wicked society, wherein in a
short time he so well profited that from a servant he became a Master, and by
his exquisite skill in Theevery was able to teach his Teachers.

I shall omit many of his mad pranks played in England at his first entrance
into this th^evish trade, because I would only mention that which is freshest
in memory: about the year 1650: he traveled into Denmark, where by cunning
policy and the help of his wicked Confederats he robbed the Kings Treasury and
conveyed away a vast sum of Money, but this not contenting his avaritious humor
he past from thence into Swedland and there robbed the Queen of 4000 l. in Money,
with Rings, Plate, and Jewels, amounting to a very considerable sum, yet it
had like to have cost him dear, for diligent search being made after him he
was quickly apprehended and committed to the common prison, there to remain
till upon trial he should be conveyed to the gallows: but Hannam, though he
loved stealing, yet was out of love with hanging, and being expert in his trade
soon found out a way to unlose himself by filing off his Irons, picking open
the Locks, and breaking the Goal.

Having thus rid himself out of that danger, he also quitted the place, and
from thence sailed into Holland, where for a while he lived like a Gentleman,
and a pretended Merchant of very great quality, and by his fair insinuating
tongue got into great acquaintance and was very well beloved, amongst the
chiefest persons of quallity in Amsterdam: (for there was his residence) at
length through his subtelty, he found an oppertunity to break up their Bank of
moneys, and took out as much as he knew well what to do withal; and before it
was discovered transported both him self and his Coin into England, in the
year 1655.

And here I cannot but vindicate him from one common lie which is frequent in
every man's mouth, and likewise printed in one feigned foolish pamphlet, to wit,
that he should robb the King of Scots, Really as the gallows has its due, so
I would have the thief to have his likewise: and I do verily believe, and
that upon very good grounds, (if a dying man may be to be believed) that he
never did any such thing, but abhorred the very thought of it. Furthermore, that
nonsensical book renders him guilty of many bloody murders; but I think no man
ever heard that he ever was so much as arraigned for murder, much less that he
killed any man: but I shall wave this discourse, lest I should be mistaken, and
proceed to his deportment in England.

Hannam living in London at a very great height for a time, kept company with
the best, and spent his money freely; for he had perfectly learned the old
proverb, Lightly come, lightly go: but the Addition (quickly gone) soon
followed* and that drove him to his old trade of Thieving again for more; but
not with so good success as formerly, For adventuring with some other of his
Confederates to robb Alderman Hancocks house, a Vintner at the Greyhound in
Fleetstreet: after they had wounded him in his bed, conveyed away some plate,
and other goods; they made their escape; but within two or three days after,
two men and a woman were apprehended for the fact, tried at the next Sessions,
found guilty, and hanged before Mr. Hancocks door, 1654. Within a little while
after this Richard Hannam was apprehended for the same crime, examined, cast
and condemned to be hanged by the Neck till he died, after the usual manner,
and so conveyed back to Newgate, there to be kept till the day of Execution.

Now or never was it high time for Hannam to bestirre himself, on Saturday he
was condemned, on Monday he was to be hanged, long time he had not to consider
on it; and therefore to be short, he suddenly pitched upon this device.

The French Ambassador having not long before been robbed of his plate, he
pretends to discover the thieves: Hereupon the Ambassador gets a Reprieve from
his Highness the Lord Protector? til he should accomplish it, In the mean mean
time Hannam plots his escape out of Newgate, and thus effects it: One morning
about three or sour of the clock, after the Watch was risen, he files off his
Chains, as it was his usual custom easily to do, cunningly picks open the
locks, and screwes out the bars of three or four strong doors, comes down into
the Lodge, the Keepers being all asleep, unlocks the outward door lets himself
out, and so made his escape; for which the Keepers were indicted the Sessions
following; but upon examination acquitted, only little Grimes the under Clerk
confessed that he knew when he went out, but durst not speak for fear of being
killed; and for being privic to his escape, he was hanged 1655.

Much search and diligent inquiry being made to retake Hannam, he was in a
short time after his escape, again apprehended in Essex and brought up to
London, but as he came through Cheap Side just against Sadlers Hall he fell
upon the two men that guarded him, struck up their heels and run clear away,
so once more freed himself from danger, but liking no place for his habitation
so well as London, in May last, 1656. he hires a chamber in Bearbinder-Lane,
near Lumberd-street at one M. Chamberlayns a Box-maker by his trade, but an
Alehouse keeper withal, and there kept himself privately and unknown
pretending to be a working goldsmiths. but it is thought that he Coined money
there, for stamps for that purpose have bin taken in the house since Saturday
the 14. of June, 1656. Upon which day about 5 of the clock in the afternoon, he
with his Father in Law (Mr. Rudd) one man more, and Tom Dales wife the Fiddler,
came to the sign of the Kings head to one Mr, Langhornes a small victual ling
house at the Lanes end, and called for a cup of Beer, a low Room was showed
them, but that not suiting with their purposes, they a skt to go up stairs,
and did so, where watching their opportunity, they picked open a Chest and role
out 8 l. 19 shillings in money, with some other goods which was conveyed away by
the woman: being suspected by Ms. Langhorn, she went up into the chamber and
quickly perceived what they had done, yet very wisely seems to take no notice
of it, but goes down and acquaints her husband with it, who immediately goes
to Sir Thomas Vines in Lumberdstreet, gets his warrant, and with a Constable
comes to apprehend these fellones, who still continued there drinking: Mr. Rudd
and the other they took and carried them before the Justice, who committed
them both to Newgate: but nimble Hannam made his escape out of the house top,
and clambred like a Cat from one house to another until at last he got into a
garret, some half a dozen doors off where a young man was at work, who being
amazed to see one come in, in that manner, Hannam very meekly beseecht him to
do him the favor as to convey him out of doors, for says he, I am in danger to
be arrested, being pursued by half a dozen Sergeants, and if I be caught, I
shall be cast in prison and undone. The young man believing him, and supposing
all that he had said to be true, willingly assisted him, and so let him escape
clear away But Hannam inwardly fretting and vexing that his father in law was
taken, vowed revenge upon Mr. Langhorn; and to that end about 4 hours after in
the evening, having changed his clothes, he came back to his house, and found
him standing at the Bar with his face from him.

Hannam makes no more ado, but with a dagger-knife that he had, stabbs him in
the shoulder; and upon his turning about, wounded him in the arm in two places,
intending to have killed him, and again made his escape through and over the
houses, till he came to Sergeant Proby's yard, whose gate being locked up, put a
stop to his furt^er passage. Sergeant Proby seeing a man come into his yard in
that manner, and at that unseasonable hour, presently concluded he intended to
rob him, and called for his sword. Hannam entreats him to begood to him: for
really sir says he I come for no harm neither mean I any to your house, but only
to free my self from au arest, therefore I beseech you suffer me to pass out at
your gate. Sergeant Proby being too wise to believe his feigned story, makes at
him with a good courage, and at the first thrust wounded him in the thigh.
Hannam feeling it smart, clapped within him, and stabbed him with his dagger in
the belly, and also stabbed his man in 2 or 3 places, yet at last was
over-mastered, and gotten down; so Sergeant Proby sent for a Constable, who
carried him away to the Poultry Counter for that night; the next morning
brought him before Alderman Foot, and upon examination he cofest what he was,
and what he had done, seeming rather to glory in, then to be sorry for his
villainy. For when the Alderman asked him how he got out of Newgate? Says he, I
opened such doors I think, as none but the Devil could have opened, and with
as much ease as one of your servants can open your door with the key in his
hand, and so I went out. Being asked, if any of the Keepers were privy to, or
assisting in his escape; he fairly cleared them all, only little Grimes, who
faith he might have gone with me if he would, I offered him to maintain him lik
a man as long as he lived; but perceiving him faint-hearted, I bid him stay and
be hanged, and so it seems he was. After some other discourse, he was sent to
Newgate, and there strictly watched and guarded till the day of his execution
which was upon Tuesday the 17 of June, 1656. the manner thus: There being a
Gibbet erected in the middle of the Round in Smithfield, at eleven of the
clock, Hannam was drawn thither in a Cart, attended by the honorable Sheriffs
of London, with a very great guard of Officers, and multitudes of people to see
his last farewell. When he came to the place of execution, he stood up in the
Cart, and addressed himself to the Sheriffs in these words:

Mr. Sheriffs,
I Stand here before you and this great concourse of People; an exemplary
object of justice, and you the Ministers thereof, to se it executed upon me, I
confess my offenses have bin numerous and heinous, and I could heartily wish
that my ruin might be a warning to them which yet stand, and take delight in
such finfull courses: wherein the greatest part of my time has vainly bin
consumed. One request I have to your worships and that is in behalf of my
Landlord and Landlady Mr. Chamberlayne, and his wife, who are imprisoned
because I lodged in their house; they being innocent neither knowing my name,
nor my quallitie for I there went under the name of Richardson, a working
Goldsmiths, Therefore I humbly beg that they may be set at liberty.

I have now done with all the world and have no more to say to any man, God
have mercy upon my Soul. Then going up the Ladder he pulled a white cap out of
his pocket and gave it to the hangman, who put it upon his head over his face
with his mourning hatband over that and so lifting up his hands toward heaven,
when the executioner touched him on the shoulder he turned himself off the
Ladder. After his body had hung about half an hour, it was cut down and
carried to the three-Tuns in Smith-field, and from thence in the evening to St.
Pulchers Churchyard and there Bu^ied,

In stead of FINIS this advice I send,
Let Rogues and Thieves beware of Hamans END.

Licsenced and Entered according to Order.


