A happy DEFEAT Given to the Kings Forces, near Tipton Green, in Staffordshire.

Where were routed The Kings General Lord Wilmote, Lord Wentworth, Lord
Cleveland, Colonel Sands, and other Incendiaries 4000 horse, and many foot,
100 slain upon the place, besides many wounded,


Taken prisoners, 1 Captain, 2 Cornets, and other Officers.


And the number and names of those that were slain and wounded on our side.

Also other Prisoners taken by the Earl of Denbie, as they were going to join
with Prince Rupert.

LONDON: Printed by Andrew Go, according to Order, MDCXLIV.

A happy defeat given to a party of the Kings Forces near Typton green, by the
Earl of Denbigh.
SIR,
BY reason of the steepness of the hill that we cut our passage for our
Ordnance for a battery, and the rockinesse of the ground; we have a toilesome
time, yet my Lord of Denbie, plies the service hard, and is mightily with them
in the works, toe encourage them till break of day, exposing himself to all
hazards, truly he is a galant man, and (beyond all ever was imagined) carries
on all conquering with love as well as Arms, even overcoming his enemies, the
King Prince, and Duke of York, were on Monday June 6 at Eversham, and that is
16 miles from us, we have taken some prisoners supposed to go toward Prince
Rupert: we last night June 6, received Letters from Stafford on Aven, from
Coventry Forces to my Lord. That the King was marched toward Worcester, and
that the Parliaments foot were quartered in their Rear 8 miles distant, and
their horse were appearing on kills three miles from Easome, and that the horse
march with speed after them.

Subscribed Purfrey, Colmer, Willowby,


I hope you shall hear we have dispatched here ere long; and are marched into
Cheshire with Sir Thomas Middleton now with us, and Colonel Mitton to recover
those parts.

Worthy Sir, From the Leaguer before Dudley June the 10
ON Saturday last we received a Letter from Sir Will. Waller, wherein he writes
to my Lord of Denbigh to join with him to pursue his Majesty in the Rear, who
is in a retreating posture, his Majesty was at Easome then: Yesterday we had
intelligence he was at Bewdly, and Kitterminster his soote 8 miles from us, we
quartered all our horse, my Lords and Sir Thomas his horse at Sturbridge,
Hales-owen, Rowly, and as near them as conveniently may be, for they make good
Beudly bridge with free Quarter there; this morning we have intelligence, Sir
Wiliam Waller is about Holt Castle in Worcestershire, the King moves on the
other side Severne: Last night we called after sermon a Council of war, to
confult what was best to do: whether to continue our siege; or to remove to be
gone to go to Wem, because we hear the King is going to Shrewsbury, (for us
to relieve Wem.) And it was resolved by the most votes, in regard sir Thomas
Middleton was engaged to Cheshire forces, and must draw off his forces, that it
is not safe for my Lord to continue the siege, but to march toward Wem; and
join in a body to follow the King, or fall in the Rear of Prince Rupert: The
castle last night pretended a parley with us, and let down a letter with a
piece of lead, which was thus.

You are immediately to depart you Traitors and Rebels, or to morrow you shall
be forced to leave your Artillery behind you, and you shall have no quarter:
for we are resolved to chastise you for your insolences.

From his Majesty's Castle of Dudley. I. BEAUMONT.


The said Beaumont commands in chief. They called yea Dogs, give us an answer,
At which we fired three pieces of Ordnance on them. We remove not this day to
experience their brava, does, but I think we shall march away suddenly. My Lord
writ to sir Will. Waller to join with him.

Another Letter dated June 12. 1644.
Worthy Friend.
IT is the Lords renewed mercy to me I am now alive, to write to you of this
days occurrences for we have been in as hot service, as ever I saw this day,
and through Gods mercy came off with admired honor, from the mouths of our
enemies, I can truly say I know not who in his place was defective in his duty
and (...). We had the first Alarm about two a clock in the morning, but it was
eight ere all our horse could be got from their Quartrrs into the field about
nine of the clock they faced us, and we them, and in the mean time hearing
that they were 4000 horse besides foot, we drew out our Ordnance which were
near engaged with much toil and our foot; we drew our Ordnance to Tipton
Green with much difficulty, the way almost with this rain made impaffible,
where being drawn up my Lord desisired Sir Tho Middleton with Cup Keme his
troop and Cap. T^mson to lead the Van, and Col: Ridgly the Rear. Col. Mitten
and Captain Keme two gallant Commanders of valient Spirits, commanded two
forlorn hopes in the van of the Carrages, each of them one. We had not marched
ha^fe a mile but the enemy had ambusheadoed the hedges, and then their body of
horse appeared in the lane, so that we were called to draw up, but before we
came that were of that forlorn hope: Colonel Bartons Troop, Captain Keme,
and Captain Noaks, Captain Tompsons, charged them so fiercely, that passing
with some little loss, our ambush routed their horse, killed three score in
the lane, their horse retreating, their ambusheadors fled, the foot seeing
that, pursued them desperately, and fired gallantly, My Lord Denbigh deported
himself with much gallantrie, leading the foot himself, he said he had
rather lose 10 lives, had he them to lose, then one piece of his Artillery and
although our carriages broke twice, yet we made them good, beat them from
them, and have brought off all blessed be God, Captain Kenae had one man lost,
and another shot through, who fought bravely, and Captain Kemes own horse shot
in the head, Captain Thompson of ours is shot in the cheek, Captain Lieutenant
Farrer, Sir Thomas his Captain Lieutenant of horse, in the nec Captain Clever
slain, who fought valiantly after the w^^, wounded in the arm; yet charged
again and was shot in the belly. Captain Turtows Lieutenant is shot through.

In all we have lost eight men, about 20 wounded, the fight lasted from two of
the clock till five, as fierce sirings as you ever heard, we killed about 100 of
them in all and it is credibly reported, wounded many more, their word was
Worcester, ours God, King, and Parliament. They cursed their men for cowards,
and said Denbighs bastards fight like devils, they were two for our own, we
jointly desire God may have the glory of all, Captain Bray was shot in the
mouth of our party, there was General Wilmot, Wentworth, Lord Cleveland, with
them Colonel Sands, etc. They all came to relieve the Papists with might and
main, but we sent them back with powder.

We are now, blessed be God, at Walfall, where we are in expectation of another
touch this night, God prepare us for it.

Never could any General behave himself better then my Lord did, and all
Officers and Soldiers did stir equally to share in honor, my Lord and Sir
Thomas came up and gave all thanks: The fight ended, Captain Keme commanded
the Van, and blessed be God has lodged all the Artillery safe in the Town, nor
would my Lord come off the Rear till all was safe up, we wished Sir William
Waller in their Rear, and Captain Keme dispatched his man to that purpose, last
night: June 11, with a Letter from my Lord, but I fear he is taken, they came
so quickly on, we took many Prisoners, two Cornets or horse Colors, one is a
red Bull in a white field roaring, one Captain Keight a Clocestershire
Gentleman (of horse) his father is high Sheriff: I believe there have few
sieges been) raised in a more gallant way.


From Walfall, June 12, at ten a clock at night.
Sir, Captain Keme took prisoner a Spy with a Warrant from Lieutenant Colonel
Beaamont, I have sent you the copy, it was on the Lords day to summon Fiddlers
to make them merry, as you may see by this enclosed.


To the chief Musician in Dudley Castle.
THese are to will and require you to bring all your instruments of Music,
especially your loud Music and repair to his Majesty's Castle at Dudley. If
any of you shall fail, I will not fail to fire his or their houses for their
disrepects.

Fom his Majesty's Castle at Dudley. J. Beamont.


Published according to Order. Tuesday, June, 18. 1644.


