A Divine Prospective: Representing THE JUST MAN'S PEACEFUL END. In a Funeral
SERMON Preached at Katherine Creechurch, Aug. 14. 1649. At the Enterrement of
the Remains of the Right Worshipful and truly Religious, Sir JOHN GAYR,
Knight: deceased July 20. 1649.

By NATHANIEL HARDY, M.A. and Preacher to the Parish of Dionis Back-church.

PROVE. 28. 18. Who so walks uprightly, shall be saved: but he that is
perverse in his ways, shall fall at once. ESAIAS 32. 17. The Work of
righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and
assurance for ever. LACTANT. Sicut vita ipsa bonum est si cum virtute vivitur,
malum si cum scelere: Ita and mors ex preteritis vitae actibus ponderanda est.
AMBR. Pretiosum est videre virum justum, ut videas eum secundum imaginem Dei:
quod foris est nihil prodest, quo lintus est sanat. LONDON, Printed for JOHN
CLARK, and are to be sold at his Shop under S. Peter's Church in Cornhill. 1649.

To the Worshipful, ROBERT ABDY, Esquire, Son-in-law: Together with his
Virtuous Consort, and the rest of the hopeful Sons and Daughters of the
Right Worshipful, Sir John Gayr, Prosperity on Earth, and felicity in Heaven.
TO preserve the precious names, perpetuate the pious memories, and publish the
eminent graces of dead Saints, is a due debt from the living. The glory which
from hence redounds to God, the benefit which hereby accrueth to the Church,
the respect which herein we manifest to them, are all severally, much more
jointly, strong obligations to this service. No fitter instrument for such a
work then the pen, which surpasses the voice in this double excellency, that
it both extends farther, and continues longer, according to that known
expression of the Poet, Vox audita perit, littera scripta manet.

These I doubt not (worthy Sir) were the impellent causes moving you to desire
a publication of this imperfect piece, in which, if there appear any luster, it
is no other then what it receives from the beams of his Virtues, whom it
represents. Indeed, what S. Bernard said of his friend Malachy, I may justly
apply to your deceased Father; he was, while he lived, Lucerna ardens and
lucens, a burning and a shining Lamp: and by Death, Non extincta sed admota,
not so much put out, as removed to Glory. The light of his good words is still
left behind him, and now set on a Candlestick to enlighten with its splendor
this declining Age of the World.

The Character here given to this faithful Servant of God, may by some (who
thoroughly knew him) be justly accounted deficient; by others, (through Envy, or
Ignorance at best) be unjustly censured as exuberant. To the former I shall
Apologize in the words of the Orator: Pictoros pulchram absolutamque faciem
raro nisi in pejus effingunt, Plin. 2.
an exact face is seldom drawn but with much disadvantage. To the latter, S.
Bernards expression shall be my Answer, Testimonium veritati praebeo non
affectioni; my Conscience witnesses to me, that my Testimony concerning him,
was not biased by Affection, but measured by Verity.

To your Candid acceptance and Patronage (Honored Sir!) I present these
unpolished Lines: the truth whereof I know you can fully, and will freely
attest. I have nothing more to add but a grateful acknowledgement of your
many immerited favors, and my incessant supplications at the throne of Grace,
That both your self, who esteem it an happiness to have been grafted into the
Stock of that Worthy Family, and all the natural Branches of that choice Root,
may be daily watered with the plentiful showers of Divine blessing,
continually grow up in a resemblance of these precious Fruits which he brought
forth: and finally, be transplanted into the Paradise of Bliss, where,
together with him you shall be flourishing Trees of Righteousness for ever. So
prays he, who is

Yours in all Affection and Service, Nathaniel Hardy.

PSALM. 37. v. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: For the end of
that man is peace.
THis Psalm is one of those seven, which we find to be composed according to
the Hebrew Alphabet: what was the reason of this order, I am not curious to
enquire, since the Scripture is not pleased to express: Musc. in loc. Mol. in
loc.
Some only account it of Musical concernment, others look upon it as an help
to memory. Ainsworth conceives it to be an indication of more then ordinary
weight and worth in the matter, this as in the rest, is eminently observable in
this Psalm, which is both of singular use and value. Indeed it may well be
styled, The good man's Cordial in bad times: A Sovereign Plaster for the
Plague of Discontent: Or, A choice Antidote against the Poison of impatience.

It is a truth evident in experience, That Gods dispensations toward the
righteous and the wicked in this life, are like Jacobs dealing with Joseph's
Sons, cross and strange: For as he laid his right hand on the younger, and
his left on the Elder, Genesis 48. 12
so does God oft-times, for the present, distribute with his left hand crosses
to the good, and with his right hand favors to the bad; not only in a
litterall sense, as our Savior speaks, He makes the Sun to shine, and the
Rain to fall upon the just, and the unjust; Mat. 5. 45.
but in a metaphorical sense he causes the Sun of prosperity to shine upon
the unjust, and the Rain of adversity to fall upon the just: hence it is, that
both the Sanctity and the Equity, the holiness and justice of God has by many
been called in question; it being a probable Argument to carnal reason, that
God, in prospering the bad, approves of their ways, and so is unholy; and in
afflicting the good, renders not according to their deeds, and so is unjust:
Hence it is, that in such times the wicked swell with the timpany of pride, and
the weak pine away in a fretting consumption; those are impostumated with
self-conceit, and these are inflamed with passion: the cure of both,
especially the latter, (to wit envious fretting at the wickeds prospering) our
Prophet endeavors in this Psalm: The medicine which he prescribes, is made up
of various ingredients, amongst which, none more operative then a due
meditation of Gods final retribution, both to the godly, and ungodly: which as
it is principally insisted on throughout the whole; so is it elegantly
recommended in the close, and in particular the quiet end of the just, both
asserted and assured for our support, and encouragement in the words of the
Text, Mark the perfect, etc.

Which words may fitly be divided into two generals, and each of those
sub-divided into two particulars: here is, officium and motivum. 1. A duty
enjoined, Mark the perfect, and behold the upright. 2. A motive adjoined, For
the end of that man is peace.


In the former of these we have considerable, 1. Objectum propositum, the
object proposed to our view, the perfect and upright man, a choice and rare
sight both amiable and admirable, well worthy our aspect. 2. Actus requisitus,
an act required with gemination, to mark and behold this man where ere we meet
him.


In the latter of these is observable, 1. Beneficii collatio, a precious
benefit conferred upon the perfect and upright man, which should move us to
behold him, and that is peace. 2. Temporis specificatio, the special time
mentioned when this benefit shall be conferred, and till when we must mark the
perfect man, and that is the end, for the end of that man is peace.


Or, if you please, take notice in the Text of these two parts: here is 1.
Ampladescriptio, a full and pithy description of a good man, and that both, a
qualitate and felicitate, from the quality of his disposition, he is perfect
and upright. From the felicity of his condition, the end of that man is peace.
2. Apta prescriptio, a fit and suitable prescription in reference to both these,
that we should mark, and behold him in himself, and in his end mark the
perfect, etc.


And in this method I shall now handle the Text, craving divine inspiration,
and your attention, that I may so speak the words of truth and uprightness,
and you may so mark, and behold what shall be spoken, that the end of the
Sermon may be glory to God, peace and profit to every one of our Souls: and so
I begin with the

1. General of the Text, the good man's description: And therein

1. The quality of his disposition in that double expression, perfect and
upright, two words not much different in sense, yet both emphaticall in phrase,
and will require a distinct explication.

1.
The first term we meet with is perfect: but where shall we find the man to
whom this character belongs? sure the Psalmist rather describes what the good
man should be, then what he is, if we look upon the most eminent Saints in
Scripture, we shall find not one of them daring to assume this title unto
themselves: Job says of himself, If I say I am perfect, it shall prove me
perverse, chap. 9. 20. Paul plainly denies it of himself, not as, though I had
already attained, either were already perfect, Phil. 3. 12. Bernard.
Et quis id sibi arrogare andet, quod Paulus ipse fatetur, se non
comprehendisse? says Saint Bernard excellently; and who is so arrogant as to
think himself more holy then this chief Apostle? but yet let God be true, and
every man a liar, Romans 3. 4.
who affirms that of Job, which he denies of himself, that he was a perfect
and an upright man? Chap. 1. 1. Let not Saint Paul, who was immediately
inspired, be thought to contradict himself, who in the forementioned place,
ver. 15. reckons himself among those that are perfect, Let us, as many as be
perfect be thus minded, that therefore these seeming contrarities may be
reconciled, and the nature of this perfection unfolded: be pleased to observe
these distinctions.

1. Divines well distinguish of a double perfection, it is absoluta, or
comporata. That is absolutely perfect, to which nothing (that may be accounted
truly good) is wanting: and thus he only is perfectus who is infectus: God,
who made all things and himself is not made, only enjoying an all-sufficient
perfection, in, and of himself. That is comparatively perfect, in which,
notwithstanding some wants, there is a fullness compared with others.

Thus every Saint is perfect, in comparison of the wicked, among whom he
lives. In this respect it is said of Noah, That he was a perfect man in his
generations, Genesis 6. 9.
his grace compared with the wickedness of the Old World, well deserving the
name of perfection; indeed every upright man is perfect in comparison of them
who are openly bad, or but openly good; stained with wickedness, or but
painted with holiness.

Thus one Saint may be perfect, if compared with another, the strong Christian
in respect of the weak, whom he out-strips in Grace and Piety: such Saint Paul
means, when he says, We speak wisdom among them that are perfect: 1 Cor. 2.
6.
that is, such as have attained to greater measures of grace then others. It
was said of Benajah, He was more honorable then thirty, but he attained not to
the first three; (...) 23. 35.
and though no Saint can ever attain to the perfection of the first three, the
blessed Trinity: yet many Saints may be honorable amongst thirty, perfect in
comparison of those among whom they live.

2. We must further distinguish of a double perfection; it is extrinseca and
intrinseca. Extrinsecall perfection, so called because by imputation, is that
which every Believer is partaker of through the perfect righteousness of
Christ, whereby all his imperfections are covered: In this respect, the Author
to the Hebrews tells us, That by one offering he has perfected for ever them
that are sanctified: Heb. 10. 14.
and S. Paul tells the Colossians, That they were complete in him, Collos. 2. 5.
meaning Christ. Indeed, August.
omnia Dei mandata tunc facta deputantur quando id quod non sit ignoscitur:
divine commands are then in Gods account fulfilled, when our defects for
Christ's sake are pardoned: and the evangelical perfection of a Christian
consists not in perfectione virtutum, sed remissione ^^.
vitiorum, in the completion of our graces, but remission of our sins.

Intrinsecall perfection so called because by inhesion, is no less rationally
then usually thus distinguished, there is perfectio partium and gradium: He is
said to be perfect, cui nihil de est, eorum, quae ad statum salutis necessaria,
who wants no graces that accompany salvation; or he is perfect, Cui nihil
deest in gradibus gratiarum and virtutum: who is not defective in the measures
of those graces: both these are frequently, and firly illustrated by the
resemblance of a child, and a grown man; the one whereof has all the
essential and integrall parts of a man, the other a complete use and measure
of those parts.

If we speak of the latter kind of perfection, there never was, nor shall be,
nor can any mere man in this life attain unto it; indeed the spirits of just
men in Heaven are perfecti, made perfect, Heb. 12. 23.
but on earth they are only perficientes, striving to be perfect; our
perfection here, is in fieri, non facto, accomplishing, not accomplished. Non
plonam induimus perfectionem, donec totam exuimus infectionem, we cannot wholly
put off the rags of corruption, and therefore not fully put on the robes of
perfection: We may be sine querela, not sine culpa, without blame in regard of
gross enormities, not without blemish in respect of sinful infirmities. True
it is, the Scriptures call upon us to be perfect, as our Father in Heaven is
perfect. Mat. 5. 48.
Non ut tantum p^aestari possit quantum suadetur, not that we can fully acquire
what is required, but to show quousque conari oportet, Aug.
at what our desires must aim, and to what our endeavors must tend. This
perfection is not patriae, but viae, reserved for the country, not to be
attained while we are in the way; in this regard all our perfection here
consists in these two things:

1. A penitential acknowledgment of our imperfection: as the best wisdom is to
see our folly, so the highest perfection is to bewail our deficiency; and
therefore we shall still find those that have been in the highest form of
grace, most sensible of the want of grace, poverty of spirit being an
inseparable attendant of the riches of piety: This made Job abhor himself in
dust and ashes. Job. 42. and 6.
David pray, Lord enter not into judgment with thy servant: Psalm. 143. 2.
And Paul acknowledge himself to be less then the least of all the Saints.
Ephesians. 3. 8.
Excellent to this purpose is that of Saint Austine, Advirtutis perfectionem
pertinet etiam ipsius imperfectionis, and in veritate agnitio and in humilitate
confessio: an humble confession, and a faithful acknowledgement of our
imperfection conduces much to our perfection: and the same Father commenting
upon that of the Apostle, as many as are perfect, thus illustrateth it, qu^t
qu^ perfect currimus, hoc sapimus, quod nondum perfecti simus, sed illia
perficiemur quo perfect currimus, as many of us as run perfectly the race of
piety, are sensible of this, that as yet we are not perfect, but shall then be
perfected, when we come to the place to which we run.

2. A zealous progress to, and endeavor after this perfection: So Aquinas
expounding that exhortation of Saint Paul, be you perfect, renders it tendatis
ad perfectum, Aquinas in 2 Cor. 13. 11.
tend to, and strive after perfection: (...) Bernard.
Indesinens proficiendi studium, and jugis conatus ad perfectionem, perfectio
reputatur, a continued desire of increase, and daily endeavor after
perfection, is accounted as our perfection: God herein dealing with us as an
indulgent Father with the child that draws the arrow as far as he can to reach
the mark, esteeming it as if he had drawn the arrow to the head, and hit the
mark: in this sense it is, that as God does repute the Saints, so the Saints
have reckoned themselves amongst the number of the perfect. Bernard.
Magnum illud electionis vas perfectum abnuit, pr^fectum satetur, says Saint
Bernard concerning Paul, that chosen vessel, a^counted his perfection to be
his profection, pressing toward the mark, for the price of the high calling
of God in Christ Jesus. Phil 3. 14.
Indeed the Papists supercilliously assert a possibility of perfection to every
Christian in an exact observance of the whole Moral Law; nay, to some, as
their Monastical Votaries, a possibility of that perfection, which according
to their terms is not only precepti, but consilii, a fulfilling of precepts,
but counsels, whereby they perform works of supererogation, and so
contribute to others, as well as their own salvation; nor do we want those
among our selves, who fondly dream of an unspotted purity, and perfection,
attainable in this life, but to these I may fitly apply those words of Saint
James, Ye rejoice in your boastings, all such rejoicing is evil; James 4. 16.
these vaunting brags are an Argument not of strength of grace, but height of
pride: Oh let us never account our selves to have attained sufficiency, but
still endeavor to be proficients, ever remembering that it is with our graces,
as with numbers, no numbers so full, but still more may be added; no measure of
grace so great, but its capable of further measure. But then,

2. If we speak of a perfection in the former sense, to wit, of parts: So it is
true of every Saint, he may, nay he must be perfect, though not as touching
exact performace continually, yet as touching constant resolution habitually;
though not throughout sanctified, yet sanctified throughout in spirit, soul,
and body; 1 These. 5. 23.
and in this construction the later word is a fit explication of the former,
perfect being no more but upright; thus Hezekiah in that Prayer upon his sick
bed joins these 2 together, in truth, and with a perfect heart, Isay 38. 1. 3.
thereby intimating that perfection which he had attained, was not in regard of
degrees, but truth of grace, accounting his heart perfect because upright: Upon
this ground it is, that Asa, David, and others, are said to have their hearts
perfect, 1 Kings 15. 14
notwithstanding their lives were in some particulars scandalous, divine mercy
passing by their defects, and accepting the uprightness of their intention,
instead of perfectness in action. Christus non loquitur de infirmitatibus
sanctorii communibus, sed accusat singularem Episcopi hypocrisin. Opera igitur
plena non absolute perfecta, sed siv^^ra negat in illo se in v^^^sse, Par. in
loc.
That charge against the Church of Sardis is very observable to this purpose, I
have not found thy works perfect before God, which were it to be understood of
exactness, according to the rigor of the Law, might be an accusation against
any, even the purest Church to whom Christ wrote, and therefore is to be
construed a want of sincerity, which is perfection according to the tenor of
the Gospel: Yea, which is further considerable, this makes our works perfect
before God, Rev. 3. 2.
because so accounted in his esteem, it being uprightness that fills up both
our Graces and duties. Hence it is that in some places of Scripture, the word
which is here read perfect, is rendered upright; so in that counsel of God to
Abraham, Walk before me, and be upright. Genesis 17. 1.
And that assertion of the Wise man, He that walks uprightly, walks surely.
Prove. 11. 18.
Musc.
And of this Text it self I find one translation reading it Integrum, another
Simplicem: Foelix. simplex in unoquoque genere est perfectum.
whereof the one is opposed to rottenness, the other to double-mindednesse. So
that the perfection which the Text requires is a freedom, not from all sin,
but from hypocrisy: the perfect is no more then the sound, or single hearted
man; and so the same, with upright, which is the

Prior abstinentiam damni, posterior collationem boni denotat, Hug.
Second term to be considered. I am not ignorant that some Interpreters
reading the first word, Innocentem, and this latter, Rectum understand both in
reference unto men; expounding him to be innocent, who does no injury, and him
upright that observes equity among men. Others refer the first word to God,
the latter to Man; restraining the sense of this word upright, to the integrity
of our dealings with those, among whom we converse: Nulli (...) preximo agendo.
Lvr. Resp^^^ inno^^^^ Deum, aquit^^ proximus, Hug.
And thus it is an undoubted truth, The good Man is both perfect toward God,
and upright toward Men; giving as God, his right, so Man his due. Piety is
ever a friend to Equity, and Religion to Justice; the whole Law is copulative,
and obedience conjunctive. It Is observable, that Saint James defining, or
rather describing, pure and undefiled Religion before God; makes mention of
those duties of visiting the Widow, and the Fatherless, James 1. 25.
which belong unto the second Table: Indeed, he cannot be a right worshipper of
God, who is not upright, and charitable in his conversation toward men.

But I rather conceive, both the terms are of equal extent, the latter being
added exegetically for the unfolding of the former: it is a word both extensive,
and exclusive; exclusive of the hypocrite, extensive to the weak; it is a bar to
keep out the one, and a key to let in the other: none are on the one side more
ready to boast of perfection than Hypocrites, that generation being commonly
pure in their own eyes; But, indeed, they are so much the more imperfect,
because, notwithstanding their pretenses to singular purity, they are full of
odious hypocrisy. On the other side, weak Saints being conscious of their own
defects, are apt to exclude themselves from the number of the perfect: and
therefore, that they might not be too much discouraged, the Psalmist joins to
this harsh term, perfect, the mild phrase of upright; that we might know by
the one, what he means by the other, and when the sense of our infirmities
forbids us, the sight of our integrity may encourage us to account our selves
perfect because upright.

It will be needful then a little to enquire, who is this upright man. The
Original Verb from whence the word in the Text comes, signifies in Kal,
rectum esse; in Pihel, complanare: and the Noune notes such a man, whose heart
is right, and ways are plain: particularly there are two things which make up
the frame of an upright spirit; to wit, measuring all our actions by a right
rule, and levelling them at a right end.

First, the upright man squares all his actions by a right rule; carnal Reason
cannot by as him, corrupt practice cannot sway him, but Gods sacred Word
directs him: Hence it is, that his respect is universal to all Divine
Precepts, avoiding all Evil, performing all Good, without exception. This was
the Character of Josiah, of whom its said, He turned to the Lord with all his
heart, with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all contained in
the Law of Moses: 2 King. 2. 23, 25.
Indeed, the upright Man with David, esteems Gods precepts concerning all
things to be right, Psalm. 119. 128.
and therefore is careful to observe them. Hence it is, that he is the same Man
at all times, in all places: what the Philosopher Arist.
says of a good Man is true of him, he is (...), like a Cube, or square, or
like a Die, that falls alike every way, because at all times, and in all
societies, he acts by one and the same Rule; It Is a good saying of one that
pretends to be Saint Cyprian, Ea non est religio, sed dissimulatio, qua per
omnia non constat sibi; Auct. de duplici Martyrio.
that is not Piety, but Hypocrisy, which is not in all things like it self,
since the upright Man measures every action by the straight line of Divine
Prescript. And

2. He levells all his actions to a right end; where integrity is in the heart,
Gods Word is in the Hand, and his Glory in the Eye, as Zeal is the intention
and fervor of every Grace, so sincerity is the intention and bent of the heart
in every duty; the lodestone of an upright soul is not self-interest, but Gods
honor; he casts no squint-eye at by-respects, but looks directly forward at
his Creatours Glory; it was the blemish which Satan thought to cast upon Job,
that his obedience was mercenary; and therefore, he says, Does Job fear God
for naught? Job 1. 9.
but it plainly appeared, that, though Gods Blessings were encouragements to,
yet not the principal end of his Service, and therefore God gives him the
Character of an upright Man. It is observable in that counsel God gives to
Abraham, these two are joined together, Walk before me, and be upright: Since
the upright man ever walks before God, and that not only because he walks as
under Gods eye, but as having his eye upon God, desirous to magnify him in all
his actions. That resemblance of Pachomius an Abbot is remarkable to this
purpose, who digesting his numerous Monks into various Classes, according to
the Letters in the Greek Alphabet, suited the names he gave them to the
natures he observed in them: Thus those whom he found Politicians and
dissemblers, he compared to the letters ^ and ^, which are full of crooked
turnings; those whom he observed to be plaine-hearted and upright, to the
letter ^, which is carried right upwards. So indeed is the sincere Saint in all
his actions, fixing his eye upon the glory of God; and the man who is thus
qualified, is he to whom this term of upright may fitly be applied.

To wind up this first Branch in a brief Application.

It is a note not unworthy our observation, that the Psalmist in the following
verse makes mention of the wicked in the plural number; (...)
but in this verse, speaking of the good, uses the singular to intimate to us,
there are many transgressors to one perfect; many wicked, to one upright man.
The Prophet bids us Behold the upright; but alas, where shall we find one
upright man to behold? It is storyed of Diogenes, that at noone day he went
about the streets with a candle lighted; and being asked, What he did? returned
this answer, Hominem qu^^^, I seek for a Man: meaning one that might deserve
the name of a man. And we find that it was Gods command to the Prophet, that
he should Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek in the
broad places thereof, to find a man that executed judgment. Jer. 5. 1.
Should we take the same course to find the perfect and upright man in the
Text, how long should we be in seeking? Pretenders to perfection, Professors of
Sanctity, this Age swarms with, but few Practicers. Facings of Religion were
never more in fashion, but the Linings of Piety never more out of request. That
Subtle malu^ secr^^^^ virus latens venenum, as Chrysologus fitly terms it,
lurking snake, subtle evil, and secret poison of hypocrisy has stung,
surprised, and infected the most among us.

Of old, a third part of the Inhabitants of Britains were called Pieti, in a
Moral sense it is a word may well fit the greatest of this generation, since
what our Savior said of the Pharisees, is true of most among us, They are like
to whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are within
full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Mat. 23. 27.
How justly might I here expatiate in a bitter complaint of the reigning
hypocrisy in this age; but the truth is, none are more deaf to reproves then
hypocrites; and therefore leaving them to their delusions, I shall close up
this with a word of Exhortation: Nor can I do it better, then according to the
Translation which the Septuagint and the Vulgar give of this clause, who render
the first word (...) in the most common acception, which is to keep, or
preserve, and take the Concrete as put for the Abstract, perfect and upright
for perfection and uprightness. (...). Sept Custodi innocentiam and vide
aquitatem. Vulg.
Oh let us keep Innocence, and look to Equity; embrace Perfection, and follow
Uprightness. It is good counsel Saint Cyprian gives to this purpose, Let us
consider the titles Christ gives his people, and by them learn our duty. Oves
nominat, and innocentia Christiana ovibus aquatur; agnos vocat, and agnorum
naturam simplicem simplicitas mentis innitetur: He calls us Sheep, oh let us
resemble them in Innocence; he styles us Lambs, oh let us be like them in
simplicity. Indeed no man more amiable in Gods eye then the upright. David knew
this well, which made him say, Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts.
Psalm. 51. 6.
It is fitly to be noted, that the word Jesurun, which is given to Israel, and
is derived from (...) upright in the Text, is rendered by the LXXII. (...),
which signifies beloved: and the Verb (...) signifies both rectus fuit, and
placuit, especially when in construction with (...) according to the Latin
phrase, rectum esse in oculis, it is as much as placere, all intimating, how
acceptable sincerity is in Gods sight. Levit. 32. 15. 33. 26. 1 Reg 7. 12.


Nor is it more pleasing unto God, then profitable unto us: this is it which
enlivens our graces, inlargeth our comfort, and obtaines a reward. Nihil
simplice cord foelicius, Greg.
none more happy then the upright soul. Keep Innocence, and it shall keep
thee. Preserve Integrity, and it shall preserve thee. So true is that of
Solomon, He that walks uprightly, walks surely, Prove. 10. 9.
Security is ever the attendant of sincerity. There is no such way to stand
firmly, as to walk uprightly. In a word, let Uprightness be thy path, and then
Gods Spirit shall be thy guide, his Angels thy guard, his Word thy light, and
Peace thy end, which leads me to the

2. Branch of the first General, namely, the felicity of a good man's
condition, for the end of that man is peace.

The Vulgar following the Septuagint, read this clause in a (...) different
translation, (...).
Quoniam sunt reliquia homini pacifice, because there is a remainder to the
peaceable man. Nor is this construction altogether incongruous to the Hebrew
phrase, and therefore give me leave a little to prosecute it.

And here we meet with another character of a Saint, he is (...) a man of
peace. Those beasts that were wild in the field, became quiet in the Arc. The
Church is a Shulamite, a mother of peace, called Jerusalem, a vision of peace,
and all her members must be sons of peace. It is written in the Law of Mahomet,
that God made the Angels of light, and the Devils of flame. Sure I am, they are
devilish spirits that delight in the flame of contention: Angelical men, who
love the light of peace. Melchisedech, that signifies King of Righteousness,
was King of Salem, that signifies peace. Indeed nothing more inclines us to
peace, then grace. Saint James describing the wisdom from above, says, it is
first pure, then peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. And S. Paul joins together peace and
holiness, Heb. 12. 14. since there cannot be a right practice of holiness,
without a sedulous pursuit of peace. No man more after Gods heart then David;
and if you would observe his temper, view the character he gives of himself,
Psalm. 120. 7. I am for peace; or as the Hebrew expresses it more emphatically,
I am peace, (...)
as if he were made up of peace. Indeed Hypocrisy is ever accompanied with
pride, and no wonder, if (according to Solomon's Proverb) by pride comes
contention, Prove. 13. 10.
whereas sincerity is ever attended with humility, which is the nurse of peace.
Nothing more usual with Hypocrites, then under pretense of advancing holiness,
to foment divisions; but the upright man endeavors to build Gods Temple
without the noise of axes or hammers. So fitly does this expression agree to
him, he is a peaceable man. Illud pro certo habemus esse reliquies homini
pacifico hominem integrum qui cum omnibus pacifice versatur reliquias and
posteritatem and successionem generis hab^^rii. Agell. in loc.


Dabit Deus homini pacifico, ut relinquat silios post ^^. Lor. in loc.
To this man of peace, sunt reliquia, says the Vulgar, there are the
remainder: that is, say some, of a prosperous posterity, a blessing which God
is often pleased to confer upon his Saints. And in this construction we find
the Hebrew word sometimes rendered, so Psalm. 109. 13. (...) the same word with
this in the Text, is translated posterity. With these Arrows God vouchsafes to
fill the just man's Quiver, these Olive plants he sets round about his Table,
they are the heritage of the Lord, and that reward which he sometimes gives to
the upright. This is that blessedness which David promises to the man that
fears the Lord, His seed shall be mighty, and his generation blessed. Psalm.
112. 2.
Some men count Children, Bills of Charges; but God puts them on the accounts of
mercies. 'Twas a pretty answer that Cornelia gave a noble Lady, who lodging in
her house, showed her all her jewels, with a desire to see her riches; She
bringing forth her Children which were newly come from School, said, Hi unice
mihi sunt thesauri, These are my only treasure. Such indeed are Children, no
small riches, where God sends them; which made the Comoedian to say, (...), a
numerous progeny, contributes much to temporal felicity. And this is promised
to the upright and peaceable man, as his remainder.

Reliquit justus post mortem sua^ memoriam justitiae suae bo^am, and Deus fibi
reliquit prami atcrna. Aug.
Others conceive this remainder to be understood of a good name, which the just
and peaceable man leaves behind him. It was a true saying of him in Plautus, Si
bonam famam servasse sat, dives ero, To obtain and preserve a good name, is
riches enough. Yea Solomon compares it with, and extols it above a precious
ointment. Eceles. 7. 1.
This is that blessing which usually attends upon the good. So true is that of
the Poet, Et memorem famam qui been gessit habet. Ovid.
Which if you please you may English by that of the Psalmist, The righteous
shall be in everlasting remembrance. Psalm. 112. 6.


When Socrates was asked, How a man might get and keep a good report? He
returned this answer, Si talis esse studeas, qualis haberi velis, by
endeavoring to be indeed, what he would be accounted. Such is the practice of
an upright man, and as none less looked at, so none is more blessed with a good
repute among men then he: That of Solomon being ever verified in experience,
The memory of the just is blessed. Prove. 10. 7.


Reservat reliquies paradis^ gaudium aternum. Hug.
Praemia aterna Deus justis reliquit. Lor.
Finally, some understand this remainder to be of a glorious reward which all
just and peaceable men shall be partakers of, a construction that may well fit
the Original, which sometimes is put for a reward: So Pro. 23. 18. it is most
aptly read, Surely there is a reward, and thine expectation shall not be cut
off. Never any man kindled a fire in vain on Gods Altar. So true is that of
the Wise man, He that sowes righteousness shall have a sure reward, Prove. 11.
18.

Dionisius causing Musicians to play before him, promised them a great reward;
having played a long time, they expected their Pay: but he told them, they were
paid already, since, as they had pleased him with Music, so he them with hopes
of reward. But, God deals not so with his Servants, he feeds them not with
vain hopes, but sure accomplishment of his gracious promises. There remains a
rest to the people of God, says the Apostle, Heb. 4. 9 And Reliquiae sunt,
says the Vulgar here, there is a remainder of blissful recompense to the
peaceable Man. To end this therefore, Quarite pacem ut inveniatis pra^ium, let
Peace be our work, that Glory may be our wages; ever remembering, that while the
rough Esaus of the time hunt after Venison, it is the smoothplain-hearted, and
quiet Jacob, that carries away the Blessing.

But to handle the words according to our Translation, as being most consonant
to the Sense, and suitable to the Original, The end of that man is peace. A
clause wherein each word is Emphaticall, and deserves a serious View.

The end, indeed the beginning, and middle of the upright man's days are full
of trouble, but his end is rest: The life of a Saint is a continued warfare,
with Satan's temptations, his own Corruptions, and the worlds persecutions, but
at his death he shall enter into peace: For the present, none under worse
slavery then the Good, but at the last there shall be a year of Jubilee: We are
here in this world as upon a Sea, continually subject to stormy Winds, and
rouling Waves; but when we come to the Haven, there shall be a serene Calm. It
is not unworthy our observation, that the Hebrews use this word in the Text, to
signify both a reward, and an end; thereby intimating to us, that the reward
is not given till the end; when the evening was come, then the laborers
received their Wages; and at the end of our lives, shall be the collation of
our Recompense.

Of that Man, to wit exclusive of him, and none but him, Fine discernuntur
reprobi ab electis; Moll.
it is the end makes the difference between the wicked and the good: Indeed,
Solomon affirms, That there is one event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked,
to the Clean, and to the unclean; to him that Sacrifices, and to him that
Sacrifices not; Eccles. 9. 2.
but that respects the matter, not the manner of their end, both end by death,
but not alike; and though the one as well as the other, must die, yet the one
does not die as well as the other: Indeed, to the Bad, Primum optimum, to the
Good, Vltimum; the Wicked man's Wine is best at first, the Good man's at last:
the Devil deals by the one as Jaell by Sisera, Judge. 4. 2.
speaks them fair at first, til he has lulled them asleep in security, and
then he involveth them in misery. But God does by us, as the Hebrew was to do
by the Captive Woman which he Married: at first he appoints us a time of
mourning, but afterward he vouchsafes us the fruition of himself in Glory.
Deuteronomy. 21. 13.
The freshest rivers of carnal Pleasure shall end in a salt Sea of dispairing
Tears; whereas the wettest Seed-time of a pious Life, shall end in the
sun-shiny harvest of a peaceful Death. In a word, the Transgressour, how
pleasant soever his beginnings be, his last shall be dolorous; but the upright,
how troublesome soever his Life be, his death shall be joyous, for the end of
that man

Is peace: This word Peace, you may please to look upon in a double acception,

1. More specially for the particular blessing of peace, which ever accompanies
the upright Man's end: Indeed, both Victory and Peace wait upon the just Man at
last. What Cyrus said of Abradatus, when he saw him lie dead in the Field, that
his end was Honorable, (...), Xenoph.
because he dyed a Conqueror, is true of the Christians end, who dies a Victor
over all the powers of Darkness, Sin and Satan, Hell and Death, being all
subdued under him, and as his end is Victory, so Peace. The Verb (...), from
whence the Noun (...), in the Text comes, signifies in Pi^el, both perficere
and retribuere, the perfect Man shall be recompensed. In Kal, both perfici, and
pacem habere, qui perfectus fuit, pacificus erit, the perfect Man's recompense
shall be Peace. Peace with God, who is reconciled to him in the Blood of the
Lamb; Peace with men, no outcries of the oppressed upon him; Peace with
himself, no perturbations within him, indeed, this peace of Conscience he
enjoyes in Life, but especially at his Death. Oh what serenity and calmnesse,
tranquillity and content, possesses the dying Saint; when being come to his
Haven, the music of a well-tuned Conscience welcomes him to the Shore: then it
is that he becomes (...) Chrysostom.
a teacher of tranquillity to all that behold him; then it is that being come
to the last act of his life, (...), Dyonis.
he is filled with sacred exultation in a sense of his reconciliation with God:
What Saint Bernard saw in holy Gerrard, is frequently observable in upright
Men, Bern.
Actitus sum ego ad id miraculi, videre exultantem in morte hominem, and
insultantem morti: I beheld him, says he, exulting in Death, and insulting
over Death. Thus do good Men die triumphing in their Victory, and rejoicing in
their Peace. So that what Gregory Nazianzen says, concerning his Sister
Gorgonias death, may be applied to every perfect man when he Dies: it is
(...), his Dying day is his Holy Day, and his Funeral his Festival. In a
Word, what Simeon desired of God, and God promised to Abraham is performed to
every upright man, he departs hence, and goes to his Fathers in peace, For the
end of that man is peace. Luke 2 29. Genesis 15. 15.


Pacis vocabulu^ apud Hebraos ^^^ssime patet. Drus.
Moll. in loc.
2. The word rendered Peace in the Text, is sometimes taken more generally for
prosperity, safety, and all good things; in the extent of its signification it
notes perfection, to which is required a confluence of all good, and in this
latitude we may take it here. So one paraphrases upon the Text, Tandem post
varias calamitates eripitur ut sit beatus and felix, his end is peace: That is,
at length he is delivered from afflictions, and invested in an estate of Bliss
and Glory. Such indeed is the upright man's condition in the end, when he shall
arrive at that place, Vbi nullum deerit bonum, nullum aderit malum, where there
shall be an absence of all evil, and a concurrence of all good, where that
shall be verified which is promised, Rev. 21. 4. God shall wipe all tears from
their eyes: and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are past away. In
a word, where there shall be, Vita aterna, beatitudo perfecta, summa voluptas,
as Saint Bernard sweetly; fullness of Joy, perfection of Bliss, and eternity
of Life: Vbi juventus nunquam senescit, decor nunquam pallescit; Amor nurquam
tepescit, salus nunquam marcessit, gaudium nunquam decrescit, and vita terminum
nescit, as Saint Austin elegantly, Where there is Youth ever flourishing,
Beauty never fading; Love ever constant, Safety never wanting; Joy always
exceeding, and Life never ending. 'Twas a Custom among the Athenians at their
Marriages, that a Youth of known Ingenuity, carrying a Van full of Corn and
Akehornes, should solemnly pronounce these words among the People, (...) I have
escaped bad, and found better. How joyfully shall the Saints in that last day,
when they shall be called to the Marriage Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19. 9.
take up the like acclamation, we are passed through all our troubles, and have
found durable joys; we have escaped out of an Egypt of bondage through a
Wilderness of sorrows, unto a Canaan of bliss. Nautae dulcia patriis oscula
littoribus figunt, liberatos se periculis, absolutos erroribus gratulantes:
Ambros.
The Mariner that has been preserved from many violent Storms, and
outrageous Tempests, does not with more full contentment kiss his native
Shore, then the upright Man after various sorrows here endured, enters into
the joy of his Lord. So true is this of the Psalmist in the largest sense, The
end of that man is peace.

To end this in a profitable use to our selves:

1. Si vis in pace mori^sis servus Dei; Bern.
as we desire to have Peace in the end, let Piety be our Race. 'Twas Marcus
Aurelius his dying Counsel to his Son Commodus, That if he would live quietly,
he should live justly. Let me a little alter it, if you would die peaceably,
live uprightly. The Pythagoreans did promise a good hope to them in the end,
who studied Philosophy: We have a surer word of promise, that peace shall be at
last to them that study Perfection. Socrates was wont to say, that (...), good
Souls do go hence with hope: Indeed they, and none but they, whose hearts are
upright can depart hence in a sure expectation of bliss, (...), a truly serene
death is asserted by the Stoics to be the only portion, (...) of good and
virtuous Men: and we see the Spirit of God in this Scripture appropriates it
only to perfect, and upright men. It is a fond presumption of those, who live
in hope to die happily, though they live wickedly. Do men gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistles! Mat. 7. 16.
says our blessed Savior. Its in vain to expect the Grapes of Peace, and
Figs of Comfort upon the Thorns and Thistles of Wickedness: We never read of
one that lived well, and dyed ill, and but of one who lived ill, and died well.
What madness were it for a man that sows his Field with Cockle, and Tares,
to look for good Corn at the Harvest? No less desperate is their folly, who
think to reap Peace and Glory from the seeds of Sin and Hypocrisy. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked: for whatsover a man sows, that shall he also
reap. Gal. 6. 7.
It is the ^^^^tion of God himself, There is no peace to the Wicked. Isay 48.
22.
True it is, for the present, they have a senseless stupidity, but
tranquillitas ista tempestas, their sleepy Consciences shall at last awake, and
bite: and though not always sensibly, yet certainly, not in their own
apprehension, yet in Gods determination the end of the wicked is destruction:
As therefore we desire our end may be everlasting life, let us now bring forth
fruit unto holiness. Rom 6. 22.


2. Let the upright learn, with patience, to wait for their peaceful end:
working Righteousness, is called in Scripture a Sowing, Prove. 11. 18.
among others no doubt for this reason, that as there is a space between the
Seed-time, and the Harvest, during which the Husbandman waits, so is there
between the work, and the reward. The Prophet tells us, he that believes makes
not haste. Isay 28. 16.
Faith is sure of the thing, and therefore is content to stay the time; for the
most part, our expectations are too short breathed, and as we post-date our
duties, so we ante-date our mercies: We do in this case as the unjust Steward,
who, when an hundred should have been set down, caused the debtour to take his
bill and write fifty. Luke 16. 6.
When mercy is to be vouchsafed an hundred days hence, we take our Bill, and
write down Fifty. Oh let us take heed of limiting the Holy one of Israel; that
must be patiently expected, which is not presently to be conferred: the time of
bestowing this peace is at the end, do thou hold out waiting until the end.
Ne deeris Deo in fide, and non deerit tibi in opere, be not thou a wanting to
God in expectance, and he will not be wanting to thee in performance. In the
mean time, let the upright man learn to run with patience, the race that is set
before him. Heb. 12. 1.
to bear quietly the afflictions that are laid upon him, Fortiter malum qui
patitur, post potitur bonum, Plaut. Asin.
he that endures evil cheerfully shall at last enjoy good certainly, the end
will make amends for all. Oh let the sweetness of the recompense mitigate the
bitterness of our sufferings; the cloudiest Morning may have a red Evening a
pleasant Spring follow a sharp Winter, the most blustering Storm end in a quiet
Calm, and the sadest trouble of the Just, not only may, but shall be
swallowed up at last in fullest joys. What the Poet spoke concerning the
Fabrication of the World, and truly, not much unlike Moses description of the
Creation. (...) Hes.


The Sky, and the Day sprang from the Night, may here fitly be applied to the
upright, there arises the light of Comfort, Psalm. 112. 4.
sometimes in, always after, nay, out of the darkness of his sorrow. It was a
pretty device of one Giacope Sanzaro an Italian, who having been long in Love,
and much crossed, filled a pot full of little Black Stones, and one White,
saying, There will come one White day, (meaning that of Marriage) which will
make amends for all my Black days. Let the perfect Man comfort himself in this
assurance, that though the Calendar of his Life, may be full of miserable
days; yet the day of his death shall be full of Joy, and the end of his Life,
a beginning of that bliss which shall never end.

In fine, that council which Solon gave to Croesus in the midst of his Glory,
let me give to the godly Man in the midst of his sorrows, Respire finem,
Observe the end. Indeed this is that which may both darken the luster of wicked
men's Prosperity, and qualify the sharpness of good men's Afflictions. And as
it concerns the perfect Man to consider his own end, so does it behoove us all
to regard the perfect Man's end: And so I am fallen upon the

2. General of the Text, which is the fit prescription of a duty to be
performed in reference to this perfect, and upright person, in those words,
Mark, and Behold.

In the two Verses immediately preceding, David records his own experience of
the Wicked, and from thence incourageth us to observe our own experiences of
the Good: Thereby intimating unto us, that as the way of the Just, and the
Unjust, is directly opposite, so their end shall be manifestly contrary. And
withal, that what he saw in his time, might be observed, and should be made
good in the experience of all times, God is the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever. Quod ego observavi longa experientia, idem, tu quoque videbis, si
diligenter attenderis. Mol. in loc. Heb. 13. 8.
The same, not only in his Essence, but in his Operation, in his Being; but in
his Working, what he has done, that he still does, and will do: Divine
providence ever acts like it self, and though it vary in particular
circumstances, yet ever keeps the general course of rewarding every one at
the last according to their works; and therefore former experiences are just
grounds of future confidence, those dispensations, of God toward the
Righteous, and the Wicked, which Holy Men of Old have registered, may encourage
us, to expect the same, to which end it is David here called upon us in the
words of the Text, Mark and behold.

The duty here required we see is ingeminated, not only Mark, but Mark and
Behold: The reason whereof, we may very well conceive to be both fervency in
the Penman, and necessity in the Matter. Indeed these two do well together,
where the duty is needful, Zeal becomes the Preacher; that cannot be too
often pressed, which must be performed; it is like the frequent knocking at the
Door, that it may be sooner opened, the renewed strokes upon the Nail which
drive it in the faster. Thus the Prophet Zephany persuading to that needful
part of Repentance, which consists in self-examination, not only propounds,
but repeats it, Gather your selves together yea, gather your selves together.
Zephan. 2. 1.
And the Psalmist here seeing a necessity of this duty, to prevent those
dangerous mis-constructions, which otherwise carnal Reason might be apt to
make of Gods proceedings; not only sets it before us, but presses it upon us
in this double expression, Mark, and Behold.

But this is not all the reason that may be given of this Gemination, we may
very well apply a double Object to this double expression of the Act, and both
out of the Text, to wit, the upright Man, and his end; what he does, and how he
fares; mark his way, behold his end; mark his action, behold his retribution:
both call for our consideration.

First, mark the upright man himself in the course of his life, indeed his
intentions are only known to God, but his actions are visible unto men: true
Grace, where ever it is, may be seen, felt, heard, and understood, 'twas our
Saviors precept to his Disciples, that their light should so shine before men,
as they might see their good works: Mat 5. 16.
And surely, if good Men must do their works so as to be seen, we must see
their good works when they are done: And in this respect we must take notice
of the upright man for a double end:

First, Vt honoremus, let us mark him, that we may honor him, and those Graces
of God which are manifest in him: indeed the world looks on the Saint with a
scornful eye, because with a Carnal; they say of him, what those Jews did of
Christ, He has no form or comlienesse: and when we see him, there is no
beauty that we should desire him. Isay 53. 2.
Let us view him with a Spiritual aspect, and we shall find that worth which
deservedly calls for our esteem: indeed the upright, as David well calls them,
are the excellent ones of the Earth: Psalm. 89. 3.
though men cast them out as Dross, yet they are the finest Gold; though men
trample them under foot as Pebles, yet are they precious Pearls: They are so
in Gods account, let them be so in our esteem.

Secondly, Vt imitemur, let us mark the upright man so as to imitate him, eye
his steps, so as to tread in them: It Is Gods goodness to afford, and should be
our wisdom to make use of the Godly, Tanquam statuas Mercuriales, as
Travellours do of those Statues which are set to point forth the way unto
them. Saint Paul calls the Saints of the Old Testament, a cloud of witnesses;
Heb. 12. 1.
alluding, no doubt, to that pillar of a cloud which went before the Israelites
in the Wilderness to lead them the way. Exodus 13. 21.
So should our eye be fixed on those Saints that are gone before us, or that
live amongst us, as a cloud for our direction in the way to heaven. 'Twas S.
Paul's request to the Corinthians, Be ye followers of me; 1 Cor. 4. 16.
we must be so of every upright man, and to that end mark him.

Secondly, Behold the upright man in the close of his death, and this is that I
conceive the Psalmist chiefly aims at: So Tremellius his reading plainly
manifests, Observa integrum, and aspire rectum, finem illius esse pacem:
Observe the perfest, and behold the upright, that the end of this man is peace.
He calls for, not a transient view, but a permanent aspect; as an Archer having
shot an Arrow, takes not off his Eye until he sees it fall, so must we with a
fixed eye behold the upright, til we see what becomes of him. This was that the
Apostle James wills those to whom he wrote, to do in reference to Job; both to
look upon him in that way of patience wherein he trod, You have heard of the
patience of Job: James 5. 11.
and withal in that end which happened to him, And have seen the end of the
Lord. Indeed, this is that duty which concerns us in reference both to the
good and bad, to look upon them not in their present, but future state. This
world is as a stage, whereon both the Upright, and the Hypocrite; the Perfect,
and the Wicked, are Actors and that which in both of these we ought chiefly to
be Spectatours of, is their Exit: not so much how they come on, as how they go
off: in regard of the Wicked this was it which Moses wished the Israelites to
fasten their eyes upon, and therefore, when Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, had
rebelliously conspired against him and Aaron; he calls the people to a
consideration of their end, If these men die the common death of all men, or if
they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lord has not sent
me. Number. 16. 29.
And in regard of the Good, it is that which here David would have us chiefly to
take notice of, his end is peace; not is it without good reason, since by this
means we shall best rectify our judgments, and avoid false censures: Noli
pracipitare jadictum nec far sententiam ex proximo intuitu. Mol. in locum.
So that these two words, Mark and Behold, are, as it were, a bridle to keep
us in from running headlong into rash judgings, when we see the upright
encompassed with afflictions; and thus we must behold the upright man's end, to
restrain us from passing wrong Sentence both upon God, and the Good; upon God,
as if he were unjust: upon the Good, as if they were the most miserable.

First, we must behold his end, in regard of God, Ne iniqu^ p^tetur Deus, dum
favet impiis, and justos affligit. Glos. Aug.
Lest otherwise we account God unequal in his dispensations; as indeed, who
would not think it strange, to see the Godly corrected, whilst the Wicked are
spared; those cast down with Sorrow, whilst these are lifted up with
Prosperity: But the Glorious end of the Saints calamitous life abundantly
cleares Divine Justice, and stops the mouth of Blasphemy; though now God
afflict the Righteous, and the Wicked, yea, many times the Righteous, and not
the Wicked, yet in the end he will put a difference between the Righteous and
the Wicked, whereby the Glory of his equity shall evidently appeear, and
therefore Behold the upright.

Secondly, in regard of the Good, lest we condemn him as miserable in those
afflictions he undergoes: What Saint Paul says in another case concerning the
Saints, If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most
miserable: 1 Cor. 15. 19.
may with a little variation be used in this, if we judge of good men according
to their condition in this Life, we shall account them of all men most
wretched; but let us stay our censure till the last, trace the Saint to his
journies end, and then we shall freely confess, that none are more blessed
then the Upright, or happier then the Perfect.

To shut up this in a word of useful Application.

It Is the general assertion of Solomon, The wise man's eyes are in his head,
but the fool walks in darkness. Eccles 2. 14.
Let us in this particular show our selves wise Men, by having our eyes in our
head, to mark, and behold the upright man's end. Let not the beams of the
ungodlies prosperity dazzle us, but rather wait a while til their dismal end,
when we shall see their Sun set in a Cloud, their Candle go out in a Snuff,
and their hope sink into Despair. Let not the Clouds of Misery, which, for the
present, hang over the upright, darken our eyes; but stay till the comfortable
end, when he shall break forth a^ the Sun in his splendor, and shine as the
Stars in Glory. 'Twas Moses his advice to the Israelites in their greatest
strait, that they should stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord. Exodus
14. 13.
Indeed, those two are well put together, stand still, and see, whilst a man
moves swiftly, his eyes dazzle, but when he stands still he sees clearly. Let us
do so, patiently expect, and diligently observe, that Salvation which God in
the end will work for his Servants. That counsel which Christ gave to the
Church of Laodicea, Apoc. 3. 7.
let me give to you, in reference to this duty, Annoint your eyes with the
eye salve of the Spirit, that you may rightly discern, and wisely judge of
Gods proceedings. Look backward by the eye of experience, and see how God has
dealt with upright persons in the end; and then look forward by the eye of
Faith, and conclude what God will vouchsafe to his people at the last. This
done, I doubt not but you will both acknowledge Gods Justice, and admire his
wisdom; you will follow the good Man's steps, and desire his end. In a word,
you will prefer afflicted Godliness, before pleasurable Wickedness;
persecuted Religion, before prosperous Rebellion; and despised Piety, before
advanced iniquity. Finally with Moses, you will esteem the afflictions of Gods
people, sweeter comforts then all the pleasures of Sin. The reproaches of
Christ greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11. 25. 26.
having a respect to the recompense of the reward, that blissful peace which
in the end shall be conferred on all them who walk before God in Truth, and
with a perfect heart, according to this of the Psalmist in the Text, Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

I have done with my Text, but I must not end here. Behold, another Text lies
before us fit to be read, and perused by us. Heredotus makes mention of a
custom among the Aethiopians, to set the dead Bodies of their Friends in
glazed Sepulchers, that their proportions might be obvious to the passengers;
how needless soever that custom was, it is doubtless no more then just, that
the pious lineaments of their minds who die in the Lord, should be presented
to the living in the mirror of Art. Indeed commendation after Death, is the
tribute of a Religious life: Good works are Jewels, not to be locked up in a
Cabinet, but to be set forth to public view. If Christ would have Mary's name
remembered in the Gospel unto the Worlds end for one box of ointment poured on
his Head; we cannot imagine that he would have the many pious and charitable
deeds of his servants to be buried in Oblivion. Consult the Scriptures, and you
shall scarce find any godly Man laid in his Grave without an Epitaph of
Honor. View the Fathers, and you shall observe it their practice to honor the
death of the Good, by giving them their deserved praises: So did Ambrose to
Theodosius, Nazianzen to Athanasius, Hierome to Nepotian; and Bernard to
Malachias, and Gerard. The truth is, in reciting the virtuous acts of Dead
persons, we do not so much advantage them, as benefit our selves. What do
they need glory on Earth, who are glorified in Heaven? Nostra interest non
ipsorum, Bern.
its our interest, not theirs, since by their examples we are provoked to good
works: Nay, let me tell you, in rehearsing their Graces, we do not so much
honor Them, as glorify God. 'Twas the Greek Fathers Apology for himself,
(...), Greg. Naz.
in praising virtue, I extol the God, who is the donor of it.

It cannot then (at least justly) offend any religious Ear, if I shall
endeavor to delineate the singular worth of this illustrious Knight, whose
Funerals we now solemnize. And here it fares with me, as with a man in a
Garden, full of choice Flowers, that knows not where to pick: abundance of
matter, making me almost barren of expression. As for a complete Enumeration of
his Virtues, it is a work which neither my scant Abilities can perform, nor
will the scantling of time permit. It cannot be expected, that a good Life,
which has been weaving a piece of Graces for threescore years, and upward,
can be spread before you in a few minutes. Besides, the History of his Life,
and Narration of his Worth, calls for a Livie rather then a Florus; a
Demosthenes, rather then a Phocion to undertake it. I want time to draw his
Picture to the length, and skill to do it to the Life: yet, Ex pede Herculem,
spare me but your patience a while, and I shall (though rudely) draw some few
lineaments, by which you may guess at the rest.

Let it not then be accounted flattery, if I take up the first part of the
Text, and apply it in particular to him: Mark this Perfect, and behold this
upright Man. Mark him in his Life, how Exemplary? Behold him in his Death, how
Happy?

Not to expatiate in the Characters of his Life, I shall limit my discourse, by
a double consideration: Mark him as a Magistrate, Behold him as a Man; Mark him
as a public Governor, Behold him as a private Christian; and in both
(setting aside Humane Frailties.) you shall find him well worthy these
Characters in the Text, Perfect, and Upright.

1. To make up a perfect and upright Magistrate, two things are especially
requisite: Wisdom in discerning, Impartiallity in Judging: both of which were
eminent in this Worthy, whom God endued with a perspicacious eye, to discern
between things that differ; and a resolute heart to do justly, without any
respect to persons. He was far from Casars temper, who said, Melior causa
Cassii; sed denegare Bruto, nihil possum: Cassius his cause is better, but I
cannot deny my Friend Brutus. Private respects could not sway him in public
Censures; he put off all relations to a Friend, when he put on the Robes of a
Magistrate; he was neither backward to encourage Virtue, nor yet to punish
Vice, and though otherwise, of a tender, and melting disposition, yet in
matters of Judicature he was wont to say, A foolish pity, is Cruelty. In
sum, the integrity of his Spirit, in administration of Justice was so
evident, that I doubt not, but many in this Congregation who sat with him in
public Courts can abundantly attest it: It pleased this City to put him upon
several places of great Trust and Honor; and not many years since, he was
thought worthy to be invested with the highest Office of Dignity and Authority;
in which he behaved himself so Faithfully, Courageously, and Discreetly, that I
may justly say, His place did not so much honor him, as he his Place. A true
Patriot indeed he was, losing, for a time, his Liberty, hazarding his Estate,
shall I say his Life? for the defense of this City, which he then conceived to
be surrounded with dangers.

2. You have seen his steps as a Magistrate, behold him now as a Christian: A
perfect, and an upright Saint is one, who, though not exactly, yet
intentionally observes the precepts of both Tables; giving (at least in desire,
and endeavor) to God and Man, that which of right belongs unto them. Of both
these, we shall find him a most conspicuous Pattern.

1. Behold him in his Religion, he was one who Copied out his Life, according
to the Old way of Christianity; wherein he writ so fair a Hand, that I believe
few come near him. In his Devetions he was neither foolishly Factious, nor
Popishly Superstitious: He Worshipped God in that way, which the Papists call
Heresy, and Schismatiques call Popery. His delight was fervent in, and
therefore his repair frequent to the House of God; esteeming (according to the
Hebrew Proverb) those Garments most Gay, which were sullied with the dust of
the Temple. And as his often addresses to these public places of Worship
whilst he lived: so the large sums of Money he gave to the Edifying, and
Repairing of them when he Died, fully proclaim that to be true of him, which
David said of himself, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. Psalm. 69. 9.
Singular was his reverence in attending to Gods Word, and affectionate his
respect to the dispensors of it, Esteeming them highly in love for their works
sake; 1 These. 5. 13.
among whom I must gratefully acknowledge my self (though the unworthiest) to
be one, who had no small share in his favor. This cordial love of his to Gods
Messengers, was so much the more to be commended in him, by how much it is so
rarely practiced among us. That complaint of the Prophet Jeremy, being too much
verified in this our Age, They respect not the person of the Priest: Lam. 4. 16.
And withal, it was so much the more imitable, in that it was not only
Verbal, but Real; in Expression, but Action; in Respect, but Relief of those
whom he thought Orthodox, and found Necessitous, to whom (besides many
particular, and liberal supplies in his life) he has bequeathed an hundred
pounds at his Death. Add to all this, that which indeed denominates him the
Upright man in the Text: he gave Meals of private Devotion to his Soul. It Is a
good saying of the Father, Non est vera religio, quae cum Templo relinquitur.
Lact.
That Religion is not sincere, which leaves a Man at the Church Door; if you
will find out a man's Integrity follow him Home, trace him to his Closet;
observe his conscientious regard of secret Devotions: this (I am certainly
informed, by them that intimately knew him) was his practice, often retiring
himself in secret: Vbi lacrymas non hominibus offerebat, sed Deo, Hier. de
Nepoc.
where he poured forth tears to his God, for his own, and the Sins of the
Nation: yea, not only in the Day, but Night, in his Closet, but on his Bed he
sought his God: Often expressing to his no less dearly, then deservedly
beloved Soninlaw, How glad he was of his frequent wakings in the Night, since
thereby he had opportunity to praise his God, and Pray for the settlement of
this miserably distracted Church and Kingdom.

2. You have seen him in relation to God, behold him in reference to Men, and
truly, in what relation soever you please to view him, you shall find him
Praiseworthy. Whilst blessed with a Consort, he was an affectionate Husband.
Toward his Children a tender Father. To his Servants, a loving and helpful
Master. To his acquaintance a faithful Friend, and in his Commerce with all
men, a just Dealer. I cannot stay to enlarge on any of these, only let me
present to you, that Grace of Charity wherein I am confident he out-stript
many, though otherwise of equal rank with him. As God had blessed him with a
fair Estate, so he gave him a large Heart: nor was he more careful by industry
to get, then forward by Charity to give. He had learnt the best derivation of
Dives from Divid^, dividing much of his Estate among those that were indigent;
besides, those pious uses formerly mentioned, he has contributed much to
Charitable ends. To the Town of Plymouth, which had the Honor to be the place
of his Birth, Five hundred Pounds, for the yearly Clothing of their Poor. To
this Parish, whereof he was a principal Member, Two hundred Pounds; besides
various other Gifts to several Hospitalls; For the Releasing of Prisoners, and
the like. And that which was most deservedly imitable in him, was that he (...)
the light of his good Works to be carried before, as well as behind him. He
made his own Eyes the Overseers, and Hands the Executors of his Charitable
mind: Witness, besides many private, and personal Reliefs, that ample Gift
of Five hundred Pounds which in his life he bestowed on Christ's Hospital, of
which he was sometimes a President. And which was no small encouragement to
him, and may be to others, in showing works of Mercy, he found that he
gathered by scattering, his Store increased by Distributing; and that Bread
again in his Cupboard which he had cast on the Waters.

Considering all this which has been said, (whereof not one tittle is more
then what I either knew my self, or have been credibly informed of:) I think
Envy it self cannot deny him (nn an Evangelicall sense) the title of a
Perfect, (or if that may be too much, yet of an Upright) man.

There is yet one Character more, which the Vulgar reading affords, and I
cannot omit, it so fitly agrees with him: and that is, Vir Pacificus, he was a
Man of Peace; he much desired unity in Affection, where there was diversity of
Opinion; and therefore he was wont to say, There should be more love amongst
us: If my Friend differ from me in Judgment, let me show love to his Person,
though I dislike his Opinion; and let me pray that God would direct him in the
right way. Neither his Prayers, nor Counsels were wanting to the peace of
Church and State: which peaceable disposition, however in this our contention;
Age it be accounted a Crime, yet, I am sure in Gods esteem, it is a Pearl of
great Price; and whilst Men look upon such as their Enemies; God reckons them
as his Children.

To shut up this, it was a notable speech of Antigonus when Zeno died; Quale
theatrum amist? Meaning that in his life he beheld a representation of many
excellent Virtues, with which he was enamored. The like complaint may all who
knew this worthy Knight, take up concerning him: What a Looking glass of
Virtues, Theater of Graces have we lost? one, in whom there was a rare
combination of Severity, and Meekness; Gravity, and Courtesy; Charity, and
Frugality; Zeal, and Discretion. I cannot better resemble him then to the
stone Garamantides, which, though it cast no great luster outwardly, Tamen
intus habet aureas guttas; Yet has golden drops within; his delight being more
in internal sincerity, then in External shows.

To draw to an end, his end must needs be comfortable, whose life was so
profitable; and indeed so it was; There were a pair of Virtues, worthy our
observation, which he expressed in his sickness: Patience, and Confidence. A
quiet submission to Gods will, and a sweet repose in Gods mercy; Both which,
though opportunity favored not me to be a personal witness of, yet I doubt
not but my reverend Brother (who officiates in this place, and was often with
him) can sufficiently attest. The pangs of his disease (which could not but be
grievous) he under-went with a quiet cheerfulness. And when his friends that
stood by him, minded him of making his peace with God; He returned this Answer,
(worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, and fit to be engraven on all our
hearts) Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; old age and sickness
are no fit times to make peace with heaven: blessing God that his peace was not
then to make. So that now I may very well take up the latter part of the Text,
and assert it of him, The end of this man was peace. He dyed in that peace,
which was promised to Abraham, before that utter ruin comes, which seems to
hang over his native Country. He dyed in peace, in his own house, not in a
prison, after all his sufferings, quietly breathing forth his last, in his own
bed. And which was best, he dyed with a quiet mind, in that comfortable sense
he had of his reconciliation to God, through faith in the merits of his
Savior. Nor must I forget to apply the vulgar reading of this latter clause in
my Text, to him, There are remainders to this peaceful man; The relict of an
hopeful posterity: God lengthning his days so far, as to see not only his
children, but his child's children: upon whose heads, I doubt not, but his
graces, through Gods mercy, will procure a plentiful shower of blessings to be
poured down. And not only so, but to him likewise there was the remainder of a
good name; like a Taper of pure wax, he burned clearly in his life, and has
left a sweet savor behind him at his going out. And as I hope his soul now
partakes of that glory which is prepared for the Saints; so to his body that
must now be-laid in the Grave, there is the remainder of a glorious
resurrection, to that immortal bliss which is reserved in heaven for all them
that love the appearing of Christ.

Let not then his Children or Allies grieve beyond measure, because not without
hope: let them not spend too many tears in vain upon his grave, but rather
let them, and all we who know him, esteem his Memory blessed; and though we
can now no longer mark him going before us, or behold him conversing among us,
yet let us still remember him, and that so, as to resemble him: let us so
imitate those graces which here he practiced, that we may come at last to be
with him, in that glory whereof he is now possessed for ever.

FINIS.

