Abners Funeral, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funeral Of that Learned and
Noble Knight, SIR THOMAS LVCIE.

By ROBERT HARRIS, B. D. and Pastor of the Church at HANWELL, OXON.

Graves are for me. JOB 17 1. Qui pro nobis mortem semel vicit, semper vincit
in nobis. Cyprian, Epist, Secundum Pamelium. 9. LONDON, Printed for John
Bartlet, and are to be sold at the sign of the Gilt Cup by Saint Austins
Gate, 1641.

TO THE HONORABLE AND VIRTUOUS, The Lady LUCIE OF CHARLCOT, Grace and Peace.
Madam,
STrange not my slownesse. I never penned and printed more unchearefully, more
sadly. Sorrow moves slowly. And what is this your Ladyship has now woone from
me! alas! I cannot print your Lord alive again: nor did I intend any
pourtraiture of him. What I spoke was meant to the Living. The Dead needed not
my attestation. Indeed I loved Him more (as another once said) than to say much
of Him. All that I can wish, is, that all, who pretend to Him, and his
Religion, would express him in these particulars.





Cic. de sinibus tib. 2. Epkurei mihi videniur melius faccre, quam dicere.
and so difference themselves from other men, as once some Philosophers did.



It is confessed, Madam, That Sir Thomas and I were not always of one mind.
Dissent we did, in some things: But this I shall ever honor in Him, That He
was Himself, and his Friends too. Neither prostituting his own, nor ravishing
another man's judgment; Herein we concurred, and for this I honored him, and he
was pleased to own me.

The world conceives my loss to be exceeding great. He was as Aristotle says
of the magnanimous(...)
And it is a truth. For I have lost the Freest Reprover that ever I met
withal. But why should we reckon our friends Gains to our Losses! I have
done, Madam, with him.

And now let us (I beseech you) get off from our selves. At least, Let Us
improve our sorrows to spiritual purposes. Mourn for this Kil-friend, Sin.
Mourn for the loss of our time, and our not inhansing opportunities and
societies. And henceforward set our faces Homeward, Heavenward. Study Heaven;
Secure Heaven; Trade and dwell in Heaven. There look our selves; thence expect
our Savior.

Mean while consider, Noble Lady, your great trust. A Great Estate, A great
Family. You have many Servants to order; Children to educate; Neighbors to
relieve. Here seal up your Thankfulness to God; your Faithfulness to your
Dearest Husband. And the God of Heaven help you. Thus at last I return you
your own. What to call these Funeral Dispatches, I wot not. Yours (such as it
is) it is, you will own it withal its imperfections, and stand betwixt blame
and me.

I could not come home to your Desires fully. Some things I forgot in the
Delivery; and some I then abridged for haste, and now make short breathd
enough. But I am come as near to my meaning, and my own Copy, as I can. The
Lord go with it, and ever be with you, and all yours. So will Pray

Your Ladyships constant servant in the Faith, ROBERT HARRIS.

Abners Funeral, OR, A SERMON Preached at the Funeral of that Learned and
Noble Knight, Sir THOMAS LUCY.
2 SAMUEL 3.38, 39. 38. And the King said unto his servants, know you not, that
there is a Prince, and a great man fallen this day in Israel?

39. And I am this day weak, though anointed King, and these men the sons of
Zerviah be too hard for me: the LORD shall reward the doer of evil according
to his wickedness.


It Is an hard thing to Funeral it well. Moses prayed GODS help in the case,
Psalm. 90.12.
and GOD (in part) helps us here by David. He had the art of mourning. His
heart was exercised, his hand in. Erst he mourned for King Saul, Prince
Jonathan, 2 Samuel 1.17.
and other his Allies: Now for General Abner.

This Abner fell very unseasonably, for Himself, for David, for all Israel. The
King is sensible of it, solemnizes his Funeral, becomes the chief Mourner,
and makes his Panegyricke. And, having passed through his other parts, is now
upon his Peroration, where his Masterpiece is, To wash his hands of Abner's
blood; and his plea (stripped out of its Rhetoric) is this.

He that is truly sorry for the dead, and would (if he could) revenge his
death, cannot reasonably be charged with the murder.

But this (says David) is my case. I am sorry for Abners death; I am sorry for
my self, that I cannot revenge his death.

And therefore no way chargeable with it.

The Conclusion is open; The first Proposition evident; The Assumption is made
good by his practice.

Slain, Slain in Israel. This was known, (if men would own their own
knowledge) and therefore they could not strange at his practice, in Forbearing
Meat, Verse. 35.
in Feeding upon Tears.

Many like the Treason, though they cry out of the Traitor; and contrive the
slaughter, though they weep over the slain: If David's heart went not with the
murder, why is not his hand upon the Murderer?

David's Answer is, to do Abner right, his estate being yet unsettled, and the
concurrents (The sons of Zerviah) potent in Court, and Camp: and therefore
execution is perforce secured.

So then, David here reconciles things (seemingly) incompatible, and gives an
account of himself.


Mourn he could, More he could not: and that is the very Truth.

Let us now survey David's practice, and trace his steps.

First, you see him refusing comfort, and inviting sorrow. Next you find him
so imbroild, that he knows not well which way to turn him.


A man (says he) is slain: A Consider able man of place and worth is slain,
and that in Israel. This is the ground of his sorrow; and these his terms and
expressions are no way inconsistent.

The man may be great, a Great Prince, of great authority, and yet Die: For,
Greatness will not keep from Death: Nay let us give this Proposition its full
extent.

No Greatness will keep from any Death. No Greatness, none.

Strength. There be that Die (says Job Chap. 21.23, 24.) in the strength of
their perfection, or in their most perfect strength, when there is not the
least decay in Nature. Birth. The high (says Job, nay the Princes, Job 34 19.)
fall, and that like others, Psalm. 82.7. (...) as well as (...) Psalm. 49. Parts,
Ver. 10. As dies the fool so the wise. Place, Ver. 12. Means and Friends, Ver
7. One, Psalm, 89.48.
No Earthly Greatness will deliver. No (...) (let his Strength lie where it
will the word is large) shall deliver himself from the Grave, Death he must
See, that is, Feel, as all senses be a kind of Feeling.
Greatness will free from any Death. No not from any.

Bloody Death. Witness great Saneherib. 2 King. 19. ult. Base Death. Witness
Queen Iezabel. 2 Kings 9. ult. Unnatural Death. Witness that great Statist,
and President of Counselors, Achitephel, 2 Samuel 17 23. Contemptible Death.
Witness King Herod, at his highest. Act. 12.23.
But why do I insist, where every Schoole-boy can enlarge upon the same
Theme? One Abner is an instance of all, being every way great; Great in
Strength, able to lead the bravest Army then in being: Great in Spirit, who
would not give his Head for washing, nor take his advantage of Asahel the
Assailant: Great in Place, Captain of the Guard, and that to Three Princes in
succession: To warlike Saul: To Prince Isbosheth: and now consigned by valiant
David: Great in Power and Authority, able to contest with his Master, and able
to sway all Israel at his pleasure. This mighty Abner lies Dead before you, and
falls from Greatest Greatness, into the Lowest Pit suddenly.

Shall I give you one Reason for all?

Greatness will not keep from any one Cause: therefore not from any one Kind
of Death.

Causes of Death, (if we speak of Death at large) are, Moral, or Legal. Sin
and Guilt. Natural, or Physical. Dyscrasy, Disproportion, etc.


Earthly Greatness can free from none of these, (as experience has taught
us.) Indeed if this Greatness could take off Adams Guilt, free from all Sin,
deliver from all Distemper, Moral or Natural: Then might it give a
Supersedeas from Death. But the first is not possible: Therefore the second is
no way feasible.

this Death, Violent Death; (so to call it) this, you know, grows from Innate
Impotency, and Deficiency, and Foreign, either Suspension of Influence, Ayds
and Supplies: (...) Vide de Anima. cop 52.53. etc.
or forcible Impressions, and Incursions made beyond all power of Resistance:
Now here Greatness is also at a stand: Great men be as tender, as passive as
others; Depend as much as others, and Stand by a Manutention; Lie as open, as
others, to Invasions and Assaults. Nay Greatness is sometimes Unwieldy of it
self, Et mole sua ruit: Sometimes it sets a man more in the Eye of Envy, and
face of Danger; and in stead of sheltring him, makes him a fairer mark. At all
times it is Finite, and may be matched. There is an Higher than the Highest, that
will make but Mortar of those under foot, as it is, Esaias 41.25. At least, Esaias
41.2^.
what is wanting in Power, may be made up in Number, which is all one. Many
Shoales of small Fish may encounter the greatest Whale. Many Swarms of Flies
and Frogs may invade King Pharaoh, and his Kingdom. Cave multos, si singulos
non times: Maximmus.
said one to that great Tyrant. Leo fortis est and occiditur. Elephas grandis
est, and occiditur, etc. The stoutest Lion, the greatest Elephant, the fiercest
Tygre may be violently slain: a Sword will pierce, a Gun will shoot, Fire will
burn, Water will drown, nay a Raisin-stone, a Fly, an hair will choke the
greatest Monarch living. We have said enough to so ordinary a point. Vide
instances in some Popes and Princes.
Only we are to make our use of it, before I dismiss it; and that I shall
(instantly) do, if first I shall be bold to tell you what you are to trust to.
You see how it fares with Funeral Sermons. They are (mostly) made but matters
of form, and men come to them as to great Feasts. The first Course, wherein
GOD is most concerned, is lightly passed over: The second, wherein Man is
represented, is most expected, and stood upon. For the preventing of this, I
pray you understand, That you are not to expect any Second course at all: But
such provision as I could make, in this my indisposednesse, you shall have
served in altogether. This said, I have now a double address.

The first to, us little ones. The other, to you of greater mark and place.


Great Fears. Great Hopes. Great Desires after great things here.
Fears, It is the Prophets Inference, Psalm. 48.5. Why should I fear, when I
am threatened, and another enriched? Nay, it is GODS own use. Esaias 51.12, and 7,
8. verses. Who art thou that fear a dying man, fading grasle, a little
Wormes-meate, Mothes-meat?



Fear him, as Great, with a Fear of Reverence, as a larger Picture of
Almighty GOD, whose is Greatness, and all great things. As great Cedars are
Cedars of God, etc, great Cities, Mountains, etc, are Gods.


But fear him not with a Fear of Baseness (fear him not so, as out of
Cowardice to decline station, balk duty, swallow sin, dissemble truth) Why? He
is a dying man, says GOD, and his greatness will be devoured of Mothes. So
basely to fear a dying man begins in weakness, and ends in a snare, Prove.
29.25. Therefore qualify those Pears.

Hopes, Hear Esaias, Chap. 2. last. Cease from Man, whose breath is in his
nostrils: Esaias 2. ult.
wherein is he to be valued? O! he is a Great, a promising man: Yea, But is not
his breath in his nostrils, ready to be let out? If so, Cease from hoping in,
or trusting on him. Psalm. 146
Hear David, Trust not in the Son of man. What if he bea Prince? Trust not in
Princes. Psalm. 146.3. Oh, but they have noble thoughts. Ver. 4.
Yea, but those dye with, or before them. Why should I be infinite? Is he a
Man, Man at his best, Every man (every whit of him) is not only vain, Psalm.
36.5. and 62.9.
but vanity. Nor so only, He is upon the Balance and Trial, lighter than
vanity it self. Therefore cast not thy Anchor of Hope there. Hope (if thou
see cause) with an Humane Hope of Charity and possibility: Beware of any
higher Hope of Certainty, of Infallibility. No doubt but many Captains, their
Hopes rose and fell with rising and falling Abner.

3 But the third Affection, Desire, is that I most insist upon. Great Desires
to earthly things, discover little Judgment. These are,

Founded in Weakness. Fed with Wind. End in Smoke.
Their Rise is weakness, as experience (after Reason) shows. Foundation.
Who so longing as the languishing person? Who so climbing as the veriest
child? So ambitious as the basest Bramble? What so aspiring as Wind and
emptiness? So ravening as the emptiest stomach? A massy man, of true worth
indeed, brings worth to things, borrows none from them.

What is the food and fuel of these desires? Food.
Truly Wind. We may say of all these Sublunaries, what Solomon says of one
particular; They are not. Prove. 23.5.
And shall our desires and eyes fly upon Nothing. They are Nothing in realitie,
and virtue. What they be, they be (as Tertullian somewhere) in Fantasy.
Absolute greatness (out of GOD) is not. There Is no such thing among Creatures.
The most is, Arist.
(as the Philosopher notes) but a Comparative Greatness.

Thus we call somethings great, compared to

Ten shillings is a great deal of money to a Farthing token, and yet what is
ten shillings?

Rome was once formidable, because the neighbors were contemptible. But lay
the comparison right, Floyus.
and bring these poor things to the Standard, and what are they? Alas!
compared to the Great GOD they are less than Littleness. Isa. 40.15, 17.
All persons and things cast in the Balance bear not proportion with one drop
of the Bucket, bear not the weight of one dust in the Balance. What Is one dust
to the whole Balance? What Is that to the Earth? What Is one drop to the full
Bucket? And what is the Bucket to the Well? The Well to the Sea? And what are
all these laid in one to the Mighty GOD? Nothing, and less than nothing, says
that high Prophet. Nay what is all here below to those vast bodies above? Ver.
17.
And then what is such an Island as this compared to some other Kingdoms and
Continents? What? But a little Moat, and Swans-nest? So true is that, which out
Masters have taught us of old: Nothing is simply great, but in reference to
what is less.

End. Prove. 23.5.
they have (as Solomon adds) Wings, but no hands under those wings. Wings to
fly from us: no Hands to do ought for us. Load us they can with great fears,
cares, envies, jealousies, distractions: but help us they cannot in the day of
sickness; much less in the hour of death. Ask the greatest, what Death, what
Hell, shall I say? Nay, what sorrow, what sickness, what ach, what pain, can
these, All these great nothings either prevent, or remove, or assuage? Ah
Smoke! mere Smoke! which carry with them some trouble, but little or no warmth
or comfort.

All which being (confessedly) so, let me say to you what our LORD said to his
Disciples: Mat. 24.2.
Are these the things you look upon? And what GOD said to Baruch, Ier. 45. ult.
Seek thou great things for thy self? seek them not. Enjoy them you may,
if cast upon you: But earnestly seek them not: Leave these to that poor
fellow in Seneca, who was all for this Poor Greatness, Sen. in. Suasoria. 2.
Senecio.
who in all haste must be a Grandee, and thereupon looked big, spoke big, and
bombasted himself out with big clothes, and so became a great Fool. Leave
these to those dark men, who never came where greatness grew, whose highest
ambition was to hear (Great) Alexander the great; Mahomet the great; Pompey
the Great; the great Cham; the Grand; Signior; the great Mogor; the King of
Kings; the Coeli Filius; the Mundi-Dominus; etc. Let us, who have as many Eyes
as the Chinois boast of, learn of Christian men, Vid. Bot. relati. l. 5. of
the Chinois. Salvia. de provid. l. 5. ad calcem.
what greatness is. If thou will be Great, says Salvian, be great in virtue,
outstrip men that way. If thou will outshine others, get goodness, get
Wisdom, says Solomon. If thou will get above all, be most useful and
servicable, says our Savior. This the way. The greatest greatness, is
goodness: for that sets us nearest to the greatest GOD, Eccl, 8.1. Zep. 2.3.
and good. Therefore let go those things which will never satisfy, never set
us above a Pagan: and seek high, great things indeed. Seek righteousness,
seek meekness, seek faith; nay, greaten these, abound in these, and other
graces* Psalm. 46.15.
then shall ye be Princes in all the Earth: you shall reign with GOD, and,
Iacob-like, Prince-it with him. This greatness Spiritual is feisable: Hos.
11.12. and 12.3.
this will set you above all these Molehils below, and will at last free you
(though not from the stroke and sense of sickness and death: yet) from the
sting, venom, curse, bondage, and hurt of all. Here stop: here sit we down.

great Ones. My humble suite to you is this, That you will be true to your
selves; and know, that in despite of all greatness, Read Ezekiel 32. where 5.
or 6. instances are given. ver. 17.18. ad finem usque.
you must die. The truth is, greatness flatters men, and men flatter it. If
great Ones will not deal truly with themselves, they must not expect it from
others. Herein Poverty has an advantage above Greatness, that it meets with
plain dealing; so does not this. We dare tell a poor man, that he is not like
to last, and bid him Set his house in order: But what servant, what friend,
(nay almost I had said) what Physician, what Esaiah will say so to an Hezekiah?
We dare call a poor man's sin, Sin, and tell him, that his ignorance is
dangerous, his pride damnable, his formalities fopperies; and bid him sit sure.
But for the rich and mighty, Cajetan.
we say in the words of the Cardinal in another case -- Si vult decipi,
Decipiatur. If a poor Curre run away with stolen goods, we pursue him, and
rate him, till he resign: but who dares take the Bear by the tooth? the Lion
by the Beard, and say Restore? Since then few, or none will be faithful to
you, be ye good to your selves: And, if you will hold a distance from your
teachers, and not (with some great ones) admit of other Monitors, Memento Mori,
Philip. etc.
be your own, and tell your selves, that you also are Mortal: else we shall
Immortalize you, as some would Alexander. Call your selves Sinners; Vid. Hist
of Jews the 11.
else we, (with that Chartrous Monk in story) Saint all who will fee and supple
us. Consult your own bodies, and senses, and see a decay there. Or, if you
will abroad, improve this double instance. See here a Noble Pair, and
establish your selves in this truth, by the testimony of two mouths, two
bodies; both not long before their ends valiant, both vigorous, both presenting
as well, and promising as much as we can, and now both lie Dead before you.
Nay, seeing Examples known and at hand work best, and the Eye (of senses)
most affects the heart; See here under view a Man accomplished, and made up of
all the Contributions of Art and Nature; a Man, in whom concurred all those
things, Pythagoras.
which the Philosopher could think to beg of his God: to wit, Beauty, Riches,
firm Constitution of body and mind: D. Baz^^.
Such a Brain, such an Heart, as the most learned Physician never saw. And
thence infer: that, There is no Redemption from the Grave. For certainly, if
greatness of wit, of learning, of spirit, of riches, of friends, of allies: if
greatness of care in servants, of atendance in Yokefellow, of skill in
Physicians, of affection in all, could have kept off Death; we had not been
thus overcast, and clouded this day. But no outward greatness will do it;
Mors sceptra liga^ibus aequat. aequo pede pulsat. etc. and quae sequentur
passim.
Death knows no measures, no distances, no degrees, no differences, but
sweepes away all, and either finds, or makes them Matches.

To you then; O ye sons of the mighty, is my message. Set your houses in
order: for you must dye. You are left behind to make ready: Oh prepare for
death, for any death, nay for sudden death: for why may not you fall in your
strength, in your Journie, as well as Abner? Say then, Are ye ready, now ready?
is your Will made? your Pardon sealed? could you dye this hour? in this place?
If so, happy ye, in case you Stay for death, not death for you. But if as yet
you be not Shot-free, and Death-proofe, what do ye mean? why do ye defer?
What? Do ye think that death fears greatness? or will be answered with
Complements? Or do ye think that greatness of spirit, of means, of
chearfullnesse, of Titles can bear you out? Or that it is all one to die in a
Bravado, and in cold blood? Or that death is the same in the hand of a man, and
of GOD? Or that a Lord have mercy, or two, an hour or two before you are all
dead, will serve the turn? No, no, it is a work of works to Die: that is,
Actively and Cheerfully to resign life. The best, who have been about it, all
their life, find all provisions little enough. And therefore do not think to
slight and to outlooke that King of Fears, that top-gallant: but fear before
hand, that you need not fear at any hand.

And yet let me advertise you of another extremity, and that is base-feare: for
that will bar up the doors against all thought of death, Vitellius trepidus,
dein'temulentus. Tac.
and set you, either on Drinking with him in the story; or on some other
Diversion, thereby to drown, or to forget your fears.

There is (as elsewhere I have discoursed) A Spiritual Fear of death. There
is, A natural. Neither of which may be dissuaded.


The Fear, I give warning of, is,

A Base, Cold, Carnal Fear, which will make a man creep into an Augre-hole,
swallow any sin, admit of any slaverie; which will kill one daily, because he
must once die, and keep him a perpetual slave, Heb. 2.
and prisoner. This the fear I would not have you Cowed by: and this fear you
may competently overcome, if you will set right the


At present, this is all. Mistake not Death,

greatest of evils. As there be better things than this poor life; GODS
favor, GODS image, the Life of CHRIST, Eternity, etc. Vid. Animadversions of
Bish. of Sarum on Gods Love to Mankind.
So are there worse things than this death; Hell is worse; Sin is worse, GODS
Curse is worse, Corruption worse; Moral, Sinful Evils worse than this, which
is painful, and evil only to Nature. And reason we have to grieve more for
being in a possibility, and proximitie of sinning, than of dying.

simply, and intrinsecally evil, as that no good can be made of it. Nay, this
may be improved, and death may be the death of all our deaths; of deadly
diseases, corruptions, temptations, of all. Thus simply considered it is not so
formidable, as that we must fling away our weapons, desert our station, and
fly, Excessum dix. Tert. contra Valent. and Cypria. Ep. 3.
(as once Israel) at the voice of this Goliath.

But now Death to a Christian becomes another thing. It has lost its name:
Luke 2.29.
and hears a Departure, Phil. 1 23.
a Dissolution, a Change, a Sleep, Job 14.14.
etc. and we should take up GODS language. Ioh. 11.11. and Passim.


Aliud demutatio, aliud perditio. Tert. de resur. c. 55.
It has lost its Nature and Relation: it is not to such an one Penal, but
Medicinal: destructive, but (fetching its denomination from its term)
perfective. Look upon it under a new Notion; Plin. Not. hist. lib. 7 and 55.
and then you will not be of poor Plinies mind, Hic rogo: non ^uror est ne
moriare mori. Mart. lib. 2. Epigram.
That It doubles ones pain, and death, to Forethinke the issues of it. No, it
doubles your strength, and makes your courage redoubted: therefore view it, and
spare not: but view it thus.

1 Look upon it, not as destructive, tending to ruin: but as a mean and way
to life. Look beyond it; See what stands behind it; A Crown of Glory, of
Life, of Bliss. And this end will sweeten and smooth the way: it will dare
amica^ilitatem mediis.

Rod in GODS hand. This (as other strokes) is moderated by him, and he can
make a Rod a Staff, Psalm. 23. yea turn Moses serpent into a Rod, and work
with that Rod Wonders. Death is a cup in our Fathers hand, as well as
sickness, and works wonders.

Person, and will in his Members. See how unable death was to separate him from
the Godhead, and shall be us from GOD, Romans 8.38. Rom 8.38.
See how he has intercepted and cut off Deaths succors. Whereas death
borrowed its Sting from sin, 1 Cor. 15.56.
and Strength from the Law and Curse: CHRIST has disarmed them all of all
their destroying, killing power; and called us, with S. Paul, to set our foot
upon their necks, and to sing: O Death! O Sin! O Curse! O Hell! where is your
power? etc. Yea see him, having killed Death, and buried the Grave, fetching
Honey and sweet out of the strong, turning Death into a Living Friend, 1 Cor.
3. ult.
and most useful servant, 1 Cor. 3. ult. subdued to us Death, and so made it
Ours.

O view death in the face of CHRIST, make him your Second in this Duel; and
then you are freed from the fear, and so from the bondage of death: then you
are Men indeed, Free men. A Man is not himself, but a Slave, till he can
either Live, or Die (as this noble Gentleman and I were wont to discourse.)
Then only he is free, when (with S. Paul) he can abound and want, be sick and
well; can live, or die. Nay then you shall be brave accomplished men indeed;
some of GODS Rabbis, as Daniel calls them. Vid. cap. 9.27 Vt and Job 32.9.
A man is not to be held a man, because he dares meet a man, and can look any
man in the face. (A great matter to look a Worm in the face!) But then you
shall be men; when you can look any pain in the face, any fit in the face,
any danger, any death in the face: when you can look Judgment, (...)1 Cor.
16.13.
and the unpartiall Judge in the face. This is to be a Man. Thus Man-it.

And, since your greatness cannot keep you from Dying, let your Goodness
keep you from sinking, perishing, and losing by Death.

Thus for David's ground of sorrow, as that must be Rational, and stand upon
ground.

Now follows his inference and practice.

A man great and considerable falls: Therefore David falls upon mourning, and
pleads for it.

humanity David would mourn. State, David would appear a Mourner. Israel;
and in point of Religion, David is to lament, and seems to Wonder at his
Servants Wondering at his practice. Know ye not (says he, etc.) q. d. It you
own your own eyes and knowledge, you cannot but know, that I have reason to
be sensible of this stroke.
Hence our second Inference.

When great men are taken from us, we must be affected with it.

When Abners fall (men great of place, and use both) we must have a sense of
it, and observe it for use. Zach 4.7. Dan 4.10. Ezekiel. 31 3 14
When Mountains are shaken, and Ceders shattered. When pillars are Pulled
down, and Stars of greatest magnitude hide their heads, we must resent this
with David, and improve it unto sorrow.

Shall I need to prove these ordinary and confessed truths? Eccl 7.2.
Solomon tells us, that A wise man lays any man's death to heart. And Isaiah
chides us, if we let an useful man (though private) pass out of the world,
Esaias 57.1.
without observation. What would he say in case we should bury a man of
public use and spirit, without an Ah his glory! what in this case has been
done, it is needless to report. I will not lead the simplest out of his own
knowledge. Genesis 50.10. 2 Chro. 32.33 2 Chro. 35.24 25. ^ King. 13.14.
Who knows not what lamentations were taken up for Patriarch Jacob, great
Hezekiah, good Josiah? who has not heard of Elisha's Epitaph, The Horsemen,
and Chariots of Israel: and that from a man not of best note? And lest you
should impute all this to the greatness only of men's place, without respect
had to men's use and worth, the Holy Ghost is pleased to set a mark upon the
Coffin of persons less public, and more obscure when they were use full. Thus
Nurse Deborah a profitable member, leaves a mark upon the place of her
burial, The Oak of Weeping, more famous than the Oak of Reformation, in our
Story: Genesis 35.8.
Thus merciful Dorcas (rather Tabitha) was covered with tears, as she covered
others with clothes, Act. 9.39.

Nor was this solemn mourning only for men and persons eminent for piety: but
for others, who in Moral and Political considerations were, in their way,
useful. Thus holy David weeps over Captain Abner, of whose piety we hear
not much: All that his friend and Countryman says of him; is, That he was a
Prudent man, Josephus.
well qualified for natural parts.

Thus he much bewails the death of Abners master King Saul, and lets not to
tell the State, 2 Samuel 1.17.
that their loss in him is great; not because his forwardnes in Religion was
much: only he was a good Husband for the Public, and a brave Commander; Verse.
24.
no less active and valiant, Ratio res Dei. Tort.
than he was comely and proper. But Reason is GODS, as well as Scripture: we
bind up the Point with Three Reasons.

Body cannot say of the Foot (nay of one Toe of the foot, nay of one joint or
nail of the toe) I have no need of thee: 1 Cor. 12.21.
much less can it say so of a more noble part. There is a loss, a maime in
the least, and the body is sensible of it: much more when an eye, or hand, or
arm is taken off: Dan. 11.15.22.31.
And Great Personages are Eyes, Hands, nay Arms.

Inferiors? and what a dependence there is upon them? They? Why they are as
Pinnes, whereon many Vessels hang, Isaiah 22. As great Oaks, which yield life
to many Sprigs; shade and shelter to more. One such a Sun is more than a
Thousand Candles: with one so pregnant and big-bellied, hundreds live and die.

Ier. 5.1. It Is farther an ill presagement, as Isaiah foretells, cap. 3. The
Pilot lost, the whole Ship is hazarded: The Captain (as the Seventie here read
it) may be more than all his Company, (...).
and weigh down Thousands, as David's Soldiers once said. 2 Samuel 18.3.


In short, In one head is Vertually contained the whole body. Judge. 9.53.
Wound Abimeleck there, and where is Abimeleck?



Higher Rank and Mark. And my suite to you is, That you will answer your
places, and be Usefully Great, which only Greatens you. The Great GOD does not
measure men by Inches, Men of Measures in Moses.
as sometimes men do: Nor by an outward Greatness: He regards not the arms,
Psalm. 147.10. Job 34.19.
or legs of a man: He respects the Rich no more than the poor: The thing he
looks to, is Virtue, Serviceablenesse; that is the thing. Genesis 1.16.
The Moon is a Great Light because of Great Use. A lew at Berea is more
eminent, Act. 17.^1.
and Honorable than another elsewhere, because more Conscientious. There is,
(you know) a Greatness in Bulk, and in worth. A Lark may be more than a Kyte,
though not in bulk, yet in worth. Molis and virtutis.
There is (they say) a Greatness Belluine, and Genuine. in that a beast may
and does exceed us: In this we exceed our selves, and others; and in this only.
No man is the better simply for his Greatness, unless it be attended with
goodness. So much we may learn from wiser times: For, sithence men understand
themselves, they let fall those Swelling and empty Titles of Greatness; few
rejoiced in that name, unless great worth and achievements put it upon them;
As it fared with Constantine, and some few others. They were gladly heard,
Wise, Learned, Pious, Philosopher, Philopater, and the like. And, when men
would honor them with attributions of worth, they styled them Nedibims(...),
Optimates, and other like, sounding their true worth, Bountiful Benefactors
etc.
and carrying meat in the mouth. Yea so much we may learn from Highest (that
is Divine) Language. Wisdom it self, when it pleases to bestow honors upon
men, calls them Fathers, Foster-fathers, Saviors, and the like. 1 King. 5.13.
Exodus 20. Esaias 49 23. Act. 7.35. Heb. 4.8. So^e^chus Soter.
Which some also, without the pale of the Church, either affected or enjoyed.
As Antiochus Soter: Antigonus in Suidas. etc.

So then, in true judgment, the style and thing, hat truly honors and enobles
a man is Goednesse, therein a man most nearely touches the Best and Highest
Good, Psalm ^19.68.
our Ever-blessed GOD, whose highest title is that in the Psalm. He is good,
and does good.

I cannot enlarge. I will say before you one only instance, of Father and Son
in the same family, who ran their several ways with different success. The
Father was Josiah; He was all for Goodness. Good he was, and did Good to GODS
house, and people. The Son was Shallum; (whether so termed in scorn, and
reference to another Shallum, I have not to say) He was all for an earthly
Greatness. Before he was well warm in his Fathers Throne, he had great
thoughts, and would not take it as his Father did: He would build a stately
Palace, much enlarge himself, and (as it seems by one affix in the Text,
Ier. 22.14.) would take in a piece of GODS house too. My Windows the Hebrew.
Thus they steared their course. Now what was the issue?

1 In Life, the one prospered: the other went backward. Did not thy father
prosper? (says GOD) to the Son. Ier. 22.15.

2 In Death, the one had a most honorable interment. All Israel mourned for
him, mourned much, Lam. 4.20.
mourned long: the other (like the unhappy son of another good father) lived
undesired, died unlamented, 2 Chro. 21.20 Ier. 22.18, 19.
and was buried with the burial of an Ass, no man weeping over him.

Give me leave to use my ancient freedom. In these read your selves, and your
own Lot. If you (with Shallum, and his Brethren) make none other use of your
Greatness, but to Rob GOD, Pride your selves, and oppress the poor, your
Greatness shall be your Shame, as 'twas Shebna's, and shall end in Baseness
and Contempt. Well may men bless, and flatter you, whiles here you magnify
and adore your selves: But when you are Dead, they will trample upon your faces,
and curse you as fast. At your Grave none shall mourn: See some Emperors,
Herod. etc.
unless Fee'd, or Forced (as once it befell others) rather they will rejoice
at your fall (as once at another in Esa. 14. and your names shall be written in
the dust, and buried in oblivion: Or if they remain, they shall Lie as Carrion
above ground, Prove. 10.7. Esaias 25.25.
and become a Curse.

On the other side, If you shall improve your Greatness to GODS glory, and to
the Countries good; to the Churches growth, and men's comfort; you shall not
need with Absalom, Otho, Julian, or any other Publicola, to Hunt for applause:
Honor will hunt out you, and you shall not avoid it. Whiles you live you shall
live in the hearts and desires of men, they will pray for yours, and praise GOD
for you: And when you die you shall not need a Trumpet or Herald to sound your
worth: Every man will be a Trumpet; every man will make an Oration; All Israel
will mourn, in heart, and not in face, and form. Oh, Choose rather to be
buried with Prayers and Thanks, than with Curses and Complaints: Set your
Servants, Tenants, Neighbors on weeping, rather than on laughing, at your
Graves. So live, that there may be Use of you, whilst you live, and Miss of
you, when you are dead. That is; Be humble, modest, godly, sober in your
selves. Be helpful, comfortable, profitable unto others. When you are gone,
there is no more remaining of you, but your Goodness. The question will not be,
How Rich, How Great, How Gallant you were. The questions will be, What did he?
Who was the better for him? If none, What made he in the World? An unprofitable
man, whilst living, is dead: A useful member, when dead, yet lives. Live,
Live, Live quickly, Live much, Live Long. So you are welcome to the world: else,
you are but Hissed and Kicked off this Stage of the World, Phocas by He^a^^.
as another was. Nay many (as Job. 27.23 and V. 1 5.) who were buried before
half dead.

Lower form, (nay lets take in all.) This I say. Either we yet have, or have
not Leading men among us. Mat. 2. Do but think what an Army is, without a
Captain; a Ship, without a Pilot; an Head, without a Body; what a misery it
is, to live without order; to be where men Talk all at once, and none can lay
his hand upon other, or command silence. Truly such a Paritie borders near upon
an Anarchie, and confusion: and we much forget our selves, if we neglect this
mercy of having Useful men. When Israel had a Solomon, they divided their
time, Psalm. 72.15.
between Praying, and Praising GOD for him.

It Is a misery never to see the Face, but the Back only of mercies. It Is a
frowardness to see nothing but faults in men, whilst we have them: and then
nothing but whine, when we lose them.

Take heed that you do not Brawle Moses out of the world; and then Scratch him
out of his Grave again, unless GOD hide him from you.

Crosses sting deeply, when Mercies Pass lightly, See what you have, before
you cease to have it.

Abner from amongst us? David prompts us our lesson. We must feel our loss.

And here, What would become of me, should I let out my self, and pursue my
thoughts! How many brave Scholars, Soldiers, Statesmen have we seen laid in
the Dust! Nay, what Mighty Stars have within our memory, been hidden from
us! What should I be meddling with Crowns? Three mighty Princes and men in
their several ways.
Or speak what a blow England, France, Swedeland; etc. have received upon their
very Head, in this our age.

These be Subjects of a Fairer Pen, and higher discourse. I have my hands and
heart full with our present Instance. Our friend Lazarus sleeps, and we cannot
wake him. In this one Bottom we have all our interests, and suffer a wrecke.

A Noble Lady has lost, not an Husband (as she says) but a Father.

Many Children have lost, not a Father, but a Counselor.

An house-full of Servants have lost, not a Master but a Physician; who made,
(as I am informed) their sickness his, and his physic and cost theirs.

Townes-full of Tenants have lost a Landlord, that could both protect and
direct them in their own way.

The whole Neighborhood have lost a Light.

The County a Leader.

The Country a Patriot; To whom he was not wanting, till he was wanting to
himself, in his former vigor and health.

What would David say in such a case? Truly, as he said, 1 Samuel ^^.
Weep ye daughters of Jerusalem, for king Saul, etc. And what can I say
less, than Weep ye poor, within doors; ye poor, without: ye poor old
people, whom he kept alive, by studying how to fit you with work: Ye poor,
in the bordering Towns, to whom he sent, with David, A Piece of flesh with
Bread, 2 Samuel 6.19.
every year: Yea, Mourn, ye Gates, who were kept warm, with weekly
provisions for the neighboring poor. Yea Mourn, all Allies, and Aliens; Rich
and Poor; Old and Young. For a Public loss, let there be a Public
lamentation.

Speak I these things after the manner of men? To Deifie the Dead; To Gratify
the Living? No, I speak of A Man, Iam. 5.
A Man (with Great Elijah) subject to like passions with us: A Man, who cast
himself lower than you, or I dare cast him. For in Saint Paul's words he said,
That he was Of sinners the chief: Of such a Man I speak, and will say no more
of him, than what has a fair Prospect to your Profit. We must do him Hinc
(...), et Iusta defuncterum.
Right; and it is one of the Rights, and Dues of the dead, To be Lamented at
their Funerals. We owe it, 1 To Him, 2 To Religion, Vid. Goul. in Cyprian. Ep.
3.
3 To. Humanity, And we should not, 4 Please GOD, If we should let such members
pass, without some sad remembrance.


And yet there is more in it, than you are all aware of.

The Time of Abner's death was almost as much as the thing it self. Isreal's
Abner was now Rightly set, (his Grounds I wave, but) over he was come to
David's side: The Sinews of that disjoynted State were now knitting: The
sparks of that unhappy war now quenching. Abner had a Great Design in hand,
and things were likely to receive a fair end. In the midst of all Abner Dies,
The Business is scoated: Pendent opera interrupta: Hence these tears in part.
It was the case of this our English Abner. He had Noble designs, and thoughts
in his head. But Alas! How soon do our thoughts fall with us! Psalm 146.
Only the thoughts, and Counsels of the only wise-GOD stand good for ever. He
had another Design upon this Our Abner: And, to fit him thereunto, he set him
to the Best School, that ever he was in; where the Two Schoolemasters of
Luther, and Calvin (Temptations and Afflictions) taught him more in one year,
than all his Books, wherein he was so much verst, could do, in an age. Now
Speculation was translated into Experience. And now I wish, that all of his
Rank (and of mine too) had heard him Decrying the Vanity of all Creatures,
and Abasing sinful flesh before the Great GOD.

You can easily conceive how Full Expressions would be from his own Mouth,
and how well it would become him, to Stain the pride of man.

But that is not all: Would, you had heard his judgment of Practical
Divinity, and unaffected Preaching. His censure of man's slighting the ways of
Wisdom, and Sanctification.

And lastly, (To say nothing of what was said under seal) I wish that all we
(Divines) had but heard his vehement expressions of the base, base, and more
than slavish flatteries of some of us Churchmen, toward the living and dead.

But why do I flatter my self with a conceit of Hearing and Having him,
whilst I speak his words! He is gone from us, and has left us no more of
Himself than a Sad Representation. And it must grieve both you and me, to
have Such a Man, at Such a Time, taken from us; and to see so much reading,
observation, knowledge, wisdom, (I could say, if yet I could speak it, so
much ingenuitie, nobleness, plainheartednesse to his Friend, when upon Trial
he could Trust him: But I only say, before I get off this sad discourse) So
much worth, and Sufficiency, qualifying him for the Service of any State, or
Prince, so Suddenly snatched from us.

But O Sin! Sin! Sin! These be the bitter fruits of our Cursed Sins.

But stay Brethren, Quiet your selves, and hear King David a little further.

Dyed Abner (says he) like a fool? No, not like a fool, nor yet so happily
(All-out) as this Abner of ours.

Abner (for ought appears) dyed Intestate; happily Childlesse; certainly he
dyed very suddenly, and had not much time left him to resign himself to GOD by
prayer.

And being dead, He borrowes his Bed in another man's Ground.

Not so this Noble Gentleman. Work of our greatest Strength.

All at once: but has left behind a Fair, a Numerous Of spring,

unexpectedly, nor was his Tongue tied. He abounded with petitions, and
ejaculations of his own, (to say nothing of what was lent him by others,)
whilst I was with him, and more afterward, as his dissolution drew nearer, as
I am told.

4 And (being fallen asleep) He is gathered to his Fathers in peace. Here he
lies in his own Bed: Here he lives in his Posterity. Charlcot is Charlcot
still, not Hebron.

The greatest service we can do him (having mourned over him, and made this
Funeral an (...) of all failings) Is to honor him in his Living pictures, (as
once they did their good Rulers at Rome, in their Dead Statues)

Be not you, who loved the Tree, wanting to his Fruit. Visit them; Advise
them; Be faithful to them; Pray at least for them, for each of them; (...)
especially for the First Borne of his family: what Hector (shall I say?) in
Homer, did for his Son? 1 King. ^.47.
Nay, what David's servants did for their Young Master. That his worth and
honor may furmount his Fathers. Amen, said Father David. Amen, said his Truest
servants to that prayer then. Amen, say I to the like now.

And so we have done with Abner.

But all this while what becomes of the King? Abner is now quiet. But the King
bemoanes himself. Hear him. I am weak: The sons of Zerviah are too strong
for me. And why, the sons of Zerviah? Why not of Asar? (if that were (as
Josephus tells us) their fathers name. Joseph. An^^^ lib. 7. ^p. 1.
) Was it, because he was dead? Or was the Mother more Masculine and Active? Or
was it, because the honor came in by the Mother, as nearest allied to the now-
King? However The Sons of Zerviah they were; and some of them yet lived; and
these were too big for David (as things stood) to buckle withal: and hence the
complaint.

But what! was not David a King? What! Did he Rule in Israel, and yet
complain? Was he Anointed, and yet overmatch't? Why then see how it fares
with us, whilst here

The highest estate may be over-topt.

The best estate (here) is a maimed, and imperfects estate.

The Best man, David.

The Greatest man, King David has here his Hands, and Heart, full. We must
draw in. Note but the Particulars in the Text.

All is imperfect. Some what still wanting in the fullest estate. Abraham had
Riches: but then he wants an Heir, and after that a Wife. Isaac has Health:
but then he wants Sight. Asa honor: but he wants Health. Vzziah Riches: but he
wants Liberty. In One; David has a Crown; but he wants an Arm.

All somewhat galling and vexing. When we are at the Highest, somewhat is too
Hard for us.

1 Kings 21. Ier. 38.5. Dan. 6.
David, Ahab, Zedekiah, Darius, All kings: and yet all met with their Match,
and were held to Hard meat. One son or other was too hard for them, as well
as Zerviahs sons were for David.

All unsatisfying; and not fully to our mind. King David cannot have his will
in all things. Somewhat goes against the Hair.

1 King. 21.6. Esth. 5.13.
Nay the Worlds Minions (Ahab and Haman) make their moan. But why do I tire
you! I Will quickly say all.

Lame and unsufficient, partial goods, which will not fill all chinks. Needy,
and shiftlesse both. We want all things, and are patcht up with these poor
Shreds. Sin; and then GOD mingles all with Gall. Home, and out of Place: And
what Quiet, and Comfort, when there is such a Dis-location?


great matters thence, at First: (as men who have the world in Reversion
usually do) Lest at Last you cry, O Solon, Solon! or O Seldius! as others have
done before you. Croe^us in Herodo^. and Carol. 5.
There is (says David) An end of all (Created) perfection: and we either have,
Psalm. 119.96.
or quickly may see over it. Indeed the most of us have already seen the best
of this world: And we do but Dream, if we Dream of better Days. Meliora
tempora nolite sp^^are. Aug. in Psalm. 96.
Do not hope for that; (says Austin) look not for better times, for better
success, than others have found. Greater we cannot be than King David: he
wore a Crown: but he found (as another said) Cares under it. Wiser we cannot
be, than that Magazin of knowledge Solomon: yet all his Wit could not keep
sorrow from his heart. Great Rodulphus Rusus.
His experience told him, that All was vanity; yea utmost vanity. And worse
than so, Vexation, and that of Spirit too. And believe it; He that will build
his hopes upon these Sands, well may he Die before his time, as Abner did: But
withal he will Die a fool, as Abner did not. Jeremy has said it, and men
shall find it. Ier. 17.11.

Friends be preferred hence to Heaven. Suppose them Kings here. Alas! Kings have
their Cares also: All things be not to their mind: They cannot save whom they
would, as David found in Absalom: Nor can they Execute whom they would, as
David felt in Ioab. Nay suppose them as well as Earth can make them. What is
Earth to Heaven! Gold to Glory! The whole Creation to the Creator! Earth! Why
it will break.

Ones Head, to compass it,
Ones Back, to keep it,
Ones heart to lose it.
It Is a misery to Need any of the Earths Crutches, and it is a Cumber to have
them: But if once they get above us, and be our Masters; they undo us: and
the more we expect from them, the less we shall enjoy them. Then, of Lean
Comforts, they become heavy Crosses. Our Great Conqueror could not conquer
his delights, His Horse: he is hurt thereby. And, Polyd. Virgil.
if I be not deceived, This Worthy Gentleman, and brave Horseman met with his
disease, in the same delight; and so both dyed Laesis Intestinis, as I conceive.

Heaven.

Full estate. Nothing is wanting there; Nothing that Reason and Grace can
desire. Here Is a world of wants. The Soul, that wants Faith, Knowledge, all; as
Peter implies. 2 Pet. 1.5.
The Body, that wants, first meat, and then cloth, and then fire, and then
sleep, and then physic, and ever one slabber or other. Yea every sense wants,
every member wants, every joint must be eft soones supplied.

Heaven) is a Free Estate. No sin there, no sorrow, no temptation, no
tempter. Here all is mingled and compounded. Our best comforts are
Bitter-sweets: our nearest friends sometimes our greatest Griefs; as David
found his Cosins here: His Father, his Brethren; his greatest Familiars, his
Sons, his Wife elsewhere.

Here nothing is fully to our minds: we do not please or satisfy our selves.
We must Perforce bear, what we bear Sadly. In Heaven All goes Right. Every
one will please us, and we shall offend none. There all are of a mind, all as
one in Christ, all one Christ, and Christ all in all.

Firm estate. A City that has foundations; a dwelling that is indeed a
Mansion, Heb. 11.
a Crown unfading, Mov^^ etc. Joh, 14.2.
a Kingdom unshaken. Here all things totter and tumble: here is nothing but
Drooping, Dropping, Dying. Erewhile, David mourning for Saul, now for Abner,
anon for his own, and thus it is here. But in heaven there is no Sunset, no
Night, no Death. We shall never see Grave, but Ever be with the Lord, and with
our faithful brethren. Oh! Assure this Blessed estate, that is thus Full,
Free, Firm. Till you be sure of that you are sure of nothing.

But how may this be done?

I will speak it, but too briefly.

1 Clear your title, that comes in by the Heir, the LORD CHRIST. You must
claim by and under him. 2 Cor. 3.18. Phil. 2.5. Pet. 1.4. Gal. 5 28. 2 Cor.
5.17.
Make it good, that he is yours, you his. That is, Produce his Image, his Mind,
his Nature, his Affections. Prove your selves crucified to the World, and It to
you. Prove that Old things are past, that al in you from top to toe is New.
Mat. 5.
And the very Title to this estate Intitles you to a present blessing.

2 Get present possession. That all your Counselors will advise you unto. Now
every Saving-grace is as Turfe and Twig: Ephesians. 1.14. 2 Cor. 5.5, 6.
is as the first fruits in Israel: is an earnest of the purchase, and
Inheritance, and gives you entrance, (Liverie and Seisin) 2 Peter 1.11. These
(if well settled) will make you Dye safely, and put you beyond all Danger.

To these Two, if you will be persuaded to add Two things more: you will Die
gladly, and be free, not only from the Hurt, but from the slavish fear of
death, and they are these. 1 Conformity with heaven. 2 Conversation in it.


1 Conform to it; and from that likeness will grow Love. Whereas in our
sinful estate, the holiness of GOD, and that company is a terror, and
torment to us. Heaven would be an Hell to a sinful man. But fiery things
Ascend as willingly, and naturally, as earthly things descend. And think the
same of heavenly Spirits and affections.

2 Converse in heaven. Lodge your thoughts, and hearts there. Look into that
every day. Spend each day some thoughts upon GOD, upon Christ, upon heaven;
make that your home. Look upon it as your place, your Center; and then you
will make to it, whatever it cost you. A Stone will through an Element of fire,
a Sea of water, to come to its Center. So will ye, if your dwelling be above.

I have said how you must be qualified. If now you come to learn and mind
these things, and keep the Soul in warmth, and upon the wing, you shall be
able to bear up, in the approaches of death, and to think of Christ's coming
without sin, with comfort. Nay, you will love his appearance, 2 Timothy 4.8. 1
These. 1.10. Phil. 3.20. and 1.23. Heb. 9.28. 2 Pet. 3.12.
wait for it, look for it, long for it, hasten to it, and hasten him, in the
words of the whole Church, and of this her Son. Come, Lord JESUS, come
quickly. So She to the last. Rev. 22.17.
Rev. 22.17. So the Spirit. So this Noble Knight, who most (as I am told) in
his last words breathed out this: Come Lord JESUS, Come, Come quickly. O my
Lord, quickly, Amen.

Even so Come, Lord JESUS; Come apace, come once for all, to make an end of all
Sins, Sorrows, Funerals, by ending the Last enemy, death, and by casting death
and hell, and grave, and all that opposes life and glory, into the Fire. Amen.

Even so come Lord JESUS, Amen.
FINIS.

