POLITICASTER: OR, A Comical DISCOURSE, IN Answer unto Mr. Wren's Book,
ENTITLED, Monarchy Asserted, AGAINST Mr. HARRINGTON'S OCEANA.

By J. H.

Ad populum phaleras, ego te intus and incute novi. LONDON, Printed by J. C.
for Henry Fletcher, at the three Gilt Cups in Paul's Churchyard, near the
West End. 1659.

EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Reader,
THey say well, that a man who has written should not trouble himself with
such as write against him; but let the world hear on both ears, and then judge.
That this in time would do well enough in my case, I make as little doubt as
another. Nevertheless, where through silence there may be damage, at the
tenderest point or season, I hold my self obliged forthwith to answer the
present Book, though it be but mere railery or jest: and for this cause, if I
also be merry, you will have me excused. Another instigation or spur to this
laudable adventure, is, that as gloves which have lain in Spanish skins give
notice of themselves in fair assemblies: so has some Book by having lain in
some man's pocket. For order, though where there are but two Speakers, I shall
scarce observe the Laws of a Play, yet the best method I can upon this occasion
fit my self withal, will be by distributing my discourse into Acts and Scoenes.
The Acts, as well because I have not taken my degrees, as that multitudes of
University-scholars (they say, soberly and seriously) profess themselves to be
converted by Mr. Wren, shall not be Drammatical, but University Acts: and to
these, being the Scholars slight me for a Lawgiver, I will for once give such
Laws as, let them do what they can, they shall never evade; the same shall be
done in such manner, as, if they cannot answer nor get loose from my first Act,
then will I thereupon declare my self A Bachelor of Arts: if they cannot
answer or get loose from my second Act, then will I be undenyably A Master of
Arts: the third shall make me in like manner A Bachelor of Law; the fourth, a
Doctor of Law, and perhaps of Divinity: for without confutation by Divines or
Lawyers, there will be no reason why my Exercises are not sufficiently
performed; and these being sufficiently performed, why have not I legitimately
acquired my Degrees? Then in the latter end, I will do something to go out
Orator; and in the last place, shall I stand to be Poet Laureate. But you must
think that a man may as lawfully be two years, if he have nothing else to do,
about business of such importance, as Mr. Wren has been about less matters. Be
then attentive: for the present you shall have the first Act; and what you
find Mr. Wren or me to be in this, I here engage my reputation, that the
respective characters shall be made good throughout.

But now upon occasion of these Acts, I warrant you we shall have my Antagonist
go pitifully complaining unto Dr. Wilkins, of dis-ingenious contumely thrown
upon the Universitie. Goodness! What is an University, at least one where they
can call such a Writer as Mr. Wren ingenious; and such trompery as his
writings, full satisfaction or conviction, that it should be unlawful for any
man, though but a Ballad-singer, to laugh such a white Mother into red cheeks!

March 20. 1659.
THE PROLOGUE: In answer to Mr. Wrens PREFACE.
GEntle Mr. Wren, (sine ira and obsequio) without passion or partiality, give
me your hand, and let me as it were by some familiar and unstudied discourse,
treat with you upon the Contents of that same Book you call Monarchy asserted,
and so forth.

Sir, for method, I shall take those places which are most material, in the
order you have borrowed for them, and so bestowed upon them; omitting none that
is not employed in the answer I shall give unto these: you shall not find me
skipping, as you do, whole Pages and Chapters. And whereas you (upon my taking
that liberty which is every man's right, of using a Libel without a name, as he
thinks fit) have appealed in the Conclusion unto my Lords, the Provosts of
Oceana, as if I had given you ill Language; and have also in diverse and sundry
places of your work, as it were, dared my Muse, I shall at leisure (it may be
within two years) add a piece of Oratory, addressed unto the said Lords, the
Provosts of the Academy in Oceana; and some Poems not abhorring from your
desires or provocations, not in the Thunder-thumping way of Grandfire Virgil,
but in the sugared speech of mine Uncle Chaucer. If you please by the way to
take a lick of it, I shall at this distance from the Opera, insert the Prologue.

What Chaucer ho, ye han the English Key
Of the high Rock Parnas with the Towers twey.
Your sooten gab, so ken I well thus far,
Of courtesy the Yate till me unspar.
But here be Bavins in the way I trow,
All to be prickle like Urchin, hi ho.
Forth come wi brond, gin ye no bren em green
Me Note they keepen out that nere were in.
Pray, Sir, have me commended to them that say, Your book is unanswerable; and
let them know, it is to them that the Prologue is spoken. The body of the Work
is Heroic, the Title thereof bequeathed by famous Seldom, runs thus: The
Wars of the makers of Mouse-traps against Inigo Jones; and it begins in this
wise:

Leif Mistress Margery Melpomine,
Out how ye snorten! sooth it been bread dey.
Ne Mother Midnight sit in sky, ne duskin,
For shame now buckle on your bloodred buskin:
Or if ye like your ease, sweet Lady Meg
Of womanhood, lend me your Lethren Leg:
And gin, I lig it not about square caps
That meet in hugger for to make Mouse-traps,
And wagen war anenst Inigo Jones
That harpen (like Amphion) till huge stones
And maken rise in view of Kerson people
Into the Element and sit on steeple.
Mote I ne tack ye mere by the small suit
When ye mount Pegasus in Crimson bute.
Look you there now, is not this fair? You have the length of my weapon:
Moreover, I have manifested unto you the whole order of my work. Now to my
tacklin.

Noble Mr. Wren, you have declared your self to be of an assembly of men who
are known both at home and abroad to be of the most learned persons of this
age: and some suspect it to have been under their eye that you have been about
two years in answering my last Book; an enterprise in which you have performed
(seeing you now own the former) your second adventure in like Chevalry; yet
where I vouch Aristotle, Machiavil, and like Authors for the undoubted right
which a private man may claim in treating upon the politics, or upon the
nature of Government, you tell me, That this privilege is not to be extended
unto every little Writer. I, against whom one of the assembly known both at
home and abroad to be of the most learned persons of this age, has written
twice, and been so long about it, A little Writer! Sir, you forget your self.

Again, the Testimony of Machiavil throughout his works, is, that he intends
not carelessly to start some Philosophical Opinion, but applies every thing
home and expressly unto Italy, though not without some despair, yet with the
ardour (or, if you will have it so) with the heat and passion belonging unto so
noble a Design. Wherefore for you to adoperate this testimony quite contrary
to the truth of it, as a proof that my way of writing has no affinity with
this Author's, is subornation of a witness.

But good Mr. Wren, is your proposion of German-horse, or, which is all one, of
a mercenary Army for a standing Government, such as professes to W. p. 107.
have any fiction or Romance (while you enter not into despair (as you say) of
living to enjoy your share of the felicities which will belong unto the
Subjects of such a Government) or adapted to the occasions or necessities of a
particular juncture? Is it such as in so many fair complements where with you
interweave me nominally, is proposed with the temper and moderation becoming a
philosophical Opinion, and not with the heat and passion belonging to a
Design? Was my Book which named no man, a Libel or a Pasquin; and are both
yours, each page whereof is endued with my name, most serious Tracts, and true
History? Alas, that ever I fell into the hands of such an Historian: what will
become of my name, preserved in such sugared eloquence to future ages! But
notwithstanding you are a great Historian, M. Wren, yet as concerning
Christopher Columbus (and because you will go to that) as concerning Sebastian
Gabato likewise, I appeal unto my Lord Verulame Hen. 7. page 188.
whether they first framed not Designs or Cards before they found out their
discoveries; or if discoveries cannot be made but by design or chance, what
need I appeal to any man for this, seeing it is known that they made their
previous contracts with Princes before they undertook their adventures? What
mean you then to say, That they who understand that Christopher Columbus must
first have been at the Indies, before he could make a Card to teach others the
way thither, will go near to suspect Mr. Harrington's abilities in modelling a
Commonwealth till he have spent some years in the Ministry of State?

Good Sir, besides the trick you put upon your Reader, in your antecedent, you
are quite out in your Consequence: For how many years, I pray you, had
Lycurgus, or Numa Pompilius spent in the Ministry of State before they modelled
their Governments? Or what modelling of Government has been bequeathed unto
the world by all the Ministers of State in France since the dissolution of the
three Estates, the ancient model of that Government; or by all the Ministers of
State since Henry the seventh in England; or have not these rather been the
ruin of the English Model? Mr. Wren, if you will believe me, the main, nay the
whole ability of modelling a Commonwealth, lies in two things; the One, in
being well versed in ancient prudence; the Other, in being disengaged from all
parties: neither of which qualifications is common with Ministers of State.

Talk not to me of French Taylours; to model is not so easy a thing as you
take it for, if we may but count our late changes of Government: when the King
left the Parliament, and the two Houses governed without a King, there was one
change: when the Peers were excluded, and the Commons governed without King and
Peers, there was two: when the Commons were excluded, and the General governed
alone, there was three: when the General governed with a convention of his own
making, there was four: when by the Major-Generals, there was five: when the
Protector governed by the Instrument, there was six: when he governed by the
Petition and Advice, there was seven; the present should be the eighth: Nor
hitherto has there been any Model at all, or any such as the makers themselves
have approved of. I hope I give no offense; for I say but as they say: But you
are such a man, you can show me no body so good at modelling as I, except it be
your self; who I am sure have had as little Ministry; and yet the next
dunghill (which is your own sweet book) you think fittest to be my Magazine.
Why seeing you will have it so, come your ways.

ACT. I.
Scoen. I. In answer to Chap. I. Whether Prudence be well distinguished into
ancient and modern
FOugh! this same mixen in the stirring, is like Pepper in the Nose; but he
says, it is Hellebore for to purge heads.

Now as concerning purging of heads, Mr. VVren, there seems already to peep
out a question. Do your Universities (gentle Sir) derive their learning from
Nimrod, from the Kings of China, from the Monarchies? (to be equally with
Macedon, I doubt, as to this point passed over in wise silence.) Are they
descended (do you understand me?) from the times in Greece, called by
Thucydides, The imbecility of ancient times; from those in Rome, called by
Florus, The childhood of that Government: or speak out, is their whole stock of
learning, without which they had not had any kind of thing whereupon to set up,
derived from the Hebrew, the Greek, and the Roman Commonwealths? If so, Mr.
Wren, whether I pray you call you not now that stock of learning Ancient
Learning, albeit they could not call it so then? and if Politicians have no
other Pedigree of Prudence, then the same that you have of learning; why is not
that Prudence which they have received in the like manner, ancient Prudence,
albeit those Commonwealths could not call it so then?

To shift these things which are thus plain, you are in this Chapter a
wonderful Artificer; yet comes all but to this, That neither Thucydides nor
Florus divide Prudence into ancient and modern. Why, Mr. Wren, neither did the
Commonwealths mentioned divide Learning into ancient and modern: this
distinction belongs unto latter times, in regard of some modern Learning that
is of latter invention. So, Mr. Wren, in regard of some modern Prudence, which
first I tell you what it is, namely, Government by King, Lords and Commons: and
secondly, how it came in, namely, by the Goths and Vandals; I call the Prudence
(do you mark?) of those ancient Commonwealths, Ancient Prudence; and the
Prudence remaining unto us from these Goths and Vandals, Modern Prudence. What
could you desire more? Nay, and this is according unto the plain sense of
Janotti too: for, says he, as to his two limits or periods of time, Of the
former, or that wherein Rome was oppressed by the Arms of Caesar, came the
second, or that when Italy was overrun by the Huns, Goths, Vandals and
Lombards; and of the second came all that alteration which has given unto the
world the face in which we now see it, and utterly lost it that face which it
had in the time of the Romans. Wherein relation unto the two Governments (the
one popular, which was the more ancient; and the other by King, Lords and
Commons, which is the more modern) is so plain, that you are put unto a shift,
who can say no more then that I make Janotti author of the division of
Prudence into ancient and modern. How dare you you for your reputation do thus,
Mr. Wren? while first by your own acknowledgment I infer this division from
more ancient Authors, as Thucydides and Florus: and secondly, my words relating
unto Janotti do no where from him derive the division of Prudence into ancient
and modern, as to those terms upon which runs your equivocation; but
fortify this division of my own, by the two periods of time by him observed,
and that are of like sense with these terms.

But, Mr. Wren, there was never the like of you! Whereas the Question by me
proposed, was, Whether Prudence be not rightly divided into ancient and
modern, you have conveyed it into a Question, whether Monarchy be not a more
ancient Government then a Commonwealth. This have I hitherto not disputed, as
that which concerns not the present Controversy: but seeing it may be for
your service, I do flatly deny that Monarchy is the more ancient Government;
not that Mr. Hobbes holds De cor. polit.
Democracie to be of all Governments the first in order of time; but first,
because upon the place where it is said* That Genesis 10. 8.
Nimrod was a mighty hunter before the Lord, it is resolved by Divines that
Nimrod was the first Monarch. Now, Sir, Nimrod began his reign about the One
thousand eight hundredth year of the world: whence I conclude thus: Either the
world had no Government till Nimrod, or a Commonwealth may be above a thousand
years elder then Monarchy: Nay, unless you can find some Government that was
neither a Commonwealth nor a Monarchy, must have been no less. I know what you
will say, That the Government till Nimrod was by fathers of families: why so, I
hope, you will yield it was afterward, at least in the line of Shem. Now let
us compute from Noah, and consider in the posterity of Shem, what judgment may
be made of the Government by fathers of families; or whether this were indeed,
as Divines affirm, Monarchical, or may not much rather be esteemed popular.

Genesis 11.
Noah had three Sons, Shem, Ham and Japhet; of Shem, by Arphaxad and others,
descended Reu; of Reu, Serug; of Serug, Nahor; of Nahor, Terah; of Terah,
Abram; of Abraham, Isaac; of Isaac, Jacob; and of Jacob descended the
Commonwealth of Israel. So much for the elder brother, which was Shem. Now Sir
for the second son of Noah, that is Ham: of Ham descended Cush, and of Cush,
Genesis 10.
Nimrod: by which, plain it is at the first sight, that the Commonwealth, as to
precedence in dignity, is of the elder house; and as to precedence in time,
unless you can show the descendents of Shem to have been under Monarchy, must
also have been the more ancient Government, that is, if Government by fathers
of families were popular. Now as to this, it is a tradition Gemara Babylonia ad
tit. Sanhed rim.
with the Rabbis, that there were seven precepts delivered to the children of
Noah: 1. Concerning Judicatories: 2. Concerning Blasphemy: 3. Concerning
perverse worship: 4. Concerning uncovering of nakedness: 5. Concerning the
shedding of man's blood: 6. Concerning rapine or theft: 7. Concerning eating of
things strangled, or of a member torn from a living creature. This tradition
throughout the Jewish Government, is undoubted: for to such as held these
precepts, and no more, they gave not only (as I may say) toleration, but
allowed them to come so near unto the temple as the gates, and called them
Proselytes of the gates. Nor do I think the proof in Scripture of these
precepts, though not set down together, to be obscure: as where it is said,
None of you shall approach to any Levit. 18. 6. 24.
that is near kin to him, to uncover their nakedness: -- for in all these the
Nations (that is, the Canaanites) are defiled, which I cast out before you. The
Canaanites were descended from Ham; and that in these words it must be employed
that they had violated the foregoing precepts, is in my judgment evident,
seeing there is nothing in the Law of Nature why a man might not approach in
this manner unto one that is near of kin to him.

Again, that two other of these precepts were given by God unto Noah, the
Scripture is plain, where he says, Genesis 9.
Flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood thereof, shall you not eat.
And whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. Whence it must
follow, that either fathers of families were not subject unto this Law; which
because it is given generally and without any exception, were absurd to think;
or else that during Patriarchal Government, they subjected themselves unto some
common Judicatories, according unto the first of the seven precepts. Of which,
says Maimonides, By this the sons of Noah constituted Judges in every City, to
judge of the other six precepts, and to govern the people; and the Gemara
Babylonia says, That this was done after the manner that Moses commanded
Judges to be set in the gates throughout the tribes. By the advice of Jethro to
Moses, the like should have been the custom of the Midianites, who, (as also
the Gibeonites, descended of the same line with the Monarchy of Nimrod; and for
ought perhaps to the contrary, of as ancient standing) were a Commonwealth. But
above all, it should seem by some of the Rabbines, that there was a Consistory
or Senate instituted by Shem, which was of use with his posterity. Now if
Patriarchal Government was exercised by or under the common Ligament of a
Senate or Consistory, then was the Government of the Patriarchs of a popular
nature, or a Commonwealth; at least these, Mr. Wren, must be disproved by them
who will have Monarchy out of all controversy to be the more ancient
Government.

Good Sir, I do not know, nor do I think that this same way (do you see?) of
disputation, has any Predecessor. What do you tell me then, W. Preface.
that you have cause to think by the last or any Book of mine, that my stores
of Reason and Arguments are brought very low? You see already that it is far
otherwise. Tell not me in this place that Doderus is as good a Book as the
Bible; nor let Divines (for a thing that I know) run here as they do from the
Scripture unto Heathen Authors. It is confessed that Diodorus Siculus, Aristotle,
Cicero, Salust and Trogus say, That in the beginning of things and of Nations,
the power was in Monarchs. But then the Heathen Stories know nothing beyond
Nimrod, or his Successor Belus; which is no excuse to you, while the Scripture
is so much a more ancient record; much less to Divines, at least such of them
as preach against the squaring of Government according to the rule of Heathen
Authors. Mr. VVren, (to be plain) there are of these that have a strange kind
of frowardness: if a Commonwealth be described out of Heathen Authors, they
will undertake to prove that of Israel to have been a Government of King, Lords
and Commons. And if a Commonwealth be out of this of Israel described
unanswerably otherwise, then they run to Aristotle, Trogus, and the rest of the
Heathens, for the antiquity of Monarchy. When none of this will do, they fall
flatly upon conjuring the people to take heed how they hearken unto men of wit,
reason or learning, and not in any wise to be led but by grace, and such grace
only as is without any mixture of wit, reason or learning. Mr. VVren, I desire
them but to tell us once, what they mean by such grace as is without any
mixture of wit, reason or learning; and you in the mean time to consider, That
Heathen Authors, though they give Monarchy the precedence in time, are very far
from giving it the van in prudence. Nay, for this matter you will find them so
much of one mind, that we need Pol. Lib. 3. Cap. 10, 11
hear no more of them then Aristotle, who divides Monarchy into two kinds; the
One whereof he calls Barbarous; and in this he relates to your Nimrod, or
your Eastern Monarchs; the Other Heroic, in which he relates expressly to
Principality in a Commonwealth; and namely, that of the Lacedemonian Kings. Say
you then, To which gives he the van in dignity; to the Heroic, or to the
Barbarous prudence? But it is no matter, strike up, and let us have the
Rodomontado, which it pleases you shall be of or belonging unto the present
Scoene: This (say you, for you may as well say it of this as of any thing else)
approaches very near unto raving, and gives me cause to suspect I have taken a
wrong course of curing Mr. Harrington's Political distempers. For whereas I
think to do it by giving him more light, knowing men (and known to be of the
learned in this age) are of opinion that I ought to have shut up the windows,
and so forth. Now very passing good indeedlaw!

Scoene 2.
In answer to Chap 2. Whether a Commonwealth be rightly defined to be a
Government of Laws and not of men, and a Monarchy to be the Government of some
man or few men, and not of Laws.
THe readiest way, Mr. VVren, of dispatch with the present Question, will be to
show how far you and I are at length agreed; And we are agreed, that Law
proceeds from the will of man (whether a Monarch or a People) that this will
must have a Mover, and that this Mover is Interest.

Now, Sir, the interest of the people is one thing; it is the public interest:
and where the public interest governs, it is a Government of Laws, and not
of men: the interest of a King or of a party, is another thing, it is a private
interest; and where private interest governs, it is a Government of men, and
not of Laws. What ails ye! If in England there have ever been any such thing
as a Government of Laws, was it not Magna Charta? Well, and have not our Kings
broken Magna Charta some thirty times? I beseech you, Sir, did the Law govern
when the Law was broken? Or was that a Government of men? On the other side,
has not Magna Charta been as often repaired by the people? and the Law being
so restored, was it not a Government of Laws, and not of men? I think you are
wild! Why have our Kings in so many Statutes or Oaths engaged themselves to
govern by Law, if there were not in Kings a capacity of governing otherwise?
And if so, then by every one of those Oaths or Statutes it is agreed both by
King and people, that there is a Government by Laws, and a Government by men.
Why goodness, Mr. Wren! is there not a Government of Men, and a Government of
Laws? Where do you dwell! Such as have laid people in Lavender for the late
great Man and his Government, it is now thought will be left unto the Law and
her Government. Come, come; Divines and Lawyers are indeed good men to help up
a Prince at a dead lift; but they are known well enough: for they will no
sooner have set him up, then if he do not govern by their Laws, they will be
throwing sticks at him. But do you hear? if a Prince would be entirely freed of
such danger, let him get a Parliament of Mathematicians.

What Miracles has Mr. Hobbes done in this kind! and how many more are there
will make you a King by Geometry! But I shall at this time content my self,
Sir, to let them pass, and consider only your grand Mathematical
Demonstration, with the nooks, crooks, angles and appurtenances of the same.
You Gentlemen of lovver forms, be attentive; it has past the trial and test of
the Doctors Academy, consisting of men known to be of the learned of this
age; and the manner thereof is as follovveth.

To be plain (and rouzing) if the declared will of the supreme power be
considered as the immediate cause of Government, then a Monarchy is as much as
a Commonwealth, an Empire of Laws and not of men. If we look farther back, and
consider the persons whose will is received as Law, a Commonwealth is as much
as a Monarchy, an Empire of men, and not of Laws.

(Here, Sir, is your cast for the game: now, Sir, for your shout.)

This is so manifest, and yet Mr. Hartington so firmly resolved not to
understand it, that considering his temper, I must needs applaud his resolution
of having nothing to do with the Mathematics; for half this obstinacy would be
enough to keep him from apprehending, that the three angles of a triangle are
equal to two right angles.

Mr. VVren, you spet crooked pins; you should be exorcised. For pray now hear
me, did you ever see 'em choose Knights of the shire? those same people, the
high shoone, as you call them, expect not, I conceive, that Angels should come
down there to ride upon their shoulders: Nor, I doubt, if the truth were
known, do they greatly care for Saints; they are most for men that drink
well, or at least for such as eat good meat in their houses: Nor have I found
by my reading, that those same high shoone have at any time set the worthy
Gentleman on foot, and taken his Horse upon their backs: by which it is
manifest, that they do not conceive their Laws to be made by any thing above
the nature of man, as Angels; or below the nature of man, as Horses. Now Sir,
all you have proved by your wonderful Mathematics, is, That Laws are neither
made by Angels nor by Horses, but by men; therefore the high shoone are as good
Mathematicians as your self. The voice of the people is as much the voice of
men, as the voice of a Prince is the voice of a man; and yet the voice of the
people is the Voice of God, which the voice of a Prince is not; no not as to
Law-giving, the voice of the Prince who was a man after Gods own heart: for
thus David proposes unto the Congregation of Israel; If it seem good unto you,
and that 1 Chro. 13.
it be of the Lord our God -- let us bring the Ark to us. David in matter of
Law-giving, makes not himself, but the people judge of what was of God; and
the Government of Laws, says Aristotle, is the Government of God.

Mr. Wren, were you contented to be no wiser then Titus Livius, (who in passing
from the Government of the Roman Kings unto that of the Commonwealth, has
this transition: Livy. li 2.
I come now unto the Empire of Laws more powerful then that of men) some who
conceive the said Titus to have done passing well, would think you the better
Politician, for not taking the upper hand of him. You will not find that
Augustus Caesar, in whose time this Author wrote, did set any Mr. Wren upon
him; which is a shrewd suspicion that Princes in that age either wanted such a
wit as you are, or would scarce have thanked you for your subtle Argument;
somewhat too Mercurial to stay even in your own head. For do not you your self
say in another place, That W. p. 171.
a Commonwealth having no eyes of her own, (as if this of all other were a mark
of blindness) is forced to resign her self to the conduct of Laws? What imply
you in this, less then that a Monarch is not forced to resign himself unto the
conduct of Laws? or what less can follow from this confession of your own,
then that a Commonwealth is a Government of Laws and not of men, and that a
Monarchy is a Government of a man, or some fevv men, and not of Laws, Nay, Mr.
Wren, nor is it once that your mind mis-gives you; for soon after you are at
it again, in showing what you fancy W. p. 172.
befalls a Commonwealth as she is a Government of Laws.

But now for joy, let me my Cap up throw;
For one thing I have said, is sense, I trow.
Sir, for this Rhyme I have some reason; seeing in a Monarchy, that the Laws
being made according to the interest of one man or a few men, must needs be
more private and partial then suits with the nature of justice; and in a
Commonwealth, that Laws being made by the whole people, must come up to the
public interest, which is common right and justice; are Propositions, which
Mr. Wren can confess to have indeed some sense in them. But this milk, alas, is
kicked down again, while you add, that they have not any more truth then those
other which wanted sense. Now this is a sad case; yet such as you say, will be
apparent, if we examine the different tempers of a single person and a
multitude enacting Laws.

Are we no farther yet? I verily believed that the different temper of a single
person, and of a popular assembly, had been long since considered in the
Propositions already granted, in as much as the single person is tempered by a
private, the multitude by the public interest: which were heretofore by your
self acknowledged to be the first movers of will, and so the efficient causes
of Law. If your Mathematics, or what shall I call them? would but hold to any
thing, we might have some end. But for the discovery of these different
tempers, you forget all that is past, and begin anew in this manner:

When a Monarch acts the Legislators part, he ought to be so far from
partiality, or respecting his own private interest, that he is then chiefly to
direct his thoughts to the common good, and take the largest prospect of
public utility, in which his own is so eminently included.

This Proposition then of yours is opposed to mine, or those in which you say
there is some sense, but no truth: so in this, both the sense and the truth
should be apparent. But Mr. Wren, if I should say, That the father of a family,
in giving rules to the same, ought to be so far from respecting his private
interest, or the regard of keeping his whole estate and command unto himself,
and holding the servants that live upon him, short, or in necessity to obey
him, and work for him, that he were to take a larger, nay, the largest prospect
of what is the public utility of the men that serve him, which is to attain
unto means whereby to live of themselves: Should I say that a father of a
family would find the common and natural interest of his servants, which is to
be free, that wherein his own interest, which is to have servants, is eminently
included; I am confident you would neither allow this Assertion to be truth nor
sense. The like say I to your Monarchy, whether it be by a single person, or by
a Nobility. A Monarchy not keeping the people in servitude, is no Monarchy;
therefore either servitude must be the interest of the people, or the interest
of the people is not that to which a Monarch ought chiefly to direct his
thoughts. Yet can you not believe that there are many examples to be produced
of Princes, who in enacting Laws have considered their own private personal
interest? You are costive of belief, Mr. Wren: consider the Turkish and Eastern
Monarchies, and show me any one of their Laws from any other Principle. It is
true, in Monarchies by a Nobility, or by Parliaments, Princes have not in
enacting Laws, been able to make so thorough work: for which cause, lest Laws
so enacted, should give check unto this private interest so essential to
Monarchy, they have still been breaking them. But neither can you believe that
Laws have been broken by any Prince, seeing that in buying and selling, and
other private contracts, Princes are content to tie themselves up to the same
rules which they prescribe to others. Rare! A King that plays fair at Piquet,
can never break Magna Charta. Caesar paid no less for an horse then another
man; therefore Caesar's Monarchy was a lawful purchase. O but such Laws, as
upon that occasion were made by Caesar, were necessary to attaining the ends of
Government: Good! and so that which is necessary unto a private interest, or a
single person, toward the attaining unto the ends of Government, the same
comes up to the public interest, which is common right and justice. Is this
disputing, Mr. Wren, or is it fidling? Yet again: a Prince breaks not the
Law, but for the public tranquillity. Wonderful! not the Tinkers that fight,
but the Constable breaks the peace. That the posse Comitatus is according unto
the Laws; or that there is a War in the Law for the maintenance of the public
peace, I have heard; but that the public peace is in any case by the breach of
the public peace (whereof the Laws only are the bond) to be defended, in good
earnest I have not formerly heard. Yet take heed, I pray. On this side of
yours, there must be no fond imagination: But on the other side, (say you)
there can be no fonder imagination, then to think that (in the Republic of
Israel framed by God or Moses, in the four hundred that judged Benjamin, in
all, in any of the Commonwealths) or when any multitude is assembled to enact
Laws, it is necessary their resolutions (though those of a single person must)
should be consonant to public justice. I have a weary life with you, Mr.
VVren, and with such of your Admirers, as if at their pleasure I pick not
straws, can soberly and seriously resolve you to be Conqueror of Mr.
Harrington; what is that? nay, of Moses, of Solon, and Lycurgus. The straw that
is your first lance in this Encounter, is, that a great part of this multitude
(so you will have it called, though Politicians understand not a people under
orders by the word multitude, but the contrary) will not, for want of capacity,
comprehend what this justice and interest is.

Sir, if a man know not what is his own interest, who should know it? and that
which is the interest of the most particular men, the same, being summed up in
the common vote, is the public interest O but the abler sort will presently be
divided into factions and juncta's; and under pretense of public interest,
will prosecute their own designs.

But, good Sir, if these abler sort act as a Council under a single person,
what should hinder them from doing the like, except they debate only, and
propose unto the Prince, who only may resolve? Wherefore if in popular
Government the Senate of Council of the people have no more then the Debate,
and the Result remain wholly unto a popular Council having no power to debate;
how can the abler sort any more divide into Juncta's or Factions under popular
Government, then under Monarchical? Speak your Conscience; the interest of the
people being as you say, That justice be impartially administered, and every man
preserved in the enjoyment of his own; Whether think you the more probable way
unto this end, that a Council, or the abler sort, propose; and a single
interest, that is, a single person, resolve; or that the abler sort propose,
and the common interest, that is, the whole people, have the result? O but take
heed; for it is to be remembered, that the greatest part of Laws concern such
matters as are the continual occasion of controversy between the people of a
Nation, such regard regulation of trade, privileges of corporations, etc.
Sweet Mr. VVren! are there more Corporations in England, then distinct
Soveraignties in the united Provinces? Have those people no trade in comparison
of ours? Or what quarrels* have they about it? Persuade them to have a King;
and to this end be sure you tell them, that if we had not had Kings in England,
there had certainly instead of the Barons Wars, been Wars between the Tanners
and Clothiers; and instead of those of York and Lancaster, others between the
Shoomakers and the Hosiers. Say, if you have any ingenuity, do you not make me
pick straws? But the longest straw comes here after all. (Say you)

It being essential to popular assemblies that the plurality of votes should
oblige the whole body, those Laws which lay claim to the consent of all, are
very often the resolutions of but a little more then half, and must
consequently go less in their pretensions to public interest.

Gentlemen, here are forty of you, whereof five and twenty see in yonder Grove
a Rooks-nest, which the other fifteen of you see not; now, Gentlemen, is that
less a Rooks-nest for this? or do these five and twenty see farther then those
fifteen? If so it be with every thing that is to be seen, felt, heard or
understood, how comes the world to be resolved otherwise upon any thing, then
that quod pluribus visum id what appears unto the most, is most authentic?
and what can you desire more of certainty in a Government, then all that
certainty which can be had in the world?

It was even now that we came from the Prince to the People; now from the
people to the Prince again. Good Mr. Wren, why do you say, or whoever said the
like, that those Laws which are reputed the peoples greatest security against
injustice and oppression, have been established by the authority of some
Prince? Do you find any such thing in Israel, Athens, Lacedemon, Rome, Venice,
Holland, Switz? But you equivocate; as to authority in Princes, Magistrates or
sole Legislators, in matter of Lawgiving, you well know that I am for it; but
not as you impose upon this term for their power. Thus be it granted, that
Alfred, Edward, Lewis, Alphonso, have been excellent Legislators; What is this
to power, or to your purpose, seeing the Laws proposed by authority of these
Princes, were enacted no otherwise then as Poinings Laws, by the power of the
people, or assemblies of their three estates? But above all, (say you) several
of the Roman Emperors, and chiefly Justinian, have fabricated those Laws so
much admired for their reason and equity, which have stretched themselves
farther then ever the Roman Legions were able to march, and which are still
embraced by those people, who have long since ceased to acknowledge the Roman
Empire. Herein you have paid your self to some purpose: for most eloquent Mr.
Wren, who but your self says, That Justinian fabricated those Laws you speak
of? I have heard indeed, that he compiled them; and surely, Sir, in that work
of his, he did but new vamp the old boots of the people of Rome: Nay, good Mr.
Wren, your Roman Emperors at the gallantest wore no better: for the full proof
whereof, I need go no foot farther then your own sweet self; for do not you
give out of Justinian this very definition of a Law; W* p. 59.
Lex est quod Populus Romanus Senatorio Magistratu interroganto (veluti
consule) constituebat? How say you then, that Justinian fabricated these Laws,
which he plainly tells you, were proposed by the Senate, and resolved by the
people of Rome? Do you see what your Emperors themselves acknowledged to have
been a Government of Laws, and more excellent then a Government of men, though
they themselves were the men that governed? And you your self have said enough
to confirm, that the justice of the dead people went farther then the arms of
the living Emperors; nay, and that such Laws as are yet of the greatest
treasures in the world, are still extant of the Roman people, though of the
Emperors there remain nothing that is good.

But say you, On the other side (you may please to say as you will, but it is
on the same side yet) those Commonwealths that have been most celebrated for
their Laws, have received them from the hands of a Sole Legislatour (which both
words and things, though you list not to acknowledge it, every* body knows that
I taught you: now let us see how you can hit me with my own weapon) therefore
it may well be doubted, whether these people of Athens and Lacedemon thought so
well of themselves as Mr. Harrington seems to do of popular Assemblies. Why, do
not I say, That a popular Assembly, as to the formation or fabricating of
Government, through the want of invention, must of necessity have some sole
Legislator? What fault do you find with Mr. Harrington? Why, that with such
repeated confidence he asserts, that the people never fail to judge truly of
the public interest, where (the Legislator or) the Senate discharge their
duty: And what have you been saying all this while in these examples of Solon
and Lycurgus, whose Laws being by them prudently proposed unto the people, were
as prudently judged, and thereupon enacted by the people? So likewise for the
Roman Decemvirs: for if you think that these did any more then propose to the
people, or that any Law of theirs was otherwise good then as voted and
commanded by the people, you should go to school. Yet that if the Legislator or
the Senate divide well, the people shall be sure to make a good choice, you
must confess is too hard for your faith: why if it be matter of faith, you
might have let it alone? but do you think it right in civil matters, that the
tenderness of faith should supply the want of sense in you; or what is the
scruple can yet remain in your conscience! Goodness! the observation which
Anacharsis made, who said of the popular Assemblies in Greece, That wise men
propounded matters, and fools decided them. Why Mr. Wren, Anacharsis would not
lose his jest, and you cannot find it. Do you think that the Commonwealths of
Greece thought Anacharsis, for this fine thing, wiser then Lycurgus, Solon, or
themselves? Why Mr. VVren, in this earnest you make your self the Jester. But
let you alone, you will be the Gascon still; that which is thrown out of the
windows wherever you come, is no less then the whole house; or if you leave
any thing, it is but that you are weary to discover all the weak Arguments and
false Inferences of Mr. Harrington, as awork to others of small profit, and to
your self of little glory. Poor Mr. Harrington! He will now leave you a while
to take breath, and confer a little with your patron.

Doctor VVilkins having laughed so much as in suggested in the Epistle, should
not methinks be altogether left out of our game. He in his Book called
Mathematical Magic, pretends B. 1. c. 14.
to a Balance too. And his Balance is made for all the world like a Jack; the
whole force of which engine consists in two double Pullies, twelve wheels and
a sail: the sail is instead of the crest of the Jack, at which a fellow stands
blowing; and by blowing in this manner, the said Author pretends to
demonstrate Mathematically, that the said fellow, with the said Jack, shall
tear you up the strongest Oak by the roots. This, to men who know that some
ship in a storm will break the strongest Anchor that is made of Iron, and the
strongest Cable that is made of Hemp, must needs be wonderful: of what then
must this Jack and this string be made, that it break not before it fetch up
this Oak? Nay, how can any man blow a million of years together? Or if he
could, where would the Oak or the Jack be? and in a less time the Oak it is
confessed could not Chapter 16.
by this means be removed one inch. This nevertheless must be a Mathematical
Demonstration. Goodness! what stuff is here for Mathematicians, upon which to
usurp demonstration in such wise, that it must be forbidden unto all the rest
of Mankind?

Mr. VVren, I have Du Moulin, and Sanderson; will you deny these Authors to
be good Logicians? upon the credit of my two eyes, in all their examples of
Demonstration, they have not one that is Mathematical. Are not they clearly on
my side then, that there may be Demonstration, and yet not Mathematical? Why
sure there may, Sir; nay, and such a Demonstration may be every whit as valid
and convincing, as if it were Mathematical. For this I appeal to Mr. Hobbes:
All true ratiocination (says he) which Elements* p 63.
takes its beginning from true principles, produces science, and is true
demonstration. This afterward he declares in all sorts of Doctrines or Arts,
and consequently in the Politics, to be holding. Wherefore, say I, if (...)
Commonvvealths-men have nothing that can be so strong or holding as this same
Jack and Jack-line of Doctor VVilkinses, let us even with patience turn the
spit, while our salary-men eat the Rostmeat.

But now, Sir, mark me well: What was always so and no otherwise, and still is
so and no otherwise, the same shall ever be so and no otherwise. What think you
of this for a Principle? A Principle which is right and straight, should be
such as admits of as little proof or denial, as that the fire burns. I can
no more prove the one then the other: wherefore if you can no more deny the
one then the other, by the leave of your Mathematicians, this principle is no
less sure and certain then the best in their art: and what ratiocination I use
in my politics, that takes not its beginning, or is not legitimately and
undeniably derived from this principle, I am contented should go for nothing.
What would you have more? or, why must I be hit in the teeth with the want
of demonstration? Stand away, I will demonstrate, that is certain: but here is
the mischief; not every man that pretends unto understanding in the Politics,
has conversed with them; and so in these, through mere want of
understanding, a man will confidently deny, what in other conversation,
where he is more skilled, he would be ashamed to question. For this cause I
will not fall full butt upon the politics at first dash, but begin fairly and
softly, in Puris naturalibus.

That conversation which with men is most general (I apprehend) to be with
women: and so here I come with my first demonstration.

What was always so, and not otherwise, and still is so, and not otherwise; the
same shall ever be so, and not otherwise.

But, Sir, women have been always some handsome, and some unhandsome, and not
otherwise; and women still are some handsome, and some unhandsome, and not
otherwise.

Therefore, women shall ever be some handsome and some unhandsome, and not
otherwise.

Mr. Wren, the reason why I begin to demonstrate in this manner, or in
something merely natural and known to every body, is, That otherwise I should
never stave men off from saying, That what was always so, and not otherwise,
and still is so, and not other wise, must ever be so, and not otherwise, must
needs be true; that is, except a man can give a reason why it may be otherwise.
This is that when I come unto the Politics, things not less natural, but only
more remote from men's knowledge or acquaintance, which they will be all sure
enough to return: Wherefore let them begin here to show me such reason as
hereafter they will ask, that is, why women, notwithstanding what is past or
present, may for the future be all handsome. Would not the undertaking of such
an adventure, be a notable ridiculous piece of Knight-errantry? In sooth, Mr.
VVren, though men will not so easily see it, it is no otherwise in the
politics, which are not to be erected upon fancy, but upon the known course
of Nature; and therefore are not to be confuted by fancy, but by the known
course of Nature. Remember, Sir, Anatomy is an Art; but he that demonstrates by
this Art, demonstrates by Nature, and is not to be contradicted by fancy, but
by demonstration out of Nature. It is no otherwise in the Politics. These
things therefore being duly considered, I proceed.

What always was so, and still is so, and not otherwise, the same shall ever
be so, and not otherwise.

But where the Senate was upon Rotation, and had not the ultimate result, there
was not any feud between the Senate and the people; and where the Senate is
upon Rotation, and has not the ultimate result, there is no feud between the
Senate and the people.

Therefore, where the Senate shall be upon Rotation, and not have the ultimate
result, there shall be no feud between the Senate and the people.

I know the humor of these times: though any thing that will patch be now
called prudence, it will be known that what is after this manner undeniably
deducible from the Major of these Propositions, is Prudence or Policy, and no
other.

But Mr. VVren, true it is that the demonstration given is but Hoti, (...).
that is, from the effect; which though a certain effect imply a certain cause,
and come after that manner to be as good and undeniable a proof as the other
demonstration; yet because this is not so honorable an Argument as the other,
I shall now give you the same, Dihoti, or from the Cause. (...).


Where the Senate has no interest, distinct or divided from the interest of
the people, there can be no feud between the Senate and the people.

But where the Senate is upon Rotation, and has not the ultimate result, there
the Senate can have no interest distinct or divided from the interest of the
people.

Therefore where the Senate is upon Rotation, and has not the ultimate result,
there can be no feud between the Senate and the people.

Sir, this I say is Dihoti: and seeing it is a custom with you to give my
things a turn over the tongue, I am resolved hereafter to hoti 'em and dihoti
'em in such manner, as shall make you take your teeth. You will say, that I am
a Passionate Gentleman. But what has any man to do in this place to tell me of
the seuds between the Senate and the people of Rome, or those of the States in
regulated or Gothic Monarchies? did I ever undertake to hoti or dihoti any of
these? If they break loose, let them look to that whom it concerns.
Nevertheless, I say, that Laws, whether in Commonweatlths or regulated
Monarchies, are made by consent of the Senate and the people, or by consent of
the States, or Lords and Commons. And I pray you, Mr. Wren, What is in your
Allegation to confute this saying? Your words are these.

If any one of these States have, in case of difference, a just power to force
the obedience of the other, it is all one as if they were private persons; but
if no one of them be acknowledged to have such power, then it comes in case of
disagreement to a State of War.

But does this prove, that in case of a Senate upon Rotation, there may be feud
between them and the people? or that Laws in regulated Monarchy are not
enacted by the Lords and Commons? You might as well have argued thus, Mr. Wren:
These same Lords and Commons have power enough to disagree, or make Wars;
therefore they have no power to agree or to make Laws: Or what does this
concern me?

But now for the Jig at parting. Mr. Hobbes says, That Aristotle and Cicero
wrote not the Rules of their Politics from the principles of nature, but
transcribed them into their Books, out of the practice of their own
Commonwealths, as Grammarians describe the Rules of Language out of the
practice of the times. Mr. VVren, if I had answered Mr. Hobbes thus: That the
whole force of his Argument amounted but to this, That because Grammarians
describe the rules of Language out of the practice of the times, therefore
Aristotle and Cicero did so in their discourses of Government; what would you
have said? But because Mr Hobbes does not prove, but illustrate what he says
by way of similitude; therefore I answer him by way of similitude in this
manner: That for Mr. Hobbes to say, Aristotle and Cicero wrote not the rules of
their Politics from the principles of Nature, but transcribed them into their
Books out of the practice of their own Commonwealths, is as if a man should say
of famous Harvey, that he transcribed his Circulation of the blood, not out of
the principles of Nature, but out of the Anatomy of this or that body. Yet you
answer me, That the whole force of this Objection amounts but to this: That
because Harvey in his Circulation has followed the principles of Nature,
therefore Aristotle and Cicero have done so in their discourses of Government.
Mr. Wren, I have complained of you for repeating me fraudulently, but not so
often as I might: for whereas upon this occasion I told you, That a similitude
is brought for illustration, or to show how a thing is, not to prove that it is
so; You repeat me thus: Mr. Harrington assured me in his last Book, that he
produced this only as a similitude, and never intended that any man should
look for Reason or Argument in it. Sir, though a similitude have not that proof
in it which may draw a man, yet it has such inducement in it as may lead a
man. But, why should I be troubled, seeing in the close you heartily crave my
pardon? Good, Mr. Wren, abundantly enough: Nay, no more; no more, I beseech
you. Look you, do what I can, he will be making me reparation too. Well then,
if it must be so, what is it? Why, say you, By way of reparation to Mr.
Harrington, I make here a solemn Declaration, That for the future he shall have
no cause to accuse for expecting Reason or Argument in any of his discourses. O
ingenuity! he confesses that he has taken my similitude for an Argument, my
Goose for my Pig; and the satisfaction promised, comes to this, that he will
take my Arguments for Similitudes: when he should be shooing my Goose, he is
soling my Pig; for which he will make (as ye shall find hereafter) this amends,
that when he should be soling my Pig, he will be shooing my Goose. Mr. Wren,
good night.

The next is the Balance. Gentlemen, to morrow we play Hunks that bears thirty
Dogs.

Hunks of the Bear-Garden to be feared if he come nigh one.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 31. for four hundred, read four hundred thousand. 36. for interroganto,
read interrogante.


