AN ELEGY ON THE DEATH OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE ROBERT BLAKE, Esquire. One of the
GENERALS at Sea, who departed the 7. of August 1657. on board the George near
Plymouth Sound.
WHat means this silence Sirs? what is here become?
Some heavy tidings sure has struck you dumb.
Light griefs make tears distill out from the Eye,
When great ones dull, and often stupifie.
What is there none dare speak? Alas I fear;
It is too harsh? to sound in English Ear.
Must my misgiving soul divine the cause
Of your sad Aspects? Stay, for I must pause:
Is he that over Neptune once bore sway,
And against our Foes did often get the day:
Is he that was to Seamen their delight,
And lead them on most daringly to fight:
Is he whose face A Terror struck; whose name
The darling was of Fortune and of Fame:
Is he that by example spent his breath,
And showed a new way how to outface Death:
He that struck Terror wheresoere he came,
And made his Foes to tremble at his Name:
Speak, is it true? Is noble BLAKE then gone,
And left us here in dark oblivion?
Is his Seraphick Soul then fled away,
Leaving naught but his Ashes and his Clay?
Your silence seems to say so: Is he dead?
Sure then your griefs cannot be numbered.
I see the lasting'st Monuments must bend;
All things must have their Period and end.
His brave Example in our Infant-dayes
Of War, when he alone deserved the Bays;
When by his virtue only Lime held out
Against a potent Foe both bold and stout.
Taunton her liberty to him does owe,
His Bounty only did on her bestow.
Dunster that pleasant seat, whose lofty Towers
E'ne peirc't the Clouds, did stoop unto his Powr's:
Bridgewater gave him birth, for that famed more,
And Honored, then ere she was before.
His Enemies did often amazed stand
When he held up his sure dead-doing hand;
And death grew pale to see himself outdone
By one of Mortal race. The setting Sun
Often peeped abroad, as often did blush to see
Neptune forced wear his sanguine livery.
Though Death did often strive him to affright
Yet he out-lookt him, made him mad with spite,
And when with open force he durst not seize him,
In a Consumption did at last surprise him.
His head a mint of Reason was, when he
Once spoke he used no Tautologie.
His Arguments Dilemma's were, which he
Confirmed b' Example out of History:
His own Experience was so great, that all
With one consent still closed In general:
And for his Intellectualls so rare,
That few now living could with him compare.
A man that always valued his word;
Bright Honor ever shining on his Sword:
To vice and baseness ever most severe,
And to his friends and goodness very dear:
From affectation free, and what was more,
A Zealous Enemy of the Scarlet Whore;
Whose able Judgment in a hot dispute,
Two of her stoutest Champions did confute;
Deserving to be (by their own confession)
His Countries Honor called; it was their Expression.
No Charming Siren could his Ears entice,
Nor tempting Venus him allure to Vice;
Nor Cleophis with her bewiching Eyes
Ere put a period to his Victories.
War was his Mistress, he did her embrace,
She has a Princely and Majestic face;
She nursed him, bred him, made him her delight,
Conducted him in many a dreadful fight;
He was her darling, she in him took pleasure,
He was her chiefest and her only Treasure.
Though Threats on Threats, and promises succeeded
From Royalty, yet he them never heeded.
Threats could not drive him, nor Allurements high
Ere make him part with his Integrity.
No Sceptick in Religion was he found,
His head and heart and Principles were sound.
Constant beyond compare, and to his Nation
A faithful servant in his Generation:
No Faction would he heed, nor Plots contrive,
Nor did he wish that ever they should thrive;
And midst our various changes still kept free,
Hating cold Dullness, base Neutrality.
Riches he valued not, nor them Respect,
Nor glorious Titles ever did affect.
Arms and the Arts did wondrously comply,
In him to make A perfect Harmony;
In both Admired, in both he did Excel,
And lived and died without a Parallel.
His Valor was diffused, and now dead,
He the Tenth Worthy may be reckoned;
The Civick, Murall, and the Navall Crown
He has deserved, all due to his Renown.
In peace he was a Seneca, In war
He out-did Mars, still proved a Conqueror.
No chamber-Musick squeaking in the night,
Nor Noyce of Vialls did him much delight;
The deep-mouthed Canons thundering in his Ears,
Was unto him the Music of the Spheres:
Those bore the Base, the whistling bullets they
Made up the Treble on a fighting day;
Small shot Division played, whose nimble Motion
Made many a Soul drink up a sleepy Potion:
This was the Music most did cheer his spirit,
And made him Justly so much praise to merit;
His Noble, Lively, Active, vigorous fire,
Never quenched in him until he did Expire.
Oh! How my soul bemones my Countries loss,
Her only Genius gone, Oh it is a Cross
Beyond compare, now hardly felt, but when
Our Sins a war on us shall bring again.
Who then shall stand in the Gap? His Noble Arm
Did quail our homebred, Foreign foes disarme.
May those succeed Elisha-like Inherit
A double portion of Elijahs spirit:
The Hollanders in Bloody lines can write
What harms he did them by the God of might;
The Portugalls, as every one does know,
Their Peace, their Plenty and their Traffic owe
Unto his worth: when Rupert he was fain
To face about and get him home again;
Loath to appear with his poor Glow-worme light,
When such a Sun as this appeared in sight.
The Barbarous Pirates upon Tunis Strand
Felt the effects of his revenging hand.
The Spaniards lately feared the name of Blake,
As once their children did the name of Drake:
What shall I say? His last attempt so bold
At the Canaries, It cannot be told
Unto It Is worth; That done with gallantry
He makes his Exit with a Plaudite;
And having done to Spain abundant Harms,
Comes home in Peace and dies free from Allarms:
The George the first Ship bore him out, and then
The mournful she that brought him back again.
Oh that some Virgil, fo: his greater Glory,
Would please to writehis Everlasting Story;
Or else some Homer bravely to rehearse
His glorious Actions in Heroic Verse;
For me to Limne the Noble Acts h'as done,
Is but to light a Candle to the Sun:
That task I Will leave tosome more able hand
That viewed his Action both by Sea and Land;
And though in blacks: may not mourn his End,
Yet none shall more benone him as a friend.
Over Death he is Victorious, and he
Bequeaths it us as his last Legacy.
Now unto God be Everlasting praise,
That thus in peace has finished his days:
And since his fatal shred is quite Spun out,
Lets draw the Curtains, put the Candles out;
And let us leave him to his silent Tomb,
Free from all troubles, closed up in the womb
Of Mother Earth let him in quiet rest,
Till he Enjoy the choycest and the best.
Of his desires, in Glory for to see
His Savior Christ to all Eternity.
Epitaph Acrostick.
Rest here in Peace the sacred Dust
Of valiant BLAKE, the Good, the Just,
Beloved of all on every side;
Englands Honor, on ^e her Pride,
Romes Terror, Dutch Annoyer,
Truths defender, Spains destroyer.
Bring no dry Eyes unto this place:
Let not be seen in any case
A smiling or an unsad face.
Kindle desires in Every breast
Eternally with him to test.
On board the Dunbar in the Downs, Aug. 11. 1657. By Geo: Harrison. Gent.

Printed for John Bartlet the elder at the Golden Cup in Paul's Churchyard over
against the Drapers, and John Bartlet the younger in Westminster Hall. 1657.


