The Princes first Fruits: OR, A Full and Perfect RELATION OF TWO VICTORIES
Obtained by Col. Rich his Brigade, together with the Forces under the Command
of Sir Michael Levesey, over some forces landed out of the Revolted ships near
Sandown Castle, in the County of KENT, August 10. and 14.

TOGETHER WITH A Perfect List of the Commanders, and Officers taken Prisoners,
and the number of slain on both sides.

To the three Sons of their Father the D.

Put up thy Pipes Prag. Melancholicus
Bedew thy sheet with tears: Elencticus!
Say, Where Is thy Jacobs staff, what star to foe
Did stain your glory with this overthrow?
Come leave your lisping, and at length be wise,
The despised Cause must Conquer all your lies.
Printed in the year 1648.

Loving Brother,
THE Prince (whom so many of our Pulpits flattered, with the Title of The
pledge of our ensuing happiness) has given us a taste of that sweet fruit,
which the Kingdom is likely to gather from his Government, if the Lord in
wrath permit him to rule over us: The young man has begun a health to Englands
happiness, and the peoples liberty, in a cup of blood. Upon Thursday the 10 of
this present, his Highness, as they call him, (for my part I know not how tall
he is) landed a party of some 80 of his men, under the Command of one Aldredge,
a Cheese-monger, who lived sometime in Bread-street, and was Apprentice with
Mr. Rob. Smith; there might be a kind of illfavoured policy, in sending out
these Water-Rats at the Heels of this Cheese-monger, the smell of his old
profession might engage them farther with him, then their personal valor
could carry them on; and indeed it proved so, for being landed, they fell upon
a small party of Sir Michaell Lev^seys foot who were upon the guard, (at the
two houses, which we call the Halfway houses, between Sandwich and Sandown,)
beat them off, and took possession of the houses; Sir Michaels horse taking the
Alarm, charged the enemy with abundance of Gallantry, routed the Party, wounded
many, killed 8. or 9. upon the place, and put the rest (they having first fired
the Warriners house) to flight. Among the prisoners taken, Aldredge was one,
who knew me well, and told me he went aboard at Yarmouth with Cap. Johnson:
this poor man was miserably wounded in the back, shoulder, and arm, cut in the
head, and both hands; yet that party, with whom he unhappily engaged, refused
to affoard him any succor or means (if possible) to cure his wounds. Sir
Michael sent a Trumpet to Sandown Castle, acquainting them with his condition,
and permitting them, if they please, to take him in, but they (whose mercies
are cruelties) would not. This Aldredge told me, that Prince Rupert and the
Lord Gerard promised him to follow, but whether they did or not, he could not
say: and for valiant Captain Johnson, if you enquire of him, take it merrily:
But Oh Thom. Johnson! Where was he?
Truly where safest 'twas to be,
Beset with Bottles, three times three,
Which no body can deny.
Had it been a drinking match on shore, the High Admiral himself, could not
have kept his new Col. aboard; but I am persuaded the Gentleman is sick of
fighting, and wishes himself in his Landladies Chimney-corner, at the spread
Eagle in Gratious-street.

I have no more at present, but to pray God to open the eyes of the Prince, his
Right, Trusty, and Welbeloved at London, whether they be Lords, or Common
Council men, that (before it be too late) they may see God in the greatness of
his power, coming out against that party, and breaking them in pieces, so as if
he did point out with his finger (as he does to Babylons daughter,) that they
and their adherents are to be destroyed. Farewell.

Your affectionate Brother, I. H.
Canterbury, August 11. 1648.
A true Copy of a Leter to a friend in London, concerning the late fight at
Deal in Kent, with the number of the slain, and a perfect list of the
prisoners taken.
Worthy Friend,
SInce you and I have wept together, and poured out our souls to God in the
behalf of the daughter of our people, I could not but in the day of Ierusalems
rejoicing, call you to rejoice and be glad with her. It is the song of the
faithful in these parts, (and I hope it will be said in this day with you
also) for this is our God, we have waited for him, and he will save us: this is
the Lord, we have waited for him, we will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
Truly friend, God has appeared for us from his holy heaven, and our God from
the mountain of his power; clouds and darkness were round about us, even a sad
expectation of a second insurrection by the sons of violence amongst us, and
behold light has appeared to us, and joy to the Tabernacle of the upright. God
(though in the wisdom of his providence, he has not yet broken and scattered
the ships of our enemies by the east wind) has wonderfully appeared for us.
Yesterday (being the 14 of this present month) the Kings Son (the darkness of
his Fathers image) landed about 5 or 600 armed men (fit instruments as any in
Colchester, or Hamiltons Army, to establish the happiness of this Kingdom) near
Sandowne Castle, this morning they sallied out of the Castle (where they
secured themselves the last night,) and intended to have fallen upon our
friends in their quarters at upper Deal, and to have swallowed them up for
breakfast. But God (who ordained the earth to help the woman against the
Dragon) sent a man before, a Seaman, who coming out of the ship, listed
himself under Col. Rich, and furnished them with intelligence of this design;
this caused our friends to draw down al, or the greatest part of their forces
both horse and foot to lower Deal (who else had layn scattered about the
Country 4 or 5 miles in compass) it is a sad truth that our honored Friends in
the L. Genesis his Army, are so few, and they so weak by reason of sickness, that
some companies do not affoard above 40 fighting men; yet the L. (who uses to
appear then most when his power shall not be darkened by the shadow of an arm
of flesh) put such courage into their hearts, and clothed their arm with such
sinews, and strength, that they gave them such a blow, as was beyond their own,
contrary to their enemies, and above their Friends expectation, the manner
briefly thus.

Major Husbands led the horse, Lieut. Col. Axted the foot, Sir. Michael Levesey
charged gallantly with them, before I can tell you they fought, they ran. In
the charge Col. Riches Quarter Mr. and 3 troopers of ours were slain, 18
private soldiers wounded: Major Husbands had the heel of his hoot shot off,
the Lieut. Col. horse killed under him, but he was soon furnished with another
for the chase, in which 180 of the enemy fell (never to rise more) upon the
sands. Gibson their Major Genesis with 20 more Commanders and Officers, and 73
private soldiers taken prisoners, 300 arms, with abundance of brave pillage;
the Commanders so much gold and silver in their pockets, as if they had no need
of the Cities 20000 li.

I cannot hear that Capt. Johnson, that famous turne-coat was in this service,
as it is supposed, he is gone (with Battens Knight errantry) a sheep hunting
into Rumney Park; this defeat may probably cool the courage of those mutton
mungers; and (we hope) be a standard lifted up against the violence of your
London design. I pray inform me by the bea^er how you perceive the Adamites
affected with this signal victory: present my love and respects to all our
cordial Friends, and be assured I am,

Your much obliged friend to serve you, D. H.
Canterbury August 15. 1648.
A perfect Copy of a list of the Commanders and Offiers taken the 14 of August
1648. near Sandown Castle in Kent, as it was presented to his Excellency the
Lord General Fairfax.
MAjor General Gibson, Commander in chief.

Sir John Boyce, the old Rob Carrier of Dunington Castle, shot in the belly,
pricked in the neck, and wounded in the head with the But end of a musket.

Sir John Knotsford. Colonel Linsey. Sir John Corran. Sir Hugh Mahan --
sometimes servant to the Prince. Lieut. Col. Ball. Lieut. Col. Gambling. Major
Drure. Major Burrage. Capt. Hull. Capt. Right. Capt. Bourman. Capt. Corpe.
Capt. Poole. Mr. Hason. Mr. James. Mr. Blix. Lieut. Handen formerly Bosons
mate. Lieut. Castate. Lieut. Mashee an Irish man.
With 180 killed on the place, 73 private soldiers taken prisoners, and 300
Arms.

FINIS.

