Thankfulness in Grain: OR, A GOOD LIFE THE BEST RETURN.

Delivered in another Sermon on the same occasion in St. Dionis, Back-Church,
Aug. 14. 1653.

By NATH. HARDY, Master of Arts, and Preacher to that Parish.

Deuteronomy. 10. 12, 13. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee,
but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to
serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? To keep the
Commandments of the Lord, and his Statutes which I command thee this day for
thy good.

Aug. Meditat. Oportet me Domine tanto magis tibi gratiosum and devotum ad
serviendum promptiorem existere, quanto me de tantis beneficiis obligatiorem
conspicio in reddenda ratione.

Bern. Sermon. cont. ingratitud. Non verbo tantum, vel lingua, sed opere and
veritate exhibeamus nos gratos ei qui dator gratiarum Dominus Deus noster, qui
est benedictus in secula.

LONDON, Printed by T. W. for Nath. Webb, and Will. Grantham, at the sign of
the Black Bear in St. Paul 's Churchyard, near the little North-door. 165^

Sermons preached by Nathanael Hardy, M. A. and Preacher to the Parish of St.
Dionis Back-Church.
Justice Triumphing, or, The Spoylers spoiled, A Sermon preached on the 5th of
November in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's. The Arraignment of licencious
Liberty, and oppressing Tyranny, In a Sermon at a Fast before the Lords in
Parliament, in the Abbey-Church at Westminster. Faiths Victory over Nature, A
Sermon preached at the Funerals of Mr. John Rushout Junior. The safest Convoy,
or, The strongest Helper, A Valedictory Sermon before the Right Honorable Sir
Thomas Bendish Baronet, his Majesty's Ambassador to the Grand Seigniour at
Constantinople. A Divine Prospective representing the Just Man's peaceful End,
A Sermon at the Funeral of the Right Worshipful Sir John Gayr Knight. Love
and Fear the inseparable Twins of a blessed Matrimony, A Sermon occasioned by the
Nuptials between Mr. William Christmas, and Mrs Elizabeth Adams. Divinity in
Mortality, or, The Gospels excellency, and the Preachers frailty, A Sermon at
the Funerals of Mr. Richard Goddard, Minister of the Parish of St. Gregory's by
St. Paul's. Two Mites, or, A grateful acknowledgement of God's singular
goodness: In two Sermons, occasioned by the Author's late unexpected Recovery
from a desperate Sickness.
Printed and are to be sold by Nath. Web, and Will. Grantham, at the black Bear
in St. Paul's Churchyard, near the little North-door.

To the Right Worthy, and his much Honored Lady, the Lady Mary Saltingstall,
present prosperity, and future felicity.
Good Madam,
I Have now fulfilled your desire in publishing these weak notions. I hope you
will pardon me that withal I fulfill my own desire, which is by these lines to
let the World know my singular obligations to your Ladyship.

Among those many graces which adorn your truly Christian life, your cordial
love to the Orthodox Dispensers of the Gospel, is not the least; and it is so
much the more amiable, because in this apostatizing age, wherein the love of
many waxes cold toward, and the rage of some grows hot against them.

Indeed as for my own particular I have far less reason to complain than many
others of my Brethren, and those far more deserving than my self; it having
pleased Almighty God both to restrain my Enemies, and multiply my Friends
beyond expectation.

And truly, next to the infinite goodness of my God (which I desire for ever to
celebrate) and the no less faithful than skillful endeavors of my worthy
Physicians (which I shall always acknowledge) I must attribute my late (almost
miraculous) recovery, to the fervent intercessions of my affectionate Friends
at the Throne of Grace on my behalf.

To them all I return my hearty thanks, and promise my daily prayers for them,
and more especially for you (my honored Lady) whom I have reason to esteem as
none of the meanest among them, That your health may be prolonged, and your
troubles ended, your Children blessed, and your comforts enlarged; finally,
that you may sparkle as a Diamond here in grace, and hereafter shine as a Star
in glory, shall be the uncessant prayer of

Your Ladyships real Friend, and Servant in the Lord, NATH. HARDY.

Psalm. 116. v. 9. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living.
Man's present Condition is subject to frequent alterations; our life, like the
sea, ebbeth and flows; as the Moon, waxes and waineth, and, with the air, is
now Cloudie and anon clear, Nulla sors longa est, dolor ac volupt as Sen.
Thyest. Habet has vices conditio mortalium ut adversa ex secundis and secunda
ex adversisnascantur. Pli. paneg.
Invicem cedunt, says the Tragedian truly, we continue not long in one state:
the day has the vicisitude of an evening and morning, the year, of Winter and
Summer: health and sickness, adversity and prosperity, interchangeably succeed
each other in this our earthly pilgrimage. And now what more fit? then that as
our condition is mutable, so our disposition should be answerable; and our
spiritual frame be suitable to our temporal estate; To hope in adversity, and
to sear in prosperity; for health to be thankful, and under sickness to be
patient: finally in afflictions to seek God with tears, and after deliverance
to walk before him with joy, is a truly Religious temper. Thus was it with this
holy man David, whom we find in this Psalm, expressing this behavior under
both conditions; when he found trouble and sorrow, he called upon the Name of
the Lord; and when his Soul is delivered from death, he resolves upon walking
before the Lord in the words of the Text now read, I will walk, etc.

At the mentioning of this Scripture, I doubt not but you conjecture the reason
of my choosing it: and I hope (beloved) you will pardon me that as yet I preach
to my self, I shall be the fitter to preach to you; nay, let me tell you, as in
teaching you I speak to my self, so in admonishing my self I speak to you: what
lately was, and now is my condition, either formerly has been, or shortly may
be any of yours: besides the duty of the Text is such as concerns, not only
me but all here present to put in practice, as being that, without the
performance of which no man can order his conversation aright. Finally, if you
look back on the former subject, that calls for this, and this answers to
that, that is as the foundation, this, as the superstructure, both required to
a perfect fabric; that, as the doctrine, this, as the use, both requisite to a
complete Sermon; and therefore having from the former Scripture commemorated
the mercy; I conceived it very fit to mind both my self and you of the duty
from these words, I will walk, etc.

Indeed with little ado we may find both in this text. According to a
different reading of the first words I shall, and I will, the clause puts on a
several sense; if we read I shall walk, they are words of confident
expectation, if I will, they are words of obedient resolution. According to the
former, the Psalmist promises somewhat to himself from God, according to the
latter he promises somewhat of himself to God. Both these constructions are
probable and profitable; so that I shall omit neither: but yet having already
drunk deep to you in the cup of Gods salvation, I shall now only give you a
taste of that, and hasten to take the other Cup into my hand, to wit of
gratulation: and as I shall desire to begin my self, so I hope you will all
pledge me, that so this saving health may go round, every one of us resolving,
some for health continued, others for health restored, in the Psalmists words,
I will walk, etc.

Begin we then with that sense which represents the words as a confident
expectation of future preservation: I shall walk before the Lord in the land of
the living. Amplificat beneficium ab effectu liberationis, says a judicious
expositor, Interpr. 1. Moller. in loc.
the benefit of deliverance mentioned in the former, is amplified in this verse
from the effect he hoped would follow upon it: that having escaped so great
danger, his days on earth should now be prolonged.

So that in the words thus interpreted, there are these two things observable:
the matter, and the ground of his hope; in that, he looks forward to what is
to come, in this, backward to what was past; that which he hops for, is, to
walk before the Lord in the land of the living, that whence this hope did
arise, was a singular deliverance already vouchfed from death, tears, and
falling; and of each of these with all possible brevity and perspicuity.

That which the Psalmist here promises to himself Part. 1.
is double, to wit walking in the land of the living, and that before the Lord,
and so his hope appears to be both of a longer and a comfortable life.

1. I shall walk in land of the living. It is generally acknowledged In his
terris ubi mortalem vitam agimus. Muis in loc.
by interpreters, that this present world is here called the land of the
living, and it is so phrased in opposition to the grave, which is the land of
dead carcasses. Silence oblivion, darkness, death and corruption, are the
doleful attendants on those subterraneous parts; but this earth is the land of
commerce, and light, and life. From this land of the living, Isa. 53. 8.
the Messiah is said to be cut off, and in this it is that here David says, he
should walk. Walking is a continued progressive motion, wherein step is added
to step, and so fitly resembles prolongation of life, wherein days are added
to days. The confidence David had of this, is that which here he mentions
with joy, thereby intimating what esteem and account he had of this life, to
wit as a blessing to be hoped for and rejoiced in. This will the more appear,
if we observe how earnestly, when in danger, he deprecateth death. So in this
Psalm: Oh Lord, I beseech thee deliver my soul, and in another Psalm, Oh my
God, take me not away in the verse 4. Psalm. 102. 24. 6. 4.
midst of my days, and again, Return, O Lord, deliver my soul, oh save me for
thy mercies sake; all which plainly insinuate how precious life was in his
sight. The like temper is observable in Hezechiah, to whom when the message of
death came, it fetched tears from his eyes, sighs from his heart, and prayers
from his lips; nor was he less joyful at the reversing; than mournful upon the
denouncing of the sentence, witness the writing he pend upon his recovery. Nor
is this only an old Testament spirit, consult the practice of Christians under
the new Testament, and you shall find them looking upon life and death with
the same aspect: witness S. Paul, who speaks of deliverance from death, as a
thing which he did trust and hope for, and to that end desires Quis enim vult
mori^ prorsus nemo, and ita nemo ut Beato Petro diceretur alter te cinget and
feret quo tu non vis. Aug. de verb. Apost. Ser. 33. Joh. 10. 18. Matthew. 26. 39.
Joh. 12. 27. Neque enim hanc humanae naturae legem sancit ut turbidis animi
motibus omnino vacet, sed quod virtute perfici potest ut eos in potestate
teneat. Dam. paral. l. 3. c. 27.
the concurrence of the Corinthians prayers. Saint Peter, concerning whose
death Christ foretelling says, another should lead him whither he would not,
thereby signifying how unwelcome death would be to him. What speak I of Saints?
when our Lord himself prays in the Garden: Let this Cup pass, and before
that, Father save me from this hour. The truth is, desire of life is natural
to all men, and though grace do moderate, yet it does not extinguish natural
desire in good men: Besides life, says the Philosopher, is in its own nature
good, and being good in it self, must needs be so to a good man, yea to him
most good, and therefore most desirable.

It is a Meditation which seems to check the folly of those men who fancy a
kind of perfection in wishing, hoping and praying for an untimely death, and a
speedy dissolution. That this is but a dream will the better appear if you
consider, that

1. In some persons this is an argument of wickedness, when men either through
discontent at their present condition, or impatiency under affliction or
despair of Gods mercy, wish Hac autem vitae appetitio ut naturalis cum suis se
limitibus continet honesta est and in optimo quoque cernitur. Chresol.
Mystagog. l. 4. c. 2. (...). Arist. Eth. l. 9. c. 9. Philip. 1. 23. Ridiculum
est ad mortem currere ^aedio vitae. Ep^cur. apud Sen. Episto. 24. (...).
Doroth. doctr. 12. in B. P. T. 1. Gr. Lat.
themselves cut off from the land of the living; such desires are so far from
manifesting strength of grace, that they argue corruption to be prevayling. To
such persons that is very suitable which Chremes said to his son Clitipho, who,
being crossed in his desire, would needs dye: disce prius vivere, let them
first learn to live, ere they desire to die.

2. In the best of Gods Saints it is many times an argument of weakness, as
being an act of passion and frowardnes; such was Jobs expostulation, when he
says, wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life to the
bitter in soul? And Jonahs prayer, now O Lord I beseech thee, take my life
from me; nor are those good men to be commended but condemned Job 3. 20. John
4. 3.
for those passions.

3. Those desires which are the fruits of strong grace 2 Cor. 5. 4. 2. In hoc
i. e. propter hec scilicet mortem and dissolutionem quae inteevenire debet ut
vita hac transeamus ad aeternam ingemiscimus, Lapid. ibid. Ad regnum quippe non
potest nisi interposit a morte transire, and idcirco confidendo quasi ambigit
and quasi ambigendo confidit, and gaudens metuit and metuens gaudet Greg. l.
31. Mor. cap. 16.
and argue full assurance of Gods love are,

1. Not so much of death, as of that bliss which attends upon it: indeed,
Saint Paul says of himself, he had a desire to depart, but he presently
adds, and to be with Christ; the dissolution of his person, departure of his
soul from his body was not, could not be grateful to him in it self, but only
in order to that intimate union of his soul with Christ: and yet more plainly,
when he speaks of himself and his fellow Saints, he expresses it negatively
as well as affirmatively, not for that we would be unclothed, but clothed upon,
that mortality might be swallowed up of life: hence it is, that these
praeceding words, in this we groan earnestly, are by some expounded, because of
this, to wit the dissolving of our earthly tabernacle, we groan, as being
contrary to nature, though we desire to be clothed upon wih our house which is
from heaven, this being suitable to grace. The truth is, it is not this death,
but the other life which a godly man wishes for, or if he may be said to
desire death, it is not because his will chooses, but necessit, enforces it.
Thus the case stands, that eternal life cannot be enjoyed till death he passed
thorough, nor can the robes of glory be put on, till those rags of mortality be
put off, and on upon this account is death acceptable to a godly man.

2. Not Absolute and illimited, but conditional and submissive. When good men
in a right way desire to die, it is with this proviso, if it may stand with Gods
will, and tend to his glory: a godly man, though he be willing to die, he is
neither weary of the troubles, nor does he undervalue the comforts of life, and
whilst he is desirous to die for his own sake, he is ready to live for Gods and
the Churches. Indeed if you would know wherein the perfection of grace in order
Confirmandus est animus vel ad mortis vel ad vitae patientiam. Sen. ep. 24.
to life and death consists, it is in an indifferency to either, as God shall
determine; to live and die are acts of Nature, but to be willing to live or die
as God will, is an act of grace, and that in strength. So that indeed both
these declare a great measure of grace, on the one hand when Gods determination
appears to be for death, to rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and to be so
far from fearing, as in order to that glory to desire it: on the other hand,
when Gods pleasure is manifest for life, to rejoice in hope of bringing glory
to God, and not only to be well contented, but well pleased with the
continuation of our life, as David here expresses himself to be in saying, I
shall walk in the land of the living.

2. But what is it that renders this life the matter of David's desire and
hope?

Is it because (as the Papists imagine) the souls of the old Testament Saints
ascended not to heaven presently after death, but Limbus patrum est sinus
inferni intra terrae viscera, in quo anima Patriarcharum poenam damni
sustinuerint, ac liberationem per Christi ad inferos discensum cupide
expectaverint.
were detained in Limbo, til Christ by descending thither freed them thence,
and carried them with him to Heaven? no, beloved, this opinion is raised upon a
rotten foundation, as if the gate of Paradise were not open to believers before
the coming and death of Christ; whereas the Death of Christ, Profuit antequam
fuit, was effectual as to its merit, before it was in time: in which respect
among others he is called, the Lamb slain from the beginning of the world:
nay, besides our Savior expressly confuteth it, when speaking of Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, he says, they live to God, the sense Bellarm. 2. de Purgat. cap.
7. Rev. 13. 8. Luc. 20. 38. Matthew. 8. 11.
whereof can be no other, but that in their souls they (though dead) live with
God in bliss; and again, when he supposes Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, to
be in the Kingdom of Heaven, where he promises that many from the East and
Agnus Dei dicitur occisus ab origin mundi, non tantum ratione decreti
promissionis ac typorum in sacrifici^s sed etiam ratione fructus and efficaciae.
West shall sit down with them.

Or is it as some among our selves have fancyed, that the Saints of those times
had not a clear Revelation of that other world, nor attained any full
assurance of their future happiness? no, neither, the Author to the Hebrews
plainly affirms concerning Abraham, that he looked for a City which has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God: of Moses, that he had respect to
the recompense of reward, yea, of all Gerard. de morte par. 172.
those Patriarchs, that they dyed in faith, and this of an heavenly Country,
and this so strong, that it begat in them Hebr. 11. 10, 13, 16, 26.
an earnest desire after it.

If you would know the true reason, it is intimated in those words, before the
Lord, which are interpreted as noting either a duty or a mercy, and though the
former acception belong properly to the other construction, yet both may be
fitly made use of in this. Before God, that is, in his service, or before God,
that is, under his care.

1. I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living, that is, by
continuing in this world, I shall have opportunity of doing God service: It was
not because those holy men had less assurance of Gods love than we, but because
they had greater affections to Gods service then we, that this life was so
amiable in their eyes. To this purpose the reasonings of David and Hezechiah
concerning death, and the grave, are very observable, Shall the dust praise
thee? shall it declare Psalm. 30. 9.
thy truth, so David. The grave cannot praise, death cannot celebrate thee, so
Hezechiah; they saw death would render Is. 38. 18.
them useless sor Gods honor, and therefore principally they prayed against it.

It lets us see, what is the frame of a Religious man, to rejoice in life, that
he may walk before the Lord, and minister to him in the place wherein he has
set him. Indeed that joy, hope, desire of life which is founded upon this
consideration, is not only lawful but commendable: and truly herein is a vast
difference manifest between the wicked and the godly. To walk in the land of
the living is the wicked man's desire, yea were it possible he would walk here
for ever, but for what end? only to enjoy his lusts, have his fill of pleasure,
and increase his wealth: whereas the godly man's aim in desiring to live is
that he may walk before God, advance his glory, and perform his service. Upon
this account it is that one has Observa, quod non dicit versabor in deliciis
in urbe mea regia, sed versabor coram domino ^n terris viventium. Musc. in loc.
coram facie Jehovae. Moll. ibidem.
fitly taken notice how David does not say, I shall now satiate my self with
delights in my royal City, but, I shall walk before the Lord in the land of
the living.

2. And most suitably to this interpretation this before the Lord, is as much
as under his careful eye. The words according to the Hebrew may be read before
the face of the Lord, by which is meant his presence, and that not general
before which all men walk, but special, before which only good men walk.
Indeed in this sense God face is as much as his favor, and as to be cast out
of his sight or face is to be under his anger, so to walk before his face is to
be in favor Abjici a facie Dei est esse in indignatione Dei sic dicebat alibi
projectus sum a facie oculorum tuorum, nam it a solent abj^ci a facie principum
quibus i^li indignantur. Musc. in psalm. 56.
with him: so that the meaning is, as if the Psalmist had said, I shall live
secure and safe in this world under the careful protection of the Almighty. It
is not then barely living with which David was so much in love, but living
under Gods tuition. And this is the Confidence which he here seems to utter
with so much joy, that Gods gracious providence should watch over him the
remainder of his days. It is that which this holy man elsewhere expresses,
when he says, In the secret of his tabernacle he shall hide me, he shall set
me upon a rock; a rock is a place of strength and defense, Tutus degam inter
vivos sub favore Domini. Vatabl. in loc. Psalm. 27. 5.
the tabernacle a place of safety and refuge; this was Gods merciful presence
to David, securing him from all dangers.

This is that which not he alone, but all godly men may Tantundem mihi valet
atque agere sub ejus cura. Calv. ibid. Psalm. 33. 14. 34. 18. Verse 13.
assure themselves of. It is the positive assertion of the Psalmist, the eyes
of the Lord are upon the righteous, nay, in the preceding Psalm he ushereth it
in with an Ecce, Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: there
is an observing eye, the eye of his knowledge which is upon all men, so much is
affirmed at the 13. verse of that Psalm, the Lord looks from heaven, and
beholds all the sons of men: Aspectus divinitatis propriae munus est
conservationis humanae Salo. de Gub. Dei. l. 2. Psalm. 123. 2. (...) Bas. in
Psalm. 32. respicit enim Propheta ad hominum consuetudinem and praesertim
parentum nam qui liberos suos vehementur amant cos habent perpetuo and gest^ant
in oculis suis liberi igitur dicuntur ambulare coram facie and in oculis
parentum quos habent excubitores pro sua incolumitate and salute. Moller. in
loc.
but his preserving eye the eye, of his Care, is only upon his righteous ones
who fear him. Their eye is upon him in duty, as the eye of the Handmaid is upon
her mistress to serve her, his eye is upon them in mercy, as the eye of the
owner is upon his cattle to feed them. One upon the Text conceives in this
expression of walking before God an allusion to the practice of tender parents,
especially toward their little Children:

Omnis enim in not is chari stat cura parent is Such is for the most part, the
love of parents to their Children (especially when young) that they cannot
endure them out of their sight, but would always have their own eye upon them,
in which respect the Children may be said to walk before their parents: no less
is the Fatherly, yea Motherly affection of God toward his people, whom he
adopts for his children, and keeps ever in his sight. Hence is that sweet
expression of God to the Church, Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of
my hands, thy walls are continually before Isa. 49. 16.
me. It is the command given to Israel concerning the Commandments; Thou shall
bind them for a sign upon thine Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
hand, and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes, whereby is intimated
a sedulous care both in perusing and performing them; not much unlike is this
of Gods graving Israel upon his hands, and setting his walls before his eyes,
the intent thereof being to express the singular Care and mindful regard of
God to his Church, and which would not be past by, it is not a writing (that
may be blotted out) but an ingraving, and this ingraving is not upon the back
(then it might be the sooner rubd off or worn out) but upon the palms of his
hands; so firm and permanent is the Almighty's Care of his people.

To this purpose are those choice Metaphors which Moses uses concerning Gods
Care of Jacob (meaning his posterity) he led him about, to wit in the
wilderness, or as the septuagint Deur. 32. 10. 11.
translate, and the Hebrew will bear it, he compassed Tutum auxilium postulans
propheta, ait, custodi me Domine ut pupillam oculi, ut protectionis divinae
fieret eitam sollicita and tuta custodia quam pupillam oculi tutissimo quondam
naturae v^llo munere dignatus est. Ambros. (...) Hexam. l. 6. Psalm. 91. 1.
him about, to wit with his love, he kept him as the apple of his eye; no part
of man's body so strongly guarded by nature, nor which men are so tender of, as
the apple of the eye, so singular was Gods Providence toward Israel, yea that
he might most fully represent it, he compares God to an Eagle bearing her
young ones (not as her prey in her talents, but) on her wings, whereby they are
safe from all danger. Finally, upon this account it is that the godly man is
said not only to walk before, but to dwell in God, and abide under his shadow;
and surely as there must needs be safety in those walls where salvation is
appointed for walls, so there cannot but be security in his dwelling, to whom
the most high's secret becomes an habitation.

How happy is the condition of a Saint? whereas the Lord Prove. 15. 29. Psalm.
34. 18. Gen, 4. 16.
is far from the wicked, he is nigh to the good; Cain goes out from the
presence of the Lord, David continually walks before the Lord; the ungodly
are like straggling Chickens often snatched up by the devouring Kite, whilst
the godly are close under the hens wings; those like stray sheep wander up and
down, exposed to variety of dangers, whilst these being under the shepherds
care feed securely. Indeed no felicity like to that which is to be found in
Gods affection; nor safety to that of his Protection, Behold he that keeps
Israel shall Psalm. 121. 1.
neither slumber nor sleep, says the Psalmist; that which Cain refused to be
to his brother, God is to his servants, their keeper, yea so watchful a
keeper, that his eye is never off them day nor night, it closes not, no not so
much as winketh, it sleeps not by night, nor slumbreth by day, and therefore
well may they lie down and sleep in peace, yea rise up and walk without fear;
it is Saint Paul's challenge, if God be for us, who can be against us? let it
be the comfort of every ^ Romans 32.
Saint, none can be so against him as to prevail, because he walks before
God; and so much shall suffice for the matter pass we on to the

Ground of his hope, which will the better appear by Part 2.
the connection of the former verse with this, because thou have delivered I
shall walk; his confidence for the future is strengthened by his former
experience. It is that way of arguing; which David often uses. Thus in the 61.
Psalm, I will trust in the covert of thy wings, is his resolution, v. 3. For
thou have been a shelter for me, so he reasons, v. 2. and again Psalm. 63. 7.
Because thou have been my help, therefore under the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice, and once more in the 1 Samuel 17. 37. The Lord that delivered me out of
the paw of the Lion, and the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the
hand of this Philistin; nor is he alone in this kind of argumentation. Jacob
being pursued by his brother Esau in his prayer for deliverance pleads with
God that prosperity he vouchsafed him under Laban, by Genesis 32. 10.
which means he that passed over Jordan with his staff, was now become two
bands. Josuah having beheld one miracle in the discomfiture of the Amorites
from the ayri^ heaven, to wit great stones cast down upon them, is bold to
Josu. 10. 11, 12.
expect another from the starry heaven, and therefore calls upon the Sun to
stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon Videns primum signum datum de coelo ae^rio
ex hoc confidens petivit secundum de caelo sydereo. Lyr. ibid.
in the valley of Ascalon. For this reason it was that Daniel wrestling with
God for the peoples liberation out of Babylon, makes mention of his bringing
them out of Egypt, and thence emphatically infers a therefore, now
therefore, Oh Lord, hear the prayer of thy servant, and from the same
praemises S. Paul draws a like Conclusion, Who delivered Dan. 9. 15. 17. 2
Cor. 1. 10. 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. Isa. 26. 11. 63. 15.
as from so great death, and in whom we trust he will yet deliver, and again,
the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, I was delivered out of the mouth of
the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work. And (to name no
more) the whole Church upon this consideration addresseth Quasi diceret Rem
novam agis and insolentem cum enim soleas ex uno beneficio alia atque
aliaseriatim ducere, quid modo hanc telam interru^p^? cur non pergis nectere
hanc catenam? quersum ver^ cessas tu^^ me beneficiis cumulare? Mend. T. a.
her self to God with confidence, Lord, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou
have wrought all our works for us; and which is not unfitly taken notice of,
upon Gods suspending of his wonted favors she expostulateth with him: where is
thy zeal and thy strength? the sounding of thy bowels, and of thy mercyes
toward me? are they restrained? as if it were a strange and unwonted thing for
God not to renew his mercyes where he had formerly conferd them.

Indeed with God the Collation of one blessing is a sufficient reason of
bestowing more. As Saint Gregory speaking of the signs of the last day, says,
sequentium rerum certitudo est praet^ritorum exhibitio, the accomplishment of
some assures the fulfilling of all: So it is no less true of divine benefits,
the donation of former is a foundation for the superstructure of future gifts;
true it is, this kind of ratiocination prevails not with Apud Deum collatio
unius beneficii est ratio alterius conferendi. Mend. ibid.
men, they have done for us, therefore they must still; nay, it is accounted
impudence to expect or desire they should; some men's ability is cut short, they
cannot do as they have done, other men's minds are mutable, their affection
cools, and Greg. Mag. hom. 1. in Evang.
they grow weary of doing what they have done; but neither of these are in God
who changes not. Queen Elizabeth's Motto, Semper eadem, though in some sense
true of her Religious constancy, yet is most properly due to God who is, semper
idem, with whom is no variablenes nor shadow of Change. There is no
abbreviation of his hand nor alteration of his heart, both the fountain of his
power and treasure of his love are inexhaustible, and the everlasting God, the
Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is weary, to
wit of doing good to his people.

Let it therefore be the wisdom of Saints to treasure up experiences of Gods
goodness to others, chiefly to themselves, that they may be both encouragements
of faith, and arguments in prayer; That which may make us blush in our requests
to men, let it rather embolden us in our adresses to God, namely the bounty we
have already received from his hand. We many times cannot find in our hearts to
petition those whom we have often troubled before, but David considering what
God 1 Samuel 7. 18. 28.
had done for him and his house, and withal what he had promised to do,
therefore finds in his heart to pray a prayer to him. Indeed promises and
experiences are strong supports of our confidence when we go to God, and plead;
Lord, thou sayedst, thou will do me good, nay Lord, thou have been favorable
to me, he knows not how to deny our supplications. This is the confidence,
says S. John, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us,
and we may have confidence 1 John 5. 14.
that what we ask is according to his will, when it is no more but what he has
spoken, yea formerly vouchsafed. And therefore as Saul when David had
mercifully spared him his life, takes courage to implore favor for his seed:
so 1 Samuel 24. 22. James 1. 17. Isa. 40. 28. Videns ^um pronum ad misericordiam,
habita pro se misericordia una^, petit aliam prosemine suo. Lyr. ib^d.
let us upon the grant of one request be emboldned to put up another, and upon
the receipt of former mercyes encourage our selves to believe, hope, and desire
future; as here David in the text, because thou have delivered I shall walk*
And so much be spoken of the first interpretation of the words, proceed we now
to a larger insisting, on that which (as I conceive) is most genuine to the
Text and was chief in my intention of handling.

And that I may in this sense handle the words according to their just and fu^l
latitude I shall consider them both Int. 2.
1. Absolutely in themselves, and 2. Relatively in their connection.


In the former, we shall see what was David's resolution,

In the latter, what was the reason of that resolution:

The better to dispatch the first consideration of the words, Consid. 1.
observe in them 1. His resolving upon a duty, I will, and 2. The duty he
resolves upon, namely to walk before the Lord in the land of the living.


I will. Saint Bernards comment upon those words of the Part. 1.
Psalmist elsewhere, in thee will I trust, may very well serve Attend; quod non
dixerit speravi aut spero, sed sperabo, hoc inquit est votum meum hoc
propositum meum, haec intentio cordis mei.
as a Paraphrase on these words, I will walk, that is this is my desire, my
purpose, and the intention of my heart to walk before him, in reference to this
it is that David says elsewhere of himself, I have said that I will keep thy
word, nay more then so, I have sworn and I will perform it, that I will keep
thy righteous ^udgment, intimating that this was not barely his resolve, but
his oath, and that which he had not only promised but sworn to do. Be^n. in
psalm. qui habit. sermon. 2.


The like we shall find to have been the practice of other Saints in Scripture,
namely to consecrate themselves to God Psalm. 119. 57. 106.
by promise, thus Jacob voweth a vow, and what is the matter of it? but that
the Lord should be his God, not only on Genesis 28* 20. Josuah 24. 15.
whom to trust, but whom to obey. Joshuah takes up a resolution, both for
himself and his family to worship the true Obligat, se ad constantiam in
obedientia and cultu v^ri Dei Par. in Genesis De^^. 29. 10. 2 Chro. 15. 12. 13.
God, I and my house will serve the Lord; Moses after he had given the Law to
the people, causes them to enter into Covenant for the performance of it. And
to name no more Asah gathers all Judah together to swear unto the Lord, that
they would seek him, with an execration of him to death who did not keep it.

Nor is it without singular reason that godly men have taken this course, that
hereby both they might be the more, strongly obliged to God, and God to them.

1. These promises bind us the closer to God. To illustrate this, you must know
that religious promises are distinguished according to the objects about which
they are conversant; some are of things in their own nature ind^fferent, and
are called ceremonial, others are of things in themselves necessary, and
termed moral; those, though after promise we are bound to observe exactly, yet
before, we were Sunt etiam quaedam quae non voventes debemus, quaedam etiam
quae nisi voverimus non debemus, sed postquam ea Domino promittimus necessario
reddere const^ingimur. Aug. Si non vovisses quid aliud tibi suadendum suit aut
quid melius ab homine fieri potest, quam ut ei se restituat a quo institutus
est? id. ep. 45.
free to do or not to do; these, we were before tied to observe, but by this
means a further bond is laid upon us. There is indeed a sufficient obligation
in Gods Precepts to require our obedience, but when to his precepts we add our
own promise, it is so much the more engaging. True it is, the Creatures
natural obligation to its Creators command is so great that in it self it is
not capable of addition, but yet our voluntary promises serve to inflame our
lukewarmenes and stir up our backwardnes to obedience. Indeed a religious
resolution is as the putting of a new rowell into the spurr which makes it the
sharper, the twisting of another thread into the rope whereby it is the
stronger, or tying of a new knot whereby it is made the faster. And hence it is
that as God in condescension to our weakness has annexed an oath to his
promises, not to make them firmer in themselves, but to confirm us the more: so
godly men in consideration of their own dulnes adjoyne their promises to Gods
Precepts, not to strengthen their force in injoyning, but to quicken themselves
the more in observing.

2. These serious resolutions of serving God, bind him to us; When 1 King. 9.
3. Fill major vel arctior obligatio non per se quia creaturae summa est
obligatio Deo, sed per accidens seu ratione nostrae infirmita it is. Par. in Genesis
Solomon dedicated a Temple to God, God engages himself to be there present in
a special manner, and from thence to hear the prayers of his people: when we
promise to be Gods servants, what do we but consecrate our selves to be his
living Temples, and may not we then expect the like Quid ergo vovemus Deo nisi
ut simus Templum Dei? nihil gratius ei possumus offerre, quaem ut dicamus ei
quod dicitur in Esaia posside nos. Aug. in psalm. 128. Si nostra tueri non
vultis and vestrae defe^detis quicquid passuri sumus dedititii vestri patientur,
privilege? When the servant had by the boaring of his ear disclaimed the
benefit of the Jubilee and engaged himself to his master for ever, the master
could not but account himself obliged to take Care of, and provide for such a
servant; nor has Almighty God less respect to those who Cordially devote
themselves to the observance of his Laws. When the Campanians could not get
any aid from the Romans against a potent enemy, they came and solemnly
surrendered themselves to the Romans, that by policy they might oblige them to
their assistance; and certainly this resigning our selves into Gods hands, this
serious resolution of, I will walk before the Lord, is the best way to obtain
his vigilant protection over us.

But it may be here objected, what means David to say thus peremptorily? I
will? Saint Paul says, it is God who works in us to will and to do, and does
David attribute Phil. 2. 13.
it to himself, I will? what men resolve and promise must be what they are able
to perform, and is not walking before God more than he had ability to do? so
that this Act of devotion seems to be an Act of presumption, since whilst he
declares his will, he may be thought to presume too much upon his power.

To answer this briefly, you must know,

1. That which here David did, and the Saints in such Seber. Itiner. in Psalm.
resolves do promis, is but only to do their endeavor. The conjugation of the
verb is Hith pael, and may well be rendered conabor incedere, I will strive to
walk, what lies in me shall not be awanting. Though he might fail in the full
execution, yet this was his real intention. It is the temper of a good man even
when the flesh is weak, his spirit is willing; so Matthew. 26. 41. Romans 7. 18.
Volo sed* non valeo. Ans. in Romans
Paul says of himself, to will is present with me, but how to perform that
which is good I find not; some men's minds are larger than their purses, a
Saints heart is greater than his strength; he would do far more than he Can,
yea, what he Men's boni studii ac pii voti etiamsi effectum non invenerit c^pti
operis, habet tamen praemium voluntatis. Salv: do Gub. Dei. l. 4.
wants in the Can, he makes up in the will; God graciously accepting the will
for the deed.

2. Besides, it is not to be doubted but that David in taking up this
resolution, had an eye to divine assistance. What a good man promises in
Civil things is with respect to Gods will, and what in divine matters with
regard to Gods grace. I will do this or that (God permitting) is either
employed, or expressed in secular; I will walk (God assisting) is always to be
understood in sacred purposes. Hence it is that prayers still attend such
promises, and sincere resolutions are always backed with earnest supplication.
Therefore you may observe him who here makes this promise, I will walk,
elsewhere breathing forth that sigh, Oh that my ways were so directed Psalm.
119. 5. 25. 5.
to keep thy statutes, and putting up that request, Lead me in thy truth; yea
you may observe the Spouse in the Canticles Cant. 1. 4.
joining both a petition and a promise together, we will run after thee, there
is the promise, but first she praemiseth a petition draw me, thus pious souls
only resolve in the might of God, whose exciting grace puts them upon purposing
and assisting Nos dulciter and confidenter voveamus, ille dabit possibilitatem
ut reddere possimus, nos tamen quicquid illi promittimus de illo speremus. Aug
de Temp. Sermon. 5. Ezeck. 36. 27. Philip. 4. 13.
grace, strengthens them in performing what is good, and their confident
promises arise not from any trust in their own but a dependence on his
strength, and assurauce of his assistance.

Nor herein do they promise to do more than what God has promised; it is the
tenure of the new covenant, I will put my spirit within you, and Cause you to
walk in my Statutes; well may he steadfastly resolve who has Gods Spirit
powerfully to enable him; it was no pride nor presumption in Saint Paul to say,
I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me; the Spirit of Christ
in a Christian makes him after a sort Almighty; this Spirit is promised and
assured to every Saint, in the strength of which he may boldly say, I can, and
therefore resolutely, I will.

Let this practice be our pattern seriously and firmly to resolve upon
obedience. This was that to which Barnabas persuades the Antiochians, that with
purpose of heart they would cleave to the Lord. Indeed the foot will move but
Act. 11: 22.
slowly, or not at all, if the will be not resolved nor can it be expected, he
should Cleave to the Lord, whose heart is not steeled with a deliberate
purpose. Alas beloved, we no sooner begin to tread in this path but many
impediments will be laid to discourage us in our way, many solicitations used
to draw us out of the way, and if we be not resolved on the Jourtey, we shall
soon be persuaded to desist or turn aside. As a man pulling at a tree, if he
find it yielding, plucketh with the more violence, and a suter being but
faintly denied comes on with the stronger force, so will the Devil if he
find us faint in our purposes, wavering in our minds, the Contritio semper est
ex voluntate efficaci destruendi culpam commissam attritio ^onsemper cum possit
s^pe esse conjuncta cum peccato mortali. Filiuc. tract. 6. de contrit. c. 7.
more earnestly tempt, and not rest till he has vanquished us. Oh therefore
let us not content our selves with a sigh that we have been so bad, with a wish
that we might be better, but let it be our will, yea let that will be voluntas
firma and rata, solid and fixed in good. What the Schools say in the point of
repentance, distinguishing between attrition and contrition, that the former
non proponit peccare, does not purpose to sin; but the latter, proponit non
peccare, purpose to sin, but the latter proponit non peccare, purposes not to
sin; the like may be made use of in point of obedience, to distinguish between
velle it as and voluntas, or wishing and a willing, the one does not resolve
against, but the other is resolved for walking in the ways of God. Let this be
our temper, and to that end, let deliberation precede our resolution, and
consideration usher in determination. David did so, and therefore he says, I
have chosen the way of truth, thy Judgments have I laid before me. Indeed, he
cannot but resolve Psalm. 119. 30.
upon, and make choice of the way of piety, who lays before him the goodness,
the rectitude, and the pleasantness of that way. When the prodigal considered
with himself how well his Fathers servants fared, he thinks of, yea
determines to go home; I will arise and go to my Father. Oh Qui Deo non vult
reddere bona quae vovit ei, quomodo vult a Deo accipere bona quae ei Deus
promisit? non sis in verbis facilis and in operibus difficilis. Bern. de mod.
been viv. sermon. 62.
then, let every one of us deliberately set before our eyes the necessity, the
utiliry, the excellency of walking before God, that so we may come, to the
psalmists, I will.

But withal let us remember we must not stay here: The Son in the Gospel,
when his Father bad him go work in the vinyard, said, I will go Sir, but he
went not; those d^ssembling Israelites promise fair, all that the Lord has
spoken we will do, but they performed not faithfully what they pretended so
speciously. Oh far be this from us, that our good purposes should prove
abortive, and our promises dye for Luke 15. 17. 18. Matthew. 21. 30. Exodus 19. 8.
Genesis 31. 13.
want of execution. When God appeared to Jacob upon his return from Laban, he
tells him, I am the God of Bethel, by which expression he no doubt intends to
mind Jacob of the promise, not only made there by God to him, but likewise by
him to God; for so it follows, where thou vowedst a vow to me. God is the God
of pious resolutions, as to approve of them, when made, so to look after them
how they are made good; and let me tell you, To profane that heart which is
once consecrated to God; to faulter in the execution of what is solemnly
resolved in Gods service, is a fetching the sacrifice from the Altar, and will
certainly bring the Coal of fire along with it. Had thou never put in for the
title of a friend and votary, with an Oh God, my heart is ready to do thy will,
thou had not been perfidious, though profane; but by breaking thy promise,
thou addest the guilt of unfaithness Prima voti gratia est celeritas
solutionis. Ambros. de Abel. and Cain. l. 1. c. 8.
to that of disobedience, and thy sin becomes beyond measure sinful; and
therefore look on David once again, who as he says here, I will walk, so
elsewhere, I have walked in thy truth, there professing he had done what here
he resolves he will do. Nemo presumat viribus suis se reddere quod voverit,
qui te hortatur ut voveas ipse adjuvat ut reddas. Aug. in psalm. 128. Psalm. 26.
3. Eccles. 5. 4.


To this end, let us speedily perform what we have once deliberatly resolved.
As we do by a fickle and inconstant man, take him at his word, whilst we have
him in a good vein, lest in a short space he alter his mind: So let us deal by
our deceitful hearts. When thou vowest a vow to God defer not to pay; it is
the wise man's counsel, and indeed it is very wise counsel, defer not to put
in action what Gods Spirit has put into thy intention. Nor let any man think
to excuse himself by pleading inability, and saying, I would, but I cannot
fulfill my religious purposes: rather let him join earnest supplications with
his serious resolutions, and not doubt but he that has begun to work in him
the will, will also strengthen him to do. Oh my God, I would do what I ought,
Oh that I could do what I would; thou have in some measure wrought my will to
thy command, Oh work my power to thy will, that I may not only will to desire
but do thy will; thou have been pleased to put, Oh keep it for ever in the
imagination of the thought of the heart of thy servant, to walk 1. Chro. 26. 18.
before thee; and so I am fallen on the duty which here David resolves upon,
namely to

Walk before the Lord in the land of the living. For the more methodicall
discussing of which, be pleased Part. 2.
to observe these three particulars.

The matter, the manner, and the season or place of performing this duty.

So that here we have an answer to three or four questions; if you would know,
What he resolves, it is to Walk. How he would walk, before the Lord. When and
where, in the Land of the living, namely in this world, which is the place; or
whilst he should be living in this land, and so it notes the time of his
walking before the Lord.


Of each of these in their order, beginning with the matter of this resolve,
which is to

1. Walk, In the handling of this both the verb, and the conjugation are
considerable.

The verb in its proper acception signifies a motion of the body, which we
call walking, but, per metaphoram de vita, Buxt. lex. L^r. in loc.
moribus, actionibus usurpatur, Metaphorically it is applied to the manners and
conversations of men, and that not without just reason. Men sit at home, but
commonly when they walk, it is abroad; fitly therefore are our external
actions represented by walking.

So that that which here David resolves upon, is the same with what elsewhere
he calls an ordering the conversation aright, and this I will walk, is as
much as if he had said, I Psalm. 50. 23.
will endeavor to lead a regular and orderly life.

It would not here be passed by, the seeming contradiction in the Psalmists
expressions; At the seventh verse he says, return to thy rest, Oh my Soul; and
here he presently says, I will walk; how can these two stand together? Motus
and quies privative opponuntur, says the Philosopher, motion and rest are
opposite; now walking is a motion, as being an act of the locomotive faculty;
How then could David return to his rest, and yet walk? an objection somewhat
specious, but the strength of it is easily enervated, and the difference
quickly reconciled.

To which end, you must know, that the walking and rest here mentioned, being
of a divine nature, do not oppose each other; spiritual rest makes no man
idle, and therefore it is no enemy to walking; spiritual walking makes no man
weary, and therefore it is no enemy to rest. Indeed, they are so far from being
opposite against, that they are subservient to each other, and it is hard to
say, whether that rest be the cause of this walking, or this walking a cause of
that rest. Indeed both are true, since he that rests in God cannot but walk
before him, and by walking before, we come to rest in God. Returning to rest,
is an act of confidence, since there is no rest to be had but in God, nor in
God but by a believing assiance in, and reliance on him. Walking before God, is
an act of obedience; when we disobey, we wander and go astray, only by
obedience we walk. Now these two are so far from being enemies, that they are
companions and ever go together, confidence being a means to quicken obedience,
and obedience to strengthen confidence; That confidence is not a spiritual
rest, but a Psalm. 37. 3. 52. 8.
carnal security, which hopes in the promise, and yet obeys not the Precept;
very observable therefore is both David's Quasi diceret, non otiosus, neque
desidiosus, neque infructuosus in Deo sperabam, sed oleo charitatis delibutus,
and bonorum operum fructibus locupletatus, instar oliv^ fructiferae meam in Deo
fiduciam reponebam. Mend. T. 2.
assertion and exhortation elsewhere; his assertion concerns himself, I am like
a green Olive Tree, I trust the more in God, intimating that the lamp of his
confidence was fed with the oil of good works; his exhortation is to others,
Trust in the Lord and do good, implying, that a right trust in God puts upon
doing good, and a sedulous doing good emboldneth to trust in God, so that these
two not only may, but must meet together in every Saint, return he ought to his
rest, but withal he must walk.

To let this go, and return to what has been already hinted. That which is
here especially considerable is, that David resolves to look to the regulating
of his life, and the well ordering his external actions. If you cast your eyes
on the first Qui spem in Deo sixam habet and per illam laborare and laboriosos
virtutis fructus producere non recusat Theod. in psalm. 51.
verse of his Psalm, you find a profession of love, I love the Lord, if on the
second, a promise of prayer, I will call on the Lord, if on this verse, a
resolve of walking, I will walk before the Lord. There are three things should
be the object of a Saints care, the devotion of the soul, profession of the
mouth, and conversation of the life; that is the sweetest melody in Gods ears,
when not only the voice sings, but the heartstrings Magnificatur Deus in nobis
apud incredulos and infideles, si secundum praecepta Domini vivamus, si bonis
operibus luceamus. Chromat. in Matthew. cap. 5. Matthew. 5. 16.
keep tune, and the hand keeps time; all of these are observable in good
David, with his heart he loves God, with his lips he calls upon God, in his
life he walks before God; and truly, this last ought not to be the least of
our care, and that in respect of God, others, our selves.

1. It is our walking that glorifieth God. So much our blessed Savior
expresses, when he calls upon his Disciples, and in them all Christians, to
let their light shine before men, to wit the light of grace within, shine in
the actions of their lives without, that men seeing their good works might
glorify their Father which is in heaven; a good heart delights God, but it a
good life honors him. It is the fruitfulnes of the vineyard which credits
the husbandman; when we John 15. 8.
bring forth much fruit then is our Father glorified. 1 Cor. 7. 16. De
dilectione conditoris lingua men's and vita requirantur Nunquam est Dei amor
oliosus, Operatur etenim magna si est: si vero operar^ renuit amor non est.
Greg. in Evang. hom. 30. Signum amoris non est in affectione ani^^i, sed in
sludio bonae operationis. Id. lib. 1. Reg. c. 4. James 2. 16. Luke 6. 44.


2. It is our walking that edifyeth others. It is not fire in the embers, but
fire that flameth forth which warmeth; it is not grace in the heart; but in the
life that profits; if the believing husband would gain the unbelieving wife,
or wife the husband, S. Paul's advise is, so let him walk; if we would be
exemplary to others, it must be in walking before others; it is not our inward
disposition, but our outward conversation which has an influence on them with
whom we converse.

3. It is our walking that in some sense justifies our selves. Nothing so
truly speaks a man as his conversation; a man is not always what he seems
or says, but he is what he does.

1. This justifies the reality of our inward disposition to man. God indeed
judges the actions by the affections, but men judge of our affections by our
actions. Show me thy faith, says Saint James by thy works; so say men, show us
your faith, your love, by your works; Every tree is known by its fruits, says
our blessed Savior, by what we do men know what we are. Psalm. 119. 32. Vbi est
ignis divinae dilectionis flammas immittit per senestras oculorum, or^^, manuum
and pedum. Guadalupe in Luc. 1 John 5. 3. John 14. 13. Nam sicut nihil est tam
leve quod ei non grave sit qui invitus facit: sic nihil est tam grave quod non
^i qui id libenter exsequitur leve esse videatur. Sal. de gub. Dei l. 1. ^vota
intentio ac commendanda spes si facta respondissent intentioni ac spei. Cajet.
in Reg. l. 1.


2. Yea this justifies the truth of our good affections in themselves. Indeed
an heart enlarged will not only walk, but run the way of Gods Commandments;
and therefore says S. Gregory, where love is present there will be a
proportionable acting, and if there be a refusing to act, it argues love to be
absent. The truth is, love is neither idle, nor weary, it is willing to walk,
and the walk seems easy; so much S. John expresses, when he says, this is
the love of God, that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not
grievous.

3. Nay, yet once more, this justifies the sincerity of our intentions in the
sight of God. They are Christ's express words: If any man love me, he will keep
my commandments; only the obedient, is an acceptable lover in Christ's
account; yea his Judicial proceeding at the last day will not be according to
what is within, but what is without, nor will God only, or so much enquire at
that day, what thy thoughts or thy desires have been, as what thy actions have
been. Oslende mihi, id est ut placeat mihi, and ellam ut mihi sis honori,
faciem tuam, id est operationem tuam. Ans. in Cant.


Let none therefore flatter themselves in their good meanings, devout
affections, pious intentions, whilst yet their lives are barren and fruitless;
as men do not gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, so neither can
thorns be gathered from grapes, nor thistles from figs; and as we cannot expect
a clean thing from an unclean, so neither an unclean Oslende mihi aspectum tuum
and opera tua bona. Par. Called. in Ghist. super Cant.
thing from a clean. It is a mere delusion to think that an holy heart can
consist with a profane life, nay to allude to Saint John's expression, if any
may say he love God, and walks not before him, he is a liar: Since his
practice gives the lie to his pros^ssion, and the dissonancie of his life
proclaims a no to what he says with his lips. And therefore let us all think
we hear Christ speaking to us as he did to his Spouse, Let me see thy
countenance, to wit in good works, Matthew. 17 16. 1 John. 4. 20. C^nt. 2. 14.
so the Chaldoes Paraphrase, as well as hear thy voice; and again, Set me as a
seal upon thy heart, as a signet upon thy arm, not only upon thy heart by a
pious affection, but on thy arm by a religious conversation; this is that which
David here purposed, when he says, I will walk.

2. The Conjugation is no less Observable than the verb, as giving to it the
signification of a frequentative; hence the same word is rendered elsewhere a
going on, and here by Vatablus, (...) me ut sig^aculum in cord tuo quo fides
t^a pl^no fulgeat sacrament^, ut signaculum super br^chium tuum quo opera (...)
luce^nt.
continenter ambulabo, I will continually walk; so that we have hereby some
thing further expressed concerning the matter of David's resolve, namely a
progressive constancy in a religious conversation. That you may discern what
plain footing this truth has in this Scripture be pleased to trace it in these
three steps:

1. The Metaphor it self of walking, intimates so Amb. de in it. ^ lib.
Signaculum Christus in f^onte est, signaculum in cord; in front, ut semper
(...); in co^de, ut semper diligamus; signaculum in brachi^, ut semper
operemur. Id. de Isaac and an. Verhum (...) in qu^rta conjugatione habet
significationem, verborum frequent ativorum ^^ud L^tinos. Moll. in Pasl.
Vatabl. in lo^.
much.

To walk is not to take a step or two, in a path, but to continue going, till
we come to our journeys end; nor is it only a continued, but a progressive
motion, every step a man takes, he gains more ground, and is so much nearer
the term of his motion.

2. The conjugation carries in it an addition to the verb; walking implies a
repetition of steps, and this a frequency of walking; indeed the most proper
signification of it, is reciprocal, but sometimes it is frequentative, and in
this verb, it is most suitably so to be construed, assidue, continuo ambulare,
Buxt. lex.
to walk on daily and constantly.

3. The meaning of those words, in the land of the living, may be understood in
the same sense, with those at the second verse, as long as I live; and so they
confirm this truth; David's purpose is, to serve God, not only for a day or a
year, but always, during the whole time of his abode in this world.

This then is the pattern here set before us, as not to be good only within,
but without; so not only to be good, but better, yea to hold fast our goodness
to the end.

Indeed as the moralist says, una actio non denominat, it is not one action
that denominateth a man, either, virtuous, or vicious; no man so evil but may
do some good, nor so good but may do some evil; on the one hand we find Cain
sacrificing, Saul Prophesying, Jezabel fasting, Ahab humbling, and the
Pharisees praying; on the other hand we may observe, a Noah overtaken with
wine, a Lot committing Incest, a David falling into adultery, and a Peter
guilty of perjury: (...) etc. Bas. in psalm. 14.
It is not then particular acts, but the general course of the life, by which
we must judge, either our selves or others. Apposite to this purpose is Saint
Basils note on these words of the Psalmist; he that walks uprightly: It is
not he that has walked, but he that does walk: for one action does not speak a
man good, but his frequent practice. Indeed this is that which differenceth a
godly from a wicked man, the wicked man like the thief may sometimes cross the
Kings high way, but still his walk is in bypath; the godly man may sometimes
be drawn aside into a by-path, but still Religion is his road; and therefore if
thou would pass a right censure, observe these two things, the constant bent
of thy heart, and course of thy life; ask thy self, what is my love, whither
tends my walk? and accordingly judge righteous judgment.

And as this must be the rule of thy censure, so let it be the Ad explicandum
quod ab ineunte aetate profecit in viz Dei and perseveravit proficiendo in ea
samper. Cajet. in Genesis
scope of thy endeavor to walk constantly in the way of righteousness. We read
concerning Henoch, that it is twice said, he walked with God; once about the
beginning of his age after he begat Methuselah, and again before his
translation, to intimate his continuance in that walk, till the end of his
life; It is that which the Scripture calls for, under Quae loquendi ratio
constantiam animi significat and invictum robur, sive ittam ducat exquisita
cognitione praeditus Apostolus a gladiatorio ludo and castris, nam gladiator
and miles stare in gradu dicuntur, sive a columnis quae (...) stare in hasi
dicuntur Symbolo filmitudinis and solidae coustantiae.
the Metaphor of standing, as well as walking; so the Apostle Paul advises the
Ephesians, having done all, to stand, as a pillar in the building:
(perseverance being the pillar of obedience) or rather as a soldier in the
field who keeps his ground. It is the desire of David that the lifting up of
his hands might be as an evening sacrifice; Saint Chrysostom asks the
question, why not as a morning sacrifice? and he answers it aptly to this
present purpose, because the morning sacrifice expects the evening, but when
the evening is done, the service of the day is finished: such would David have
his service to be, not only begun, but completed. Very fitly is this
expressed by that phrase of supping with Christ; it is not enough to break our
fast with him by good beginnings, nor yet to dine with him by some forward
progress, but we must sup with him by constant perseverance, till at last we
lie down in the bed of the grave, and sleep the sleep of death. The truth is,
Cresol. de virtur. T. 2. cap. 1. Sect. 4. (...), etc. Chryfost. in psalm. 140.
Hieron in Galat.
non tam initia sunt in bonis studiis spectanda quam finis, it is not so much
to get as to keep the faith, to have done well, as to continue doing to the
end; and he must carry his goodness to the grave, who will have it carry him to
heaven. The sacrifice which we offer to God must have a tail as well as an
head, and the coat of piety must be not only parti-colored, for variety of
graces, but down to the heels by perseverance.

Nor yet is this all, having begun, we must continue, and in continuing we must
move forward from step to step, grace to grace. It is said of Aarons rod, that
it brought forth buds and bloomed blossoms, and yielded Almonds: whereby is
shadowed Ephesians. 13. 14. Rev. 3. 20. Numb. 17. 8.
forth the daily progress of a Saint, from the buds of thoughts to the blossoms
of words, from the blossoms of words to the Almonds of works, or (as Origin)
from the Buds of Est ergo primum germen prima hominis in Christo confessio,
secundo frondescit ubi renatus donum gratiae Dei ex Spiritus Sancti
purisicatione susceperit, inde affert flores ubi proficere coeperit and morum
suaevitate decorari ac fragrantiam misericordiae and benignitatis effundere,
etc. Orig. hom. 9. in number.
beginnings, to the Blossoms of increase, yea the Almonds of perfection. As God
in the Creation proceeded, from imperfect, to more perfect Creatures, Plants to
Beasts, Beasts to Man: so must we, from one degree of goodness to another. Nor
must we only hold out till we come to the end, but as we draw nearer the end,
run the faster: and (to use St. Chrysostom's comparison) as Pilots, having
passed many storms, are exceeding solicitous, lest they should miscarry in
their approach to the Haven; or as Runners put themselves forth the most, when
they approach nearest the Goal: so should we, as every day we are nearer the
Grave, draw nearer Heaven. Our goodness must not be like the Morning-Cloud,
that quickly vanishes, but like the rising Sun, that shines brighter; not
like the early Dew, that is soon dried up, but like the green Olive Tree, which
flourishes more and more: And as the last Wine of the Feast was the best, so
our last Works be better than our first. Though then Parum est adipisci aliquid
potuisse plus est quod adeptus es posse servare. Cypr. Epist 7. (...), etc.
Chrysostom. in Genesis orat. 30.
we must stand as it is opposed to going backward, or running away, yet we must
not stand as it is opposed to going forward, or walking on: We are not at the
end of our race, till the end of our life; and therefore must not think of
staying in the way, but of hastening to the end. The Man cured of his Palsy
must not only rise, but take up his Bed, and go to his House, Math. 9. 6.
Christ calls upon his Love not only to rise, but come away; and that not once,
but again, Cant. 2. 10. 13. Non operis boni, sed mali feriae sunt, says St.
Ambrose; We must cease from sin, but not from good; a Saint keeps every day
as an Holy Day in respect of peace of conscience, and yet every day as a
work-day in respect of the actings of grace. Christ healed them that were sick
on the Sabbath Day, as well as on any other; to intimate, that there is no day,
no not the day of rest, wherein we may cease from Semper add, semper ambula,
semper profice, noli in via remancre. Aug. Sermon. 15. de verb. Apost. (...). Gr.
Nyss. in Cant. Ambros. in Luc. 13. Bern. epist.
religious actions; Vera virius finem nescit, Grace, like Fire, is of a
restless nature, still ascending. Thou must never say with the rich Fool, Soul
take thy ease, but still resolve with David, I will walk. And that thou may
not err in thy walking, be sure to perform it in the right manner; and that is,

2. Before the Lord; the particular that comes next to be handled. If you
please to observe the Scripture Phrase, you shall find three several
expressions frequently used; to wit, walking with God, after God, and before
God; postures which in a literal sense are inconsistent: It is impossible for a
Man at the same time to walk before and after another; and if he walk with, he
is neither before nor after. But all of these in a spiritual sense may well
agree together; nay the truth is, they are all one in substance, though yet
each has its particular and emphatical signification.

1. It is said of Enoch, that he walked with God, Genesis 5. 22. and that implies
an heavenly, holy, and humble, yet familiar enjoyment of God in our way. Can
two walk together and not be agreed? Amos, 3. 3. is the Prophets question,
thereby intending a negation; God and a Saint are agreed and acquainted,
because they walk together.

2. It is said of Josiah, that he made a Covenant to walk after the Lord, 2
King. 23. 3. in opposition to which is the phrase of walking after other Gods,
and the imaginations of their own hearts, Jer. 16. 11. and it imports as much
as a following those directions God has given us in his Word, especially in
matters of his Worship. He goes before us, as it were with the light of his
Word in his hand, and we are to follow after.

Finally, It is God's prescript to Abraham, Walk before me, and be perfect,
Genesis 17. 1. and that is, when (as to allude to that known expression) Manus ad
clavum, oculus ad coelum, as our hand is upon the work, so our eye upon God in
every thing we do; which is the ground of that uprightness called in the
Scripture-dialect, perfection.

In sum, we walk with God, as a sweet Companion; after God, as a commanding
Lord; before. God, as an observing Judge; we walk with him, as his Friends;
after him, as his Servants; before him, as his Children; finally, we walk with
him, by an humble familiarity; after him, by a regular conformity; before him,
by a cordial integrity; and this is David's resolve, I will walk before the
Lord.

To give you the full meaning of this phrase, be pleased to consider three
things in reference to a Saint's walk which these words, before the Lord, may
instruct us in; namely, the right way wherein he must go; the special motive to
incite him to his walk; and the principal end whereat he ought to aim: Of each
a word.

1. Before the Lord, intimates the way; and that either in particular, or in
general.

1. In particular; the way of God's worship, and so to walk before the Lord,
is, Occupatum esse in cultu Dei, to be frequently Lorin. in loc.
conversant in religious performances; so that this ambulare may be interpreted
by adorare coram Domino, I Musc. ibid.
will walk, as much as, I will worship before the Lord. Coram Domino intelligo
de Tabernaculo Domini, Before the Lord is as much as in the Tabernacle of the
Lord; where was the Ark, a sign of his special presence; whither David
resorted, that he might give God the worship due to him, Psalm. 75. 6. So that
we may expound this walking before God by that which he says elsewhere, I will
dwell in the House of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23. 6. Indeed in respect of this
constant residence in God's House to offer sacrifice, the Priests are said to
walk before him, 1 Samuel 2. 30. For though God be everywhere, yet he is more
peculiarly present in his House: The whole World is his Court, but the Church
his (...). Chrysostom. in Cor. Ep. 1. Sermon. 36. Psalm. 95. 2.
Chamber of Presence. Well then may they who serve at his Altar be said to walk
before him. Nor is it only true of them, but of all who frequent God's House,
since then they come before his presence, and draw nigh to him in a more
special manner.

That then which according to this exposition we may observe, is, the temper of
a godly man, what he takes most delight in, gives himself to, and desires to
employ himself about, to wit, God's immediate worship and service, and that
especially in the Public Assemblyes. What Pleasure is to the Voluptuous,
Honor to the Ambitious, Wealth to the Covetous, Applause to the Vainglorious,
that is God's worship to the Religious, the Chief, nay the All he delights in.
And therefore this holy Prophet elsewhere makes this his one, nay only request
to God (which being granted, it matters Non divitias quaero and potentiam, nec
regnum and gloriam verum divino Templo continuo assidere, etc. Theodor. in
Psalm.
not what else is denied him, and which he would not cease seeking after till
it were granted him) that he might dwell in the House of the Lord all the days
of his life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and enquire in his Temple, Psalm.
27. 4. Indeed as a Mole in the Earth, a Fish in the Sea, a Bird in the Air, so
is a Saint in the House of God, to wit, as in his proper place: no wonder if
David desire to dwell in it all his days. In God's House it is that God
manifests himself to his Servants, and his Servants behold his Beauty, ask
his counsel, and sweetly converse with him; well may the Psalmist not only
desire, but seek after it. So amiable is communion with God to a pious man,
that even in earthly businesses he has heavenly thoughts; and whilst he
walks before men in civil conversation, he is still with God in spiritual
affections. Surely then, he cannot but be in love with Religious Duties,
wherein he so immediately converseth with, and walks before God.

2. In general; the way of God's commandments, and so to walk before God, is,
to walk ad nutum and voluntatem Dei, in that way which God is pleased to set
before us: Ex ejusdem Lorin. in loc. Ambulare coram Deo est semper esse
paratum, expeditumque atque intentum ad id quodcunque velle ac ^ubere Deum
noverit prompte and alacriter exequendum ut solent esse Ministri ac seni in
conspectu Dominorum suorum. Perer. in Genesis 17.
praecepto velle omnia facere and vivere, to resign up our selves to the
guidance of God's Word and will in all things. It is said of Zachary and
Elizabeth, that they were righteous before God, Luke 1. 6.
walking in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless: where one phrase
explaineth another. So that if you would know what it is to be righteous before
God, it is to walk in all the Lord's Commandments. What other exposition need
we, or better can we have of this phrase, than God himself gives in that
speech of his to Solomon; If thou walk before me as David thy Father walked, to
do according to all that I have commanded thee, 1 Chronicles. 7. 14. Wherein is
plainly intimated, that to do according to all God's commands, is, to walk
before him. So that this phrase of walking before (in this sense) is much like
that of standing before: And as Servants stand before their Lord ready to
perform his injunctions, or Scholars before their Master to receive his
instructions, so do holy men before God to sulfill his prescriptions.

It informs us in the character of a true Saint; he is one who walks before
God, avoiding what he forbids, performing what he commands, and so making
his Law Hac lucerna accensa est in omni verbo, and omni opere, ad hanc lucernam
gressus noster forensis internusque moveatur. Ambros. in Psalm. 118. oct. 14.
the rule and square of all his actions. This is that which elsewhere this holy
man more expressly professes, when he says, Ps. 119. 105.
Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a Light unto my paths, namely, to guide
him in all his actions both inward and outward, of heart, and tongue, and hand.
A true Saint dares not go a step further than this light goes before him; nor
will he refuse to go whithersoever this Lamp leads him; Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears, said Samuel, 1 Samuel 3. 9. when God appeared to him. Lord, what
will thou have me to do? Act. 9. 6. was Paul's voice when Christ manifested
himself unto him. This is a truly pious temper, when our heart ecchoeth to
God's voice, and we are willing to obey whatsoever he is pleased to command. O,
my Brethren, often ask your selves these Questions, Before whom do I walk? At
whose command am I? What are my ways? Does the Spirit or the Flesh govern me?
Is carnal reason, or God's Word, my rule? Believe it, only they who walk
before God now, shall with joy appear before him hereafter; and only they who
walk in the way of his precepts, do in a religious sense walk before him.

2. Before the Lord may very fitly be construed by subejus oculis, to walk, as
remembering that we are under his eye, and all our actions obvious to his
inspection: In which Ambulare coram Deo est semper intueri Deum quasi
praesentem sibi and idcirco cautissimum moderatissimum and devotissimum Deo
semper incedere. Perer. in Genesis Prove. 3. 6. ^
sense they carry in them a singular motive to, and help in the right ordering
our conversation, namely, a serious consideration of God's presence.

It is the counsel of the Wise Man to his Son, In all thy ways acknowledge
him, and he shall direct thy path: The Vulgar Latin reads it, Cogita Deum,
in every thing thou take in hand think on God: And truly the very thought of
God (if serious) would be an excellent means to direct our paths. He must needs
walk right who does nothing to which he dare not crave God's assistance, or
from which he would desire God's absence. Thus did that pious Father
acknowledge God, which made him say, Lord, whatsoever I do, I Quicquid facio
ante te facio, and illud quicquid est quod facio melius vides quam ego qui
sanio. Aug. Solil. Cum nos videri non credimus in sole clausos oculos tenemus.
Illum videlicet nobis abscondimus, non nos illi. Greg. Moral. l. 25. c. 4.
do it before thee; and whatsoever it is I do, thou know it better than I
who do it. The same, David elsewhere expresses to have been his temper, when he
says, All my ways are before thee, Psalm. 119. 168. and again, I set the Lord
always before me, Psalm. 16. 8.

Indeed we are before God even when we will not set him before us. To persuade
our selves God does not see us, is but to shut our eyes whilst the Sunbeams
shine upon us: We may by this means hide God from our selves, but we cannot
hide our selves from God: How much better therefore is it for us all to make a
virtue of necessity, by keeping our eyes on him whose eye is always upon us!

Were this duty of walking (in this sense) before God well practiced, how
would it teach us to walk before our selves! Qui vitam suam sollicitus aspicit
quia se ante se ponit, coram se ambulat. Id. in Ezekiel. l. 1. hom. 5.
and the thought of divine inspection put us upon diligent circumspection. The
truth is, look we never so narrowly into, watch we never so carefully over our
selves, God will see those faults in us which we see not in our selves. No
marvel if the consideration of a divine aspect make us to say, We will take
heed to our ways, Psalm. 39. 1. Indeed this it is which will be both a bridle
to our sins, and a spur to our graces, Sancti viri tanto se subtilius in
cogitatione constringunt quanto a superno judice districtius considerari
conspiciunt, etc. Id. Mor. l. 21. c. 4. Plut. de Util. cap. ab host. Sen.
Epist. 11.
keep us from wandering, and inoite us to walking.

1. He that walks before God cannot but stand in awe of his presence, and
therefore dare not wander into bypath. A Conjurer being brought before that
holy man, Mr. Tindall, professed he could not do any of his feats in his
presence: Much less would we dare to act any wickedness, did we walk in God's
sight. Plutarch advises Men to live as if their Enemies were their continual
Overseers. Seneca, as if Cato, Laelius, or some grave Man were their
Supervizor. If the imagination of their presence would lay upon Men a great
Nullum majus fraenum, nulla efficacior ratio componendi mores quam ambulare
ante fociem principis. Cajet. Magna nobis indicta est necessita^ recte vivendi,
qui omnia facimus ante oculos judicis cuncta cernentis. Boe^, de Consol.
restraint, how much more would the meditation of Gods, who is really and
continually present. What Man would be so impudent as to steal before the
Judges face? or act any thing unseemly in his Princes sight? Would it not then
be a great curb to our licenciousness, did we consider Antonin. hist. part. 2.
c. 15. Agens propheta sub Judice and Scrutatore cordium Deo in custodia
mandatorum Dei permanet. Non vias seculi, neque vias vitiorum inc^dit, etc.
Hilar. in Psalm. 118.
that the King of Kings, and Judge of all the World looks on? And in as much
as God's presence is universal, this restraint will be general, not only from
open, but secret wanderings, in the closet as well as in the street, of the
heart as well as of the life. Ecclesiastical History tells us of some notorious
Strumpets whom this argument has converted, That God sees in the dark, when
the Doors are fast, Windows shut, and Curtains close: Surely he dare not sin
any where, who pondereth this duly, that God is every where.

2. Nor will this walking before God only bridle sin, but quicken grace, by
the fear of God not only filthiness is cleansed, but holiness is persected. A
Noble, and much more a Royal Spectator, puts any one upon much diligence in the
execution of any action: He that remembers God beholds him, cannot but be very
exact and sedulous in his performances, Deus totus oculus est quia omnia videt,
totus manus est quia omnia operatur, totus pes est quia ubique est. Aug. Epist.
111. Est prosecto Deus qui cuncta quae facis videt and judicat. Horat. Capt.
that though they cannot be worthy of, yet they may be some way meet for so
glorious a Majesty. O therefore let that of Solomon be often in our minds, The
eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15.
3. or that of the Apostle, All things are naked and open to his eyes with whom
we have to do, Heb. 4. 12. or that of St. Augustine, God is all Eye, which
therefore cannot be deceived, because it is never closed; or, if you will, that
of the Poet, Verily there is a God who sees and judges all our actions: so
shall our whole life be a continual walking before God.

3. Lastly, Before the Lord, may very rationally be referred to that which
ought to be our chief aim and end in all we do, namely, the approving our
selves to God. Both the Septuagint and the Vulgar Latin read these words thus,
I will do that (...). Septuag. Placebo Domino. Vulg. Genesis 5. 24. Heb. 11. 5.
which is pleasing in the sight of the Lord. Yea that synonimous phrase of
walking with God, is so rendered by the Author to the Hebrews concerning Enoch,
that he pleased God. It is a truly pious disposition to grieve at nothing more
than offending, and delight in nothing more than the pleasing of God; to fear
lest any thing we do should be distasteful, and endeavor that all our actions
may be acceptable in Gods sight; finally, to be displeased with nothing that
God does, and (as near as we can) to do nothing which may displease God. For
this the Apostle prayed in behalf of the Hebrews, that the God of Peace would
work in them that which is well-pleasing in his sight. To this St. Paul
exhorts the Thessalonians by the Heb. 13. 21.
Lord Jesus, That as they had received of him how they ought to walk, and
please God, so they would abound more and more. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1.
The defect of this was matter of sorrow to Pambo and Carino, who seeing an
Harlot to spend a great deal of time and Socrat. Eccles. hist. l. 4. c. 23.
(...). Geom. Parad. in B. P. T. 1. Gr. Lat. 1. King. 8. 23. 9. 4. 2 King. 20.
3. Isa. 38. 3.
pains in decking her self to please her Lovers, wept that they had been less
careful to please God. In fine, this is that which here David resolves upon*
I will please the Lord.

It is very observable, that this phrase of walking before God, in Scripture is
frequently joined with integrity of heart and righteousness, with truth and a
perfect heart: So that this walking before God is to be taken in opposition to
Hypocrisy, which is only a walking before Man. This indeed is a special
difference between a sincere hearted Man, and an Hypocrite: The Hypocrites
praise is not of God, but of Men; the upright Man's praise is not of Men, but of
God: The one in his services to God looks at Man; the Romans 2. 29.
other in all his actions, even toward Man, looks at God: The one only
desires to seem good that he may please Men; the other to be good that he may
please God.

O let us take heed of contenting our selves with a Pharisaical righteousness,
whose desire was to be seen, and care only to be approved of Men; of whom
therefore Christ Matthew. 6. 1, 2.
says, they have their reward, to wit, humane applause; and they have no
reward, to wit, from God. Indeed how can it be expected that those services
which are only rented forth to Men's eyes, should have any payment at God's
hands? The truth is, no folly to that of Hypocrisy. What madness is it to
regard the fellow servants eye, and not the Masters? (...). Chrysostom. hom. 3.
de Uzz.
What foolishness is it to desire that one should be a Spectator, and expect
another to be a rewarder of thy actions? Yet thus does the Hypocrite who
coveteth glory from Man, but seeks not God's approbation, who aims at
pleasing Man, and hopes a recompense from God.

Let it then, O let it be our wisdom, to endeavor that with Noah we may find
grace in the eyes of the Lord; of Genesis 6. 8. (...). Id. hom. 23. in Genesis 2 Chronicles. 26. 4 (...). Id. hom. 3. de Uzz.
whom, from those words St. Chrysostom excellently observes, That divine
commendation was his only scope, not weighing either the applause or reproach
of the Old World. Let that character which was given of Uzziah, be ours, of
whom it is said, He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord; upon
which that same Father affirms, It is not only said he did what was right,
but it is emphatically added, in the sight of the Lord, as opposite to
ostentation before Men. Finally, let Zachary and Elizabeth be our patterns, of
whom it is said, They were both righteous before God; Truly no righteousness
will stand us in any stead but that which is so before God; God sees not as
Man sees; and hence it is, that many are just in the eyes of Men, who are
wicked in God's sight; and those whom Men prize as Silver, God rejects as
Dross. Whatever then others do, let our eyes be upon God, and our care, that as
we are beheld by, so we may be accepted of him, that so we now pleasing him, he
may one Non omnis qui justus est ante homines, justus est ante Deum, aliter
vident homines aliter videt Deus. Ambros. in Luc.
day please us; and we here delighting him with the sight of our integrity in
heart, and uprightness in life, he may hereafter delight us with the sight of
his resplendent glory to all eternity.

To sum up this part; if you will have in few words the extent of this walking
before God comprised, I cannot do it better than in words much like those of
Lapide concerning Cogita sub oculis Dei nos stare spectante ac judicante ipso
conversationis ac vitae nostrae curricula decurrere, pervenire nos tunc demum
posse ut cum videre contingat si ipsum nunc videntem delectemus actibus
nostris, si nos dignos gratia ejus praebeamus, si placituri sen per in regno in
hoc mundo ante plateamus. Cypr. de Zelo. Ambulare cum Deo tuo, i. e. per omnia
Deo adhaerere, eum ubique prae oculis habere, illius jussa voluntatem and nutum
exact observare and explere, illi per omnia placere and satisfacere. Lapid. in
Mic. 6.
walking with God: To walk before, or with God, is to be frequent in drawing
nigh unto him; to set him ever in our sight, and our selves in his, according
to our ability to fulfill his will, and obey his precepts; in all things to
endeavor that we may please him, approving our selves in sincerity of heart to
him. So that in this phrase we have as it were a brief dclineation of the
Saint's walk; the path it self is divine command; the hedge to keep him in this
path, is divine presence; the end which he proposes to himself, is divine
acceptance; and the foot whereby he walks in this way, to this end, is an
even and upright heart: all which David resolves upon, when he says here, I
will walk before the Lord. I have done with the second, pass we on to the last
particular considerable in the duty, to wit, the place, or time of performance.

3. In the Land of the Living. These words admit of a threefold
interpretation, being understood

By some, especially for the Land of Judea.

By others, eminently for the Jerusalem which is above.

By the most, and most probably, for this habitable Earth, the present World.

1. That exposition which Cajetan, Lorinus, with others, give of the words,
would not be rejected, who conceive that by the Land of the Living, David here
means Judea, in which, or rather over which being constituted King, he
resolves to walk before God, and do him service. This is not improbably that
Land of the Living in which the Psalmist, when an Exile, believed to see the
goodness of the Lord, this is certainly that Land of the Living wherein God
promises Psalm. 27. 13. Ezekiel. 26. 20. Illam se vivorum astimare regionem
asserit, ubi colitur verus ac vivus Deus, non mortua simulacra: ubi etiam
suppetunt vitae corporali transigendae subsidia opportuna, coeli ac soli
bonitas, victus abundantia, copia rerum ad honestam voluptatem consetentium.
Lorin. in Psalm. Psalm. 115. 5, 6.
to set his glory: Nor was this title without just reason applied, yea
appropriated to that Country.

1. Partly, because it was a Land which afforded the most plentiful supports
and comforts of natural life, in regard of the wholesomness of the Climate, the
goodness of the Soil, the overflowing of Milk and Honey, with other
conveniences both for food and delight.

2. Chiefly, because it was the Land in which the Living God was worshipped,
and where he vouchsafed to place his Name; whereas the other parts of the World
worshipped liveless things, of which the Psalmist says, They have mouths, and
speak not; eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not.

And though in this sense the words seem especially to concern David, or, at
the furthest, only the Jews, yet by way of Analogy it concerns us; in as
much as this appellation upon the same reasons no less justly belongs to our
Land wherein our lines are fallen, a Land enriched with all manner of
abundance, enamelled with variety of delights; and, which is far beyond all the
rest, blessed with the Dew of Heaven as well as fatness of the Earth, God
having been pleased for many years to vouchsafe the enjoyment of his Ordinances
to this Land. O my Brethren, how great is our shame, how sad will be our doom,
who are as barren Trees in so fruitful a Soil! sit in darkness,
notwithstanding so glorious a Light! yea remain in the Congregation of the
Dead, whilst in the Land of the Living? No wonder if God have suffered so thick
a Cloud to obscure the luster of his Gospel among us, and our Land seem at this
day as it were dying, and ready to give up the ghost.

2. The Land of the Living is construed by the Ancients to be that Heavenly
Country, the place of the Blessed.

Indeed this appellation does most fitly agree to Heaven; Aug. epist. 121. Illa
vita est vitalis, dulcis, and amabilis, ubi certa securitas, and secura
tranquillitas, and tranquilla jucunditas, and jucunda falicitas, and faelix
aeternitas, and aeterna beatitudo. Id. de Spec. Tract. 6. (...)
this World is Desertum mortuorum, a Desert of Dead, at least dying Men; that
only is Regio vivorum, a Region of living Saints. He who is our life, is in
Heaven, yea, our life is hid with him in God; and therefore we cannot be said
to live till we come thither. In comparison of that, the natural life is not
worthy of the name of life; yea, as Saints, we may be rather said to dye to
sin, than to live to God on Earth; in Heaven it is we shall possess that which
is the truly vital and perfect life. That is the Land of the Living, as Gregory
Nyssen elegantly, where is no sin, and therefore can be no death: not this
Earth, which, though it bring forth living Creatures, yet such as must dye, and
return to this Earth whence they came.

And as Heaven best deserves this appellation, so in Heaven it is that we are
most justly said to walk before the face of the Lord, the Beatifical Vision
being reserved for that Country. Now we see, says St. Paul, in a glass, but
then face to face; here being at home in the body, we are Greg. Nyss. de Beat.
Orat. 2. Col. 3. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 13. 12. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 8.
absent from the Lord; but when absent from the body, we shall be present with
the Lord: So the same Apostle. Sweetly to this purpose St. Augustine and St.
Hierom upon this text, according to the vulgar reading, observe, that it is not
Vbi placebo? in regione vivorum. Haec enim regio mortuorum est, alia est terra
vivorum. Hieron, in Psalm. 114.
placeo, but placebo; we do not in a strict sense please God here, but we shall
hereafter; we do not now walk before his face of glory, but we shall one day;
so that the very life of this mortal life consists in the hope of that
immortal; and in a certain expectation of that future Vision is all our present
exultation.

In this sense no doubt that devout Bishop and Martyr, Illam animarum requiem
dicit terrom esse viventium quo p^ccata non penetrant, ubi virtutum vivit
gloria. Amb^. de bono mortis, cap. 9.
Babilas, used the words, who being condemned by Numerianus the Emperor to an
unjust death, a little before his execution, repeated this, and the two
preceding Verses, with a loud voice. Nor is it unfit for any dying Saint to
comfort himself with the like application of these words, and say in a
confident hope of that blessed sight, I shall walk before the Lord in the Land
of the Living.

3. But doubtless the literal and proper meaning of these Tunc crimus in
regione vivorum ex omni part placentes in conspectu Do mini, ex nulla ab eo
part peregrini. Aug. in Psalm. 114. Illud hoc loco praeterire non possum quod
de Babyla Antiochena Episcopo scribit Suidas, etc. Moller. in loc. (...)
words (as has been already declared) is of David's abode in this World;
during which time, wheresoever he should be, he would walk before God; for that
seems to be the emphasis of the plural number, Lands, according to the
Original. The World consists of many Countries, several Lands, and it is
possible for Men either by force, or willingly, to remove from one Country to
another: But a good Man when he changes his Country, yet alters not his
Religion, yea wherever he is, he resolves to serve his God.

The better to illustrate this interpretation, give me leave to proceed by
these three steps.

1. This present World is justly called the Land of the Living, or as it is in
the Hebrew, a Land of lives. In this Land it is that every Man enjoys a
natural life, and every Saint leads a spiritual life: In this Land it is,
that as we enjoy a temporal, so we lay hold on eternal life. Indeed that life
which the Saints lead in Heaven, must be begun on Earth; there it shall be
manifested, but here it is conferred; then is the consummation, but now must be
the inchoation of that life which shall never end. And surely since this is the
Land wherein not only the life of nature, but the life of grace is vouchsafed,
yea that life of glory is obtained, assured, and after a sort begun, it may
very well deserve this appellation of the Land of the Living.

2. In this World it is that we are most properly said to walk; in Heaven we
shall be Comprehensores, Possessors, as in our Country; on Earth we are
Viatores, Travelers, as in the way; there we shall be on Thrones as
Conquerors, here it is we march as Soldiers; finally, there we shall sit down,
Revel. 3. 21.
resting from all our labors, here it is we must work and walk. The Temple, a
type of Heaven, was fixed, and so a place of rest, where the People did settle
and enjoy God's presence: but the Tabernacle, a type of this World, was
ambulatory, removed from place to place; after death we shall lie in Abraham's
bosom, but in this life it is we walk in Abraham 's steps. Luc. 16 23. Romans 4.
12.


3. Lastly and chiefly, this present World is the place, and this life the
only time wherein this duty of walking before the Lord is to be performed. The
term to which a Saint walks is that other Land of the Living, the Heavenly
Mansion: but the ground whereon he must walk, is this Earthly Desert. That
which is here called the Land, is in that parallel Scripture styled the Light
of the Living. Indeed, Psalm. 56. 13. Quamdiu. vivis, quia postmortem nullum
gratificandi tempus. Euthym. in Ps. 55. Joh. 9. 4.
as our blessed Savior says, When the night (to wit, of death) comes, no Man
can work; the light, the day (namely of life) is the time allotted us for
working. Not much unlike is that of Solomon, There is no work, nor device, nor
knowledge^, nor wisdom in the grave whither thou go: Only this time,
whilst we are going to the grave, is the season as of conversing with Men, so
walking before God. Eccles. 9. 10. Isa. 55. 6. Neque enim tunc erit invocandi
tempus quando nemini prope erit Deus, aliis quidem praesens, aliis vero nimis
val^e ^emotus. Bern. de Quadrages. Ser. 3. Joh. 12. 35.
Oh therefore let the Prophet's counsel be acceptable, Seek the Lord whilst he
may be found, and call upon him whilst he is near; that is, according to the
Caldee version, whilst we live, since as S. Bernard both wittily and piously,
After death there will be no time of calling upon God; when God shall be so
present to the godly, that there will be no need; and so remote from the
wicked, that there will be no possibility of calling on him. Remember the
advice which our blessed Savior gave the Jews, Walk whilst you have the
light; which though there it be meant principally of the Gospel, yet it may be
secondarily referred to this life; and whilst we have this light of life, let
it be our care to walk with God.

To this end be pleased to consider seriously these two things.

1. This present is the only time. Whether we read the words, I will please,
or, I will walk, both are to be performed here, or not at all; after death
there is no place either Heb. 11. 5. I ergo tu and medio gehenne expectato
salutem qua jam facta est in medio terrae. Bern. in Cant. Sermon. 75.
for prayers or tears, in the grave there is neither ability nor opportunity of
walking. It is said of Enoch, that before his translation he had this testimony
(and so must we, if at all) that he pleased God, to wit* by walking before him.
It will be too late to begin this spiritual, when we are at the end of our
natural journey; In vain is that salvation hoped for in the midst of Hell,
which was wrought in the midst of Nunc rapiendum est regnum Dei, nunc spiritu
vivendum, nunc sinistris abrenuntiandum ut ibi a dextris locus reperiatur. Hug.
Eter. de regress. anim. ab inf. 2 Cor. 6. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 17.
the Earth. Behold now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of
salvation; the prize of glory must be won, and the race of piety run now, or
never.

2. The present time is but short, very short. Though the Inhabitants of this
Land be only living Men, yet they are not long lived; it is called by the
Apostle, and most ap^ly, a time of sojourning, and therefore our stay cannot be
long; this whole World is but as a common Inn, wherein some stay but a few
hours, the most but a few days, none can dwell always.

O then, as we must go on constantly, so let us begin presently; Per (...) and
(...), voces tum fluxa and instabilia, tum firma and sempiterna significavit.
Incolatus enim est brevis commoratio etc. Elias Cretens. not, in Greg. Naz.
Orat. 10. Gal. 6. 10. (...). Hipp. Aphor.
the way is long, the day is short, the work great, the time little; we need
not grudge to hold out till evening, we had need to set forth in the morning;
and whilst we have opportunity, let us seriously resolve, and speedily practice
this duty of walking before the Lord.

And thus I have considered the words distinctly and absolutely in themselves,
representing to you both David's resolving upon a duty, and the duty upon which
he resolves, in the matter, manner, and season of performance; it now
remains that I proceed more briefly to a conjunctive and relative discussion
of them, as depending on the precedent verse, that you may see what was the
impulsive cause, obliging reason, inducing motive to put him upon this duty
toward God, namely, God's mercy toward him.

Because thou have delivered, etc. I will walk, etc. The sense of which
connection, if you please, take in this larger paraphrase; as if David had said,
Oh my God, thou have wiped away tears from my eyes, to thee therefore I will
lift them up in thankfulness; thou have kept my feet from falling, how can I
employ them better than in walking before thee? thou have delivered my soul
from death, to whom but thee should I dedicate my life? it is thy free gift to
me, it is my due debt to thee: I can give thee little, if not thy own; I have
received as it were a new life from thee, surely I will return it to thee, by
walking before thee in the Land of the Living. M^c. 6. 5. J^h. 5. 19. Genesis 17.
1. Hos. 11. 4.


1. It lets us see in general, that Beneficium postulat officium, Mercy calls
for duty, and beneficence obliges to obedience; not only the rod of God's
correction, but the staff of his protection, has a voice, and that double; the
one is Vincula hominum opponuntur vincula bruterum and mancipiorum duris loris
and ferre^^ catenis. Zanch. in Hos. Beneficia vocat funicula and vincula atque
pereleg^^ter, nihil enim magis homin^m devincit alteri quam collatio officiorum.
that of Christ to the Criple, Sin no more; the other that of God to Abraham,
Walk before me and be upright. For this reason no doubt it is that God
compares the benefits which he conferred on Israel to the Cords of a Man, and
the Bonds of Love; Stripes are the Cords of a Slave, a Beast, and the Bonds of
Justice; Favors are the Cords of a Man, and the Bonds of Love: but these as
well as, nay rather than the other, are Cords and Bonds, Bonds to keep us from
sin, Cords to draw us nearer, and bind us faster to God. Indeed this is the end
at which God aims in bestowing the riches of his goodness, that it might lead
us, as to repentance, so obedience. It was the saying of Fulvius to his Son,
Patriae te genui, non Catilinae; I begat thee to be a servant of thy Country,
not an Guadulup. in Hos. Is^. 5. 4. Clamat invicta ratio and quisque se illi
subjiciat a quo habet ut sit, etc. Laur. Justin. l. de obed. c. 5.
associate of a Traitor. In like manner God says to us, I have brought you up
that you might serve me, not your lusts. So much he expresses concerning his
Vineyard, when having elegantly delineated the care he took for its
flourishing, he says, Wherefore I looked it should bring forth Grapes. Nor Is
it any more than reason that he should expect, and we should return service to
him for his favors to us. What man plants an Orchard, and looks not to eat
of the Fruit? builds an House, and hops not to enjoy the comfort thereof?
feeds a Flock, and expects not to eat of the Milk of the Flock? Well then
may God call for obedient fruitfulness, when he has afforded his merciful
goodness. The Philosopher could say, (...), Prosperity engages a Aristot. E^h.
Man to love God; supposing Men to have so much humanity in them as to love him
from whom they have received so many courtesies; and the Poet's reasoning was
very valid, had it been pitched upon a right object, to wit, Jehovah, not
Caesar. -- -- Deus nobis haec otia fecit,
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus. Virgil. Eclog.

He shall be my God from whom I receive security, plenty, and tranquillity.
Hence it is that St. Paul beseeching the Romans to offer up their bodies a
sacrifice, uses no other obtestation to back his obsecration, but this, I
beseech you by Romans 12. 1. (...). Theoph. in Luc. Luc. 1. 74, 75. Hoc Deus
certe per sua intendit beneficia, ut ei scilicet placeam cum colam, quae sunt
illi grata saciam, etc. Lorin. in Ps. 55. Psalm. 56. ult.
the mercies of God; and Zachary in his Song asserteth this to be the end of
our deliverance from the hands of our Enemies, that we might serve God without
fear in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives: And the Psalmist
plainly insinuates as much in that parallel text, Thou have delivered my soul
from death, that I might walk before thee in the Land of the Living.

2. For the clearer illustrating, and fuller opening of this truth, be pleased
to view in particular on the one hand to what David conceives himself obliged,
and on the other hand what it was obliged him.

1. The duty which the Psalmist here expresses as the obligation of mercy, is
observable in each parcel.

1. Because, etc. I will. Promises of obedience are seasonably made, or rather
renewed, after mercy received. Indeed there are three special seasons of taking
up pious resolutions.

1. Before we are to perform our solemn services to God. 2. Under any straight,
danger, distress inflicted on us by God. 3. After any deliverance, blessing,
mercy vouchsafed to us from God.
An instance of each of these we have in this holy man David. Before he will
compass God's Altar, he resolves, Psalm. 26. 6.
I will wash my hands in innocence; when he was in trouble, his mouth uttered
vows to God; and here being delivered Psalm. 66. 14.
from danger, he promises, I will walk.

The first sort of promises are preparatory, none being fit to draw nigh to God
but such as at least seriously purpose to cleanse their hands, and purify their
hearts.

The second are impetratory, those prayers being most Jam. 4. 8. Anna Samuelem
impetravit, and acceptum Deo reddidit, quia cum posecret, vovit. Aug. epist.
121.
effectual which are accompanied with religious promises; Faith and Repentance
are the two wings of prayer, since Faith is that which pleads with God his
own promises, and Repentance engages the soul to God by promise.

The last are gratulatory, holy vows being choice testifications of our
thankfulness. At the twelfth verse of this Psalm we find David putting a
question, what shall I render? in this and other verses we find him making
resolutions, I will call, I will pay, I will offer, I will walk. A grateful
heart studyeth nothing more than a proportionable V. 13, 14, 17.
return; and if it cannot do what it would, it will do what it can.

2. Walk. The rich Fool having his Barns filled, calls upon his soul to take
its ease; but good David, being mercifully Luc. 12. 19. 19. 20. Math. 20. 3.
delivered, calls upon himself to walk. That Servant is branded as evil and
wicked, who having received a Talent, laid it up in a Napkin. Mercies, as they
Non verbis sol^ sed etiam factis laudare oportet, and hanc laudem ut symphoniam
graliosam, and coelo dignam requirit maxim Deus. Cresol. de virtu^.
are received, so they must be employed for the Donor's glory. God sends Men
into, and continues their days in this World, not that they should stand idle
in the Marketplace, but work in the Vineyard, and do him service.

Again, The thankfulness which here David resolves, is not verbal but real,
talking but walking. Indeed elsewhere he says, I will talk of thy doings; that
being one Psalm. 77. 12: Hos. 14. 3. Psalm. 50. 23.
part of our gratitude, to declare what God does for us. But that is not all;
as there I will talk, so here I will walk, is his thankful resolve; we must
offer to God the Ocationem veram dixeris csse actionem, sed religiosam, actio
bona oration est, sed operosa and practica, been orat qui been ^git. Dre^el.
Rhetor. coel.
Calves of our lips: but if nothing else, they will prove but the Lips of
Calves. Whosoever offers praise (says God) glorifieth me: but then it must be,
by ordering his conversation aright. Many with Peter's fish have money in their
mouths, thanks in their lips; but whilst they honor God with their lips, they
blaspheme him in their lives. Oh remember, he praises God most who serves him
best; the life of thankfulness consists in the thankfulness of the life; Quid
enim rectius, aut quid dignius, quam ^t quibus per munera sua Do^inus quasi
specialiter videbatur placere voluisse iidem quoque specialius Domino cultu ac
religione placuissent. Salv. de Gub. Dei, l. 7.
yea, a good conversation is both the most effectual prayer, and real praise.

3. Before the Lord. Thankfulness is a spirit still upon the wing rising to
Heaven, and conversing with God; it is an Eagle-grace, whose game lies all in
soaring and mounting toward the Sun; the grateful man is still ascending; it
is a low mercy cannot raise him up as high as Heaven; with the Bird, he
drinks and looks up; with the Beast, he lies down, and rises kneeling; he
takes every blessing as from God's hand, and therefore his eye is still upon
God.

4. Not to neglect the Septuagints version, I will please Significat velle se
Deo placere uhivis, quoad suerat in vivis, quamdiu vixerit, dum spiritum
traxerit. Genebrard. in Psalm.
the Lord, is a suitable resolve to a thankful heart. Whom should a Man labor
to please if not his Benefactor? it is Lex talionis, that which the Law of
retaliation calls for, to return kindness for kindness, love for love, pleasing
for pleasing; it is but fit, that as God fulfilleth our desires, so we should
(at least strive to) fulfill his precepts; and as by his mercies he pleases
us, so we should by our service Quia semper a^cipis, semper invoca, and quia
quod habes, a Domino est, debitorem ^e semper esse cognosce. Amb orat fun. de
obita Theodos. Imp. Luc. 1. 75.
endeavor to please him.

5. Lastly, In the Land of the Living, to wit, so long as he should be among
the Living thankful David resolves to walk before God, so runs Zacharies
song, all the days of our life; so St. Ambrose reads the second verse of
this Psalm, in omnibus diebus meis; indeed no day, no hour, no moment, which
carries not with it a new obligation; Scuet nullum est momentum quo homo non
utatur vel fruatur Dei bonitate, and misericordia, sic nullum debet esse
momentum, quo eum praesentem non habeat in memoria. Bern. Meditat. devot. cap.
6.
and besides, even particular favors oblige to continued service; it is not to
be devout and zealous for a time, whilst the deliverance is fresh and new, but
to set upon a constant course of obedience, which true gratitude calls for;
that thankfulness is of the right dye and color which is lasting; nor must our
obedience expire but with our life.

2. You have seen the extent of the duty, now take a short view of the mercy
which does thus oblige, and that in this threefold consideration.

1. Thou have delivered. Of all mercies deliverances are the most engaging;
every deliverance supposes a danger, and the danger sweetneth the mercy; the
truth is, we never so highly prize a blessing as when we either are deprived
of; or in danger to lose it. How welcome was the spacious Land to Jonah, when
he had been Prisoner in the Whales belly? What kind greeting think you was
there between Lazarus and his Sisters, when he was returned from the dead? It
is not to be imagined with what readiness those hands of Abraham embraced his
Isaac, which were even now unwillingly stretched forth to kill him. Health
preserved and continued, is a mercy; but when restored and renewed, it is far
more acceptable. No wonder if David being delivered, resolves to walk Non
dubium est omne beneficium obligare receptorem erga datorem, and quanto majus
fuerit, tanto magis obligare. Paris. de legib. cap. 21.
before the Lord.

2. My Soul from death. Every deliverance is a Bond; but when from death (the
worst of outward evils) it makes our Debt the greater. Every mercy has a
voice, but the greater the mercy, the louder the call to obedience. To this
purpose both St. Bernard and Parisiensis, It is no doubt but that every benefit
obliges the Receiver to the Giver; and by how much the larger the gift, by so
much Tanto quis amplius timere Deum, and magis solicitus esse debuerat quanto
majora ejus munera percepit. Bern. in Ps. qui hab.
the stronger the tie; and therefore in the service of God we ought to be so
much the more solicitous, by how much his love toward, and care over us, has
been the more gracious. Thus St. Paul, having obtained mercy more eminently,
labored more abundantly than the rest; Mary 1 Cor. 15. 10. Luc. 7. 47.
Magdalen loved much, because much was forgiven her; Jehosaphat being lifted up
with riches and honor in abundance, his heart was lifted up in the ways of
the Lord; 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6.
and David having received a deliverance from so great danger as death,
promises to walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living.

3. Lastly, Mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling. Lo here a
deliverance, not from one, but many dangers, to wit, death, tears, and falling:
Single deliverances are as Threads, but when multiplied, they become as a Cord
twisted of many Threads, more potent to draw us to God. Any one mercy is as a
Link, but many favors are as a Chain consisting of several Links, to bind us
the closer to our duty; Vis unita fortior. Frequent droppings of the Rain
cannot but make an impression even on the Stone, and renewed mercies may well
prevail with the stony heart. Parisiensis relates a story of a Man, whom
(notwithstanding his luxurious and vicious courses) God was pleased Parisiens.
de univers. parts primae, pars tertia, cap. 9.
to accumulate favors upon, so that at last he cried out, Vicisti,
benignissime Deus, indefatigabili tua bonitate, Most gracious God, thy
unwearied goodness has overcome my obstinate wickedness; and from that time
devoted himself to God's service. No wonder then if David upon deliverance from
such numerous and grievous afflictions, makes this his resolve, to walk before
the Lord in the Land of the Living.

To apply this. Which of us (my Brethren) here before God this day have not
experienced variety of mercies, positive and privitive, in our persons and
relations? yea, which of us at some time, in some kind or other, has not been
blessed with deliverances, and that from various, yea desperate dangers? And
now, Compensare credo Domino Deo nostro cultu, honor, reverentia, beneficia
quae ab eo accepimus adnitimur (as Salvian of those in his time) One would
think, having received so much love and kindness Salvian. de Gubern. Dei, lib.
6.
from God, we should repay him in love and service, worship and reverence;
being graciously delivered, we should go to his House with praises, renounce
the sins of our former life, vow to God new obedience, and offer up our selves
a sacrifice to him. Thus indeed we ought to do; but what do we? are we not like
the highway side, which returns no crop, though you cast never so much seed
upon Matthew. 13.
it? yea, like the Vineyard, which though fenced and planted, instead of Grapes
brought forth wild Grapes? Isa. 5. 4.
Nay yet worse, like the Earth that drinks in the Rain, and instead of Herbs
meet for the Dresser, brings forth Hebr. 6. 7, 8.
Thorns and Briars? whilst we either sit still living in idleness, or else
instead of walking before, wander far from God by profaneness, nay walk
contrary to God by rebellious wickedness.

It may be in the day of our distress we go to God, but in the day of our
deliverance we run from him. As Antigonus his Soldier, when sickly, was
valiant; but when recovered, turned Coward; and as Aesop's Snake, which lay
still in the Frost, but stung him who warmed it in his Si qua necessatas gravis
presserit, tunc Deum recordantur, si belli terror infremuit, si morborum
pestifera vis incubuit, ad Deum confugitur a Deo pelitur auxilium, nunquam Dei
meminerunt, nisi dum in malis funt, postquam met^is deseruit and pericula
recesserunt tum alacres ad Deorum Templa concurrunt, his liba it, his
sacrificant. Lact. Instit. divin. lib. 2.
bosom. So it is with the most of us in adversity, we seem dovout, but in
prosperity we prove licencious and rebellious. In the Tomb of Terrentia were
certain Lamps which burned under ground for many ages, but so soon as they were
brought into the Air, they went out, never to be kindled again. A fit emblem
of our practice; whiles we are kept in a Cave of darkness, confined to a Vault
of misery, we are burning and shining Lamps: but when God has lifted us up
from the Gates of death, and carries us as it were abroad into the open Air,
that we enjoy this worlds allurements, the light of our piety goes out, and we
practice the works of darkness. So that what Lactantius complained of
concerning many in his days, who under pressing exigencies would call upon the
true God; but when the danger was over, would return to their former
idolatries: the like may be charged upon many of us, who in affliction
remember, but after restoration forget, yea dishonor the God of our mercies.

That acknowledgement of the Psalmist we have all reason to make concerning
God, He crowns thee with Psalm. 103. 4. His miserationibus nos coronat Deus,
ut solent duces urbem militibus cingere quam rebellem adjungere cupiunt ad suum
dominatum, proh duras hominum mentes quae beneficiis divinis obsessae, non se
dedunt. Cresol. Mystag. l. 3. c. 11. Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Isa. 1. 2. Hos. 7. 15.
loving kindness, and tender mercies, or he compasses, to wit, round about
with variety of compassions (as a General does begirt a rebellious City with a
numerous Army of Soldiers) But tell me, do we yet yield to this gracious
Siege? these gentle Batteries? nay rather, do we not stand out the more
rebelliously against him? yea, our unthankfulness striveth with Gods goodness
for the victory, as Absalom did with David, whether the Father should be more
kind, or the Son more unkind. Sad, though just, were those accusations of God
against Israel, by Moses, Jesurun waxed fat and kicked; by Isaiah, I have
nourished and brought up Children, and they have rebelled against me; by Hosea,
Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they imagine mischief
against me. And may they not as truly be charged upon us? we are fatted with
God's blessings, and spurn at his precepts; the beams of his goodness have
shone hot upon us, and our vicious lives have sent up the Ille nobis ad hoc
bona praestat, ut boni stmus, nos e diverso quoties hona accepimus mala nostra
cumulamus, ille beneficiis suis provocat ad compunctionem, nos ruimus in
dissolutionem, etc. Salv. de Gub. l. 6.
more noisome stench into his Nostrils; he has magnified his mercies, and we
multiply our iniquity. Very apposite to this purpose are those complaints of
Salvian and Lactantius, God gives us good things that we might be good, we on
the contrary abuse those good things to increase our evils; he calls us by his
benefits to repentance, and we become the more dissolute: Then most
unthankfully forgetting, and injuriously dishonouring God, when we have the
most reason to remember and glorify him.

But do we thus requite the Lord, oh foolish People, and unwise? Consider, I
beseech you,

1. Is not this the most odious ingratitude to retaliate Tum maxim Deus ex
memoria hominum elabitur quum beneficiis ejus fruentes honorem dure divinae
indulgentiae deberent. Lactan. Instit. divin. lib. 2. cap. 1. Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Job
2. 19.
injuries for courtesies? That we should receive good at the hands of God, and
not evil, is unreasonable to expect: but to receive good, and return evil, is
very injurious to act. There is a retaliation of good for evil, this is
admirable; of good for good, this is laudable; of evil for evil, this is
blameable; of evil for good, this is abominable.

2. Does not the Law of Nature teach us to do as we would be done to? and would
we have others deal by us as we do by God? I appeal (in Salvian's words) to you
that are Interrogo omnes potentes ac divites mundi hujus, cujus piaculi reus
sit Servus ille, qu^ bono ac pio Domino malum cogitet, qui been merenti
convitium faciat, and pro l^bertate quam accepit contumeliam reddat, etc.
Salvian. de Gub. l. 6.
the great and rich Men of this World; how great were the guilt of that Servant
who should cast reproach upon, endeavor mischief against an indulgent and
bountiful Master? And shall we our selves practice that toward God which we
would abhor and condemn in a Servant toward us?

3. What shall we answer to God in that day of account, when he shall plead
with us for our ungrateful disobedience. Oh thou rebellious Wretch! had God
instead of restoring destroyed, sparing thee in, cut thee off from the Land of
the Living, thou might have pleaded, Lord, if thou had lengthened my
days, I would have reformed my life: but now that patience has tried thee,
and goodness waited on thee, what excuse can thou make for thine impenitency?
The sense of this made Ezra to Ezra, 9. 10. Quanam front attollo jam oculos ad
oultum patris, tam boni, tam malus filius. Pudet ingratitudinis quanquam ad
confusionis cumulum arguar etiam reddidisse mala pro bonis, and odium pro
dilectione. Bern. in Cant. Ser. 16. 2 Samuel 7. 8, 9.
blush in behalf of the People, crying out, And now, Oh our God, what shall we
say after this? for we have forsaken thy Commandments. In the apprehension of
this, devout Bernard exclaimeth against himself, With what sace can I, so
stubborn a Child, lift up my eyes to so gracious a Father? I am ashamed of my
ingratitude in returning hatred for love. Imagine thy self (Oh ungrateful
Sinner) standing at God's tribunal, his mercies and thy iniquities set in order
before thy face, and think thou hear God upbraiding thee in words much like
those by Nathan to David, I have many a time delivered thee from great dangers,
I have given thee Wife and Children, with many other blessings; and if this had
been too little, I would have given thee such and such things: wherefore have
thou despised my Commandments, dishonored my Name, abused my Mercies? and
surely thou can not but cover thy self with a Cloud of shame, yea pour out a
shower of tears.

4. Finally, Do we not think that God is highly provoked with, and therefore
will surely and sorely avenge himself upon such ungrateful Rebels? Was not
David greatly enraged against Nabal, when he said, In vain have I kept all that
this fellow has in the Wilderness, he has requited me evil for good? Was not
God incensed bitterly 1 Samuel 25. 21.
against the old World, when he said, It repented me that I made Man upon
Earth? He says no less of all unthankful Genesis 6. 7.
Sinners, In vain have I both given and kept all that they enjoy, it repents
me that I ever made them, or conferred Hos. 2. 8, 9. Ingratitudo ventus urens,
siccans sibifontem pietatis, rorem misericordiae, ^luenta gratiae. Bern. in
Cant. Ser. 51. Josh. 24. 20.
the least mercy on them. And will you know what follows upon such
provocations? Hear what God says concerning his People, She did not know that
I gave her Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold which
they prepared for Baal: therefore will I return, and take away my Corn in the
time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof, and will recover my Wool and
my Flax given to cover her nakedness. Hear what Joshua says from God to
Israel, If ye forsake the Lord, and serve strange Gods, then he will turn and
do you hurt, and consume you after that he has done you good. Believe it,
Brethren, if mercy induce not to obedience, disobedience will ruin our mercy;
nor are either life, or health, or any other blessing so entailed upon any
person, but that ingratitude may, yea will cut it off: Nay let me add,
Ingratia beneficia, ingentia flagitia, ingentia supplicia, if as Tanto gravius
de ingratitudine judicabimur quanto magis accumulatis beneficiis ingrati
probabimur extitisse. Id. in Sermon. cont. ingrat. Ezra, 9. 13, 14.
mercy has abounded, iniquity superabounds; as iniquity abounds, so calamity
shall much more; and by how much the Oil of God's compassion has been the more
plentifully poured upon us, by so much shall the flame of his judgments burn
the hotter against us: And therefore Ezra pronounces this as a most just
sentence against himself and the People, in case of their disobedience, Seeing
that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have
given us such deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments, and
join in affinity with the People of these abominations, would thou not be
angry with us till thou had consumed (us) so that there should be no remnant
nor escaping. Oh therefore yet at last let the bounty of God lead us to
repentance and obedience; give unto the Lord the glory due to his name, and
serve him according to his great goodness. To which, that we may be the better
enabled, observe and practice these following directions.

1. Keep God's mercies fresh in thy memory, and often ponder, especially upon
eminent deliverances. This remembrance of Divine benefits is that which St.
Bernard Recordemur misericordiarum Dei ut sic accendamus in ejus amorem
revocemus ad memoriam bona quae tribuit nobis. Id. de Int. Dom. c. 9.
commends as fit to be a pillar in the spiritual house of our souls; and this
is that which thankfulness takes care of; it is God's faithful Register, she
is never forgotten, and she never forgets; she writes God's love, as he
does his Beloved, on the palms of her hands; she has still new thoughts of the
days of old, and makes a deliverance live, as God does, for ever: And surely
this duty well performed, would be a singular means of exciting and enabling us
to walk worthy of mercy. When Ahasuerus Esth. 6, 1, 2, 3.
on the night he could not sleep, commanded the Records to be brought unto him,
and read before him, and therein found how instrumental Mordecai had been in
delivering him from the treason of his Chamberlains, he presently asks, What
honor and dignity has been done to Mordecai for this? So will the soul that
faithfully and seriously meditateth on God's deliverances and benefits,
(whereof he is not only an instrument, but a principal efficient) often ask it
self the like question, What honor have I brought, what service have I done to
my God for this? and such questions are the ready way to pious resolutions.
Quia bona quae assecutus fuerat, repent memoriae intulit malum, quod se
pulsabat, evicit, quia perceptae gratiae meminerit vim culp^: imminentis
fregit. Greg. Mo^ l. 30. c. 9. Genesis 39. 8, 9.
When Joseph, being solicited by his Mistress to uncleanness, remembered the
kindness his Master had showed him, yea the gracious providence of God toward
him, he returns her that excellent answer, Behold, my Master woteth not what
is with me in the house, and he has committed all that he has to my hand;
there is none greater in this house than I, neither has he kept back any thing
from me but thee, because thou art his Wife: how then can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? Observable to this purpose is that connection
which David makes between these t^^o, Thy loving kindness is before mine eyes,
and I have walked in thy truth. These were Psalm. 26. 3.
two things this holy man had ever before him, his own sins, so elsewhere, My
sin is ever before me; God's goodness, Psalm. 51. 3.
so here, Thy loving kindness is before me: they are both very imitable
patterns. Well were it if we would every one keep a Catalogue both of the sins
we commit, and blessings we receive, especially notorious sins, and glorious
deliverances, that the remembrance of the one might keep us from wandering, and
of the other excite us to walk before God in truth.

2. Often recollect the promises thou made to God in thy distress, and that
will put thee on renewing and performing them after deliverance. When
Sigismund asked Theodoricus, what a Man should do to walk in the right way that
leads to bliss? he answered, Si vitam tuam Aeneas Sylv. l. 2. com de reb.
Alphons.
ita enstitueris ut te facturum promisisti dum calculus aut podagra sive alia
valetudo adversa acrius to oppressit, If a Man did so lead his life as he
resolves to do when the Stone, or Gout, or some other sore disease is upon
him. Call then to mind (Oh Sinner) those dark and cloudy days in which the
guilt of thy sins affrighted thee, the pain of thy disease tormented thee, the
fears of death surprised thee, and the sorrows of Hell caught hold of thee;
Remember how then thou did pray and promise, beg Votum est postulatio bonorum
a Deo cum solvendi muneris promissione. Et ideo cum impetraveris quod petisti
ingrati est tardare promissum. Ambr. l. 1. de Abel and Cain, c. 7.
and vow, that if the Lord would remove his rod, thou would forsake thy sins;
if he would spare thee, thou would serve him; and if he would renew thy
days, thou would lead a new course of life. Oh be not so perfidious as now
that God has upon thy promise granted thy desire, thou should by
nonperformance frustrate his expectation. Be the same to God in thy health,
that thou were in sickness, else it will appear thou did only vow to amend
thy life that thou might amend in health; nor did thou desire to recover
that thou might glorify God, but only promisedst to glorify God that thou
might recover.

3. Frequently ponder thy own unworthiness, acknowledge with Jacob, I am less
than the least of all the mercies, Genesis 32. 10. Erubiscau^us prava c^mmittere
quo nos a Deo meminimus gratuito bona percepisse. Greg. Mor. l. 30. c. 9.
and of all the truth that thou have showed to thy servant; say with David,
What am I, O Lord God, and what is my House that thou have brought me hitherto?
and in the sense of thy vileness thus reason with thy self, I am unworthy to
receive, shall I be unwilling to requite the goodness of God? I am not able to
requite, shall I not endeavor to return something to him for all his love? I
have deserved nothing but death, and tears, and falling, shall I not be
thankful for 2 Samuel 7. 18. Magno debo obligata e^ anima mea, multum accep^st^,
and nihil a te habuisti. Aug. meditat. (...), etc. Chrysostom, in Ps. 9.
deliverance from all these? my former wanderings called for judgment instead
of mercy, destruction instead of preservation, and shall I not answer so
undeserved a recovery by future walking before God? Thus would the
consideration of thy antecedent demerit put thee upon an endeavor of
subsequent obedience.

4. Lastly, Be much in prayer after, as well as before thy deliverance; not
only praise but prayer must wait upon mercy. Have thou then obtained health,
pray for that which is better than health, grace to improve it in God's
service: why should thou be blessed to thy cost, nay thy curse? say in this
case, as Abraham in another, Lord, what will thou give me seeing I go
childless? Lord, what will thou give me if I go graceless? It were better not
to be delivered, than not to have spiritual enablement with thy temporal
deliverance to walk before God. Let this therefore be thy own prayer for thy
self, yea for this desire the prayers of others. To end all; This is that
request (my dearly beloved in the Lord) which I must now make unto you: In the
time of my sickness you were pleased to wrestle with God for my recovery, Oh
cease not to pray for me still, I need your prayers, I beg your prayers, it
will be your good as well as mine: Oh therefore pray for me, that I may lay out
this health and strength which God has restored to me, in his service; and
that being delivered from death, and tears, and falling into the Grave, I may
be enabled both to resolve and perform that of which David here has set both
me and you a pattern in the words of the Text, I will walk before the Lord in
the Land of the Living.

FINIS.
ERRATA, in the first Sermon.
Page 1. lin. 25. for un r. in. 2. 30. after less d. the comma. in the marg.
for lu r. tu. 3. 25. for warmness r. weariness. 4. 16. for ^^ r. (...). 5. in
marg. for saer r. ser. 6. 36. for (...) r. (...). in marg. for vo r. no. 7. in
marg. for (...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...). 8. 27. for and r. both. in marg.
for (...) r. (...). for (...) r. (...). 11. 8. for and r. are. in the marg.
after de r. triplici. 12. 10. put Christ before est timos. 14. in marg. for
care r. cant. 17. for (...) r. (...), for (...) r. (...). 18. 25. d. but nisi.
l. 26. after but put in nisi. 20. 3. for (...) r. (...). l. 7. (...) r. (...).
21. 34. for ut r. et. and for tur r. tor. 24. 33. r. Christian. 25. 22. d. to.
in marg. for (...) r. (...). 26. 8. after to insert be. 31. 12. put the comma
before so. in marg. after Bibl. r. e. for (...) r. (...). 32. in marg. for
(...) r. (...). for (...) r. (...). l. 30. r. then to. l. 30. d. ing. 35. in
marg. set the comma before illa.

In the second Sermon.
Page 4. in marg. before (...) is omitted (...). after (...) r. (...), and join
the (...) with (...). 5. in marg. for intee r. intervenire, after ut r. a vua
hac. 8. in marg. join (...) with (...), r. (...), d. (...), r. (...), r.
gestiunt. 17. 3. for or r. a. 20. 8. for the more in r. in the mercy of. l. 19.
for his r. this. 21. 37. r. devota. 22. in marg. for at r. as. 24. in marg. for
(...) r. (...). 25. 37. for (...) r. (...). l. 38. for (...) r. (...). for
(...) r. (...). 30. in marg. for sanio r. facio. 32. in marg. for (...) r.
(...). 33. in marg. r. (...). 39. in the end of the marg. for and r. ut. 45.
22. r. Terentia. 46. in marg. for du r. da.


