THE COMPLETE Husbandman: OR, A discourse of the whole Art OF HUSBANDRY; BOTH
Foreign and Domestic.

Wherein many rare and most hidden secrets, and experiments are laid open to
the view of all, for the enriching of these NATIONS.

Unto which is added A Particular discourse of the Natural History and
Hubandry of IRELAND.

By SAMUEL HARTLIB, Esquire

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Edward Brewster at the Crane in Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

TO THE READER.
Courteaus Reader.
THe Discourse which I did formerly publish concerning the Brabant-Husbandry,
was somewhat imperfect, nor was the Author thereof then known unto me; but since
I have learned who the Author was, I have also lighted upon a more perfect
Copy, which I intend to offer to the Public in a Second Edition, that such
as have entertained that first offer with liking and acceptance, may find the
benefit of a clearer and fuller satisfaction in that which shall further be
imparted unto them. And to the end that Ingenuity and Industry may want no
encouragement, in the mean time accept of these Enlargements upon the same
Subject; wherein you will find diverse other ways, and no less (if not more)
profitable, then that which was left by Sir RICHARD WESTON (the Author of the
Brabant-Husbandry) as a Legacy to his Sons, whose Introduction to that
Discourse, I have here premised to this, to bespeak thee in his words to his
Sons, and to gain thy affections more fully to these ways of advantaging both
thy self, and the Public. And I could wish, that God would put it in the
heart of those Worthies that manage the Public Trust; that by their Influence
and Authority, these and such like Means of Industry, may not be left wholly
to the uncertain, disorderly and lazy undertakings of private men, so as not to
have an eye over them, and over that which in their proceedings does so mainly
appear to be a Public Concernment. Therefore let us all join to entreat and
petition them, that in order to the Public and General Welfare of this
Commonwealth, these two things at least may be thought upon and settled.

1 In respect of the known untowardnes of the major part of the people, who
being wonderfully wedded to old customs, are not easily won to any new
course, though never so much to their own profit, that two or more fit persons
of approved skill and integrity may be made Public Stewards or Surveyors; one
of the Husbandry, the othet of the Woods of this Commonwealth, and empowered
to oversee and take care of the preservation of what is, and by all good
improvement to procure and provide for what is wanting to the present age: and
(except some such Expedients be used) it is more then likely will be wanting to
succeeding ages.

2 That according to the usual custom of Flaunders, a Law may be made of
letting and hiring Leases upon improvement; where the manner is, That the
Farmer covenanteth on his part, to improve the land to such or such a greater
Rent, by an orderly and excellent management of Husbandry, as well as building.
The Landlord on the other side covenanteth on his part, at the expiration of
the said Lease, to give so many years purchase of the Improvement (according to
the agreement) which is 3 or 4 years, or sometimes more, or to give out of it
such a parcel or moity of Ground. As if land formerly going for 6. s an Acre,
be upon improvement worth 10. s or 13. s 4. d an Acre. The Landlord is to give
4. or 5. s upon every Acre, more or less, according to the agreement. If it
please God to bless these Motions, and that accordingly the National
Husbandry of this Commonwealth be improved; we may hope through Gods blessing
to see better days, and to be able to bear necessary and Public burdens
with more ease to our selves, and benefit to Humane Society then hitherto we
could attain unto. Which more and more to advance, in reference to a Public
and Universal Interest, as subordinate to Higher things; and which, though
less visible and sensible, are more permanent, and to truly Rational and
Spiritual Husbandmen as perceptible, shall be the uncessant prayers and
endeavors of

Thy faithful Servant Samuel Hartlib.

Sir RICHARD WESTON late of Sutton, in the County of Surrey, his Legacy to his
Sons, etc. Anno Dom. 1645.
My Sons,
I Have left this short ensuing Treatise to you as a Legacy; if I shall not
live my self, to show you (what therein is written) by examples, which I know
instruct far more then precepts; yet precepts from a dying Father, instructing
of his Children what he has seen and known, and received information of from
witnesses free from all exceptions, should make such an impression on them, as
at least to believe their Father writ what he thought was true; And therefore
suppose those things worthy to be put in practice by them, which he himself
would have done, if it had pleased God to have granted him life and liberty;
especially seeing the matter it self, which is required by him to be done, is
in show so profitable, and so easy to be effected, and with so little charge,
considering the great gain that is proposed by it, that not any thing can
restrain a rational man from trial thereof, but not giving credit to the
Relator.

The whole Discourse shows you, how to improve barren and heathy land, and how
to raise more then ordinary profit thereof, by such ways and means as are not
practiced in England, but as commonly in some parts of Brabant and Flaunders,
as the Husbandry of Wheat and Rye is here. By that means you may nobly augment
your estates, and will receive so much the more profit and praise, by how with
more industry and diligence you govern your affairs: and will not only be
imitated, but also honored by your Neighbors, when they shall see your labors
prosper so far, as to convert barren and heathy ground left un-husbanded for
many ages, into as commodious arable land, with Pastures and Meadows, as any be
in this Kingdom. And certainly, that man is worthy of praise and honor, who
being possessed of a large and barren Demeasne, constrains it by his labor and
industry to produce extraordinary fruits; which redounds not only to his own
particular profit, but also to the Public benefit. Cato says, It is a great
shame to a man, not to leave his Inheritance greater to his Successors then he
received it from his Predecessors, and that he despises the liberality of God,
who by slothfulness loses that which his land may bring forth, as not seeming
willing to reap the fruits which God has offered him. Nay, he threatens the
crime of high treason; to those that do not augment their Patrimony so much as
the Increase surmounts the Principal. It is a thing much celebrated by
Antiquity, and thought the noblest way to gather Wealth, for to employ ones Wit
and Money upon his Land, and by that means to augment his estate. If you
observe the common course of things, you will find that Husbandry is the End,
which Men of all estates in the world do point at. For to what purpose do
Soldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and men of all Occupations and Trades,
toil and labor with great affection, but to get Money? and with that money,
when they have gotten it, but to purchase Land? and to what end do they buy
that land, but to receive the fruits of it to live? and how shall one receive
the fruits of it, but by his own Husbandry or a Farmers? so that it appears by
degrees; that what course soever a man takes in this world, at last he comes
to Husbandry, which is the most common Occupation amongst men, the most
natural and Holy, being commanded by the mouth of God to our First Fathers.
There is care and diligence requisite in Husbandry, as there is in all the
Actions of the World; and therefore as a Captain has a Lieutenant to command
his Soldiers in his absence, or for his ease: So must you provide some able
honest man to whom you will commit the execution of such things, as you your
selves cannot do without too much labor: whereof you must often take an
account, and confer with him (as occasion shall require) about your business,
that nothing may be left undone for want of providence. To such a man you must
give good wages, with intent to advance your own gain, and take the more ease,
by reason of his honesty and knowledge.

You will find this Husbandry (after you have once had experience of it) to be
very pleasing to you, and so exceeding profitable, that it will make you
diligent: For no man of any Art or Science (except an Alchymist) ever pretended
so much gain any other way, as you shall see demonstrated in this ensuing
Treatise. The Usurer doubles but his principal, with Interest upon Interest in
7 years; but by this little Treatise, you shall learn now to do more then
treble your principle in one years compass And you shall see how an Industrious
man in Brabant and Flaunders would bring 500 acres of barren and heathy land,
that was not worth at the most above 5. l a year, to be worth 700. l a year in
less time then 7 years. I know no reason why the like may not be done in
England, for we are under as good a Climate as they are; Our heathy Land, that
is neither Sand nor Loam, is as good a soil as their barren ground is. We have
not only Dung to enrich our Land, but also Lime and Marle, of which they know
not the use, where they sow their gainfullest Commodities mentioned in this
ensuing Treatise, nor of any other Manure but only Dung. In fine, I am certain
there is none of their Commodities but grow in England, as they do in Brabant
and Flaunders, but ours are not of the same kind, as theirs, nor put to the
same use. What cannot be vented at home, may as well be vented from hence into
Holland, as the like commodities are from Flaunders thither. I will say no more
of this Subject in the Preface: only it remains to tell you, that you must not
expect either Eloquence or Method in this ensuing Treatise; but a true Story
plainly set forth in the Last Will and Testament of your Father; which he would
have you execute: but before all things, to be sure you lay the Foundation of
your Husbandry upon the Blessing of Almighty God, continually imploring his
divine aid and assistance in all your labors: for it is God that gives the
increase: and believing this as the Quintessence and soul of Husbandry, Primum
quaerite Regnum Dei; and postea haec omnia adjicientur vobis. These things
being briefly promised, I will leave the rest to this short ensuing Treatise,
and commit you all with a Fathers Blessing to the Protection and Providence of
Almighty God.

Thus far Sir RICHARD VVESTONS Introduction to the discou^se of BRABANT
HUSBANDRY; which is shortly to be published in a Second Edition corrected and
enlarged. A large Letter concerning the Defects and Remedies of English
Husbandry, written to Mr. Samuel Hartlib.
SIR,
ACcording to your desires, I have sent you what I have observed in France,
about the sowing of a seed called commonly, Saint-Foine, which in English is as
much to say as Holy-Hay, by reason, as I suppose of the excellency of it. It Is
called by Parkinson in his Herball, where you may see a perfect description of
it, Onobrychis Vulgaris, or Cocks head; because of it is flower, or Medick
Fetchling: By some it is called Polygala; because it causes cattle to give
abundance of milk. The plant most like unto it, and commonly known; being
frequently sown in gardens, is that which is called French Honey-suckle, and
is a kind of it, though not the same. France although it be supposed, to want
the fewest things of any Province in Europe; yet it has no small want of Hay,
especially about Paris; which has necessitated them to sow their dry and
barren lands with this seed. Their manner of sowing it, is done most commonly
thus: When they intend to let their Corn-lands ly, because they be out of
heart, and not situate in a place convenient for manuring, then they sow that
land with Oats, and these seeds together about equal parts; the first year
they only mow off their Oats, leaving the Saint Foine to take root and
strength that year; Yet they may if they please, when the year is seasonable,
mow it the same year it is sown; but it is not the best way to do so: the year
following they mow it, and so do seven years together; the ordinary burden is
about a load, or a load and a half in good years, upon an Arpent, (which is an
100 square Poles or Rods, every Pole or Rod being 20 foot) which quantity of
ground being nigh a 4th. part less than an English Acre; within a league of
Paris, is usually Rented at 6 or 7 s After the land has rested 7 years; then
they usually break it up, and sow it with corn till it be out of heart, and
then sow it with Saint Foine as formerly: for it does not impoverish land, as
Annual Plants do; but after seven years, the roots of this plant being great
and sweet, as the roots of Licorish, do rot, being turned up by the Plough, and
enrich the land. I have seen it sown in diverse places here in England;
especially in Cobham-Park in Kent, about 4 miles from Gravesend; where it has
thriven extraordinary well upon dry Chalky banks, where nothing else would
grow: and indeed such dry barren land is most proper for it (as moist rich land
for the great Trefoile) or great Glover-Grasse (although it will grow
indifferently well on all lands) and when the other grasses and plants are
destroyed by the parching heat of the Sun; because their roots are small and
shallow; this flourishes very much, having very great root and deep in the
ground, and therefore not easily to be exsiccated; As we have observed Ononis
or Rest-Harrow commonly to do, on dry lands; but if you sow this on wet land,
the water soon corrupts the root of it. This plant without question would much
improve many of our barren lands, so that they might be mowen every year once,
at least seven years together, and yield excellent fodder for cattle, if so be
that it be rightly managed; otherwise it comes to nothing, as I have seen by
experience. I therefore council those who sow this, or the great Trefoile or
Clover-Grasse, or any other sort of grasses, that they observe these Rules.

1 That they do make there ground fine, and kill all sorts of other grasses and
plants; otherwise they being native English will by no means give way to the
French ones; especially in this moist climate; and therefore they are to be
blamed; who with one ploughing sow this or other seeds; for the grass
presently grows up and choaketh them, and so by their negligence, and ill
Husbandry, discourageth themselves and others.

2 Let them not be too sparing of their seeds; for the more they sow, the
closer and thicker they will grow, and presently fully stock the ground, that
nothing else can grow. And further the seeds which come from beyond the Seas,
are oftentimes old and much decayed, and therefore the more seed is required.

3 Not to expect above 7. years profit by it; for in that time it will decay,
and the natural grass will prevail over it; for every plant has his period;
some in one year; some in 2. others in 3. as the common Thistle; and therefore
after 7. years let them either plough the land up, and sow it with that same
seed again, or with other Grain as they do in France.

4 Let not sheep or other cattle bite them the first year, that they may be
well rooted; for these grasses are far sweeter then the ordinary grasses; and
cattle will eat them down, leaving the other; and consequently discourage their
growth.

5 The best way, if men will be at the charge, is to make their ground very
fine, as they do when they are to sow Barley, and harow it even; and then to
how these seeds in alone without any other grain, as the Gardiners do Pease;
yet not at so great a distance; but let them make the ranges about a foots
breadth one from another, and they shall see their grasses flourish, as if they
were green Pease; especially if they draw the how through them once or twice
that summer to destroy all the weeds and grasses: And if they do thus, the
great Clover and other seeds may be mowen even twice the first year, as I have
experimented in diverse small plots of ground.

There is at Paris likewise another sort of fodder, which they call La Lucern,
which is not inferior, but rather preferred before this Saint Foine, for dry
and barren grounds; which has bin lately brought thither, and is managed as
the former; and truly every day produces some new things, not only in other
Countries, but also in our own. And though I cannot but very much commend
these plants unto my Countrymen, knowing that they may be beneficial to this
Nation; yet I especially recommend unto them a famous kind of grass growing in
Wiltshire, 19 miles from Salisbury, at Maddington, which may better be called
one of the wonders of this land, then the Hawthorne-tree at Glassenbury, which
superstition made so famous: for diverse of the same kind are found elsewhere.
You may find this, grass briefly described in a Book called Phytologia
Britannica, (which lately came forth, and set down even all the plants which
have been found naturally growing in England, Gramen Caninum Supinum
Longissimum, which grows 9 miles from Salisbury, Mr, Tuckers at Madington:
where with they fat hogs; and which is 24 foot long, a thing almost incredible;
yet commonly known to all that shire. Now without question, if the seed of this
grass, be sown in other rich Meadows, it will yield extraordinarily; though
perchance not so much, as in its proper place. I wonder that those that live
thereabouts, have not tried to fertilize their other Meadows with it: for it
is a peculiar species of grass; and though some ingenious men have found about
90 species of grasses in this Island: yet there is none like to this, that can
by any means be brought to such an height, and sweetness. And truly I
suppose, that the through examination of this grass, is a thing of very great
importance, for the improvement of Meadows and Pastures; and it may excel the
great Trefoile, Saint Foine, La-Lucern, or any exotic plant whatsoever. And
though I am very unwilling to exceed the bounds of an Epistle; yet I cannot
but certify you, wherein the Husbandry of this Nation in other particulars (as
I suppose) is greatly deficient, which I will do as briefly as may be; and
likewise, how ingenious men may find Remedies for these deficiencies.

1 Deficiency concerning Ploughs and Carriages.
First, he would do the honest and painful Husbandman a very great pleasure, and
bring great profit to this Nation, who could facilitate the going of the plough
and lighten our ordinary Carriages. I wonder, that so many excellent
Mechanics, who have beaten their brains about the perpetual Motion and other
curiosities, that they might find the best ways to ease all Motions, should
never so much as to honor the Plough (which is the most necessary Instrument
in the world) by their labor and studies. I suppose all know, that it would be
an extraordinary benefit to this Country, if that 1 or 2 horses could plough
and draw as much as 4 or 6, and further also, that there is no small difference
in ploughs, and wagons, when there is scarce any s^^e rule for the making
them; and every Country, yea almost every County, differs not only in the
ploughs; but even in every part Some with wheels, others without; some turning
the Rest (as they call it) as in Kent, Picardy and Normandy, others not; some
having Coulters of one fashion, others of another; others as the Dutch, having
an Iron wheel or circle for that purpose; some having their sheares broad at
point; some not; some being round, as in Kent, others flat; some tying their
horses by the tail, as in Ireland. So, likewise Wagons and Carts differ: some
using 4 wheels, others 2 only; some carrying timber on a wheels in a Cart,
others with 4 wheels, and a long pole only between, which is the best way;
some plough with 2 horses only, as in Norfolk, and beyond seas in France,
Italy, where I never saw above 3 horses in a plough, and one only to hold and
drive: But in Kent I have seen 4, 6, yea 12 horses and oxen; which variety
shows, that the Husbandman, who is ordinarily ignorant in Mechanics, is
even at his wits end in this Instrument, which he must necessarily use
continually. Surely he should deserve very well of this Nation, and be much
honored by all, that would set down exact Rules for the making of this most
necessary, yet contemned Instrument, and for every part thereof: for without
question there are as exact Rules to be laid down for this, as for Shipping and
other things. And yet in Shipping, how have we within these 6 years
out-stripped our selves, and gone beyond all Nations? for which Art some
deserve eternal honor. And why may we not in this? I know a Gentleman, who
now is beyond seas, where he excels even the Hollanders, in their own
business of draining; who promises much in this kind, and I think he is
able to perform it; I could vvish, he were called on to make good his
promise. In China, it is ordinary to have wagon to pass up and down
without horses or oxen, with sails as ships do: and lately in Holland a
vvaggon was framed, which with ordinary sails carried 30 people 60 English
miles in 4 hours. I know some excellent Scholars, who promise much by the
means of Horizontall sails (viz.) to have 3 or 4 Ploughs to go together; which
shall likewise both sovve and harrovv.

I dare not being ignorant in these high speculations, engage my self to do
much thereby; but wish these gentlemen, whom I know to be extremely ingenious,
would attempt something, both for the satisfying of themselves and others.
There is an ingenious Yeoman of Kent who has 2 ploughs fastened together very
finely, by the which he plougheth 2 furrows at once, one under another; and so
stirs up the land 12 or 14 inches deep, which in deep land is good. Near
Greenwich there lives an Honorable Gentleman, who has excellent Corn on
barren land, and yet plougheth his land with one horse, when as usually through
Kent they use 4 and 6. These things show that much may be done in this kind;
and I hope some in these active times, vvil undertake and accomplish this work
of so great importance.

2 Deficiencie, about digging of land, Setting and Howing in of Corn.
There is a Book long since Printed, made by Sir Hugh Plattes, (the most curious
man of his time) called Adams Art revived, wherein is shevved the great
benefit which would accrue to this Nation, if all land which were fit to be
dug, were so ordered, and their corn set. Mr. Gab. Plattes likewise has
written much of this kind, and promises that men shall reap 100 for one; all
charges born which are very great. That this may be true, he brings some
probable Reasons, supposing that less then a peck of Wheat, vvil set an Acre,
I dare not promise so much as these Gentlemen do, neither can I commend Mr.
Gab. Plattes setting Instrument: For I know their are many difficulties in it,
which he himself could never vvade through; but concerning digging and
setting, and hovving in of Corn, these things I dare maintain.

1 That it is a deficiency in Husbandry, that it is used no more.

2 That one good digging, because it goes deeper than the Plough, and buryeth
all weeds, kills the grasses; is as good as three Ploughings, and if the
Land be mellovv, not much more chargeable.

3 That it would employ many 1000 of people, that a third part of the seed
might be saved. As I have found by experience, that all the weeds and grasses,
might be more easily destroyed thereby, and the ground better accommodated for
other crops; and to conclude, the crop considerably greater. Yet thus much I
must further say, concerning setting of Grain, That great Beans are even of
necessity to be set, and that small Beans in Surrey and other places, are
likewise set with profit, for the reasons above mentioned; that to set Pease
(unless Hastevers) Oats, Barley, is a thing even ridiculous: that Wheat
although in diverse grounds it may be set with profit; yet to how it in (as the
Gardiners speak) as they do Pease, though not at the same distance, but about a
foot the ranges one from another, is better then setting, for these Reasons.

1 Because to set Corn is an infinite trouble and charge; and if it be not very
exactly done, which children neither can nor will do, and these must be the
chief setters; will be very prejudicious.

2 If worms, frost, ill weather, or fowls, destroy any part of your seed,
which they will do; your crop is much impared.

3 The ground cannot be so well weeded, and the mould raised about the roots by
the how. Which 3 inconveniences are remedied by the other way.

Further, I dare affirm, that after the ground is dug or ploughed and
harrowed; even it is better to how Wheat in, then to sow it after the common
way; because that the weeds may be easily destroyed by running the how through
it in the Spring, and the mould raised about the roots of the Corn, as the
Gardiners do with Pease, it would save much Corn in dear years, and for other
Reasons before mentioned. Yea, it is not more chargeable; for a Gardener will
how in an Acre for 5 s and after in the spring for less money run it over
with a how, and cut up all the weeds, and raise the mould: which charges are
not great, and you shall save above a bushel of seed, which in dear years is
more vvorth then all your charges.

Further 1 s 6 d an Acre for the sovving and harrowing of an Acre in Kent is
accounted a reasonable price; but if any fear charges let him use a
Drill-Plough. I therefore cannot but commend the howing in of wheat, as an
excellent piece of good Husbandry, whether the ground be dug or ploughed;
not only because it saves much Corn, imployeth much people, and it is not
chargeable; but it also destroys all weeds, fitteth grounds for after-crops
and causes a greater increase, and in my apprehension is a good Remedy against
Smut and Mildew. There is an Ingenious Italian, who wondereth how it comes to
pass, that if one sets a Grain of Corn, as Wheat, Barley, etc. it usually
produces 300 or 400, as I have tried: yet if you sow Wheat after the ordinary
way, 6. or 8. for one is accounted a good crop; what beccometh of all the
Corn, that is sown, when as the 50th. part, if it do grow, would be
sufficient? For answer to this.

1 I say, much Corn is sown, which nature has destinated for the Hens and
Chickens, being without any considerable vegetative faculty.

2 Womes, Frosts, Floods, Crows and Larkes, (which every one does not
consider) to devour not a little.

3 Weeds, as Poppie, May-weed, and the grasses growing with the Corn, do
destroy much.

Lastly, when Corn is so sown after the ordinary manner, much is buried in
the furrows; especially if the ground be grazy: much is thrown on heaps in
holes, and consequently starve and choke one another. Most of these
Inconveniences, are to be remedyed by this way of setting and hovving in of
Corn.

3 Deficiencie, concerning Gardening.
Gardening, though it be a vvonderfull improver of lands, as it plainly appears
by this, that they give extraordinary rates for land; (viz.) from 40 s per Acre
to 9 pound, and dig and how and dung their land which costeth very much; Yet
I know diverse, which by 2 or 3 Acres of land maintain themselves and family,
and employ other about their ground; and therefore their ground must yield a
vvonderfull increase, or else it could not pay charges; yet I suppose there are
many Deficiencies in this calling.

1 Because it is but of fevv years standing in England, and therefore not
deeply rooted. About 50 years ago, about which time Ingenuities first began to
flourish in England; This Art of Gardening, began to creep into England, into
Sandwich, and Surrey, Fulham, and other places.

Some old men in Surrey, where it flourishes very much at present; report,
That they knew the first Gardiners that came into those parts, to plant
Cabages, Colleflowers, and to sow Turnips, Carrets, and Parsnips, to sow
Raith (or early ripe) Rape, Pease, all which at that time were great rarities,
we having few, or none in England, but what came from Holland and Flaunders.
These Gardiners with much ado procured a plot of good ground, and gave no less
then 8 pound per Acre; yet the Gentleman was not content, fearing they would
spoil his ground; because they did use to dig it. So ignorant were we of
Gardening in those days.

2 Many parts of England are as yet ignorant. Gravesend.
Within these 20 years, a famous Town within less then 20 miles of London, had
not so much as a mess of Pease but what came* from London, where at present
Gardening flourishes much I could instance diverse others places, both in the
North and West of England, where the name of Gardening, and Howing is scarcely
known, in which places a few Gardiners might have saved the lives of many poor
people, who have starved these dear years.

3 We have not Gardening-ware in that plenty and cheapnesse (unless perhaps
about London) as in Holland and other places, where they not only feed
themselves with Gardiners ware, but also fat their Hogs and Cows.

4 We have as yet diverse things from beyond Seas, which the Gardiners may
easily raise at home, though nothing nigh so much as formerly; for in Queen
Elizabeth's time, we had not only our Gardiners ware from Holland, but also
Cherries from Flaunders; Apples from France; Saffron, Licorish from Spain;
Hopps from the Low Countries: And the Frenchman who writes the Treasure
Politic says, that it is one of the great Deficiencies of England, that Hopps
will not grow, whereas now it is known, that Licorish, Saffron, Cherries,
Apples, Pears, Hopps, Cabbages of England are the best in the world.
Notwithstanding we as yet want many things, as for example: We want Onnions,
very many coming to England from Flaunders, Spain; Madder for dying comes from
Zurick-Sea by Zealand; we have Red Roses from France; Anice-seeds,
Fennel-seeds, Cumine, Caraway, Rice from Italy, which without question would
grow very well in diverse moist lands in England; yea Sweet Marjorame, Barley,
and Gromwell seed, and Virga Aureae, though they grow in our hedges in England.

Lastly, Gardening is deficient in this particular: that we have not Nurceries
sufficient in this land, of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Vines, Chestnuts, Almonds;
but Gentlemen are necessitated, to send to London many hundred miles for them.

Briefly, for the advancement of this ingenuous calling, I only desire, that
Industrious Gentlemen would be pleased to encourage some expert workmen into
the places where they live, and to let them land at a reasonable rate, and if
they be poor and honest, to lend a little stock; they will soon see the benefit
that will redound, not only to themselves, but also to all their neighbors,
especially the poor, who are not a little sustained by the Gardiners labors
and Ingenuities.

4 Deficiency in Smut and Mildew.
4 Our Husbandry is deficient in this, that we know not how to remedy the
infirmities of our growing Corn; especially Smut and Mildew, to instance in
these two only, which oftentimes bring great calamities to these Nations: Smut
in wet years, Mildews in dry. These distempers in Corn, are not only in our
Country; Helmont.
but also in other places. A learned Author says, that Smuttynesse of corn,
which makes it smell like a Red Herring, was not known in France, till about
1530, at which time the great foul disease began to break forth, which he
conceives from hence to have some original; as also the camp-disease. Mildews
are very great in the Kingdom of Naples, which often stick to the sithes of
those that mow grass and Corn: and (God be thanked) we are not troubled with
Locusts, which is a great flying Grasse-hopper, nor Palmer-worms, which is a
kind of great black Cater-piller, nor with great hail in summer, nor with great
drought, which stifleth the ear in the stalk; which Calamities in hot
Countries, do very often totally destroy the honest and patient Husbandman's
labors: neither are we troubled with extreme colds, which in New England and
other cold Countries, do often destroy the Corn. But to return to our purpose.

And first briefly to show you my opinion concerning the Causes of Smuttynesse
I desire not to fetch Causes afar off, and to tell you of the sad
Conjunctions of Mars and Saturn (for I think Quae suprae nos, belong not to us)
when as we have enough at home: This is certain, that there are many evident
causes of this corruption of Corn.

1 A moist season about Kerning-time: which moisture either corrupts the
roots of the Plant, or the nourishment of it, or the seed in its Embrio: or
perhaps in some measure all these.

2 Low; moist, foggy ground, for the reasons above mentioned.

3 Dung'd land. In Vineyards it is observed, that dung causes more increase in
quantity, but less in goodness, so that the ill-tast of the dung may easily
be discerned; because wine has an high taste, without question the same
happens to other Plants, although it be not so easily discerned; for the
ferment or ill odor of the dung, cannot be over-mastered by the Plants, as we
see also in Animals, that corrupt diet causes unsavory tastes in the flesh: so
hogs in New-foundland, where they are nourished by fish, may by their tastes be
called rather Sea-porpusses then Land-swine.

4 The sovving of Smutty Corn often produces Smuttynesse; the son like unto the
father; I account Smutty Corn an imperfect or sick Grain, and suppose that by
a Microscope the imperfection may be discerned.

Lastly, the sovving of the same seed often on the same field, causes
Smuttynesse; because that nitrous jewce, which is convenient for the
nourishment of the Grain, has been exhasted in the precedent years; and
therefore it is excellent Husbandry every year to change the species of Grain,
and also to buy your Seed-Corn, from places far distant. I am informed of a
Gentleman, who did sovve some Wheat which came from Spain, where the Grain is
usually very hard and flinty, and as it were transparent, and far vveightier
than ours (as it appears by a measure at Amsterdam which holds about 3
bushels, and if our Wheat in the Northern parts vveigheth 160. the Southern
Corn weighs sometimes 180, 200, 220:) and had a crop beyond expectation.

The usual Cures of Smuttynesse, besides those mentioned before, are these.

1 To lime your ground, which warmeth and dries the land.

2 To lime your Corn, which is done thus. First, slack your lime, add then
moisten your Corn or lime, and stir them together, till your Grain be as big
as a small Pease. This liming preserves Corn likewise from birds and worms,
and is found a very good Remedy against this disease: others make a strong ly
with common salt, and steep their Corn in it all night, and then draw away
their ly for further use; which seldom fails of its desired effect. Whether
this strong ly does by its corrosivenesse, mortify the weak and imperfect
Corn, so that it will not grow; Or whether it be a Remedy, to cure the
imperfections thereof, is worth the enquiry? I suppose this ly does exsiccate
the superfluous humidity, which is the cause of this corruption. If Corn be
brought into the barn very Smutty, in Kent they usually thrash it on dry floors
planked with boards; by which means, the Smuttynesse is beaten away, and
sticks not to the Grain, only a little blackness appears about the eye,
but if it be thrashed on a moist floor, the blackness sticks to the grain,
which therefore appears dark, and is sold at a lower rate to the Bakers.

Mildew is without question an unctuous dew, which descends from above about
Midsommer; it abounds in dry years, as Smuttynesse in moist. I cannot think
that there is ordinarily any Malignity in this dew, but it produces its effect
by manifest causes, viz. from an oily viscuous quality which stops the pores
of the husk wherein the Wheat lies, and depriveth it from the Air, and
consequently from nourishment: for the Air is the life of all things. I have
heard, and do believe, that if you streak any ear of Wheat with oil, it will
produce the same effect. I am sorry that I never tried, that I might better
understand the nature of this sad calamity which often undoeth the Industrious
Husbandman; and causes great scarcity in this Isle. It is to be observed
further, that Wheat only suffers considerable damage by Mildew; because it
lies in a chaffy husk, which other Grains do not. The Grounds most subject to
Mildew are these.

1 Those that are enclosed with trees and high hedges. And truly this is the
only great Inconveniency I find by enclosures.

2 Low Valleys. I have seen very often in the same field, the banks fine, bright
Corn; and all the lower parts, though greater in straw; yet little vvorth by
reason of the Mildew.

3 Dung made of straw, I have observed to dispose much to Mildew, and
Sheeps-dung to be a kind of Antidote against it: as also Pigeons-dung; because,
as I conceive, these, 2 last sorts abound much in Niter, which produces a
firm, hard, bright Corn, not easily to be putrefied; but the other being more
oily and Sulphurous causes a dark Spungy Corn, soon corruptible. And 2
because straw is a part in the same kind corrupted, which is always in some
measure hurtful to the same species, both in Animals and all Vegetables, and
therefore rotten sticks or the earth proceeding from them, is found hurtful to
the roots of trees; and trees will hardly grow, where Roots of other trees
have formerly been corrupted.

The Remedies for this Accident, briefly are these. (Not to speak of Bees, who
questionless make most of their Honey, from these Honeys or Mildews: for they
gather very little, in comparison of that which falls.)

1 The best way is to cut down the trees about your ground, and your hedges
lovv, that the vvind may ventilate your Corn.

2 To sovve early; that your Corn may be full Kerned, Sir Cheney Culp.
before these Mildews fall. I am informed, that an Ingenious Knight in Kent,
did for curiosity sovve Wheat in all months of the year, and that the Corn
sovvn in July, did produce such an increase, that it is almost incredible; and
truly I think it a great fault in many places that they sow late, for many
reasons: I am sure in France, they usually sow before Michaelmas.

3 Some use (and with good profit) to draw a line over their Corn, and to
strike off the Mildew, before it be inspissated by the Sun; This ought
especially to be done before sunrising: two men in an hour will easily run
over an Acre; the Mildews usually fall like a thick fog, or a Mysty rain; if
you go to your Bees, you will soon perceive it by their extraordinary labor,
very early in the morning.

4 The use of a kind of bearded Wheat, is an excellent Remedy: for the beard
shoveth off the dew, that it does not so easily insinuate it self into the
ear, and likewise causes the ear to shake by the least wind. There is a kind
of Wheat in Buckingham-shire called Red-straw-Wheat, which is much commended:
it is a strong-stalked Wheat, and does not soon lodge, and therefore excellent
for Rank land where Corn is apt to lodge, and consequently to Mildew; but I
question whether it has any property against Mildew. This I am very confident
of, that if this Wheat, or any other, were without the Chaffy husks exposed
bare to the Air; as Barley and Rye are, Wheat would not be afflicted with
Mildew. Perhaps such Grain may be found by diligent enquiry. I have casually
picked out of a Wheat-field some stalks, which had 2 ears on them: and though
Barley usually has been 2 ranges; yet I have seen some sorts wit 4, 6, and
there are many great varieties in grains not yet discovered. Truly, if any one
knows better ways then these, how to cure this Malady of Mildew, he is much
to blame, if he do not publish it for the good of his Countrymen.

5 Deficiency concerning the planting of Apples, Pears, Cherries and Plums.
I will not here set down the diverse manners of Graftings and Inoculations,
which nevertheless is an art absolutely necessary in Planting; for every book
of Husbandry does show it, and every Gardener can teach it those who are
desirous to learn it; Neither will I set down all the sorts of Apples, Pears,
Cherries, Plums, etc. for it would be too tedious a discourse; and Mr.
Parkinson has already very excellently done it, in his Book called Paradisus
Terrestris, where at leisure you may read it. I will only point briefly at the
Deficiencies, which I find in this part of Husbandry, and the best ways to
Remedy them.

1 I say, that it is a great Deficiency in England, that we have not more
Orchards planted. It Is true, that in Kent and about London, and also in
Glocestershire, Hereford, and Worcester, there are many gallant Orchards, but
in other Countries, they are very rare and thin* but if there were as many
more, even in any Country, they would be very profitable. I know in Kent, that
some advance their ground even from 5 s per Acre to 5 pound by this means, and
if I should relate, what I have heard by diverse concerning the profit of a
Cherry-Orchard, about Sittenburne in Kent, you would hardly believe me; yet I
have heard it by so many, that I believe it to be true: Namely; that an Orchard
of 30 Acres of Cherries, produced in one year above a 1000 pound, but now the
trees are almost all dead; it was one of the first Orchards planted in Kent.
Mr. Cambden reports, that the Earl of Leicester's Gardener in Queen
Elizabeth's time, first began to plant Flemish Cherries in those parts; which in
his time did spread into 16 other Parishes, and were at that time sold at
greater rates then now; yet I know that 10 or 15 pound an Acre has been
given for Cherries, more for Pears, and Apples.

2 There is a great Deficiency in the ordering of Orchards, in that they are
not well pruned, but full of Moss, Misletoe, and Suckers, and oftentimes the
ground is packed too thick of trees; for they should stand at least 20 foot
asunder; neither will ill husbands bestovv dunging, digging, or any other cost
on Orchards, which if they did, might pay half their rents in some places. One
told me for a secret, a Composition for to make Trees bear much and excellent
fruit, which was this: First, in an old tree, to split his root; then to
apply a Compost made of Pigeons-dung, lees of wine, or stale Urine, and a
little Brimstone, (to destroy the worms,) it has some probability of truth:
for by experience I know that a bushel of Pigeons-dung has caused a tree to
grow and bear, which for diverse years before stood at a stand; but concerning
the splitting the roots, I know not what to say. Some old Authors affirm this
ought to be done; because that the roots may as well be hide-bound, as other
parts of the tree, and not able to attract his nourishment, and when the Root
is split, it will speedily send forth diverse small fibrous roots; which are the
principal Attractors. It were good that some would give us an account exact
of this Experiment, But some will object against Orchards, that they spoil much
ground, and therefore ought to be planted only in hedges. To this I answer.

1 That Plumtrees and Damsins may very well be planted in hedges, being
ordinarily thorny plants; this is used very much in Surrey and Kent, where the
Plums usually pay no small part of their Rent; yet I never saw in these
Southern parts of England, any Apples or Pears thrive in an Hedge, unless a
Crab or a Wilden, or some Sweeting of little worth. How they thrive in
Hereford-shire and those places, I know not.

2 The Inconveniences of Orchards planted at 20 or 30 foot distance, is not
worth speaking of: for this is the usual course in Kent, when they plant any
ground, they exactly place them in rank and file, and then plough their lands
many years, and sow them with Corn, till the Orchard begins to bear fruit;
then they lay them down for pasture, which pasture is not considerably sour;
but has this advantage above other Pastures.

1 That it is sooner grown by 14 days in the spring than the Medows, and
therefore very serviceable.

2 In Parching Summers here is plenty, when other places have scarcity.

3 They are great shelters for Cattle, especially sheep, who will in those
places, in great snowes scrape up meat, which in other places they cannot do:
and if the pasture were sour, yet the loss is not great; for it will be a
convenient place for the Hogs to run in, who must have a place for that
purpose, where there are no Commons.

4 I say, that the Benefits are so many by Orchards, that you ought like an
ungrateful man to thrust them up to the hedge: for they afford curious walks
for pleasure, food for Cattle, both in the Spring early, and also in the
parching Summer, and nipping snowy Winter: They afford fuel for the fire, and
also shades from the heat, physic for the sick, refreshment for the sound,
plenty of food for man, and that not of the worst, and drink also even of the
best, and all this without much labor, care or cost, who therefore can justly
open his mouth against them?

3 Deficiency is, that we do not improve many excellent Fruits, which grow
amongst us very well, and that we have as yet many fruits from beyond Seas,
which will grow very well with us. I pass by the general and great Ignorance,
that is amongst us, of the variety of Apples, of which there are many sorts
which have some good and peculiar uses; most men contenting themselves with the
knowledge of half a score of the best, thinking the virtues of all the rest are
comprehended in them: as also of the variety of Pears, which are incredibly
many. A Friend of mine near Gravesend, has lately collected about 200 species.
I know another in Essex, (Mr. Ward) who has nigh the same number. I hear of
another in Worcestershire, not inferior to these. In Northamton-shire. I know
one, who has likewise collected very many. So that I dare boldly say, there
are no less in this Island then 500 species; some commended for their early
ripeness; some for excellent tastes; some for beauty; others for greatness;
some for great bearers; others for good Bakers; some for long lasters, others
for to make Perry, etc. But to our purpose: I say many rare fruits are
neglected; to Instance.

1 In the Small-nut or Filbird, which is not much inferior to the best and
sweetest Almonds.

2 The great Damsin or Pruin-plum, which grows well and bears full in
England.

3 Almonds, which grows well and bears good fruit, as I have seen diverse
bushels on one tree in my Brothers Orchard.

4 Walnuts, which is not a fruit to be despised.

5 Vines and Mulberries, but of these presently in another place. I might
likewise add Currants, Raspeses, of which excellent drinks may be made.

6 Quinces, of the which I cannot but tell you that a Gentleman at Prichenel in
Essex, who had a tree from beyond Sea, has the best in England, and has made
above 30 pound of a small piece of ground planted with them, as I have heard
from his own wifes mouth. And therefore it is by reason of our ill Husbandry,
that we have Quinces from Flaunders, Small-nuts from Spain, Pruins from France,
and also Walnuts and Almonds from Italy, and Chestnuts (which I had almost
forgot) from Portugal. And now I cannot but digress a little, to tell you a
strange and true story, with my opinion of it. In diverse places of Kent, as at
and about Gravesend, in the Country and elsewhere, very many of the prime
Timbers of their old barnes and houses are of Chestnut-wood, and yet there is
scarce a Chestnut-tree within 20 miles of that place, and the people altogether
ignorant of such trees. This shows that in former times those places did
abound with such timber; for people were not so foolish surely in former times
to run up and down the world, to procure such huge massey timbers for barnes
and such buildings when as there was plenty of Oaks and Elmes, at their doors:
And further, it shows, that these Trees will grow again with us to a great
bigness. This puts into my mind the story of the moore-logs, which are
found in diverse places of the North of England in moors many foot deep; which
logs are long and black, and appear to be a kind of Fur or Pine; and yet in
those places, people are altogether ignorant of these Trees, the Country not
producing any of these species. The first story of Kent, which I know to be
true, causes me to wonder the less at the latter: for I see that a species of
wood, may be destroyed, even totally in a place. And

2 I know, that in Virginia and New England, that Pines, and Firres and Cedars
do grow wonderfully thick in such Moors or Swamps, and being light wood, and
easily wrought, they are continually used, while they last, for buildings.
Further, I suppose these Moors are Commons, to the which the poor have used to
resort for firing, and how soon great woods will be consumed by them, every one
making what havoc he pleases, all men know. As concerning their being so deep
in the ground, the blackness; I suppose that when wood was abundant in those
places, every one did cut what they pleased, and left what was not for their
turns, which being in moist places, was soon glutted with moisture, and made
ponderous; by which means it soon buried it self, as ships do, on quicksand, or
perhaps the turf (which has a peculiar faculty vegetative, for where it is
exhausted, it soon grows again) in time has grown over them; the people
permitting it, because that wood, once sobb'd in wet, is of little use, as we
see by Piles on the marshes-side, scarce any man vouchsafing to carry them
home. The blackness of this wood proceeds, as I suppose, from the sooty
fume, or evaporation of the black turffe, (which endeavors, as all earths
do, to reduce all things into its own nature; which though it be not able fully
to accomplish; yet it introduced diverse dispositions, and qualities, as
blackness in the wood. Some suppose, that these moore-logs have lain there
ever since the flood, with whom I will not contend; seeing that any wood, if it
be kept from the Air continually moist or dry, will endure even thousands of
years without putrefaction.

6 Deficiency, The 6 deficiency concerning not improving our Fruits.
is the Not-improving of our Fruits for the best ends and purposes. Normandy,
which produces but little wine, makes abundance of Cider, Perry, which they
estimate equally to wine, if it be made of good fruit. The ordinary Perry is
made of Choaky Pears, very juicy, which grow along by the high-way-sides, which
are not to be eaten raw. In Biscay in Spain, where wine is scarce, they make
Cider of a certain sweet Apple, which has a little bitterness in it, and is
like to our snouting, and the Cider is very good. And truly here in England, if
we would make Cider and Perry of the best sorts of Fruits, which is rarely
done, (for we think any fruit good enough for that purpose) we might make
drinks, no ways inferior to the French wines, which are usually spoiled
before they come over the seas to you, their spirits soon evaporating. There
are two ways of making Cider and Perry: one, by bruising and beating them, and
then presently to put them into a vessel to ferment or work (as it is usually
called) of themselves: The other way is to boil the juice with some good
spices, by which the rawnesse is taken away, and then to ferment it with some
yest, if it work not of it self, this is the best way: and I have tasted Cider
thus made of an excellent delicate taste. Neither let any complain of the
vvindinesse; for it is only want of use: When I had for 2 or 3 years
continually drunk wine beyond Sea, the strongest beer for 2 or 3 vveeks was as
vvindy to me, as Cider will be to any; and afterward when I went to Paris,
the wine of that place was as troublesome as English beer for a little time:
how much wine might be saved, and also malt if Englishmen did take these
good courses, which other Nations do, and consequently how much advantage
would this Island reap thereby? If I were an housekeeper in the Country, I
would make excellent Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Metheglin, Wine, of our own
grapes, and if my Friends would not drink these, they should drink water, or
go away a thirst: I would scorn to honor France so much as men do usually;
and the Spaniard and Italian should not laugh at us, and say that we can as
well be without bread, as their wines, Currants, etc. Thus may many other
excellent drinks be made out of our Fruits: not to speak of those which are
made of our Grain, as Barley, Wheat, etc. yet I must tell you, that I know an
Ingenious man, who can without malting Barley, make a drink not inferior to
wine, and a greater quantity of Aqua-vitae out of them, and with less cost,
then by the ordinary way, by a peculiar fermentation of his own; which time
will discover. There is another Ingenious man, who out of Damsins and other
fat and svveet plums, can make a drink not inferior to the best wines, and
abundance of Aqua-vitae. Many Ladies know how to make Cherry, Raspes-vvines;
and Sir Hugh Plattes in his Closet for Ladies, discloseth many secrets of this
kind; as also for Conserves, Marmalades, which are things both delightful and
profitable. I have a kinsman, who can even out of black-berries, make a very
pleasant drink, which curiosity he is unwilling to publish. Glauber an
excellent Chemist has diverse secrets of this kind, even to the advancing of
Hawes, Hips, Canker-berries, Slowes, to excellent Aqua-vitae's, drinks,
vinegers, which he himself first invented. In Russia in the springtime, it is
an usual custom to pierce the bark of the Birch-trees, which at that time
will weep much liquor, Helmont.
and yet like children be little the worse; this the poor ordinarily drink for
necessity, it is a pleasant healthful drink; and also the rich men, because
it is an excellent preservative against the stone.

The means to advance this profitable and pleasant work are these.

1 To advance Nurceries of all sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, Cherries, which
Gentlemen may do for a small matter, and then plant out these trees, when they
are grown great enough. The best and cheapest ways to raise all Nurcery wares,
is done thus. Plums may be raised either of stones, which when you have eaten
the plums, may be presently pricked into the ground, or by Slips, which you will
find about the old trees. Apples may be raised for Kernels (Crab-Kernels are
the best) which ought to be preserved in dry sand, til the spring, least they
grow moldy: or Crab-stalke may be fetched out of the vvoods, and grafted.
Some Trees as Sweetings, Codlings, Quinces, vvil grow very well of slips.
Cherries are very well raised by stones, (the Black-Cherries are the best,
which so soon as you have eaten them, are to be hovven into Beds made very
fine, the ranges a foot distant; bevvare least you let them heat, and take
heed of the mouse. I have seen Cherry-stones and Apple-kernels grow 2 foot and
a half in one year; and consequently in fevv years they would be fit to be
transplanted. The Art of Grafting, Inoculating a Gentleman vvil learn in two
hours.

2 Eor the advancing of Ingenuities in this kind, as that making of
Vinous-Drinks out of Apples, Plums, etc. I counsel all Ingenious Gentlemen to
try diverse experiments in these kinds; with these Cautions.

1 That he attempt not great quantities at first, which perchance will be
chargeable and troublesome; for by a gallon he may have as much certainly, as
by a hogshead.

2 Not to be discouraged, if they suceeed not well at first dash: for certainly
there are many Ingenuities in these fruits which time will discover.

3 Proceed by fermentation: for every liquour which will ferment, has a vinous
spirit in it, and without fermentation even the best fruits will have none.

Lastly, fermentation is done either in liquido, or humido; and herein consists
some Mystery. I have forgot to speak of Apricocks, Peaches, Melicotores, which
are fine pleasant fruits, yet very dangerous; and therefore called by the
Italians, Mazzo-francese, that is, Kill-Frenchman; and wish Ladies, and others
to take heed of surfeiting by these and some other dangerous plums.

The 7 deficiency concerning Vines.
I cannot without much tediousness, relate the diverse sorts of Vines, which
are even Infinite; Rome having in it usually, 40 or 50 sorts of Vines; and all
very good: Other places of Italy Spain and France, have also great varieties; I
therefore pass them by, as also the manner of managing them, because it is
described in the Countrey-Farme, and also by Bonovil a Frenchman, who at the
command of King James, wrote a short treatise of Vines and Silkworms, for the
instruction of the plantations of Virginia. I shall only according to my
method show you the Deficiencies amongst us in this particular plant, and the
best Remedies for it.

And first, although I think that the wine is the great blessing of God, which
Hot Countries especially enjoy, as temperate Countries do Milk, Butter, Cheese
in abundance, and the coldest and Barrennest Fowl, and Fish in an incredible
number; God of his goodness distributing some peculiar blessings to every
Country; Notwithstanding I dare say, it is probable, that Vineyards have
formerly flourished in England, and that we are to blame, that so little is
attempted to revive them again. There are many places in Kent called by the
names of Vineyards, and the grounds of such a Nature, that it seems probable,
they have been such. I hear further by diverse people of credit, that by records
it appears, that the tithes of wine in Glocestershire was in diverse Parishes
considerably great; but at length Gascony coming into the hands of the English,
from whence comes the most of the strong French Wine, called high-Countrey
wine, and customs being small, wine was imported into England from thence,
better and cheaper then we could make it, and it was thought convenient to
discourage Vineyards here, that the greater trade might be driven with
Gascoine, and many ships might find employment thereby.

Some fond Astrologers have conceited, that the earth being grown older, and
therefore colder has caused the sun to descend many degrees lower to warm and
cherrish it, and one argument which they bring for this opinion is, that Vines
and Silkworms are found in those Countries, wherein former times they were
unknown: But if these fond men had considered the good Husbandry in these
times, with the blessing of God on it, they had not run into such foolish
imaginations. This is true indeed, that the Roman soldiers, who had Alsatia
given them to live in, which is one of the best and most Southern places of
Germany, mutined, because they thought it so cold, that Vines should not grow
there, and that therefore they should be deprived of that delectable liquor;
whereas we find at this present day Vines flourishing many hundred miles more
toward the North, both in France, Loraine and Germany; and that they are crept
down even to the latitude of England, for the Rhenish-wines grew within a
degree of the West-Southern places of this Isle, and Paris is not two degrees
South of us, yet Vines grow threescore miles on this side Paris, as Beaumont;
yea the Vines of these places are the most delicate; for what wine is preferred
before the neat Rhenish for Ladies, and at table; and truly in my opinion,
though I have traveled twice through France; yet no wine pleased me like Vin
D'ache and of Paris especially about Rueill, which is a very fine brisk wine,
and not fuming up to the head, and Inebriating as other wines: I say therefore
that it is very probable, that if Vines have stepped out of Italy into Alsatia,
from them to these places, which are even as far North as England, and yet
the wines there are the most delicate, that they are not limited and bounded
there. For a 100 miles more or less causes little alteration in heat or cold,
and some advantages which we have will supply that defect. But not to insist too
long on probabilities, I say, that here in England some Ingenious Gentlemen
usually make wine very good, long lasting, without extraordinary labor and
costs. To instance in one, who in great Chart, in the Wild of Kent, a place
very moist and cold, Sir Peter Ricard.
yearly makes 6 or 8 hogs-heads, which is very much commended by diverse who
have tasted it, and he has kept some of it two years, as he himself told me,
and it has been very good; Others likewise in Kent do the same: and lately in
Surrey a Gentlewoman told me, that they having many grapes, which they could
not well tell how to dispose of, she, to play the good House-wife, stamped them
to make verjuice; but two months after drawing it forth, they found it very
fine brisk wine, clear like Rock-water, and in many other places such
experiments have been made. I therefore desire Ingenious men to endeavor the
raising of so necessary and pleasant a commodity; especially when French Wine
is so dear here, and I suppose is likely to be dearer; I question not, but they
shall find good profit and pleasure in so doing, and that the State will give
all encouragements to them: and if the French Wine pay excize and customs, and
the Wines here be toll-free, they will be able to afford them far cheaper,
than the French can theirs, and supply the whole Isle, if they proceed
according to these Rules.

1 To choose the best sorts of grapes, which are most proper for this Isle, and
though there are many sorts of grapes amongst Gardiners, yet I commend four
sorts especially to them; and I desire that they be very careful in this
particular: for it is the foundation of the work; if you fail in this, you fail
in all; for I know that Burdeaux-Vines bear very great grapes, make verjuice
only at Paris, and that the tender Orleans-Vine does not thrive there.

The first sort is the Parsely Vine or Canada-grape; because it first came from
those parts, where if grows naturally; and though the Country be
intolerably cold; yet even in the vvoods without manuring, it so far
ripeneth his fruits, that the Jesuits make wine of it for their mass; and
Racinee (which is the Juice of the grape newly expressed, and boiled to a
Syrup, and is very svveet and pleasant) for their Lent-provision, as you may
read in their Relations: and this Vine seems to be made for these Northern
Countries, because it has it is leaves very small and juicy, as if it were on
purpose to let in the sun, and it ripeneth sooner than other grapes, as I have
observed in Oxford-Graden,

2 Sort of Vine is the Rhenish-grape; for it grows in a temperate Country,
not much hotter in summer then England; and the wine is excellent as all know.

3 Sort is the Paris-grape; which is much like the temper of England, only a
little hotter in summer: this grape bears a small bunch close set together,
very hardy to endure frosts and other inconveniences, and is soon ripe; so
that the vintage of Paris, is sooner ended then that of Orleans or Bordeaux;
and though it be not so delicate to the taste, as some other grapes; yet it
makes an excellent brisk wine.

4 Sort is the small Muskadell; which is a very fine pleasant grape, both to
eat and to make wine. In Italy it usually grows against their houses vvalls,
and of this they make a small pleasant wine, a month or two before the
ordinary Vintage. It is a tender plant in respect of the other Vines in the
fields: these Vines I know are the most convenient for this Isle; because they
bear small bunches, and grapes soon ripen, and are hardy to endure frosts and
ill vveather.

2 To choose convenient places. For this end, I counsel them, First, to plant
Vines on the South Side of their dwelling houses, Barnes, Stables, and
Outhouses. The Gentleman of Kent, whom I mentioned before, uses this course:
and to keep the Vines from hurting his tiles, and that the wind may not wrong
his Vines, he has a frame made of poles, or any kind of wood, about a foot
from the tiles, to the which he tyeth the Vines; by this means his Vines
having the reflection of the yard, sides of the houses, and tiles do ripen very
well, and bear much; so that one old Vine, has produced nigh a hogs-head of
wine in one year: and I wish all to take this course; which is neither
chargeable, nor troublesome, but very pleasant; and if all in this Island would
do thus, it is incredible, what abundance of wine might be made, even by this
petty way.

2 If that any Gentleman will be at the charge of making a Vineyard, let him
choose a fine sandy warm hill, open to the South-east, rather than to the
South-west: for though the South-west seems to be hotter; yet the South-East
ripeneth better, as I have seen in Oxford Garden; because the South-east is
sooner warmed by the sun in the morning; and the South-west winds, are the
winds which blow most frequently, and bring rain, which refrigerate the
plants; and such a place is very requisite; for in other places Vines do not
thrive, even in France: for if you travel betwixt Paris and Orleans, which is
above 30 leagues, yet you shall scarcely see a Vineyard, because it is a plain
Champian-Countrey. So likewise betwixt Fontarabia to Bordeaux, in the Southern
parts of France, for an 100 miles together; because the land is generally a
barren sandy plain, where only Heath abounds and Pine-trees, out of which
they make Turpentine and Rozen, by wounding of them; and Tar and Pitch, by
the burning of them: and if any find such a fine warm hill, and do dung and
fence it well, he has a greater advantage of most of the Vineyards of France
by this convenience, than they have of our Isle, by being a hundred miles more
South; for most of their Vineyards are in large fields not enclosed, on land
that is stony, and but indifferently vvarme. But some will say, that the wet
weather destroys us. It Is true, that the wet will destroy all things; Sheep,
Corn, etc. yet no man will say, that therefore England will not produce and
nourish these Creatures; and if extraordinary wet years come, they spoil even
the Vines in France: but take ordinary years and our moisture is not so great,
(though some abuse us, and call England matula Coeli but the Vines, especially
those I have mentioned before, will come to such perfection as to make good
wine: and if extraordinary raines fall; yet we may help the immaturity by
Ingenuity, as I shall tell you anon: or at worst make vinegar or verjuice,
which will pay costs.

Further these advantages we have of France.

1 This Isle is not subject to nipping frosts in May, as France is; because we
are in an Isle, where the Air is more gross than in the Continent; and
therefore not so piercing and sharp, as it plainly appears by our winters,
which are not so sharp as in Padua in Italy: neither are we subject to such
storms of hail in summer, which are very frequent in hot Countries, and for
many miles together do spoil their Vines, so that they cannot make wine of the
grapes: for those grapes which are touched by the hail, have a Sulphurous and
a very unpleasant taste, and only fit to make Aqua-vitae. Further, sometimes
in France, caske for their wines is so dear, that a tun of wine may be had for
a tun of caske: and the custom and excize which is laid on wines here, is as
much again as the poor Vigneron in France expects for his wine. Not to speak of
the ill managing of their Vines, especially about Paris, where poor men
usually hire an Acre or 2 of Vines, which they manage at their spare hours,
and most commonly pack in so many plants on their ground, for to have the
greater increase, that the ground and Vines are so shaded by one another, that
I have wondered, that the Sun could dart in his beams to mature them; and
therefore I cannot but affirm again, that we may make abundance of wine here
with profit, the charges of an Acre of Vineyard not being so great as of Hops:
an hundred sets well rooted, at Paris cost usually but 4 or 6 sous or pence,
where I have bought many: ^000 will plant an Acre very well, 50 s a year is the
ordinary rate for the three diggings with their crooked Instrument called
^^ventage, and the increase usually four tuns for an Acre, which will be profit
enough: and though I refer all to Bonovil and others, who have written of the
managing of Vines; yet I counsel to get a Vigneron from France, where there
are plenty, and at cheaper rates than ordinary servants here, and who will be
serviceable also for Gardening.

2 I will briefly tell what I have seen. In Italy through all Lombardy, which
is for the most part plain and Champian, their Vines grow in their hedges on
Walnut-trees, for the most part: in which fields, they speak of three harvests
yearly, viz. 1 Winter-Corn, which is reaped in June, etc. 2 Vines and Walnuts,
which are gathered in September. 3 Their summer-graines, as Millet, Panicle,
Chiches, Vetches, etc. Buck-wheat, Frumentone, or that which we call
Virginia-Wheat, Turnips, which they sow in July when their Winter-corne is cut
and reaped, they reap in October. In France, their Vines grow th^^e manner of
ways; in Provence they cut the Vine about two foot high, and make it strong
and stubbed, like as we do our Osiers,; which stock bears up the branches
without a prop.


2 About Orleans, and where they are more curious, they make frames for them to
run along.

3 About Paris they tie them to short poles, as we do hops. In France they
usually make trenches, or small ditches, about three or four foot from one
another, and therein plant their Vines, about one and a half deep, which is a
good way, and very much to be commended; but if we here in England, plant Vines
as we do Hops, it will do very well, but let them not be packt together too
thick, as they do in France in many places, least they too much shade the
ground, and one another. In Italy when they tread their grapes with their feet
in a cart, they pour the juice into a great vessel or Fat, and put to it all
their husks and stones which they call graspe, and let them ferment, or (as we
say) work together 12 or 14 days, and usually they put one third of water to
it, this makes a wine less furious, Garbo or rough, and therefore a good
stomach- wine; but it spoileth the color, and takes away the pleasant brisk
taste. In France so soon as they have pressed out their liquor with their
feet, they put it in hogsheads, and after in their press squeese out what
they can, out of the graspe; which serves to fill up their hogsheads while
they work, which is usually three or four days, and then stop them close:
this is also the way used in Germany, and is the best, for it makes a fine
gentile wine with a curious color. In Germany, when their grapes are green,
they make fire in their sellars in Stoves, by the which means, their wines
work extraordinarily and do digest themselves the better: This course we must
also take here in England some years; for it helps the rawnesse of all
liquours very much. There is an Ingenious Dutchman, who has a secret, which as
yet he will not reveal, how to help maturation by a compost applied to the
roots: The compost which I have spoken of before, made of brimstone:
Pigeons-dung, is very excellent for that purpose, Gl^uber.
as also lees of wine, blood, lime used with moderation. He also knovveth how
to make sour grapes produce good wine; I suppose his way to be this, all
juice of grapes newly expressed is svveet, and which may by it self alone be
made into a sweet syrup, which the French call Racinee: further in the
Evaporation of liquors, which have not fermented or wrought, the watery part
goes away first.

3 Fermentation gives a vinous taste, and makes a liquor full of spirits.

You may then easily guess at the way, and perhaps he may add also some sugar
and spices, as the Vintners do when they make Hippocras. I know a Gentleman,
who has made excellent wine of raisins well boiled in water, and afterward
fermented by it self, or with barme, its called usually Medea. I likewise
know, that all sweet and fatty Juices will make fine vinous Liquors, as
Damsins, if they be wrought or fermented ingeniously: but whosoever goes about
such experiments, let him not think that any thing is good enough for these
purposes; but let him use the best he can get: for of naughty corrupt things,
who can expect that which is excellent and delicate.

The 8 Deficiency concerning Hemp and Flax.
The Deficiency of us in this kind is so obvious, that all the world takes
notice of it, and it is (next the neglect of fishing) the greatest shame to
this Narion; for all know that we have as good land for these seeds, as any can
be found in Europe; and that the sowing of them requires neither more labor,
cost or skill than other seeds. And further that the materials made from these
are extremely necessary: for how miserable should we be without Linen,
Canvases, Cordage, Nets? how can we put our Ships to Sea, which are the
bulwarks of this Isle? And yet we are necessitated to have these Commodities
from those who would destroy (I will not say the Nation, but I may boldly say)
our Shipping, and Trade. I hope that this will more seriously be considered by
those at the Helm of our State. I will freely and plainly relate, how this
Deficiency may easily be Remedied according to my judgment.

1 To compel by a law, that all Farmers, who plough and sow 50 or 100 Acres of
land, should sow half an Acre, or an Acre of Hemp or Flax, or to pay 5 s or
10 s to the poor of the Parish where they live, or some law to this purpose;
for there is no man but has land fit for one of these, Hemp desiring a stiff
land, Flax that which is light.

For there is so much irrationality in some professions that they must be
forced even like bruts to understand their own good. In King Edward the 6 days
something was enacted to this purpose, as I am informed. In Henry the eighth
days, there was a law enacted that every man should sow his lands, and that no
man should enclose his lands, least he should turn it to Pasture; for we have
had great dearth in England through the neglect of Tillage; which laws even as
yet stand in force; yet there is, nor needs there be any force to compel men
to til and sow their lands; for they have at length found the sweetness, and
willingly go about it for their own profits sake, and now we suppose (and not
without cause) that Enclosing is an Improvement: and so concerning Hemp and
Flax, I say, if they were once accustomed to sovve them, they would never
leave it, as I see Farmers do in East-Kent; scarce a man but he will have a
considerable plot of ground for Hemp, and about London far greater
quantities of Flax is sown then formerly.

2 It were convenient, that every Parish through the Nation should have a stock
to set their poor to work, that the young children and women might not run up
and down idle, and begging or stealing (as they do in the Country) of Apples,
Pease, Wood, Hedges, and so by little and little, are trained up for the
Gallows.

3 That a severe law should be enacted against those who run up and down and
will not work: for if all know, that they may have work at home, and earne
more within doors honestly, then by running rogueing up and down, why should
they not compel them to it? and though some may think the Parishes will lose
much by this way; because that the stock wrought will not be put off, but with
loss, as perhaps 10 l will be brought to 8 l yet let them consider how much
they shall save at their doors, how many inconveniences they are freed from;
their hedges in the Country shall not be pulled, their fruits stolen, nor
their Corn purloined; and further, that the poor will be trained up to work,
and therefore fit for any service: yea and in their youth, learn a calling by
the which they may get an honest livelihood; and I dare say, their Assessements
for the poor, would not be so frequent, nor the poor so numerous: and the
benefit which redounds to the Nation, would be very great.

4 The charitable deeds of our forefathers, ought to be enquired after, that
they be not misplaced, as usually they are, but be really bestowed for the good
of the poor, that are laborious (as in London is begun) and if there be any
that will not work, take Saint Paul's rule, who best knew what was best for
them. I dare not advise to take in part of Commons, Fens, etc. and to improve
them for this use, least I should too much provoke the rude merciless
multitude. But to return to my discourse. I say, that sowing Hemp and Flax,
will be very beneficial.

1 To the Owners of land: for men usually give in diverse places 3 l per Acre,
to sow Hemp and Flax (as I have seen at Maidstone in Kent, which is the only
place, I know in England where thread is made: and though nigh a thousand
hands are employed about it; yet they make not enough for this Nation,) and yet
get good profit. How advantageous will this be to those who have drained the
Fens, where questionless Hemp will flourish, and exsiccate the ground. (for
Hemp desires stiff moist land, as Flax light and dry,) and likewise to those
in the North of England, where land is very cheap? I hope in a little time
Ireland will furnish us with these commodities, if we be idle; for there land
is very cheap, and those seeds need no enclosure; for cattle will not touch
them, neither does it fear the plunderer, either in the field or barn.

2 It Is profitable to the sower. I know that they usually value an Acre at 10
or 12 l which costeth them usually but half the money. Whether there be Flax,
that will yield 30 or 40 l per Acre as some report, I know not.

3 To the place where it is sown; because it sets many poor to work. I wish it
were encouraged more in the North than it is; because there is many poor, who
could willingly take pains, and though spinning of linen be but a poor work;
yet it is light, and may be called Women's recreation, (and in France and Spain,
the best Citizens wives think it no disgrace to go about spinning with their
Rocks) and though in some part the poor think it nothing to earn 4 or 6 d er
day, and will as soon stand with their hands in their pockets, as work cheap;
yet in the North they account it well to earne 3 d or 4 d by spinning, which
they may do.

Lastly, it would be very beneficial to this Nation, and save many thousand
pounds, I may say 100 thousands, which are exported, either in cash or good
Commodities; and we should not be beholding to Holland for fine linen and
Cordage, nor to France for Poldavices, Locrams, Canvases, nets, nor to
Flaunders for thread; but might be supplied abundantly with these necessary
commodities even at our own doors.

There is no small Deficiency in dunging and manuring lands, both because that
all manner of manuring and amending lands, is not known to every one, 9
Deficciency, concerning Duning and Manuring Lands.
and also that they do not employ all they know to the best use. I will
therefore set down most of the ways I have seen here in England and beyond
Seas, by which land is improved, and the best ways to use the same.

1 To begin with Chalk, which is as old a way as Julius Caesar's time, as he
himself reports in his Commentaries. Chalk is of 2 sorts.

1 A hard, strong dry Chalk, with which in Kent they make walls, burn lime,
etc.

2 Kind is a small unctuous Chalk: this is the Chalk for land, the other
helps little; only it makes the Plough go easier in stiff lands: broomy
land is accounted the best land for Chalk and Lime, but it helps other lands
also; especially, if you Chalk your ground, and let it lie a year or two,
which is the way used in Kent; that it may be matured and shattered by the
sun and rain, otherwise if it be turned in presently, it is apt to lie in
great clods, as I have seen it twenty years after. Chalk also sweetneth
pasture, but does not much increase it, and kills rushes and broom.

2 Lime, which is made of diverse sorts of stones, is an excellent thing for
most Lands, and produces a most pure grain: 160 bushels is usually laid on an
Acre, but I suppose that if men did lay but half the dung on the ground, as
they usually do, as also lime and Chalk, and dung and lime it oftener, it would
be better Husbandry: for much dung causes much weeds, and causes Corn to
lodge; and too much Chalk does too much force the land, so that after some
good crops, it lies barren many years. It Is good Husbandry likewise to lay
down lands before they be too much out of heart; for they will soon recover;
otherwise not.

3 Ordinary Dung, which every one knows; but let it not be exposed to the Sun
too much, nor let it lie in an high place; for the rain will waste away it is
fatness. It Is observable, that earth the more it is exposed to the Sun, it is
the better; as we see that land is much bettered by often ploughings: for the Sun
and dew engender a nitrous fatness, which is the cause of fertility; but dung
is exhausted by the Sun, as it appears by the folding of Sheep, which profit
little, if it be not presently turned in; therefore a Shepherd, if his time
would permit, should turn up the ground with an how for to sow Turnips, as
Gardiners do. I have seen Ordinary Dung on dry lands in dry years to do hurt,
and it often causes weeds and trumpery to grow.

4 Marle. It Is of diverse kinds: some stony, some soft, some white, some
yellovvish, but most commonly blew. It Is in most places in England, but not
known by all: the best marks to know it, is to expose it to the Air, and to
see if the Sun or Rain cause it to shatter, and if it be unctuous, or rather to
take a load or two, and lay it on the midst of your fields, and to try how it
mendeth your lands. It Is excellent for Corn, and Pasture; especially on dry
lands. In Essex the scourings of their ditches they call Marle* because it
looks blew like it, it helps their lands well.

5 Snaggreet: which is a kind of earth taken out of the Rivers, full of small
shells. It helps the barren lands in diverse parts of Surrey. I believe it is
found in all Rivers; It were well, if in other parts of England, they did
take notice of it.

6 Owse out of marsh ditches, has been found very good for white Chalky land:
as also Sea-mud and Sea-Owse is used in diverse parts of Kent and Sussex.

7 Sea-weeds.

8 Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall relates, that they use a fat Sea-sand,
which they carry up many miles in sacks, and by this they have very much
improved their barren lands. It were vvorth the while to try all manner of
Sea-sands: for I suppose, that in other places they have a like fertilizing
fatness.

9 Folding of Sheep, especially after the Flaunders manner, (viz.) under a
covert, in which earth is strevved about 6 inches thick, on which they set
diverse nights: then more earth must be brought and strevved 6 inches thick, and
the Sheep folded on it, and thus they do continually Winter and Summer. I
suppose a shepherd, with one horse, vvil do it at his spare hours, and
indeed sooner then remove his fold; and this folding is to be continued,
especially in Winter, and does the Sheep good; because they lie vvarme and dry:
and truly if I am not mistaken, by this means we may make our Sheep to enrich
all the barren dry lands of England.

10 Ashes of any kind, Seacoale-ashes with horsedung the Gardiners of London
much commend for diverse uses. It Is great pity, that so many thousand loads are
thrown into vvast places, and do no good.

11 Soote is also very good, being sprinkled on ground, but it is too dear, if
it be of wood; for it is vvorth 16 d or 2 s a bushel.

12 Pigeons or Hens-dung is incomparable: one load is vvorth 10 loads of other
dung, and therefore it is usually sovvne on Wheat, that lies afar off, and
not easy to be helped: it is extraordinary likewise on a Hop-garden.

13 Male-dust is exceedingly good in Corn-land: blood for trees; also shavings
of horns.

14 Some commend very much the sweeping of a ship of salt, or drossey salt and
brine: it is very probable; because it kills the worms, and all fertility
proceeds from salt.

15 I have seen in France, poor men cut up Heath, and the Turffe of the
ground, and lay them on an heap, to make mould for their barren lands. Brakes
laid in a moist place, and rotted, are used much for Hop-grounds, and generally
all things that will rot, if they were stones, would make dung.

16 In New England they fish their ground, which is done thus: In the spring
about April, there comes up a fish to the fresh Rivers, called an Alewife;
because of it is great belly: and is a kind of shade, full of bones; these are
caught in vviers, and sold very cheap to the planters, who usually put one or
two cut in pieces into the hill where their Corn is planted, called
Virginia-Wheate, for they plant it in hills, 5 grains in an hill, almost as we
plant Hops (in May, or June; for it will not endure frosts) and at that
distance; it causes fertility extraordinary for two years, especially the
first: for they have had 50 or 60 bushels on an Acre, and yet plough not their
land, and in the same hills do plant the same Corn for many years together, and
have good crops: besides abundance of Pompions, and French or Kidney beans. In
the North parts of New England, where the fishermen live, they usually fish
their ground with Cods-heads; which if they were in England would be better
employed. I suppose that when sprats be cheap, men might mend their Hop-grounds
with them, and it would quit cost: but the dogs will be apt to scrape them up,
as they do in New England, unless one of their legs be tied up.

17 Urine. In Holland they as carefully preserve the Cowes urine, as the dung
to enrich their land: old urine is excellent for the Roots of trees. Columella
in his book of Husbandry, says, that he is an ill husband that does not make
10 loads of dung for every great beast in his yard, and as much for every one
in the house, and one load for small beasts as hogs. This is strange husbandry
to us: and I believe there are many ill husbands by this account. I know a
woman who lives 5 miles South of Canterbury, who saves in a pail, all the
droppings of the houses, I mean the urine, and when the pail is full,
sprinkleth it on her Meadow, which causes the grass at first to look yellow,
but after a little time it grows wonderfully, that many of her neighbors
wondered at it, and were like to accuse her of vvitch-craft.

18 Woollen rags, which Hartford-shire-men use much, and Oxfordshire, and
many other places: they do very well in thin Chalky land in Kent for two or
three years. It Is a fault in many places, that they neglect these, as also
Linen rags, or Ropes-ends, of the which white and brown paper is made; for
it is strange that we have not Linnen-raggs enough for paper, as other Nations
have; but must have it from Italy, France, and Holland.

19 Denshyring (so called in Kent, Mr. Cambden.
where I only have seen it used, though by the word it should come from
Denbigh-shire,) is the cutting up of all the turffe of a Meadow, with an
instrument sharp on both sides, which a man with violence thrusts before
him, and then lay the turffe on heaps, and when it is dry they burn it, and
spread it on the ground. The charge is usually four Nobles, which the
goodness of a crop or two repayeth.

20 Mixture of lands. Columella an old writer says, that his Grandfather used
to carry sand on clay, and on the contrary to bring clay on sandy grounds, and
with good success, the Lord Bacon thinking much good may be done thereby; for
if Chalk be good for loamy land, Natural History.
why should not loame be good for Chalky banks?

21 I may add Enclosure as an Improvement of land: not only because that men,
when their grounds are enclosed, may employ them as they please; but because
it gives warmth and consequently fertiliey. There is one in London, who
promised to mend lands much by warmth only, and we see that if some fevv
sticks lie together, and give a place warmth, how speedily that grass vvil
grow.

22 Steeping of Grains. The Ancients used to steep Beans in salt water: and
in Kent it is usual to steep Barley, when they sow late, that it may grow the
faster; and also to take away the soil: for vvild Oats, Cockle, and all save
Drake vvil svvimme; as also much of the light Corn, which to take away is
very good. If you put Pigeons-dung into the water, and let it steep all night,
it may be as it were half a dunging: take heed of steeping Pease too long;
for I have seen them sprout in three or four hours.

23 Is the sowing of Course and cheap Grain, and when they are grown to
plough them in. For this purpose the Ancients did use LUPINES, a plant well
known to our Gardiners: and in Kent sometimes Tares are sown, which when
the Cattle have eaten a little of the tops, they turn them in, with very good
Improvement for their ground.

10 Deficciency, concerning the not Improvement of our Meadows.
I will not deny, but that we have good Husbands, who dung and Marle their
Meadows, and Pasture-land, and throw down all Mole and Ant-hils, and with the
their spud-staffe, cut up all thistles and weeds, and that they likewise straw
ashes on their grounds to kill the Moss; and salt for the worms, and they do
very well, but yet there are many who are negligent in these particulars, for
the which they are blameworthy, but the Deficiencies, of which I intend to
speak of, are these following. Cato, one of the wisest of the Romans, says,
that Pratum est, quasi paratum; always ready, and prepared; and prefers
Meadows before the Olive-Gardens, (although the Spaniards bequeath Olive Trees
to their children, as we do cottages) or Vines or Corn; because Meadows bring
in a certain profit, without labor and pains* but the other requires much
cost and pains, and are subject to Frosts, Mildew, Hail, Locusts: to the
which for the honor of Meadows, I may add that the stock of Meadows, is of
greater value, and the Commodities which arise from them, are diverse, and of
greater value, than Corn, as Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides, Beef, Wool; and
therefore I may conclude, that England abounding in Pastures more than other
Countries is therefore richer; and I know (what others think I care not) that
in France Acre for Acre is not comparable to it, Fortescue Chancellor of
England, says, that we get more in England by standing still than the French
by working: but to speak of the Deficiencies amongst us.

1 We are to blame, that we have neglected the great Clover-grasse, Saint
Foine, Lucerne.

2 That we do not float our lands, as they do in Lumbardy, where they mow
their lands three or four times yearly, which consist of the great
Clover-grasse. Here are the excellent Parmisane Cheeses made, and indeed these
Pastures far exceed any other places in Italy, yea in Europe. We here in
England have great opportunities by brooks and Rivers in all places to do so,
but we are negligent; yet we might hereby double if not treble our profits,
kill all rushes, etc. But he that desires to know the manner how to do this,
and that profit, that will arise thereby, let him read Mr. Blithes Book of
Husbandry, lately printed.

3 That when we lay down land for Meadow or Pasture, we do not sow them with
the seeds of fine sweet grass, Trefoiles, and other excellent herbs.
Concerning this you may read a large Treatise of the Countrey-Farmer; for if
the land be rich, it will put forth weeds and trumpery, and perhaps a kind of
sour grass little worth, if it be poor, ye shall have thistles, May-weed and
little or no grass, for a year or two. I know a Gentleman, who at my entreaty,
sowed with his Oats the bottom of his Hay-mowe, and though his land were
worn out of heart, and naturally poor; yet he had that year not only a crop
of Oats; but he might if it had pleased him, have mowen his grass also, but
he spared it, which was well done, til the next year, that it might make a
turffe, and grow stronger. By this Husbandry lands might be well improved,
especially if men did consider the diversity of grasses, which are 90 sorts,
and 23 of Trefoile: I know a place in Kent, which is a white Chalky down which
ground is sometimes sown with Corn a year or two, and then it rests as long
or longer: when it is laid down, it maintains many great Sheep and very
lusty, so that they are even fit for the Butcher; and yet there does scarce
appear any thing that they can eat, which has caused diverse to wonder, as if
they had lived on Chalke-stones: but I more seriously considering the matter,
thoroughly viewed the ground, and perceived that the ground naturally produces
a small Trefoile which it seems is very sweet and pleasant, it is commonly
called Trifolium luteum, or Lupilinum, that is, yellow or Hop-Trefoile: and I
am persuaded, if that the seed of this Trefoile were preserved, and sown with
dates, when they intend to lay it down, it would very much advance the Pasture
of that place; therefore I desire all Ingenious men, seriously to consider the
nature of the Trefoiles, which are the sweetest of grasses, and to observe on
what grounds they naturally grow: and aso the nature of other grasses, which
(as I have said before) are no less than 90 sorts, naturally growing in this
Isle; some on watery places, some on dry, some on clay, others on sand, chalk,
etc some on fruitful places, others in barren; by the which means, I suppose a
solid foundation might be laid, for the advancing the Paesture-lands of all
sorts, through this Island? for I know some plants, as the Orchis called
Bee-flower, etc. which will thrive better on the Chalky barren banks, than in
any garden, though the mould be never so rich and delicate, and the Gardener
very diligent in cherishing of it: and why may not the same propriety be in
grasses? for we see diverse benty grasses to thrive, especially on barren
places, where scarce any thing else will grow. I must again and again desire
all men to take notice of the wonderful grass which grows near Salisbury,
and desire them to try it on their Rich Meadows,

11 Deficiency concerning waste Lands.
It Is a common saying, that there are more waste lands in England, in these
particulars, than in all Europe besides, considering the quantity of land. I
dare not say this is true; but hope if it be so, that it it will be mended. For
of late much has been done for the advancement of these kinds of land; yet
there are as yet great Deficiencies. In the times of Papistry, all in this
Island were either Soldiers or Scholars; Scholars by reason of the great
honors, privileges, and profits, (the third part of the Kingdom belonging to
them) and Soldiers, because of the many and great wars with France,
Scotland, Ireland, Wales. And in those times Gentlemen thought it an honor to
be careless, and to have houses, furniture, diet, exercises, apparel, etc.
yea all things at home and abroad, Souldier-like: Music, Pictures, Perfumes,
Sawces, (unless good stomachs) were counted, perhaps unjustly, too effeminate.
In Queen Elizabeth's days Ingenuities, Curiosities and Good Husbandry began to
take place, and then Salt Marshes began to be fenced from the Seas; and yet
many were neglected, even to our days, as Hollhaven in Essex, Axtel-holme Isle
in Yorkshire: many 1000 of Acres have lately been gained from the Sea in
Lincolne-shire, and as yet more are to be taken in there, and in other places.
Rumsey-marsh in Kent consisting of 45000 Acres and upwards, (as Cambden
relates) is of some antiquity where the land is usually let for 30 s per Acre,
and yet 1 d per week constantly is paid, through the whole levil, for the
maintenance of the wall, and now and then 2 d whereas ordinary salts are
accounted dear at 5 s or 6 s per Acre; so that the improvement is very
considerable: the same I may say of Fens, especially that great Fen of
Lincolnshire, Cambridge, Huntingdon consisisting as I am informed of 380000
Acres, which is now almost recovered; and a friend of mine told me very lately,
that he had proffered a mark per Acre; for 900 Acres together, to sow Rape on,
which formerly was scarcely valued at 12 d per Acre; very great therefore is
the improvement af draining of lands, and our negligence very great, that they
have been wast so long, and as yet so continue in diverse places: for the
improving of a Kingdom is better than the conquering of a new one.

2 I see likewise no small faults in this land, by having so many Chases and
Forests, where brambles, brakes; furzes do grow, when as these trumperies
might be cut up, and potashes made of them; and the ground employed profitably
for Corn, or Pasture. I know a Forest by Brill in Buckingham-shire taken in,
and the land is usually let being now well enclosed, for 4 or 5 Nobles per Acre.

3 Sort of waste-land, is dry heathy Commons. I know that poor people will cry
out against me, because I call these waste lands; but it is no matter: I desire
Ingenious Gentlemen seriously to consider, whether or no these lands might not
be improved very much by the Husbandry of Flaunders, (viz.) by sowing Flax,
Turnips, great Clover-Grasse, if that Manure be made by folding Sheep after the
Flaunders way, to keep it in heart?

2 Whether the Rottenness and Scabbinesse of Sheep, Murrein of Cattle,
Diseases of Horses, and in general all diseases of Cattle do not especially
proceed from Commons?

3 If the rich men, who are able to keep great stocks, are not great gainers by
them?

4 Whether Commons do not rather make poor, by causing idleness, than
maintain them; and such poor, who are trained up rather for the Gallows or
beggary, than for the Commonwealths service?

5 How it comes to pass, that there are fewest poor, where there are fewest
Commons, as in Kent, where there is scarce six Commons in the County of a
considerable greatness?

6 How many do they see enriched by the Commons; and if their Cattle be not
usually swept away by the Rot, or starved in some hard winters?

7 If that poor men might not employ 2 Acres enclosed to more advantage; than
twice as much in a Common?

And Lastly, if that all Commons were enclosed, and part given to the
Inhabitants, and part rented out, for a stock to set all the poor on work in
every County; I determine nothing in this kind: but leave the determination for
wiser heads.

4 Parkes. Although I cannot but reckon Parks amongst lands, which are not
improved to the full; but perceive considerable waste by them, by brakes,
bushes, brambles, etc. growing in diverse places, and therefore wish there were
fewer in this Island; yet I am not so great an enemy to them, as most are: for
there are very great Uses of them, as.

1 For the bringing up of young cattle.

2 For the maintaining of Timber, so that if any have occasion to use a good
piece of Timber either for a Mil-post, or a Keel of a Ship, or other special
uses, whither can they go but to a Park?

3 The skins of the Dear are very useful, and their flesh excellent Food. Not
to speak of the Medicinal Uses, nor of Acorns for hogs, etc. But some will
object, that the plough never goes there. To the which I answer, It Is no
matter: for I cannot but say as Fortescue Chancellor to Henry 6 does, That God
has given us, such a fruitful land, Preeminence of English Laws.
that without labor we have plenty: whereas France must dig and delve for
what they have. And I suppose, that I could maintain two things which are
thought great Paradoxes, (viz.) that it were no loss to this Island, if that
we should not plough at all, if so be that we could certainly have Corn at a
reasonable rate, and likewise vent for all our Manufactures of Wool.

1 Because that the Commodities from Cattle are far more stable than Corn:
for Cloth, Stuffes, Stockins, Butter, Cheese, Hides, Shoes, Tallow, are certain
even every where: Corn scarcely in any place, constantly in none.

2 Pasture imployeth more hands, which is the second Paradox; and therefore
Pasture does not depopulate, as it is commonly said: for Normandy and Picardy
in France, where there are Pastures in a good measure, are a populous as any
part of France; and I am certain, that Holland, Friezeland, Zealand, Flaunders,
and Lombardy, which rely altogether on Pastures are the most populous places in
Europe. But some will object and say, that a shepherd and a dog formerly has
destroyed diverse villages. To this I answer, that we well know what a
shepherd and a dog can do, (viz.) look to two or three hundred sheep at the
most, and that two or three hundred Acres vvil maintain them, or the land is
extremely barren; and that these two or three hundred Acres being barren, will
scarcely maintain a Plough, (which is but one man and two boys,) with the
horses: and that the mowing, reaping, and threshing of this Corn, and other
work about, vvil scarcely maintain three more with work through the whole
year. But how many people may be employed, by the Wool of two or three
hundred Sheep, in Picking, Sorting, Carding, Spinning, Weaving, Dying,
Fulling, Knitting, I leave to others to calculate. And further if the Pastures
be rich Meadows, and go on dairing, I suppose all know, that 100 Acres of such
land imployeth more hands than 100 Acres of the best Corne-Land in England, and
produces likewise better exportable Commodities. And further, if I should
grant, that formerly the shepherd and his dog did depopulate; yet I will deny,
that it does so now: for formerly we were so unwise, as to send over our Wool
to Antwerpe, and other places, where they were Manufactured; by which means
one pound often brought 10 unwrought to them; but we set now our own poor to
work; and so save the depopulation. Yet I say, it is convenient to encourage the
plough; because that we cannot have a certainty of Corn and carriage is dear,
both by sea and land, especially into the Inland-Countreys; and our Commodities
by Wool do cloy the Merchants.

5 Rushy-lands. Blithe tells us, good Remedies for these Inconveniences,
(viz.) making deep trenches, often mowings, Chalking, Liming, Dunging and
Ploughing. I know where hungry guests Horses soon make an end of them.

6 Furze, broom, heath, these can hardly be so destroyed, but at length they
will up again; for God has given a peculiar propriety to every kind of earth,
to produce some peculiar kinds of Plants, which it will observe even to the
worlds end, unless by Dung, Marle, Chalk, you alter even the very nature of
the earth. In Gallitia in Spain, where such barren lands do very much abound,
they do thus: first, they grub them up as clean as they can; of the greater
Roots and branches they make firewood; the smaller sticks are either employed
in fencing, or else are burnt on the ground; afterward the land being ploughed
twice at least, they sow Wheat, and usually the crop is great, which the
Landlord and Tenant divide according to a compact; then the ground rests, and
in 3 or 4 years the Furze or broom will recover their former growth, which the
painful Husbandman grubbeth, and does with it as formerly. I set this down
that you may see how laborious the Spaniard is in some places, the poverty of
the country compelling him to it.

7 There are other Inconveniences in land, besides weeds and trumpery (viz.)
Ill tenures, as coppy-hold, Knight Service, etc. so that the Possessor cannot
cut any Timber down, without consent of the Lord; and when he dies must pay
one or two years rent. But these are not in the power of the poor Husbandman
to remedy; I therefore pass them by: yet hope that in little time we shall see
these Inconveniences remedied; because they much discourage Improvements and
are (as I suppose) badges of our Norman slavery.

To conclude, it seems to me very reasonable, and it will be a great
encouragement to laborious men, to improve their barren lands, if that they
should have recompense for what they have done, according as indifferent men
should judge, when they leave it, as is the custom in Flaunders.

I have likewise observed some Deficiencies in Woods, 12 Deficiency* in Woods.
which I shall briefly declare, with the best way to Remedy the same.

1 It Is a great, fault that generally through the Island the Woods are
destroyed; so that we are in many places very much necessitated both for fuel,
and also for timber for building and other uses; so that if we had not Coals
from New Castle, and Boards from Norwey, Plough-staves and Pipe-staves from
Prussia, we should be brought to great extremity: and many Mechanickes would be
necessitated to leave their callings.

2 Deficiency, is that our Woods are not ordered as they should be; but though
Woods are especially preserved for timber, for building and Shipping; yet at
this time it is very rare to see a good Timber-tree in a Wood.

3 That many of our Woods, are very thin, and not replenished with such sorts
of Wood, as are convenient for the place.

4 That we sell continually, and never plant or take care for posterity.

These Deficiencies may be thus Remedyed.

1 To put in execution the Statutes against grubbing of Woods, which are
sufficiently severe. Its well known, we have good laws; but it is better
known, they are not executed. In the Wild of Kent, and Sussex, which lies far
from the Rivers and Sea, and formerly have been nothing but Woods, liberty is
granted for men to grub what they please; for they cannot want firing for
themselves, and they are so seated, that neither firewood, nor timber can be
transported elsewhere. I know a Gentleman who proffered their good Oak-timber
at 6 s 8 d per tun, and the land in those parts in general is very good. About
Tunbridge there is land which formerly was Wood, is now let for 30 s per Are;
so that to keep such lands for Wood, would be both loss to the owner, and to
the Island: But in other parts of the Island it is otherwise, and men are much
to be blamed for destroying both timber and fuel. I have seen at Shooters-hill
near London, some Woods stubbed up which were good ground for. Wood, but now
are nothing but furze, which is a great loss, both to the owner and to the
Country. For the land is made worse then it was formerly. I conceive there
are Lands, which are as naturally ordained for Woods, viz. Mountainous,
Craggy, uneven land, as small hills for the Vines and Olives; plain lands for
Corn; and low moist lands for Pasture: which lands if they be stubbed, do
much prejudice the Commonwealth.

2 That all Woods should have such a Number of Timber Trees per Acre, according
to the Statute. There is a good law for that purpose, but men delude both
themselves and the law, that they every felling cut down the standers which
they left the folling before, least perchance they should grow to be Timber,
and leave 12 small standers, that they might seem to fulfill in some measure the
Statute; but it is a mere fallacy, and causes the Statute to fail of it is
principal end, which is to preserve Timber.

3 The best Remedy against thinness of woods, is to plash them and spread them
abroad, and cover them partly in the ground, as every Countreyman can direct;
by this means the wood vvil soon grow rough and thick. It Is good Husbandry
likewise to fill your woods with swift growers, as Ashes, Sallow, Willow,
Aspe, which are also good for Hoppoles, Hoopes. Sycamore is also a swift
grower. In Flaunders, they have a kind of Salix, called by them Abell-tree,
which speedliy grows to be timber.

4 That some law be made, that they which fell, should also plant or sow. In
Biscay there is a law, if that any cut down a Timber-tree, he must plant three
for it, which law is put into execution with severity: otherwise they would
soon be undone; for the Country is very mountainous and barren, and depends
wholly on Iron Mines, and on Shipping: their Woods are not copsed there, but
only Pollards, which they lop when occasion serves. I know one, who was bound
by his Landlord to plant so many trees yearly, which according he did, but
always in such places that they might not grow. In France, near to the borders
of Spain, they sow Ashkey, which when they grow to such a greatness, that
they may be slit into four quarters, and big enough to make Pikes, then they
cut them down; and I have seen diverse Acres together thus planted: hence come
the excellent Pikss, called Spanish-Pikes. Some Gentlemen have sown Acornes,
and it is a good way to increase Woods. Though the time is long, I doubt not but
every one knows, that it is excellent to plant Willowes along the waters side,
and Ashes nigh their houses for firing: for they are good pieces of Husbandry;
and it is pity that it is not more put in practice. There is a Gentleman in
Essex who has planted so many Willowes, that he may lop 2000 every year: if
others were as Ingenious, we should not want firewood; Osiers planted in low
morish grounds do advance land from 5 s per Acre to 40 s 50 s 3 l and upward;
it is much used Westward of London: these Osiers are of great use to
Basket-makers. There is a sort of small Osier or Willow at Saint Omars in
Flaunders, which grows on Islands which floate up and down; it is far less
than that which the Western men call, Eights, with this they make their
curious fine Baskets: this plant is worth the procuring, being so nigh: John
Tredescat has some plants of it. There is a plant likewise in England called
the sweet Willowes; it is not only good for shade and firing; but as I am
informed, the leaves do not sour the grass, but that the cattle will eat them
sooner than Hay: if this be so, it may be of singular use for Meadows.

5 That those things which mightily destroy Woods, may be restrained, as
Iron-workes are; therefore the State has very well done to pull down diverse
Iron-workes in the Forest of Deane, that the timber might be preserved for
Shipping, which is accounted the toughest in England: and when it is dry as
hard as Iron, the Common People did use to say, that in Queen Elizabeth's days
the Spaniard sent an Ambassador purposely to get this Wood destroyed: how true
this is I know not; but without question it is admirable Wood for Shipping, and
generally our English Oak is the best in the world for Shipping; because it is
of a great grain, and therefore strong: but the Oaks of other Countries have
a finer grain, and more fit for Wainscot; and in this kind our Forefathers
have been very provident; for we have an Act of long standing, prohibiting
Iron-workes within 20 miles of London, and within 3 miles of the River of
Thames: though you may find Iron-stone in diverse places, as in the great
gravel-pit at Woolwhich. There are some Ingenious men, who lately have got a
Patent for making Iron with Sea-coale: I hope they will accomplish their
desires; for it would wonderfully advance this Island, and save Wood. There are
two faults in Sea-coale, in respect of melting Iron-oare.

1 That it is apt to bake together, or cake.

2 It has a sulphurous fume in it, which is an enemy to Metal, and consumes
it as we see by our Iron-Bars in Windows at London; so that the Metalline
nature of the Iron-stone is much wasted by it, and that which remains is very
brittle, and will be Could-shire. I know that by the mixture of Coal beaten
with loame and thoroughly dried, one (if not both of these Inconveniences) may
be taken away. In the Duke of Cleveland's Country, they use have Turffe, half
Charcoale. There is a way by making a kind of Barter with Loame, Urine, etc.
which vvil cause Charcoale to last very long, as I am informed: but these
discourses belong to another place.

It Is a great Deficiency here in England without question, 13 Deficiency, of
Bees.
that we have no more Bees, considering that they are neither chargeable,
requiring only a fevv stravves for an house, nor troublesome: and this Island
may maintain ten times as many: for though a place may be over-stocked with
these Animals, as with the greater; yet I know no part of this land, that is
so: and I know diverse places which would maintain many hundred hives, yet
scarce one to be seen.

2 Our Honey is the best in the world, and Wax a staple Commodity. Further we
know, that that cold Countries, not comparable to ours as Moscovia have far
greater quantity than we have; so that it is incredible what quantity is found
in the Woods, if the story of the man be true, who fell up even to the ears in
Honey, and had there perished, had not a Bear, on which he caught hold, pulled
him out. Now I have enquired, how it comes to pass that there is so great
store of Honey in Moscovia, considering the Winters are extreme cold, and also
very long: and I am credibly informed that first, the spring when it
begins, comes extraordinary fast, that the days are very long, and the
Summers far dryer than ours here in England, so that the Bees are not
hindered by continual showers; as they are some years here in this Isle: and
lastly, that the Country abounds much with Firs, and Pine-trees, which the
Inhabitants usually cut, that the Gum, Rosinous, or Turpentine substance may
sweat forth, to which places the Bees do come, and presently fill themselves,
and return laden: and perhaps for these very reasons, Bees thrive very much in
New England.

2 We are Deficient in the ordering of them. Not to speak of the negligence of
particular men, which is very frequent: nor to write a general story of the
ordering of them; because it requires much paper: and Mr. Leveret and Butler;
especially the latter, has written so exactly, and upon his own experience
that little can be added to it: only in a point or two I differ from him; of
the which I will speak briefly.

1 That we must take and destroy all the Bees for their Honey, and not drive
them, as they do in Italy once or twice yearly.

2 That if a swarm be poor with little Honey, that that swarm ought to be
taken; because it is poor; so that the rich stocks are destroyed, because
they be rich, and the poor swarms, because they be poor: so that be they rich
or be they poor, they must be destroyed. An Italian reports, that in the
City of Askaly, there was a law made, that none should destroy a swarm of
Bees, unless he had a just cause; accounting it a part of extreme injustice
and cruelty, to take away without cause, both the goods and lives of such good
and faithful servants. I am credibly informed, that an English Gentleman beyond
the Seas, gets many 100 l yearly, by keeping Bees after a new and Ingenious
Manner, which is thus. He has a room made very vvarm and close; yet with
glasse-vvindovves, which he can open at his pleasure, to let the Bees fly
abroad when he pleases, where he keeps his Bees and feeds them all
vvinter; with a sweet Composition made of Molossoes, Flowers, sweet Wine,
Milk, Raisins, etc. (for with such things as these, they usually feed the
Bees in Italy) and oftentimes in summer, when the vveather is rainy, vvindy,
or so disposed, that the Bees cannot conveniently go abroad, he feeds them at
home, with diverse svveet things, and gathers diverse flovvers, and lays
them amongst them, and sticks up many fresh boughs in diverse places of his
Rooms, that in swarming-time, they may settle on them; by these means he
preserves all his svvarmes, and gathers an incredible quantity of Honey and
wax; and truly this way seems to me very probable: for

1 We know the Bees, (even as we say of the Aunts) vvil work continually,
even night and day, vvinter and summer, if that they were not hindered by
darkness, cold, and moisture.

2 That Bees do not only make Honey, (for I suppose, that they have a peculiar
propriety of making Honey, as the Silk-wormes Silk) out of Mildewes or Honey,
but also out of all sweet things, as Sugar, Molossoes, etc.

3 That many sweet things may be had, far cheaper than Honey; which (I suppose)
the Bees will transmute into perfect Honey. This way, I conceive, would be very
advantageous to us in England, for the preserving of late swarms, and also for
the enriching of old stocks, so that we need not destroy them, but might drive
them from hive to hive, and set them to work again; and truly I think there is
no place in the world so convenient for this purpose as England; because that
though our Winters be long, yet they are not very cold; but Bees would be
stirring in them: and further our Summers are so subject to winds and raines,
that many times there is scarce a fine day in a whole week: and Further
Molossoes, Refuse Sugar, Sweet Woort, Milk, etc. may be had at reasonable
rates.

I hope ere long to give an exact account of this experiment, and desire those
who have any Ingenuities in this kind, freely to communicate them. I have not
observed many things more of importance concerning Bees, in my travels; only
in Italy they make their hives of thin boards, square in 2 or 3 partitions,
standing either above one another, or very close side to side, by the which
means, they can the better borrow part of their honey when they please. In
Germany their hives are made of straw, to the which they have a summer-doore,
as they call it, which is nigh the top of the Hive, that the Bees when they are
laden, may the more easily enter and discharge themselves of their burdens.

3 We are to blame, that we do not employ our Honeys in making Metheglin: It Is
true, that in Hereford-shire and Wales, there is some quantity of this liquor
made; but for want of good cookery it is of little worth; but usually of a
brown color, of an unpleasant taste: and as I suppose commonly made of the
refuse honey, wax, dead Bees, and such stuff, as they ordinarily make it
elsewhere* for the good house-wife thinks any thing good enough for this
purpose; and that it is pity to spoil good Honey by making Meade: but I know
that if one take pure neat honey, and ingeniously clarify and scum and boil
it, a liquour may be made not inferior to the best Sack, Muskadine, etc. in
color like to rock-water, without ill odor or favor; so that some curious
Pallates have called it Vin Greco, rich and racy Canary, not knowing what name
to give it for its excellency: This would bring very great Profit, not only to
the Public, by saving many 1000 l disbursed for Wines through all the world;
but would be very advantageous to private families, who use to entertain their
friends very nobly, Wines being at present intolerably dear and naught; Thope
therefore ere long to see it put in execution. An excellent drink not much
unlike this may be made of Sugar, Molossoes, Raisins, etc. of the which I have
already spoken, yet think it fit to put you in mind of it again.

14 Deficiency, concerning Silkworms
It Is a great Deficiency here in England, that we do not keep Silk-wormes (which
in Italy are called Cavalieri,) for to make Silk. I know that is a great
Paradox to many, but I hope by this short discourse to make this truth to
appear plainly* The first original of Silke-wormes by what I read in Histories
is from Persia, where in infinite numbers they are still maintained; and the
greatest profits of that great Monarch do arise from hence: China also
abounds very much with Silk. In Virginia also the Silke-wormes are found
wild amongst the Mulberry-woods, and perhaps might be managed with great
profit in those plantations if Land were not so so scarce and dear. I suppose
this Silke-worme of Virginia is produced by the corruption of the
Mulberry-tree, as Cochinneale, from ficus Indica, or Indian figtree: for some
ingenious and curious men who have strictly observed the generation of Insects,
do find that every plant has an Insect which grows out of its corruption,
(as diverse sorts of lice from Animals) and that these Insects do usually feed
on that plant, out of which they were made, as Lice on the same animals from
whence they were engendered. I know a Gentleman here in London, who has 3 or
400 Insects, M. Marshal.
and can give a very good account of their original feedings. And also Mr.
Moreney in Paris, has a large book of the same subject. But to return to our
purpose: I say that we had Silke-wormes first from Persia. In Justinian's time
about 1000 or 1100 years ago, some Monks presented a few to him at
Constantinople; where in his time they began to plant Mulberries: from thence
it came to Italy, about 3 or 400 years since: for the Ancient Writers of
Husbandry, as Cato, Pallad, Golumell, do not so much as mention these
creatures: and at length these have passed over the Mountains into France
within an 100 years; where they flourish so much, that if we will believe their
own Authors, they bring greater profit than the Wine and Corn of that large
Country. I know that France has Silk enough to maintain their excess of
apparel, and to export Plushes, Velvets, etc. Now then if that these worms
can thrive, not only in the parched Persia; but also in Greece, Italy, yea in
France; which differs not much from the temper of England; why should we
think, that they are confined to that place, and must move no farther
Northward? for they have come many 100 miles toward the North, why not one 100
or two more? and further we see that Mulberries, which is their food, thrive
here as well as in any place. But some will object, that our Air is too cold
and moist. To which I answer.

1 That those who write of Silk-wormes, say, that you must take heed, that you
make not the place too hot: for too much heat may destroy; and therefore that
you must set the windows open to let in the cold Air.

2 We know, that moistness of air rather increases such Insects, and
nourishes them. Indeed if moisture hurts, it is because that it too much
corrupts their food, and causes a flux amongst them: but this easily is
prevented, as I shall show you anon. But to be short, it is not only my
opinion that Silke-wormes will thrive here, but the solid judgment of King
James and his Council confirms the same: as you may see by his letter to the
Deputy-Lievetenants of every County; wherein also many weighty reasons are
contained to convince men of the same, which letter follows anon.

Lastly, we find by experience, that Silke-wormes will thrive here, and
therefore the matter is out of question: for diverse Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Scholars, Citizens, etc. have nursed up diverse worms to perfection, though
they have had little skill in the managing of them; and likewise not such
accommodations as are necessary for them; and more would they have done, if
they could have had Mulberry-leaves. I am informed that one near Charing-Crosse
makes a good living by them: as also another by Ratliffe-Crosse; and therefore
if we can bring up an 100, why not a 1000, yea, 100000, if we had food for
them? Truly, I know no reason to the contrary, neither could I ever find one
that could speak any thing to the purpose against the business. And further I
must tell you, that the ordering of this worm is very easy, none need to be
bound prentize to the trade; the special business is to be careful in
feeding them, and keeping them sweet; which things children use to do. He that
would learn this Art exactly, let him read Boneil, or an Author W.S. Printed
1609, about Mulberries, and sold in Paul's Churchyard, by Eleaz. Edgar; but
because that the books are out of print, I will give you a few Rules.

First, endeavor to get store of Mulberry-trees, which are of 2 sorts, the
white and the black. The white grows greatest, and has a fine leaf, and
sweetest, and therefore fittest for the young worms. This is easily propagated
by Slips, as Quinces, Codlings. The Black Mulberry is difficultly propagated by
Slips; but must be raised from seeds, sown either at Michaelmas, when the
Mulberries are eaten: or kept in dry sand till the spring; and then sow or
how them in, as other seeds and stones, and must be diligently weeded. This
grows not to be so great a tree as the former: the leaves are rougher and
harsher, and fittest for the worms. When they are strong and ready to spin,
when your trees are grown to a good bigness, you may plant them forth, as is
usually done for walks or Orchards, or in waste places, as they do in Italy,
(for the Fruit is little worth, only the Leaves are useful,) where I have
seen the trees as bare of leaves at Mid-summer as at Mid-winter. There are 2
sorts of Silke-wormes, the Spanish and Calabrian. The Spanish is the smaller
and more tender, and makes a finer silk. The Calabrian is greater and more
hardy, and makes more Silk, but courser. This sort seems to be the best for
this Country. When the Mulberry-trees begin to bud, take the eggs of your
Silke-wormes, and lay them on a piece of stuff or say, (some use to Bathe them
first in warm Malmsy, and say that it makes them stronger,) and carry them
about you in the day in a Box, in the night lay them under your Bed, or in a
warm Oven, till the worms begin to come forth, then lay a piece of paper of
the wideness of the box, cut full of holes on them, and on the paper lay
Mulberry-leaves, and as fast as they hatch they will crawle forth, and stick to
the Mulberry-leaves; which remove into other boxes, till all be hatched: then
when they have past their second sickness, feed them on shelves 2 foot broad
and 18 inches one from another: the Room where you keep your Worms, must
neither be a low place, nor nigh the tiles; but a middle Room, warm and dry,
yet sometimes a little cold air is good.

Take heed of Rats and Mice, as also of Hens, Robinredbreasts, Sparrows, and
other birds; for they will eat them.

They have 4 Sicknesses, the first 12 days after they are hatched; and from
that time at the end of every 8 days: their sickness lasts 2 or 3 days,
and then they are to be fed but very little.

The whole time that the worms do feed, is about nine weeks: feed them twice
daily at least: at the first when they are small, give them a fevv leaves; and
as they grow greater, more, and feed them oftener. Let your leaves be dry and
well aired upon a Table or cloth before you give them; and gather not your
leaves, till the dew be off; and in dry seasons if you can possibly, you may
keep your leaves gathered 3 or 4 days or longer.

Keep your shelves and boxes very clean: but take heed you touch not your
worms with your hands, when you remove them; but move them not when they
are sick.

In cold moist vveather, set a Pan of coals in the Room, and burn a little
Benjamin, Juniper, etc. especially when they are young, (viz) the first 5
weeks; but afterward, unless it be extraordinary cold, give them Air, and
keep them not too hot, and let the Room be well sented with Herbs.

Let not your Worms be too thick on the shelves: if any dye or be sick,
speedily remove them, least they infect the rest.

As soon as by the clear Ambour-colour of your worms, you perceive that they
would spin; make Arches betwixt your shelves, with heath made clean, branches
of Rosemary, Lavender, etc. where the worms will fasten themselves, and make
their bottomes in 2 or 3 days, and about 12 or 14 days after, will come forth:
before which time, you must take away the bottom, which you will use for
Silk, and kill the worm within, by laying the bottomes in the sun 2 or 3
days, or in an hot Oven.

The bottom which you will keep for seed, lay in a vvarme place, till the
worms come forth: which put on some pieces of old Say, Grogran, Velvet, made
fast to some wall: there they will engender, and the Male having spent himself
falls down and dies; so the Female, when she has laid her eggs, which eggs
when they are gray, you may gently take them off with a knife, and keep them
in a piece of Say in a dry place, till hatching time come.

The vvinding of the Silk off the bottom requires a peculiar wheel, which
an Artificer must make: 1 l and 2 ounces of the bottom yields from 1 ounce
to 3 of Silk.

An ounce of Spanish seed yields ordinarily 6.8. or 10. li. of Silk. and the
worms will eat 250. li. of leaves: the Calabrian-worms being greater, do eat
nigh 300. weight, and yield 11. or 12. pound of Silk.

To conclude, I desire all men seriously to consider, what advantage this
business will bring to this Island, if it be brought to perfection. Truly I
know nothing does hinder but want of Mulberry-trees, which will in little space
come to a considrable greatness. And though I commend those who endeavor to
advance this work in Plantations, and prefer it before Tobacco; yet I know that
it cannot be for want of hands; whereas in England we have plenty of women,
children, old folks, lame, decrepite. etc. who are fit to be overseers of this
work. And I wonder Gentlemen do not go about a thing so pleasant and
profitable, (for 3, 4, or 5. at most will attend as many worms as will make 40.
or 50, li. worth of Silk, in 2, or 3. months) and the worms eat only leaves,
which are of no value: neither is there any considerable trouble about the
worms unless it be the 12. or 15. last days. I hope, if that particular men
will not endeavor to advance this work for their private profit, yet the State
will for the Public Good, it being the best way I know to set all the poor
Children, Widows, old and lame people on work, and likewise will save this
Nation many 100 thousand pounds per annum. And further, the way to accomplish
this work may be done without grievance to the Subject, (viz.) to command every
one to plant or sow so many Mulberry seeds which may easily be procured from
beyond Seas, etc. But I leave States matters to States men, I am none.


A Copy of King James's Letter to the Lords Lieutenants of the several Shires
of England, for the increasing of Mulberry-Trees, and the breeding of
Silkworms, for the making of Silk in England.
JAMES REX.
Right Trusty and Wel-beloved, we greet you well.
IT is a principal part of that Christian care, which appertains to
Soveraignity, to endeavor by all means possible, as well to beget, as to
increase among their people the knowledge and practice of all Arts and Trades,
whereby they may be both weaned from idleness and the enormities thereof,
which are infinite, and exercised in such industries and labors as are
accompanied with evident hopes, not only of preserving people from the shame
and grief of penury; but also raising and increasing them in wealth and
abundance, the Scope which every freeborn spirit aim that, not in regard of
himself only, and the ease which a plentiful estate brings to every one in
his particular, but also in regard of the honor of their Native Country,
whose commendations is no way more set forth then in the peoples Activenesse
and Industry. The consideration whereof, having of late occupied our mind, who
always esteem our peoples good, our necessary contemplations: We have
conceived as well by the discourse of our own reason, as by information
gathered from others, that the making of Silk might as well be effected here,
as it is in the Kingdom of France, where the same has of late years been put
in practice. For neither is the climate of this Isle so far distinct or
different in condition from that Country; especially from the hither parts
thereto* but that it is to be hoped, that those things which by industry
prosper there, may by like industry used here, have like success, and many
private persons who for their pleasure have bred of those worms, have found no
experience to the contrary, but that they may be nourished and maintained here,
if provision were made for planting of Mulberry-trees, whose leaves are the
food of the worms. And therefore we have thought good thereby to let you
understand, that although in suffering this invention to take place, we do show
our selves somewhat an adversary to our profit, which is the matter of our
customs for silk brought from beyond the seas, will receive some dimunition:
Nevertheless, when there is question of so great and public utility to come
to our Kingdom and Subjects in general; and whereby (besides multitudes of
people of both sexes and all ages) such as in regard of impotency are unfit for
other labor, may be set on work comforted and relieved; we are content that
our private benefit shall give way to the public; and therefore being
persuaded that no well-affected subject will refuse to put his helping hand to
such a work as can have no other private end in us, but the desire of the
welfare of our people, we have thought good in this form only to require you
(as a person of greatest authority in that County, and from whom the generality
may receive notice of our pleasure) with more convenience then otherwise) to
take occasion either at the Quarter Sessions, or at some other public place of
meeting, to persuade and require such as are of a ability, (without descending
to trouble the poor, for whom we seek to provide) to buy and distribute in that
County, the number of ten thousand Mul-berry plants, which shall be delivered
unto them at our City of, etc. at the rate of two farthings the plant; or at 6
s the hundred, containing five score plants. And because the buying of the said
plants at this rate may at the first seem chargeable to our said Subjects,
(whom we would be loath to burden) we have taken order that in March or April
next, there shall be delivered at the said place a good quantity of
Mulberry-seeds, there to be sold to such as will buy them; by means whereof the
said plants will be delivered at a smaller rate then they can be afforded being
carried from hence: having resolved also in the mean time, that there shall be
published in print; a plain instruction and direction, both for the increasing
of the said Mulberry-trees, the breeding of the Silkworms, and all other
things needful to be understood, fur the perfecting of a work every way so
commendable and profitable, as well to the planter, as to those that shall use
the trade. Having now made known unto you the motives as they stand with the
public good wherein every man is interessed; because we know how much the
example of our own Deputy Lievtenants and Justices will further this cause; if
you and other your neighbors will be content to take some good quantities
hereof, to distribute upon your own lands we are content to acknowledge thus
much more in this ditection of ours; that all things of this nature tending to
Plantation, increase; of science, and works of industry, are things so
naturally pleasing to our own disposition, as we shall take it for an argument
of extra-ordinary affection toward our person; besides, the judgment we shall
make of the good dispositions in all those that shall express in any kind
their ready minds to further the same: and shall esteem that in furthering the
same, they seek to further our honor and contentment (having seen in few years
space past, that our brother the French King, has since his coming to that
crown, both begun and brought to perfection the making of silks in his Country,
where he has won to himself honor, and to his subjects a mavelous increase
of wealth) would account it no little happiness to us, if the same work which
begun among our people, with no less zeal to their good, (then any Prince can
have to the good of theirs) might in our time produce the fruits which there it
has done: whereof we nothing doubt, if ours will be found as tractable and apt
to further their own good, now the way is showed them by us their Sovereign, as
those of France have been to conform themselves to the directions of their King.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the sixteenth of
November, in the sixth year of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland
the two and fortieth.

15 Deficiency, concerning the Husbandry of other places.
15. Deficiency is the ignorance of the Husbandry of other places (viz.) what
seeds, what fruits, what grasses they use, what Ploughs, Harrows,
Gardening-tools they have; how still they manage and improve their lands; what
cattle they have; how they feed and fatten them; and how they improve their
commodities, etc.

For there is no Country where they are such ill Husbandmen, but in some
particular or other they excel: as we see even in the several Counties of this
Island, every County has something or other wherein they outstrip their
neighbors. And that much profit may arise from hence in this nation, is
manifested by that excellent Treatise, which is published by you concerning the
Husbandry of Flanders; wherein are briefly set down diverse particulars very
useful for us here in England, and formerly unknown. And without question,
France, Spain, Italy, Holland; Poland, Germany. etc. have many excellent things
both for Husbandry, Physic, Mechanics, worth the manifesting and very
beneficial to us: so likewise there are diverse things in our Plantations worth
the taking notice of, in Husbandry. To pass by the Southern Plantations, as
Barbados, Antego, Saint Croix Christopher, Mevis, Monferate, where the
commodities are only Cotten-wools, Sugars, Gingers, Indicoes, which our cold
climate will not produce; and also Tobacco which grows also with us, about
Norwich and elsewhere. We will only sail upon our Northern Plantations,
Verginia, New England, and instance in a few things. Why may not the
Silk-grasse of Verginia, the Salsaperilla, Sassarfas, Rattlssnake-weed (which
is an excellent cordial) be beneficial to us, as also their Cedars, Pines,
Plum-trees, Cherries, great Strawberries, and their Locusts (which is a prickly
plant, a swift grower, and therefore excellent for hedges) be useful to us? So
for New England, why should we think that the Indian corn, the Marsh-wheat,
that excellent Rye. the Pease (which never are eaten with magots,) the French,
or Kidney Beans, the Pumpions, Squashes, Water mellons, Musk-mellons,
Hurtleberries, wild Hemp, Fir, etc. of those parts are altogether useless for
us? as also the Cramberries, (which are so called by the Indians, but by the
English, Bear-berries, because it is thought the Bears eat them in Winter; or
Barberries, by reason of their fine acid taste like Barberries,) which is a
fruit as big and as red at a Cherry, ripe only in the winter, and growing
close to the ground in bogs, where nothing else will grow? They are accounted
very good against the Scurvie, and very pleasant in Tarts. I know not a more
excellent and healthfuller fruit.

But some will object, that they will not grow here with us, for your
forefathers never used them. To these I reply, and ask them how they know?
have they tried? Idleness never w^^ts (...)cuse; and why might not our
forefathers upon the (...), held their hands in their pockets, and have said,
that Wheat and Barley would not have grown amongst us? and why should not they
have been discouraged from planting Cherries, Hops, Liquorice, Potatoes,
Apricocks, Peaches, Melicotones, and from sowing Rape-seeds, Colliflowers,
great Clover, Canary-seeds, etc. and many more of this kind? and yet we know,
that most of these have been brought to perfection, even in our days: for there
is a viciffitude in all things, and as many things are lost which were known
to our forefathers, as well the Purple color, etc. as you may read in
Pancirol: so many things are found out by us, altogether unknown to them, and
some things will be left for our posterities. For example, not to speak of
Gunpowder and Printing, nor of the New-world and the wonders there, which
notwithstanding are but of a few 100. years standing: I say twenty Ingenuities
have been found even in our days, as Watches, Clocks, Way-wisers, Chains for
Fleas, diverse Mathematical Instruments, Short-writing, Microscopes, by the
which even the smallest things may be discrned, as the eggs, eyes, legs and hair
of a Mite in a Cheese: Likewise the Selenoscope, which discovers mountains in
the Moon, diverse Stars, and new Planets, never seen till our days. But to
return to our pur purpose, I say that in Husbandry it is even so; for the
Ancients used diverse plants which we know not; as the Cytisus-tree, so much
commended for Cattle; as also their Medick fodder, which Colum. says endures
10. years, and may be mowen 4 years, 7. times in a year, and one Acre he
esteems enough for 3 horses. This fodder likewise is accounted very sweet and
healthful, whereas the plants which are usually called Medicaes with us, are
annual plants, and have no such rare proprieties. So we are ignorant what their
Far or fine Bread Corn was, what their Lupine, Spury, and an hndred of this
kind, as you may read in Mathiol. or Dioscorides: so on the contrary, infinite
are Plants which we have, and they knew not, as well appears by their small
and our large Herbals; and daily new Plants are discovered, useful for
Hushandry, Mechanics and Physic; and therefore let no man be discouraged from
prosecuting new and laudable ingenuities. And I desire Ingenuous Gentlmen and
Merchants, who travel beyond Sea, to take notice of the Husbandry of those
parts (viz.) what grains they sow? at what time and seasons? on what lands? how
they plough their their lands? how they dung and improve them? what Cattle they
use? and the commodities thereby? also what books are written of Husbandry, and
such like? and I entreat them earnestly, not to think these things too low for
them, and out of their callings; nay, I desire them to count nothing trivial in
this kind, which may be profitable to their Country, and advance knowledge.
And truly, I should thank any Merchant that could inform me in some trivial and
ordinary things done beyond Sea, (viz.) how they make Caviare out of Sturgeons
Rows? in Muscovia, how they boil and pickle their Sturgeon, (which we English
in New England cannot as yet do handsomely?) how the Bolognia Sausages are
made? how they ferment their Bread without Yest? of what materials diverse sorts
of Baskets, Brooms, Frails are made? what seed Grout or Grutze is made of? and
also how to make the Parmisane Cheeses of Italy, which are usually sold here
for 2. s. or 2. s. 6. d per pound; or the Angelots of France, which are
accounted better Cheeses then any made in England; as also the Holland Cheeses,
which are far better then our ordinary Cheeses, and yet these sorts of Cheeses
are made not of Mares milk, as some think, but from the Cows, and our Pastures
are not inferior to theirs, etc,

2. I desire ingenious men to send home whatsoever they have rare of all sorts;
as first, Animals, the fine-woolled Sheep of Spain, Barbary Horses, Spanish
Jennets, etc. and so likewise all sorts of Vegetables not growing with us, as
Pannick, Millet, Rice, which grows in the Fenny places of Millan; and why may
it not grow in our Fens, and the best sorts of Grains or Fruits in use amongst
us? perhaps there is Wheat that is not subject to Smut or Mildew; perhaps other
seeds will give double increase, as Flax, Oats, Pease; and diverse other things
of importance there are beyond Sea, which may be useful to us; as the Askeys,
the Cork, Acorns, the Scarlet-Oak, sweet-Annise, which grows abundantly in
Millan, Fenel, etc. Tilia or Linder-tree for bas^e Ropes, etc. Spruce Pines for
Masts and Boards, seeing that they are swift growers, and many will stand in a
small piece of ground: they have formerly grown here, and some few do flourish
in our Gardens, and in Scotland. I suppose that this ought seriously to be
considered: for altough we have plenty of Oaks, yet what will it profit for
Shipping without Masts? and how difficult it is to get great Masts above 22.
inches diameter, is very well known. Many things I might add of this kind, but
for brevities sake I refer you to Master John Tredescan, who has taken great
pains herein, and daily raises new and curious things.

3. Consider that these new Ingenuities may be profitable, not only to the
Public, but also to Private men: as we see by those who first planted
Cherries, Hops Liquorice, Saffron, and first sowed Rape-seeds Colliflowers,
Woad, Would, Early Pease Assparagus, Melons, Tulips, Gilliflowers, etc. and why
may we not find some things beneficial to us also?

16. 16 Deficiency, of the ignorance of things taken from the earth and waters
of this Island.
Deficiency is the ignorance of those things which are taken from the Earth and
Waters of this Island.

Although it may seem to many that these things do little concern the
Husbandman, who usually is not a Naturalist, but only indeavoureth to know his
own grounds and the seeds proper for it and seldom pierces into the bowels of
the earth: yet if we consider that out of the earth he has Marle, Lime, Stone
Chalk, for the enriching his lands; and also Loam, and Sand for his buildings*
oftentimes fuel for fire, etc. it will plainly appear, that it is necessary for
him to know all subterrany things, and to be a Petty-Phylosopher, and that the
knowledge of these things will be very beneficial for him. And here I cannot
but take notice of a great deficiency amongst us, (viz.) that we have not the
natural history of all the Sands, Earth, Stones, Mines, Minerals, Metals, etc.
which are found in this Island: it would not only advance Husbandry; but also
many other Mechanic Arts, and bring great profit to the public. I hope some
ingenious man will at length undertake this task; for the Lord has blessed
this Island, with as great variety as any place that is known, as shall in part
appear anon; and it may be proved by that great variety which is found near the
Spaw-waters in Knaresborough, as Dr. Dean relates in his Book called the
English Spaw: Or the glory of Knaresbrough, springing from several famous
fountains there adjacent (called the Vitriol, sulphurous and dropping Wels) and
also other Mineral waters, whose words are these: Here is found not only white
and yellow Marle, Plaster, Oker, Rudd, Rubric, Freestone, an hard
Greet-stone, a soft Reddish stone, Iron stone, Brimstone, Vitriol, Niter,
Alum, Lead, and Copper: (and without doubt diverse mixtures of these) but also
many other Minerals might (perhaps) be found out by the diligent seach and
industry of those who would take pains to labor a little herein.

Printed at York by Tho: Broad, being to be sold in his shop at the lower end
of stone-gate, near to Common-Hall-Gates, 1649.
This Letter will not permit me to make a complete Natural History of the
things of this Isle; yet I shall relate diverse things which may be as hints to
set some others to work, which I have found in Mr. Cambden and others: and
shall briefly instruct the Husbandman what he ought to take notice of, for his
own and others good. And first, if he live nigh the Sea, let him take notice of
those things the Sea casts up; for it has even with us cast up Ambergreece,
which is worth so much Gold; with the which not long since a Fisherman of
Plymouth greased his boots, not knowing what it was: sometimes it casts up
Jet and Amber, as at Whitbey oftentimes. In former times we had Oysters which
had very fair great Pearls in them of good worth; and at this time some of them
are found in Denbigh-shire; Coperas-stone likewise is found along by the
Seacoasts of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hampshire, out of the which Copperas is
made; a thing very useful for D^ers, Curriers, etc. further Sea-weeds are not
to be slighted; for in Iersey they have no other fuel amongst them; and here
in England it is burnt to make Kelpe for Glassemen, and is also very good
manure for diverse Lands; also Sea-owse is not only good to lay on Land, but at
Dover, and other places, the Inhabitants make Brick thereof, called
Flaunders-Bricks etc. Sea-sands in Cornwall do very much enrich their Lands;
and in Cumber-land out of a certain kind of sand they extract Salt, etc.

2. Let him take notice of all sorts of Waters, which issue forth of the earth,
differing from the ordinary, in Color, Odor, Taste: for it is well known, how
advantageous these waters are; oftentimes, not only to particular men, but also
to the Country about; yea to the whole Island, as appears by the waters of
Tunbridge in Kent, and of Epsham in Surrey, Knaresborough, Spaw in Yorkshire,
and by the Allum-waters in Newenham in Warwickshire, like Milk in taste and
color, and are excellent for the Stone and wounds; and also it appears by
the salt Fountains in Worcestershire and Cheshire, which furnish all those
parts, with an excellent fine white salt: by the hot Bath's in Summer-setshire,
and the lukewarm waters by Bristol. etc. At Pitchford in Shropshire, is a
fountain which casts forth liquid Bitumen which the people use for Pitch, etc.

3. Let him not despise the sorts of Sands, which he finds: for some Sands
are for buildings, as the rough sorts; others for scowring* others for casting
fine metals, as Highgate sand; others for the Glass mex, as a sand lately
found in Sussex* In Scotland there is a sand, which contains a considerable
quantity of Gold: and in diverse Countries fine Gold abounds very much in
sands; and if we may believe an excellent Dutch Chemist, there is scarce any
sand without it.

4. Let him take notice of the Earth, Loames, Clayes, etc. which have diverse
and necessary uses: as first the stiffest Clayes, as New Castle and Nonsuch,
are for the Glassemens Pots, for Crucibles, melting pots: the less stiff for
ordinary Earthen wares, Brewers, Tiles, Bricks* etc. white Clay is for
Tobacco-pipes: Marle of diverse colors and stiffness is excellent for
Husbandmen: Fuller's-Earth is found in Kent, Surrey, and lately in diverse
other places, for the great benefit of the Clothier: Rub and Rubric in
Yorkshire, as also diverse other in Oxford and Gloucestershire excellent for
Painters, etc. Turffe for firing may be found in most parts of this Isle, if
people were industrious: necessity now and then compels them to be
inquisitive, as it did lately at Oxford and Kent, where it is found in good
quantity. in Holland they have little fuel, save what is taken out of their
ditches; and therefore it is truly said, that their firing is as it were fished
out of the water, and its indifferent good fuel: Coals are found in very many
places, yet diverse places are in great want of them.

5. Let him take notice of the several stones found in this Isle, as of
Freestones for building; Cobbels and rough hard stones for paving, Tomb-stones;
soft sandy stones commonly called fire-stones, because that they will endure
strong fires, and therefore fit for Iron furnaces; and this propriety these
soft stones have, that when they are white hot, a steel instrument will scarce
touch them to hurt them. Alabaster is found at Burton on the Trent, and in
Staffordshire, and a Titbury-Castle: excellent Marble at Snothil in
Hereford-shire: a course Marble near Oxford; in Kent, also at Purbrick in
Dorsetshire, Milstones in Anglesey, in Flintshire, Darbyshire, Lime-stones:
Chalk in very many places, for diverse uses: Allum-stone is found in Anglesey,
but especially at Gisborrow in Yorkshire, where the Alum works are, which
serve this Island; Lapis Claminaris is lately found in Somersetshire, by the
which Copper is made brass: Manganese for those that make white glass, lately
found in the North: the best Emery for pollishing Iron in Jersey: Plaster at
Knaresborough: Black* lead in Cumberland, and no where else in Europe: There is
a stone in Durham out of which they make salt; Diamonds are found about Bristol
and Cornwall very large, but soft: There is a stone near Beaver Castle like a
Star. In Yorkshire another like a Serpent petrefied: and also other stones
round like bullets, which being broken have as it were a Serpent in them
without an head, etc.

6. Of all Minerals and Metals, Iron-stone is found almost in every County, and
is profitable where Wood is plentiful: the best is found in Lancashire, one
load and a half making a Tun of Iron: it has been transported into Ireland, to
mix with poor Mine. In Richard the 2. time a Copper-Mine was found in Wenlock
in Shrop-shire, but exhausted: in Queen Elizabeth's days one was found at
Keswick in Cumberland: and lately in Stafford shire, Yorkshire, and near
Barstable in Devon-shire, on which some Gentlemen intend speedily to work: Lead
is found in Durham-wall and Devonshire: Brimstone in Yorkshire and Wales,
Antymony in Staffordshire: a silver Mine in Cardiganshire: a gold Mine was
discovered in Scotland in King James his time: and many rich Mines, might be
discovered in England, if that the Kings prerogative (which was to take all
Royal Mines to himself, (viz.) Silver, Gold and Copper) were so certainly
abolished, that they which should find these Metals in their own Lands, might
safely digg them. But some will object and say, that many things are of little
worth and profit. To these I answer, that God has made nothing in vain, every
thing has his peculiar use, and though some things seem to be of little worth
and contemptible, as Sand, Loame, Chalk; yet it has pleased the wise Creator
to make these things very necessary for man's comfortable subsistence, which
they that want these things can testify: As for example, in New England, where
there is no Chalk nor Limestone, they are compelled to burn Oyster-shells,
Cockles, to make Lime; or else they could hardly build any houses. The like I
may say of Sand and Loam in diverse places, where they are wanting.

2. I say that most of those things I have spoken of, are very profitable in
one place or other. To instance in some of the meaner sort, at London Brick-men
give 50 l per Acre, only for Loam to make Bricks, and pay 3 l per Acre, of
yearly Rent, and are to leave the Land worth the same yearly Rent; likewise I
know a Chalk cliffe in Kent not two Acres of ground, valued at many 100 l and
that one Colum of Chalk which is 10. foot square, is valued at 40, or 50 l at 8
d per load. The Oker Mines of Oxford and Gloucestershire are of great value,
and so would others of that kind, if they could be found; so is the Black-lead
Mine. Also the pits of Clay, Marle, Coal, Turffe, etc. And therefore I desire
all Contrymen to endeavor to know all sorts of Stones, Clayes, Earths,
Oars, and to teach their Children the use of them, that they may know that
this sand is for building, this Loam for Bricks, this Clay for Pots, this Marle
for Corn-land: and if that they shall find any Stones, Earths, which they know
not, that they would lay them up, till that they meet with some ingenious man,
that can inform them. The richest Mines of the world, have been found out by
these means, if we will believe Histories. And this I am sure of, that by this
means, they may much advance their knowledge, and be more profitable to the
public, their Neighbors, and also to themselves.

17. Deficiency* is the ignorance of the Vegetables of this Island, 17.
Deficiency, of the Vegetables of this Island, and their Virtues and Uses.
and their Virtues and Uses.

And the first Deficiency that I take notice of, is the ignorance of the
ordinary seeds which are commonly sown amongst us: for usually the
Countryman contenteth himself with one or two sorts, and knows no more,
when as there are very great varieties; some of which agree with one sort of
ground, some with another: as for example, there are very many sorts of
Wheates, some called White Wheat, some Red Wheat, some Bearded, (which, as I
have said before, is not so subject to Mildews, as others) others not: some
sorts with 2. rows, others with 4. and 6. some with one ear on a stalk,
others with double ears, or 2. on the same stalk; red stalk Wheat of
Buckinghamshire, Winter Wheat, Summer Wheat, which is sown abundantly in
New England, in April and May, and reaped ordinarlly in 3. months; and many
sorts more. Not to trouble my discourse with Spelt, Zea, Tiphine-Wheat, or
Olew, Far, Siligo, Alica, which were used amongst the Auntients; but now
unknown not only to the Countreyman, but even to the learnedest Botanicks: so I
may say that the ordinary Yeoman is ignorant of the diversities of Barley's,
for there is not only the ordinary Barley, but also big sprat-Barly, which has
lately been sown in Kent with good profit; also Winter-Barly sown in Winter,
Barley with 4.6. rows, naked Barley, which require diverse dispositions in Land:
some delighting in finer, others in stiffer grounds. So there is also Winter
and Summer-Rie, and 20. sorts of Pease, the ordinary Schew, the Raith or
Early-ripe Pease, the Roncivals, Hastivers, Hotarses, Gray-Pease, Green-Pease,
Pease without skins, Sugar Pease, whose shells are sweeter then the Pease it
self, and have been within these 10. years plentifully sown in Lincolnshire
with profit; also Fulham, Sandwich-Pease, etc. which require diverse sorts of
land and seasons: so also there are diverse sorts of Oats, white, black, naked,
which in New England serves well for Oatmeal without grinding, being beaten as
they come out of the barn; Scotch, Poland, etc. Also Buck-wheat, Lentiles;
diverse sorts of Tares, of Hemp and Flax, altogether unknown to most
Contrymen, but I hope that hereafter rhey will be more inquisitive after
them: for diverse of them may be of good use on their lands.

2. Defficiency in this kind, is, that they are ignorant of the Plants and
Grasses which naturally grow among us, and their Uses, which likewise were made
for to be food for Cattle, and also for the service of man. This ignorance
causes them to admire, and to esteem even as miraculous, ordinary and trivial
things; as for example, how it comes to pass, that in one Meddow an Horse
thriveth very much and speedily, and yet a Bullock will not in that place; and
contrariwise in a Meadow close by the former, the Bullock will thrive, and the
Horse not: so also how it comes to pass that Conies and Sheep will thrive
well, where there is scarcely any Pasture, and yet come to nothing on Commons,
where there is a greater quantity of Pasture; which proceeds from this cause,
that some kind of Plants are more agreeing and sweeter to one sort of Cattle
then to another, and every Beast almost has some Plant or other, which they
love exceedingly. I suppose, that the observances of this kind, might be very
useful in Husbandry. These Deficiencies I will draw to three Heads.

1. I say that diverse Plants (not to speak of Fruits, because we have already
spoken of them) that grow naturally in our Island, may be very serviceable to
the Husbandman, both for his Pastures and Corn-lands. To instance in some few:
we see that diverse sorts of wild Vetches, Chiches, Tares, etc. grow wild in
diverse places which though they bear not so great and large crops, as some
others already used; yet who knows what they would do, if they were manured
as other grains* and in land proper for them: for we see that the transplanting
of Plants into gardens, does very much meliorate or better them; and without
doubt all those grains which are in use with us, were at first picked out of
the fields and woods; and by ingenious men found useful for man or beast, and
of late diverse have been found not known to our forefathers, as Saint Foin
Lucern; and why may not we find diverse Grasses, Vetches, Medicaes, Wild Pease,
etc. which as yet are scarce taken notice of.

2. There grow diverse sorts of wild Pease, but to speak of two only.

1. Sort which grows on the stony beaches of the sea, where there is little
or no earth, the roots are many foot deep in the ground. In Queen Mary's days
in a dearth, the poor people gathered diverse sacks full of them, and they were
no small relief, to to them, who has tried whether they would thrive better on
better land?

2. Sort grows on dry barren land, and is commonly called the everlasting
Pease; which continually grows out of the same root. In Gardens I have seen
it grow 10 years together, and larger at the 10 years end, then at the first. I
have also seen it flourish on barren grounds, where Oats were burned away: who
knows but these and other Plants may be serviceable, if not for man, at least
for beasts or Pigeons; for in New England the great flights of Pigeons are much
maintained by these, I am sure it were good to make experiments of these and
diverse others.

2. Head, is the Ignorance of the MechanicaI uses of Herbs and Trees, for even
for these uses most Plants have some peculiar propriety. To instance in a few.
We know that Elm is for wheels; and tbe best wood to make Herrings red, Oak is
for the Shipwright, Joyner, Tanner; Horn-beams, Beech, for the Milwright;
Line-tree for bass-ropes; old Elder without pith is very tough and fit for Cogs
of Wheels, Tooth-pickers; Pear Tree for Mathematical instruments and ingravers,
etc. Osiers for baskets; Walnut for Gunstocks; Asp for Hoops; Box, Ash for a
100 uses; and much more might be spoken of this kind, if time would permit. So
likewise diverse Plants are for Painters, as you may see in Battees experiments:
some for the Dyers, but as yet we know but four, ( viz. Woad, Would,
Green-wood, and Madder) amongst 1200 Plants and upward; which grow wild with
us. I could wish some ingenious man would take the pains to search out the
Mechanical uses of Plants; surely it were a good way to advance Mechanics, who
in their callings usually go round; as horses in a mill, and endeavor very
little to advance or know the causes of their operations, I know a Gentleman,
who promises some things in this kind, and I hope will be as good as his word.

3. Head, is the ignorance of the very Physical uses of Plants: for though many
hundred Plants do grow amongst us; yet but few of them are used Physically:
whereas there is scarce any one but may be useful in this kind. And truly in
my opinion it is a great fault that we so much admire those things, that are
far fetched and dear bought; when as oft-times they are gathered in
unseasonable times, and corrupted by long voyages by sea, counterfeited by
Merchants; yea we have very often quid pro quo, and rank poisons, and do neglect
those medicines which God has given us here at home. I am credibly informed
that in former times, Virga aurea was in great use with us. and usually sold
for eight pence per ounce, and brought from France: but so soon as it was found
growing plentifully in our hedges, it was cast forth of the Apothecaries shops,
as of little virtue. And though some will object, that our Plants have little
virtue. I say its false; for God has tempered them for our complexions: and we
see very often that one simple medicine does more good then the great
compositions of the ancients, which are rather ad pompam then for health, and
seem to savor somewhat of the Mountebank; because Opium is always an
ingredient. And further we see, that where any Endemicall or National disease
reigns, their God has also planted a specifique for it: As the Cochleare or
Scurvy-grasse for the Scurvy, in the Baltic Sea, where it is very frequent,
and also in Holland, England. So in the West Indies, (from whence the great Pox
first came, and where it reigns very much, that not only man, but other
Creatures are infected with it, so that even Dogs die of that disease in our
Northern Plantations, perhaps catching this infection, by mingling with Indian
Dogs,) there grow the specifiques for this Disease, as Gujacum, Salsaperilla,
Sassafras, and the Salvages do easily cure these distempers* Further we see,
that even the irrational Creatures, can find not only meat, but also Medicines
for themselves; as the Dog, Couchgrass for a vomit: the Dove, Vervein; the
Weasel Kue; the Swallow, Celandine, the Toad Plantine; and where is our reason
that we cannot?

I therefore desire all Countrey*people, to endeavor to know these Plants
which grow at their doors: (for God has not planted them there for no
purpose; for he does nothing in vain,) and to collect together the plain simple
Medicaments of their Grand^m^; by this means they may save many a 40. pence: I
mean preserve themselves and Families, and Neighbors, in good health. Some
small Treatises have of late been written, to show the use of our Plants in
Physic; and I hope ingenious men will daily more and more communicate the
secrets of this kind, which they have in their hands, for the public good.

18. Deficiency concerning Animals.
They that write of 4. footed beasts, do reckon about 120. species of them: half
of them are scarcely known amongst us. I do suppose therefore, that diverse
species are wanting, which may be useful. To instance in some: And

1. To begin with the Elephant, the greatest, wisest, and longest lived of all
Beasts: which abound very much in the Eastern parts of the world; as China,
India, and are accounted very serviceable, both for the Wars, and for
carriage (15. men usually riding on his back together) they are not chargeable
to keep; why may they not be of use even here, when I am credibly informed, an
Elephant lived diverse years here in a Park? so that they can endure the
coldness of this Climate.

2. The Buffle, which is as big as an Ox, and serviceable both for the Plough,
and for their Milk: their skins make the best buffe, they will fare very hard,
and live in Fens and bogs, where nothing else can. In the Duke of Florences
Country near Pisa, are many of them.

3. The honest and patient Ass, which was very much used in the old time for
carriage, (as the Horse for the War, and the Ox for the Plough,) and in many
Countries at this time; they will eat Thistles, and live even with nothing.
They may save poor men (who are not able to keep an Horse, because he is a
great feeder,) much labor.

4. Mules, which is a very strong and proud beast, and will carry far more then
an Horse, and are more sure footed. I suppose, that they might be serviceable
to the Carriers here, as they are beyond the Seas.

5. Black Foxes, may be profitable; whose skins have been sold from 20. l per
skin to 90 l I might add diverse more of this kind: as Muske-Cats Sables,
Martines, Minkes, Musk Squash, Guiney-Pigs, and a sort of Con^, which some few
have in Hampshire, whose Fur is worth 2 s. 6. d. or 3 s per skin, being little
inferior to Beaver, etc. but for brevities sake I pass them over: as also
diverse sorts of Fowls, of good use; as a kind of Duck with a crooked bill,
which lays constantly as Hens do, as also Hawks of diverse sorts of good
value, which perhaps the Countryman loves not; because they are enemies to
his Poultry.

2. Deficiency is, that we do not endeavor to advance the best kinds of this
Cattle, which are amongst us. And

1. To begin with horses. The Frenchman that writes a book called the
Treasure politic, says, that in England in Queen Elizabe^hs days, we had not
above 3 or 4000 horse worth any thing for the war, and those only in Noblemens
stables, which thing perhaps did the more encourage the Spaniard to invade us;
but at this time we are known to have very many thousand of horse not inferior
to the best in the world: yet I suppose, that we might much meliorate our breed
by Spanish Jennets, Barbary, etc. And we are not so careful to increase good
horses as we should be.

2. We are too negligent in our kine, that we advance not the best species: for
some sorts give abundance of milk, and better then others: some sorts are
larger, more hardy, and will sooner fat, etc. Lancashire and some few Northern
Counties, are the only places where they are a little careful in these
particulars.

3. We are not curious in procuring the best sorts of sheep, for greatness,
soundness, and fine wool. I wonder that some of our sheep-masters have not
procured of those exceeding fine-woolled sheep of Spain; whose wool costeth the
Mrchant nigh 10 s per pound, before it is exported: I suppose that it would for
a time mend our wool, if not continue so for ever: for these sheep were first
carried forth out of England, if we may believe stories, Spain not affording
such sheep before. Dutch sheep, are reported to have two or three Lambs
ordinarily. Dutch sheep are very great, with great tails; but their wool is
very course, not only because of their course feeding; but also because in hot
countries, they ordinarily mingle with Goats, and therefore in Venice ordinary
Porters will scarce eat any Mutton. And here I cannot but relate, that all
strangers very much wonder at 2 things in our sheep, (not to speak of the
finenesse of wool,) And

1. That our sheep if they be sound, seldom or never drink, even in Summer;
though they go on the driest Chalky lands: as it plainly appears in Kent,
where there is scarce water for the great Cattle, which proceeds from the
moisture of our air, and abundance of rains and dews.

2. That our sheep do not follow their shepherds as they do in all other
Countries: for the Shepherd goes before, and the sheep follow like to a pack
of dogs, this disobedience of our sheep, does not happen to us, as Papist
Priests tell their simple flocks; because we have left their great shepherd
the Pope; but because we let our sheep range night and day in our fields
without a shepherd; which other Countries dare not for fear of Wolves and
other ravenous beasts, but are compelled to guard them all day with great dogs,
and to bring them home at night, or to watch them in their folds.

3. Deficiency in this kind, is the neglect of Fish Ponds, which are very
profitable: for fish usually live by such worms and flies as are engendered in
the ponds, and require no charge. Concerning the ordering of them, and the
profit of them, read Mr. Vaughans Golden Grove. And surely it would be a great
benefit to this Island, if we had fish at reasonable rates. I cannot therefore
pass by two extreme abuses, which exceedingly destroy fish, and are in no wise
to be permitted.

1. That diverse poor men keep many Swine, and in nets, or otherwise catch many
vessels of the young fry of fish and feed their Swine with them.

2. That the Fishermen in the River have the meashes of their nets so straight,
that they take many sorts of fish, when they are too small, and do destroy more
fish then they take. I hope these abuses wlll be reformed with all severity. To
this head I may add Decoys, which are very frequent in Holland, and
profitable; but very rare with us in England: yet it may be very profitable and
delightful.

4. Deficiency, is the ignorance of the insects of this Island. And though it
may seem ridiculous to many, to affirm that Magots, Butterflies, should be of
any importance; yet I desire them to consider, that we have our Honey, the
sweetest of foods from Beas, which are Cattle of this kind: also all our S^lks,
Satt^ns, Plushes, and bravery from the poor Silkworm, which may be called a
Magot, Caterpillar, or Butter-flie, etc. the richest of our Colors from the
Co^heneile, which is one of this sort. Cum-la^ is made by Aunts, some are used
for food, as Locusts, etc. as you may read in Musset's Book de Infectis. Many
of these likewise are used in Physic, as Cantharides, Wood-sowes, Lice, etc.
Some think, that Medicines transcending even the Chemists, may be had out of
these; for every Plant, which has a Medicinal virtue, is also sublimed up into
this living Quintessence: and therefore I commend diverse ingenious men, as Mr.
Marshal and others, who have collected many hundred sorts of these; and I hope
they will communicate ere long their experiments to the world.

19. Deficiency concerning diverse things necessary for the good of Cattle. 19.
Deficiency concerning diverse things necessary for the good of Cattle.


1. That we are ignorant of the diverse Diseases of Cattle and their Cures. Not
to run over all the diseases of Cattle and their Cures, which would be too
long, and you may read them in Mr. Markams works, the Country Farmer, and
others. I will instance only in two, which some years sweep away Cattle, as the
Plague does men, (viz.) the Murreine amongst great Cattle, and the Rot amongst
Sheep. And though diverse have wrote concerning the Cures of these Diseases; yet
we do not find that effect which we desire: and therefore I hope some will
attempt to supply this Deficiency, and write a good Treatise about the Diseases
of Cattle. Of these 2. Diseases, I shall briefly declare my mind: And.

1. Of the Murreine, which proceeds from an inflammation of the blood, and
causes a swelling in the throat, which in little time suffocateth the Cattle.
The especial Causes of this Disease, are an hot and dry season of the year;
which dries up the waters, or at least does so putrify them, that they are
unwholesome; and also the letting of Carrion lie unburied. This Disease is
thought to be infectious; but perhaps it may proceed from one common cause, as
the rottenness of Sheep. The best way to keep your Cattle from this Disease, is
to let them stand in cool places in summer, and to have abundance of good
water, and speedily to bury all Carrion: and if any of your Cattle be infected,
speedily to let them blood, and to give them a good drench, etc. by these
means diverse have preserved their Cattle; when their Neighbors have perished.

2. Concerning the rot of Sheep, not to speak of the Pelt-rot, or Sheep that
are starved; but of the ordinary rot, called by some the white rot, and is a
kind of dropsy, their bellies are full of water, and their liver discolored.
I have seen out of the livers of sheep tending to rottenness, living
Creatures, leaping like small Flounders; which without question in little time
will destroy the liver, and consequently produce an indisposition not unlike to
the Rot. The common people say, that these worms are caused by the
over-heatings of sheep, and that Rottenness proceeds from a plant called
Cotyledon, or Marsh Penny-wort, which is of a very sharp taste, and therefore
not likely that sheep will eat it; but it may be a sign of wet rotten Land, as
broom is of sound and dry land. This is certain, that in wet moist years, sheep
die very much of the Rot; and in dry years on the same ground, they hold sound:
and yet I have heard that in Ireland, which is far moister then England,
rottenness of sheep is not known. It were therefore well worth the labor of
an ingenious man, to inquire into the causes of these indispositions in sheep.

The means, which have been found very effectual for the curing of these
Diseases, are these: first, to drive your sheep up to dry Lands, or to keep
them in the fold, till the dew be off the grass, or to feed them some days
with fine dry hay, especially of salt Meadow, or to put them into salt Marshes;
for in those places sheep never rot, or to drive them to some salt River, and
there to wash them, and make them drink of the water, this will kill the skab,
and also the ticks, and fasten the wool; but if you have not the conveniences
before said, then rub their teeth with salt, or rather make a strong pickle
with salt and water, and force them to drink thereof. Some dry Pitch in an
Oven, and add to the pickle, and have found very good success: for these
Medicines do exoficcate the superfluous humidities, open obstructions, and kill
worms. Some commend the Antimonial Cup, as a catholic Medicine against all
Diseases of cattle.

2. We are ignorant of diverse ingenuities, concerning feeding and fatting of
Cattle and other Creatures. To instance in some; And

1. Of the Horse who is a great feeder. In Kent and Hartfordshire they usually
cut all their Oats and Pease small, and give them with their Chafe; by this
means the Horses sooner fill themselves, and eat all the straw up: some put his
Horse-meat into a bag, and so order it that a little only lies in the Manger;
which when that is eaten up, more falls down, and not before; by this way
Horses do not blow their meat, nor throw it out of the manger with their Noses.
A further good piece of Husbandry they use, which is this, when their Horses
are well fed at night, they fill the Rack with Wheat or Barly-straw, and so
leave them; the Horse perceiving that that which is in the rack is not very
pleasant, lies down and takes his rest, which is as good to him as his meat:
if he rise in the night, and fall to the rack and manger, as he usually does,
and finds nothing but straw, he sleeps till the morning; but if it be Hay,
Tares, or Pease, the Jade will pull it all down and spoil it, and likewise will
be hindered from his rest; by the which double damage does ensue. Currying and
dressing of horses ought not to be forgot, it is half as good as their meat.
Brimstone and Elecompaine roots are the especial ingredients for this Physic.
2. Of the feeding and fatting of Cows. We usually feed Cattle with straw in
racks in the yard, or turn them to the fields, and there let them feed as much
and how they please; which has many inconveniences: as first Cattle spoil as
much with their heels as they eat, especially if the ground be moist, or if the
Fly be very troublesome, and they blow and stench and tumble much, and if the
Fly be busy they run up and down, and over-heat themselves, and fat very
little, so that oftentimes in June or July they fatten as little as at
Christmas, and most of their dung is lost by these means, etc. But in Holland
they do thus: They keep their Cattle housed winter and summer; for the
Winter-provision, they lay in not only hay, but also grains,) which they buy
in Summer, and bury in the ground:) and also Rape-seed Cakes, and sow Turnips,
not only for themselves, but their Cows also; with the which Turnips being
sliced, and their tops, and Rape-seed Cakes, and grains, etc. they make meshes
for their Cows, and give it them warm; which the Cows will slop up like Hogs,
and by this means they give very much milk. In the Summer time they mow the
great Clover-grasse, and give it them in racks; so that their Cattle are not
troubled with the pinching frosts nor rains, nor with the parching Sun in
Summer, neither with the Fly, nor do they over-heat themselves or spoil half
so much meat; and are always as fat as their Masters, or Bacon-hogs. The Dung
and Urine they charily preserve, and thereby keep their meadows of
Clover-grasse (which are constantly mowen twice or thrice yearly) in good
heart: and indeed Cattle ought not to go amongst Clover-grasse, because it
usually grows with long Haum (as they call it) like Pease, which if it be
broken will not thrive. In Bermudas they have a peculiar way of fattening their
Cattle, not used any where else that I know* which is with Green Fennel, that
grows in that Island plentifully.

There is a plant in Essex called Myrchis or Cow-pursley, which grows fast
and early in the spring, which they give their Cattle at the beginning of the
year, and they eat it well.

It is an ill custom that is used almost every where, to let Hogs lie in their
dirt and dung, when they are fattening; for all creatures generally do hate and
abhor their own dung: and an hog is the eleanliest of all creatures, and will
never dung nor stale in his stie, if he can get forth, which other creatures
will: and though he tumble in the dirt in Summer; yet that is partly to cool
himself, and partly to kill his lice, for when the dirt is dry, he rubbeth it
off, and destroys the lice thereby.

Sir Hugh Platts in his writings sets down diverse ingenious ways of
fattening Poultry, etc. and more may be found out daily. The Jews have a
peculiar way of fattening Geese, with Milk, Figs, Raisins, and other sweet
things, by which they make the liver of an extraordinary greatness, and is a
dish much valued by them.

In Moor-fields there is one that keeps many hundreds of Coneys with grains
and bran: and some others who keep the great laying Ducks, with these things
and blood, to their great advantage. I have seen a book translated out of
French, which teaches how to gain diverse hundred pounds per annum, by fifty
pound stock in hens. I suppose about London where Eggs are so dear, great
profit might be made by them. Turkeys may be kept with good profit, where there
are many Meadows as in Suffolk. In Bark-shire many keep tame Pheasants, and
have gained well thereby.

3. We do not know how to improve the commodities proceeding from Cattle to the
highest: as for example our ordinary butter might be better scented and tasted:
some Ladies have fine ingenuities in this kind. We cannot make Cheese
comparable to the Parmisan, nor so good as the Angelots of France, our ordinary
Cheese is not comparable to the Holland Cheeses, where also diverse sorts of
Cheeses are made of diverse Colors: but I cannot much commend their green
Cheeses, which are made of that color by Sheeps-dung, etc. but I hope in short
time our good Hous-wifes will scorn that any shall excel them.

20. Deficiency, Is the want of diverse things, 20. Deficiency, Of the want of
diverse things which are necessary for the accomplishment of Agriculture.
which are necessary for the accomplishment of Agriculture -- As

1. That we have not a Systema or complete book of all the parts of
Agriculture. Till the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's days, I suppose that there
was scarce a book wrote of this subject; I never saw or heard of any. About
that time: Tusser made his verses, and Scot wrote about a Hop-garden, Gouge
translated some things. Lately diverse small Treatises have been made by diverse,
as Sir Hugh Platts, Gab. Platts, Markham, Blithe, and Butler, who do well in
diverse things; but their books cannot be called complete books, as you may
perceive by diverse particular things, not so much as mentioned by them. The
Country Farmer translated out of French is enough; bt its no ways framed, or
squared for us here in England: and I fear the first Authors went on
probabilities and hear-says rather then experience, I hope some ingenious man
will be encouraged, to undertake a work so necessary and commendable.

2. Deficiency is, that Gentlemen try so few experiments for the advance of
this honest and labourious calling; when as many experiments might be made for
a smaller matter; for half a Pole square, will give as certain a demonstration,
as an Acre, and a pottle as a Hogshead. I hope in time there will be erected a
College of experiments, not only for this, but also all other Mechanical
Arts.

3. Deficiency is, That Gentlemen and Farmers do not meet and communicate
secrets in this kind, but keep what they have experimented themselves, or
known, from others; as Sybils leaves: I mean as rare secrets, not to be
communicated. I hope that we shall see a more communicative spirit amongst us
ere long. And Sir I cannot but desire you, if you have any things more in your
hands of Gabriel Platts, or any men's else, that you would with speed publish
them.

4. Deficiency is, That we want a place to the which men may resort for to find
such ingenious men, as may be serviceable for their ends and purposes; and also
know where to find such seeds and plants as they desire, as the great
Clover-grasse, Saint Foin, La Lucern, etc.

5. Deficiency is, That men do usually covet gteat quantities of land; yet
cannot manage a little well. There were amongst the ancient Romans some
appointed to see that men did Til their lands as they should do, and if they
did not. to punish them as enemies to the public; perhaps such a law might not
be amiss with us: for without question the public suffers much, by private
men's negligences; I therefore wish men to take Columel's Council; which is,
Laudato ingentia Rura, Exiguum Colito. For melior est culta exiguitas, etc. as
another says, or as we say in English, A little Farm well tilled is to be
preferred: for then we should not see so much wast land, but more industry,
greater crops, and more people employed, then are at this present, to the great
profit of the Commonwealth.

21 Deficiency, that because of our sins we have not the blessing of God upon
our labors*
21. Deficiency is, That by reason of our sins we have not the blessing of the
Lord upon our Labors.

And this the reason, that although the Husbandman has been laborious and
diligent in his calling these last years; yet our Crops have been thin, his
Cattle swept away, and scarcity and famine has seized on all parts of this
Land; and if we had not been supplied from abroad, we had quire devoured all
the Creatures of this Island for our sustenance, and yet we could not be
satisfied, but must have devoured one another. And therefore to conclude,
though I desire the Husbandman to be diligent and laborious in his calling, yet
I counsel him to break off his sins by Repentance, to have his eyes toward him
who is the Giver of every good thing, and to pray daily to him for his
blessings, who gives freely to them that ask, and upbraideth not. And although
all callings ought to look up to him that is on high; yet the Countryman
especially; for he has a more immediate dependence on him then any other: for
if the Lord withold his fat dew from Heaven, or the former or later Rain, it
is in vain that the Husbandman rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the
bread of earofulnesse: for we know, that it is the Lord that makes barren
places fruitful, and he likewise that turns fruitful Lands into
barrenness, (as the Land of Canaan, which was very fruitful even in the time
of the Canaanites, but now a barren desert) and therefore, I again desire the
Countryman to walk as it becomes a Christian, in all Sobriety,
Righteousness and Godliness: not to trust to his confidence in his own
labors, and good Husbandry; but on the Lord that has made all things: for
though even Paul himself does plant, and Apollo does water; yet it is only the
Lord that gives increase and plenty, which he will not deny to those that fear
him; for they shall want nothing that is good.

And thus Sir, I have written to you very largely my thoughts concerning the
Husbandry of this Island, and partly what I have seen in many travels. Good
Sir, be not offended at my long and impertinent stories, my rude language, and
unmethodical discourse. It was, if not to satisfy; yet somewhat to gratify the
universal goodness of your spirit, and care of the public, which God has
enriched you withal. And these are only my first thoughts, which in haste I
have hudled up together. I hope (if the Lord send life and health) my second
thoughts shall be better: But whatsoever I have done, pray look on it, as
coming from one who is desirous to serve you, and to advance the Public good,
according to the talent the Lord has given him. Thus I commit you to the
protection of the Almighty: And rest

SIR, Your, (...)
Anno; 1651.

Copies and Extracts of more letters written to Mr. Samuel Hartlib: They all
tending very much to the great improvement not only of Agriculture, but of
true and real Learning, and Natural Philosophy.
SIR,
The several things observed and set down during my stay in the Country, are
these.

1. I Learned the whole way and art, of making and ordering of Woad, viz. the
time when they sow it, when first they weed it, and cut it. I saw the manner of
their gathering it, grinding, balling, drying it, and after sweating, and
curing it. Informing my self of the whole charge and profit of it: have made
diverse Annotations on it, and taken order for some seed to be sent to me, for
other more compendious and profitable trials, answerable to the Nature and
Philosophy of it,

2. This and some other things, gave me occasion to make the best inquiry I
could of Housewives and of Fowlers, for all sorts of dying weeds, and herbs,
used in the dying of wool; or of nets, which I have carefully collected to
improve to a more then ordinary use; some being very remarkable.

3. Among other general inquiries and adventures, I heard of one at Ware, that
charr'd Sea-coal; procured an errand and commendations thither; went, was
civilly used, and satisfied in the truth and manner of the thing, and found the
Gentleman who was the first Author of it to be one Airs, now dead an ingenious
man, a great Malster, made much profit of it: it drying Malt as sweet as if the
Sun it self did it; it is cheaper then either wood or straw; and may be many
otherways applied.

4. I went into the Isle of Ely, to see one of the Holland-mills for dreyning;
though set up there and kept by certain Frenchmen. The Invention seemed to me
but mean and rude, and Mr. Wheelers way much more ingenious.

5. I saw at Wickleson the manner of your Holland Sluices. The ruins also of a
Cochlea, for the emptying and dreining of water, of which Vbaldus has writ a
whole Treatise. Likewise a pretty kind of Pinnace with Ordnance, somewhat like
a close Liter, but flat-bottommed; which rowed with wheels instead of Oars,
employed it seems formerly with admirable success, for the taking in of
Crowland, and which gave me a proof of what I for many years have thought
possible, and of very great use and service, and still think it of unknown
value, if it were skilfully indeed framed, and applied as it might be.

6. The Lord F. W. assured me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, that made above 10000.
l. sterling. of a piece of ground, not 40. yards square, and yet there was neither
Mineral nor Metal in it, He after told me, it was only a sort of fine Clay,
for the making a choice sort of earthen ware; which some that knew it seeing
him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland, received
so much money for it: it is a story not to be despised.

7. His Lordship told me the way of making of Spunk or Touch wood.

8. Mr. H. his Lordship's Bailiff, showed me a small plat of ground, scarce an
Acre and half, wherein he assured me, he had in one year 21. hundred of Hops;
and falling out then to be scarce in other places, he made of that small parcel
of ground 4. score. l.

9. At Milton I saw a Spring, that might have been made big enough to serve a
large Town; which my friend Wheeler had newly discovered, and broke up; every
man opposing him in it, and deriding his confidence, till he made it appear,
and shamed them. Hereupon he gave me several marks of knowing and finding out
Springs under ground.

10. From Springs we converted our discourse to Pipes, for the carrying along
of Water under ground to any House or Town; wherein he imparted some Secrets to
me, both of the fittest Wood and Trees for Pipes, and preserving them whole
Ages from corruption, by ways extremely rational, and not hitherto observed or
found out by any.

11. This drew on some discourse of woods, their differences and several
applications: in which he told me many singular observations.

12. After this, I saw at Melton an excellent Model of a Garden, Orchard, and
Walks; and being further curious, my friend related a Witty invention he once
put in practice, to plant an Orchard in a Morish place, where never grew a Tree.

13. I casually met with one Boughton, a most singular rare man in carving or
cutting out Figures in small or in great Stone; and for that reason Servant in
ordinary to the late King: who acquainted me of many excellent ingenious men,
and promised to seek me at my lodging.

14. Being in Cambridge-shire, I examined more particularly the Husbandry,
planting, ordering, and curing of Saffron.

Some other things came in my way not without notice: but these are the chief.
My own improvements and comments, upon all which, I shall more at large give
you, when we meet together being always.

SIR, Yours (...)


Queres sent into France; about the seed called La Lucern.
WHen one N. N. was last in France, (being in discourse with Doctor D.
concerning Saint Foin, he was then told by Doctor D. that for the improvement
of barren grounds) there was in those parts of France about Paris) another seed
that did far excel that of Saint Foin, and that the name of that more excellent
seed was La Lucern. I am desired by a friend of mine to whom N. N. related this
passage of Doctor D.) that by your kindness, he may be spoken to of this La
Lucern, and his directions desired, where the said seed is to be had? for what
price? how much is usually sowed upon an English Acre? what time of the year
its sown? whether it be sown alone? or with any other ordinary Corn? and with
what Corn? and with what kind of land it best agrees? and finally, what other
particulars he can direct more then is hete set down.


The Answer to the Queres from Paris.
I Have been with Doctor D. about Lucern, who tells me that it grows best in
wettish grounds, that the best time of sowing it in England will be in
February, at the same time that Oats are sown with the which also it may be
sown, but best alone; that to the sowing of an Arpent, (which is much-what the
same with an English-Acre) there will go 12 or 15 l of the seed, the which
uses to be sold here at 8 or 9 sols the pound.


More Quere's concerning Lucern.
I Desire further to know, what kind of wet grounds are best for it? whether
Moorish or Clay? whether poor or rich? whether it will continue over a year in
the ground? and if more then a year, then how many years it will continue
without being new sown? whether it be only good for Meadows or for Pasture?
and if for pasture then whether the sheep or Cattle be suffered to go upon it?
or whether it be carried off green as the Clover-grasse is in Flanders?

Lastly, for what Cattle it is most proper?


Another Answer from Paris.
I Thought to have sent you 9 l of the seed of Lucern for the sowing of three
Acres, Doctor D. having told me, as heretofore I told you, that 3 l would sow
an Arpent or Acre; But as I was going about it, I met with a Gentleman an
acquaintance of mine, who some years since (but unknown to me hitherto) has
had some Acres of Meadow of Lucern upon his ground, to whom having casually
spoke of my business, and told him all that Doctor D. had told me about the
Lucern; he answered me, that Dr. D. was most grossly mistaken in the quantity of
the seed required for the sowing of an Acre; and that it would not take up 3 l
but two whole Sacks, each sack containing the full load of a strong Porter;
after which rate the quantity of seed for the sowing of 3. Acres would fill a
great dry-fat, the sending whereof by Land would come to excessive great
charges, and therefore necessarily to be sent by Sea in my opinion. You will be
pleased to impart these things to your friend, and to let me know his final
resolution upon them, the which shall be faithfully accomplished by me; and in
the mean while, I will get him a perfect and full answer upon all his Quere's,
not from Dr. D. (whom I dare trust no more in this business, having found him
guilty of such gross mistakes about it) but from that other Gentleman, who
told me he could himself resolve most of those Questions; but that for to be
the surer, he thought it best to confer first with his Farmer about it. You
make Apologies for putting me upon these Inqueries; but I pray you to believe,
that at any time I shall most readily and cheerfully perform any service that
shall lie in my power, for you or any of your friends, for your sake. And I
were very unreasonable, to think troublesome any thing that you require of me,
when as continually I put you to so much trouble my self.


The last Answer concerning Lucern.
THe information about the Lucern that I have got from my Friend, being a very
particular one, and containing a very full answer to all the Questions
propounded by your Friend; is such as follows: It requires a rich ground,
but somewhat loose and light, so as a stiff Clay, and such other tough
grounds, are no-wayes fit for it; The ground must not be over-dry nor
over-moist, but in a mean; yet somewhat more inclining to moisture, then to the
contrary. It must be ploughed three times, the first time in October, and the
second and third, toward the Spring. Naturally it does not love Dung, and
comes much better in a ground that is sufficiently rich of it self, then that
which has been enriched by dunging; and where Dung is made use of, it must be
very stale and well rotten, and long before the sowing-time. It cannot endure
the cold, and therefore must not be sown till the cold weather and all the
danger of it be quite past, viz. about the beginning or midst of April. The
Quantity of the seed, is the sixth part of Corn, that the same ground would
require: so as only one Bushel of Lucern is to be sown on that space of ground,
which would require 6. Bushels of Corn. It must be carefully weeded, especially
in the beginning. And to the end, that it may take the more firm root, some
Oats must be mixed with it, but in a very small proportion. It is to be cut as
soon as it begins to flower, which in the hot Countries (Provence,
Languedock and Spain) it does 5. or 6. times, and some years 7. or 8. times in
a Summer; but in this Climate it uses to be cut twice a year, about the end of
June, and about the end of September. Being cut, it must be turned very often, that
it may dry the sooner, and be carried off the ground the soonest that may be;
and it must be kept in close Barns, being too tender for to be kept in Reeks,
open to the Air as other Hay, It is good for all kind of Cattle, as Kine,
Sheep, Goats, and as well for the young ones (Calves, Lambs, Kids) as for the
others; but above all it agrees best with Horses. It is much more feeding then
any other Hay: insomuch, as any lean beasts will soon grow fat with it; and to
the Milch-beasts, it procures abundance of milk: but it must never be given
alone, especially to beasts that have not been long used to it: but must ever
be mixed with straw, or with some other Hay; for otherwise it over-heateth
them, and fills them too much with blood; and that so suddenly, as it greatly
indangererh their health, and their life too; which it does principally to
Kine: to whom it is more dangerous, if too plentifully given, then to any other
Cattle. After the last cutting, you may let your Cattle graze on your
Lucern-fields, and that all Winter long, until the beginning or middle of
March. Of once sowing you will have your Meadow continue good for 10. or 12.
years. and until 15. and afterward too, it will still continue to bear; but
the Herb will then notably decay in goodness. Wherefore it is best to turn it
then to some other use. Kine must never eat of this Herb green; but only
dried, and that moderately too, as has been said* But Horses eating their fill
of it green in the Spring, are purged thereby, and grow fat by it in 8. or 10.
days time: If one desire to have of the Grain, one may let such a proportion
of the Meadow as one will; grow up to seed, after the second cutting, any year
except the first only: and when the seed is ripe, the tops of the Herb, with
the Codds wherein the seed is enclosed, must be cut in a dewie morning, and put
into sheets, for fear of loosing the seed, and must be beat out with Flails
upon the same, when that it is well dried: and afterward the remaining part of
the Herb must be mowen close to the ground; after which it continues to
sprout out again after the usual manner. The Hay thereof will keep good 2. or 3.
years; and one Acre is sufficient to keep 3. Horses all the year long.


A Postscript to the last Answer concerning the Lucern.
SIR,
THe Gentleman, who had given me the note about the Lucern, has told me since
two particulars more, which he had forgot to put into it: The one, that not
only to other Cattle, but even to Horses with whom that Hay agrees best of
all other beasts: it is not to be given but in winter; because that in the
Summer it would too much heat their blood: And the other, that this hay must be
perfectly well dried, before it be carried off the ground; and to that end
turned very often: because that being put up with any the least moisture, it
will quite spoil, much more then any other Hay. Now these and all the other
particulars, which I have had from the Gentleman, have been confirmed to me by
many others. And yet within these 2. or 3. days I met with a Physician of
Rochel, who assuring me that the Lucerne was very common in his Country, made
me a relation of it agreeing with the former, only in these 3. points, viz.
That of once sowing it will continue 10. or 12* years; That it is cut twice a
year, serving afterward for Pasture all Winter; And that it wonderfully
fatteneth all kind of Cattle; but very much different from it in all the
others, and in some of them point blank contrary to it. For he says, that it
is to be sown in the beginning of March; that it desires a temperate ground,
but rather dry then wet, and no ways fat nor clayish, but stony and gravily;
that it need not be mixed with any other Hay, but may be given alone, and all
the year long; in Summer as well as Winter, not only to Horses, but to Cowes
and other Cattle. He added, that the proportion of the seed, is the charge of a
Porter for four Arpents or French Acres. Which particulars I thought good to
impart unto you, that your friend comparing them with the others might make his
best profit of them; and this Rochellois; (or Rocheller) who has lived three
or four years in England, thinks that Lucern will come admirably well in that
Country.

NOTE.
THe meaning of these words -- The quantity of the Seed is the sixth part of
Corn that the same ground would require -- is this, That whatever quantity of
Wheat or Barley an Acre of ground would require of the seed of Lucern; you must
take but the sixth part of that quantity of the seed of Lucern; so as that
ground which for its sowing requires six bushels of Corn, does require but one
bushel of Lucern-seed.

An Arpent deter (which how much it is in English measure Cotgrave's
Dictionary will perfectly tell you) requires 10. l. of that seed, as several
Grain-sellers (of whom I went to inquire for it) have unanimously told me: the
seed being exceeding small, and to be sown wonderfully thinl. As for Saint
Foin or Holy Hay, I have seen it grow here about Paris in several places, in
rich fat grounds, and those both high and dry, and others low and Marshy. It is
cut but once a year, much what about the same time of other Hay, and a great
deal of the seed of it is required for sowing the ground with it. But being
once sown, it lasts 10 or 12 years, as well as Medica or Lucern, wherewith
also it correspondeth altogether in its Virtues and Uses.




A Copy of a Letter, relating a Proof or Experiment of an English Husbandry.
Honored Sir.
I Desire your acceptance of this small present, may be according to the real
worth of the thing; not as at first sight it may appear to be (viz.) straw or
stubble. This is I assure you no other then the true and real Experiment of
what by the blessing of God, the native fertility of our English ground,
rightly Husbanded will bring forth: nay I can upon most probable grounds
affirm, that had I used all the Art and Care which I could and might have done*
(had I not been otherwise taken off) it could hardly have failed to have been
double, treble, or quadruple to what it is. And it is also most true, that any
good ground well managed, may yield one, ten, a hundred, etc. Acres, in which
there shall be very many superior to the biggest root of these, and hardly one
inferior to the best but one; by which account it will easily appear, how much
beyond the old way, this is the increase, there being between two and five
quarters on the Acre; and the product of this way will be rarely under 10
quarters, not rarely 16 or 20 and the same for most grains; yet will this dull
age as to goodness not believe it without some testimony, and perhaps scarce
suffer themselves to be convinced by this so eminent an experiment; wherein it
plainly appears, That out of one single Barley- Corn is sprung about 80 Ears,
of which near 60 had, some 36, 34, 32, 30. and hardly any less then 38. which
in all is above 2000 for one: And truly the charges to be bestowed on an acre
of this sort is no ways double to the common way. Accept it therefore, and
reserve it as a real rarity, and a jewel only fit for a Public and Pious
spirit, as yours is: till I shall by Gods assistance be able next year to
produce you more abundant examples of Gods wonderful power and bounty that
offers, and man's ingratitude that neglects, or refuses such honest means, of
the truest and most justly gotten humane wealth, honor and happiness.

Your most faithful and obliged friend and servant. (...)
September 26. 1650.

An Extract of a Letter from Amsterdam dated the 28 of November, 1650. in
answer to the former communication, with another experimennt of a French
Husbandry.
SIR,
I Am much obliged unto you for sending me the Discourse of the Braband
Husbandry, which I have perused. Not long ago I was told of certain men which
would fain have morgaged some thousand Acres of Heathy grounds, which lay here
and there as Commons. But the late Prince of Orange by the advice of his
Council, durst not entertain any such Propositions, the lands belonging to the
Commonalty. On the other hand the undertakers would not be contented with less
for imparting of their Secret. It appears unto me by all circumstances, that it
was the same design of Husbandry with yours, the parties if I remember well
being Englishmen. From Paris I am advertized (for certain) of one, who did last
year, 1649, ferment one grain of Wheat, which this year has produced him 114
Ears, and within them 6000 Grains, which is more then 80 Ears, and 600 Grains
of your English friends. This year, 1650. he has a great many fermented and
sown.


An Answer to the foregoing extract of a Letter from Amsterdam.
SIR,
I Have received from you a Relation of a very great and wonderful production
or increase, which your Friend at Amsterdam relates to be done in France. I am
far from lessening the admirable greatness of that person's skill and success.
Only since I find my self taken notice of by the same party, and the experiment
I made the last year of Barley, weighed in the scales with this, and found too
light; I shall take leave to say, that (besides all difference that is or may
be conceived to be betwixt the soyles; that of France has a manifest advantage
in the elevation and powerful operation of the Sun.) That it is probable he did
use all possible means both to the ground and seed, to make them both fruitful,
which I did not at all; but quite contrarily I chose the worst seed I could
procure, and my ground was as barren as any whatsoever in the parts adjacent. I
added nothing to either; all I did was after the blade was sprung up. And
whereas your friend mentions 600. out of 80. ears, those ears contained one
with the other at the least 30 single Corns, which is 2400. That besides that,
Wheat is no whit inferior to Barley, but rather more inclined to its proper
nature to branch and spread: it is also allowed as long time again to grow, and
therefore may better spread to many ears then Barley. That my ears of Barley
rated at 30. one with the other, (which they were at least, some having 38. a
thing I suppose rarely (if ever) seen in England before) are full as high as
his Wheat ears rated at 52. And the seeming great difference between 2400 and
6000. when looked into, will prove not to be in the number of ears, which
differ no more then as 14. to 10. but in the nature of the Grains, there being
universally as many more in an ear of wheat as in an ear of Barley. That if
(as it is most like) he in France did only try conclusions, to what height
nature might possibly be scrued by art, and that what is here related, was the
effect of that trial; that holds not comparison with mine, which is generally
practicable, without any considerable expense of time or stock more then in the
common-way. Lastly I affirm, in all possible humble reverence and submission to
Gods good pleasure, power and providence; that when I shall make use of good
feed rightly prepared, good Land in right condition, and all other helps which
I know and can use; I shall not doubt for smaller numbers of the same grain
(viz.) Wheat, to produce 200. or 300. ears, and in them 10000. 12000. or
15000. Corns, (and somewhat like that, for whole fields together, and that here
in England,) howsoever let us always remember to give all possible praise to
God, whose blessing only makes rich.

SIR, I am your faithful Friend and Servant (...)


Another Letter from Paris, discovering the secret of the forenamed French
Husbandry.
SIR,
J Do with much impatience desire the Treatise or Discourse published by you
about the Braband-Husbandry, and do very much admire the industry of that
English Gentleman your friend, who has found out the ways of making Corn
multiply so prodigiously. The Parisian Experimenter of Corns multiplication I
know not: but a friend of mine very well acquainted with him, assures me to
have had the following description of his secret from himself; and to have seen
the experience of it very fully in the year 1649. not in any great quantity,
but in a Garden, only for trials sake.

Pour into quick or unslack't Lime, as much water as suffices to make it swim
four inches above the water: And unto ^0 l of the said water powered off, mix
one pound of Aqua-vitae, and in that liquor steep or soak Wheat (or Corn) 24.
hour: which being dried in the Sun, or in the Air, steep again in the said
liquor 24. hours more, and do it likewise the third time; Afterward sow them
at great distances the one from the other, about the distance of a foot between
each grain. So one grain will produce 30.36.38.42.52. ears, and those very
fruitful, with a tall stalk, equalling the statute of a man in height.


Another Extract of a Letter from the Lowe-Countries.
SIR,
THese are to give you special thanks for communication of the Parisian
Experimentors Secret. Water (if he means cold water) poured into quick or
unslackt Lime, cannot work much in one hour upon the Lime; but if it be boiled
with it, and that the water be poured always afresh upon the Lime, then it
will come to be strong at last, that an Egg may swim in it, as I learned by
tradition from Dr. Hartmannus, but could never make any trial of it, for want
of unslack't Lime in the place where I live. This perhaps may be yet better;
but experience goes beyond reason in these cases. The often macerating or
steeping, and drying of grains I like very well. I have only according to Mr.
Gabr. Platt's directions steeped them 24. hours in turned or tainted
Rainwater, and Cow Dung, and afterward sown them thus wet; which on Sandy
grounds has produced such goodly Corn, as if it had been very good Land. Some
here use Saltpeter, which also does much good; but is found likewise in
Sheeps-Dung, as may appear by its fertility. I have lost the Book of Husbandry
of Mr. Plats, which was called, A Discovery of infinite Treasure hidden since
the Worlds beginning; Whereunto all men of what degree soever, are friendly
invited to be sharers with the Discoverer. For having lent the same to a
friend, that it might be translated into High Dutch, I could never see it
again. I am told it is out of print. But if you could help me to another, you
would do me a pleasure. I have nothing to add for the present, but that the
Genius of this Age is very much bent to advance Husbandry; and that in all
Countries I hear there are found Gentlemen, that study professedly these
improvements more then in former times. I rest always

SIR, Yours, (...)


Another Letter expressing the reasons why the Experimenter of the Barley-Corn,
thinks it not fit or expedient to part with his secret as yet, for a more
common use.
SIR,
I Find daily more and more, that it is too true, that most men love money,
that they even worship it in their hearts, as the only Sammum Bonum. I need
not go far for proof, since they have brought one to my hand. That (having so
fair and just offers made, in order to the Corn-businesse; as I have presented
to them by your hands,) will by no means (though so very much to their own
profit and the Public Good) part with their moneys; and yet stick not to
demand (in effect) the discovery from me of that talent of knowledge, which God
has made mine by his free gift; as the reward of my industry, and faithful
love to my native Country; An estate (if I mistake not) better gotten then by
any of the common means; by which men grow rich daily. Surely the commodities
cannot be less then equal. The most wise and virtuous men that ever lived,
have preferred Art, Industry, and Ingenuity far before money^ Money (especially
the abuse of it) is become the very poison of the world, against which Art and
Industry is an Antidote or Cordial. Money is counted and enjoyed by a thousand
thousands, Art and Industry but by a few. And things of excellent use are
accounted Jewels, especially when rare and scarce. The Professors of Art and
Industry, besides their private aim also at a Public good: these prefer their
private gain (too often) before the being and well being of the whole world;
nay of their own souls. These are ever ready to part with invaluable treasures
upon easy conditions: Those will not upon any conditions whatsoever (but such
as please themselves or are full of oppression) part with their moneys, (no not
to save a Brothers, or hardly a Fathers, or a Child's life.) And finally if they
judge it improvidence to part with a little of their estates, only for a time,
to return again to them shortly, like Noah's Dove with an Olive branch, a double
branch of Peace and Prosperity: I desire to be excused, if I upon better
grounds hold it profane, to sell a better right then a birthright for less
then a mess of pottage; even for just nothing, and for ever. I can never
forget the exceeding great ingenuity to the world, showed and given by Mr. Gab.
Platts, as will more fully appear, when you shall have printed those writings
of his which he left to your trust and custody, and the worlds base ingratitude
that let such a man fall down dead in the street for want of food, without a
shirt to hih back; none (but your self that want not an enlarged heart but a
fuller hand to supply the worlds defects) being found with some few others, to
administer any relief to a man of so great merit. In a word, that God that has
forbid to muzzle the Ox that treads out the fodder, has appointed every man to
use his blessings (next to his glory for the providing for and preservation of
his family, which he that can do and does not, is worse then an Infidel. I dare
not give away this means of obtaining outward blessings to my self and family,
till I have found away to make it instrumental to that end; and that end once
effectually attained to, I dare not deny Gods mercy and bounty to me, nor
longer restrain the Public use of this universal good: I remain

SIR, Yours, (...)


A Secret practiced with very good success in England, concerning sowing of
Wheat, to prevent it from being Smutty.
FIrst take your Wheat, pour the same into a tub of water, and stir it about,
take off all the Corn that swimmeth upon the water, and pour the rest upon a
floor, letting the water run off. Then make a strong brine of Bay Salt, and
pour some of the brine on the Corn upon the floor; and take to half a quarter
of Corn, half a peck of Salt, and strew it on the Corn, and stir and mix it
continually, as you pour thereon the brine, and strew the salt thereon, until
the Corn be all wet and overstrowed with Salt.

Then take to a half quarter of Corn, half a bushel of unslack'd lime, and
strew that likewise over the Corn, mingling it well together; which done you
may sow the same the next day. The brine must he cold when you pour it on the
Corn, and you must prepare no more Wheat, then you intend to sow next day.


Another Secret practiced in Germany for the enriching of Meadows*
A Meadow yields 6 times more Hay, when it is turned up with a plough, and
sown thick with ashes burned out of the substance thereof, but the rain must
fall first. Afterward sovve your Meadow with the seed of Trefoile, and
plough and harrovv them in. The first grass which grows thereon, let it be
very ripe, that the seed may fall off it self; then let some go over it, and
with rakes stir it, that it fall out. Afterward let it be movven off, and
carried to a certain place where it may be dried, so the Grass will grow
presently again, and may be movven again in three vveeks.


How to make Rushy ground to bear Grass.
Break the Rushy ground, and rake the roots and the rushes together, and burn
them or carry them away, Then spread upon that ground, Turffe-ashes, or
Pigeons-dung, Chalk or Lime, according to your ground. Try of every one of
these upon a little plot of your ground: you may use other Ashes, Marle or Dung
for experiments: and that which you find does kill the Rushes and other Weeds
best, use it: You are to make gutters or draines to carry away the water from
the ground: you may destroy Rushes or Fern, if you will; but cut or movve
them down in the beginning of June, and so use to do it 2 or 3 years together
at that time.


For planting or sowing Walnuts.
IN the season when they are full ripe on the trees, a fevv days before they
would fall, as near as can be guessed, let them be gathered or beaten off; and
in the green husk, or without it, put them into good ordinary earth in a
barrel or basket: So let them continue until the beginning of March
follovving: as soon as that month begins, get as much vvarme Milk from the
Cowes as will steep them 24 hours: after they are steeped, set them in ground
well dug, and judged natural for such fruit, with their little end, or
their prickled sharp end upvvards about 3 or 4 inches deep in the earth, and
not one of 28 will fail, as has appeared by experience. This may make dry
Walnuts also prove trees, the Nuts used as above said, as far as may be, set
them near one foot a-sunder, and in a right line to weed them. The Walnut
breeds good Timber, good shadow, good smell, good fruit. At four years growth
transplant them.


Mr. Lanyon's Description of the usual manner of planting and transplanting
(according to that of Flaunders) of those Trees called Abeales, imparted for
Public Good.
THey are first planted from any even the least part of the Root of the same
Tree: you must divide the root, by slipping each part from the other, and not
by cutting it in sunder: you may take those parts from those trees whilst they
grow, and without danger to them, rob them of all the small sprigs of the root,
and leave only the Master-Roots; but the most usual way is to multiply them,
when they are transplanted; which time is at their growth of 5 years: their
season is in March. They are first planted in the way of a Nursery, in loose
earth, moist and sandy, or inclining to it: their distance is 10 inches one
from another (the earth being first prepared as for a Garden:) you are to make
holes with a stick, the depth of the length of the part you have to set,
setting him so that you may only see a part of it above ground, the earth
being closed about them; they are to be kept weeded as any other plants. The
second year in February you are to prune off all from the Master or
Middle-shoote, and so to the 3 and 4 year: the 5 you may transplant them, so
as they like the ground of their Nursery. Their usual distance one from
another is 10 foot: you may drive a stake with them when you transplant them,
to secure them stiff against the wind; for that they will grow very tall in
those years, and so be much exposed to the winds. They may without much
prejudice (to Corn) be planted in the furrows where it grows; so as the
ground be moist, and you keep them well pruned, and leave only a bush at the
top of the tree. No stiff Clay grounds will admit them to thrive, they will
grow in moist Clay ground, but only in height, and will not burnish for want
of room to extend their roots. This tree if he likes his ground; will be at
full growth in 20 years. He is valued in Flaunders after 7 years growth, worth
every year 12 d until his time be up. He grows very straight without boughs,
only a bush on the top, and so exceedingly well becomes a Walk. This Timber
is uncomparable for all sorts of wooden vessels, especially Traies;
Butchers-traies cannot well be made without it, it being so exceeding light
and tough. Some years ago there were ten thousand at once sent over into
England, and transplanted into many Counties. M. Walker at S. James can give
the best account of them to all such as desire further to be directed in this
particular.


FINIS.
AN APPENDIX TO THE LEGACY OF HUSBANDRY: OR, A Seed-plot of Annotations upon
the LEGACY aforesaid.

WITH AN INTERROGATORIE, Relating more particularly to the Husbandry, and
Natural History of IRELAND.

Printed for Richard Wodenothe, MDCLII.

To his worthy and very much Honored Friend, the Author of the large Letter of
Husbandry.
SIR,
YOu may perceive by these Additionals to your large Letter, which you vvrote
to gratify my desires, that the Public has been benefited by your
Communications, which was all that I intended, by setting you upon that
work: nor will you repent of the pains I hope which you have taken this way.
For you see that your Open-hartedness in this kind has provoked another Friend
of mine of very public desert in the Commonwealth of Learning, to impart
unto me his Observations of the same nature. And although his Annotations now
and then, are Animadversions rather then Enlargements, yet it is not
unprofitable to the Public, nor disadvantageous to us; that our errors and
mistakes (for who can pretend to be without them:) be laid open and rectified.
I suppose you would be as loath as I, that any by your means or mine, should
be led into a by-way, and instead of gaining become a loser, in making trial
of what we offer for his advantage I could wish that my worthy Friend who has
imparted these his thoughts unto me in the following extemporary Letters, had
spared some expressions; and bin less censorious against the Persons of some,
of whom others have a high and honorable opinion, as Helmont and Glauber: but
he is to be born with all in this, as we would be borne with all by him and
others; in the freedom which we might take of giving our opinions concerning
his failings. Also I am confident, that that learned Gentleman is not
interessed by any prejudice of passion, or personal disaffection against any
of them; but that as a man of a free spirit he does give his judgment through
his zeal and love to every truth as it lies in his apprehension; let every one
have his freedom in things which are well meant for the Public; and the best
way to rectify one another mistakes, will be to strive to set each other a
Copy, of better and more moderate expressions in the like Cases, wherein there
may be a mistake or failing: If we were skillful to provoke one another, only
to the affections of love and of good works; and by our own useful
experiments discreetly dispensed toward the Public, could draw forth the
profitable (but buried) skill of others, unto common use to be imparted unto
all; what could not be done for ease of the poor, and the relief of common
calamities? Truly, although neither God by his directions how to make use of
all his gifts; nor Nature his handmaid by her supplies of things necessary and
comfortable for our livelihood are wanting to us. Yet we by the untowardnesse
of our spirits, and the shutting up of our bowels, and the enviousnesse of our
dispositions, bring a scarcity upon our selves, and upon others, whilst we are
not faithful and liberal stewards of our talents, for the benefit of those,
for whose sake God has bestowed them upon us: therefore I shall desire you, as
you have begun, to continue in well doing, for you know the promise, that in
due time you shall reap the fruit of all your labors, if you faint not. And
least you should imagine, that you are at this distance forgotten by us, give
me leave to present you with another task proper for your thoughts in the
place where now you are, that the advantages of Nature, which God has bestowed
upon Ireland, may not lie undiscovered, and without improvement, at this season
wherein the Replanting of the vvast and desolate places of that Country, is
seriously laid to heart by many: I shall therefore desire you to look upon this
Alphabet of Interrogatories, and consider what Answers your Observations
will afford unto them; or what you can learn from the Observations of others
to clear them; and as you have opportunity, do, as my Friend from Paris has
done; furnish me with what Gods providence shall send unto your hands, that
as I have begun, I may put it out to use: and requite you more plentifully, as
I hope I shall be able to do, with the increase, which it shall yield, by
this way of Trading, which I have taken up freely to bestovv my pains and
cost upon others, that all may see the goodness of God in the works of his
hands, and have cause to be thankful unto him for the same, and that so many
eminent talents which God has put into your hands, may not (seeing he has
given you a heart to use them) lie idle for want of Objects, and fit
Commodities vvherevvithall to be trading with him, who subscribes himself
always,

SIR, Your very much obliged and assured friend to serve you, Samuel Harthb.

Annotations upon the Legacy of HVSBANDRY.
Paris the 1 of July 1651.
I Give you most hearty thanks for your work of Husbandry, the which having
perused instantly a capite ad calcem. I find it a most excellent piece both
for the improvement of Husbandry, and of the other Commodities of the Country,
as likewise for the Natural History of England, and have learned many
particulars by it, which before were unknown to me. But I remember to have
heard of a Dutch Merchant in Dublin, that the Dutch used to fetch their
Black-lead out of Wales; whereas you say it is found in Cumberland, and no
where else in Christendom. I pray you to let me understand, whether you have
any particular knowledge of that Mine, of the nature and properties of that
material, whether it serves for any other uses, than to make pens off, and
to neale earthen vessel vvithall, and how for this use Potters do prepare and
apply it.

Paris the 12/22 of July 1651.
I Was hugely taken with the large Epistle in your Legacy upon the first
reading of it, and am more now upon the second, which makes me sorry, that
the Author should give any advantage to carping wits; as he does here and there
in some of the Parerga; upon which I shall freely give you my sense, that being
communicated to him, he may mend them in the next Edition, if so he see it
fitting: What he says out of Helmont page 13. The smuttinesse of corn, and
the foul disease to have begun in France, together about 1530, and the latter
to have had some original from the former. To say nothing of the small credit
of that Author, even in things subject to his own knowledge and experience, (I
being able to convince him of most palpable lies out of his own writings) a
more credible Author than he should not be alleged, much less heeded; if
opposite to so notorious a truth; as that of the foul disease, it is original
in France, as well as in Italy and Spain; full 36 years sooner than Helmont
says (viz.) in the year 1494: and nothing could be advanced more absurd or
ridiculous in the judgment of all sound Physicians, than to attribute the
original of that disease in any wise to smutty corn, as he does. The
imperfection of smutty corn, consists altogether in a similar distemper, and
that of the more spirituous part, consequently not at all subject to the eyes,
and so not to be found out by the Microscope, to the contrary of what our
Author supposes, page 15. The corn sown in July, produced such an increase,
page 18. I cannot imagine, how Corn sown in Summer can come to good, or what
humane wit or skill can hinder it from running up; and spending it self,
before the coming in of winter. His Philosophy of the blackness of the
Moor-loghs, as communicated by the blackness of the earth or turffe, page 25.
is no ways receivable. I find him too credulous, page 27. to Glauber and
others, about those Mountebanke boastings of brewing without malt, and of
drawing great store of Aqua-vitae out of the imaginary Beer; and other unfit
materials. The opinion of the Suns descending lower, page 30. although justly
(as I hold it rejected by Moestlinus, Longomontanus, Keplerus, Morinus,
Bullialdus, quibus omnibus praeit Ptolomaeus, ought not to be spoke of so
contemptuously, seeing that one of the greatest Astronomers that ever was,
(viz.) Copernicus did first advance it, and Reinholdus, another most famous
Artist approve of it, and he having made the lowest descent of the Sun but of
35 minutes, which is but a little more than half a degree; I know not what
makes our Author speak of the Suns descending many degrees lower. It is true,
that those 35 minutes amount to many thousands of miles, which expression
therefore would be both more pertinent, and more suitable to the vulgar capacity
of most Readers, than that of minutes or degrees; This is what I have observed
till page 30: further than which I am not yet come: And forasmuch as I have
never an English Dictionary here, I would be glad of the exposition of some
English words not so well understood by me, as howing (so often spoke off) and
the how; Wheats-lodging, page 18. Canker-berries, page 27. and the difference
betwixt hawes and hips; page eadem, I having ever taken them to signify the
same thing. I do not know neither, what are the piles on Marshes sides, page
25. and am ignorant of the History of Glassenburies-Hauthorne mentioned page 4,
about which I would willingly receive some light.

Paris the 9/19 of August 1651.
AN English Gentleman, who many years has lived and been a Housekeeper in
Devon-shire, as he was yesterday reading your Legacy at my house, having
lighted on that passage, page 26. about the making of Cider, told me, that the
second way there mentioned is not a making of Cider, but a certain preparation
of it already made, usual also in wines and other liquors, especially those
that are to be transferred a great way by Sea; and as for the first, that he
never saw it practiced in Devon-shire, where Cider is very common; and where
himself usually made 40 hogsheads every year; but that the way of making
Cider in that Country used by all men is this; Having reduced their Apples
into Mash, by turning upon them a kind of a millstone set edge-vvaies in a
wooden trough, they presently carry them to a wooden press of that bigness:
as in one hour they will press out two hogsheads of Juice: the which
having let stand a day or two, and taken off the black scum that arises in
that time, they tun it, and in the barrels it continues to work some days
longer, just as Beer uses to do. He told me diverse other perticulars about
Cider, partly of his own, and partly of that Countries common observations, the
which I forbear to relate, because I believe that Markham has spoke of them.

Paris the 6/16 of September, 1651.
SEeing by your last, you desire the continuation of my Annotations upon your
Legacy, I must tell you that I believe your friend has not been well
informed, page 23. about the Countries there named by him; for the sending of
Walnuts, Quinces, and Chestnuts into England, and that it will be found upon
better enquiry, that these commodities do come into England, if not solely yet
abundantly: the first from Holland, the second from Zealand, and the third from
France; and as for small nuts, except he speak of some exquisite kind of them,
I know not why one should run so far as Spain for them seeing that Ireland
abounds in them above all Countries in the world; page 27. I know an
ingenious man, who can without malting, etc. If you and your friend will be
ruled by me, you shall not take this upon Glaubers bare word, nor any of those
other magnificent promises; which he makes in that boasting Catalogue, till he
have made them good by the effect, least the similitude of the Prophet Esaias
29.8. be verified in us, page 28. Grafting, Inoculating, etc. a Gentleman will
learn in two hours, to learn it to some purpose will require more than so
many days, if not weeks expertus loquor: page 30. we find Vines flourishing
many hundred miles more toward the North [than Alsace] both in France, Loraine
and Germany: If for many hundreds he had said one hundred miles, he might
perhaps have made that good, and yet not that neither in all the three
Countries here named, I am sure not near it in in Loraine, and very hardly in
France: page 31. Vines grow 60 miles on this side Paris at Beaumont; Beaumont
is but 8 leagues, or 16 English miles North from Paris and Beauvais (which and
Beaumont is the most northern part of France, where any Vines grow) is but
twice as far, being distant 16 leagues from Paris. Ibid. Those places which
are even as far North as England, nothing near none of them; page 36. linea 3.
pack in so many plants, etc. I have seen most of the Vineyards about Paris for
many miles round, and never saw any such thing, very few having any thing in
them but Vines, and where any thing else was, I savv only a fevv Peach-trees
here and there, too far asunder to do any great harm to the Vines or ground;
37. To short poles, as we do hops, out of one Hop-pole you may make 3
Vine-poles. as for length; wherefore they should not be so yoked together:
ibid. In France, so soon as they have pressed out their liquor with their feet
[pressing with feet is not used in all parts of France, and utterly unknown
in these northern parts of it,] they put it into hogsheads not at all till it
have wrought first in Keeves: 39. from these who would destroy, etc. I could
vvish that bitter and exasperating expression in the behalf of my Countrymen
might be spared. If I would make Observations upon those passages, which have
something of good and excellent in them, as well as upon them where I conceive
something is to be mended, I should never have done, the Book being full of the^
from one end to another; yet I cannot let pass with silence those words page
44. The Sun and Dew engender a nitrous fatness, they pointing at the unfolding
of one of the greatest Mysteries in Nature, unknown to most of them if not to
all; who professedly do deal in the inquiries of that noble science, but to
speak of this to the full were not the work of a Scholion, but of a whole
Treatise, concerning the Improvement of Land by Sea-land; of which page 45 you
will find a confirmation of that in Irelands Natural History, and it is very
much used in Devonshire, with admirable success, not only equal to, but even
beyond Lime it self, as I have been told by that Gentleman, whose Observations
concerning Cider I gave you formerly; page 46. All fertility proceeds from
salt, addendum. Made unctuous, or oily, and spirituous, id est uno verbo
nitrous, nam sale mero nihil magis inimicum faecunditati; 47. In Holland they
as carefully preserve the Cowes urine, as their Dung to enrich their land, they
preserve it no otherwise than is done in all other Countries; viz. mixed with
the Dung and jointly with it carried out to the Dunghill, ibid. we must have
it, [paper] from Italy, France, and Holland; I believe Italy sends out
little paper, either to England, or to any other Country, and as for Holland;
it has none to send, but what it self gets from abroad, there being none
at all made there, (viz.) In Holland properly so called, nor in any of the
other Provinces that I know of, but only some in the Velaw, a part of
Gelderlant, and in England there is good store made, both toward Oxford, and
in some other places, though not enough for to serve the Nation.

Paris 18/2^ October, 1651.
HAving continued to read on in your Legacy from page 48. where I left with my
last Annotations, I find nothing that needs any Animadversions but these few
following things, page 60, a kind of Salix called by them Abel-tree, the Tree
called a Abell in Dutch is no ways a kind of Salix but is Populus alba;
Ibidem; If we believe their own Authors, etc. I know not who those Authors
are, but I am sure that whoever has said so, has said most untrue; for the
profit that arises to France by Silk, cannot in the least part come in
competition with that of Corn and Wine Ibid. In France, which different not
much from the temper of England; Silk is a stranger to those parts of France
that agree with Englands temper; 69. I could wish those words, linea 3 and 4.
we know nourishes them, to be left out, as devoid of all truth, if applied to
the Insect in question: page 70. linea 2. let him read Boneil, add Andream
Libavium, qui peculiari Tractatu inserto parti secundae Singularium: fuse ac
diligenter admodum omnia ad Bombyces spectantia pertractavit: similiterque
Olivier de Serres libro 50. Theatri Agriculturae. Among the things which page
70. he thinks might be transplanted profitably into England, I could wish the
omission of the three first, (viz) Sassafras, Sarsaparilla, and Snake-weed, the
which I greatly doubt would hardly be made to grow there at all with any
industry, but sure I am, never to any purpose: and the same I believe about
their Cedars and Pines. Medica veterum is without all peradventure the plant
now known under the name of Lucerna; wherefore it ought not to be ranked as it
is, page 80. amongst the plants now unknown; Quid esset lupinus veterum, nemo
unquam Herbariorum quod sciam dubitavit quare omittenda ejus mentio inter
herbas controversas page 80. Page 81. What seed, grout, or grutze is made of
the same seed, and in the same manner, as that which in English is called
Groats (viz.) of Oats and of Barley; of those three sorts of Cheeses which he
reckons up, page 81. only the second and third are made of Cowes milk, and
therefore his expression is too general, and what he says there, which are
far better than our ordinary Cheeses is true indeed, but as true it is, that
they are far better than their own ordinary cheeses: and as true likewise, that
the best of those Cheeses are no better, nor so good by far as some English
Cheeses. Verbi gratia Chedder-Cheeses. He is much mistaken, if he believes
that all those things reckoned up page 82. will grow in England at least to any
purpose, especially Rice, Cork, Scarlet-Oake, and that Sentence of Virgil; Vt
quid quaeque ferat regio, quid quaeque recuset. Justly termed an Oracle by
Pliny, does not depend wholly (as our Author seems to take for granted) on
the climate, and the latitude of Regions, for were it so Dictamnus, Laser,
Cinamonum, Balsamum, Myrrha, Camphora, Stirax, Mastick, Benjovin, Caryopbylli,
Nux-Muschata; and an infinite number of other Plants would not be, and from all
time have been confined to such Territories as they are; all the Industry of
man, and the power and wealth of greatest Princes never having been able to
make them grow; at least not to make them fructify out of their native soiles:
I wonder also to find Linder-trees named in the Catalogue of Plants, which he
would have denizon'd in England, seeing that great store of them and very
goodly ones have been growing in several parts of the Land, many years since
even in and about London, as at Exeter-house, Wimbleton-house, etc. and there
besides Sherewood-forrest in Nottingham-shire, abounds in them naturally.

Paris the 8/18 November, 1651.
I Come now to your Legacy, whereon these words, page 84. it casts up Jet
and Amber, I must tell you that as it is most certain, that of Jet, good store
is found on some part of the shore of Yorke-shire, so I dare say that upon
inquiry it will appear, that never any Amber or Succinum was cast up there by
the Sea; that being a commodity so peculiar to Spruce or Prussia, as the Sea
was never known to render it in any other Country of the world whatsoever,
page 85. at Dover they make brick of Sea-owse, a thing very incredible to me.
In Cumberland, out of a certain kind of sand they extract salt; it were worth
the while to tell in a few words at least, how they proceed in the doing
thereof; Not only notice should be taken by the Husbandman, or
Countrey-Gentleman of the different color, odor and taste of waters, as our
Author wishes them to do, eadem page 85. but also and much more (as a thing
of a much greater and more particular concernment to them) of the wonderful
and vast difference of waters (in which none of those three qualities is
notably to be discerned) for the several uses of ordinary housekeeping of
Husbandry, and of several Manufactures, page 86. if we may believe Glauber,
there is scarce any sand without gold; I am very sure that whosoever believes
him herein, as in many other things, will find himself very foully deceived;
Ibidem, save what is taken out of their Ditches. For the word Ditches no ways
proper here, should be substituted Bogs, Fens, or Moors; It is indifferent
good fuel, yea, many sorts of them are most excellent fuel. An Englishman
speaking of turffe, should not name Holland only, but Scotland and Ireland in
which two Countries turffe is of very great and general use, page 87. There is
a stone in Durham, out of which they make salt, I would we were told the
manner hereof: Ibidem, Lead is found in Durham-vvall: I would feign know what
Durham-wall is, whether a Town or Country, and in what part of England, and
why Derby-shire, where those famous Lead Mines are, is not at all named here,
page 94. Opium is always an ingredient, this is too generally spoken, page 95.
I am not well satisfied with what he says of transplanting Elephants into
England, and making them of common use there, for many reasons; and I believe
it would prove as hard a task to people in England, with any considerable
store of Black Foxes, Muske-Cats, and some others of those Animals named, page
96. in these words.

Paris the 2 of December, 1651.
THe conceit I find in your Legacy, page 99. Of the medicinal virtues of the
plants being sublimed into the Insects bred out of them, is altogether
destitute of truth, as very easily and practically may be demonstrated, page
101. That in Ireland rottenness of sheep is not known; It is too well known
there, and even in my time, I have seen great mortalities of sheep caused
thereby. Page 103. In Holland they keep their Cattle housed winter and summer:
I never knew any Cattle housed in summer in my Country, but all about Paris
that is very ordinary: Ibidem, they bury the grains in the ground; they keep
them indeed in the ground; but in that manner as cannot well be called
burying; for they dig holes a man's length deep and square, cemented not only
in the bottom, but on all the four sides, with a wooden shut at the top, and
there they keep their grains, not lying loosly; but rammed as close as may be;
Rapeseed-cakes, Ibidem, he should have added Linseed-cakes: Ibidem, Turnips; I
never knew them given to Cowes in Holland, but at Roven, it is a usual thing
to feed Cowes therewith, and they do thrive wonderfully therewith, as I am told
by an English Lady of my acquaintance, an excellent Housewife, who has lived a
great while in that City, eadem pagina 103, which are constantly mowed twice or
thrice yearly. I never in Holland saw or heard of any Medows mowen more than
once a year: The Paradoxe held forth. Initio paginae 104. of the cleanliness
of Hogs, and their not loving Dirt: I believe not at all to be consonant to
truth; especially in the second particular. Ibidem (the Jews have a peculiar
way) after those words, I could wish to be inserted; (which also anciently was
most common among the Romans) For the Liver of the Goose augmented to an
excessive bigness by a peculiar kind of cramming, was one of the greatest
dainties of the Romans, as may be seen in Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 22. and the
Authors there alleged by the Scholiast.

Paris 6/16 December, 1651.
INstead of going on for to make an end of my Annotations upon your Legacy, to
the end whereof I am well near come; I shall at this time step back, for to tell
you that one of Purchase his Pilgrims having given us most amply and distinctly
the whole manner of making the Caveare, as may be seen in his second Tome,
page 1420. your friend will do well to leave that out of the Catalogue of those
things, which page 81. he desires to be informed of, by the travels of any
Merchant or Gentleman: as likewise give you at large a Relation made to me
within these few days by a brave English Lady, and an excellent Housewife,
greatly confirming and illustrating the practice of feeding Cowes with Turnips;
of which page 103. she tells me, that at Roven (where she has lived a good
while) and in all the Country round about it, they feed their Cattle usually
in this manner. Of Turnips (not of the best, but refuse ones, such as being
worm-eaten, or otherwise faulty, are not good for man's meat) they boil a great
many in a great Kettle, whole as they are, with their leaves on their tops; til
they be tender, adding thereto good store of branne; (of Wheat only, because
that, that of Rye, is scowring, and so not proper for them) and afterward of
the cakes of Rapeseed, or Linseed; which cakes having a singular faculty of
fatting Cattle, they put much less of them into the Mesh for Milch-Cowes, (for
fear of spoiling their Milk) than for other kind: of this they give them twice
a day, so as it makes the greatest part of their feeding, much more than the
hay, which they give them betwixt whiles: and thus they feed them only in
Wintertime, because that all the Summer long they keep them abroad at grass:
Whether this be used in Holland as your friend says, I cannot tell of my own
knowledge: having never there seen it, nor heard of it: but in France it is of
very old standing, as appears by these words of Columella lib. 2. cap. 10.
Rapa non homines solum, verum etiam boves pascunt, praecipue in Gallia, ubi
Hyberna cibaria praedictis pecudibus, id olus praebet. De-serres does also
speak of it, but very shortly, and only mentioning it in a word or two. lib.
4. cap. 9.

Paris the 6 of January 1652.
IN the 104th. page of your Legacy, where I left with my last Annotations, I
find these words: In Barkeshire many keep tame Pheasants, and have gained
well thereby: The which having communicated to a brave English Lady here, a
great friend of mine, who has been a great Housekeeper in England, and is a
most excellent wife; she tells me that at a Countrey-house of hers, not far
from Chelsey, she had alvvayes great store of them; insomuch as she has
hatched to the number of 200 in one spring: whereof though many dyed, yet
far and far the greatest part would come to perfection. That of people of
quality she never knevv any but her self who kept any; but that there is
abundance in the parts near London, who keep them, for to make profit of them
and sell them to the Poulterers, that there is nothing more easy to bring up,
and to keep, than Pheasants; when they are once past the first Month: for til
then, they must be kept only with Aunts eggs, and feed on nothing else; of
which one would think it a hard matter to get so many, but there are
fellows in England who for a little money vvil get one as many as one can
desire: the first month being past, they are kept afterward with Oats
only, requiring nothing else: but as they love to be kept in grassie fields:
so one must change them somevvhat often to fresh grounds, because they taint the
grass and the ground in the same manner, as Geese do, and for to keep them in,
my Lady used to have those parcels of ground, where they were kept, enclosed
with lats.

Paris the 3/13 of January 1652.
YOu shall have now the conclusion of my Annotations upon your Legacy according
to your desire.

In the bottom of page 104: your friends speaks, as if the excellency of
Butter and Cheese depended wholly of the handling of it, and that Cheese like
to Parmesan and Holland Cheese, might be made in England, if the same industry
were used there, as in those Countries, which is nothing so: For though Art and
Industry can do very much in this particular, as in most others, whereof I have
seen most remarkable examples both in England and Ireland, yet there is some
thing in the particular nature of different waters and different Soiles, and of
the food for Cattle thereon growing: and consequently in that Cattles milk,
and in the Butter and Cheese made thereof, which no Art nor humane skill can
supply or imitate, no more than the same kind of Beer can be brewed in all
places, or the same kind of Wine be made to grow on all grounds. And this is
most manifest hereby, that in Holland itself there are made several sorts of
Cheeses hugely different among themselves; which difference is most remarkable
in those two excellent sorts, (viz.) the Edam-cheese (being that kind which is
so much transported into foreign Countries, and every where known by the
general Name of Holland-cheese) and the Stolke-cheese. And if it should be
thought, that that diversity proceeds from the different makings of Cheese,
used in the several parts of that Country; I can assure you, that if you make
Edam and Stolke boors exchange their habitations, and keep all their own
fashions, each of them shall make Cheeses, not such as they were wont to make
at home, but as used to be made in the places to which they are come. The like
may be said of the green-Cheeses, made in Holland of Sheepsmilke, especially
those of Gravesand, Tessel, and Grind; all three most excellent ones; and yet
extremely differing among themselves. And not to go for examples of this,
further than England it self; It were against all reason and experience, to
think that, that notable difference betwixt Suffolk and Cheshire-cheeses,
comes only from the different way of making it. Another thing, which I find
fault withal in the same Discourse, is, that the Author names the French
Angelots among the excellent sorts of Cheese; whereas they are nothing so,
neither in their qualities, nor in their price, they being sold for two Sols a
piece, whereas they use to weigh half a pound. I do likewise mislike, that he
for to instance in the best kinds of Cheese; he fetches Parmesans, and
Holland-cheese from abroad, without taking notice; that at home in several
parts of the Land, and particularly in Mongomery-shire, Cheese is made equal
to the best of these kinds; and at Chedder in Wiltshire, that which in my
judgment is far to be preferred before them, and to any other cheese in the
world. Page 105. I cannot brook, that he complains England has not a
Systema, or a Complete Book of all the parts of Agriculture; and reckons
Markham among them, who have writ only diverse small Treatises of it: whereas
Markham has comprehended in his works, whatever belongs to any part of
Husbandry and of Housewifery too; with very few and small omissions; such as in
no wise can rob him of the name of a general writings; his works also having
that excellency, that they are altogether squared for England, and go on
experience rather than on Probabilities, and hear-says; to the contrary of what
our Author seemed to tax in him, as well as in other writers of that kind;
which makes me suspect; that either he has not at all been conversant in
Markham's writings; or that in reading of him he has been strangely
fore-judged, he being in my opinion, one of the most excellent of his kind; and
in many particulars to be preferred before the most excellent of them all. It
is true what is said page 106. There were among the Ancient Romans some
appointed, to see that men did till their Land as they should; but that which
follows: and if they did not, to punish them as Enemies to the Public; is
too hyperbolically spoken, there being a vast difference betwixt punishing one
as an enemy to the Public, and a simple fining of him, which was all the
punishment inflicted for that fault, as you may see in the twelvth Chapter of
Aulus Gellius his fourth Book. In these words, page 107. he that turns
fruitful Lands into barrenness, as the land of Canaan, very fruitful
heretofore, but now a barren Desert. Our Author says nothing, but what is
common in the mouth and pens of almost every body, and yet the truth thereof is
very questionable, as an observant Reader will easily find by the exactest and
latest writers of that Country, among whom Eug. Royer is to be placed in the
very first rank. And thus I make an end, having nothing to say to any thing
contained in the following pages of your Legacy; the reprinting whereof with
those alterations and amendments I have hinted to you, I do most earnestly
wish for, it being indeed a most excellent piece; and from the beginning to the
end fraught with most excellent observations and experiments.

FINIS.
Page 98. line 12.

Mr. Vaughan's Golden Grove should not have been named at all, as containing
only certain Georgica Animi, matters of Morality, and nothing at all
concerning the ordering of Fish Ponds, and the profit of them; of which
Dubravius de Piscinis, has written on purpose in the Latin Tongue.

AN INTERROGATORY Relating more particularly to the HVSBANDRY And Natural
History of IRELAND.

Prove. 14. Verse 22. Do they not err that devise evil? but mercy and truth
shall be to them that devise good?



Printed for Richard Wodenothe, MDCLII.

THE ALPHABET of Interrogatories.
A.
Apricocks. WHether any thing common in gardens, in whose gardens, how long
since they were brought in first and by whom? Acorns. Whether any store be in
the Woods of Ireland, as to feed any great Herds of Swine, and whether they
ripen as kindly as in England? Acres. Difference of Irish and English Acres,
how many feet and perches go to an Acre, how many inches to a foot, and how
many Acres to a Plow-land? Ale. What the best manner of brewing it, and wherein
it d^ffers from the English Ale? Alder. Whether any great store of them any
where, to what uses the timber of it is put? Almonds. Whether any trees in
Ireland, whether they bear any fruit at all, and whether it come to any
Perfection? Alum. Whether any found in Ireland, where, what quantity, how
refined; Ambergreece. Upon what parts of the coast any has been found, when,
by whom, in what quantity, what sorts, wherein and how much differing from the
best? Ants, Pismires. Whether in any such quantities, as to cause annoyance and
waste of grains, what means used to destroy them? Apples. Whether any great
plenty any where, what sorts? Artichoaks. How long known in Ireland, by whom
brought in since when come to be plentiful? Ash tree. Where most plentiful, in
how much time from the seed they will grow to perfect trees, to what uses their
timber is put? Ashes. Where used in stead of dung, in what quantity, what time
of the year, what good it does? Asses. By whom any were brought over at any
time, what numbers, how they thrived, and whether they did procreate?
B.
Badgers. Where any are, what store, how they lodge themselves, what they feed
upon, what hurt they do, how hunted, how they do to defend or save themselves,
how many they whelp, what their skins are worth, and to what use put, whether
any body do eat their flesh? Bacon. The whole ordering of it, and the best
ways? Bay-trees. Whether any store any where, and of any great bigness,
whether at any time they bear ripe berries? Barley. In which parts of the land
most sown, in what grounds, how manured, what proportion upon each Acre, what
increase, what is the seed-time, whether commonly bread be made of it any
where? Barnacles. Where any are, in what numbers, how sold, when they come in
and go out, whether any such thing be, as Barnacles engendered in shells out of
rotten wood, upon what coasts any such thing has been observed, when, by whom,
where, in what manner: how long ere they come to any perfection, whether they
engender at all, what color they are of, what bigness, what they feed on?
Barred-harbours. Where any are, how spacious, how many foot of water upon the
bar at full sea, how many at low water? Barrel. What different sorts of
barrels usual in Ireland, how they differ, what inferior measure they
contain, how many of them go to an hogshead, and a tun, what proportion they
bear to the London-measures? Barren-ground. What sorts of ground absolutely
barren, not at all, or hardly to be made profitable, in what Counties and
Baronies any be, and of what extent? Base. Where any taken, what store when in
season? Bats. Whether and where any store of them, what hurt at any time done
by them to man or beast, particulars of their breeding and feeding, how taken
and destroyed? Beans. In which parts most sown, on what grounds and how
manured, with what increase, and for what uses, how much seed put to each Acre,
when sown? Bear. Wherein differing from barley, where most sown, at what
time a year, on what ground, and how manured, what proportion for each Acre,
what increase, for what uses, whether any difference in goodness betwixt Bear
and Bear, and what difference? Beef. What quantities of beef were wont
yearly to be made by the Merchants in Dublin, and other Port-towns, what it
would cost them the barrel, and what they would sell it beyond seas, and in
what places? Beech-trees. Where any grow, what store, whether they bear nuts,
and ripe ones, what uses made of the wood? Beer. How brewed in Ireland, what
several ways, which the best, how to make it lasting? Bees. Where most kept,
where any store of wild ones, what grounds and herbs they most delight in, how
looked to, what hives, when they begin to make honey, when they give over, how
much honey and wax ordinarily in one hive, when they take out the honey,
whether they take all, or leave some for them to feed on during winter, what
vermin they are obnoxious to, and how preserved from them, when the young
swarms are taken, and how hived? Beetles. What particulars observed concerning
their nature, breeding, feeding? Birch-trees. Where any are, what store of
them, how sown, in what time they will grow to perfection, what use made of
them? Birdlime. Where any made in Ireland, what quantity, in what manner?
Birds. What sorts of birds every where, what plenty, what goodness, when in
season, how taken, their natures, breeding, feeding, what sorts of them are
constantly in Ireland at all times, and what sorts do come and go at scertain
seasons? Birds of Prey. What sorts in any place, what store, what hurt they do,
how taken and destroyed, how made tame? Blackbirds. Where any store, when in
season, and how long, when their breeding-time, their feeding, ways of taking
them, at what rates sold the dosen, whether any different sorts of them, and
wherein they differ? Bloomeries. The fashion of them, charges of making one,
how many people necessary to attend them, what quantity of iron they can melt
in a day, and with what quantity of charcoal, whether the iron melted in them
differ in any thing from the iron melted in furnaces, and wherein, where any
are, whose they are, when and by whom erected? Bogs. What several sorts of
them, the nature and condition of each of them, what use is or can be made of
any of them, where any very great ones are, and of what length and breadth?
Bogs draining. What bogs apt to be drained, how it is done, what the charges,
what the profits, where, when, and by whom any great proportions have been
drained, and what it has advantaged them, whether any of them make good
Arable, and how long it must be first? Box-tree. Whether in any parts of
Ireland it grows up to an height, and what store, in what grounds? Brawn. The
whole manner of the making on it, differences of goodness, and from whence
arising? Breams. In what parts, what store, what bigness and goodness, when
in season, and how long? Bricks. The whole manner of making them, what manner
of clay fittest for this use, what may be the charges, what errors usually
committed in the making, and what the effects thereof, Since when begun to be
used in Ireland? Bridges. How many good ones, in every County and Baronie, of
how many Arches, when built, and by whom? Brooks. What brooks have any thing
remarkable in their rising, course, over-flowings, (water-mills) violence,
fish, etc? Broom. What grounds they be, where it grows plentifully, and
capable of what improvements? Bulls. Of their size, strength, ordering, diet,
time of covering the Cows, what particulars observed of their courage, etc?
Bull-finch. Their nature, feeding, breeding, plenty, season, ways of taking
them? Buntings, Their shape, colors, nature, diet, breeding, seasons, numbers.
Buzzards. Where any be, what store, nature, breeding, shape, bigness, etc?
Butchers-broom. In what places it grows, what use made on it? Butter. The
whole manner of making and ordering it, both for goodness and lasting; what
proportion of it out of a proportion of milk and cream, different sorts, (for
color, taste, goodness) and the causes? Butter-flies. Their several sorts,
natures, feeding, breeding, seasons, changes.
C.
Cabbage. The several sorts of them? Calves. The manner of rearing them,
Calving-time, whether at any time more then one calved at once? Cane-Apples.
Where any grow, what store? Carp. Where, what store, their season, bigness,
goodness? Carrets. Caterpillars. Their sorts, when and where most cumbersom,
what ways used to destroy them? Caves. Cats. Where any be, how deep, how large,
the fashion of them, what within them? Champion. What Counties and Baronies,
altogether or for the most part are champion land, and wha oil? Charcoale. Of
what sorts of wood usually made, and the whole manner of making them? Cheese.
The whole manner of making it, the different sorts for goodness, with the
causes thereof? Cherries. Where any great store, by whom planted, what sorts?
Chestnuts. Where any grow, when and by whom planted, whether they bear any ripe
fruit, or any at all? Cider. Whether any made in Ireland, where, when, by whom,
what quantity, what goodness, how lasting? Climate. Clay. What several sorts
of it, which good, which barren, how to be handled and mended, of what depth,
which best for brick? Coals. Where any found, when, by whom, what sorts, of
what goodness, what charges the digging, how deep they dig for them, and in
what manner, what soil above them? Cockles. Where any Plenty of them, when in
season? Cock of the Wood. Where any be, what store, their size, color, nature,
breeding, feeding, season, what meat they be, manner of taking them?
Colliflowers. In whose garden any, when brought in, by whom, what store? Cod.
On what parts of the coast it most abounds, seasons of fishing them, what
profit, the whole manner of salting, them, what quantity one Fisherman may take
in twenty four hours, in what depths, and how far from the land, what
weather and wind best for fishing, what worth the tun, and what the charges?
Conger. Where any taken, what store, of what different bigness and goodness,
when in season? Cordage. Where any made, what store and size, what charges,
what profit? Cormorants. Where any be, what numbers, their bigness, color,
shape, nature, their manner of fishing and feeding, where they breed, how taken
alive, whether ever any body made them tame, who, when, where, what they would
perform? Corn. What sorts are most commonly sown in each part of Ireland,
what ground, and how manured, best for each kind, how much of any sort
commonly sown upon one Acre, and how much that uses to yield? Cornelians.
Where any grow, since when, in whose Orchards? Cowes. The best vvays of
ordering them for breeding and milk, when they take the Bull, how long after
they calve, what quantities of milk ordinarily an English Covv may give in the
several times of the year, and what an Irish, their diseases, the nature and
the cure of them, how old they begin to calve, and how long they continue?
Crabs. Where they are in any plenty, what sorts, what seasons, how they are
taken? Cranes. Where any be, what store, their nature, breeding, feeding,
season, what meat they are? Crayfish. Where any is taken, what store, in
what manner, what seasons? Crickets. Their several sorts, nature,
ingendrings, feedings, seasons? Crows. What sorts of them in Ireland, what
hurt they do, how hindered or destroyed, whether any body eats them, and what
meat they are? Observations of their nature and properties. Cuckows. Their
nature, breeding, feeding, season, bigness, shape, color, what meat they
are? Curlews. Where any store of them is, their shape, bigness, colors,
nature, breeding, season, ways of taking them?
D.
Darnik. Daws. See Iackdaws. Dear. What store in any place, what kinds, their
fawning-time, how long they are with fawn, how many they use to fawn, what time
a year they cast their horns, how long it is before they begin to bud out
again, and in what space they come to their perfect bigness? Observations of
their nature, long-livednesse: Wherein Chiefly lays the difference betwixt
red dear, and fallow dear? Dew. What time a year, and in what weather, most
plentiful, what good or harm it does at any time? Diamond. False diamonds,
like Bristows, found some where, in what places, upon or under the ground?
Diseases of men. What diseases peculiar and reigning in some parts of the
country? the nature, causes, cures thereof. Diseases of beasts. What diseases
amongst all sorts of tame beasts, Common in Ireland, the nature, causes, cures
thereof. Ditching. Diverse. Where any are, what store, their nature, shape
bigness, color, taste, season, feeding, breeding? Dogfish. Where taken, what
quantities, what season, their bigness, shape, nature, taste? Dogs. The
several kinds of dogs in Ireland, their several natures and properties?
Dotterels. Whether any in Ireland, and where their shape, nature, color,
manner of taking them? Doves. See Pigeons. Draining of Bogs. See Bogs. Ducks.
Ordering and profit of Ducks. Wild Ducks, where is any store, in what
seasons, how taken? Dung. Several sorts of dung usual in Ireland, for what
grounds, and grains each sort, how, when, and in what quantity to be laid
on?
E.
Eagles. Where any are, what sorts, observations of their nature and
properties, their manner of hunting, etc. Earth. What several sorts of earth in
Ireland, how differing for fruitfulness, and in the several vvays of
manuring, the defects of each sort how to be amended? Earthquakes. Whether any
in Ireland at any time, when, how long continued, what harm done by them?
Earewigs. Ebb and Flood. See Tides. Eeles. Where most abundant, biggest, best,
where and when taken in great numbers, with what nets, in what vveather
and season, the manner of salting them, what the charges, and what the
profits of the Eelesishing, when they come in season and how long they
continue, what has been observed about their ingendring and breeding? Elder.
Elecampane. Where any grows of it self, any where, where, and what store?
Elmes. Where any grow in the country, what store, by whom planted?
F
Fallow dear. See Dear. Falls, Salmon leaps. In what rivers any are, in what
Counties, and Baronies, near what Towns, how far from the sea, how high, how
broad. Faulcons. Where any breed, what store, where destroyed, how taken, how
taught, how to be ordered, and dyeted; Observations of their nature,
properties, engendring, manner of preying. Felfares. Where any are, what store,
in what seasons, their shape, bigness, Color, taste, price, feeding? Ferrets.
Where any are wild, how taken, how made tame, how dyeted? Fig Trees. Where any
grow, in whose gardens, whether at any time they bear any fruit, or any at
all? Filberts. Where any grow wild? or in gardens? Finches. Where any store of
them, what sorts, how differing in shape and Color, when in season? Fir-trees.
Where any grow, what store, what use made of them: where any found in bogs, how
deep under ground, whether the stems only, or with roots and branches? Fish.
What rivers and loghs most abounding with fish, what kinds, what goodness;
What strange fishes now and them are taken, or cast a shore? Fishing. What
weather in general most fit for fishing; dark, gloomy days and troubled waters,
or Sunshine and calmes. The several sorts of nets used in the sea; locks,
rivers, with the fashion and bigness of every one of them; and which nets most
used, for which kinds of fishes, the several baits. What other ways used for
the taking of fish, besides nets and angling. Flax. What store of flax sowed in
each County and Barony, of what goodness, the whole ordering of flax, to make
it fit for spinning? Flies. The several sorts of them, when they come in, when
they go out? Fleas. Flood and Ebb. See Tides. Floods. Land floods. Which parts
most obnoxious to them, what harm they suffer thereby, and how to be remedied?
Flowers. What variety of rare and choice flowers in gardens, and in whose
gardens? Flownders. The several sorts of them, where greatest store of them,
when and how long in season? Foards. Description of all Foards in any County or
Barony, that have any thing peculiar or remarkable in them? Foggs. In which
parts most frequent, and when, what harm they are found to do to man or beast?
Forelands. Description of all the remarkable Forelands in each County upon the
coast, how far they run into the sea, how high, what land, barren or fruitful,
low or high, rockie or sandy, or earthy, with a strand or without? Foul. What
sorts of Foul in every Province and County, what store, what seasons, how
taken, what sorts are constant in the Nation, and what sorts do come and go at
certain seasons? Fountains. What fountains in any parts that have any thing
remarkable in them, for largeness, fashion, properties of water, manner of
rising, etc. Foxes. Where most abundant, what harm done by them, the several
ways of taking and killing them: what particulars have been observed concerning
their breeding, lodging, preying, cunning, what profit made of their skins, and
how sold the dosen at first hand? Freestone. What sorts of it, differing in
color, hardness, smoothness, etc. what kinds grow better by wind and rain,
and what sorts worse, where any very deep quarries are, and how deep? French
beans. How long since, and by whom brought into Ireland first? Fruits. What
several sorts of good fruit in any gardens and orchards, and whose, how it
uses to ripen? Furs. What several sorts of Furs the country affords, and
at what rates, the manner of dressing them? Furze. Several sorts of Furze, what
profit Furze affords, in what time it comes to Perfection, what benefit
brings to the ground?
G.
Galls. Whether any grow upon the Oaks in Ireland, and where? Gardens. Where
any choice gardens (for rare plants, flowers, fruits) when and by whom made?
Geese. Where any great flocks were kept, and what profits made of them? Wild
Geese, in what parts, what store, their seasons, whether they breed in the
Country or come from other Countries, and from whence? Glass. Where any
Glasse-houses, by whom made, what the profits of them yearly, all charges
abated; where they have their materials, if in the land, in what parts, what
sorts of glass they make, and out of what proportions of land and ashes, the
whole manner of melting the glass? Glue. What sorts of Glue made in Ireland,
in what places, of what materials, after what manner? Goats. Gnats. Where any
flocks kept, what the profits that are made of them, what the yearly increase,
what time a year they use to kid, how many at once, how long they are at once,
whether any use made of their hair, and what? Godwins. Where any be, what
store, their shape, bigness, Color, feeding, season, goodness: Goshawks.
Wherein they differ from other hawks, their shape and bigness, where they
breed, how they are taken, how nurtured, at what games they are best, the
manner of their flights? Goldfinches. Where any plenty of them, their shape
Colors; how they are taken? Grafting. What kinds of grafting used in Ireland,
what time a year best for them, what particulars to be observed about them?
Gray-hounds. What kinds of them in Ireland, their nature and properties?
Grains. See Corn. Grapes. Whether any come to ripeness, where, what kinds, in
whose gardens? Grasshoppers. Whether any in Ireland, what kinds, what time a
year? Grass. The causes of sour rank grass, where the sweetest grass, where
the deepest and thickest, what grass fittest to be preserved for
winter-feeding, what grass best for Sheep, Cowes, Oxen, Goats, Horses?
Growses. Where any store of them, their shape, bigness, color, when in
season, what kind of meat they are? Gudgeons. Where any be taken, what time of
the year, their shape and bigness?
H.
Haddock. Where taken in great quantities, how far from the coast, what time
a year, how salted, when best of all to be eaten? Hail. Hay. All the
particulars to be observed about hay-making. Hares. Havens. Descriptions of
each haven, in what County, how far from the next havens, how large, how
deep, how far they run into the land, how vvide at the mouth, whether barred
or no^, what rocks and sands before or within them, the shape of them. Hawks.
What sorts of Havvks in Ireland, where they breed, what store, how and
vvherin they differ from each other, the manner of the slights of each of them,
and at what games each of them best, and how to be nurtured? Heads. Capes.
Description of all the principal heads of the Coast, their height,
spaciousness, whether of bare rock, heathie, grassie, whether steep, or
with a strand before them, how far distant from the next places of note.
Herbs. What gardens stored with rare and choice herbs, and with what store?
Heaths. Where any grear Heaths, what extent, whether in Champion or Mountain,
whether altogether barren, or some vvays improvable, who has reduced Heaths
into profitable lands, what scopes, with what helps, and to what
advantages? Heath-cocks. See Growses. Hedge-hogs. Where they breed in any great
numbers, what they feed on, what harm they do, what vvays used to take them,
how they engender, and how numerously, whether their flesh eaten by any,
what use made of their skins? Hedging. Hemp. Where any great quantities
sovvn, upon what ground, and how manured, what hurt or good it does to the
ground, the whole manner of ordering hemp? Hernshaws. Hens. Where any be,
what store, when in season, what paticulars have, been observed about their
nature breeding, feeding, etc. Herrings. On what places of the Coast taken,
what time a year, what quantities, how sold the mease, the whole manner of
salting and re-salting them, what are the signs of their being out of season,
what winds and weather best for taking them. Hides. What quantities yearly
used to be sent forth, at what rates. Hills. What Countries all hilly?
Hoary-frosts. What hurt done by them to fruit, corn, grass, etc. Hobbies.
What their peculiar quality, size, what store of the race left, and where?
Hogs. Hollie. Where any great store grows, and to a perfect bigness, what
use made of the wood and of the rind? Honey. What quantities made in such or
such a County. what sorts, what goodness? Hops. Where any hop gardens, when
and by whom planted, what yearly profit they yield. Of what goodness the Irish
hops? Horses. What good races in Ireland, where and whose, where any great
steeds kept, by whom, upon what grounds, how long Mares are with foale,
whether ever they foale more then one at once, at what years they use to give
over. Diseases ordinarily incident to horses, the causes, prevention, and cures
of them? Horseleeches. Hounds.
I.
Iackdaws. What store of them in Ireland, where most, what harm they do, their
nature and breeding? Ice. Islands. Description of the Islands upon the coast,
and in the Loghs, their number, bigness, what kind of soil, and what they
bear, what trees on them, what hills, brooks, rocks in them? Iron.
Iron-mines. Where any Iron-mines are, of what sorts, (rock-m^ne, vvhite-mine
or bog-mine,) how found out, and how dug, especially the bog-mine and
rock-mine, which mines the richest, and how much oar will yield a tun of
iron, what kind of iron each sort of Mine gives. Iron-works. Where any are,
and whose, when and by whom made, the charges of making one, and of
maintaining one, what yearly profit they yield, how much iron they melt in
twenty four hours, what proportion of charchoale is laid to the oar, in
what order they are put into the furnace, how far the furnace is filled what
store of men employed about one work, and in what several offices. The manner
of melting and hammering the iron, at the forges, and with how much waste?
Juniper-trees. Whether any grow in Ireland, and where?
K.
Kine. See Cows.

What the best grounds and grass for Kine to feed on, what d^seases incident
to Kine, and the ways to prevent and cure them.

Kites. What store in Ireland, what places they breed, what ways used to
destroy them? Knives. Where any good ones made, where they have the steel, how
they temper them, what waters best for to harden them etc.
L.
Lambs. The manner of rearing them? Lampreys. Where any be, what store, how
taken, when in season, how they breed and engender? Lands. Leeks. Larks.
Observations concerning their nature and properties, when in season? Leather.
Lettice. Leeches. See Horse-leeches. Licoris. Leeks. Where any grows, what
quantity, what goodness? Lice. Lime. Limestone. What several sorts of kilnes
used for lime, and what sorts of fiering, the whole manner of burning lime, and
the charges of it, whether any differences of limestone, in color,
brittlenesse, etc. where they use lime for the enriching of the ground, what
quantity to an Acre, what time a year? Lightning. Lind-trees. Whether any grow
in Ireland, where, and by whom planted? Ling. Where any taken, what quantity,
what time a year, the manner of salting it, the shape of the fish? Lisards.
Observations of their nature and properties Loghs. What Loghs in every Province
and County, of what depth, length, breadth, compass, what Islands in them, and
what sorts of fish? Lobsters. In what places they are plentiful, when in
season, what time of the year they cast their coat, and how long it is before
they get a new one.
M.
Maccamboy. Whether there be such a thing at all, that this herb should purge
the body merely by external touch, or whether it be a fable, what particular
observations have been taken for or against it, the shape of the herb, and in
what place it grows? Macarels. On what parts of the coasts they are taken in
any great plenty, when they come to be in season, and how long? Madder. Whether
any be planted in Ireland, where, what quantities, how manured and ordered?
Maggot apies. See Pies. Maggots. Maids, A kind of scate or thorn-back. In what
parts to be had, what quantity, what time a year, their nature and properties?
Mallards. See Ducks. Malt. Manuring. The several ways of manuring the ground,
with all the particulars of each kind, and where used? Marble. What sorts are
found, in what places, in what ground, (champion, mountain or hill) what soil
over head, how deep they dig for it, the charges of digging it? Marle. Where
any is found, in what County and Baronie of each Province, how long since it
was found, and by whom, what ground over head, and how deep, the depth of the
Marle it self, the nature and color on it, upon what grounds they use it, what
time a year, how many loads to an Acre, and at what charges, what grains marled
land wilt bear, and how many years together, how to be used afterward, and
whether it may be used more then once upon the same piece of ground, and with
what effect? Marshmallows. Whether any grow of themselves, where, what store?
Mastiffs. What store of them in Ireland, their several natures and properties?
Match. Where any made in Ireland, of the whole manner of making it? Measures.
What several measures usual in Ireland, for the measuring of Land, Corn,
Beer, Wine, Fish etc. Meaws, sea-meaws. Where any store, what use made of
them; their nature and properties; whether there be any different kinds of
them; and what? Meadows. The time and manner of laying meadows, what grounds
best for meadows; and in which meadows the sweetest grass? Medlers. Where any
grow, whether wild, or in Gardens only? Merlin. Where any ayries of them; how
and when to be taken; and to be used to the hand; their nature and properties,
the manner of their flights; and on what game they are best; how to be looked
to, and dieted? Mice. Whether field-mice any where, what store, what harm they
do; how destroyed? Milk Mines, See Iron-mines Silver-mines What share the
King had in mines that are found out, and what share the Lord of the Manor?

Minerals. What several sorts of minerals, found in any parts of Ireland?
Mists, See Fogs. Moales. Whether any be in Ireland, and where? Moore-hens.
Where any found, what store, what time a year best for meat; their shape,
bigness, Colors; nature, properties? Mountain. What proportion of mountain
in each Province and County, the length and breadth of it, how high, where at
the highest, what soil, and what it bears? Mud. Where used to enrich the
grounds, in what manner and proportion? Mulberries. Where any grow, and in
whose Gardens? Mullet. Where any taken, what store, when in season, their
nature, properties? Muskemillions. Whether any grow in Ireland, and come to any
perfection? Muskets. Whether any made in Ireland, where, and how? Mussels.
Where in greatest plenty, what season? Muttons. General rules about the making
and ordering of Muttons?
N.
Nightingailes. Whether any body ever brought any over, and how long they lived
in Ireland.
O.
Oaks. What Oaks of any extraordinary bigness any where are, or-have been
lately. Oase. Sea-Oase. What store in any plaee, what kinds, what use made
thereof? Oats. Where most sown, on what grounds, how manured, their
seed-time, their kinds? Oatmeale. Where any made, and the whole manner of
making it? Oysters. Onions. Where any store, what sorts, when in season?
Orchards. Where the most, where any choice ones, when and by whom planted, what
good fruits in them? Osprays, Where any be, their shape, bigness, color,
their manner of taking fish, whether any be made tame, and what sport they
afford? Otters. In what parts any be, what store, how they are taken, what use
made of their flesh, their nature and properties, manner of their building, at
what rates their skins are sold at first hand? Owls. What sorts of them in
Ireland, and where, their nature, properties, nests, diet, whether used for
birding in any parts of Ireland? Oxen.
P.
Paper. Whether any be made in Ireland, where, the whole manner of it? Parkes.
Where any were before these troubles, when and by whom made, what compass,
what vert, what sort and store of Deerein them? Parrets. Parsneps. Partridges.
In what Counties and Baronies any be, where they most abound, when in season,
observations concerning their nature and properties? Patricks-Purgatory.
Perfect description of the Logh, Island, Caves, and the whole proceedings
there, during the Justiceship of the Earl of Cork, and the Lord Chancellor
Loftus. Peaches. Where any good ones, and any store does grow? Peacocks Whether
any in Ireland, where, with whom? Pears. Where any store, and what sorts?
Pearmains. Whether any grow in Ireland, and where, when planted, and by whom?
Pearls. Where any found, what store, what goodness? Pease. Where most sown,
on what grounds, and how manured, their seed-time, what uses made of them?
Perches. Where any, what store, when in season? Perrie. Whether any made in
Ireland, where, by whom? Perwinkles. Where taken, what store, when in season?
Phesants. Where any be, what store, when in season, their nature and
properties, manner of hunting and taking them? Pigeons. Where any great store
of tame ones, and where of wild ones; what ways used to take the wild ones;
their nature and properties? Pigeons-dung. Where used to dung the ground, in
what manner, to what purpose? Pigs. Pikes. Where any, what store, what
bigness, when in season, what several ways of taking them. Pilchards. Where
any Pilchard-fishing, what time a year, what charges, what profit, how far
from the coast, the whole manner of ordering and salting them, whither they are
transported? Pintails. Pintail is a bird in bigness between a Duck and teale,
of color like a wilde-duck; in the tail it has a spring of feathers in
fashion like a bulls pisell, three or four inches long, of dainty various
colors, are no where in Ireland, but in Connaught, and there at no other time
of the year, than in February; and then they are there in great abundance; so
as ordinarily they are sold at four and six pence a couple; they are most
dainty meat. Pipe-staves. Where any made, what store, what charges, what
profit, whether transported? Pismires, See Ants. Pippins. Whether any grow in
Ireland, where, by whom planted, and when, what store? Pistols. Where any made,
what store, what goodness? Places. Where taken, what store, what bigness, and
goodness, what time a year? Plague. When any in Ireland, how far it spread,
what numbers it killed how long it lasted? Plants. Plovers Gray Plovers, and
green Plovers, where, what store, when in season, what particulars observed
about their nature and properties? Plow-land. What it is, and of what extent?
Plums. What sorts of Plums in Ireland, what store, where, by whom brought into
Ireland? Poisons. Particular observations of the Antipathy of the Irish earth
and Air, against all poisonous creatures? Poplars. Where any grow, what store,
what uses made of them? Pork. Goodness of Irish pork, and the whole manner of
ordering it? Porpases. Where any be, what store, what time a year; their
shape, bigness, nature? Potatoes. Where any store sown, when brought over
first; and by whom; what uses made of them, what time to be taken up, and how
to be preserved? Powder, Gunpowder. Where any made, what quantity; from whence
they have the Materials? Prawms, See Shrimps. Privet. Puits. Whether any in
Ireland, where, what season; their shape, bigness, Color, nature? Pumpions.
Whether they come to perfection in Ireland, where they grow; and what store?
Pumiestone. Whether any found in Ireland, and where?
Q.
Quails. Where any, what store, what season; their nature and properties?
Quicksets. Where any very good ones, the whole manner of ordering them?
Quinces. Where any grow, when and by whom planted?
R
Radish. Railes. Where any; what store, what season, their shape, bigness,
Colors, what ways they are taken? Rapeseed. Where sown, on what ground, how
manured, the profits thereof? Rasors. Where taken, what store, what bigness,
and goodness? Rasps. Whether any grow wild in Ireland; where, what store;
what kinds? Rats. Where the most abound, and since when; what ways used to
destroy them; what parts clear from them? Ravens. What store in Ireland, and
where most; what particular observations have been made concerning their
nature, properties, long life? Red Deeres. Where any, what store, when in
season, particulars observed concerning their nature, properties, long life;
when they cast their horns, when they grow again, and when they come to their
perfection. In what space of time Red Dear comes to its full perfection;
their fawningtime, and how long they are with fawn? Red herrings. Whether any
made in Ireland, where, what store? Reeds. What sorts of them in Ireland; and
where; what use made of them? Rhubarb. Where it grows, in what quantity?
Rye. In what parts of Ireland most sown, on what grounds, how much to an Acre,
and what increase? Ring-doves. Rivers. Rinnet. Particular description of all
rivers in each Province and County, where they rise, where they fall into the
sea or other rivers, through what Locks they pass what sorts of fish is in
them, what fishing, and at what times a year, how far they ebb and flow, Ships
of what burden may come into them, and how far, how far they are portable at
all: what towns of note, great hills, woods, great bogs they pass close by, how
long, and how deep and broad, where at the broadest, and deepest, what time a
year they use to swell most, what weres and falls are in them, and
where-abouts? Roads. What roads of note upon any parts of the coasts; how near
to the shore ships may come to an Anchor there, in how much water, and for what
winds lay Landlockt? Robin-red-brests: Roches. Where any are, what store, when
in season? Rooks. Where any are, what store; whether any eat them; of their
nature and properties, wherein they differ from Crows? Rot of sheep. Roses:
Rushes. The several sorts of them, and to what uses they are put? Russetings.
Whether any grow in Ireland, in whose gardens, when brought in?
S
Saffron. Whether any grows in Ireland, where, what store? Salmons.
Salmon-fishing. Where any are taken, what quantities, in what times of the
year? Salmon-salting. The Manner of them? what Salt best? Sallows. Salt.
Whether any made or refined in any part of Ireland, and the whole manner of
doing it? Saltpeter. Whether any made in Ireland, where, what store: the whole
manner on it? Sampier. Where any grows, and what store? Sand. Whether there be
any sandy places in the land altogether barren, where, of what extent, and what
kind of sand? Savin. Whether any grows in Ireland, where, what store, to
what height? Sea air. What has been observed in the several parts of the
coasts: Concerning the sea-aire, what good or hurt it does, to men, beasts,
trees, Corn, and grounds? Sea-coales, See coals. Seals. Where any are, what
store, how taken, of their nature and properties? Service-trees. Whether any
grow in Ireland, and bear ripe fruit, and where? Shad. Whether any be taken
upon the coasts of Ireland, what quantities, where and what season; their shape
and nature? Sheep. Sham-rocks. What grounds best for them, how to be ordered
according to the several seasons of the year, how to be provided for in
Winter, during frost and snow; What diseases incident to them, and the ways to
prevent and cure them; things to be observed in the rearing of flocks; Names of
all the great Sheepe-matters, that were throughout the kingdom at the breaking
out of the Rebellion; what flocks they had, and what profits they yielded them
yearly? Sheldrakes Where any be, what numbers; when in season, their shape;
bigness, Color, nature, diet? Shel-fish. What several sorts of them the Irish
sea affords, and in what parts in most abundance: When every sort in season,
and where best? Shelves upon the coasts. Where any lay, and what observable
things can be said about them? Shrimps. Where any are taken, what bigness;
what store, what seasons? Silk-wormes. Where, and by whom any have been kept,
what store, what quantities of silk they made? Silver. Silver-mines Skirrets.
Where any store, in whose Gardens, since when, who brought them first into
Ireland? Slate. Where any quarries of them are, how deep it lies, what kind
of slate it is, (for color, brittlenesse, etc.) what charges? Black-slate.
Where dug, what store, the virtues of it, how found out first, when, and by
whom? Smelts. Whether any be taken in the Irish-sea, where, what store; what
seasons? Snailes. Whether ever any such abundance of them any where; as to do
any great harm to gardens, or fields, and what ways are used to destroy them?
Snites. Where any be, what store; what seasons; their nature and properties?
Snow. In which parts most snow uses to fall; which is the longest, that it
continues upon the Mountains in any part of Ireland? Soales Where any taken,
what store, when in season? Soape. Whether any made in Ireland; where, what
quantity; the whole manner of making it? Sows, See Swine: Soil. The different
kinds of soiles in Ireland; what use every kind is best for; the excellencies
of every kind; as also the defects, and how to be remedied? Black sows, (a
kind of vermin.) Spaes. Where any in Ireland, of what nature and property,
when, and by whom found out? Spanniels. What different kinds of them in
Ireland, with the properties and excellencies of each kind? Sparagus. In whose
Gardens any grow; what store, and since when? Sparrows. The different kinds of
them in Ireland; with the peculiar properties of each kind? Sparrow-hawks.
Where any breed, what store, how to be taken, and ordered; their nature and
properties? Sponges: Whether any grow upon the coasts of Ireland; where, what
store, of what goodness? Springs: Description of all springs in the several
parts of the Land that have any thing rare, or observable in them? Sprats:
Whether any taken in Ireland; where, what store, what seasons? Squirrels. Where
any be, what store; their nature, properties, diet, breeding, how a dozen of
their skins uses to be sold at first hand? Stags: Starch. Whether any be made
in Ireland; where, what store? Sares. Where any great numbers of them. Their
nature, properties; diet? Steel. Where any made, what store, in what manner?
Storks. Whether ever any have been seen in Ireland; when and where? Stronds.
The different kinds of them, where high; where flat, where rockie, where fair
and sandy, where none at all; so as the sea is very deep close by the Land?
Sturgeon. Whether ever any seen in the Irish-seas; when and where? Straw. The
different uses made of straw; for dung, thatch, etc? Swallows. Strawberries. In
what parts they grow of themselves in any plenty? Swans. Where any numbers of
tame ones have been kept. Where any store of wild ones; their season, nature;
and properties? Swine. The whole manner of ordering herds of swine, and what
profits to be made of them. Diseases incident to swine; the causes, preventions
and cures of them? Swords. Where any made, and where the best? Sycomores.
Whether any grow of themselves any where?
T.
Talbots. Where any are taken, of what bigness and goodness, in what seasons?
Tallow. What store every year uses to be made and transported at Dublin and
other ports? Tanneries. Where any great ones, when, and by whom erected?
Teales. Where any great store of them, when in season? Thunder. Thornbacks.
Where any store taken, when in season; observations of their nature and
properties? Thrushes. In what parts to be had in any store, when in season,
their nature and properties? Thrushels. Where to be had, what store, when in
season; their nature and properties? Tides. On what parts of the coasts very
high and very strong tides go; and where highest; how many foot the water does
rise and fall? Tillage. What things observable in the tillage of Ireland; and
what things chiefly to be regarded for the well ordering of it for all manner
of grain: and wherein the chief difference between the tillage of England and
Ireland? Timber. What sorts of timber in Ireland; of what goodness, and to
what uses each kind is employed? Tortoises. Whether any in Ireland, and where?
Trane. Where any made, what quantities; of what fishes, what charges, and what
profit? Trees. What sorts of trees, both wild and other; naturally grow in
Ireland; and what sorts have been brought in of late, that grew not there
before? Trowts. Wherein extraordinary plenty, or of extraordinary bigness, when
in season and how long? Turbot. Where any taken, of what bigness and
goodness; and at what times of the year? Turfe. How many sorts of turfe, what
sort the best; what is the deepest they dig for any turfe, how they do to keep
out the water out of the turfe-pits; whether the turfpits use to fill up again,
and in what space of years: In what turfe-bogs trees are found, what sorts of
trees; and how deep under ground? Turkeys. In what part greatest store is bred;
how long it is since they had any in Ireland. What things chiefly to be
observed in breeding of turkeys? Turnips. What their seed-time, when to be
taken up; what ground fittest for them? Turtles. Whether any be in Ireland, and
where?
V
Valleys. Venomous creatures. See Poisons. Veale. Things to be observed about
the right ordering of veale? Verjuice. Whether any be made in Ireland, where,
what store? Vermin. What sorts of vermin chiefly abound in Ireland, what harm
they do; what means used to destroy them? Vines, See Grapes.
W
Wagtailes. Where any, what store; their nature and properties? Walnuts. Where
any ripe ones grow, and what store? Wares. What wares Ireland sends forth;
what quantities, to what Countries; at what rates, what wares are imported,
from whence, at what rates? Water. Notable differences of the several sorts of
water, and for what peculiar uses each sort of water is fittest? Wax. What sort
of wax made in any part of Ireland; and how they make it? Weres. Wells.
Particular description of all Wells that have any thing rare, or observable in
them, either for the nature of the water, depth, etc. Wesels. Where any great
store of them, in what places they live abroad, and on what they feed;
observations concerning their nature and properties? Whales. On what parts of
the coast any Whales have been cast up at any time within memory, what
numbers; what bigness, what time a year? Wheat. In what parts of Ireland it
is most sown, on what grounds; how manured; what proportion to an Acre; and
what increase? Whitings, and Whiting-maps. Where most taken, what time a year?
Wilde-beasts. Wigions. In what parts they are, what store, when in season,
their nature and properties? Wild-fowle. What sorts of them in Ireland, what
plenty of each sort, and when in season? Willows. Winds. Which parts of the
Country most subject to high winds, and at what times of the year; what kinds
of winds most predominant in the several parts of Ireland? Wonderful things.
The turning of wood in to stones; in Logneagh and the like; what particulars
have been observed about that? Wood-cocks. Where in great plenty, when they
come in, and when they go out. Particulars observed about the nature and
properties of them; What places fittest for glades? Woods. Where any great
woods destroyed within these forty years; upon what occasions, and by whom;
what profit made of the Lands recovered out of the woods: What great woods
standing to this day; and in what Counties and Baronies? Woolfs. In what parts
of the Land any are left, and what store, what ways used to take them;
peculiar observations concerning their nature and properties? Wool. Where the
best wool, wherein the Irish wool differs from the English; what store of
wool yearly uses to be transported from Dublin, and other places, and at what
rates; the right ordering of wool for sale? Worms. What several sorts of
worms in Ireland, what harm done by them, and how they are destroyed?
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 18. for to devour, Read do devour. p. 12. l. 11. for add then r.
and then. p. 17. l. 2. for ought like. r. ought not like. p. 19. l. 6. for the
blackness. r. and blackness. p. 21. l. 23. r. from Kernels. p. 23. l 25. for
should not r. would not. p. 25. l. 1. for bear very r. which bear very p. 29.
l. 31. r. Meade. p. 41. l. 14. for af. r. of. p. 46. l. 26. for folling. r.
felling. p. 48. l. last. for have r. half. p. 53. l. 6. for Moreney r. Morin.
p. 59. l. 9. for two r. three. l. 28. for detection. r. direction. p. 60. l. 3.
for which begun. r. which we begun. l. 37. for sassarfas r. sassafras. p. 61.
l. 12. for at a cherry. r. as a cherry. p. 64. l. 14. for dnopping. r.
dropping. l. 21. r. search. p. 66. l. 25. r. Calaninaris. p. 71. l. 32. for
Kue. r. Rue. p. 73. l. 6. r. these cattle. p. 78. l. 22. for vessels. r.
bushels. p. 76. l. 29. r. exsiccate. p. 75. l. 23. r. but. l. 30. r. small
matter.

IF any desire to have the great Clover of Flaunders, or the best sorts of Hemp
and Flax-seeds of those parts, or Saint Foine, La Lucerne, Canary-seeds, or any
sorts of Seeds of this kind: Let them enquire at Mr. James Long's Shop at the
Barge on Billings-gate; and they shall upon timely notice have them procured
new, and very good from France or Flaunders at reasonable rates.

The Titles of other Treatises of Universal Husbandry, lately published for the
general benefit of the Nation, by Mr. Sam Hartlib.

The Reformed Husbandman, or a brief Treatise of the Errors, Defects and
Inconveniences of our English Husbandry, in ploughing and sowing for Corn;
with the reasons and general Remedies, and a large, yet faithful offer or
undertaking for the benefit of them that will join in this good and public
work.

An Essay for Advancement of Husbandry-learning: Or Propositions for the
erecting a College of Husbandry, and in order thereunto, for the taking in of
Pupils or Apprentizes, and also Friends or Fellows of the same College or
Society.

An Invention of Engines of Motion, lately brought to perfection, whereby may
be dispatched without wind, water or horses, any work now done in England, or
elsewhere, (especially works that require strength and swiftnes) either by
wind, water, Cattle or Men, and that with better Accommodation, and more
profit then by any thing hitherto known and used.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden Hall Market, next door to the
Golden Heart. 165^.


