LONDONS Charity enlarged, STILLING The Orphans CRY.

BY The Liberality of the PARLIAMENT, in granting two Houses by Act, and giving
a thousand pound toward the work for the employment of the Poor, and education
of poor children, who many of them are destroyed in their youth for want of
being under a good Government and education, whereby they may be made
serviceable for God, and the Commonwealth.

ALSO This good work is much encouraged by the liberal Contributions of many
well-affected Citizens of London, for the better carrying it on for the glory of
God, the honor of the Nation, and comfort of the helples Poor.

WITH A Platform, how many Officers needful to govern 100 children in a
Workhouse, with Laws and Orders for the Schoolmaster to read to the children
once a day for a time, afterward twice a month, whereby they may be kept under
a godly and civil Government, to the great joy of good peopl.

With other Observations worthy the reading.

By S.H. a well-wisher to the Nations prosperity, and the Poors comfort.

London, Printed by Matthew. Symmons, and Robert Ibbitson, 1650.

The Orphans Cry, We perish, we die.
As we you see
So may yours be
For the Lords sake
Some pity take
Lay not this sin to their charge
I am sick, I die
Dead in the street


To the Right Honorable Thomas Foot, Lord Mayor of the City of London, with the
Worshipful Sheriffs, and to the Gentlemen of the Corporation for the Poor,
both Aldermen and Common Council of the City of London; S.H. wishes your
Lordship, and the rest, happiness in this life, and eternal consolation by
Christ Jesus in the life to come.
Right Honorable, With the rest of the Gentlemen:
I Hope this is the Year of Jubilee, or Joy to the Poor, and all Gods peopl,
and that by your helps and assistance, concurring together, such a work of
Reformation will be set on foot, and carried on for the good of the Poor, as
well for their souls, as their bodies, as was never so exactly performed in
former ages in our Nation.

The work of the Poor consists in two things, viz. Comfort, the honest helples
Poor. Reform, the obstinate ungodly Poor.


And for your ground and Authority to carry you on in the performance of this
good work, you have 1 The Law and Command of our God. 2 The Laws of our Land,
and the assistance of Parliament if you need


1 The Law of God says, He that will not work, let him not eat: This would be
a sore scourge, and smart whip for idle persons, if Gods Law were so executed,
that none should be suffered to eat, till they had wrought for it (if they were
able) this would torment such persons (both back and belly) more then ten
lashes a day, and such a restraint from victual, would in time drive them to
works whether they would or no, tho never so stubborn; for if such should be
made to fast that will not work, one or two days, before they eat, they will
be glad to fall to his or her labor the third day; for hunger will tame the
wildest Colt, and constrain him to come to hand for hey or straw.

2 The Laws of the Land says, He that is idle, and may work, and will not, let
such be sent to the house of Correction, and there be employed, and restrained
from a begging idle life.

There are other good Laws made against incorrigible Rogues, which I will omit
to speak of, desiring those that would know more of them to search the Statutes
of England, which are very good in suppressing the idle, and relieving the
needy, only if one thing might be added:

That no lusty person should have the benefit of a Pass if he lived abov
thirty miles from London; the reason why I speak of the distance of thirty
miles, it is because the Cariers come two or three times a week, and a letter
from the Corporation to the Parish, and the said Carier that dwells nearest to
the Parish to carry it; and the Porter that is servant to the Carier, to carry
the said letter to the Parish where the Beggar says he was born, or last
dwelled, and he to deliver it to the Constable or Collectors for the poor, and
they without delay upon a penalty to return answer by the first or second
return of the Carier, and their hands with the hands either of a Justice or
Minister of the Parish, of the truth, whether ever any such person were born
there, or inhabited amongst them; by this means you will soon discover much
falsehood amongst beggars, and much carelessenes among Constables, in not
guiding home the beggars to their Parish, a penalty on them will make them be
careful; therefore if the Corporation do intend to do the work truly,
faithfully, and with advantage to the Commonwealth, they must neither take the
word of a wandering beggar, nor the true service of a careless Constable, for
they are both ill members to a well-governed Commonwealth, and will deceive;
therefore two letters from the Corporation to the Parish where the Beggar says
he was born, or last abode will be very necessary, viz. one to know the truth
whether ever any such person belonged to them, by this means you shall have a
true account whether the Beggars report be true: The other letter is when the
Beggar is sent away with the Pass, to know whether he be come to his Parish,
if not, you shall be sure then to know what Constable was in the fault, that
the Beggar was not conducted to his Parish, such Constables being fined, will
make others beware, this will be little charge to the Corporation, and your
work done very judiciously with care and prudence; for some Beggars may commit
some misdemeanor in their Country; therefore it is a simple thing to take their
word, for they will never tell truth; As for example,

Suppose a Constable of London should take up a Beggar in his Precinct or
Parish, and should ask him where he was born or last dwelt, the Beggar should
say, at York, or Newcastle, when as peradventure he was neither born, nor
inhabited in any of the foresaid Cities, and it may be he was never in that
Country in all his life, yet upon the bare word of the Beggar the Constable
makes his Pass, corrects him, and sends him away to the place of his birth, or
last abode, as he says, and when he comes thither, the inhabitants there will
own no such person, and so he must be brought back again to the great trouble
of the Country, according to this I will give you a president.

A Gentleman who is now one of the Corporation being Constable, a lusty Beggar
was begging in his Parish, he asked him where he was born, he said at Dover, he
caused the Beadle to whip him, and made him his Pass, and sent him for Dover,
when he came thither, the Inhabitants of Dover would not receive him, they had
none such born there, they sent him back again to London from whence he was
sent; when the Constable saw him, he admired that the Laws were so defect; and
he was sorry the Country was so much troubled, by carrying, and re-carying to no
purpose; then he asked the Beggar where he did ever dwell, he said at Bristol,
the Constable sent him away for that place, and what became of him afterward
he could not tell.

Herein we find it is a trouble to a Commonwealth, that a Constable have no more
proof concerning a wandering Rogues birth or abode, but only his bare word,
which may lie if he please, as well as tell truth.

Consider in the next place how a careles' Constable may prove an ill
instrument to the Commonwealth; for if a lusty Beggar pass through the hands
of many Constables safe as he is carrying along the Country; yet if at last he
fall into the hands of a careless Constable he can make his escape and go into
another part of our Nation, and continue still a trouble and a danger to the
Commonwealth, for some of them are very desperate and envious; if a Farmer give
not them an alms to their own mind, or a crosse-word, they care no more to set
his Barn and Ricks of corn on fire, then to light a pipe of Tobacco, so
desperate many of them are to do a mischief by day or by night; wherefore in my
apprehension there is no better way to guide Beggars to their homes then by way
of the Carier, for some Cariers have been complained of for bringing boys and
girls, and leave them at London upon the charge of this City.

I conceive a Carier or Wagoner are the fittest men to convey Beggars, that
dwell about 30 miles from London, for Trunk; provided the Parish pay the Carier
for his pains, and if the Carier or Wagoner do not perform their care for the
good of the Commonwealth, let a penalty be laid upon on them, by this means,
the Constable will be freed, and the Country eased of such persons that are a
pest and trouble to our Nation.

And if in case a lusty vagrant should say he was born a hundred miles or more,
not then to have a Pass, but rather be kept to work either in the house of
Correction, or in the Galleys, or clensing of streets, I mean little narrow
places where carts seldom come, with such like employment, till such time they
can be sent to the English Plantations, unless such can procure good security
to live orderly.

I have no more to say, but beseech the Lord that your Lordship, with the rest
of the Corporation, may be tender fathers to the honest poor, and severe to the
obstinate, knowing, as I said before, you have the Law of God, and our Nation
to strengthen your hands, and the power of Parliament to countenance you. For
which shall be the daily prayer of him, who is Your humble servant, S.H.

To the Right Honorable His Excellency, Tho. Lord Fairfax, General of the
English Army.
Right Honorable,
THat which sets the chiefest Diadem upon great persons, is not so much in
their birth, and blood Royal, as in their Piety and Charity, such persons
whose hearts God has seasoned with the graces of his holy Spirit, they are of
a hyer blood, then those that are born from Emperors and great persons, such as
they are but born of the flesh, they are not born of the the Spirit: And Christ
tells us, If we are not born of the Spirit, that eternal Royal seed, we shall
never enter into the Kingdom of God. By this we find (My Lord) that there is a
necessity to seek after this second birth, being of the Spirit, and from the
Spirit of God, as our first birth is of the flesh, and from the flesh of men;
the first birth is a fading birth that shall perish; the last birth is a
lasting birth that shall never perish, it shall never dye, as Christ says, viz.
They shall never dye in the spirit, though they suffer death in the flesh, and
our Savior Christ bids his peopl, Not to fear them that can but kill the body,
but are not able to destroy the soul.

My Lord, I hear many boast of their first birth, which is but from sinful man
at the best; but I hear but few in comparison of the other to boast or glory
any thing in their second, which is from the highest birth Royal of all,
inasmuch as the is none greater then he, who is not only called King of Kings,
but King of the Saints, that is King of Kings to overpower them, for they are
in hands like Rivers of water, that have their tides, who have their flowings
and swellings, ebbings and fallings, as pleases the Lord; and he is also
called the King of Saints, because he is their Governor and Protector;
therefore he is not ashamed to say, I will be your Father, and you shall be my
children; and Christ his dear Son, is not ashamed to call them Brethren. By
this we find that the Saints, whether rich or poor, noble or ignoble, are in
great favor with God and Christ.

And the Apostle St. James says, God loves the poor that are rich in faith;
and the poor so qualified, through the grace of Jesus Christ, are in a capacity
to have a right to the hy birthright of the Royal blood of Heaven, which is
the highest birth and blood of all: And truly, My Lord, whereas God and Christ
loves the poor, I rejoice when I see rich men, and great men love the poor that
excel in virtue; And this I must speak to the Honor of your Excellency, that
both your self, and the Officers of your Army, have been cordial in
propagating the cause of the poor, and their miseries, in that your Lordship
upon request of some well-affected, to send two or three Letters, some of them
to the Parliament, and one to the Lord Mayor of the City of London, late
deceast, that they would improve their power and interest for the carrying on of
this good work, That poor children that beg, may have maintenance, employment,
and godly education; and all sorts of wandering poor kept under a daily
government, whereby God may be glorified, and good peopl have joy and comfort in
it; it is a mercy to a Nation when great men are good men, seeking to advance
Piety and Charity more then their own honors, and we have cause to bles God,
that has made you isntrumental for the honor of God, and the good of the
poor, and for the continuance of these mercies to the Nation: It shall be my
daily prayer, with the peopl of God, that Piety and Charity may never fail you
to your dying day, and that you may then everlastingly enjoy that heavenly
birthright, and by blood Royal spoken of before.

Your Excellencies most humble servant in the Lord. S. H.

To the Reader,
Christian Reader,
PICTURS of misery, mooves the hearts of merciful peopl to greev, the
condition of the poor is like the picturs in the beginning of the Book,
decypher'd out; some Crying, some Dying in the Streets, if thou desire to
remedy these miseries, by thy liberal contributions, according to that portion
God has given thee, thou do like a good Steward; and God and Christ who is
the Father and Savior of the poor, who are rich in faith, will Crown thee
with mercies here, and with glory and life Eternal in Heaven hereafter; but if
thou have this Worlds good, and yet are miserable and hard hearted, and
regardest not to advance so good a work, as employing the poor, take heed thy
condition be not like his that Solomon speaks of, saying, He that withholdeth
Corn in the time of Famine, the Poor shall curse him: I desire of God, that
thy coveteousnesse may not abound so much upon thee, that the Curse of God and
the curse of the Poor should fall upon thee. Remember how much Dives Dogs were
kinder to poor Lazarus then their Master, for they came and licked Lazarus
Soars, when as their Master would not give a Penny toward the poor man's Cure,
so far in love with his money was he. But what was the end of his cruelty?
Perpetual woe and misery, as the Scripture says; and because he had not a
favor to the poor man, he lost the favor of God. Thou know not what a
third War will produce, for, rumors are abroad, therefore I council thee to
be liberal to advance this good work of the Poor, while thou have it, that God
may show mercy upon thy Soul and Body, and preserve the rest of thy Riches from
foreign Plunderers, and doubt not, but God will favor thy life and Estate,
when thou favourest the Poor.

The advance of this work we hope will produce great joy to the Nation, and we
hope that the Parliament will to their utmost stand for the honor of God, and
the good of the peopl, which consists in piety and charity; that is, by
advancing the Gospel of Christ, and seeking the peace of the Nation, for so in
several Ordinances they have declared to do.

1. They have declared they will provide maintenance for Preaching Ministers
in England, tho yet many places thereof are in darkness, wanting, as also for
other Countries beyond the Seas belonging to this Natino that the word of the
Lord may have its free course and be glorified amongst them as it is with us in
this City of London.

2. They will endeavor that the releife and employment of the poor may be
settled in all Cities and Market Towns of the Nation, as in London.

3. They will endeavor the releasment of poor Prisoners that are not able to
pay their hard hearted Creditors, and yet lie in Prison for a small Debt; and
as for such that lie in Prison and are able to pay, and will not do it, being
the undoing of many a poor man and his Family, which does occasion great
poverty upon the Nation.

3. They will endeavor to appoint Friend-makers in all great Parishes of the
Nation, that the mighty may not oppress the poor; this is a work of great
concernment, and will prevent much poverty in the Nation, and bring glory to
God, and honor to the Parliament: God is angry with oppressors, as he was with
King Pharaoh, and it was his end throuwe, and God says, they that oppress the
Widow, the Fatherless, the Stranger, the poor, he will take away their
Oppressors with horns, and fish-hooks, he will not hear their cry in
distress, but will Scatter them among all Nations, a fearful judgment will
fall on such as neglect to settle a short and speedy way to right the poor
against their oppressors; therefore it was a good saying of one, That quick
Justice makes quiet Kingdoms, but Forma pauperis are often times tedious to the
undoing of many a poor man, and also many actions arising more from malice
then matter, are a means to impoverish many a poor body. And truly I must
speak plainly, it stands upon the Parliam^t, to dispatch these high and public
things out of hand, for the peace and prosperity of the Commonwealth, for the
honest rich, and merciful and comfortles poor, whither Prisoners or others,
wait for a reformation, as the thirsty ground for rain, and indeed I must say,
there is as great need for the Parliament to find out ways and means to
preserve peopl from poverty, by Oppressors or otherwise, as it stands upon them
to keep peopl from starving when they are poor.

And now Christian Reader, thou that art cordial for a godly reformation, and
desire not only that swearing, Sabboath-breaking and drunkenness may be
pulled down, but also oppression, which is like a violent storm, and sweeping
rain, as Solomon says, but also desire, that good things may be planted
throughout the Nation for the glory of God, and the peace and prosperity of it.

Wherefore I pray thee be not impatient or unbeleeving, but pray, and wayt, and
thou shall see the Parliament will act suddenly, according to the hearts desire
of the godly, and merciful, rich and the oppressed poor, for the finishing and
perfecting of all which, shall be the daily prayer of him, who desires to be,

Thine in the Lord Christ, S. H

LONDONS Charity Enlarged, Stilling the Orphans Cry.
THE Corporation appointed by Authority of Parliament for the well ordering of
the Poor within the City of London, and the Liberties, that the honest poor
who are willing to work, may be countenanced, and the idle suppressed; and the
said Corporation I hope does desire to acquaint all well affected peopl that
are willing to advance this pious and charitable work by their liberal
contributions what their intents and purposes are (by Gods assistance) to carry
on the foresaid good work: And,

Therefore to take off all jealousies that none may have the least suspicion of
their fidelity, as well in relation to the preserving of the stock as also in
performing the good work so long desired by many good peopl, shall be declared
as a well wisher to them in these particulars ensuing.

1. They will endeavor that the Lord Mayor may be moved to send his precepts
to the Marshalls and Constables, and Beadles of the City of London, to bring
all idle persons to Bridewell and the Workhouses, and to allow something to the
Officers for every one they shall bring to the aforesaid places; that the
Corporation may know how the better to dispose of them, either for Sea or Land.

2. I hope they desire an unanimous conjunction with the Governors of
Bridewell, London, that they may assist each other by taking up, and employing
to work all the lusty poor they find begging.

3. I hope they will endeavor that the said lusty poor be kept hard to work,
and not to depart thence at least, till he or she have been there a Month,
unless they can give sufficient security to the Corporation and Governors of
Bridewell that they will behave themselves civilly and orderly, leaving off the
trade of a begging idle life.

4. I hope they will endeavor that all such as are acquitted for petty Felony
may not be set at liberty, as formerly they have been, for within a Month or
less they have fallen to their old course of stealing, and brought to Prison
again: therefore that such upon the discharge out of Prison, may be brought to
the Houses of Correction, whether it be London, Westminster, Middlesex, or
Surrey, where the party lived, or the these committed, or else employed in the
Ships and Busses for the fishing Trade, the better to make them serviceable to
the Commonwealth, by reforming their ungodly life.

5. They will endeavor that such as are incouragable to have power from the
Parliament to send them to the Plantations belonging to the English, beyond the
Seas, to see whither God will be pleased to turn them.

6. I hope they will take care that poor Children may be taught to write and
read two hours in a day, so that by that time the Boys come to the age of
12.14. or 16. they will be able to read and write, fit for Apprentices, but
such as are quick witted to make Scholars, and accomptants, or what they
delight in, either for Sea or Land.

And I hope also, they will endeavor that such poor that are willing to work
at home with their Children, that they may have Hemp, Flax, Cotten-wool, and
other materials to work upon at their own dwellings, they leaving a pawn, or
bringing a friend for their security to return such materials again to the
Steward of the Corporation, and not to sell it, or pawn it away for Ale and
strong Beer, as some poor have done their Masters work.

7. I hope they will endeavor to use all means (some of them being Justices
of the Peace) to prevent such Familys from poverty, who are made poor by common
drunken Husbands, such drunkards bring misery and poverty in the Commonwealth
in three relations.

1. By it, they make their Familys poor.

2. By it, they are apt to charge and burden their Parishes.

3. By it, they impoverish the plenty of the Nation, by spending the plenty of
it wastfully, and so threaten a Famine upon us; for two drunkards will spend
more in drunkenness in one night, then will serve two moderate men half a
week.

8. I could wish, for the better sanctifying of the Lords Day, for so I call
it, especially from Christ's Resurrection, because then our enemy death was
overcome, and our full redemption wrought, that the Schoolmaster on every such
Sabboath, keep the Children and others belonging to the Workhouse, from
wandering the Streets and Feilds in Sermon time by exercising his gifts of
Prayer, reading of Chapters, singing of Psalms, Catechizing them in such a
Cathecisme appointed by Authority; that Children may be prevented from errors,
especially that of Free Will, for a man is not saved by his own works, but the
chiefest hopes and assurancet of his Salvation stands upon these helps
ensuing.

1. By the free grace of God that pardons a sinner of his sins; as a
merciful Creditor forgiveth a poor man a Debt, when he has nothing to pay, as
Christ makes the comparison of the Creditor and the two Debtors, that when they
had nothing to pay, the Creditor forgave them, Luke 7.4. Meaning God the
Creditor, and the two Debtors were Jew and Gentile, the Gentile was the
greatest Debtor, for he was for a time a Prodigal, yea without God in the
World, having no fear of God before his eyes, but now the work of grace by
Christ Jesus, has wrought a great reformation in many a poor Gentiles soul.

2. As God is the forgiver of sin, so he is the giver of power against sin,
that is, by his holy and good spirit in converting a sinner, which makes the
Saints to rejoice and wonder when the strong holds of Satan in a sinner are
thrown down.

3. Means we are saved by faith, that is, beleiving that Christ Jesus was the
best Sacrifice that ever was offered to take away sin from sinners, therefore
Christ has gotten him this honor, that he is called the unspotted Lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the World, that whosoever beleiveth on him
should never perish but have everlasting life.

4. Means of Salvation is a man's works, where God has given him some measure
of his spirit, for to act. Therefore a man must be careful not to deny his
spirit by despising it; nor he must not greive the spirit, nor quench the
spirit, if any do, God will be angry with such, for he has made man a
rational Creature: therefore the Apostle says, we are the workmanship of God,
created unto good works; yet we are to know, that without Christ we can do
nothing that is good, no more then a body can live, when the spirit of life is
departed from him; these are special things for a Schoolmaster to instruct,
and season Children with, on Sabboath-days. Also the reading of good Sermons
are very profitable, which I desire may consist of these heads.

1. A Sermon concerning the holy Trinity, in their offices and attributes,
needful to be known in these erring times, for some deny a Trinity, some deny
Christ, and some deny a unity or spiritual union.

2. Sermon of faith.

3. Of Love.

4. Humbleness of mind in these proud times.

5. Of sobriety and chastity, in these drunken and unchaste days.

6. Self-denial, that is, denying ungodliness and Worldly lusts, we may live
righteously and soberly, etc.

7. Of the excellency of patience that makes a man entire.

8. Of contentedness in a low condition, and affl^ction; for godliness with
content is great gain.

9. Of the excellency of truth, which will cast out of a man, lying and
stealing.

10. Of the excellent Joys of Heaven, and chiefly wherein, Viz. In beholding
the beauty of God and Christ, as a Bridegroom delights in the fair beauty of
his Bride, above all her riches.

11. The horror of Hell, and chiefly wherein, Viz. The loss of the glorious
presence of God, and his love and favor; this is a hell beyond the
unquenchable fire. The Lord deliver us from it.

12. A Sermon not to be idle, but labor with our hands for the good of the
Commonwealth.

T^se Sermons being read, and the blessing of Gods spirit carrying on young and
old to the practice of it, who can tell but this may be a means to beget
abundance of the poorer sort of people, and their Children to a holy knowledge
and obedience to God, in life and conversation, and consider if any shall
scruple at the reading of these things? I Answer it is ordained of God, as well
as preaching. See these places in Scripture which do confirm it. Deuteronomy. 31.11.
Josh. 8.34, 35. Jer. 36.6. Dan. 3.16.17. Luke 4.16. Act. 8.30, 31. Act. 13.27.
2 Cor. 1.13. Collos. 4.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.27. Rev. 5.4.

9. Is in relation to their employment.

1. Upon the fishing Trade, this will not only employ many thousands, but also
be a means to bring in food for the great releife of the poor. There is a
Book lately come forth very useful to employ housands of peopl for the
advance of Fishing, and are sold at the Greybound in Little-brittaine.

2. The Children shall be employed to spinning, knitting, and sowing, and such
other employment as consists to the making of their own Clothes, therefore to
have a Weaver to weave the Cloth, and a Tailor to make and mend their
Clothes; other employments in time may be found out, which may be very
assistfull to Handycraft-Tradesmen, and the good of the Merchant.

10. Is in relation to Raiment and Food for the Children.

1. For their Raiment, a c^urse Woollen suite for winter, and a Canis or such
like for summer, as for their food, I will speak of it afterward.

11. Is in relation to their Recreation.

1. Sometime warlike exercise, which many Children take much delight in, this
recreation will be comodious to the Commonwealth, by bringing them up, some
for the Drum, and Pipe, some for the Trumpet, and all will be skilled with
Warlike terms and postures, which they will not forget when they come to be
Men.

This exercise to be performed by each Work house at home once a week, or
fortnight, and once a month in summer time in some convenient place, then, and
there all the Children of ability of body, in the Work houses to meet
together, to exercise their skill and valor.

Other Recreations may be used in winter time, as the Children of Christ's
Church do, for the sharpening of their wits, reviving their spirits, and
preventing them from Scurvyes, and dropsies, and such like.

This usage of Children serves to confute the thoughts of some, that thought
the Corporation would not be so kind, and tenderhearted unto poor Children;
and therefore to take off all jeal^usies, I shall be bold to say this of the
Corporation, I verily believe that such Children whom God does endue with
grace, and towardlynesse of carriage, they will be willing to prefer to the
best services and honest Masters they can get for them, for the better joy and
comfort of such poor that live orderly.

12. I hope the Corporation will endeavor that all such well minded peopl,
whom God has enriched with this Worlds good, and having their hearts enlarged
to the poor, by giving them Bread and other food, one day in the VV^ek^, or
more, to as many as come to their Doors, as to my knowledge some rich Bakers
of London do, that such bread or any other provision as they, or any else, that
shall give, may be fetched from their Houses by the Beadle or the like
Officers, for the releife of the poor in the VVorkhouses, which will be a
considerable thing to uphold the stock, because much of the stock will be spent
toward feeding and clothing the young Children, and that the Beadle or other
officer be careful for the receiving of it, having two or three of the people
of the VVork-houses to go with him in gathering it, and they to deliver it to
the cook or Sutler, for the use of the Poor. This also will be a great succor
to such Women that beg with little Children in their arms and hands, for
bread, and broth, and beer, are the chiefest things that Children feed upon,
all which will be had with little charge to the Corporation: only the Beadle
or Officer for his pains, and I believe some men will, from a charitable
disposition, do it for little gains, because it is for the honor of God, and
the good of the poor.

13. And lastly, I hope they will endeavoor that these ensuing Laws may once
or twice a week for a time, be published to the Children by the Schoolmaster,
for the better regulating them in the fear of God.

1. THat none young nor old in the Workhouse shall swear, neither by the name
of God, nor the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. That none either young or old give their tongues to lying, railing, filthy
talking, or singing ribbauld Songs.

3. That none scoff at any man or Woman's person, being Deformed, seeing it is
the Workmanship of God, who might have laid it upon thee that scoffest; nor to
scoff at any man's profession being never so low and mean in the World, if
needful in the Commonwealth.

4. That none have any cursed wishes in their tongues to any, neither in the
Workhouse nor abroad.

5. That none give their hands to stealing, or imbezeling any of the goods of
the Corporation, or any of their Fellows goods belonging to them in the
Workhouse.

And if any refuse to obey these, or the like wholesome Laws, and Orders of the
Workhouse and despises to be under the Government and Correction of such
punishment as the Corporation shall think meet for such offenses, greater or
lesser, that then they be sent to Bridewell or house of Correction, to receive
further punishment for deserts. Consider that these Laws and Orders being read
by the aforesaid Schoolmaster, upon such days as the Corporation shall
appoint, and the punishment executed upon the Offenders, young or old, will be
a means to make many of them afraid to offend; as it appears by Solomon's
words, Prove. 22.15. Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the rod
of correction shall drive it far from him.

Here follows to be considered the charge and the gain of employing the poor
in these particulars ensuing:

1 How many officers needful to govern 100 children.

2 The wages of officers to govern the children from 5 or 6 year old, to 14 or
15.

3 The charge of diet for such children whose Parents are dead, or very poor.

4 What profit will arise out of their labor toward this charge.

First, how many officers needful to order 100 children in each Workhouse?

1 A Steward. 2 A Schoolmaster. 3 A Cook, or Sutler. 4 A Botcher. 5 A Cobbler. 6
A Barber. 7 Five women teachers, to order the said hundred children in
spinning, kniting, or the like; in all, there will be need of these 11 officers.

2 What wages each officer to have yearly in a competent measure for the better
preservation of the Stock, and a hopeful carrying on of this good work.

li. d. s. 1 The Stewards Salary, besides his lodging, 50 0 0 2 The
Schoolmasters Salary, with his loding, 20 0 0

And if this be thought too little, allow him so much Serge as will make him a
Suit and Cloak of the childrens spinning, which will be a good help to him.

li. d. s. 3 The Cook or Sutler his Salary, 12 0 0

And the benefit of selling bread and beer to the work-peopl, etc.

li. d. s. 4 The Botcher his Salary 6 0 0 5 The Cobbler his Salary, 4 0 0 6 The
Barber his Salary, 3 0 0 7 The 5 women 5 li. a piece Salary, comes to 25 0 0
120 0 0

Besides, if every woman may be allowed a penny out of every shilling the
children earn by spining, kniting, or other work, this will not only be a
means to stir up the children, to make them quick-handed, but also the
Teachers, and the Corporation will both gain by it, for the better preserving
the stock for the good of the City; as for example, The five women having 20
children a piece to govern, If each woman after a while, can by her industry
and care, bring her 20 children to earn 12 d. a week a piece, this will bring
to the Teacher 20 d. per week, but when the children come to earn 18 d. per
week, then it will be 2 s. 6 d. per week, which amounts unto yearly 6 li. 10 s.

So that with the allowance of the Corporation 5 li. per annum, with her own
care and industry to forward the children, will amount yearly to 11 li. 10 s.

Consider, if the Corporation allow a competent maintenance to every Officer,
they shall be sure not to want an officers or Teacher, when any dye or be
removed, for peopl will sue for an office in the Workhouse, as Parents sue
yearly to get their children in Christ-church Hospital; besides, after a few
years, the Corporation will have Teachers of their own trayning up, to serve
their occasion when ever they need.

Having shown the total of all the Salaries, for all the Officers amounting to
yearly 120 li.

3 I come now to speak of the charg of diet for the 100 children, this will be
a thing uncertain, because all the whole 100 children may not be at the charge
of the Corporation for thee meals a day, whether they be strangers or
inhabitants, for that were to bring a vast charge upon the Corporation and
City; and if the Corporation should entertain all that come East, West, North,
and South, they should have ten strangers for one Parishioner, I beleev it is
not so intended by them, but rather the livelihood they appoint, is for such
children that are in the Parish where the Workhouse is, or such Parishes
adjoining near, or about the Workhouse, viz. such children who have neither
Father, nor friend; but the Parishes, and they ought to be the Fathers to them
to provide for them, and such children must have three meals a day, and lodging
with it.

Another sort of poor children there are, who are the children of poor widows,
or poor Parents, who are so poor they are not abl to pay for their childrens
Schooling 3 d. or 4 d. per week, much les to find them victels, but are
enforced to send them, to beg bread, and pottage, or what they can for their
livelihood, such as these also to have some allowance three times a day, except
on public fast days, they going home to their Parents for lodging.

There is another sort of poor children, whose Parents are very poor, yet they
send not their children a begging, yet they fare very hard, scarce eat a piece
of meat throughout the year, whose fare for the most part is bread and pottage,
and roots in Winter, and herbs in Summer, or Raddishes, and Salt, with a piece
of bread, without Butter or Cheese, and their drink for the most part, fair
water from the Pump, and yet blessed be God, tho the fare be mean, yet they are
long livers and healthy.

These poor peopl if their children might be allowed one meal a day, and their
childrens teaching, they would acknowledge it a mercy from God, so to put it
into the hearts of good peopl, to provide for poor children, and others.

I come now to speak of the allowance of three meals a day, and the charg of
it, beginning with the Winter season, because then provision is deerer then
Summer.

1 For breakfast in Winter 3 ounces of household bread, a mess of pottage, and
half a pint of drink.

The charg of this meal is about a ob.

2 For Dinner, 5 ounces of bread, a pint of beer, a mess of pottage, made
sometimes of meat, sometimes of milk, and sometimes water-grewel, one herring,
or that quantity in other fish, with a Turnip with it, to qualify the saltness
of it.

The charg of this meal will be about 1 d. ob.

3 For Supper, 4 ounces of bread, half a pint of beer, one Hering with a
Turnip, and sometimes broth in cold weather.

The charg of this is about ob. q

By this we find, that the charg of three meals a day, amounts to 2 d. ob. q
this will be the most, if these three things be considered, for the improvement
of diet.

1 If the Fishing trade for the City of London be carried on by the Parliament
and the City, some pious persons with 600 l. stock, will undertake to bring
from Sea, fish monthly for the relief of the poor at the Workhouse, which will
much ease the Corporation, and the charg will not be so great as to buy all at
London. Furthermore if a quantity of London Busses may be set out by the
Parliament and City, the rich and poor in and about London would fare the
better by it.

2 If we may buy one time with another ordinary wheat at 6 s. per Bushel, we
may allow a child 12 ounces of bread for a penny that is 3 for breakfast, 5 for
dinner, and 4 for supper, with other things with it, all which amounts unto
each day except public Fastdayes 2 d. ob. ^o. By the week it amounts to 1 s. 7
d. q. By the year about 4 li. 3 s. 6 d

3 Some years we may buy Wheat for 3 s. and 4 s. per Bushel, which now worth 7
s. or 8 s. per Bushel, so that when it is a cheap year of Corn, and our own
industry and labor (all hands working) for carrying on the fishing trade, we
shall be abl by Gods blessing to find our children food at a cheaper rate then I
have set down.

Consider if one child's dinner cost 1 d. ob. which is for the whole week 10 d.
ob. as well Sabbath days as others, for so I hope the Corporation do intend to
do, that so all boys and girls that come to School or work, may be kept under
government on the Sabbath days, as I said before, from rambling abroad.

Reckon then if one child cost for one meal a day by the week

10 d. ob What will the charg be for the year 2 li. 5 s. 6 d. Then reckon for
50 children a year is 113 li 15 s. Consider then, 50 children 3 meals per day,
amounts to by the year about 227 li 10 s.

Now reckon the charg of 100 childrens diet, as well those 50 that are to have
but one meal a day, as those that are to have 3 meals a day, and see what the
whole charg amounts unto.

Their charg of diet amounts unto yearly about 341 li. 5 s. The Officers Salary
amounts to yearly 120 li. In all it comes to 461 li. 5 s.

Here is the whole charg laid down in as low a manner as may be in Christian
charity, as well for the smalness of the wages for the officers, as the
littlenes of the meals for the children; and tho the allowance be small, yet it
will be a great refreshment to many a poor child, for nature is content with
littl, and grace with less. Also the contributors to this good work may see the
care of the Corporation is so much for the good of the City, that they would
competently refresh the poor, and not wast and lavish the stock; but that this
charitabl work may be held up for ages, by Gods blessing, and good men's
endeavor.

Upon the prosperity of the fishing trade, for the better ease of the charg of
diet, if children eat fish 4 times a Week; that is, on Mundays, Wednesdays,
Fridays, and Saturdays, and meat on Sabbath days, and Thursdays. A quarter of a
pound of Beef for a child is the allowance of Christ's Church Hospital to their
children; and on Tuesdays a little dumpling or pudding, a fare that most
children delight in; and this note, if children be refresht in Winter with 7
meals for 10 d. ob. in Summer, provision is cheaper.

4 Particular, What profit these 100 children will bring in weekly by their
labor toward this great charg.

Suppose after 2 or 3 months teaching, by the care of the Teachers, the
children may be brought to earn 12 d. per week a child, one with the other,
viz. some children, tho in 2 or 3 months teaching cannot earn 12 d. per week, by
reason they are dull, and heavy handed, yet others being quick-witted, and
nimble-handed, may earn above 12 d. per week, so that one with the other, they
may earn 12 d. per week or more.

Reckon if 100 children by their labor, earn 12 d. per week one with the
other, it amounts to per week, 5 li. and 5 li. per week, by the year amounts to
260 li.

The charg of Officers, and diet, being yearly 461 li. 5 s. The loss is yearly
201 li. 5 s.

Consider then, when the children come to earn 18 d. per week or more, the loss
will not be so great; but put the ease the Corporation should lose 200 li.
year, yet the Church of God, and the Commonwealth will gain by it, but he that
seeks his own interest above the honor of God and the Commonwealth, shows
himself to be no true friend to God, nor the Commonwealth; therefore I counsel
all peopl hy and low to their uttermost, advance the honor of God, and the good
of the Commonwealth, lest they fall and perish, as many great men have done of
late; for it is dangerous when God and a Commonwealth, eyes a man as no friend to
them.

The work of well-ordering the poor is a rare work, and by it three excellent
things will be produced, toward a good Reformation.

1 Gods honor will be set up, when that that is good is advanced.

2 The peopl of God will rejoice, when sin in children and others is beat down.

3 The poor children will have a benefit by it, because thereby they are like
to be made serviceabl for the Commonwealth; otherwise, they will be as thorns in
the sids of the Nation; wherefore I rejoice when I see great men in hy places to
have pious hearts, and public spirits, such persons God, and a Nation will
stand for, against all their enemies, and he will make their enemies to be at
peace with them.

But as for such that are enemies to this good work, either by opposing it in
their words, and works, or by starving it with their poor and small charitys, I
fear God has a curse for them here, or a woe for them hereafter, When Christ
shall say, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil, and it
is angels: And Christ will say to such, Inasmuch as ye have not don it to the
poor, ye have not don it to me: Such opposers of charitabl good works, when
they shall com upon their deathbeds, they will then wish they had given half
their estates with Zacheus, that they could then obtain the love of a Christ,
and the happiness of a Zacheus, that salvation might com unto their house, as
it did unto his; therefore I wish all rich men that desire to obtain the love of
a Christ, to make their hands and their eyes, their first executors, because
their last executors may deceive them, as some have don.

Consider, if children are kept under government and employment, they are the
fitter for Tradesmen, and others, and so thereby, made serviceabl to the
Commonwealth, so that the loss of 200 l. is the preserving of 100 children from
ruin: therefore we conclude, if the City of London should lose 1000 l. per
annum in this work, yet they would gain by it, in the preservation of 500
children, and more; for if children are not kept under a government, they will
in time grow to a generation of ungodly wretches, having no fear of God before
their eyes, and so become a dishonor to God, and a burden to the Commonwealth.

Therefore let us judge seriously, which will be the greatest loss, either money
or peopl to a Commonwealth? viz. whether 500 children should perish yearly,
rather then the City of London should lose 1000 l. over and above their other
common charity?

If ungodly, uncharitable muck-worms should say, we had rather see 500 children
beg and starve yearly, rather then the City of London should lose 1000 l.
yearly toward poor childrens education and relief; I would say to such
unchristian like peopl, as St. Peter said to Simon Magus, thy money perish with
thee; so say I, let their money perish with them, rather then poor souls should
perish for the want of so small a portion of food for a meal, as I have set
down before.

And whereas the loss of 200 li. arises in the dyeting of 100 children, if
these ensuing helps may be gained; the loss will then be very little, which is
by way of gathering from Bakers and others, who give bread one or two days a
week constantly to the poor at their doors, but if the poor of the workhouses
might have it, they would rather give it there. For I understand there are many
honorable and rich persons in and about London are resolved to give no more at
their doors, since they have heard of a Corporation appointed to regulate the
poor by work, and other good government, therefore as Christ said. Take up the
fragments that nothing be lost. I believe the practice of this will save the
City of London, 500 l. per annum or more, otherwise it will be lost.

As I have spoken of the officers and their salleries, so I desire to show what
is the chief work of a Steward to do, and what the Schoolmasters work is,
and the Cook or Suttlers is,

1 The Stewards work is, to keep books of accounts, one book is, what he
receives from the Treasurer, either monys, or materials received from the
public store house, appointed by the Corporation, for the laying in of wool,
hemp, flax, etc.

The second Book is, what commodities are delivered out, to work-people in the
house, or abroad.

3 Book is, for the commodities received when it is wrought.

4 Book is, to take notice of what loss was in any pounds of wool, hemp, flax,
or cotton wool, as well in weight as tale, this will be a means to prevent
stealing and carelesnes, such losses the workers to make good, besides the
allowance, some masters allow one ounce in the pound loss in childrens work.

2 His care is to see to the house, that it be swept and washed, and kept clean
and wholesome, when the Corporation or strangers come into it, to see the people
at work.

3 His care to see the Instruments belonging to the work people, that they be
preserved, and if any hap to be brok, or out of order to see them repaired, and
to buy such things as the Corporation shall appoint.

These are the chiefest things the Steward is to perform, for the honor of the
work.

The office of the Schoolmasters is,
1 To pray with the people once a day at least. 2 To teach the children to read
and write, 2 hours in a day, one in the forenoon, the other in the afternoon,
the rest of the day to work 3 To read the laws and orders at certain times to
the children, to the end they may know how to walk before God and men, for the
law read, is a terror to mild children, and such will reproov others that are
more stuborn, saying I will tell my Master, because you did swear, or you did
this or that evil, contrary to the Laws of the workhouse, these words falling
from the child will daunt the reprooved. 4 To exercise those gifts, God has
given him, on the Sabbath days, by prayer, reading of Chapters, and Sermons, as
aforementioned, and catechizing the children, by this means the streets and
fields will be cleared of many idle children who now spend their days in
wickedness, to the dishonor of God, and the disgrace of this City, and Common
wealth.


When God shall be pleased to bring this Government, then rich and poor,
affected with goodness shall say, Happy art thou O England in this thy
Reformation, and blessed be thy God for it.

3 The office of the Cook or Sutler, to provide such provision for the children
as the Corporation shall appoint.

1 By taking care, that all such provision that shall be given weekly by well
disposed people, for the comfort of poor children, whether it be Bread from
Bakers, Beer and Broth from Taverns Innes, and others, or what else any shall
provide, for the maintenance and upholding this good work.

2 For his better livelihood, that he provide Bread and Beer, and such like for
the comfort of poor people that work in the house, for they will be glad to
have it nigh them, that they may not be hindered of their work: besides, the
having of it by small quantities, farthings and half penny worths, as they
have need.

These are the chiefest things, that these three officers are to act, for the
glory of God, the honor of the Corporation, and the comfort of the poor, that
none may perish for want of bread, as many have done of late; witness some
about Westminster that lived upon Dogs and Cats these deer and hard times;
others upon Beasts blood and Brewers grains boiled together, and the poor
woman that killed her child, and dyed for it the last Sessions 1649. upon her
examination, she confessed extreme need and fear of famine occasioned it.

To conclude, for the better releife of the poor, it was well observed of one,
who said, that England had many hundred of Acres of waft and barren lands, and
many thousands of idle hands, if both these might be improved, England by Gods
blessing would grow to be a richer Nation then it is now by far.

A Parliament power would do much toward this work, to make it general
throughout the Nation, by causing all planting of Tobacco to be thrown down in
England, which is a hinderance to the poor Englishmen beyond the Seas, and a
wrong to the custom, if they sell it in other Countries for want of vent here,
that such lands may be employed in sowing Hemp, and Flax, and Roots, and
planting of trees for fruit and fuel, all which would be a great succor to the
poor, as well to employ them, as relieve them; the Parliament have intentions
to make this good work of employing and releiving the poor, generally
throughout the Nation. The great God of heaven is able to make them to act and
perform it for a general good.

FINIS.
April 12. 1650. Imprimatur, John Downam.


