A Glimpse of Divine Light, BREAKING THROUGH A Cloud of Errors. BEING An
explanation of certain Passages exhibited by Anonymus, to the Commissioners of
White Hall, appointed for Approbation of public Preachers, against Joseph
Harrison Gospel-Preacher at Lund-Chappel IN LANCASHIRE, For the supposed
delivering of which, he was denied Approbation. Published by the said JOSEPH
HARRISON, and proposed to the consideration of all them that love our Lord
Jesus Christ in sincerity.

ACTS 24.13, 14, 15. Neither can they approve the things whereof they now
accuse me, But this I confess unto thee, that after the way which they call
Heresy; So worship I the God of my Fathers, Believing all things that are
written in the Law and the Prophets, and have hope toward God, which they
themselves also allow. London, Printed for N. Brook, and are to be sold at the
Angel in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange, 1655.

To my Christian Friends and Acquaintance in the County of LANCASTER, More
especially the Church-meeting at LUND near Preston in ANDERNES. Grace and Peace
from God the Father, and Jesus Christ our LORD.
Beloved in the Bowels of Jesus,
AS there has always been a reluctance upon my spirit, whiles seeking for
approbation from men: so have I always perceived a reluctance upon the spirits
of men, when about to grant me that which is so ordinary a favor. And though I
will not say it made them more scrupulous how they approved: yet certainly it
made me less scruple at their Non-approval, because, I needed not (as some
others) either Epistles of commendation unto you, or letters of commendation
from them; you were our Epistle written in our hearts, known and read of all
men. 2 Cor. 3.2, 3. Nevertheless (as occasion has been offered) I always
desired it. 1. That I might live peaceably amongst, and keep a correspondency
with the neighboring Ministers, and not separate for circumstance, so long as
we agreed in the substance of the truth. 2. That (while providence made way) I
might not be chargeable (though I feared not my being troublesome) to any of
you. 3. The maintenance allotted to the place at which I usually preached, and
near unto which I was born, did arise (as some of you know) from within the
Precincts and Borderies thereof; and the people were generally willing, and
freely petitioned, that it might be disposed off to me rather than to
strangers, that exercised at places far remote, and yet with all earnestness
solicited for it, This last general call (in obedience to which, I with many
others crowded up to London) cannot possibly but have been heard of by every
one of you, And my desire is, that you should truly know, what was upon my
heart before, and in reference to my going thither; what entertainment I found
there, and how it comes to pass, that you are now presented with, and invited
to peruse, an explanation of these (Scarce intelligible) passages.

I was not freer in my spirit to seek for approbation now, than i^ the days of
old; nor did I expect these in commission now, to be any freer in granting (to
such as me) than men entrusted by men with the like power, had formerly been.
Though I profess, 1. That I honor some of the present Commissioners exceeding
highly for their works sake; and am glad (as well for their sakes as the quiet
of my own mind) that providence so ordered things, that they were not present
at this Transaction, nor did sit to vote concerning me. Tender hearted
Christians might perhaps have been troubled at themselves afterward, least
they had offended some of the little and despised ones. 2. I could not be
persuaded of so much as an intended opposition from, or by the brethren of the
Classis in the County of Lancaster, because I knew 1. That the Grandees of that
party had refused for these four years last past, to observe either the public
days of fasting or thanksgiving appointed by the State; And I did not think men
of that zeal and spirit, would strain their consciences, and make use of that
power (no not if they had been assured thereby to promote their own catholic
cause) which they had so lately refused (merely out of conscience) either to
pray or give thanks for according to 2 Timothy 2.1.2. Their own consciences might
tell them, that though they always have the happ to get and keep, that which
is by them called the honor of maintenance: yet men as disputable as I in
their account, deserved countenance from the powers that be, as well as they.
3. Neither I, nor any friend of mine (that I heard of) ever harmed any of them
either in their persons or estate; And though they were guilty, A vindication
of the answer to the Queries lies by me in scattered sheets: the publishing
called for, and at hand.
(as many reported) not only of delivering (as is pretended against me) but of
acting some Illegal and Antinomian Passages; yet were they passed by in
silence; no advantage taken, nor information posted up against them. 4. My
conversation (to say no more of that) these very men have not excepted against,
and the points wherein I seemed to differ from them, whether in doctrine,
worship, or discipline, have been so fully discussed in writing, and pillars of
that party so far engaged upon that account, that I deemed it inconsistent
with the ingenuity of the men, either to fetch Arguments from Carters Topics,
or with Mr. Baxter, in a passion sure, to Querie about the extent of the 38.
Article of our late Charter. Reply to Crand. page 43.
5. I was not conscious to my self of any point of doctrine maintained or
published by me, that differed really from the Christian Religion contained in
the Scriptures, and held forth as the public profession of this Nation. And
therefore as the Law is good, so if used lawfully, I saw not wherein possibly I
could be judged a Transgressor of it; But contrary to my expectation, letters
were written to a Brother, or Brethren in London. These passages sent up in
that form, and in those very words at they are presented to you in the
following page: And the minds of the Commissioners, so far as some of these
men's Interests could prevail (for I speak not of them all) exasperated and
prejudiced against me. But to say no more of that. The method and manner of
their proceedings with me was briefly this, and thus.

At after ten days tedious attendance, I had the favor to be called in, and
was then honored with the presence of a full Committee: my certificate never
questioned, nor any Querie proposed to me to try my knowledge and utterance: or
discover whether the grace of God was in me of a truth. But the passages
following were distinctly read twice over; I was required to answer yea or nay,
as to the matter of fact, had liberty to speak what I thought meet in order
thereunto, commanded to withdraw, recalled at after a short pause, and heard
the sentence of a Non posse approbare: scilicet, That the Brethren had
consulted together, and could not grant the one of those printed papers (which
yet were so common, that four hundred at least had gotten of them) called an
Approbation. One of the Commissioners who appeared (as to me) more respective
and ingenuous than any of the rest, was pleased at after this to offer. 1. A
reference into the country for examination of things before witnesses (as to
the matter of fact) if I conceived my self wronged, and did desire it. 2. A
liberty (as I apprehended) to answer those passages in writing, and present it
to the Commissioners, unto the latter I said nothing. In order to the first I
answered: that for ought I knew, the men in our country that were best known
to them, and to whom I should be referred were my professed adversaries; to
which the Gentleman replied, that I might leave the choice of persons for the
discharging of that duty wholly unto them. Whereupon I desired a copy of the
passages, and time to consider, both which were granted. And upon
consideration, I did not think it meet to accept of the first offer. Because 1.
The letters of Reference (since granted to neighboring Ministers) were
commonly directed to those I took to be the Informers themselves, assisted with
some of their own brethren, and collected from that, compared with the
entertainment I had already found; That this sort of men, had such an influence
upon, and were of that repute with the Commissioners, that it was not possible
for them to account me any other than an evil Doer. They answered and said unto
him, if he had not been an evil doer, we would not have delivered him up unto
thee. Ioh. 18.30.2. I am willing to submit to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake: yet it suited not with that Christian wisdom and frame of Spirit
the Lord has given me, to desire and petition for orders of this nature, or
voluntarily to put such a cause as this upon trial before the Judges qualified
in such manner as I conceive them to be. 3. If it be possible, as much as lies
in me, I desire to live peaceably with all men, and therefore seeing they have
smitten me on the one cheek, and taken away my cloak, which they knew to be the
Summum jus, or utmost that could be done (by virtue of any Law or Ordinance yet
in force) it was upon my heart to follow Christ's counsel, even offer them the
other, and not forbid them to take away my coat also. If the quiet enjoying of
the unrighteous Mammon will make them my friends, I love them so well as not to
suffer them to incur any further guilt by continuing my enemies. And not the
latter; for 1. I freely and publicly delivered my judgment upon some of the
passages (instead of returning my yea or nay) which was so stumbled at by the
Commissioners, that I thought my Writing would give no satisfaction at al, but
more offend. 2. Though when called, I was willing to submit my parts and gifts,
and my life and conversation, or any thing I can call mine, to the credit of
Commissioners empowered by the State: yet the doctrine I preach, being such as I
cannot call mine own, I dare not submit it to the vote of any man on earth:
unless they could make it out that they have their Commission immediately from
Jesus Christ. 3. I knew my self unable to answer De facto, to all or any of
these passages, which I conceived would be chiefly, if not solely expected. For
first, I took no notes in writing of any Sermon preached by me for this eight
years last past, and if I had, yet these being (as the Informers well call
them) merely passages, not positions or conclusions, it is not likely that I
should have booked any of them, 2. It is (so far as I can learn from others, or
collect by circumstances) three years and a half at the least, since the
Sermon was preached; in which it is pretended that these passages were
delivered, and I have not so well studied the Art of memory, as to recollect
passages of so old a date. Nor can I hear that any of those hundreds that were
present at that public meeting (except only these Informers) remember that I
delivered any such; or can punctually call to mind any form of words then used;
save the text it self, Romans 10, 6, 7.3. Though the passages, as here presented
without any thing consequent or antecedent sound somewhat harsh; And those that
know me best, can scarce think that I should be so spermalogical, or
egregiously act the part of a babbler as (ipsis terminis) to deliver any such:
Yet do I so clearly discern several precious truths latent in, obscured by, and
struck at through this mist of words; that though I cannot own the words
themselves simply considered: yet can I not disown the things hinted at by
them, without making shipwreck of faith and a good conscience.

And hereupon I did resolve to write an explanation of these passages: that so
I might (according to the measure of light and grace received) 1. Vindicate
clear and free those truths of Christ, which I looked upon as contemned,
darkened, and here imprisoned through the unrighteousness of men. 2. That such
scruples and Queres might be removed, as may hereby have been cast into your
minds, and disquieted the peace of your spirits. 3. That I might discharge mine
own conscience, and leave with you a reason of the hope that is in me; for the
conviction, if not satisfaction, of all such as shall ask for, or expect it.

And now (my brethren) I hope I need not in the close of all to put in one
caveat more against my self, and tell you what so many say, and you your selves
already know, Scil. that I am a man not only subject to the like, but more
passions and infirmities, than other men. Yet however let me mind you, that
though I profess, I neither speak nor writ any thing but what I believe to be
a truth; yet dare I not believe that all is true that I do speak and write, nor
do I think it safe either for you or me to adhere to any expressions, or form
of words whatsoever: but such as the holy men of God have left upon record who
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost: Sine verbo Dei temerarium est
asserere quod videtur nobis bona consequentia trahi, says Luther, It is a
rashness to assert without the word of God that which seems to us to be
drawn from it by good consequence. And hence I much admire the greatness of
the Beam, that is in some men's eyes. Daring to condemn others for asserting a
perfection practical, when they themselves practice toward others, Reply to
Mr. Blake, page 49.
as if they were infallible in their judgments. I confess says Baxter) I was
well acquainted with the Genius of many of my reverend and newly honored
brethren. I thought that no godly man would have taken himself wronged, if a
man told him he had error, no more than to tell him he had sin. I took it for
granted, that Humanum est errare, and that we know but in part: and that
sanctifying grace had so far destroyed pride, and made the soul apprehensive
of its imperfections, that at least men of eminent godliness, could have
endured patiently to hear that they are not omniscient nor infallible: and that
they have some ignorance with their eminent knowledge, and why not in these
points as well as others. Try therefore all things, and hold fast that which is
good. And with those noble Bereans, search the Scriptures daily, whether these
things be so. Know no man after the flesh, and though you hear others say, they
are resolved to think the worse, and that doubtless it is a Jesus of Nazareth,
and not of Jerusalem, that is here held forth: yet do not you say, that you are
resolved to think the better of what is written: because you know who it is
that writ it: nor yet be ye afraid of their terror, or drawn aside by the
excellency of their speech or wisdom, from the simplicity of the truth: But
look up unto God and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up etc.
Accounting, as I always preach, Christ Jesus the Lord, and me

SCALES, Aug. 18. 1654. Your Servant for Jesus sake, JOSEPH HARRISON.

Certain Passages concerning Mr. Harrison, Preacher at LUND Chapel in the
County of Lancaster.
Concerning the above named Mr. Harrison, he has in a public Assembly
delivered these Passages following,
1. HEarken not to the letter which says labor, but look for the Spirit to
work. 2. The Law was not given to an unconverted people; but to a converted. 3.
I can preach that which John Baptist could not: nay Christ in the flesh
preached not. 4. Repentance is a not saying in thy heart, Do this, that is,
this or that Commandment of God. 5. There are two sorts of people: First the
uncalled, to them only preach the Gospel: Secondly the called, to them preach
good works. 6. But is it not good for a man to do all that he can? viz. in way
of obedience to Gods Commandments? Answer. The sum of all the Commandments is
that of the Sabbath: Now to a christian, the Sabbath is to cease from his own
works, working according to a form, or letter. 7. Christians when they glory,
glory in their sins. 8. Righteousness or good works, are to be done by me: but
they are not profitable to me, but to others.
The first passage, Hearken not to the letter which says labor, but look for
the spirit to work.
THis passage, though for the form Adversative, yet does not the position of
the consequent necessarily remove the Antecedent: For (if ever delivered)
whether by way of dehortation or Inhibition, it does not in its natural bent
restrain a toto but tali; not from a Hearkening to the letter at all, but from
such a carnal Hearkening to the letter (which says to us Labor) as is
destructive to, or exclusive of an Evangelicall looking for the Spirit to work,
and in effect amounts to no more than this, Hearken not ( Scilicet, exclusively
in the sense aforesaid) to the letter which says Labor; But even then (while
so hearkening) look for the Spirit to work, which Christ has promised.

Letter may be taken, either largely for the whole book of Scriptures, or more
strictly and properly for the Law of Moses, so eminently lettered in tables of
Stone, 2 Cor. 3.7.

And then 2. the letter, or this Law, may be taken either materially for the
substance of what is there required, or formally under the notion of a covenant
as then dispensed by Moses. 3. By hearkening may be meant, either a mere
Attentionall hearing or listening with the ear, or a harkening which Includes
an (...) and is obedientiall. 4. Looking for the Spirit, may be interpreted
either of a fantastical, opiniative, groundless looking, or of a
Christian-like looking for the Spirit in faith, bottomed upon the promise. And
now,

1 If by letter be understood the Scriptures or writings of the Old Testament
and the New, The word is an Instrument of Gods Spirit, not cooperative, but
passive, working only per modum objecti, as it contains a Declaration of the
divine will, and it proposes to the understanding and will the things to be
known, believed and practiced.

Blake of covenants, Sec. 20. out of Mr. Pemble: Grace and faith. vbi vid. et
Kend. answer to Goodwin. cap. 4 page 163.

The power of the spirit does not work upon the word, to put life into it, but
it works upon our souls to put life into them. Pemb. Vind. p. 122.


then 1. Christians are, and it is profitable for them to Hearken, search into,
read and meditate therein, 2 Pet. 1.19. Acts. 17.11. 1. Tim. 4.13.

2 If holds forth the Credenda et facienda, whatsoever is necessary to be
believed and done by Christians. Ioh. 20, 31. 2 Timothy 3.15.16.17. And yet 3.
Christians are not to look upon, or Hearken to the letter as able either to
discover to, or work in them what it holds forth, and requires of them, or
upon themselves as able either to understand or conform thereunto; But
acknowledging the letter, in regard of the things signified to be spiritual,
Romans 7.14. and themselves in regard of their own powers to be altogether
carnal, 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 7.14.18. they are to look up unto God by faith in
Christ for the Spirit of promise, not only to reveal to, but in their minds,
to work in them, not only to will but to do, what is outwardly and objectively
represented to them in the letter, John. 16.13. Luke. 24.45. Phi. 2.13. Gal.
1.16. For 4. as the Scriptures are not tho life, but testify the life to be in
Christ, and the great sin therein condemned (even by Moses) is not coming unto
Christ for the life, John. 5.39.46. So the letter is not that which enlivens or
changes the heart, but witnesses that to be done by the Spirit it self. 2,
Cor. 3, 6. And the great sin against the letter (even of the Gospel) is looking
for it or for self, and not for the Spirit of Christ to work accordingly as
there is promised, See John 6.63. 2 Cor. 3.3.

2, If by the letter be understood the law taken materialiter, or that which is
held forth by Christ, and the Apostles to be the sum and fulfilling of the
Law: as love to God and to our neighbors, Romans 13.8, 11. and worshipping of
God in spirit and in truth, John 4.23 24. Then first Christians as they are to
hearken unto, so really they are to delight in this law of God after the inward
man, Romans 7.22, It is written in their hearts and put into their minds, Heb.
8.10. They are taught of God to love one another. 1 These. 4.9. They are
circumcised from confidence in the flesh for this very end, Scilicet, That they
may worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus 3. Phi. 3. And yet
2, Christians are to look for the spirit in faith, to strengthen them with
might in the inward man, Ephesians. 3.16. And whereas thirdly, They find a law in
their members, warring against the law of their minds; and that though to will
be present with them, yet how to do that which is good they know not, they are
to pray continually, that the God of peace will sanctify them wholly 1 These.
5, 23. and that through the Spirit they may mortify the deeds of the body.
Romans 8.13.

Thirdly, If by the Letter be understood the Law taken Formaliter, Dispensed by
Moses Sub ratione foederis, vind. leg. page, 142. The doctrine I will insist upon
is this, that the Law was delivered by God on mount Sinai in a covenant way
page 220
for as a law (says Mr, Burgess) it was Adams, Abraham's etc. then though
Christians may hear, read, speak of, and hearken to the letter which says
labor, and it may be but useful in diverse respects as is hereafter shown: yet
are not Christians bound to an (...), or obedientiall hearkening thereunto, as
when it says unto them labor upon that account: but they are to hearken to
the word which is nigh them, even in their mouths and in their hearts, That is
the word of faith which we preach, and to look for the Spirit in faith to
work in them through the ministry of the Spirit all such effects as Christ
has purchased, and the Father has promised in that new covenant, of which the
Man Christ Jesus is the everlasting Mediator.

The Antecedent of this position, which is Negative, is evident: for first the
Apostle opposes the Letter or law, as dispensed by Moses, unto the word of
Faith or doctrine of the Gospel which we preach, and dehorts from an
obedientiall hearkening unto that, and exhorts to a hearing and Cordial
believing of this, as holding forth Christ the end thereof for righteousness
and salvation to every one that believes, Romans 10.4.5.6, 8.9, Secondly. We are
not under the law but under grace. Romans 6.14. I through the Law am dead to the
Law, Voluit dicere legem nobis esse mortuam, et sic nos ejus jure selutos:
Sicut mulier mortuo marito ejuslege liberatur: sed videtur rationem habere
Iudaeorum ne tali sermon hos offendat quanqua id ipsum recte dicet verse 6.
Pareus in Romans Cap. 7 verse 4.
that I might live unto God, Gal 2.19. We are become dead to the Law by the
Body of Christ, that we should be married to another, even to him who is raised
from the dead, we are delivered from the Law, that being dead, wherein we were
held, Romans 7.46. Thirdly, The binding of Christians to obey this Law, renders
Christ unprofitable to them: for circumcision did it not simply (for if so,
doubtless Timothy should not have been circumcised by any consent of Paul) but
because it was looked upon as making them debtors to do the whole law, Gal.
5.2, 3, 4, and necessarily putting them under the curse for not doing of it.
Gal. 3.10.12. If it be granted that Christians are freed from the Damnatorie,
but not from the Mandatory power of the Law, and that the promissory being
accidental to a Law, this and the Directory essential, Then note 1. that the
question is not about a Law, but this Law; The law is complexum quid containing
in it command* and blessing and cursing; take command without blessing and
cursing and it is no more Law with Moses.

Ball. covenant page. 100.


nor what is essential to, or will make up the definition of a Law Politic,
but what is essential to, and will make up the Definition of the Mosaicall Law,
which was dispensed at Sinai, subratione foederis, and so not after the usual
manner of other Laws, And now if we believe Paul, and will not be so very
Logical as to deny Moses description to be a Definition; He describes the
righteousness which is of the Law, That the man which does these things shall
live by them, Rom, 10.5. And Paul proves that as many as are of the works of
the Law, are under the curse, Because it is written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things that are written in the book of the Law, to do
them, Gal, 3.10. He proposes these texts as containing the Sum and essentials
of Moses Law. And can no more be denied so to do (for ought I See) then that
of Genesis 12.3. cited Gal. 3.8, Nos igitur mortuos dicit legi and legem nobis,
quod eadem redit: nam mortuo altero conjugum nexus conjugij, utrinsque solutus
est set positamorte nostra ponitur etiam mors legis; quia lex nihil cum
mortuis, sed est ipsis mortua, hoc est nulla Par. vbi supra
to contain the Sum and essentials of the Gospel. Secondly, The Law is said
to be dead. Romans 7.2.6. But how dead, if both essential parts be united and in
their vigor? Can a man be said to be dead because he wants some Integrall
part, as a leg or Arm, So Long as the body and Soul, which are the
essentials; remain in union. Thirdly, Believers under the Old Testament were
freed from the Damnatory power of the Law, for they were blessed with faithful
Abraham, as well as believers now, Gal. 3, 9. But believers under the New
Testament, are freed from this Law or covenant, as believers under the Old
Testament were not, and therefore cannot their freedom be Interpreted of a
freedom from the curse or Damnatory power thereof, as is fully cleared by Mr,
Shephard, These, Those that say the law is abolished as it is faedus, but not as
it is regula, say true.

Burg. vind. legis p. 204.


Sab. part 1. page 73. they must therefore of necessity be said to be freed
from the obligatorie power of the Law; at least qua foedus; and if so, qua
dispensed by Moses, which is the point to be confirmed, Secondly, Christians
are to serve God, not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the newness of the
Spirit, Romans 7.6, whereas the Law or letter demands the service to be done in
the power of the old man, menaces death for the least failing therein, and is
disenabled either from accepting or rewarding any obedience unless so done.
Romans 8.4. For though it be not against the service done in the newness of the
spirit, Gal 5.23. any more than the satisfaction made by Christ in the flesh;
yet as this, so that is not exactly, Idem, the same there required, at least,
not done per eundem, by the same, though being spiritual and proceeding from
the spirit of Christ, it be really the tantidem the tantamounts, nay the
Supramounts and far more acceptable to the Father, who is both the Sovereign
over, and was the giver of the Law.

The consequence of this position which is affirmative is as plain. For first,
Christ has promised to send the Spirit. John. 16.8, And the Scriptures
plentifully declare both that and what he shall work when he is come Ezekiel.
36.27, nay what he has already wrought Gal. 5.22. And sure then Christians
should look for the spirit to work, and to work those very works in and upon
them in measure which are promised and have been wrought in others. Secondly,
Christians are encouraged to pray for the holy Spirit, Luke 11.13 and sure not
to be idle, but to work either by, in, or upon them: and shall they not look
for an answer to their prayers? Thirdly, Christians are exhorted (...) Phil.
2.12. to work their own salvation, That is ( as Chamier Interprets it from the
like phrase Genesis 2, Cham Tom. 3 lib. 4 cap. 8. Sect 13.
Rev. 18) to be employed, and work in those things which concern their own
salvation, with fear, as in the presence of God, and with trembling at the
sense of their own weakness and unworthiness, and that upon this ground,
because it is God that works in them etc. And if, though we be called upon
and said to work, It is indeed not so much we that work, as God that works
in us: shall we presume to set our selves to work in conformity to the
letter? and not firstly, nay continually in much weakness fear and trembling
look to and for God to work both the will and dead by his own Spirit? Totus
liber actorum nihil aliud agit quam quod vocet ex lege non dari spiritum
sanctum, sedexaudiru Evangelii Luth. loc: com: clas. 1. cap. 28.
And fourthly. Seeing we received not the spirit by the works of the Law, but
by the hearing of faith Gal. 3.2. we are to look for the spirit to work, not
by the ministry of the Law, which says labor; but by the word of faith or
doctrine of the Gospel. For (as Reynolds) The Law can only show what is good,
gives no power at all to do it, for that is the work of the Spirit by the
Gospel use of the law page. 388.

If any think that Christians are hereby set at liberty from all liberal
commands and shall never work, but when and as, and what the Spirit moves them,
let him consider, first. That there is a difference betwixt the commands of the
Law, or letter (strictly so called) which requires obedience (though Spiritual)
to be done in the power of the Old man which is carnal. And the commands of
Christ, or given by the Apostles in the Name of Christ, which calls for an
obedience Spiritual, but to be done in the power of the New man, which daily
fights against and mortifies the old. Christians may be set at liberty from
these, Act 15.20. And yet not set at liberty from, but in a liberty to walk
accordingly as is required by these. 2 Cor. 3.17.1 Ioh. 5, 3, Mat. 11.30.

Secondly, It were well if Christians did (but alas they do not) work either
so often, or in that manner and measure, nor always what the Spirit moves them
to, for first, The Spirit, or inward man where the Spirit dwells, is willing
(...) (as some read, Romans 12.11.) to do or suffer upon all occasions, Its the
flesh that's weak. Mat. 26.41. Paul found the Law of his mind warring against
the law of his members, Romans 7.23, 25. Paulus cos demu^ filios esse dei
pronnnciat, qui ejus spiritu aguntur, by agi proprio spiritu, Divino autem
vacuos esse volunt qui sint filii Dei, ille servos Christi. Calv Instit lib. 3
cap. 2. sect. 39.
And the Spirit against the flesh, as well as the flesh against the Spirit Gal.
5.17. To will was present with him, though how to do that which was good, he
found not, Romans 7, 18. Secondly, One of our great sins, reproved and complained
against, is quenching of the Spirit, 1. These. 5.19. Grieving and resisting the
Spirit. Ephesians, 4.30. Acts. 7.51. Genesis 7.3. Nay Christians as they live in the
Spirit, are exhorted to walk in the Spirit and assured thereupon, that they
shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh Gal. 5.16. Thirdly, The most liberal
legal men confess that they often resist the good motions of the Holy Spirit,
that Acti agunt, they act, when acted. That by the power of their Habitual
grace they cannot stir without the Antevening of some new exciting grace, and
that they attempt often to work in their own time which is the night, having
neglected Gods time, which is the day. Fourthly, Did Christians deny, (as
always they should, and the Grace of God teaches them, Tit, 2.12) to walk
after the flesh, See the explication of passage the 6 Answer to quere the 4.
they needed not labor, or work before the spirit, it were sufficient for
them to walk after it, Rom, 8.1. and with the rest of the Sons of God to be
bid by the Spirit of God Romans 8.14. to deny themselves, take up their present
crosses, and at his call follow him, not heeding the voice of strangers John,
10.4, 5, Thirdly, I do not hold that the Spirit of Christ does work in
Christians or carry them out to work any thing, but what is agreeable to the
directory and Mandatorie part of the Scriptures, nor that it does teach them to
believe any thing, but what is agreeable to the doctrine of the Gospel, as
recorded by the Prophets, and Apostles and do therefore, for the discovery
and prevention of false delusive spirits, often inculcate those sayings, If any
man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him acknowledge, that
the things that I write are the commandments of the Lord, 1 Cor. 14.37. To the
Law and to the Testimony if they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them. Isa. 8.20. Fourthly, Though I dare not limit
the Spirit that blows where it lists, unto means, as if it could not, or
often did not work without them; yet do I not despise prophesying, praying,
reading, conference etc. but look for the Spirit to work in and by all such
means as Christ has appointed, and the Apostles who received immediately from
him, have delivered unto us. For albeit, Fifthly, The Anointing, which the
Saints have received of him, abides in them, and they need not that any man
teach them other things than what that Spirit (by which they were at first
begotten through the Gospel) daily teaches them, yet is there need of speaking
and writing to, and Harkening and adhering unto what is written and spoken both
by fathers, young men, and little children, 1 John. 2.13. 2 These. 2, 15. Jude.
3. First, That Christians may be put in remembrance of these things though they
know them, and are already established in the present truth, 2 Pet. 1.12. or
once knew them, Jude. 5. Secondly, That they may be stirred up by being put in
remembrance. 2 Pet, 1, 13, Thirdly, To diswade them from the love of the world,
by representing the vanity thereof. 1 John. 2, 15, 16.17, Fourthly, For the
mutual comforting and confirming one another in the says, by manifestation of
the same truth, Rom, 1, 22, 1 John, 2, 21, Fifthly ly, For the discovery and
prevention of the Spirit of Ante-christ, which under a pretense of glorifying
and immediately communicating with the Father denies Jesus Christ to have come
in the flesh to take away sins, and our fellowship with the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ, contrary to 1 John, 1.2.3 and 2, 23, 4, 3, Sixthly, That
Christians may not be shaken in mind, or troubled either by Spirit, by word, by
letter, or by signs and wonders, telling, or foretelling such things as are
not recorded by the Apostles for our learning, upon whom the ends of the world
are come, 2 These, 2, 2, 3, 15.

The second passage. The Law was not given to an unconverted people, but to a
converted.
1. BY the Law may be understood either that covenant of works, as made with
Adam in Paradise, Stat igitur firmissimu^ primu^ nostrae theseos membrum.
precepta decalogi quatenus per Mosen tradita sunt Iudet ad gentes nihil per
tinere cum ad eos fuit missus

and.c. sic etium in signs Theologi omnes fentuint. Zanc, Tom. lib 1 page.223

Muscul in loc. com.


or that Legal Subservient Covenant, added to the promise, because of
transgressions, and ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator Gal. 3.19.
Secondly, By a converted people; may be understood, either only those that are
such Judicio certitudinis in a judgment of certainty, which only can be
passed by the Lord himself, He alone knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2.19. Or all
those that are such Judicio charitatis in a Judgment of charity, so far as
is meet for us to judge. Phi. 2.7. The Law taken in the first sense in its
primative Institution, cannot properly be said to have been given either to a
people converted, or unconverted, (those very terms presupposing the fall of
man) but to Adam in the state of Innocence, as the head, root and
representative of all mankind; as is evident from the event; Death having
passed upon all men, for that, or in whom all have sinned. Romans 5.12. The Law
taken in the latter sense was not given to the Gentiles, but to the Jews, a
circumcised people, a people that renounced the gods of the Heathens, and
visibly worshipped and called upon the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and by
consequence, so far as it is meet for us to judge, a converted people. And the
truth of this appears 1. From Gods own designation of the condition of that
people, There are some learned and sollid divines as Zen. (He and River many
Papist, as Snares and Medina which hold the law as delivered by Moses not to
belong to us
to whom he gave this Law, when as he calls them, and reminds them in the
preface, That they were by him brought out of the Land of Epypt, out of the
house of bondage: which agrees not with the condition of Pharaoh, or any that
stayed in the Land of Egypt, and house of bondage, or were else where scattered
upon the face of the earth: could he say to them, or any of them; Thee have I
brought out, and therefore thou shall have. etc?

Secondly, The Lord does not promise I will be the Lord thy God upon condition
that thou keep these commandments: sect Burg. 7 page. 57.
but declares absolutely to and of that people, to whom he gave the Law both in
the preface and in the five first commandments, that he actually and
Antecedently was the Lord their God. And now those expressions are used in
Scripture of no other people but the children of Israel only, whom he had
already taken into the covenant made with Abraham: the rest were accounted
Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of
promise, having not hope, and without God in the world. Ephesians. 2.11.

Thirdly, The Law upon Mount Sinai (as is confessed by all and is clear Exodus
19.) was given Sub Ratione foederis, under the notion of a Covenant. but no
other people entered into covenant but only the children of Israel. Moses came
and called for the elders of the people. etc. verse. 7. and all the people
answered together and said. etc. verse. 8. they answered for, and thereby
obliged, themselves and their children; but neither did they, nor could they
capitulate. or make any restipulation for the Gentiles whom they represented
not, nor were the Gentiles, nor any for them, called to such a stipulation as
is evident from verse. 3, 16.

Fourthly. The Law was but (...), a thing added to another, not set up as a
complete ordinance of, and by it self, and therefore must be extended no
further than that was, to which it was added as subservient; but that (
Scilicet, the promise) belongs only to Abraham and his seed, and not to the
rest of the world, and so by consequence did the Mosaicall law: and hence does
the Apostle say of the Jews to them belongs (...) the covenants Romans 9.4. And
of the Gentiles that they were strangers (...) to the covenants. Mr. Burgess
himself undertakes to prove no more but that though when God gave the ten
commandments fo the people of Israel, they were the present subjects to whom he
spoke yet he did intend an obligation by these law, not only udon the Jews,
but also all other Nations, that should be converted and embrace their
religion. Vind. lect 17. page 138.
Ephesians. 2.11. Fifthly, The Gentiles were made Proselites, and circumcised before
they were looked upon as obliged to, or by the Law of Moses; And hence Paul
lays it down for a general rule, and thereupon dehorts them from submitting to
circumcision. If any among you be circumcised, he is a debtour to do the whole
Law Gal. 5.6. Sixthly. The Scriptures hold forth the giving of the Law by Moses
as a special prerogative, and a peculiar privilege vouch-safed to the Jews,
and not to, other nations. I have written to them the Honorable things of my
Law, Hos. 8.12. He has not dealt so with any nation. Psalm, 47.19.29 When the
Gentiles which have not the Law, Romans 2.14. What advantage then has the Jews?
much chiefly, because unto them were committed the oracles of God. Romans 3.2.
And it is recko^ed amongst their other privileges, that unto the^ appertains
the giving of the Law. Romans 9.4. Seventhly. the Apostle writing to the
Christians at Rome, proves the Gentiles guilty of sin from the Law of nature
in the two first Chapters. And the Jews from the Law of Scriptures, Chap. 3.
from verse, the first to the 19. And that he might charge those sins home
upon the Jews (as the late English Annotatians observe) he adds verse, 19.
whatsoever the Law says ( Scilicet written) it says to them that are under
the Law; i. e. to the Jews, Leges non dantur extrani is sed in disenis leges
venetae non obligant Romano etc. Par iu Romans 3.19.
as is Generally agreed by commentatores.

Eighthly. The Law (says the same Apostle speaking of the Law which was
ordained by Angels. Gal. 3.19. and of himself and his Countrymen the Jews: as
appears from verse, 23, and the commutation of the persons, verse 26) was
(...) our Scholemaster, or (as Leigh) our child-leader which led us who were
children; and therefore not the Gentiles who were accounted as servants and not
of Abrahames seed, and only us while children And therefore not now being the
Sons of God by says in Christ Jesus verse. 25.26. it is no great danger to say
that the laws was abrogited as it was part of the matter of Moses law, the
parts falling with the whole, and the matter with with the from; not in
themselves and absolutely but tas, Part and as Phat matter Ca. p. to col.
Silvanus Tailor.
The Gentiles before conversion neither were nor are accounted (...) children.
And therefore not, to be looked upon as put by the father under their
paedagogie of the Law; And now at conversion they receive the spirit of
adoption and are Sons, and so freed from that suppositive bondage of the Law,
under which they should have come at that time, had not Christ by his death
redeemed them from it Gal. 4.6.17.

The third passage. I can preach that which John Baptist could not, nay Christ
in the flesh, preached not.
1. THe comparison, betwixt John Baptist and me, or any other, now a Gospel
Preacher, is not in respect of any personal worth, whether natural, acquired
or given, as if in any of these we did excel John Baptist and were thereby
enabled to preach that which he could not, nor in respect of the effects, and
powerfulness of preaching: for he went before him in the spirit and power of
Elias, he was filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mothers womb, many of
the children of Israel did he turn to the Lord their God. There cannot be
faith in a beast or stone, any more then there can be in them therefore reason
or the light of nature make man in a passive capacity fit for grace although he
has no active ability for it and when he is compared to a stone it is not in
the former sense but in the latter. Burg. Vind. page 70
Luke. 1.17. Nay he laid the Axe to the root of the Tree. Mat. 3.10. and feld
down the very generation of Vipers. He forced them to disclaim their legal
privileges, and righteousness, brought them to confess themselves sinners
(even as vile as beasts, and as unfit as Stones. Mat. 3.7.8.9.) And to be
washed in the same water with Publicans (whom they loathed) for Remission of
sins. But the comparison is in respect of the doctrine preached, and that not
because of any difference in the substance of doctrine, as if John had preached
one Jesus, and we another. No, for Jesus is the same, yesterday, to day and for
ever Heb. 13.8. But only in respect of some difference necessarily arising from
the circumstance of time, or the variation of the subjects condition in the
several times wherein we preach. He living before and we since that Hour of
Christ: whence we have the advantage to declare some things of, and concerning
Jesus, which John, during his time, could not. And now 1. The making of the
comparison is warranted by Christ himself, Verily I say unto you, among them
that are born of women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist:
notwithstanding he that is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he
Mat. 11.11. Here Christ compares John with those that went before him and the
least in the Kingdom of heaven (that is the ministry of the Gospel say the
English Annot) is compared with, and preferred before John. Secondly, See Engl,
Annet in Luke 7, 28,
That the matter of the comparison, or the thing wherein they are compared, is
their Doctrine (Differenced as is already said) appears. First, From that
consideration, in and upon which this excellency is ascribed to John above
those that went before him, which is (as Luke explaines) quatenus et quia; as,
and because of the eminency of his prophesiing: among those that are born of
women there is not a greater prophet than John Baptist: Luke. 7.28. that is,
that speaks so fully and clearly concerning Christ, as John does; For whereas
They did only praedicare venturum, foretell that he would come, Ille monstrabat
praesentem, He plainly told and pointed him out as already come. Behold the
Lamb of God. John 1.29. et quanto majore^ etc. as Pareus And by how much, and
in what sense he makes John, greater than the Prophets of old: by so much, and
in the same sense does he make the least of the preachers of the Gospel, more
excellent then John. So that they do not foretell with Daniel after seaventie
weeks, the most holy shall be Anointed to finish transgression, and to make an
end of sins and. Dan. 6.24. Nor tell with John that the Lamb of God is come
(...) which is taking away the sins of the world But Evangelize with Paul what
neither Daniel nor John could: Scilicet, that now once in the end of the world,
Christ has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. or
in Daniels word has finished transgression, made an end of sins, made
reconciliation for iniquity and brought in everlasting righteousness.
Secondly, From the unanimous consent of protestant Expositors who thus
Interpret the place, and clear it against the papists. Greater than John in
dignity of office, and clearenesse and fullness of Doctrine, in a publishing
the entire performance of all things foretold of Christ, as his Death, Parcus
in l^c,
Resurrection, Ascension, and Calling of the Gentiles; which John saw not.
English Annot And Thirdly, An occational using of this comparison cannot (so
far as I apprehend) be altogether deemed unseasonable in these days of ours,
any more than in the days of Christ; considering, that as the Jewish Doctors
would allow no clearer nor fuller discovery of the Messiah and his Kingdom,
than what had been made of old by Moses and the Prophets: So, many of the
Apostles and mighty Scripturall men in our Israel will allow (in effect) no
clearer nor fuller Gospel than what was preached by John: Scilicet That Christ
is come, and is taking away the sins of the world not that he is dead, or
rather risen again and has taken them away, Heb. 1.3 Nay some are not so
clear, but will needs make repentance continual Baptism, washing away sins
out of Gods sight, And that not Sacramental or Ratione signati, as baptism is
said to do, when dispe^sced by the minister: but instrumentally as a medium
(...) means used by Christians themselves: which is such a kind of washing as
(I believe) John Baptist never knew of. And had not such Doctors as these that
are so great in the kingdom, need of some little Aquila or Priscilla to pluck
them by the sleeves and expound unto them the way of God, more perfectly, Acts
18.26. Beza taught that he denied Jesus to be the Messiah: qui, in eo vno, per
vnicam ejus oblationem semel factam non confidit sese a deo patre gratis per
fidem Iustificatum, ac proinde tandem corpore et animo glorificandum. Beza in 1
John 222
But we that are least in the kingdom, may blot out justificatum, and instead
of glorificandum write justificandum, and yet (Sine operibus) it will not pass
for Orthodox and classical, with the Rabbis in our Northern Israel, Brethren I
am sure (if not nearer kin) to these Informers.

Secondly, This latter comparison (even as reported by these men) is not de
posse as if he that were least in the Kingdom of Heaven, could preach that
which Christ in the flesh could not. The very mention of this, sounds harsh to
Christians cares, neither can I say that in any sense its warrantable, and
edifying to make a comparison betwixt Christ and us: but only de facto that he
that's least etc. can preach that which Christ in the flesh, that is before his
death upon the cross, did not preach. Not as if he could absolutely preach
that or any thing else without Christ, no: for without him we can do nothing.
But suppositively in case Christ be pleased to strengthen and enlighten, him by
his Spirit, then he may do this and all other things as he shall be called
unto, And the truth of this is evident, For First, Christ while in the flesh,
never preached those grand Articles of the Christian, as distinguished from the
Jewish, faith: Scilicet, That he himself was crucified dead and buried,
descended into hell, rose again the third day from the dead and ascended into
heaven, which yet may now be triumphantly preached by him that is least in this
Heavenly Kingdom Romans 8.34. Secondly, Christ tells his disciples in his last
Sermon John. 16.12, 13.14, That he had many things to say unto them which he
forbear to declare at that time. First. because of their Infirmities, ye
cannot bear them now: Secondly because he purposed to send his holy Spirit to
comfort them after his departure Howbeit when the spirit of truth is come etc.
Thirdly because he knew this way of manifestation to make most for his own
glory. He shall glorify me for he shall receive of mine and show it unto you.
If any ask which be the things that were not showed then, and should
afterward? Its conceived they are employed in these words, He shall show you
things to come. And then if by things to come be meant such future Events as are
the subject of prophesiing (strictly so called,) then were they showed
afterward to John and by him recorded in his book of Revelation. If such
Scriptural mysteries of the kingdom of heaven, as for the hight and depth,
were not then Suitable to the disciples, but should afterward (the Spirit once
poured forth and Jesus Glorified) be preached unto all the Saints, the^ were
they revealed al after his Resurrection and ascension to the Apostles and
recorded in their Epistles: Especially to, and by Paul in the three first
chapters to the Ephesians (as Calvin. conceives) and so may be preached
(according to the measure of grace received) by him that is least in the
Kingdom or Heaven.

The fourth passage Repentance is a not saying in thy heart, do this: that is:
this or that commandment of God.
I gave a description of repentance (whether Theoreticall or Practical) in my
answer to the Queries: which being come (as I verily believe) to these
informers hands, before the collecting of these passages

First. I hope that they do not look upon this as a description, much less a
definition of repentance, but only an occasional expression, holding forth
some single Act thereof, Secondly. I desire that they would be pleased
Severally to enter into their closets, and there for a while commune with their
own hearts and be still, Selah. And having compared their notes with what is
written in their consciences, tell of a truth ethice (for Logicee I think they
cannot) First, Whether or no they ever heard this passage delivered by me in
these very words. Secondly. Whether or no by the rules of Orthographie it
should be closed with a period, or space left for some thing Exegeticall to
extend or explain it. Rom 10, 6, 7,
Thirdly, whether or no this Repentance, or not saying in the heart, do this:
i. e. this or that commandment, had express reference to any other
commandment, than this and that of ascending or descending mentioned in the
text: which being proposed at first by way of Querie, by a desttessed and
distrustful soul, came afterward oftentimes to be imposed upon the soul it
self as commandments from God, though really they be the dictates of its own
tormented conscience. For 1 the soul enquires who shall, etc. and if not stopped
there by the word of grace, the next Querie is, shall I? And then, Thirdly.
neglecting the word of faith, is too apt, in the time of Temptation, to turn
back to the Covenant of works, and look upon it self as bound by the law of
God, or legal Covenant; either to ascend, that is, (as Diodate) to undertake by
its own works to obtain a right to eternal life, or to descend, that is, to
take upon its self the pains of death and hell, for satisfaction for its own
sins. And doubtless Evangelical repentance includes in it a not saying in the
heart, do this, that is, this or that commandment, whether of ascending or
descending, which are accounted, by a distressed, distrustful soul, to be the
commandments of God or of Gods law yet in force; Of the first, for the
attempting to do, that is to bring down Christ from above. And of the second,
for the attempting to do that, is to bring up Christ again from the dead, Romans
10, 6, 7. And if ever such a passage as this fell from me, in a public
Assembly (Nisi mentis and memoriae inops) I am verily persuaded, and speak it
as in the presence of the Lord: that first it was grounded upon, and occasioned
from that Text: Romans 10.6, 7. Secondly, that it was intended per dicentem, by
me that spoke it, in that sense, or to that effect as is before explained.
Though thirdly I dare not aver, but that the Dicta, or the words spoken, simply
considered, might sound harshly in such men's ears, that: first are accustomed
to press an active obedience from the law of works: secondly, came filled with
prejudice: and thirdly, never heard me preach, nor express my thoughts upon
any such a subject, either before or since these passages were collected. I
have answered thus far to this passage in Hypothesi, though not to any of the
rest, because I have some special hints from the Text, which contains part of
it, 1. To what purpose I might possibly speak. 2. What might be the ground of
these Informers misapprehensions and mistakes, 3. That the unprejudiced reader,
(from this to which, De facto; I can say a little) may be directed in some
measure, how to judge of their dealings with me in the rest. I shall now
declare (as if this had not been said) what I conceive of the passage it self
in Thesi.

1, Repentance is either legal, which consists chiefly in a sense of, and
sorrow for the transgressions of the law, and a restless fear of the
judgments threatened and deserved, and this (I grant) is often followed, nay
commonly accompanied with a saying in the heart, do this or that, or what shall
I do, this commandment or that commandment, to free my self thereby from fear
and bondage; Thus the Jaylour cries, Sirs, What must I do to be saved. Or
Evangelical, which includes a Renunciation of a man's own Righteousness, or the
works: The Ismaels begotten of his own flesh, by the law, and a turning unto
Christ, who is the Lord our Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, and
this is that hereafter spoken of.

2. By this or that commandment of God, may here be meant either first those
Vtopian fancied commands, Deuteronomy. 30.12. to which the Apostle seems to allude:
Romans 10.5, 6. Or secondly, some of the ten commandments which are, and as they
are the condition of the Covenant and Law dispensed by Moses, or thirdly, such
scriptural commands which are, and as they are given by Christ himself (who
has all authority) for a Directory and Rule, to the lives and conversations of
christians:

1. If by this or that commandment be meant those Vtopian fancied commands
which the deceitful heart of man (not being able to hear, or do the word that
is nigh) enquires to have fetched from heaven or beyond the Sea, that it may
hear and do them; Then does Repentance include not only a not saying in thy
heart; Do this, but what is not a not saying in the heart: So much, as who
shall ascend, or who shall descend to inform thee of this or that commandment.
For, 1. This is a sinful evading of the just sentence of the Law already given
by God, instead of submitting to judgment, and acknowledging the sin and
guilt. And an hypocritical arrogance enquiring for some new Law, as if God knew
not how far short all men come of keeping the old. Romans 3.23.2. Its a
neglecting to look up to the Brazen Serpent now, when stung with the fiery, and
a seeking for devised remedies, run for a covering, but not of Gods Spirit; and
so an adding sin to sin, like as Adam did when he sewed Fig Leaves. Isa.
30.1.

2. If by this or that commandment be meant this or that of the ten: as
dispensed by Moses; In the original, they were submitted in the passive
signification, which supposes that the great arrogance that is in a man
naturally, being unwilling to deny his own righteousness, and to take Christ
for all. Burg. Sect. 28. p. 254.
and have their bent by him described, Romans 10.4. He that does them shall live
in them; then does repentance include a not saying in thy heart, Do this, that
is, this or that commandment of God, that by doing of them, thou may live in
them. For thereby 1. Thou show thy self ignorant of Gods righteousness. 2.
Thou vainly go about to establish thy own righteousness. And, 3. Thou
rebellest against, instead of submitting to, the righteousness of God. Romans
10, 3.

3. If by this or that commandment, be meant the scriptural commands, which
are, and as they are given by Christ himself according to that: If ye love me,
keep my Commandments. John 14.15. Then does repentance include a saying in the
heart; Do this, that is, this or that commandment of God; nay, all the
commandments of God, together with a denial of all ungodliness and worldly
lusts, which war against the spirit, and are contrary thereunto: Tit, 2.12.
Acts 3.36. 1 Cor. 7.10, 11.

The fifth Passage. There be two sorts of people, first the uncalled; to them
only Preach the Gospel. Secondly the called, to them Preach good works.
THis Passage may be resolved into three Queries. 1. Whether there be two sorts
of people, the one called, the other uncalled. 2. Whether the Gospel only is to
preached to the uncalled. 3. Whether good works are to be preached to the
called. The first, all sober christians hold in the affirmative, yet because
some there now are, that maintain an universal calling of all, of all sorts,
active at least, if not passive. Note,

1. That by a people called, are not meant a people called upon merely by a
Lecture read out of the book of conscience, or the Dictates of a natural light.
For 1. Paul (before his conversion, or that light from heaven shined about him,
Asts 9.) had this light within him, and yet remained ignorant in unbelief: and
at the height that this could lead him unto, persecuted Christ and the Church.
Neither can it be said, that it was because of his not minding that light. For
1. He labored always as much as possible for man to do, to follow that light,
and profited more than his equals. 2. Touching the law he was blameless, and
persecuted the Church out of pure zeal of acting according to this light. 3.
He bears the Jews record, that they acted for God zealously according to this
legal light, and yet wanted knowledge; or that Evangelical true light, which
shines from God in the face of the Lord Jesus. 2 Cor. 4.6.4. The Jews killed
the Disciples, and yet judged from this light, that they did God good service,
not knowing (indeed) either the Father or the Son: Joh. 16.2, 3.2. Though all
the Gentiles show the work of the Law written in their hearts: Romans 2.15. yet
not any work of the Gospel. Nay, where is it said that this light ever
convinced Gentile of sin, for not believing in Christ? Is not this to be done
by the Spirit of Christ? Ioh. 16.8. Or where was ever Heathen savingly
converted, but by the foolishness of preaching? The world by wisdom (that is
this light improved to the utmost) knew not God, And therefore it pleased God
by the foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe: 1 Cor. 1.21.3.
Adam had this light, and it taught him first, That he was naked: 2. To Sew
fig leaves. 3. And when those vanished at the voice of God, to seek to hide
himself, under a thick covering: But could neither teach him to confess his
sin and commit himself unto God, nor tell him any thing of the seed of the
woman, That should break the head of the Serpent. 4. The Apostle distinguishes
of a natural man, and of a spiritual man; And though he that is spiritual
judges all things, yet the natural man receives not the things of the spirit
of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because
they are spiritually discerned: 2 Cor. 2.14, 15. Nay, what needed Christ to
send the Spirit of truth to lead the Disciples into all truth. If the light thy
already had could have discovered it to them, and effectually guided them
thereunto?

2. By a people called, are not meant a people called upon merely by a Lecture
read from the book of the creature, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, etc. For 1.
Though the heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his
handy works, etc. Yet the Psalmist concludes them all imperfect; As to the
converting, making wise, and true enlightening of the soul, and ascribes all
those effects unto the word of the Lord: verse, 7, 8.2. Though the Philosophers
and wise men might by contemplation come to know the eternal power and
Godhead, Romans 1.20. Or, A Deum absolutum, (as Luther speaks) yet could they
know nothing of a God manifested in the flesh, and justified in the spirit;
which the Apostle calls the mystery of godliness: 1 Timothy 3.16.3. God did not
make use of any of the stars of the old creation, but created a new one (called
his Star: Mat. 2.2.) And thereby led the wise men (blind fold as it were) in a
way they knew not, to Jesus Christ.

But thirdly, By a people called, are meant a people called out of the world by
the Spirit in the preaching of the Gospel. To know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent. Io. 17.3.

For, 1. This is the only means appointed by Christ, for calling a people to
himself Mar. 16.5.2. Christ intercedes in a special manner for those that shall
be so called. Neither pray I for these alone (meaning his Disciples) but for
them also which shall believe in me through their word, John 17.20.3. People in
the writings of the Apostles are denominated (...) called and (...) a Church or
people called out, only in reference to this call. 4. By this it is, that the
true light comes into the world, not only (...), appears or shines dimly
through types and ceremonies, as under the Promise and Law: Vide Heming. in
Ioh. 1.9.
John 1.1.4, 5, nor to one Nation only, as it did during Christ's abode in the
flesh: John 1.11. But now (...), it shines forth clearly and effectually,
convincing the world of Sin, Righteousness, and Judgment; according to Christ's
promise, or enlightening every man, Jew and Gentile, Greek and Barbarian, even
every creature, John 1.9.16.8. Mark 16.15. And yet 4. Some people of each sort,
or a singuli Generum, (in respect had to this Evangelical call) are still
uncalled, either negatively, as never having heard it: or positively (having
heard) and yet not so much as visibly yielded themselves obedient thereunto,
both are evident. For if thousands live and die, and never hear so much as that
there is a Jesus. 2. The Apostle witnesses that of those, that heard, some
mocked, etc. Act. 17.32. and brings Isaiah complaining, Lord, who has believed
our Report: Romans 10.16. Many may be called upon, active, or quoad actum
praedicandi, and yet few called passive, or quoad effectum praedicationis.

In answer to the second Quere. I say first the Gospel is to be preached to the
uncalled. For 1. Christ commands his disciples to go in to all the world and
preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16.15. Come, for all things are
ready. Those very men are invited that were, and while they were taken up with
pleasures and profits, insomuch that at the first hearing (with one consent)
they began to make excuse: Luke 14.17, 18. Secondly, preaching the Gospel is
the means by which God calls the unregenerate to his Kingdom and Glory: 1
These. 2.9.12. It is the power of God unto salvation: Romans 1.16. In Christ Jesus
I have begotten you through the Gospel: 1 Cor. 4.13. So that unless Ministers
will refuse to use the means for conversion of sinners, they must preach the
Gospel to such. Nay, there is a necessity laid upon them, and woe unto them if
they preach not the Gospel. 1 Cor. 8.16, Thirdly, were it not that the Gospel
is and ought to be preached to persons that are uncalled, why should those be
damned that obey not the Gospel? 2 These. 1.8. or how shall they be convinced of
sin that believe not on Jesus? Io. 16.9.

Secondly, if (only) be referred to the persons to whom we are to preach, and
the sense of the Quere be this Scilicet, whether the Gospel is to be preached
only to the uncalled. I answer, negatively, For 1. The Apostles in all their
Epistles writing to Christians, especial Paul in the three first Chapters to
the Ephesians, preach the Gospel. Luther in loc. com class. 3. loc. 9.

We should do us those Stewards, that set bread and salt upon the table what
ever dish there is; so we should always preach Christ, and persuade them to
believe in him. Preston says. page 77. Saul made a Law, that none should eat
of any thing, and so Jonathan must not taste of the honey. Saeul indeed thought
hereby to have the more enemies killed, but Jonathan told him, that if they had
been suffered to eat more honey, they should have bin more revived and enabled
to destroy their adversaries; thus the Papists, they forbid us to eat of this
honey, this precious comfort in Christ, as if thereby we should be hindered in
our pursuit against sin, whereas indeed it is the only strength and power
against them. Burgess. vind. lect. 22. p. 209.


Paulus ad Romanos undecem capitibus fidem fundat, and quinque capitibus deinde
mores superaedificat. Ad Galat. Quinque fidem uno and sexto mores docet. Sic
and in aliis epist suis facit. Secondly, It is requisite and meet thus to
preach, First to prevent the bewitching of Satan: Gal. 3.1. And natures
continual lusting either to return again to the Covenant of Works, or to be
carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.14. Secondly, that christians
beholding as in a Glass, the Glory of the Lord, may be changed into the same
Image, from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord: 2 Cor. 3.18,
Thirdly, the Gospel is said to work effectually in them also that believe: 1
These. 2.13. and christians, the more they grow in grace and in the knowledge of
the Lord Jesus Christ, the more they grow in a sense of their own weakness and
unworthiness, which occasions that faithful saying, still to be seasonable,
and worthy all acceptance. That Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Thirdly, The men that are most zealous for pressing the
Law of works, will allow the Gospel (if a conditional covenant may be called
Gospel) to be preached to themselves, and such like godly men whom they look
upon as truly called. Nay, in old time, Christ might have been feasted at the
Pharisees houses, provided he would never reprove them for taking the highest
rooms to themselves: Luke 14.8. nor appear a friend to Publicans and sinners.
Luk 17.39.

Thirdly, if (only) be referred unto the Gospel, or the Doctrine to be
preached, and the sense of the Quere be, whether only the Gospel is to be
preached to the uncalled? Then first, Christ, in commission for preaching which
he gave to the Apostles, mentions only the Gospel, and inserts not a word
touching the Law of Moses, and he that in hearing that believes and is baptized
(no mention of other works) shall be saved, and he that believes not, (what
other works soever he does) shall be damned: Mar. 16.16. Secondly, Paul
professes that he was made an able Minister of the New Testament, not of the
letter, but of the Spirit: 2 Cor. 3.6, and that God has reconciled us to
himself by Jesus Christ, and has given unto us the ministry of
reconciliation. 2 Cor. 3.7.9. not of death and condemnation. 2 Cor. 3.7.9.

Thirdly, the Law that was given by Moses to the Israelites, only as has been
shown, and not so much as for the use of the Gentiles while such, but
suppositively and secondarily in case they became Proselites, and were by
circumcision incorporated into the body of the Jews: And for the Covenant of
Works made with Adam, In his reply to Crandon. p. 43.
Mr. Baxter himself to use his own words) does now maintain that there is no
such thing as a Covenant of works now in being, to any on earth. However the
work thereof is indelebly and undeniably written in the heart: the conscience
bearing witness, and the thoughts in the mean while excusing and accusing one
another. Fourthly, I distinguish Inter praedicare legem, and praedicare de
lege, betwixt Preaching Law, and preaching of the Law: Praedicare de lege, or
to preach of the Law, is to declare first what the Law in its own nature
requires; and what it behooves them to do or die, that think to become
righteous, or to get life by conformity thereunto: as Luke 10.25.28. Romans 10.
5. Mat. 5.22.28. Secondly, that none were ever able to perform it, all having
sinned and come short of the glory of God: Romans 3.23. Thirdly, that the
Gentiles which had not the Law of Moses, sinned against the Law of Nature. Romans
1.32. Romans 2.12.14, 15. And the Jews who were under the law of Moses, became
guilty thereby before God: Romans 3.13. (...) sine adjecto articulo generaliter
accipitur. Beza in loc.
No flesh could ever be justified by the deeds of either law: (...) for by each
law, whether of nature or Scripture, to the conscience appealing, comes an
acknowledgement of sin, Romans 3.20. Fourthly, that what the Law could not do, in
that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin has condemned sin in the flesh, and fulfilled the
righteousness of the Law in us, or is the end of the Law for righteousness:
Romans 8.3, 4. Romans 10.4. Fifthly, that though De facto, the Law without,
seconded by the Law within, accuse, terrify, and condemn; yet De jure, it has
nothing to do either to charge or condemn the elect of God: Romans 8.33. Romans
8.1. Gal. 3.13. Romans 6.14. Sixthly, to tell, to whom, for what use, and until
what time the Law was given, and what great and precious privileges we enjoy,
who are freed from the bondage of it, Rom, 3.19.5.20.6.14. Gal. 3.19.4, 5.
Seventhly and lastly, to declare that love is (...), the fulfilling, sum, and
even the whole of the Law, which is now the new commandment of our Husband
Christ, and not simply required of us, as formerly by our old Husband: but
freely begotten in us by the immortal seed of the Word, as fruit acceptable to
God the Father; All which are plentifully done by the Apostle Paul, in his
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians, and should now be done by
Gospel Ministers as occasion is given, either by the pride of the Pharisees,
the poverty of the Publicans, or the rising of such contentious disputes about
the Law, as did in the days of the Apostles, and are likely to continue till
the end of the world. But as for preaching the Law whether given to Adam or by
Moses as a Covenant of life and death, according as the Scriptures describe
them: Genesis 2 17. Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.10. which is truly Praedicare legem, or to
preach the Law indeed as yet alive (an abrogated, repealed, fulfilled,
satisfied Law, being no otherwise a Law, then a dead man, a man) as it was
never commanded by Christ, so was it never (that we read of) practiced by the
Apostles, and by consequence, not now to be revived by the Ministers of the
Gospel. And yet fifthly, This excludes not all preaching, that is minatory for
those that manifest themselves to be positively uncalled (especially:) and all
sorts (occasionally) should be taught, that he that believes not the Son,
shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him. John 3.36. If the word
spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every Trangression and disobedience,
received a just recompense of reward: How shall we escape if we neglect so
great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, etc? Heb.
2.7. To which we may add such like; as Heb. 10.28, 29. Heb, 12.25. Acts 3.22,
23.

The third, Scil. whether good works are to be preached to the called. I affirm
and say they are, and that in a special manner. For first these things I will
that thou affirm constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be
careful to maintain good works: Tit. 3.8. Nam ii soli etc. as Beza in loc.
Secondly, Christ having charged his Apostles, (...), to discipulate all
nations, which was done, as Mark explaines it by preaching the Gospel, adds
(...) not (...); and so (...) not (...); Scilicet, teaching, not all the
nations, but such as should be discipled, or called by preaching of the Gospel
out of the nations, to observe, etc. Mat. 28.20. Thirdly, the called are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works: Ephesians. 2.10. They are
redeemed from the hands of their enemies, That they might serve him without
fear, in holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of their lives:
Luke 1.74.75. God has called us not to uncleanness, but unto holiness: 1.
These. 4.7. Walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called. Ephesians. 4.1.
Indeed, i^ any be so critical, as to make the word (preach) of no larger
extent, than praedicare amongst the Latins, Piscat. in Romans 2.21.
when taken strictly and properly, then is the Gospel, or the triumph of Christ
over the Law, Sin, Death, and the Devil, etc. The proper object of preaching,
and Ministers more fitly said to teach, then to preach good works to the called.

But if this Quere or part of the passage (though indefinite) be intended to
run in equipage with the former, and that to preach good works to the called;
shall amount to as much as to preach good works only to the called. Then
consider that good works may be taken first largely, as including all good
works whatsoever, though the immediate products of the Gospel. As repentance
and faith: or secondly strictly, as including only such works, as are mediate
effect, supposing the precedence of faith, in which sense good works are
commonly said to flow from, or follow after faith. If we take good works in the
former sense. Its true, that good works, Scilicet faith and repentance, though
not expressly all good works, are to be preached to, and required from those
that are yet passively uncalled. For, 1. Christ himself having preached the
Gospel of the Kingdom, or proposed the object which instrumentally begets,
immediately injoynes the duties, or calls for the Acts to be exercised
thereabout. Repent and believe the Gospel. Scilicet, which I have preached:
Mar. 1.15. Secondly, In the name of Jesus, held out as the Savior of sinners,
repentance, and remission of sins, or as the Syriaok conversion into the
remission of sins, is to be preached unto all nations: Luke 24.47. Thirdly,
Peter bids the Jews repent and be converted: Acts 3.19. And Paul exhorts the
Jailer to believe on the Lord Jesus: Acts 16.31. Take good works in the better
sense and though it be true, that Sensu diviso, the uncalled should do these
subsequent works, as love the Brethren: 1 Pet. 1.22. Call upon the name of the
Lord: Romans 10.14. etc. as being now immediately called to obey the truth, and
believe the Gospel, by which they may be enabled and privileged thereunto: yet
not Sensu composito, or while uncalled: For 1. People under command should hoc
agere: not only do the things commanded, but in that order as they are
commanded to do them: when servants are bidden come, they should not then say,
they will go, and when they are bidden go, they should not then come, or do this,
(though both due in their season) but when the Master says come, they are to
come: when he says go, they are to go, and when he says, do this, then are
they to do it. Mat. 8, 9. People therefore being immediately, and firstly
called to repent and believe the Gospel, Non per opera venitur ad fidem: sed
per fidem ad opera. Luther. What is the difference between Christians and
Moralists? and without this, what is our preaching? we may gather well near as
good instruction to resist vice, out of Plutarch, and out of Seneca, as out of
Paul's Epistles.

But this differenceth it, we preach Christ, and from Christ veriry, ability,
and strength to do all things else. Dr. Preston of Faith. p. 74. Shepherd Sab.
par. 1. These. 101.


should Hoc agere, not set about doing other works of God, (though right, and
due in their season) But do this work of God now required to be done: Scilicet,
Believe on him whom he has sent. Obey the call which is, First to renounce our
own righteousness, next to embrace the righteousness of Christ, which God
freely offers in the Gospel: English Annotat. in Romans 10.3. Secondly, All
works which are required, and as required by Christ, should be done in faith.
Heb. 11.6. For otherwise, though they may be good Ethice, and both taught and
done in Genere moralium: yet are they not good -- Theologice, (as we now speak)
nor to be taught or done in Genere spiritualium: And if they must be done in
faith, then not before faith: But first should men believe, and then through
believing, do all other works. Qui vult been operari, non ab operando, sed a
credendo incipiat. Thirdly, the Apostles do constantly direct their practical
exhortations to such as are visibly called (...), teaching them, and only them
to observe all things: etc. according to Mat. 28.20. Fourthly, Believers only
are in a condition for acting in an Evangelical way, and upon Evangelical
grounds (and that an Active obedience is not now to be pressed from, or to the
Law, has and shall be fuller cleared) For as Mr, Shepherd no friend to
Antinomians (in that very tract where he so learnedly opposes them) says;
This caution is ever to be remembered, that such acting be not to make our
selves just, but because we are already just in Christ; not that hereby we
might get life, but because we have life given us already; not to pacify Gods
justice, but to please his mercy, being pacified toward us by Christ already.
And if so be that Believers are only in a condition of thus acting; and
obedience active, is not to be urged from the Law, I see not but the (...), or
Appendants to the (...) or Gospel, should presuppose the preaching of that as
Instrumental, to bring persons into this condition; and especially, if not
solely, be preached to Believers. The end or sum of the commandment is love,
and that out of a pure heart, etc. 1 Timothy 1.5.

The sixth Passage. But is it not good for a man to do all that he can, viz. in
way of obedience to Gods commandments? Answ. The sum of all the commandments,
is that of the Sabbath: Now to a Christian the Sabbath, is to cease from his
own works, or working according to a form or letter,
I Shall not here discuss; whether this Solution be pertinent and full, as to
the objection: But express the sum of both in four Queries, and return
answer severally to each of them.

The first Querie.
1. Whether it be not good for a man to do all that he can, viz: in a way of
obedience to Gods Commandments?

1. Man may be considered either in the state of nature, or in the state of
grace, Secondly, it may be said to be good for a man to do, etc. either simply
in relation to the work it self, or in reference to the effects and consequents
of the work; that is, the procuring thereby either a Temporal, or a Spiritual
good. Thirdly by commandments, may be meant, either the precepts of the Law as
a covenant, written in nature or Scripture: or the commandments given, and as
given by Christ who is Lord of all, even of the Sabbath day. Fourthly, by way
of obedience may be meant either a man's own way in which alone he can obey: or
Gods way. Scilicet, Accordingly as he commands.

1. It is good for a man in the state of nature to do all that he can in way of
obedience to Gods commandments, under whichsoever notion considered in relation
to the work it self. For first, Virtus per se ipsa amabilis: virtue it self by
it self is amiable, and vice hateful. Secondly, a work that is good, though
only for the substance of it, is better then that which is evil, both for the
substance and circumstances. Thirdly, it is good and commendable for any man to
walk according to that light vouchsafed unto him, and not to hold the truth in
unrighteousness. Romans 1.18.

2. It is good for a man in the state of nature to do all that he can, in
reference to the procuring of a Temporal good. For first, Because Ahab humbled
himself, the evil was not brought in his days, 1 Kings 21, 29. Secondly, the
Pharisees that gave alms, (...), have their reward, Mat. 6.2. though in the
present tense all here, and with an ((...)) a thing distinct from God, like
Esau's blessing gotten by selfish tears, and not God for their reward. Thirdly,
the wrath of God is exemplarily revealed in punishing such as held the truth in
unrighteousness, and have followed lust contrary to the light of Law and
Reason. And though a man doing what he can, cannot prevent. Yet if fourthly,
any say that to him eternal punishment shall be mittigated, as to the degrees
of it, I shall not contend.

3. It is not good for a man, in the state of nature, to do all that he can in
his own way of obedience, to Gods commandments, however considered, in
reference to the procuring of a spiritual good; that is, all or any of those
blessings, which are the peculiar purchase of the blood of Christ for his
elect. For first, This is a seeking them as it were by the works of the Law,
that is, a working to get a right to, or possession of the blessings purchased
by Christ, as if that were to be obtained by the carnal observance of an
outward command; whereas they are freely given by Christ, through a lively
faith begotten by the Spirit in the Evangelical publishing of them unto
sinners, Romans 9.32.4, 5. Secondly, All that a man (while such) can do (though
pretended and intended in a way of obedience) really and in truth, is
Rebellious Disobedience. For the minding of the flesh, is enmity against God.
Romans 8.7. and so by consequence the more he can do, the more he can rebel, and
procures to himself the greater condemnation: The minding of the flesh is
death. Romans 8.6. And so the more, the more deadly: Homo non solum nihil potest
suis viribus ad justitiam coram Deo, sed etiam adjutus lege docente and
operibus per iegem extortis deterior efficitur. Thirdly, Neither Law, nor the
commands under the Gospel, requires any such obedience as this man can perform.
For the Law requires that which is spiritual to be done in the life and power
of the flesh; such as man could have performed at his first creation. The
commands under the Gospel, call for an obedience Evangelical to be done in the
life and power of the Spiris of Christ, such as the elect only do and can
perform after their second creation. If all that a man can do, were all or part
of that a man should do; if his way of obeying answered to Gods of commmanding;
or if the work, when done, were good by rule of any law, there were some
probability of it being good, for a man to do all that he can in reference to
the getting of some good by that Law: But all things here being otherwise, what
can man's doing be good for? But as it is sin, so to procure the wages of sin,
which is death. There is none in, they are all gone out of the way, and thence
are they altogether become unprofitable. Romans 3.12. Thirdly, there is no
promise in Scripture (of any spiritual good) made to a natural man's doings
though he do all that he can, and how shall any man call them good, in
reference to the getting of that which God has never promised upon any such
condition? Is not piety alone said to be profitable, 1 Timothy 4.8. and that as,
and because it has the promises. Fourthly, Paul did what he could in a way of
obedience to Gods commandments, and yet he confesses at last he gained nothing
thereby, in reference to any spiritual good, but was a looser, and found all
his doings to be dung, Phil. 3.7, 8. The natural man's looking for God to give
him Christ, or the blessings purchased by him because he does this or that, or
works more than other men, is not only groundless, having no promise whereupon
to bottom it, but abominable; even as if a servant should expect a pearl from
his Master, because he throws Dirt in his face, and that more constantly than
other men; does that which is abomination in his sight, Luke 16.15. And yet
will needs persuade both him and others that he is doing acceptable service, a
prime piece doubtless of that Religion, which derives it self, a religando,
from binding of God to man, and not man to God. Fifthly, Christ reclaimes men
in the state of nature, from doing all that they can in their own way of
obedience to Gods commandments, to do that which is not only beyond their
abilities to do,, but beyond their understandings, (while such) to think that
they should do it, Censet ne idem esse hominem hartari ad poenitentiam, and ad
utendum suis naturalibus? O vere Papisticam caecitatem! quasi non prius
exuendus sit vetus homo cum factis suis. Cham. Tom. 3. lib 4. cap. 10. sect.
17, 18. Atque hic est sinis cur Augistinus ex doctrina Apostolica demonstrat,
omnia infidelium opera esse peccata nempe ut omnes ad veram in Christum fidem
sine qua quicquid fit, peccatum est, hortetur et stimulet, quomodo igitur
damnari potest haec doctrina? imo contra doctrina quam adversarii tradunt
efficit homines hypocritas, retardat eos in sua ipserum infidelitate, efficit
ut gloria^tur in seipsis retardat eos a fide in Christum, etc. Zanch: Tom. 4.
lib. 4. p. 144. Concludimus ergo omnem sollicitudinem et zelam quibus homines
erga salutem suam feruntur, omnem diligentiam quam adhibere possunt, esse vanam
et frustaneam magis noxiam quam utilem ad fidem et Spiritum renovationis. Cited
by the Remonst. Ex libello etc. Collat. Hagiae habit. p. 297. Luther clas. 3.
loc. 11. Homo mere passive habet nec facit quidpiam, sed fit totus.
or how it is that God will have it done: Scilicet, To Repent and believe, or
to cease from their own dead works, and dead way of working, and accept of
Christ through a says (not gotten by them, but begotten by the word) as the
end of the Law for righteousness. What shall we do (say the Jews) that we
might work the works of God? This (says Christ) is the work of God, etc.
Actively and Passively. The work now commanded to be done by you, and yet the
work which only is, must and can be done by God, John 6.28, 29. Men and
brethren what shall we do, say those, Acts 2.37? Repent, (answers Peter) or
abandon the present thoughts and actings of your minds, whereby you are
alienated from God, and yield your selves up as dead lost men, to be baptized
or buried under water with Christ in Baptism, thence to be raised up by his
mighty power alone to newness of life. It is therefore good for a man (instead
of doing what he can in his own formal Hypocritical way of obedience to the
outward commands) First to learn experimentally from the lusting and rebelling
of his own heart against Gods commandments, that he can do nothing but sin.
That when the commandment comes, Sin reviveth; that sin takes occasion by the
commandment, and works in him all manner of concupiscence, Romans 7.8, 9.
Secondly, to acknowledge himself a sinner and guilty of death. Romans 3.19, 20.
Thirdly, To digest judgment, or admit (without pleading for himself) the
letter or law to condemn and kill him. Romans 7.10, 11. Fourthly, Not to stick to
save himself actively, by doing and conforming to the letter. But passively to
suffer God to work in him, upon him, and concerning him, the whole power of his
will by the power of his word: for if dead, he may perhaps hear that which he
never did nor could while he was alive, even (not the letter nor Epistle only
sent by messengers) but the voice of the Son of God, and in hearing, Believe
and live. Joh. 5.25.

And here we conclude, that it is hurtful for a man in the state of nature to
be active, or do all that he can, or any thing he is able to imagine he either
can or should do in reference to the procuring the spiritual goods or blessings
purchased by Christ, and firstly conferred upon his Elect, as Regeneration,
conversion, faith and Repentance: and (that we may the more particularly prove
and clear this) consider that here, and in order to the collation of these; it
is true, that the sum of all the commandments is that of the Sabbath, or a
ceasing of man from his own works, or working according to a form or letter.
Nos praedicantes fidem omnino dehortamur ab operibus homines, ut praedicemus
Sabbatum, non operando, sed patiendo boni sumus cum patimur divinas actiones
quieti ipsis. Your strength is to sit still. Isa. 30.7. For if man must act or
be active in reference to his Regeneration and conversion, which is the first
special blessing that is conferred by Christ. I ask first, whether as an
efficient principal, or instrumental? Not as principal, for if so, he might be
said to Regenerate or beget himself, the old man to be the father of the new
man; nay the new man the workmanship of the old, made in himself by works
Antecedent, and not created in Christ unto works subsequent: That which is born
of the flesh be spirit, contrary to John 3.6. Not as instrumental under God;
for first, We are not begotten by corruptible, but incorruptible seed by the
word of God which lives and abides for ever. 1 Pet. 1.23. Of water and the
Spirit, not water and the flesh. John 3.5, Secondly, If a man were actively
instrumental in his Regeneration, he might of necessity be actuallie alive
before regenerated; for how should man act before he have life? But man is not
actuallie alive, before Regenerated, But dead in sin and trespasses. Ephesians.
2.1. And therefore not activelie instrumental in his regeneration; nay, he is
so far from being an instrument, that he is not so much as the matter out of
which life is educed, but only into which it is induced by the Spirit of life,
in materia privativa non positiva operatur Deus. Thirdly, Quid insanius fingi
potest, as Luther. Does not the flesh fight against the Spirit, at actu, and
how then should it act for and with the Spirit, before, or in Regeneration.
Fourthly, he should not; for the Law does not command any man to be born from
above, or of the Spirit of Christ; And Christ does not require any man to
regenerate himself from below or in the power of his flesh. All in this
Kingdom of heaven is to be done in the power of his own Spirit, the commands
presupposing the giving of it in the Gospel. And hence is that (as the
Ministry of the Spirit) to be preached antecedentlie unto those, even to
every creature. And then does this new husband, Christ call for the bringing
forth of those children to God, which he has already begotten by that immortal
seed of the Word.

Secondly, If man be or should be active herein, he must needs antecedently
know and will his conversion, and the means of it, for otherwise he acts
sensuallie as a beast, not as a man: but he neither knows, nor wills either of
these antecedentlie, or till he be regenerated, but opposes and accounts them
foolishness. That he knows them not is plain, first from 1 Cor. 2.14. and
Nicodemus cast. John 3.4. who could neither apprehend the thing, nor tell any
means or way to it (though Christ had already told him) But entering the second
time into his mothers womb: The new man in this resembling Melchisedech, Heb.
7.3, being to a natural man (for oughr he can find in Scriptures) without
Father, without Mother, and without Descent, neither having beginning of days,
nor end of life; and that because he is made not after the manner of the sons
of men, but like unto the Son of God. Secondly, Christ says, The wind
blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not
tell whence it comes, and whether it goes: So is every one that is born of
the Spirit. John 3.8. Thirdly, We must be known of God, before we can know God.
1 Cor. 8, 2, 3, Gal. 4.9. Quia cogniti sunt, ideo cognoscunt: I know my sheep,
and am known of mine. John 10.14. Man must be born again or from above, before
he can so much as see the Kingdom of heaven. John 3.5. Nor can he antecedently
will either of these. First, because he cannot know them, and it is a general
maxim, Ignoti nulla cupido. If there be none that understands; there is sure
for being any that seeks after God, Romans 3.11. He knows doing the old way,
and naturally can will as the old end, so the old way, to do, to be saved: but
not suffering, which is the new. He can as little think of dying in, and to his
own flesh, with which he so sweetly now converseth, as the Disciples, of
Christ's suffering those things, and so entering into his Glory. Luke 24.26. Oh
what living man can think: that either we must, or that the Captain of our
salvation was made perfect through sufferings? Heb. 2.10. Secondly, the Text is
plain. John 1.13, Which were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh,
nor of the will of man, but of God. If any say, that a man may antecedently
will regeneration, or conversion, by antecedaneous works of grace, though not
of nature. I answer, first, It is said that God works in us, to will. Phil.
2.13. And to will is present with us, who are born of God, Rom, 7.18. but never
that he works it in them that are unborn: So that secondly, To will
conversion is not a work of grace antecedent, but subsequent thereunto, and
argues the Infant born and alive, though yet it cannot tell so much; but only
cries, thirsts and hungers, for in this very willing, there is a turning
toward God, and then undoubtedly a believing on the Lord Jesus. And he that
believes, is born of God. 1 John 5.1. Thirdly, Christ puts not the except of
entering into the Kingdom upon man's doings, but upon Gods; he says not, except
a man beget, bear, or convert himself; but except a man be begotten, born
again, or (as some read it) from above, and be converted, He cannot enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, Mat 18.3. Vbi manebit liberum arbitrium? ubi facere quod
in se est? cum hic fieri nos doceamur non facere; and non nos operemar, sed
Deus operetur: Luther loc. com. class. 2. lec. 7.
facturae non factores sumus, funditus scilicet ruit omnis Theologia superborum,

Thirdly, Man neither is, nor should be active in reference to the effecting
either Faith or Repentance; for if so, either as an agent in the producing of
them, or as an agent in the using of means to procure the producing of them
from and by God: not in the former sense, for first, faith is not of our
selves, it is the gift of God: Ephesians. 2.8. It is given to you on the behalf of
Christ to believe. Phil. 1.19. This is the work of God. John 6.29. Him has God
exalted to give Repentance unto Israel, and Remission of sins. Acts 5.30.
Secondly, Shepherd sound Beleev, page 99, 100.

Baxt. Replytr, Kendall p. 132.


Mr. Shepherd, Mr. Baxter, (and before them Camero and Ferrius, maintain, that
God does not infuse a habit of Faith and Repentance, whereby men are enabled
antecedently by an inherent habitual grace, to produce the acts of believing
and repentance, but does himself (say they) first produce the first acts, and
then infuseth habits whereby men are enabled to act afterward. Kendall against
Goodwin. cap. 4. page 142.
And if we should say, with Mr. Kendal, that faith is in us as the adjunct, and
has to God only the relation of an effect, that it denominates him alone the
Author of our believing, though us the Believers, because the subjects: As the
Boul only is said to run, and yet it is the man that is the cause of the
motion. I see little that Mr. Baxter is pleased, or that others can say against
it, and not in the latter, For first, God has appointed means to be used by
the living, through which he has promised to beget faith in all the elect
(though for the present dead) Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel,
Mar. 16.15, but of means appointed of God for the dead to use, thereby to get
faith, or to procure the raising of themselves from and by God, we read not, If
any say that prayer is a means, then first, If by prayer be meant the
intercession of Christ, it is granted, for it is his intercession alone that
procures the actual collation of all those blessings purchased by himself in
the flesh, promised in the new Covenant by the Father, and conveyed to us by
the Spirit. But if by prayer be meant any petitioning of ours, then is prayer
not a means to, but a consequent of faith; for first, How shall they call on
him, in whom they have not believed. Romans 10.14? The interrogation is
equivalent to a strong negation, viz. they cannot. Secondly, Christ taught his
Disciples to pray in faith, not before, nor for faith. Mat. 21.22. unless by
faith be meant the increase thereof, and then we pray, Lord increase our faith.
Luke 17.5. I believe, Lord help my unbelief. Mar. 9.24. Thirdly, he called
them to leave all and follow him, before they asked him any such a thing. You
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. John 15.16. and after he had called
them, he prescribes them a form of prayer, or teaches them to pray after this
manner, saying. Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Mat. 6.9. Luke 11.1, 2.
And is it now agreeable to that form or letter, to teach men to prefer the
petitions before they can say the Preface? or to enjoin them to pray thy
Kingdom come, before they can cry Abba, or, Our Father? These men (I fear)
would teach their Scholars all the Alphabet of Christianity before Christ's
Cross, all the petitions before the Preface, and it is doubtful then (that as
some coppies do) they will leave out the conclusion also, and the observation
of all the Commandments, before that which stands in the front, Scilicet, I am
the Lord thy God which brought thee out of the land of Egypt. Secondly, God
has made no promise to an impenitent unbelieving man (while such) that upon
condition of using such and such means, or performing such and such duties, he
will bestow upon him either of those, where it is said either implicitly, or
expressly; if thou will do thus and thus, I will give thee faith, or I will
give thee repentance? And how any doing or dutying of man, should be called
means of getting any thing from God, unless in a moral consideration, and way
of causation, as conditions to some promise; I have not yet learned from those
Masters, that style one another the Orthodox Divines. Thirdly, though many
enquired of the Apostles, What they should do to be saved: yet did never any
ask what they should do to get Faith, Repentance, Conversion, Regeneration, or
to get Christ, into Christ; nor did the Apostles leave any Directions or Rules
to be observed by such Querists in future times: but brought the word nigh unto
them into their mouths, and into their hearts, even the word of faith which we
preach: and tells them, that faith comes by hearing, and that hearing is not an
Antecedent act of their own, but that that also comes by the word of God. Romans
10.8.17. The legal resolving of these Queries, and the teaching of Nicodemus
Disciples how to beget themselves the second time by entering into their own
fleshly wombes, is left to the Grand Casuists of these our days, who can
direct their followers, how to beget that which is spirit, of that which is
flesh, and how to get the fruits of the Spirit by doing the works of the Law;
can either ascend to heaven, or go beyond the Sea to fetch such commandments
(as were neither given by Moses nor Christ) that their Disciples may hear and
do them, Luther loc. com. class. 2. loc. 7.
and have their reward. Fourthly, Luther and other sensible believing men
assert; that, Non nobis cogitantibus, sapientibus, volentibus, oritur in nobis
fides Christi: sed incomprehensibili and occulto opere spiritus praevenitur
quisquis fide danatur in Christo ad solum verbi auditum, caetera omnem nostram
aliam operam; and witness to the truth of, Romans 10.20. I was found of them
that sought me not, I was made manifest to them that asked not after me. Prius
oportet nos a Deo inveniri, quam ipsum quaeramus. Beza in Heb. 11.6.
Antevertens venit ad vos regnum Dei (...) propriae significat antevertere, seu
praevenire and sane regnum Dei ita ad nos pervenit ut praeveniat, hoc est
veniat antequam nos ipsum quaeramus. Piscat. in Mat. 12.28. Abraham (the father
of the faithful) was called when he served other gods, and Paul (a patttern to
them that come after) when he breathed out threatenings against the Church, and
Matthew when he sat at the receipt of custom. See Ball. covent. page 324.

Fourthly, It is Bonum in se, and bonum sibi. Good in it self, and good for a
man in the state of Grace, to do all that he can in Gods own way of obedience
to the commandments which are given, and as they are given by Christ for such
reasons, and in such respects as are shown in the explanation of the eighth
passage.

The second Querie.
2. Whether that of the Sabbath be the sum of all the Commandments.

The Commandment of the Sabbath may be taken either literally or mystically:
when taken literally, if we attend only to the outward form and draught
thereof, forbidding (for diverse reasons) all servile works on the 7th day, and
enjoining it to be kept holy. It is true, that then it is no more than one
amongst the ten. But if we attend to the consequents that depend upon the due
keeping and neglecting thereof. It is frequently in Scriptures put for all the
rest, and the keeping of it calls for, as if it implied vertually and
consequentially, all other duties: and the polluting of it declares against, as
containing, or making way for all other sins. Isa. 56.2. Ier. 17.22. when taken
mystically as relating to the spiritual, internal Sabbath, figured thereby
(which Calvin conceives, Primarium in Sabbato locum tennisse) that of the
Sabbath is the sum of all the Commandments. For first, All the commandments
(except the fifth) though implicitly they may be called affirmative, and said
to require those duties; the contrary whereof they forbid. Yet explicitly and
according to the letter of them they are Negative, enjoining a cessation from
our own works, or forbidding man to sin, which is in effect, a bidding man be
quiet, for he can do nothing but sin. And the commandment of the Sabbath
requires this very thing, Scilicet, Feriationem a propriis operibus, Calvin.
Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 28.
ut Deum in nobis operari sinamus. A ceasing from our own works, that we may
suffer God to work in us. Secondly, the Apostle Paul reduces all the
commandments to two. Romans 8.4. Walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit;
and this of the Sabbath compriseth both these, for though it be not lawful to
do evil, or walk after the flesh any day, yet are Christians required to do
good, or walk after the Spirit, even on the Sabbath day; and as the Priests
profaned the Sabbath by killing Sacrifices, and were blameless: So may
Christians crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts, and do nothing but
what is acceptable to God and their reasonable service. Thirdly, In the state
of glory when faith and hope shall cease. 1 Cor. 13.13. what other things shall
the Saints do, but keep this everlasting Sabbath, and thereby be completely
conformable to the will of God; which could not be, unless the Sabbath were
the sum of that eternal rule of Righteousness, and law of love.

Is demum cessare ab operibus suiscensetur, qui non agitur suo arbitrio, nec
consiliis suis indulgit, sed a Spiritu Dei diversa patitur. Calv.
The third Querie.
3. Whether to a Christian the Sabbath is to cease from his own works?

The Spiritual Sabbath, or rather the (...) signified by the Jews, though it
be not simply a ceasing from works; yet it is a ceasing from our own works,
that is, works done by our own strength, according to the counsel of our own
wills, and for our own ends as is evident, because the Apostle expressly so
describes it, Heb. 4.10. He that is entered into his rest, he also has ceased
from his own works, as God from his. There remains another Sabbatisme
(another I say) besides that Sabbath of Canaan, which Sabbatisme he defines in
the following verse: Pareus in loc. Secondly, the Prophets call for this
cessation or abnegation of self, as the main thing intended in the commandment,
Is. 58.13. Upon which says Calvin, the Prophet reckons the several kinds, by
which he might make it evident, that the true observation of the Sabbath does
consist in a denial of self and entire conversion. Hence do we clearly see
wherefore God does so highly commend in Scriptures the observation of the
Sabbath: for he looked higher than the external ceremony, that is, the rest and
quiet in which the Jews did think their holiness to be? But rather would have
the Jews bid adieu to the affections and lusts of the flesh, and yield up
themselves in obedience to him; Because no man can live the life of the
heavenly Kingdom; unless he be dead to the world, and to himself. Now when
that ceremony is abrogated, nevertheless the truth does remain, because Christ
is dead, and is risen again, that we may have a perpetual Sabbath, that is, may
keep holy day, or cease from our own works, that the Spirit of God may act
powerfully in us. Thirdly, the example of Gods resting from his works proposed
for our imitation, both in the commandment it self, and Heb. 4. as likewise
the injunction to the Jews for a total cessation from all servile works, teach
and confirm the same thing: Whosoever does work therein, shall be put to death:
ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations. Exodus 35.2, 3. quod nisi
eximiu^n aliquid, etc. But unless there had been some excellent and singular
thing in the Sabbath, it might seem more cruel than was meet to command a man
to be slain only because he had cut down a piece of wood. Tantum quoniam ligna
exciderat: Calvin. Fourthly, though this Sabbath does not imply a ceasing from,
but a spiritual acting of good works; yet it implies a ceasing to account the
good works acted to be ours or our own, according to that. Not I, but the Grace
of God that is within me. 1 Cor. 15.10. I am crucified with Christ,
nevrthelesse I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20. And hence
love, joy, peace, faith, long-suffering, etc. are called by the Apostle, Not
our works, but the fruits of the Spirit. Gal. 5.22. Vsque eo patet haec hominis
exinanitio, ut in bonis quoque operibus violetur Sabbatum quamdiu ea deducimus
nostra esse, recte enim Augustinus (ultimo capite libri vigesimi secundi de
civitate Dei) Nam and ipsa bona opera nostra, quando ipsius potius
intelliguntur esse, quam nostra, tunc nobis ad hoc Sabbatum adipiscendum
imputantur, dum vacamus ad videndum quod ipse est Deus: quia si nobis ea
tribuerimus servilia erunt; quum de Sabbato dicatur, omne opus servile in eo
non facietis. Call. Harm. Exodus Levit. etc. page 354.

And that to a Christian, the spiritual internal Sabbath, or Sabbatisme, is a
ceasing, or to cease from his own works, is as evident. Cbristus tune regnat in
nobis quando nos ab operibus nostris feriatos inhabitet, and in Sabbato suo per
nos sanctificato ipse in nobis manens facit omnia opera nostra. Luth.
For first, The Apostle says, there remains therefore a rest or keeping of
the Sabbath to the people of God. Heb. 4.9. And he that is entered into his rest
(and we which have believed, not only shall, but do enter into Rest, Heb. 4.3.)
has ceased from his own works, as God from his. verse 10. Secondly, Christians
are exhorted to enter in, Let us labor to enter into that rest, verse 11. Let
us therefore fear, least a promise being left to us of entering into his rest,
any of you seem to come short of it. verse 1. And not only so; but thirdly, It
remains that some must enter therein, And they to whom it was first preached,
entered not in because of unbeleefe, verse 6* and then by consequence those who
believe the word preached, do enter in by faith. It profits for that end when
mixed with faith in them that hear it. verse 2. for as (Beza) Si infidelitas
arcet ab aditu, fides certe introducit. Fourthly, Christ invites (...). All
those that labor and are heavy laden to come unto him, and promises to give
them this very rest or Sabbath, and that doubtless not only from their passive
being burdened under guilt and vanity, but their own active fruitless
laboring to free themselves from it, they shall rest as well qua (...), Mat.
11.28. Fifthly, Faith in the very nature of it hot only implies a resting on
Christ, by way of remembrance for some good and happiness to come by him, but
a resting (...) in Christ by way of satisfaction and complacencie, as our
present good and happiness. In him all fullness dwells. Col. 1.19. In (...),
ye are complete of filled full: through faith in him we have the substance of
things hoped for. Heb. 11.1. Sixthly, Mr. Shepherd, as he does most learnedly
argue for an external Sabbath to be observed at certain times, and on special
days: so does he acknowledge an internal Sabbath from Isa. 66.3. Heb. 4.1, 2.
which ought continually or every day to be observed, it resting from all sin,
and resting in God by Jesus Christ. These. 77.80. And yet I do not hold that
Christians in this life can perfectly keep the Sabbath. For first the flesh is
against the Spirit. Gal. 5. They find a law in their members, warring against
the law of their minds, they cannot do the things that they would, when to will
is present with them, how to do that which is good, they find not. Romans 7.
Secondly, Paul pressed toward the mark, trying if by any means he might attain
unto the resurrection from the Dead, and yet confesses that he had not yet
already attained, neither was already perfect. He followed after, and was
perfectly apprehended of Christ Jesus, but could not perfectly apprehend. Phil.
3.11, 12, 13, 14. And hereupon as a wretched man cries for deliverance from
the body of this death, Romans 7.24. Desires to depart and to be with Christ,
which he reputed gain, and far better. Phil. 1.21, 23. And that Paul not
attain to a perfect conquest over the flesh till death, or his departure hence,
and so no to a parfect sabbatising from sin and in Christ, seems evident:
First, from the time in which he makes this acknowledgement of his, not having
attained, which was (doubtless) not long before his death. This Epistle being
writ by Eupaphraditus from Rome, where he was then imprisoned (and as some
vinculis secundis) Chapter 1. verse 13. he had writ (if we credit either the
Histories of others, or what is evident from his own writings) ten of his
Epistles, fulfilled the greatest part of the course of his ministry, being a
Professor and a Preacher at least thirty years, and pressed still toward the
mark, trying if by any means he might attain. And if after all this, he
acknowledged that he had not attained; shall we profess our selves actually to
have attained that which he could not? Secondly, After he had been caught into
Paradise, or the third heaven, and heard unspeakable words not possible for man
to utter; There was given to him a Thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to
buffet him, and that upon this ground, because after that he was imperfect, and
in danger to be exalted above measure through the abundance or Revelations, 2
Cor. 12.7. And for this thing he besought the Lord thrice that it might depart
from him. verse 8. But it was denied as inconsistent either with his safety, or
the advancement of Gods Grace, Power, and Glory, verse. 9. and fourteen years
after this, he confesses himself the same man, to stand in need of the same
pricks and buffettings, and that therefore most gladly will he rather glory in
his infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon him, verse. 2.9, 10.

Thirdly, there is no such thing mentioned either in any of his own or the
Epistles of others that bear a latter date, and it is his own rule, 1 Cor. 4.6.
not to think of men above that which is written. Thirdly, the life that we live
in the flesh, is not a life of sense or of the flesh, as if we did not die
daily through the strength of sin, or had not matter of confession, 1 John 1.8,
6. Of contrition, 2. Cor. 7.10. and self-condemnation. 1 Cor. 11.31. But the
life that we live in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20.
we walk by faith and not by sight. 2 Cor. 5.7. The God of hope fills our
hearts with peace and joy, not in seeing, but in believing. Rom 15.13. And
hence I do assert with Calvin.

That Nostram in illo beatam quietem hic inchoamus, etc. in it we here begin
our blessed rest, Calv. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 30.
in it we do daily proceed in profiting more and more: But because we have
still a continual war with the flesh, it shall not be consummated until that
saying of Isaiah 66.23. be fulfilled concerning the continuing of new Moon with
new Moon, of Sabbath with Sabbath, Even then when God shall be all in all. Here
is (indeed) had here perfection of the object, but not of the subject. Christ
whom we enjoy is perfect, and can admit of no addition; But our manner of
enjoying him is not so. That then which we Christians hope for, is not to enjoy
a more perfect rest than now we do; but more perfectly to enjoy the self-same
rest. The same yesterday, to day, and for ever. 1 Cor. 13.10, 12. Heb. 13.8.
And that secondly, This does not destroy, but confirm the external
solemnization of the Lords day, or first day in the week, both in a cessation
from all such works, as may be either a vocamenta, or impedementa, and a
diligent and special waiting upon God in the public dispensing of such
administrations as he has instituted: the thus exercising and stirring up the
gifts and talents which God has given to some for the benefit of others upon a
special day, being a powerful means (as Mr. Shepherd well says) to sabbatize
every day.

The fourth Querie.
4. Whether to a Christian, the Sabbath be to cease from working according to a
form or letter?

If by working according to a form or letter be meant, either a laboring in
the flesh, or power of the old man, according to the tenor of the legal literal
commands, or a mere outside formal working (in our own time which is always
ready. John 7.6.) according to any prescribed form or penned rule whatsoever,
then does the spiritual Sabbath imply a cessation from working according to a
form or letter. For first, These are our own works both in respect of the
principle and the end; done either first, in the time of darkness, to kindle a
fire, and warm our selves with the sparks thereof. Isa. 50.11. Or secondly, to
get praise of men, Aliud erat Hypocritas esse: aliud tanquam Hypocritas. Voluit
autem ne hypocritis quidem similes esse.
Luke 16.15. Or thirdly, out of custom and conformity, which is to be if not
Hypocrites, yet (...) as the Hypocrites, Mat. 6.5. Or fourthly, to quiet
conscience, and bribe the Bayliffe for serving the Writ according to the Law,
though it may be intended as well, as pretended to pacify the angry Creditor,
and get the debt book crossed. Secondly, this is a serving in the oldnesse of
the letter, and not in the newness of the Spirit, as the Gospel-commands
require, or a worshipping without the Spirit and truth; which sort of
worshippers (though Satan-like, they will needs present themselves amongst the
Sons of God) Job 1.6. yet does not the Father seek for any such to worship
him. John 4.23.24. Thirdly, This argues a man to have only (...) not (...) 2 Timothy 3.5. a legal form of godliness, according to the directions whereof
(though with a heart unpurified) he endeavors to act, in the mean while
denying and mocking at the power of godliness. Scilicet, The free
Gospel-working Spirit, by which Christians are acted. The Sons of God (...)
aguntur (as the vulgar) are acted by the Spirit of God, Romans 8.14. But if by
working according to a form or letter, be meant no more than working such works
as are agreeable to a form or letter (which differs, if we speak strictly, The
Law with out, though it be no rule of the spirit, yet it is that rule according
to which the spirit guides us to walk, and by which we are to judge, whether
the guidance be the Spirits guidance or no. Shepherds Thesis. 87.47.
from working according, etc.) or be it working according to a form or letter
(suppose that form or letter to be the Evangelical (...) or (...), Romans 6.17. 2 Timothy 1.13. not the legal (...). Romans 2.20. 2 Timothy 3.5. and the works wrought
accordingly as is there required, then does the spiritual Sabbath not exclude,
but imply a working according to a form or letter. For first, The Spirit (as
has been said) works no other works, but such as are agreeable to this form.
The works of the Spirit when wrought, being always agreeable thereunto (though
I dare not say) that the Spirit in working is at any time guided thereby.
Secondly, This form or letter requires all our works to be wrought in God,
John 3.21. or in the Spirit, and not in the power or life, but in the weakness
and death of selfish flesh. Thirdly, The rule or form may be observed by
Christians in acting, and yet Christians not always observe a form or rule,
when and while they act. Artificers that have any acquired habit, may work
agreeable to the rules of art, and yet not always by their artificial rules.
The rule is always Regula operis, a rule of the work, and it is wrong if not
agreeable thereunto; but not always Regula operantis, the rule of the worker (
Scilicet in working) for it is not contrary to the rule, though he sometime
work without looking at it: So the work be wrought accordingly; and when
wrought, It is not essential to the rule to give power to conform unto it (nor
to command conformity) but to be that according to which we are to be
conformed. Shep. Sab. These. 86.
be according as is required in it. And he (when all is done) submit his skill
and work to be tried by the standing rule. Fourthly, As the Spirit is the
Pylate; So this form is the compass, not by which he steereth, yet according
to which we are steered. As the Spirit is the guide: So this form is the rule
not by which he guides, yet according to which we are guided. As Christ in
Spirit is the King or Ruler, so is this form the Magna Charta according to
which he (though an absolute Prince) is pleased to declare, we shall be ruled
by. Fifthly, As the Spirit rules and governs according to these sciptural
laws enacted in heaven, and proclaimed by the Apostles on earth: So these
Scriptural laws require us to be ruled and governed by the Spirit of Christ,
As the Spirit leads us to the word, so the word leads us to the Spirit, etc.
These. 89.
and make it death either to resist the commands of this governor (who always
commands agreeable to these laws) or yield obedience to any other, whether
flesh, world, or devil, who would rule according to their, or our wicked lusts.
Sixthly, the Negative commands do obligare semper and ad semper, always and
unto all times: so that it is a transgression of the Sabbath, ever to obey
either flesh, world, or devil (suppose that the Spirit did suspend his Actings
for a time) The affirmative Semper, but not ad semper, always but not unto all
times (except that of walking after the Spirit, because that virtually
contains all the rest. And the Spirit is continually moving, enclining, or
powerfully working a Christian to some or other of the duties there required;
Spiritus sanctus nunquam otiosus est: in piis semper aliquid agit quod pertinet
ad regnum Dei. Luth. Clas. 1. cap. 11.
if not to those (which commonly past under the name of works and duties, yet
to that which is the work of works, Scilicet, Believing, waiting, and resting
in and upon God by Jesus Christ, Exodus 14.13, 14. Isa. 50.10.30.7. Psalm. 27.14.
Ioh. 6.29. And hence it is, that prayer is always a duty, because in Specie
always commands Christians: and yet are not Christians bound to be of the Sect
of the Euchitae always praying. The determining in individuo, when and which
of these works is to be done by each particular Christian, is left to the holy
Spirit, whom Christ has sent to govern and guide his Church by the law of
light, life and love unto the end of the world. For otherwise first Christ
could not discharge those relations of Head, Husband, Bishop, King, Lord, and
Captain: all which (keeping within the bounds of the General Law) Determine for
those under them. Qua tales, when, and which particular duties each shall do, I
say to this man go, and he goes, to another come, and he comes, and to my
servant do this, and he does it. Secondly, There would be no sin against the
Holy Ghost, but only against the letter; whereas the great sin is called the
sin against the Holy Ghost: and offering dispite to the Spirit of Grace, Acts
7.51. Heb. 10.29. Mat. 12.32. Thirdly, Christians now should be in the same
bondage as the Jews were under the Law. Scilicet, bound Sub poena peccati and
mortis, to act at the mere commandment of the letter, Rom, 7.9. But the law of
the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, haeth made them free from that law of sin
and death. Romans 8.2.14. So that it is not the letter it self; when of it self
commanding, or as simply spoken by our neighbor, but to Jesus Christ himself
speaking in the letter, or speaking the things contained in the letter, that
Christians nextly and immediately owe their obedience. And hence it is clear,
(for ought I yet see) that though sin De facto, when committed, be firstly and
formally the transgression of the letter or law without: yet in fieri, or in
committing, it is firstly and more directly against the Spirit or law of the
mind, that is, within. And though it be granted, that to cross the Spirit, is
not that which firstly makes the fact sin: yet it is that which firstly makes
this or that Christian a sinner. If thou will know, in the definition of it,
what is Rebellion, and what is sin, consult with the letter, or Law, 1 John
3.4. But if thou will know in individuo, what is rebelling and sinning, or who
rebels and sins, look within thine own heart, even now standing out against
some or other of the personal commands (which are always legal) of Jesus
Christ our King and Lord; Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man
hear my voice, etc. Rev* 3, 20. The words that I speak are Spirit and life.
John 6.63. If any ask, how shall Christians know when to do this, and when
that, or which of these in particular is to be done. First, must they set down
the time themselves, wherein they will perform such and such duties? Shall they
appoint aforehand such an hour they will pray, and such an hour they will
mourn for sin, and such an hour they will do acts of charity? etc. No; For
first, Christians should stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made
them free. Gal. 5.1. And as in respect of times and seasons they are not to be
enbondaged, or imposed upon by others: so much less by themselves: what has
any man to do to be his own Lawmakers? By multiplying laws, to multiply sins?
Or to bind himself in such things, as these in which Christ has left him at
liberty? Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. Since secondly, It is clear that Christ never
appointed any set times for his Disciples, nor ordered them to appoint any for
themselves to perform such and such duties in, but left them free both as to
the particular times to perform the duties in, and as to the particular duties
to be performed in such and such times. He said, When ye pray, pray thus: not,
ye shall pray, then, and there, and this; Mat. 6.6, 7, 9. and in like manner,
When ye give alms, and when ye fast, and as often as ye do this, do it, etc.
Mat. 6.2, 3. Mat. 6.16.7. 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. Nay, where do the Apostles,
throughout their Epistles ever enjoin any such thing to Christians, or ever
reprove them for the neglect of any such a duty. Thirdly, There is the same
reason for Christians to limit themselves unto certain places, subpoena
peccati, as unto certain times which yet none do, which know (in any measure,)
what is meant by christian liberty? Though nevertheless, fourthly Christians
out of a consideration of one another infirmities (while here in the flesh) as
well as for order, decency, and conveniences sake, both may and should appoint
times and places for assembling themselves together, to provoke unto love and
to good works, and so much the more as they see the day approaching, Heb.
10.24, 25: 1 Cor. 14.40. and are then in a special manner to stir up the (...),
or gifts that are in them, 2 Timothy 1.6. being strengthened (...), in, or by the
grace that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.1. Secondly, must Christians wait for
extraordinary impulsions of the Spirit? No; For first, though sometimes, and
upon some special occasions, Christians are said (...), to be vehemently
stirred or sharpened in Spirit, Christians may expect (...), to be led by the
Spirit, Romans 8.14. but not (...), to forcibly moved or born anew, as the
Prophets. Though men may thus depute and appoint days to worship God, yet they
cannot state any such days, but only as Gods providence calls them to it,
according to the present occasion: Therefore it were certainly a sin, if a
State should appoint once every year to be a fasting-day in a religious way;
God did so, but men have no power to do so, the reason is this; because they do
not know, but God may call them to rejoicing upon that day, they have nor the
liberty of the time, etc. Buroughs in Hos. Lect. 8. page 409.
as Acts 17.16. yet not always. The work of the Spirit may be irresistible in
it self, and infallibly produce its effect in, or upon, and yet not work
irresistibly as unto us. For secondly, our Spirits are not said to be forced
but freed, made free, or freely carried out to work by the Holy Ghost. He
works in us to will. Phil. 2.13. Thy people shall be a willing people in the
day of thy power, Psalm. 110.3. Thirdly, The Spirit ordinarily works us to, or
in us, this or that by proposing to us objects suitable to the eye or ear, as
appears from those Ordinances appointed by Christ himself. And therefore
thirdly, Christians (like the wise Virgins, With oil in their vessels, with
their lamps: Matthew. 25.4.) should continually watch and wait for their Lord and
Master Jesus, to call them forth to all or any of these, either immediately by
spiritual suggestions, and heavenly impression upon their hearts and minds, or
mediately by providential objective administrations and occasions; as, and when
it shall seem good unto him. For first, Christianus verus (as Luther, Class. 3,
loc. 1.) nec liber est, nec servus, neque Indaus, neque Gentilis neque
masculus, neque foemina, neque Clericus, neque Laicus, neque orat, neque legit,
neque facit, neque omittit; Sed ad omnia prorsus indifferens est faciens and
omittens sicut ad rationem sese res rel obtulerit, vel abstulerit. A true
Christian is neitner free nor bound, neither Jew nor Gentile, neither male nor
female, neither Clerk nor Layman, neither prays nor reads, nor does, nor
omitteth; but is altogether indifferent unto all things, doing and omitting
each, as the matter or occasion shall either offer or withdraw it self.
Secondly, This is agreeable to the Evangelical (...), form or letter, which
points not out for Christians a Tempus Physicum of hours, days, months,
etc. calculated by the motions of the Sun and Moon accordingly, as was done to
the Jews under the Law, as appears by their new Moons, and their other
appointed solemnities, which continued till the time of Reformation, or the
passing away of old things, Heb. 9.10. 2 Cor. 5.17. But a Tempus Theologicum,
or Evangelicum, calculated by the motions of the Son of righteousness, Mal.
4.2. which by its distance and presence, and various workings in and upon
things by an Occult influence causes to Christians, their Seed-time and
Harvest, cold and heat, Summer and Winter, day and night, a time to be born,
and a time to die, a time to weep, Ephesians. 6.18. He does not say (say Zancby and
others) (...) in every particular time, but (...) in every season, every fit
time, when just occasion and opportunity is offered, Leigh: crit. sacr.
and a time to laugh, a time to keep silence, and a time to speak, a time to
love, and a time to hate, etc. Eccl. 3.2, 3. etc. according to that Mar. 2.19.
Can the children of the Bride-chamber fast? (or as Luke) can ye make the
children of the Bride-chamber fact, while the Bridegroom is with them? As long
as they have the Bridegroom with them, they cannot fast. The presence of the
Bridegroom points out and makes it a day of feasting unto such children,
what ever be the condition either of John or the Pharisees Disciples? But the
days will come, when the Bridegroom shall be taken away from them, and then
shall they fast in those days The absence of the Bridegroom points out, and
makes it a time of fasting and mourning to those children, though may be,
neither the Disciples of John, nor the Pharisees be troubled at the want of any
such thing, to which accords that of Iam. 5.13. If any among you be
afflicted, let him pray, is any merry? let him sing. And hence it is, that
neither the Priest nor the Levite, that pretended to walk precisely, according
to the Mosaical rules, but the good Samaritan (a man looked upon as irregular,
and an Antinomian by them) is said by Christ to be neighbor to him that fell
among thieves, and proposed as an example to the Lawyer; Do thou likewise, that
is, show mercy as this Samaritan has done, when thou see a man in misery,
for that is the time to love indeed, and he is thy neighbor which way soever
he travels, or what countryman soever he be, Luke 10.29. and see 1 John 3.17.
2 Cor. 9.7. Secondly, The Leper of Samaria that returned back and gave thanks,
Fatemur bona opera fidem sequi debore, imo non debere, sed sponte sequi sicut
arbor bona non debet fructum facere, sed sponte facit. Luth. Cl. 3. loc. 9
as the present occasion required (according to 1 These. 5.18. Ephesians. 5.20.) is
commended above the nine that came from Iudaea, and went on forwards, according
to the letter of the legal command, to show themselves unto the Priests, Luke
17, 15, 16, 17, 18. Thirdly, The blessed man is said to be like the tree by the
Rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, Psalm. 1.3. not so
much working rationally, or upon consideration of what will follow his doing or
not doing, as bearing fruits naturally from an internal principle of life in
such a time as the husbandman expects, and comes to seek for it. Luke 13.6.7.
Such a one was Timothy, Phil. 2.20, who naturally (or from his
birth-principles, as the word implies) cares for their estate. And the blessed
man, Ier. 17.7, 8. Thirdly, we read not that either the Patriarks before the
Law, or Christ and his Apostles since the Law, prescribed certain times
aforehand, wherein they looked upon themselves as bound to perform such and
such duties: But they stood always ready (as in the volume of the Book it is
written of them) to do the will of their God, yea his law was in their hearts.
Fourthly, Christians now (in the time of their darkness, or rather in the time
of lights apperance, Oration est ardua and magni laberis, and long difficilem,
quam praedicatio verbi.

Orare est difficilimum opus, idea etiam carissimum a id. Luth. Cl. 3. loc. 17.


which makes them truly see darkness and their own blindness, and in the
confessionary part of their prayers) acknowledge, that they know not what to do
or say, unless it please God in much mercy by his Spirit to direct their minds,
and move and work their hearts to that which is the good, acceptable, and
perfect will of God. Romans 12.2. we know not (they will say in the very day of
trouble, when they ought to pray indeed) what we should pray for as we ought;
But the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with Groanings which cannot
be uttered, and he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to the will of
God. Romans 8.26, 27.

The seventh Passage. Christians when they Glory, glory in their sins.
THis passage seems to relate to the practice of Christians, what it is, that
De facto they do glory in, when they glory, and not to the faith of Christians,
what it is that they believe De debito, when they glory, they should glory in.
And now, there is a great difference in Theology betwixt these Queries:
Scilicet, what Christians should do De debito, and what Christians ordinarily
do, De facto. To the first (though it be not directly contained in the passage:
yet for clearing both the truth and my self. I answer, First negatively)
Christians when they glory, should not glory in their own righteousness, for
first, we are all as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness as filthy
rags, Isa. 64.6. Accounted by Paul (...) quasi (...), Dutig, or dogs-meat;
fit to be thrown to the dogs of the concision, and not to be reserved as food
for the spirits of those that have Jesus Christ to rejoice in. Phil 3.3, 8.
Secondly, Christ advises, Not to let the left hand know what the right hand
does. Mat. 6.3. And though he himself be pleased in mercy to say, Well done
thou good and faithful servant, Mat. 25.21. yet he teaches us to say, (though
we did all things that are commanded us) That we are unprofitable servants.
Luke 17.10. Thirdly, The Pharisee is checked for preferring himself before the
Publican, (though he acknowledged all the distinguishing works to come from
God) Luke 18.11, 14. See Phil. 2.3. And those that pleaded, Lord, Lord, have
not we etc. gathering acquaintance with God from a recital of the more than
ordinary works, which they had done in his name; Hear God professing unto them.
I never knew you, Depart from me, ye that work iniquity. Mat. 7.22, 23. Mat.
25.44. Fourthly, It is of grace, not of works, least any man should boast. Ephesians.
2.9. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only. Psalm.
71.16. Fifthly, Glorying in our own righteousness, and duties, or
performances, argues a resting and rejoicing in them, and seven of our eminent
Divines (five now Commissioners appointed, etc.) Assert; That Christians when
they abound in much doing, and well doing, In an Epistle prefixed to Mr.
Buroughs Gospel-conversation.
should be still as much afraid of resting in doing well, as of committing ill.
And be content to have all flowers withered, that refresh them without Christ.
And when after humiliation and casting down for sin, they begin to stand
upright (as they think) upon the legs of their prayers, performances, inherent
graces, and qualifications, and righteousness, and holiness, expressed in
their lives and conversations. They may, yet notwithstanding all this be
brought, not to glory in themselves, but in Jesus Christ; and willingly come
down from the throne of their own conceits, sufficiencies, abilities, and lie
at the footstool and threshold of Jesus Christ. That seeing they know nothing;
are nothing, have nothing, do nothing, they may be nothing in their own eyes,
that Christ might do all their works in them and for them, and so may wholly
live upon Christ and to Christ, still drawing virtue from him, seeing a need of
Christ and nothing else, and finding a fullness and help in him, and nothing
else.

Secondly, christians when they glory, should not glory in their gifts, whether
inward or outward, For first, It is forbidden, Ier. 9.29. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, neither let the mighty man glory in his might, let not the
rich man glory in his riches. Secondly, they are but common to the Reprobate
and the Elect; No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before him.
Eccl. 9.1. See Luke 10.20. Thirdly, who makes thee to differ from another, and
what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory, as if thou had not received it. 1 Cor. 4.7? Fourthly, gifts
are bestowed upon us by God as instrumental, to draw our hearts to glory in the
mercy, bounty, and faithfulness of him that gives, and that he is ours, though
we, more unworthy than other men, Genesis 32.9, 10. and not in the enjoyment of
the gifts themselves, or that they are ours, and other men more unworthy than
we. Luke 18.11. Thirdly, Christians when they glory, should not glory in their
sins. For first, christians by their sins grieve the holy Spirit, whereby they
are sealed to the day of Redemption Ephesians. 4.30. and therefore are they to grieve
and be humbled for their sins, (which is inconsistent with glorying in them)
nay, even for the sins of their brethren. 1 Cor. 5.2. And this godly sorrow
works repentance, not to be repented of; Scilicet, A detestation and
renunciation of all sins, I am troubled that I made you sorry, and yet not, for
what zeal, what revenge, etc. 2 Cor. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11? Secondly, Christians
should be so far from glorying in, that they are, or ought to be ashamed of
their sins: what fruit had you then in those things, whereof you are now
ashamed. Romans 6.21? And the carnal earthly minded christians glorying in the
satisfaction of their lusts, are said (as a thing most abominable) to glory in
their shame. Phil. 3.19. Thirdly, the Saints, as Job, David, Peter, etc. are
frequently brought by God to loath and abhor sin and themselves, because
sinners: but never either to glory in their sins, or in themselves, because
they had sinned against that gracious God, Who does neither behold iniquity in
Jacob, nor sees perverseness in Israel. Numb. 23.17.

Secondly, I answer affirmatively, christians, when they glory, should glory in
the Lord: For first, Christ of God is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption; that according, as it is written, He that
glories, let him glory in the Lord. 1 Cor. 1.30, 31. Secondly, Glory is
peculiar unto the Lord, My glory will I not give unto another, Isa. 42.8. Thine
is the Kingdom, Power, and Glory. Mat. 6.3. Thirdly, Paul says, I will glory
(...), in mine infirmities, or in the weakenings, and disenablings of my self,
(from attaining ease in the flesh) by those crosses, pricks, or buffettings of
Satan's messengers; yet not simply in them as considered in themselves, but
because he found them Instrumental (through the wise and merciful ordering of
his God) to take away all occasion of glorying in any fleshly things, and to
give occasion to the grace and mercy of God, to appear as sufficient for him,
and to the power of God to be made perfect through those his infirmities, and
to rest in and over him. 2 Cor. 12.9. that so he might be brought to rest,
rejoice and glory (which is the true christian sabbatizing) only in the Lord.
See Phil. 1.3.

That the answer to the second Querie may be more distinct and clear, note
first, christians are either formal, such only in outward profession: or
spiritual, such also in deed and in truth. Secondly, The Pronoun (they) may
relate either to these very Christians meant in this passage, or to some others
spoken of in a precedent, connected (though here omitted) discourse. Thirdly,
The quantity of the Praedicate is not to be supplied with the adverb Semper,
always, or constantly, but with Maxima ex part, for the most part, or most
commonly, or aliquando sometimes, Fourthly, glorying is either inward in the
heart, or outward in words, And then this either real, which is a publication,
or a public narration of our sins accompanied with a conceit of an excellency
in, and a delight arising from them, or imagined; and such only in the account
of some sort of men, being indeed nothing else but a public confession of our
sins, accompanied with a detestation of, and an inward compunction for them.
Fifthly, Sins are either of ignorance or knowledge, either such as appear black
and ugly, or such as appear white and beautiful in the eyes of men.

1. Formal Christians when they glory, do most commonly glory both inwardly and
outwardly in their seemingly beautiful, if not ugly sins. For first, The
Pharisees (an emblem of such) are said to sound Trumpets, Mat. 6.2. and make
their brags De splendidis peccatis, of their fair outside sins, Luke 18.11.
which though highly esteemed by men, yet are abomination in the sight of God.
Luke 16.15. Secondly, The false Disciples are said (as their common practice)
to glory in appearance, or in the face, that is, in outward disguising, and
that colored show of man's wisdom and eloquence. Engl. Annot. 2 Cor. 5.12. and
the embondaging of others to the legal yoke. Gal. 6.13. Thirdly, The Apostle
says, That such professors as minded earthly things, gloried in their shame.
Phil. 3.19 And is it not apparent, that many in these days do ordinarily boast
of, and rejoice in, fulfilling those lusts which they, like slaves, are
secretly making provision for; If not (I say) in fulfilling those that are
from-wards them, bringing shame abroad, and want at home; as drunkenness,
whoredom, swearing, and the like, yet in fulfilling those that are toward
them, bringing profit and worldly honor, as covetousness, pride, envy, etc?

Secondly, The most spiritual christians, when they glory, do in heart if not
in words, sometimes glory in their sins, if not of knowledge, yet of ignorance,
if not such as appear ugly, yet such as have a fairer show in the flesh. For
first, Christians cannot say their hearts are always clean from any sin
(except that against the Holy Ghost) Psalm. 19.12, 13. Ier. 17.9. and then
doubtless sometimes not free from glorying in their sins, at least of
ignorance. Secondly, The Christians at Corinth walked sometimes as men (
Enevyings, strife, and divisions, and lawsuits, being amongst them, 1 Cor.
3.3.6.6.) and then consequently they gloried sometimes in fulfilling those
lusts, which for the present they walked after. Thirdly, the Church at Laodicea
(one of the seven to which Christ was pleased to write) did for a time glory in
a covering, but not of Gods Spirit; saying, I am rich and increased with goods,
and have need of nothing; And knew not that she was wretched, and miserable,
and poor, and blind, and naked. Rev. 3.17. Fourthly, Christians are sensible
of, and often humbled for, many proud risings, and secret boastings in their
hearts, occasioned by the sight and sense, but of some outside fleshly
performance, whereby they think they have gained praise of men, and seem to
themselves to differ from others. Ye are puffed up, your glorying is not good.
1 Cor. 5.2.6.

Cham. Tom. 3. lib. 8. cap. 3. Sect. 24.

David understood this reasoning to be indeed the true reasoning of the
covenant of Grace, and he pleaded thus with God. Psalm. 25.11. Pardon my
iniquity for it is great: Lord my iniquity is great, therefore pardon it. Ser.
Buroughs in Hos. cap. 2. v 14. Lect. 12. This Therefore has a strange and
wonderful. Wherefore, etc.


3. Spiritual Christians, when they, that is, the formal professors glory in
their own righteousness, or when they, that is, they themselves glory really in
the Lord, do then most commonly in that imagined kind of glorying, glory in
their sins, that is, do publish or publicly declare (though with detestation
of and hearty compunction for their sins.) First, what great sinners they were
before their conversion, and how God prevented them with his mercy, calling to
them before they ever looked after him. I was a blasphemer, a persecuter, and
injurious (...) Sed misericordia sum donatus, as Beza, but I was had mercy on,
because I did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. which last words, though
some conceive added by way of extenuation, yet does Chamier, out of Salmero
interpret, as added by way of aggravation of his sin. Qausi diceret, Deus vidit
me per incredulitatem coecatum, ut maia mea non agnoscerem, ideo mera sua
misericordia praevenit me, peccatum enim causam esse summae bonitati ut
subveniat, As if he should have said, God has seen me blinded through
unbeleef: so that I could not acknowledge my misdeeds, therefore he has
prevented me with his mere mercy; for sin is a cause to infinite goodness,
that it may come and help: and compares it with that parallel. Genesis 8.21.
Secondly, what great sinners they yet are, though converted, according to that
1 Timothy 1.15. Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
Thirdly, that the Law (...), Subintravit, or obiter subiit, as Erasmus, came in
unexpectedly, as to the Jews: Scilicet, Not that righteousness (as they
imagined) but that the offense might abound Romans 5.20. (...) was added as an
appendant to the promise, (...) for transgressions sake. Vide Zanch. fid. obs.
in cap. cap. 13 Aph 7.
Gal, 3.19. Scilicet, To side with sin against the person, or to be the
strength of sin. 1 Cor. 15.56. And not (...) as Christ was delivered, Scilicet,
Appositissime igitur citatum hoc testimonium ab Apostolo and recte est
explicatum ^er (...) cum si finis etiam declaretur non quidem ipsis
peccatoribus se Deo propositus fuos ad tempus tentationibus exponenti. Beza in
To. 3, 4 If Gregory said truly of Adams sin, fael^^ culpa, it was a happy
fault, etc. no question but God cat overruled the sins of his people for their
own advantage As a godly man said, he go more good by his sins, than by his
Graces. Audeo dicere, etc. Augustine. I dare be bold to say, that it is
profitable for proud men to fall into manifest and open sins, whereby they may
be ashamed, and made loathsome in their own eyes, this therefore God does to his
people, to prevent sin, he lets them fall into sin,
for the taking away of sin from the person, or siding with the person against
sin, by conferring either justifying, or sanctifying grace John 1.17. Romans
4.15. And that yet for all this, Where sin abounded (...), Grace did much more
abound. Romans 5, 20. Fourthly, that Christians are divinely ordered, though
never compelled, permitted, though never commanded to sin against God; that
hence God may prove true, and every man a liar: That as it is written, He may
be justified in his sayings, and clear when he is judged. Romans 3.4. Or that the
most sanctified man may come sensibly to know, that there is weakness and
wickedness remaining in his heart, which as yet he never saw, as it is evident
in the case of Hezekiah, and Peter: the one being left to himself, (for this
very end) after a most solemn profession made to God of the uprightness of his
life. Isa. 38.3.39.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 32.31. The other after a most zealous
confession of the strength of his faith, Mat. 26.33, 34. Fifthly, That as the
Devil through his subtilty and malice does often bring the greatest evil to
them out of their good works, Scilicet pride against God, and Ignorance of
self-nakednesse, Rev. 3.17. So does God through his infinite wisdom and
goodness, often bring great good out of their sins, Scilicet, the advancement
of his free mercy in pardoning them at their worst condition, when they have
least to say for themselves, and against the Devil: and his severe justice in
condemning the Devil at his best condition, when he has most to say for
himself, and against them, witness his dealings with Adam, Genesis 3.14, 15. with
David, 2 Samuel 12, 13. with Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.26. and with Peter, Luke
23.61, 62. And now, though this publication and penitential confession of sins,
be to a single eye, and a spiritual man, instrumental for the glorifying of
Gods grace shining clearly in the glass of the Gospel, above that cloudy
appearance in the Law, the casting down of man in himself, and the rendering of
sin most odious and abominable: yet looked upon with a double eye, and to a
carnal man, it is all one with a real glorying in, or a public narration of
our sins, accompanied with a conceit of an excellency in, and a delight arising
from them. For first, Let christians confess with Paul, I was a blasphemer, a
persecuter, and injurious, and yet I was had mercy on, Burges Instit. Lect. 27.
page 237.
or God who is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved us,
quikened us, when we were dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.4, and these men
presently conceit, that they teach people to commit those sins to prepare
them for mercy or converting grace, and that they not only deny good works to
be the way to get salvation. But assert bad works to be the way to obtain
justification at the hands of God. Secondly, If christians confess after the
receiving of grace and mercy, that they are the chiefest of sinners, or count
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus their
Lord, for whom they have suffered the loss of all things, and do count all
things but dung, that they might win Christ. Phil. 3.8. And these men
conclude peremptorily, that they delight in committing the chiefest of sins,
and are professed enemies to all good works. Thirdly, if christians recite that
of Paul, the law entered that sin might abound; but where sin abounded, grace
did much more abound: These men proclaim them Antinomians against all Law, and
unless they will recant and use it, not only (...) as becomes the nature of a
Law. 1 Timothy 1.8. but (...) in the very place, and steed of the Gospel, they
will not let to swear, that they are Libertines, and teach men to continue in
sin, God suffered David to fall to cure his pride of heart, make him know
himself, and magnify the riches of his grace in his recovery.

Ball. cove. page 155.


that Grace may abound. Romans 6.10. Fourthly, If christians confess with David,
Against thee, thee only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight, that
thou might be justified in thy sayings, and over come when thou art judged.
These men not understanding how the unrighteousness of men serves to commend
the righteousness of God, censure them either to judge God unrighteous, who
takes vengeance, or that it is man's duty to lie, that the truth of God may
thereby more abound to his glory. Romans 3.5.7. Or if fifthly and lastly, we say,
that out of the evil we do, God many times brings good: they will not stick
to affirm that we say, Let us do evil that good may come thereof: whose
damnation is just, Romans 3.8.

The Eighth Passage. Righteousness or good works are to be done by me, but
are not profitable unto me, but unto others.
THis Passage seems to contain three Positions, the first Assertive.
Righteousness or good works, are to be done by me: The second exceptive. But
righteousness or good works are not profitable unto me. The third Restrictive.
But righteousness or good works are profitable unto others. For the first of
these that it is true in Thesi, The first Position prooved.
is unquestionable, and however it is already proved in the explanation of the
fifth Passage. If any take occasion from the Pronoun (me) and question it in
Hipothesi, 1. Whether righteousness or good works are to be done by Ministers.
2. Whether by such as me, whom, those that style themselves able, godly, and
Orthodox, represent as Libertines and enemies to all good works. Then first,
not only good works of piety, such as preaching, praying, and the like, are to
be done by Ministers, and sins of another nature; Acted Cum privilegio, Mat.
23.14. But works of righteousness and charity. For first, the Apostle says,
Let ours also (that is, Homines nostri ordinis as Beza) learn to maintain good
works, for necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful. Tit. 3.14. And
expressly requires these as well as those. 1 Timothy 3, 2, 3. Secondly, Paul
enjoyneth Timothy to be an example to the Believers, in word, in conversation,
in charity, 1 Timothy 4.12. And Peter charge the Pastors in general to be
examples to their flocks, 1 Pet. 5.3. not to stand like posts only, pointing
out the way unto others, but to walk in it themselves. Thirdly: Peter dehorteth
them from false lucre, from Lordlinesse and Domineering. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. And
John wrote against Diotrophes, who loved to have the pre-eminence, and
challenged him for prating against poor christians with malicious words, and
that not content therewith, neither did he himself receive the brethren, but
forbad them that would, and cast them out of the Church. Ioh, Epist. 3. verse.
9, 10. Fourthly, Melancthon (who continued forty years at Whittemberg, and yet
was always expecting a removal before the end of fourteen days) found special
need during his time, both of exhorting and reproving the men of his own order,
and thence often cried, Ab odio and rabie Theologorum, libera nos Domine! and
it is to be feared, that in these days of ours, there is not only need of
reproving and censuring the Antinomian Ministers for neglecting works of piety.
But likewise of exhorting and admonishing the Ministers counted Orthodox, to
perform works of righteousness and charity, to deal tenderly with religion, And
beware of offending the little ones. Aphor. Epist. Dedica.
Mat. 18.6. For first, what Mr. Baxter says of the humane nature in
Magistrates, without blemish to Magistracy; I think may as truly be said of the
humane nature in Ministers, without blemish to the Ministry. That for the most
part it can as ill bear a high estate, as a man's brains can endure to stand on
the pinnacle of a Steeple, never more subject to mis-judge of things, than when
advanced by the Magistrate to sit in Cathedra. Secondly, Saul (I mean the
blind zealot) begins already to breath out threatenings, as if he had
letters in his pocket, and were in hopes to mount to Damascus. Thirdly, if any
enquire, Quid rerum nunc geritur in Anglia? The answer is, Consulitur de
religione, And I learned in a Sermon (preached by the right worthy
Vice Chancellor at Oxford, in my way betwixt Lancashire and London) that
Nunquam pejus de Religione consulitur quam cum incidit inter Reverendissimos.

2. Righteousness or good works are to be done in a special manner by such as
me. First, That with well doing we may put to silence the ignorance of foolish
men. 1 Pet. 2.15. Secondly, That we adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in
all things. Tit. 2.10. And make it evident to all, that we are not redeemed to
sin, but from sin. Nor that we turn the grace of God into wantonness, but are
turned from wantonness by the grace of God, which has not only brought
Salvation, but Sanctification; freely and effectually teaching us (what the law
can only tell to, and in appearance force from them, Scilicet,) That denying
ungodliness and worldly lust, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world, Titus 2.12. Thirdly, To heap coals of fire upon the
adversaries heads: coals (I mean) Amoris, to destroy the sin (if possible)
for the persons sake, which is the Gospel-way: Not Furoris, to destroy the
person, if God will permit, for the sins sake, which is the legal way; knowing
that it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay says the Lord. Romans 12.19,
20. For fourthly, we are not only accounted by others, but really know and
acknowledge our selves, to be of the number of those Bankerupts, to whom much
is forgiven: and that therefore there is much reason of our loving much. Luke
7.39 43. The debt-book is frankly crossed without our paying of one farthing,
and therefore it is not meet that we of all men should take our fellow servants
by the throats, saying to any, Pay what thou owe: but be tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us. Ephesians.
4.32. And hence fifthly, I cannot but admire the furious blindness of some
zealots in these days, that will maintain good works to be the cause, if not
of acquiring, yet at least of continuing, and not loosing Justification; and
yet dare pull their fellow servants by the throats that owe them, I am
confident, under the value of an hundred pence, Mat. 18.28. contrary to that
very Scripture, upon which they seem mainly to ground this their assertion.

The second Position, how true in the Negative.
Righteousness or good works, are not profitable unto me or other Christians:
First, as procuring causes of election, for which opinion soever be embraced,
whether that which presents man as the object thereof, qua condendum, qua
conditum, qua lapsum, or qua credentem, as to be created, as created, as
fallen, or as believing; it matters not as to this, all implying the works we
now speak of, to be subsequent as fruits, and not antecedent as causes, or
conditions of election. And however the Apostle says, That it is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy, Vocation
according to the purpose of God is free, not depending upon any precedent
condition on our part required, or whereby we are fitted or prepared to receive
grace offered, nor upon the good use of any natural gift vouchsafed. Ball:
Covent. page 324,
Romans 9.16. The children being yet unborn, neither having done any good or
evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand: not of works
but of him that calls, it was said unto her, The elder shall serve the
younger, as it is written: Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated. Romans
9.11, 12, 13. Nor secondly, as the procuring cause of conversion or vocation;
For first, the contrary has been cleared in the explanation of the sixth
Passage. Secondly, it is evident, 2 Timothy 1.9. That God has saved us, and
called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his
own purpose, and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world
began. Thirdly, Christ himself professes, That he came not to call the
righteous, that is, men that can act, and do, and think themselves able to
perform such works, or offer such sacrifices as can De congruo at least, if not
De condigno, plead for the acceptance of their persons: But sinners that are
such as can neither act, nor do, but find themselves both unfit for, and
unworthy of any other recompense save the wages of sin, which is death. He
called indeed all, of all sorts, outwardly (...) to repent, but these alone
effectually (...) to the thing repentance, Mat. 9.13. That is, unto an
immediate and actual renunciation of all the works that they ever could, and
now fain would plead for themselves: that loosing all they have of their own,
they may win the Kingdom of heaven, not as their right in law according as the
Pharisees laid claim unto it, but violently (at least in the account of all
such men) videlicet, as sinners, etc. soldiers through the mere gift and
absolute conquest of their Captain Jesus. Mat. 11.12, 13. Romans 6.23. Nor
thirdly, as procuring causes of justification. For as our own works are not the
matter of that legal righteousness required in the old covenant: So are they
not the means of procuring that Evangelical righteousness, which is held forth
in the new. Because first, See Crandons example of Bap. Aphor. page 242*
there is no Scripture that requires them for that end, but calls men's
laboring with that intent, a seeking for righteousness, as it were, by the
works of the Law, and not by faith. Rom 9.32.2. To him that works, is the
reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt, Romans 4.4, So that if works were
means to procure the new Covenant, Justification, we were not justified freely
by grace, but of due and debt. It should not be said to him that works not,
but believes on him that justifies the ungodly His faith is counted for
righteousness, but to him that does work and meriteth, from him that
justifies the godly, his work is imputed, for it is righteousness. 3. Those
that assert works to be means, or procuring causes: say not that they are such,
Ratione valoris and meriti proprie sic dicti. By reason of any proportionable
inherent worth: But only Ratione pacti, as they are conditions to some promise
or other, freely made by God; and if that be true, neither righteousness, nor
good works, can be means or procuring causes of the the new Covenant,
Justification, because there is no promise thereof made to him that works or
does righteousness. It is no where said in Scripture, either ex. pressely, or
implicitly, that he that will work, or perform such and such duties, shall be
justified by the blood of Jesus, Nay, though we read, Acts 13.39. Whosoever
believes is justified, yet it is no where said, He that will believe, shall be
justified.

Fourthly and lastly, Righteousness or good works are not profitable to me or
other Christians: either as the way through which we come, as the means by
which we shall get, or as the condition upon which we may ground our hope of
eternal Glory. It is only Christ that opens heaven, it is only Christ that is
the way to heaven, besides him there is no way, no truth, no life. Mr.
Ambrose's second birth page 6.
Not as the way: For first, not works, but Christ alone is in Scriptures called
the way. Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whether thou go, and how
can we know the way: Jesus says unto him, I am the way, the truth, and the
life, no man comes unto the Father, but by me, John 14.5, 6. He has
consecrated for us a new and living way (in opposition to the old dead legal
way) through the veil, that is to say, his flesh, Heb: 10.20.2* Works cannot
be the way, because they are neither the truth; that is, the substance of the
Law, and ceremonies; nor the life which was held forth in the promises, for
they being not the truth; we who are unworthy, must not pass that way, and
they, not being the life, we who are sold under sin, cannot pass: So that
though works were granted to be a way in themselves, yet it is impossible, that
they should be a way unto us. The Gulf is so great, Luke 16.26. that there is
no descending or ascending, but by Jacobs Ladder which was put down by God, and
not put up by men: and is of that length, that the top reaches as high as God
in heaven: and the foot as low as Jacob laid upon the stone, Genesis 28.13, 14.3.
A way is a steady and immovable thing mounted so high, that the waters cannot
overflow it, and thence called a highway: but works are sandy and slippery,
soon overflowed, and not able to bear us up in the time of Temptation: Though
we know nothing by our selves, yet who dare stand upon this ground; and plead
not guilty before God. 4. Faith might more probably be called the way to heaven
than works: Since as the Apostle says, by faith we stand, 2 Cor. 1.24, and have
access by faith into the grace wherein we stand, Romans 5, 2. And yet is faith
only said to be a coming into the way, as Ioh 6.35. and never called the way it
self. Let therefore works be called (as they truly are) viae Regni, the ways
of the Kingdom: or motions of those that are in the way, not upwards to God,
for the good of themselves; but downwards to men for the good of others, or the
going forth of Christians from God (like the Angel, Heb. 1.14.) to do service
for Christ in the world: and not their coming to God by Christ (as in faith and
prayer) to wait upon and converse with him in heaven. Not as a means. For
first, The Scriptures hold them forth as such. 2. If the works of Christians be
the means or instumental cause, then are Christians themselves constituted the
principal cause: and consequently the Authors of their own salvation. And then
it shall not only be true that Christ is the Author of eternal salvation to
those that obey him. Heb. 5.9. But that Christians are the Authors of their own
salvation by their obedience unto Christ. 3. Promises under the Gospel that
seem most legal, do not run like those of the Law of Moses, He that does these
things shall live by them, that is, by them as means of life: But simply thus,
He that does such or such things, shall live and be saved, Scilicet, by the
mediation of Jesus Christ. Nor as conditions upon which we may ground our hope
of glory. For first, It is not works, but Christ in us, that is the hope of
glory, Col. 1.27. In all other grounds there is yea and nay, a doubtfulnesse
and uncertainty, which occcasioned Bellarmines Tutissimum est, etc. and
therefore no sure and steadfast Anchorage for the soul, Heb. 6.16. But all the
promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen unto the Glory of God; 2 Cor.
1.20. And thence as there needs not, so there is not any other sure and
steadfast ground of our future enjoying the things promised, but the present
indwelling of Christ in the heart by faith. 2. As other foundation or ground of
hope can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11, So
the very attempting to lay another ground, is both an overturning of the Faith,
and a turning back unto the Law of Moses. It being not the title and interest
to the Kingdom, or the Ius ad rem: But the possession of the Kingdom, or the
Ius in Re, that was promised in the law, and to be hoped for by the Jews in
case they could observe it. 3. Let works be made the condition upon which (as
some assert) Christians must necessarily ground their hope of Glory, and there
will be no ground of hope left for such as walk in darkness, and have no light.
Isa. 50.10. or that cannot by a reflexe Act discern themselves actually,
performing such and such conditions. The conditional promises (as a learned
writer observes) being made rather to the Acts than Habits. And least we, Ep.
before Mr. Burrought Gospel-conversation.
as well as they, should leave such poor souls comfortless, consider. First,
The admonition of the seven brethren in the forecited Epistle, Scilicet, there
is a sturdy stoutness and unyieldingness of spirit in men against the blessed
truths of the Gospel made known unto them, they must have peace, comfort, and
assurance their own way, or else they reject all; They would find a principle
of life and power within themselves, and not go to Christ for it; they would
bring something to Christ, and not fetch all from Christ, not knowing that the
way which all believers have gone (after much wearying of themselves to find
some thing in themselves) has been at last to roll themselves wholly upon the
free grace of God through Jesus Christ, seeing nothing in themselves, yet
giving glory to God by believing. And if they could bring their hearts so
disposed and qualified, yet they see the danger of resting in what they are,
have, and do. And if want of such and such conditions and qualifications, had
ground enough to keep them from Christ, it might have hindered any that ever did
cast themselves upon the free grace of God, because they would still have been
at a loss, finding a defect in them. 2. That he that is born of God, may have
the seed remaining in him, that he cannot sin, and yet not always be able to
bring forth the fruits of righteousness; at least not always see himself so
bringing forth, for that the being of grace in, does not necessarily infer the
seeing of grace by a christian. That which we look upon as Luz, may be Bethel,
the Lord in that place, and yet Jacob knew it not. Gen, 28.16. The promise made
good and applied to the soul, and yet the soul not make good the condition,
nor apply it self unto the promise: God be with us according to his word, Heb.
6.13. and yet we, as to our apprehensions, at a distance from God, Psalm. 77.3,
10.2. The Scriptures hold it forth as a firm qualication for a believer to see
himself unqualified (...) Poor or beggarly in spirit, Mat. 5.3. and that then
a man is in the fittest condition for the Kingdom of heaven to come to him:
when he sees himself able to perform no conditions whereupon he may ground his
coming into the heavenly Kingdom (...), The poor are Gospellized, Luke 7.22.
(the rich need not, they can Gospellize unto themselves, both fetch down a
promise suitable to that condition they have performed, and form a faith ad
libitum, out of that condition suitable to the promise) 4. Though they be
promises made to such and such conditions, and such Christians as have them,
while they can certainly say, We say that a christian in time of darkness and
temptation, is not to go by signs and marks, but obedientially to trust God,
as David calls upon his soul often.

Burg. vind. Leg. page 34. Abraham after he had done many great works in the
manner of Justification, he presented himself before the throne of grace: not
only Sub forma pauperis, but what it more, of an ungodly man, etc. Ball.
Covenant. page 72.


and see they have them, may ground their hopes (though neither infallibly nor
ultimately) thereupon: yet are there absolute promises, or rather declarations
of everlasting love through Jesus Christ to poor wretched creatures, that can
say nothing for, but all against themselves: Scilicet, that they are ungodly,
and the chief of sinners, 2 Timothy 2.25. And God by these, without those, is able
both to beget and increase faith in the heart of a sinner, and keep him by his
mighty power alone, through faith in that word unto salvation. He through the
Spirit, waiting continually for the hope of righteousness by faith, Gal. 5.5.
For 5. Though says receive much refreshment and encouragement from sense, yet
it receives life and nourishment only from the word, Rom 10.17. 2 Pet. 2.2.
Abraham the Father of the faithful, may part with Isaac (the only sensible
ground he had of the accomplishment of the promise) and yet his faith not be
thereby destroyed, but proved to be a true working faith indeed: And Christians
may loose the light of all their works, and yet not loose the life of faith nor
ground of hope: but come experimentally to know the true difference betwixt
faith and works: what it is to believe on him who justifies the ungodly, Romans
4.5. and to be justified by faith without the works of the Law. Romans 3.28. O
woman, great is thy faith, says Christ to her that believed, and yet saw, and
confessed her self to be a dog. Mat. 13.27, 28. And as that (says Mr. Burges)
is the best manifestation of love, when it is carried out to an enemy: So is
that faith when relying upon God, though feeling terrors, and hell within us.
See Burgess justificat Lect. 14. Sect. 8. page 117. Citing and approving of
Luthers twofold pardon, the first of mere faith, and obtains much of God:
the latter of experience, and takes off from the excellency of faith.

The second Position, how true in the affirmative.
Righteousness or good works are profitable to me and other Christians. 1. As
subservient, subsequent Testimonies of our adoption in Jesus Christ. For there
is assurance in a believing soul successively, or conjunctly, as pleases God
to order: either primary, which is the result of a direct act of the holy
Spirit: or secundary, which is the result of a reflexe act of an enlightened
understanding. The first comes like faith, not by seeing, but by hearing, and
the active instrument (if we may call it an instrument) by which the holy Ghost
gives, conveyes, or begets it, is by his own voice, testimony, or word: And the
Passive instrument through which as the Conduit, it is conveyed into the heart
or inwards of a Christian, is believing the Gospel or word of reconciliation,
as it is evident from Romans 8.16. Ephesians, 1.13. 1 John 5.10. Heb. 10.22. The second
is collected from sense, or a visible discerning the effects and fruits of the
Spirit of Christ in, and flowing from a believing heart, and is more properly
called Scientia, (...), knowledge from the effects, or an assurance of
knowledge, than of Faith, 1 John 2.3. 1 John 3.14, 19. because drawn by reason,
enlightened from fore-granted premises, the one whereof at least is evident to
sense. The former of these is independent as to works, infallible, has its
evidence in, and from its self, is fully satisfactory to the Spirit of a
Christian, and is most lively manifest, and vigorous in the evil day. The
latter is dependant upon works, will not amount to a (...) or full assurance,
has its evidence in and from the Ergo, or manner of inference, is very
convincing and silencing to reason, because grounded upon sense, and is
ordinarily had in the good Sunshine days of a Christian. Secondly, they are
profitable, etc. to prevent Satan's bringing believers into despair, or shaking
us on, though he cannot shake us from of the foundation of our faith. And hence
does Peter exhort Christians to add to their faith (through which they were
already established in the present truth, 1 Pet. 1.12.) Virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, etc. and assures them that if they do
these things, they shall never fail. 1 Pet. 1, 10. Because by the constant
going on in these, the advantage is taken from Satan of casting
stumbling blocks in our way, which the committing of gross, or discernably
poisonous sins does afford unto him, they being as it were Darts put into the
devils hands, which he sets on fire in hell, and shoots with terror through
the Canon of the Law, to batter down that spiritual Kingdom of righteousness,
peace and joy, which Christ has erected in us. 3. Though the Testimony of my
conscience, or my own integrity and innocence, in such a particular cause or
fact, be not able to bear me up to plead at the judgment seat of God, for I
know nothing by my self (says Paul) etc. yet is the Testimony of a good
conscience, or my own righteous dealing in such or such a cause, namely
instrumental; to encourage and embolden me, under, and against the false
accusations, aspersions, and extra-judicial censures and sentences of all sorts
of men and creatures whatsoever. Hic murus aheneus esto, nil conscire sibi etc.
could the Poet say. And here Paul accounted it a very small thing to be judged
of them, or of man's judgment: 1 Cor. 4.3, And Peter advises Christians to
have a good conscience, and tells them that it is better if the will of God
be so, that they suffer for well-doing, than for evil doing, 1 Pet. 3.16, 17.
Fourthly and lastly, good works are profitable, etc. To manifest to others the
reality of our faith, and the purity and undefilednesse of our Religon, and
undefiled before God and the Father, is this. To visit the fatherless and
widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted of the world. Iam.
1.27.

The third position proved. Calv. Instit. lib. 2. cap. 8. Sect. 54.
RIghteousness or good works are profitable unto others. For first, The Apostle
expressly asserteth, That they are good and profitable unto men. Tit. 3.8, 2.
Calvin makes the very essence of works as good to consist in their being
profitable unto others, and says, that in tota lege syllaba una non legitur,
etc. In the whole Law, there is not one syllable read, which prescribes a rule
to man concerning those things, which he should either do or omit for the
profit of his flesh. Insomuch, that thirdly, It is Antinomianisme with him, or
contrary to the bent of the Law, for a man to love and do for himself first,
and then secondly, To love, and do for his neighbor as for himself, making
love to self the rule, and so superior to the love of his neighbor. This
says he, was not the intent of the Lord in that Law, Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self. Sedubi naturali pravitate solebat. But whereas by a
natural depravity the affection of love was wont to reside within our selves;
He shows that it ought now to be diffused another way, it being the property
of true love, not to seek her own things. 1 Cor. 13.5. And hence, 4. it was in
my thoughts to have discussed the point a little with these Informers, and
enquired how this work of theirs (deemed so righteous) can be called good; fith
it will be hard to make it appear that it is profitable to any, save themselves
and me: To them carnally, and Per se, feeding (though not filling) that which
in them lusts unto envy; To me spiritually, and Per accidens, as the
messenger of Satan was by his buffeting unto Paul. But because I am persuaded,
it will be harder for them to kick against the prick they have made in their
own spirits, then it is for me to grapple with that they have made in my flesh,
I shall be silent as to that, and willingly (if my God see it good) suffer here
with Abel, as a man of vanity and nothing: and leave them Cain-like, men of
great possession, though smally bettered if in the land of Nod. And yet I must
needs say, to give even Cain his due (the pattern of all such as sin against
the law of love. 1 John 3.12.) That he dealt far more heartily with Abel,
then they have done with me; for he first talked with his brother, and then
afterward slew him, Genesis 4.8. These men have bent their bows, and shot their
Arrows poisoned well nigh four years in the Quiver, and are yet to talk and
make it out, that their sacrifice is of so much worth, as to entitle them to
the birthright, and empower them cum privilegio, to trample upon the necks of
their poor younger brethren. But notwithstanding this (my brethren) in your
patience, do you possess your souls. Mat. 21.19. give place unto wrath, Romans
12.19. Let the Lord of the Vineyard do what pleases him unto these husbandmen,
Luke 20.15.

FINIS.

