Plain Dealing: OR, The Countreymans doleful Complaint and faithful Watchword,
to The Statesmen of the Times, Whether in the PARLIAMENT or ARMY. Wherein is
set down, The Rise, Nature, and Species of Right Government, WITH The
Corruption thereof in former, and this our Generation, to this present time.

By EDWARD HARRISON of Keensworth in Hertfordshire, Sometimes Preacher to Col:
Harrison's Regiment.

Micah 6.8. He has showed, O man, what is good: And what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

London, Printed for J. Harris, and are to be sold at Addle-Hill, 1649.

The Preface to the Reader.
READER,
I Shall not much court thee for thy candid Constructions, or favorable
Interpretation of the ensuing lines, there being nothing declared therein, but
what all rational and unbyassed men will readily subscribe to; and for others,
I never intended to please, but reclaim them hereby (if it be the will of God.)
I have been a very serious observer of the Parliaments and Armies pretenses and
actings of late; And (notwithstanding many clear Demonstrations of their
crooked proceedings) yet have ever declined either speaking, writing, or acting
any thing that might evidence the least jealousy of their integrity and true
zeal to the Freedom of the People, and Liberty of the Nation; suffering my
judgment to be guided and overpowered by my strong affection toward them so
long, till I have been by many honest men thought to have either lost my
understanding, or departed from my Principles: Wherefore I was at last enforced
in my Spirit to bear this my witness against some present actings, beseeching
the Lord to make it as profitable to others, as it is satisfactory to my self:
However, my Record is on high, and (however men rescent it) the answer of a
good Conscience toward God and man, will be unto me a continual feast.

EDWARD HARRISON.

Plain Dealing.
THe great God of Heaven and Earth, The Rise and causes of right Government.
created all things for the use and service of Man, whom he made after his own
Image, as the Master piece of the whole Workmanship of his hands; and being
careful of all things, comprehending in himself the Beginning, Midst and End of
All, according to his good pleasure, out of respect to the Common good and
preservation of Humane Society, has from time to time distributed to sundry
persons distinct and different gifts, that in the exercising of diverse Estates,
Charges, Administrations, Offices and Occupations, they might by CONSENT,
through mutual succor and interchangeable help, preserve and maintain
themselves and one another: In which assertion is clearly discovered, the
several causes of all right Government.

1. The Efficient cause is, God the Creator, out of his care to man's weal and
tranquillity, communicating his common gifts severally for the benefit of All,
both Governors and Governed.

2. The Material cause is, The increase and multiplying of Mankind, the
Original of all Societies, as, Families, Towns, Cities and Kingdoms, or
Commonwealths.

3. The Formal cause is, The mutual CONSENT of both parties, the one to Govern,
the other to be Governed, according to such Laws, Articles and Covenants as are
agreed upon between them.

4. The Final cause is, The mutual Succor, Help, Commodity, Freedom, Peace,
Security and Preservation one of another.

From all which, these profitable Propositions may be deducted,

First, That Magistracy and Government is of Divine institution, and an
Ordinance of GOD, and the calling of a Magistrate a lawful and honorable
calling.

Secondly, That men cannot live together, without a Government of one kind or
other.

Thirdly, All right Government is by CONSENT of parties.

Fourthly, That both parties are equally bound to conform and stand to the Laws
and Articles agreed upon, as well the Governor as the Governed.

Fifthly, Where Common commodity, Peace and Freedom is swallowed up by
Particular Interests, there is nothing but Tyranny, Slavery and Confusion to be
expected.

Which Truths, when they shall be Cordially assented to, and Conscienciously
practiced by Magistrates and People (then, and not till then) shall that
Prophecy be fulfilled, laid down in Isa. 3.4. They shall break their Swords
into Plow-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; Nation shall not lift up
Sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more.

But can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may the
generality of Magistrates (who are accustomed per fas and nefas, to uphold and
advance the Interest of their Will and Power) and the major part of the People
(who account it their Glory to be Vassals and Slaves to great Titles and gay
Clothes) own Righteousness as the only Pillar of Lawful Authority, and prize
that Liberty, wherewith God by Nature has made them Free.

Now that I may not be thought to proceed upon false grounds, I shall revive
the aforementioned Propositions, and briefly examine their consistency with the
Ordinance of God and right Reason.

To the first and second, wherein the Divine Right and necessity of Government
are asserted, all men of all parties are ready to subscribe.

Unto the last, wherein the end of Government is declared, most men agree.

The third and fourth, viz. ( That right Government is by the CONSENT of
Parties, and that both Parties are EQUALLY bound to stand to the AGREEMENT) are
(by the Luciferian pride and covetousness of great men in Authority, and
slavish pusillanimity of the People under them) become disputable.

Nay, the contrary (till of late) accounted Fundamental truths, without
believing whereof, the Clergy of those ages would allow no man to be saved,
viz. That absolute Monarchy was of Divine right: (What then meant by absolute
Monarchy, appears by the other King-clawing Doctrines of those Trenchard
Chaplains,) viz. That the King was accomptable to none on Earth.

That he had right to all his people enjoyed, and that they held it but as mere
grace from him; That what ever he did, or caused to be done to them, they ought
in no case to resist him.

With much more such goodly stuff, which they put in to fill up their Court
Sermons, which I pass by, as being unwilling to rake further in this Augean
stable.

All which recited State Heresies, so desperately destructive to to humane
society, I shall very briefly confute, and then pass to the confirmation of the
truths proposed.

The iniquity of those Court Maxims is thus discovered:

There are two Essentials in Magistracy.

First, Power and Authority to protect the good, and to correct and punish evil
doers: And this is immediately from God, and Gods Ordinance in all society of
men whatever.

Secondly, The designation of Persons to administer, and the Rules and Laws by
which that administration is to be guided; and this is left to Men, God not
using now immediately to impose particular Governors or Magistrates upon
Societies of Men; or limit them to his judicial Laws, as was his dealing with
the Jews, whose Government Josephus and other Authors acknowledge to be a
Theocratia, or a Government immediately from God: They had their Magistrates,
Judges, and Kings, by Gods immediate appointment; They could neither Enact
Laws, appoint Governors, nor make War or Peace, but by express and immediate
command from God: Paul calls Magistracy an Ordinance of God; Peter styles it an
Ordinance of man; which seeming discrepancy is thus reconciled: All Power and
Authority to do Justice and Judgment, is the Ordinance of God, and is not left
to the will and pleasure of men, to alter, vitiate, or contemn, without the
incurring the displeasure of God for the same: But the choosing or appointing
Officers, and the making of Laws, is left to men, and is the Ordinance of man,
and can only be called the Ordinance of God, in that (when men proceed
righteously therein) it is owned and approved of by him.

If this distinction be not admitted, but that every Superior power in both
senses is of Divine institution, and so properly the Ordinance of God, these
absurdities will follow, viz.

That Paul and Peter were not guided by the same Spirit, they writing things
irreconcilable: That the Supreme Authority exercised by the Pope, is the
Ordinance of God; read Dr. Willets Exposition upon Romans 13.1. who there
concludes, That Monarchical, Aristocratical and Democratical Governments, are
all of them the Ordinance of God; and that the State may for their preservation
resist a Tyrant, and quotes Pareus pleading for the same, which without the
aforesaid distinction, were false to affirm. In the Parliaments Declarations,
and other rational discourses, you may find enough to discover the foppery of
the forenamed Tenets; I shall therefore go on to confirm the truth held forth
in my third and fourth Propositions, viz. That all right Government is from
Consent of parties; and that both parties are bound to the Laws and Articles
agreed upon between them; the first whereof is proved by the Authority of
Demosthenes, Aristotle and Cicero, who unanimously affirm, That true
Sovereignty was instated upon the good will and liking of the PEOPLE, who chose
out of themselves, and submitted to such as excelled most in virtue in those
times.

By the formal and ceremonial Election and Oath made and taken at the late
Kings of England admission to their Government, and by the many Declarations of
this Parliament, especially the last against Monarchy, wherein it is
acknowledged, That they were Elected, Trusted and Authorized by the PEOPLE for
the Common good, page 5. And by the pressing for an Agreement of the PEOPLE as
a foundation of future Government, in the Remonstrance of the Army, page 67.
where it is propounded, that none may be capable of being admitted to the
Crown, or any Office or Place of Public Trust, without express accord and
subscription to the same.

The second, By that saying of Seneca, that the Magistrate, together with the
People, have one God to serve, one Law to keep, and one death to fear: By the
Reason alleged in the Remonstrance of the Army, for the bringing of CHARLES
STUART to Justice.

By the Parliaments last Declaration, page 13. And by the practice of the Roman
State, of Swetheland and Scotland, who have brought their Supreme Magistrates
to account for breach of Laws.

The Ordinance for a City or Nation, and Order among Magistrates, especially
among them that had the Sovereign rule over all, was called by the Ancients,
Commonwealth, or Weal Public; and those Commonwealths that tended to Common
benefit, were said to be right; those that respected the profit of Superiors
only, were accounted corrupt.

I read of three kinds of right Government, The several kinds of Government.
and three of corrupt.

1. The first of right is Monarchy: when the Sovereignty is in one alone, who
seeks public profit only, and prefers Common benefit before his own
private will and particular Commodity; and when he endeavoreth to advance his
own Interest, and to govern by his absolute will, then he becomes a TYRANT, and
the Government Tyranny, which is the first kind of corrupt Government.

2. The second of right is Aristocracy, the power of the best men, viz. when a
few approved and tried men for righteousness, have the Sovereignty jointly
together, and make Laws for the rest of the People, directing their thoughts at
no other marks then public Peace, Freedom, Vtillity and Profit, as among the
Lacedaemonians of old: But when these reject the poorer sort, aim at nothing but
their own advantage, without any care of public Commodity, take part with
their equals in riches and greatness, to the oppression of their Inferiors,
then the Government degenerates into Oligarchy; the second sort of corrupt
Government.

3. The third of right is Democracy, the power of the People, when mean and
indifferent men are by them chosen; neither of the richest, to avoid Tyranny,
nor of the poorest, to avoid Confusion.

Of which Aristotle says, That those societies which consist of mean persons
in power, is very good, and those Cities and Commonwealths are well governed,
wherein there are many of the middle sort, who have more power then both the
other parties, or at least then any one of them; for where, says he, many are
very great, or many very mean, there follows either an extreme Oligarchy or
Anarchy, a confused multitudinous hodge podge; which is the third sort of
corrupt Government.

Thus having spoken of several sorts of right and corrupt Governments, and
given you the description of them, that you may know them one from another when
you meet them: I shall proceed to particularize how and by whom right
Government came to be corrupted in former, and in this our Generation.

How and by (...) ^ight Government has been corrupted.
The first breach upon right Government that I read of, was made by Nimrod,
Chams Nephew, of whom we read, Genesis 10.10. whom Historians report was the first
that brought men into subjection by force and violence, establishing his
Principality in the Kingdom of Assyria; which Tyranny of his was successively
exercised upon the People, and submitted unto for a long time in the days of
succeeding Tyrants, during the continuance of the Assyrian, Mede, Persian,
Grecian and Roman Monarchies, till the People of Rome coming to the knowledge
of their own Power and Liberty, threw the Tyrant Kings out of their saddles;
then succeeded the Government by Consuls, December Viri, and Tribunes, all which
lasted 1084 years, till at last Caesar taking advantage by their manifold
divisions, first got the Office of perpetual Dictator, and afterward the Title
and Power of an absolute Emperor, Et nunquam postea nisi deprincipitatu
quaesitum, says Tacitus, that is, Then came no other question to be debated,
but who should be the Sovereign Prince of the State; which was the condition of
the generallity of the World, especially since the Civil and Ecclesiastical
States were by Antichrist jumbled together, for then Kings and Priests
conspired together to inslave both Souls and Bodies of the People; which
Mystery of Iniquity has been fully discovered in these times of Light, wherein
God has begun to stain the pride of glory, especially in England.

G^v^rnment (...) wherein (...) in (...).
How far and wherein Tyranny and Slavery was brought in upon the English Nation
by the King and his Clergy, under the specious pretenses of Legal Prerogative
in Civil, and decent Uniformity in Spiritual, is so fresh in all men's memories,
that it were needless to trouble the Reader with the story of it, whereto
though the generallity of the people, Issachar like, were willing to subject
themselves, yet the iniquity and unrighteousness of our Tyrants being full, the
Lord hearing and granting the Prayers and Tears of his People (as sometimes the
Israelites) stirred up some heroic Spirits to withstand the Usurpation of
those in power, and to give a check to their furious proceedings, which
opposition meeting with a resolved and hard-hearted Pharaoh, was the cause of
Englands misery and desolation, as to its outward glory, riches and plenty,
(though through the Lords goodness) his People have had their sufferings
abundantly made up by the accession of Light, Liberty, and Spiritual
acquaintance with themselves, Wars, confusions, and shaking earthly
foundations, Gods design of removing corruption in Government, how obstructed
by half Reformations, during our late troubles.
being the forerunners of Gods design of doing his work, his strange work, even
destroying his Enemies, and delivering his People in England; which design of
his, that the mercy when enjoyed might be the more prized, his name the more
advanced, his People the better prepared for it, and that the less of man might
appear in it, he was pleased to carry on (as to humane apprehensions) foully,
abscurely, by contrary instruments, principles, means and ways, through many
obstructions, intermissions, hopes and fears, as by sad experience we have
found, the Wisdom and special Providence of our God, being very admirable in
his constant Counterworkings of our Statsemen in their Linsey-Woolsey
Reformations, as may be thus briefly demonstrated.

When this Parliament was by necessity in the Tyrants part summoned and called,
the Members thereof came with resolution to free themselves and the people of
those notorious burdens wherewith they had been formerly sorely crushed; viz.
Ship Money, High Commission Court, Star Chamber, to bring those whom they
counted evil Counselors to Justice, to abolish Episcopacy, to revive the
constant Succession of Parliaments; and in order thereto, to obtain the Militia
into their own hands, which in those times of the dawning of the day, was all
the Liberty they pretended to aim at: which particulars all gained (the King
continuing his Negative Voice, power of adding whom and as many as he would to
the House of Lords, and of bestowing places of Honor and Profit upon whom he
pleased, and thereby an opportunity of gaining the Major part of both Houses to
his party: And lastly, setting up a proud Formal and bloody Presbytery in the
room of Episcopacy) had not amounted to the least dram of true Liberty; yet
even some of those things were vigorously opposed, which caused a bloody War,
and after that, all the forenamed particulars were by Conquest given in to the
Parliaments Possession. Wise men quickly saw how little all the glorious
Liberty so vigorously contended for availed them, the Parliament making their
little fingers heavier then the Kings loins, introducing more oppressions upon
the Consciences, Estates, and Liberties of the People, then they had formerly
taken away; the Houses contending against the Kings unlimited Prerogative,
exercise as destructive a Power themselves; that of the Lords being as bad as
the Star Chamber or Council Table, and that of the Commons in conjunction with
their Synod, not much better then the High Commission Court, persecuting the
faithful of the Land under the notion of Sectaries, as formerly they had been
in the other Court under the name of Puritans: And in order to the completing
of their intended Reformation (not according to the Word of God, but in
compliance with the Scottish Tradition) right or wrong a Covenant was imposed
for the finding out and crushing of all such conscientious and discerning men
out of the Army of the Earl of Essex, and all other public employments, as
could not dance after the Scottish Pipes.

The Lords blasting the corrupt Designs of our State Petitions.
These designs the Lord ordered for good: Thus,

First, He provided an Asylum, a place of refuge for the conscientious
dissenters in the Army under Manchester and Cromwell.

Secondly, He suffered the remainder, the dross and scum of Essex's Army to
moulder away, and notwithstanding many great and chargeable recruits, to lose
ground, not performing any memorable service, and at last gave them up as a
prey to the enemy in Cornwall.

Thirdly, He honored the despised Dissenters, made them Victorious in the
North, and gave them favor in the sight of the People.

Lastly, He caused the wheel to turn upon his Peoples Enemies, by the new
Model, wherein the formal profane and loose Covenanters were left out, and the
Religious and faithful Worthies put into their rooms whom he quickly made
instrumental in subduing the Royalists, to the great terror of their Enemies,
open and secret, at Oxford and Sion College.

The next Plot was, the disbanding of that Schismatical Army, the only block in
their way to the setting up their Presbytery with Fire and Sword, under the
pretense of the relief of Ireland, which occasioned the disbanding of Eleven of
the chief contrivers out of the House of Commons, and the imprisoning the Major
and diverse Aldermen of the City.

This design thus failing, they Court the Riff-Raff in the City and Country to
Petition the House in behalf of the King and Presbytery (a goodly pair) and
against the Army, and invited all the Cavaliers in Scotland to set up Church
Government in England according to the Covenant, whence proceeded our last
dangerous and bloody War: But through the Lords wonderful goodness to his
People, who works all things for good to them, their Designs produced no
other effects, save only the Kings and the Lords righteous Execution, the
extirpation of the House of Lords, the purgation of the House of Commons, and a
glorious opportunity for freeing of this Nation from all its oppressors and
oppressions, by the laying of a foundation of Liberty, Peace and Satisfaction
to all serious men of all parties.

How happy were ENGLAND, were men's Designs of inflaving it here at an end? How
gladly should I here break off, and praise the Lord for his goodness to
England? But alas! the Countrey-mans heart is as full of grief, Englands sad
complaints by reason of the present corruptions in Government.
and his eyes as full of tears, as ever; he cries out he is deceived, his
expectation frustrated, and his Liberty betrayed; he takes up David's complaint,
it is not an open Enemy that enslaves him, not damme Cavaliers, not rigid
envious and surly Presbyters, but Religious and godly friends, that have
Prayed, Declared, Remonstrated and fought together for Freedom with them; that
with their Swords have cut in sunder the Chains of other Tyrants, and yet now
are become the greatest Tyrants over their brethren themselves, which when he
can refrain from sighing and sobbing, he in his broken and rustic language
thus expatiates: All the forms of Government being corrupted and abused, the
LAWS and Administration perverted, and the PEOPLES LIBERTIES betrayed; it was
promised that a new foundation should be laid by an AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE,
to such righteous Principles of Justice and Common Right, that (as to humane
Reason) it should be impossible for any Tyrants in this or future Generations
to introduce bondage upon the People, that Justice upon all Offenders should be
impartially executed.

That all Public Officers should be called to an account.

That the Public Debts of the Nation should be paid.

That this Parliament should have a Period set for its dissolution, and a
Succession of future equal Representatives ascertained.

And that the Petition from many about London, dated September 11th. should be
considered, and the Grievances and Pressures therein complained of removed:
Witness the Demand of the Army in the large Remonstrance, from page 62. to page
68. who in the prosecution thereof purging the House, seizing upon the City,
and thereby gaining into their hands the whole power of the Kingdom, who would
expect, but that which was by them Demanded (and because not granted, so ill
rescented and severely punished by Imprisonment, Read the Declaration of Army,
of November 30. 1648. page 4.
as to some, and expulsion of the House as to others) would have been by
themselves (now enabled to effect them) speedily given to the People as their
due and right: And he therefore much rejoiced in the extraordinary Action of
sifting the House of Commons, wholly taking away the House of Lords, erecting an
High Court of Justice, trying and executing the King and Lords (as the pulling
down an old House ready to fall upon and ruin the Nation, and the burning of
rotten post^ only fit for the fire) in order to the setting up a new frame,
consisting of sound and well seasoned Timber, The several corruptions in
present Government.
under which the English Nation might find shelter from future Storms and
Tempests; but his hope makes him ashamed, his joy is turned into sorrow, and
his mirth into mourning; and that upon these grounds.

First, The AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE is waved, in order to which the other
actings were only justifiable either before God or man, the old Government in
force according to Law, was by King, Lords and Commons, and there was yet never
any Reason alleged to vindicate the manner of the altering, and the High
proceeding in order thereto; but that all power was Originally in the People,
and that all former must give place to the end of forms, the COMMON GOOD of the
PEOPLE; and therefore till there be a foundation laid by an AGREEMENT of the
PEOPLE, it is no State blasphemy to affirm that there can be no true form of
Government in the nation.

As for the present House of Commons, he would be glad to have cause to bless
God for it, as being instrumental in keeping ill minded men in awe by their
Title, until a more full and formal power, vi^ Declaration of the Army p. 6, 7.
in a just and equal Representative to be speedily indeavored, can be
introduced.

Secondly, No Justice is executed upon any Members of Parliament that betrayed
their Trust, which has been and is by the Cavaliers thus interpreted, That the
Parliament and Army executed the King and Lords, not out of Zeal to Justice,
but for sinister ends, else, say they, Why should not Waller, Clotworthy,
Brown, and the rest, accused of so great crimes, be all this while brought to
their Trial.

Thirdly, No Account is taken of the Treasury of the Kingdom, how it has been
disbursed, which makes many of the Enemies report, That Mulus Mulum scabit,
that the Parliament, Army, and country Committees, connive at each other,
while they share the riches of the nation among them.

Fourthly, Though King, Queen, Princes Revenue, Delinquents Estates, Dean and
Chapters Lands, are wholly at their disposing, yet there is no burden removed,
neither Excize nor Tithes (a burden so contrary to any Profession, the Gospel,
and the very Covenant it self, repugnant to the Gospel. Read the story of
Walter Brute in Foxes Martirology, page 446, 447. and you will find it clearly
proved, That Tithes are not in any sense due by any Law of God in the times of
the Gospel: Read also that learned Exhortation of the Bohemians to the King and
Princes, page 602. and the Examination of William Thorp, page 494, 495. where
it is quoted out of CISTERCIENSIS, That Pope Gregory the tenth, in the year of
our Lord 1211. first ordained Tithes to be given to his Priests. Augustine in
his Iuchyridion, 76 Chap. and Chrysostom upon the 11 of Luke, affirms, Tithes
to be pure Alms; and it is recorded, That they were not paid in the primitives
times at all; and that the Priests wresting Scriptures to their profit at the
first, obtained them as Beggars do Alms, page 426. By all which it appears, That
Tithes, or any enforced Maintenance, are contrary to the mind of Christ in the
Gospel, and to the very Letter of the Covenant, wherein all Covenanters engaged
to take away all Popery and Popish innovations, root and branch: and over and
above the aforesaid burdens, the Tax for the Army swells from 60000 l to 90000
l a Month.

Fifthly, There is a new Council of State erected, which much amuseth poor
ignorant souls in the Country, who fear, that instead of succession of equal
Representatives, they shall be popt off with a perpetual Parliament, or
Everlasting Council of State, and Omnipotent council of War, that can make it
justifiable to break all Forms themselves one day, and yet Vote it mutinous in
others, to act any thing that displeases them, though neither against any true
Form or Order, as lately they have done: I love and honor many of their
persons, and should rejoice if the Lord by me would reclaim them from the evil
of their present way.

I shall lay down some Considerations, which may be useful for them, and trust
God with the success.

First, That Honesty is the best Policy: Considerations presented to the
Council of the Amry.
The deep plots and witty Contrivances of men in power, when inconsistent with
the Will of God, requiting them to do Judgment and Justice, and to take off
the ^^kes from the Oppressed, have always been abortive, for God will not be
mocked; and Experience tells us, That Self-seekers, though otherwise godly and
gallant men, yet are and shall be saved as by fire; witness many worthy Members
of Parliament, who endeavoring by a Treaty to secure themselves, are by the
Lord with disgrace laid aside; he thereby, no doubt, intending much good to
their souls, Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cantum, he is a happy man that
takes warning by other men's harms.

2 C^^^^d^tion.
Secondly, Carnal mixtures with corrupt interests, are destructive to them that
make them.

Mixtures are carnal, when made upon fleshly and sinful considerations; and
interests are corrupt, when incroaching upon Christ's Kingdom in Spiritual
Administrations; or when found repugnant to righteous Government in civil.
Hence it follows:

Inferences from the second consideration.
First, That under pretense of taking in the Generality of the people into their
party, or pleasing these or these great and potent men, or (which is the best)
the bearing with the weakness of godly men, for any to incroach upon the Kingly
Office of Christ, and take upon them to judge of Blasphemies and Heresies, and
to restrain men from acting in things of Supernatural cognizance; yea, to
enforce a maintenance for a Ministry (out of which should they pick out all the
Drunkards, Swearers, The Synod consists of one hundred or thereabouts.
Cavaliers, noted time-servers, and idle Drones, they would scarce have enough
left to make up a Synod) When as Christ himself is engaged to take care of
those, whom he employs in the work of the Ministry, and has no where required
the Magistrate to do it, (it being out of his sphere, as a Magistrate) is a
carnal mixture with corrupt Interest, and will destroy those that join in it;
for Christ will not endure that any should be so saucy, as to intermeddle with
that which is his own proper work, it implying, that they judge him either weak
or unfaithful, and so not able, or not faithful, in doing his duty, which has
been the bane of many, otherwise useful men in this Kingdom, as Hollis,
Stapleton, Brown, Massey, Pryn, etc. and will be Yours to, if in time you lay
it not to heart; and what comfort will it be, if when God shall lay you aside
for these things, your Consciences shall tell you, That you suffer for doing,
or attempting that which he never required at your hands?

As for satisfying weak consciences, do you think that any evil is to be done,
or good left undone, simply upon that account; if you do, why then did you not
forbear trying and executing the King, taking away the House of Lords, and
purging the House of Commons, which I am sure that Party whom in these things
you seek to please, were and are very much dissatisfied: Besides, Religion and
Reason will teach you, that you ought to prefer the satisfaction of those that
joined with you, and have hazarded all for you in things agreeable to the will
of God, before the complying with your opponents, and professed adversaries
(though otherwise godly) in things contrary to the will of God.

Secondy, That under pretense of bearing with the People that the Nation is not
fit for it, that many kinsmen, friends, and honest men are guilty, and will be
undone, to continue and encourage a multitude of unnecessary Lawyers, to
forbear the calling Public Officers to Account, and to increase the Peoples
burdens, is a Carnal mixture with corrupt Interests; therefore take heed
betime, the Lord is righteous.

Thirdly, The greater measure of light God has given you, the greater is your
sin, and the heavier will be your punishment in the day of account, if your
actions be not proportionable to it: Glorious things have been delivered by you
in your Declaration and Remonstrance; let not the World have just cause to say,
That they were put in to draw people to your party in your straights, but when
you are arrived at your Haven of Power, you alter your Principle with your
Condition.

Fourthly, When Gods people cry and complain to him of oppression, he will
regard them and revenge their wrongs: Many poor souls bewail their conditions
to God thus, O Lord we have been long vexed and oppressed by such a party, and
such a party, from whom we expected no better usage; but now we suffer under
those that are our Brethren, that have formerly suffered with us: we could
pluck out our eyes to do these men good; we have always loved them, prayed for
them, joined with them in their greatest dangers, owned them with the hazard of
our lives, when they have been the By word of the people, and we for their
sakes, and yet they deliver us not now it is in their power; they seek to
please their Enemies, and go on with the multitude to do evil: But us they
regard not: O Lord, hear and regard; Lord help, for the faithful fail from
among the children of men. And do you think that God will not answer them? and
say to you, as he did once to the Israelites, You have I known above all the
people of the earth, therefore I will punish you for your iniquity: I have
honored you above such and such, I have exalted you, carried you as upon Eagles
wings, and is this the requital? is this the return you make to me of all your
kindenesses? Certainly, the Lord will in rich mercy heal your backslidings, and
make you glorious (...) of Repentance, or else he will harden you, and make you
fearful Examples of Justice and Wrath, as Apostates and Hypocrites, I mean, as
to your outward Estates.

Fifthly, Consider the desperate presidents you have made, if your present
power (through the Lords withdrawing from you) should be crushed; There being
no Foundation by the Peoples Agreement settled, if ever any more Parliaments
should be, there is a president to take out as many, and whom the prevailing
party pleases, to establish an Extraordinary Court to try, and take away any
man's life, his Judges being picked by those that accuse him; to place and
displace Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, or any other public Officers; to
lay what Taxes they please upon the people; and to imprison the Authors, and
suppress the Writings which any way displease them.

These things laid together, are sad presages of farther trouble to this poor
Nation.

The Lord knows, I could willingly sacrifice my life for the Peace and
Liberty of the Nation, and the Honor of the Parliament and Army, but in these
things I am at a loss; yet this I know, The counsel of the Lord shall stand,
and he will do all his pleasures And herein my Soul, as in a Sanctuary, finds
Rest, that all things shall work together for good to them that love God.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Intended these lines should have only visited a friend or two, but
providence has ordered them a farther journey, and more public view; they
complain sadly, but had they been now to write, the Paper would have blushed to
have contained such Relations as might have been inserted: Omissions of good,
are seconded by Commissions of evil, yea, the shedding of INNOCENT BLOOD,
slighting and rejecting honest Petitions, which I tremble to consider of, in
reference to the lamentable consequences thereof to this poor Nation, if the
Lord prevent not.

The only visible and rational expedient is, for all honest men, in a meek and
peaceable way, to join in an AGREEMENT to some righteous Foundations, and
Principles of Government (thereby at least to acquit themselves before God and
the world, of designing, abetting or partaking with the Tyranny introduced, and
endeavored to be fastened upon the People of this Nation, a most complete and
exquisite Model whereof, is newly set forth by the Four worthy Asserters of
Englands Liberties, now Prisoners in the Tower.

May the first, 1649. Edward Harrison.

2 Maii, 1649.

Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbot.


