Plain English TO Our wilful Bearers with Normanisme; OR, SOME QUERIES
PROPOUNDED To and concerning the Neglectours of ENGLANDS grand Grievance and
complaint lately published under the title of Anti Normanisme.

Wherein is undeniably demonstrated, that while this Nation remains under the
Title of the (pretended) Conquest, She and every Member of her are no other
then Slaves properly so called; And moreover, that (while she retains the same
Title) all her and her Representators contending with their Prince for
ungranted privileges, upon any pretense whatsoever, is unwarrantable and
seditious.

Number inimicus sum vobis, dum veritatem vobis enarro? Gal. 4.16. London, Printed
for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor in Cornhill near the Royal
Exchange, 1647.

To the Reader.
READER,
THou may (perhaps) wonder that this poor piece of plain truth, without lie
or flattery in it, and being also unfurnished of the Licensers Pasport, should
without an Armies protection adventure into the public, in the month of an
opposite piece of Ordnance charged with dire menances against such bold
Intruders; But thou ought rather to wonder that in England, and at such a
time at this, a Discourse of this nature should need to be written, or that
being written, it should seems questionable; For is it not a monstrum
horrendum, etc. that a Parliament of England assisted with an Army of the same,
having consulted and fought these 7. years in the bahalfe of this Nation, and
for her Rights and Liberties, and having the whole Kingdom in their hands like
a piece of Porters Clay, to be new molded to their own pleasure, should not
yet take it into their heads, nor after it has been viz. By the Edition of
Anti-Normanisme.
thrust into their heads, suffer it to enter their hearts to deliver the Nation
from the slavery of an unjust, disgraceful, pretended, Conquest by foreign
Enemies? But thon wilt say (perhaps) that we are since united, and become one
Body, and that the Successors of the Conquerours are now our natural Heads,
and part of our Nation; but I answer, that there can be nothing more absurd
then to say so, For as there can be no Conquest of a Nation, but by foreign
Enemies, Rome being never said to be conquered till the Goths came, though it
had been often before forceably mastered, for that those Masterers (namely
Caesar and many of his Successors) were members of her self; So the Heirs of
a Conqueror, while they retain his right and title, though it be after a
myriade of descents from him, do still retain the quality of professed foreign
Enemies, only with this distinction, that the Conqueror is the Victour, and
his Successors the Triumphers; Now that triumphing does also of it self
necessarily imply a foreign Enmity, appears also (to omit reason) from the
practice of the said R^manes (who were no Novelists in these matters) for that
no triumph could be acted among them, but only over foreign Enemies,
Civill-warre Victories afforded no Laurels, whence(by the way) We may also
observe the ab^urdity of some Who of late would needs march laureated through
this City: But if any be censor^ously inclined against me for this work, my
defense is this.

1. That the Parliament have declared (as the chief warrant for all their
actions)that Res Populi is the Supreme Law; Now I must new mould my Notions,
if what I have here, and in my Anti-Normanisme propounded, be no: more for the
service, not only of the People and Parliament, but also of the King, then any
thing that has been yet propounded, said or done, in this Kingdom, since the
pretended Conquest unto this day; for that without this effected (n^mely the
abolishing of the Right and Title of the Conquest) our Kings are (in naked
truth, as Dr. Hudson in his Late Treatise of Government, p. 123. grants, and I
have before manifested) no better then usurplug Forraigners, our people
absolute slaves, and our Parliaments undutifull servitors to both; ye^, without
this, not only the proceedings of this Parliament are irregular(which is the
sum of what my ensuing Discourse charges upon them) but also all our Laws
and Liberties, even Magna Charta it self, are without any firm foundation, and
may in point of strict Law (though not of Conscience)be blown down with the
Kings arbytrary breath; and thus much is ^vincible, not only by reason, but
also from the tenor of Magna Charta it self, which runs thus; Spontanea and
bona voluntate nostra dedimus and concessimus, etc. which shows it to be only
a free and spontaneous Grant, and such free Grants are revokable at pleasure,
the sole ground and consideration of it being expressed to be respect of duty
toward God, and not of duty (though benefit) to the Nation. It is also manifest
from a confession of Parliament, cited by Mr. Pryn, in his Sovereign power, p.
59. (though he (good man) cited it to prove the contrary) extant in a memorable
Record (as he calls it) in the Parliament Rolls of the 1. of H. 4. Numb. 108.
where it is recited, that King Richard should say, that the Kings of this
Realm might turn (or change) the Laws at their pleasure, which assertion the
Parliament did not deny to be true, but instead thereof, accepted of the Kings
gracious promise not to take advantage of such his Prerogative, but to keep the
Laws, etc. So that by this time, I suppose it appears, that I have the
warrant of the Supreme Law of Res Publica for my Enterprise; But if thou
find fault that it is too bold and plain, I answer, that I know nothing in
it more bold or plain, then true, nor yet then necessary, seeing the softer
and suasory language of my Anti-Normanisme obtained no regard.

2. It is commanded in the Mosaicall Law, that Si Bestiam errantem videris,
reduxeris in viam, and if we owe such dutiful endeavors to Beasts, then, much
more to the Pilots of our State.

Lastly, admit an incredibility, that is, that our Statesmen should profess
themselves Normanes, and so persecute the Assertors of the English Liberty as
Enemies; yet should I not repent my adventuring in this Cause, for that Dulce
et decorum est pro Patria mori. But it is high time to end, least I meet with a
Diogenes and hear of Myndas. Therefore farewell,

JO: HARE.

QUAERIES.
Propounded to and concerning the Neglectours of Englands grand Grievance, etc.
Quarie I. WHether among the Civil Rights of this Nation, If it be of no
value, Why was the violation of it made one of the heinous Articles against the
E. of Strafford, viz. for occasioning the dishonorable loss of Newcastle to
the Sco's?
which (in name) have been so highly and hotly contended for, her Honor be of
so inferior a value, as not to be worthy the least consideration?

Qu. 2. Whether it be not an absurdity to ascribe other Honor to our Nation
then to a Slave, For what is a Slave but a Captive serving his Conqueror or
his Heirs? And moreover, according to your own verdict, if the suffering of
one Town to be conquered, was a betraying of the Nations honor; then what is
the suffering of the whole Nation to ly under a Conquest?
while she remains a Captive, and wears the Title and If you know not what
those are, see Anti-Normanisme, p. 2, 13, 14.
Badges of Captivity?

Qu. 3. Whether it be not an absurdity to pretend to restore or advance this
Nation to her just Freed me, The just Freedom of this Nation consist in being
under a Prince (or his Heirs) of her own Election, Blond, or (at least)
Admission, and under her own Laws, of which Laws (also) the Supreme next
unto Gods glory (according to your own doctrine) ought to be Salus Populi; But
ye make her to profess her self to be under the dominion of her usurping
Enemies, (for what is a Conqueror, or any suceeding in his Right, but a
prevailing and tryumphing Enemy) of which sort of Dominions (namely those
grounded upon Conquests) (also) the Supreme and Fundamental Law, and which is
unseparable from that Title, is unquestionably (as I shall anon prove) the
Will, Honor, and benefit of the Conqueror and his Heirs; And yet ye call
your selves Assertors of your Nations Liberties.
and yet to leave her under the title and injuries of a (pretended) Conquest?

Qu. 4. Whether they are not, Your own interests and claims you assert with
Swords; But your Nations just Freedom and Honor, that might distinguish her
from a Slave, not with a word.
and are not to be repu^ed, of private spirits and interests (whatever they
boast) whether they be Councels, Cities, or Armies, that are so tender of their
own honors and interests, and yet so negligent (or else ignorant) of their
Nations?

Qu. 5. Whether they are not contemptibly ridiculous, that call themselves men
of honor, or so much as Freemen (how highly soever born, The Right
Honourables of an Enslaved Nation, are but right honorable slaves.
in what dignity soever placed, or whatsoever they have achieved against their
own Countrymen) who yet with the same mouth confess and profess themselves
Members of a Captive Nation?

Qu. 6. Whether they are not also confessedly seditious, It is no other then
as if one should say, Sir, I am and will be your slave in right and title, but
your Master in Act.
who professing their Nation, and consequently themselves, to be Captives by
right of Conquest, and moreover being (like the Jews eare-bored slaves) nor
minded to leave that quality and profession, do yet contend wi^h their Prince
for free Subjects Privileges or rather ( Mamaluck-like) to be sharers in the
Supreme Authority?

Objection 1.

Yea, but our first Normane Prince was admitted upon Tea^ms, as being Legatee
and Kinsman of S^. Edward, and upon condition to preserve our Laws and
Liberties.

Answ.

Ye contradict it your selves, If perchance you deny that you say it, and so
think to invalidate all my incusations with that Paradox. What means his title
of Conqueror, which ye still allow him? the Doctrine of his Conquest of this
Nation, which without your contradiction remains a received Maxim in this
Kingdom? The Effects and Badges of such a Conquest, which you retain as
Ornaments? Your suffering Magna Charta to be in the mouth of the Law, the
foundation of our Liberties? And lastly) your a Conquestu, current not only in
past Acts of Parliament, which (until you gainesay them) enjoy your suffrage,
but also in Fines past by the Authority of your own Great Scale of England at
this day?
while ye say (how truly I have Anti-Norm. p. 15.
else where shown) that he came in by Conquest.

Object 2.

But we have sithence had a Charter of Liberties granted us.

Answ But there is no clause in that Charter for liberty to contend for more,
the granting you an Inch intitles you not to the taking of an Ell; And as for
the Clause therein (which Mr. Pryn in his Sovereign Power, p. 74. sticks not to
allege as an undeniable Warrant for all your proceedings) That the Prince will
not deny or defer justice or right to any man, by Justice or Right is
plainly meant Execution of Law, and not a fulfilling of your unlimited
Desires, as is manifest by the rest of that Chapter, and confirmed by the Lord
Cooks Exposi^ion of that place.

Object. 3.

But the King is bound by his Coronation Oath to grant all such just and
reasonable Laws as the People (that is the Commons in Parliament) shall choose.

Answ.

This I confess (if it were so, and according to your own interpretation; that
is, to grant all such Laws as you shall say are just and reasonable) might
seem a bottomless privilege, able to furnish you with Licentiousness enough
(I Will not say Liberty, for were you invested with as many donations and
privileges as Haman, or any Favorite in the Turkish Court, yet while you
profess to serve in reference to a Conquest, you are but For the mitigation of
Slavery does not take away the Essence of it. Now you cannot deny, that you
serve in reference to a Conquest, seeing you are so far from ever having
declared him whom you call your Conqueror, an Usurper, that you place him, for
the Root and Alpha of your right. fulll Kings in the Regal Catalogue.
Slaves) Yet for Answer, I say, It is well known that our present King never
took any such Oath.

Reply. But he ought to have taken it.

Answ. Whether he ought or not, since he did it not, he is not bound by it in
Law; and as to his obligement to take it, if any such obligation was, it must
be either by Statute or Custom, by Statute you will not say it was, and as for
Custom, to make it obligatorie, it must (according to your own The Lord Cook
and others.
Oracle) have both Reason, and usage time out of mind; But this oath by your
own in your Remonstroof the 2. of Novem. 1642
confession, was used neither by Henry the 8. Edward the 6. King James, nor King
Charles, So that in stead of usage, here is a disusage; and as for Reason,
there is less; for what reason is there that some Princes and their Heirs
doing some Acts of grace and favor (as I shall anon prove that you grant this
to be) to their people, that therefore all there Posterity should be obliged to
the same as duties? so that you see this Oath cannot in any wise bind your
Prince, for that he neither took it, nor was bonnd to take it;But although he
had taken it, yet I shall sufficiently prove,(notwithstanding all Mr. Prins
impertinent volumes to the contrary) that (while you allow to his Blood the
right of a conquest over your nation) the Oath would not serve your turn so as
to give you authority to force to the performance of your desires; for first,
you say it was an Oath, Now an Oath or votum has not you but God for the
object, so that if it be violated, he alone is the vindex, and that it is so,
is testified by this, that the Oath is tendered not by you or your substitutes
but by the Arch- Bishop, who is Gods Representer testified by his Crowning and
annoynting the Prince which confers on him, or signifies the conferring of the
Divine authority; now that it makes him not liable to you, appears also by our
own Laws, for what Lawyer ever heard of an Action brought upon an Oath? In all
the Register no such writ occurres; But if you will make it a Covenant or
Promise, that it may be obligatory, it must be grounded upon a valuable
consideration, now that here is no valuable consideration appears from your
own confession, for you confess him to be your King by right of conquest and
succession, and accordingly do reckon his reign from the death of his
Predecessor, not his own coronation as being but a ceremony and that also
administered neither by you nor your Substitutes, So that it is plain that you
should have no sufficient right to exact the performance of it if he had taken
it; But grant both that he had taken it, and also that he were thereby bound
unto you, yet could you not from thence justly claim your demands, for that
which the Oath binds to is the granting of just and reasonable things, but the
things that you demand are proper and fit only for ingenuous subjects, or
rather for Consortibus Imperij, whereas (you know) Non decet Liberorum panem
Canibus objicere; you have no reason to disdain the comparison, since that Dogs
themseves are so disdainable beyond other creatures only for this that they
are beyond the rest, such Servi Voluntari^.

Object. 4.

But the King is bound to these things by the Law of nature and inferences from
Salus populi which is the supreme law:

Answ.

Ye have nothing to do with the privileges of the Law of nature or Salus
populi, while you adhere to a subjectednesse by right of conquest, for in so
doing, you renounce them: neither will any man say, you deserve them, while
having Liberty (that is Obedience in reference to a succession from the
legitimate Princes of your own blood) and Servitude (that his subjection in
reference to a (pretended) Conquest) both which Titles are concurrent in His
Majesty, who (no doubt) is willing to indulge as well to the honor as to the
benefit of his Subjects, while (I say) having these two set before you, you
reject the first, and prefer the servitude: In this Case therefore you are to
look only to the nature of the Law of Co^quest^, which as you may read in
Caesar, lib 1. de Bello Gallico, is this, vt hi qui Vicissent his quos
Vicissent quem admodum Vellent Imperarent, that the Conquered are under the
arbitrary Government and power of the Conqueror; And consequently, while ye
are pleased to remain in that quality, you are to make much of your Princes
Grants of favor, whether past, or future, and not to challenge more, for no
more belongs to you: In sum it is plain, that while you retain your dear
profession of Captivity (notwithstanding all allegations whatsoever, that have
been, or can be raised to the contrary) in contending for ungranted
Privileges, you do but act Sedition, and repeat the old Bellum Servile.

Demonstrations from Scripture (for those that will not understand Reason)That
to be under Conquest is to be in Slavery, and that such Servitude is a Curse,
and consequently that it is absurd to pretend to make this Nation blessed (or
happy) and yet to leave her in that quality.

Of whom a man is overcome, 2 Pet. 2.19.
of the same he is brought in Bondage. Now that such Bondage is a curse may
sufficiently appear by Inferences from the following Texts.

Cursed be Cham, Genesis 9.5., R^m. 9, 12, 13.
he shall be a Servant of Servants. The Elder shall Serve,etc. as it is written,
Esau have I hated; where such Servitude is made a Demonstration of the divine
hatred.

The Stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high and thou
shall come down very low, Deuteronomy, 28.12. in that grand Charter if Curses.
he shall lend to thee, and thou shall not l^nd to him, ( viz. Laws, Language,
Customs, etc.) he shall be the head, and thou shall be the tail, which is ou^
very Case.

In sum, while ye foster the Right, Title, and Evidences of this ( pretended)
Conquest, Ye make a cursed Slave of your Country an usurping Forrainer of your
King, and your Selves strange Servi^ors to both. And therefore one may justly
say to our Reformers, in the behalf of England, as Cato once did to Pompey in
the Cause of Rome, Miseram quid decipis urbem Si servire potes? Never pretend
to lead us out of our Grievances into Blessedness, If you account the injuries
and disgrace of a (pretended) Conquest, for no Burden, and can be content to
suffer your selves, and your Nation to wear forever the accursed Title and
Badges of Captivity.

If ye ask what then is to be done? ye may please to see what is set down in
Anti-Norm. p. 19. which may be easily eff^cted without injury to or just
opposition of an^ which is also required not only by this N^tions Right, but
also by the Right of his Maj. just Title (de^ived from the English
Bloud-Royall, one way, and from St. Edwards Legacy joined with this N^tions
admission of the Normane Blood, another way) against the unjust usurpation of
his other Title attributed to his Blood (at first by Traitors and Enemies to
this Nation) from a (pretended) Conquest, which even Dr. Hudson in his late
Book of Government, p. 123, 124. (though one of the greatest Royalists in the
Kingdom) declares to be no better then Sacrilegious Theft and Robbery, and
that the same ought both in Honor and Conscience, to be oppugned by all
dutiful Patriots with their utmost abilities.

FINIS.

