A Vindication OF THE Holy Scriptures. Or the Manifestation of JESUS CHRIST The
TRVE MESSIAH Already Come.

Being the Christians Antidote against the poisons of Judaisme and Atheism of
this present Age.

Proved out of Sacred Scripture, Ancient Historians, and Jewish Rabbis.

By that Learned, and late Eminent Divine, JOHN HARRISON.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. and sold by J. Benson, and J. Playford, at their
shops in Dunstans Churchyard, and in the Inner Temple. 1656.

The AUTHORS EPISTLE To the forlorn and distressed Jews in Barbary; and in
them, to all others now groaning under the heavy yoke of Captivity, in what
Nation soever; scattered and dispersed throughout the world. Grace, Mercy, and
Peace be multiplied, in Christ Jesus the true Messiah.
BEing employed not long since into Barbary, the land of your Captivity, where
at this present you live in great Bondage and Slavery, and so have done this
long time (as do also the rest of your Brethren and Nation elsewhere, dispersed
throughout the world, Accounting from their first entrance to the day of their
departure thence. Exo. 12.40.
groaning under the yoke of their cruel Taskmasters, as did your forefathers
in the land of Egypt four hundred and thirty years; this Captivity of yours
having continued now almost four times four hundred years; the last and
greatest of all, then the which was never heard nor read of greater of any
people, from the Creation of the World to this day, nor shall be) The King at
that time of my arrival, upon his expedition toward Fez, I appointed to stay
at Saphia till his return back from those wars; where I remained in the lower
Castle almost six months, solitary, and in suspense, expecting the doubtful
event thereof. Whether resorted to me often to accompany me, and for my better
instruction in the Hebrew (whereof I had a little taste before) one of the
chief Rabbis of that your Synagogue, Rabbi Shimeon, a man of grave and sober
carriage, and pleasant otherwise, of whose company I was very glad. Now and
then (among other matters) arguing and reasoning of the Messiah ( as ye say,
yet to come, but as we say, and are able to prove, by invincible arguments and
demonstrations, both out of your own Law and Rabbis, already come) which gave
me occasion (having little else to do, and not knowing how to pass that tedious
time better) to gather together all those arguments and reasons I had read, or
for the present could conceive of my self, drawn out of the sacred Scripture,
and other Books, as touching that controversy. Whereby I might be the more
able, over and besides the matter of employment and business I came about, to
maintain that Religion professed in my Country, and the Undoubted Faith,
whereof his Majesty, the King of great Britain (as others his Predecessors have
done) pro^^ss^th himself a chief Defender; according to that his most just
Title, Defender of the Faith. And afterward, when the King sent for me to
Morocus, being lodged amongst you by his appointment in the Judaria, in one of
your principal houses; where I staid, before I could get a dispatch from the
King, three months and an half; where also I grew familiarly acquainted with
diverse of your Nation and was presented at sundry times (especially at your
Marriages and solemn Feasts) with diverse of your Dainties, which I took very
kindly, and ever since have studied what Christian Dainties I might send you
back again in recompense; or rather Duties instead of those Dainties. Seeing
also in the mean time (which I could not choose but see with much pity and
compassion) the great and grievous oppression under which you groan; taxations,
vexations, exactions; grammings (as you call them) even with torments rather
then fail; drubbings (so many hundred blows at once, as my self have both seen
and heard) with that base servile and most contemptible state and condition
(otherwise above any other Nation or People) under which you live: not only in
Barbary, but in all other parts of the world besides, as a fatal effect of that
heavy curse laid on you by your own forefathers long ago upon the death of
Christ ( when Pilate the Judge washed his hands, saying, I am innocent of the
blood of this just man, look ye to it) they cried with one consent, his blood
be upon us, and on our children. As also of that Prophecy of our Savior in
his life time, when he wept over Jerusalem, saying, Oh if thou had even
known, at the least in this thy day, those things which belong to thy Peace,
but now are they hid from thine eyes, etc. And more particularly to his
Disciples, he renews it over and again; When ye shall see Jerusalem besieged
with Soldiers, then know ye that her desolation is at hand. For these be the
days of vengeance, to fulfill all things that are written. For there shall be
great distress in this land, and wrath over this people. And they shall fall on
the edge of the Sword, and shall be lead captive into all Nations, etc. Which
heavy curse of your own forefathers, and Prophecy of his, how truly they have
been fulfilled both the one and the other, all the world sees, and ye your
selves feel the effect, as before. The Lord in mercy take away the vail from
your hearts, that at length ye may know those things which belong to your
peace, which now are hid from your eyes: For why will ye die, O ye house of
Israel? These considerations (I say) and reasons, with some others, have moved
me; and partly in recompense of those your Defina's and Dainties, whereof I
tasted so often while I was amongst you, to send you here a small banquet, of
such Dainties as Christendom can afford; wishing you would but taste some part
of mine (as I did of yours) being indeed Sabbath days dainties: Taste (I say)
and see how sweet the Lord is. Psalm. 34.8.
And the rather do I invite you to this Banquet, yea rather provoke you
thereunto, Romans 11.11.
even to your own salvation, which through your fall is come to us Gentiles to
provoke you; as it as in that place, for that now the time of your redemption
draws near ( with ours, much nearer now then when we believed) foretold also
both by Christ and his Apostles, as was your desolation; and shall one day as
surely and certainly come to pass, the one as the other. For God that has
promised, is of power to perform it, he will do it; He is able to graff you in
again into your own Olive Tree. Luke 13.35.
Verily I tell you (says our Savior to the Pharisees) ye shall not see me,
until the time come, that ye shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the name
of the Lord Therefore such a time shall come, without all doubt, wherein ye
shall so say, that is to say, most willingly obey the heavenly calling, without
any more resisting the holy Ghost, Acts 7.51. Luke 21.24.
as did your forefathers, Also in another place, And Jerusalem shall be trodden
under foot of the Gentiles, until the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled: So
long, and no longer, there is the period. And Paul the Apostle in a most
fervent manner, both prays and prophesies to this effect: Brethren, my
hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel is, Romans 10.1.
that they might be saved. Then prophesies at large in the chapter following,
and that most divinely, as of their fall, so of their general call in due time,
with many arguments and reasons to that purpose. Which Prayer and Prophecy of
h^^, proceeding from a Divine Instinct and Revelation, no doubt shall one day
take effect. For it cannot be but that the word of God should take effect. For
it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes to the Jew
first, and also to the Grecian: To the Jew first, there is the promise, there
is the privilege. Lift up your heads now therefore O ye Jews, sons of Abraham,
children of the promise, to whom pertains the adoption, and the glory, and
the covenants, Romans 9.4.
and the giving of the Law, and the service of God, and the promises: of whom
are the Fathers and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came. I say, lift up
your heads, and listen to the heavenly calls of Christ and his Apostle Paul,
For your Redemption draws near. This is the generation of them that seek him,
of them that seek thy face: Psalm. 24.6.
Jacob, Selah. Lift up your heads ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors and the King of glory shall come in. And let us Christians also (upon
whom the ends of the world are come) lift up our heads and know (remembering
that parable of the Fig Tree) when we see these things begin to come to pass,
Luke 21.28.
that the Kingdom of God is near, even at the doors. Mat. 24.32.
Verily, I say unto you, This generation shall not pass, till all these things
be done: Acts 20.32
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away. They are
the words of our Savior.

And now Brethren ( to return to Paul) I commend you to God and to the word of
his grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among
all them which are sanctified. Psalm. 51.18.
Be favorable unto Zion, for thy good pleasure build the walls of Jerusalem.
Then shall thou accept the sacrifice of righteousness, even the burnt Offering
and Oblation, then shall they offer Calves upon thine Altar. Psalm. 53.6.
O give salvation unto Israel out of Zion; when God turns the captivity of
his people, then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. Psalm. 126.1
When the Lord brought again the captivity of Zion, we were like them that
dream; then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy: Then
said they among the Heathen, The Lord has done great things for them. Psa.
106.47.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice. O Lord bring again
our Captivity, as the Rivers in the South. Psalm. 90.15.
Save us (O Lord our God) and gather us from among the heathen, that we may
praise thine holy Name, and glory in thy praise. Psa. 102.13.
Comfort us according to the days that thou have afflicted us, and according to
the years that we have seen evil. Thou will arise and have mercy upon Zion, for
the time to have mercy thereon, for the appointed time is come. For thy
servants delight in the stones thereof, and have pity on the dust thereof. Then
the Heathen shall fear the Name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the Earth thy
glory: When the Lord shall build up Zion, and shall appear in his glory: and
shall turn unto the Prayer of the desolate, and not despise their prayer. This
shall be written for the generation to come, and the people which shall be
created shall praise the Lord, for he has looked down from the height of his
Sanctuary, out of the heaven did the Lord behold the earth: That he might hear
the mourning of the Prisoner, and deliver the children appointed unto death;
that they may declare the Name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in
Jerusalem. For God will save Zion, and build the Cities of Judah, Psalm. 69.35.
that men may dwell there, and have it in possession: The seed also of his
servants shall inherit it, and they that love his Name shall dwell therein.
Surely the Lord will not fail his people, Psalm. 105.8.
neither will he forsake his Inheritance. Psalm. 94.24.
He has always remembered his Covenant and promise, that he made to a thousand
generations. Psalm. 74.2:
Thou will think upon thy Congregation which thou have possessed of old, and on
the rod of thine Inheritance, which thou have redeemed, and on mount Zion
wherein thou have dwelt. Yea when the Lord turns again the captivity of his
people, which will be when they turn unto him by hearty repentance, not before;
and 107.6.
when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of their
distress; then will he make even their very enemies to become their friends,
and give them grace and favor in the sight of all those Kings and Princes
under whom they now live, and groan in most miserable slavery and bondage (as
in their former captivities may be observed) He saw when they were in
affliction, and 106.44.
and heard their cry. He remembered his Covenant toward them, and repented,
according to the multitude of his mercies, and gave them favor in the sight of
all them that led them captive; Prove. 21:1
for the hearts of Kings are in the hands of the Lord, as the Rivers of waters,
he turns them which way soever it pleases him. Ezra 1.1.
So the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus King of Persia (after that their
seventy years captivity in Babylon, chap. 6.1.
as also Darius and others, to write in their behalf, sundry most favorable
Edicts for their return into their own Country again, with large liberality for
the re-edifying of the Temple of God in Jerusalem: For the Lord had made them
glad, chap. 6.22.
and turned the heart of the King of Asshur unto them, to encourage them in the
work of the house of God even the God of Israel. Therefore Ezra blesses the
Lord for all these extraordinary favors, chap. 7.28.
saying, blessed be the Lord God of our Fathers, which so has put in the Kings
heart to beautify the House of the Lord that is in Jerusalem, etc. Yea rather
then fail of his promised deliverance to his people, when they cry unto him in
their distress, Psa. 105.14.
He will rebuke even Kings for their sakes: As he did Pharaoh King of Egypt,
in the days of old; with this peremptory command by the hand of Moses over and
over; Exodus 7.16* and 8.1.20. and 9.1.13. and 10.3.
Let my people go, that they may serve me, or if thou will not, etc. inflicting
upon them one plague after another, till at length they were forced to drive
them away (as it is in that place) Rise up, Exo. 12.31.
get you out from among my people, and go serve the Lord, as ye have said. And
the Egyptians did force the people, because they would send them out of the
Land in have (for they said, we die all) giving them favor in the mean time in
the sight of the Egyptians: Also Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, and
11.3.
in the sight of Pharaohs servants, and in the sight of the people. Behold, and
7.1.
I have made thee Pharaohs God (says the Lord) so he brought out Israel from
among them, Psa. 136.11. Accounting the time as before.
for his mercy endures for ever; with a mighty hand, and outstretched arm,
etc. after four hundred and thirty years captivity in Egypt. And when the four
hundred and thirty years were expired, even the self same day departed all the
hosts of the Lord out of the land of Egypt. Exo. 12.41,
And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud to lead them the
way, and 13.21.
and by night in a pillar of fire to give them light. He divided the Sea in two
parts, Psa. 236.13.
and made Israel to pass through the midst of it, and overthrew Pharaoh and his
host in the red Sea, for his mercy endures for ever. So leading them through
the wilderness, and feeding them forty years with Manna from heaven; till at
length he brought them safe and sound ( as it were upon Eagles wings) maugre
all difficulties and oppositions of enemies whatsoever, even to the promised
Land of Canaan, the lot of their Inheritance. Where thy continued in peace and
prosperity so long as they served him, and kept his Commandments; but when once
they sinned against him (or rather as often as they sinned, for it was not
once, but often) and forgate the Lord their God, which brought them out of the
land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage: then he suffered their enemies to
prevail against them, and tyrannize over them, sometimes one, and sometimes
another, till at length they were carried captives to Babylon. Yet ever (as the
Burden of that Psalm is) when they cried to the Lord in their trouble, he
delivered them out of their distress, raising up from time to time Judges as he
did Moses and Joshua at the first, Judge. 2.16
which delivered them out of the hands of their Oppressors.

Othoniel, Judge. 3.7.
who delivered them out of the hands of the King of Aram, as it is in that
place, where it is said, That the children of Israel did wickedly in the sight
of the Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim; therefore the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of
Chushan-rishathaim, King of Aram, whom they served eight years. But when they
cried unto the Lord the Lord stirred them up a Savior, even Othoniel, etc. So
the land had rest forty years. Ehud, chap. 3:12.
who delivered them out of the hand of Eglon, King of Moab. Then the children
of Israel again committed wickedness in the sight of the Lord, and the Lord
strengthened Eglon King of Moab, etc. So they served Eglon King of Moab eighteen
years. But when they cried unto the Lord, the Lord stirred them up a Savior,
Ehud the son of Gera, etc. So the land had rest eighty years. And after him was
Shamgar the son of Anath, Judge. 3.30.
which slew of the Philistims six hundred men with an Ox-goad, and he also
delivered Israel. Deborah and Barack who delivered them out of the hand of
Jabin, and 4.1.
King of Canaan. And the children of Israel began again to do wickedly in the
sight of the Lord, and the Lord sold them into the hand of Jabin king of
Canaan, whose chief Captain was Sisera. Then the children of Israel cried to
the Lord, etc. and 4.4.
And at that time Deborah a Prophetess judged Israel; Then she sent and called
Barack etc. And the Lord destroyed Sisera, and all his Chariots, etc. And the
Land had rest forty years. and 5.31.
Gedeon, who delivered them out of the hands of the Midianites. and 6.1.
Afterward the children of Israel committed wickedness in the sight of the
Lord, and the Lord gave them into the hands of Midian seven years, etc. So was
Israel exceedingly, impoverished by the Midianites: and 6.6.
therefore the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, etc. and he raised them
another Savior, even Gedeon, that valiant man, who with three hundred men (and
no more) such as lapped water with their tongues (the rest sent away by the
Lords command) overthrew the whole host of Midian, Judge. 6.12. and 7.5.
with this cry, and 7.20.
The sword of the Lord and of Gedeon. and 8.28.
Thus was Midian brought low before the children of Israel, so that they lift
up their heads no more: And the Country was in quietness forty years in the
days of Gideon. But when Gideon was dead, and 8.33.
the children of Israel turned away, etc. and remembered not the Lord their God
which had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side,
etc. After him succeeded Abimelech his son, after Abimelech Tola: after Tola,
Jair the Gileadite. After these arose Jepthe, who delivered them out of the
hand of the Ammonites. and 10.6.
And the children of Israel wrought wickedness again in the sight of the Lord,
and served Baalim, etc. and forsook the Lord, and served not him. Therefore the
wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel, and the Lord sold them into the
hands of the Philistims, and into the hands of the children of Ammon, etc. Then
the children of Israel cried unto the Lord, Judge. 10.10
etc. So the Lord raised them up another valiant man, even Jepthe. Then the
spirit of the Lord came upon Jepthe, etc. So Jepthe went unto the children o^
Ammon to fight against them, and 11.1. and 11.29.
and the Lord delivered them into his hands. Thus the children of Ammon were
humbled before the children o^ Israel. And Jepthe judged Israel six years. and
12.7.
After him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. After him Elon. After Elon, and
13.1.
Abdon But the children of Israel continued to commit wickedness in the sight
of the Lord, and the Lord delivered them into the hands of the Philistims forty
years. Then God raised up Sampson, who with the Jaw bone of an Ass slew a
thousand of the Philistims at once. and 25.15. v^i. 20.
And be judged Israel in the days of the Philistims twenty years.

Thus may we see by at these examples (and make use thereof, if we be wise)
what the state and condition of Gods people has been ever of ^old, the effect
in brief, or burden of the Song, nothing else but this: When they sinned
against the Lord, he delivered them into the hands of their enemies: but when
they cried to the Lord in their trouble (that is to say, repented) he
straightway delivered them out of their distress, raising up from time to time
one Savior or Deliverer after another, and so immediately governing them by
Judges till the day of Samuel. When this people growing worse and worse, and
not contented with this sacred kind of Government, immediately from God
himself, but desiring a King like all other Nations: Make us a King to judge
us, like all other Nations: He gave them a King in his anger, saying to Samuel:
Hear the voice of the people in all that they shall say unto thee; 1 Samuel 8.5.
for they have not cast thee away, but they have cast me away, that I should
not reign over them, etc. And as before under the Judges, so now under the
Kings still as they sinned and multiplied their transgressions, so did the Lord
inflict and multiply upon them his judgments one plague after another, til at
length they were carried captives into Babylon. After which long captivity, yet
restored again upon their repentance, the time was not long, but they fell
again to their old byas, and forgate the Lord their God, which had done so
great things for them* yea, rather now worse then ever, persecuting the
Prophets from time to time, whom God raised up amongst them, and killing them
one after another, even till the coming of the Messiah, and him also they
crucified. Whereupon ensued this last and final desolation as the full measure
of their sine deserved, and as themselves desired, saying, His blood be upon
us, and upon our children; which has continued now almost these sixteen
hundred years; the longest captivity, and greatest misery that ever happened to
any people; and, so shall continue, till they (as did their forefathers) turn
to the Lord by true and hearty repentance, and cry unto the Lord in their
trouble, and then will the Lord deliver them out of their distress, according
to the former examples, and not before. And this is the state and condition of
the Jews at this day the miserable state I say, with the cause and the remedy
which God grant they may make use of, Amen.

AN ALLARUM TO THE JEWS, Or the MESSIAH already come.
FIrst for the promises and prophesies of old, as touching the coming of a
Messiah, whom we call CHRIST, both they and we agree; both of us reading daily
in our Churches and Synagogues, teaching and holding for canonical the very
self same Scriptures, even the Law and the Prophets. In so much that the
Gentile is often times enforced to marvail, when he sees a people so extremely
bent one against another, as the Jews are against Christians, and yet do stand
so peremptorily in defense of those very principles, which are the proper
causes of their disagreement, But in the Interpretation and Application thereof
arises all the Controversy, they understanding and applying all things
literally and carnally to their long looked for Messiah yet for to come: We
after a Spiritual manner, understanding all those promises and prophesies to be
most truly and real^ fulfilled in the person of our blesse^ Messiah already
come, they expecting a temporal King to rule and conquer in this world, we
acknowledging a spiritual King, whose Kingdom is not of this world, as himself
did many times protest while he was in the world: My kingdom is not of this
world. To begin with Adam, and so forward.

Gods promise to Adam.
THe first promise, as touching the Messiah is this made to Adam after his
^all, Genesis 3.15
for the restoring of mankind to wit that the seed of the Woman should break
the Serpents head, that is to say, one of her seed to be born in time, should
conquer the Devil, Death and Sin, as the ancient Jews understand this place,
which being a spiritual conquest, and against a spiritual enemy the Devil, he
(I mean the Messiah) must needs be a spiritual, and consequently not a temporal
King, as the Jews imagine.

Gods promise to Abraham.
THe second to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, often repeated. To Abraham, Genesis
12.3. In thee shall all the Families of the earth be blessed. To Isaac, Genesis
26.4. In thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. To Jacob Genesis
28:14. In thee and in thy seed shall all the Families of the earth be blessed.
Therefore the Gentiles as well as the Jews, the blessing is general without
exception, all the Families of the earth, all Nations, no Prerogative of the
Jew, no exception of the Gentile, as touching the Messiah, I mean the benefit
of this so general and great a blessing, though otherwise much every way, Romans
3.2. Romans 9.4.
as the Apostle reasons to the Romans. Whereupon I infer as before, that the
Messsiah must be a spiritual, and not a temporal King: otherwise it had been
but a very small benediction to Abraham, or others after him (who never saw
their Messiah actually) if he must have been only a temporal King, and much
less blessing had been to us Gentiles, if this Messiah of the Jews must have
been a worldly and temporal Monarch, to destroy and subdue all those Nations
formerly blessed (and blessed shall they be) to the servitude of Jury, as the
latter Teachers do imagine.

The Prophecy of Jacob.
THe third, (which confirms the former) is the prophecy of Jacob at his
death, Genesis 49.10. the rod or scepter shall not depart from Judah. nor a
Lawgiver from between his feet, till Shiloh come, and the People or Nations
shall be gathered unto him. Which the Chalde Paraphrase, as also Onkelos, both
of singular authority among the Jews, do interpret thus. Until Christ or the
Messiah come (which is the hope and expectation of all Nations, as well
Gentiles as Jews) the government shall not cease in the House or Tribe of Juda.
Whence I infer the same conclusion as before, that if the Messiah must be the
hope and expectation, as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews, then can he not
be a temporal King to destroy the Gentiles, as the latter Jews would have it,
but a spiritual King, as before has been declared.

Secondly, if the temporal Kingdom of the house of Juda, whereof the Messiah
must com, shall cease and be destroyed at his coming, and not before, that
being a certain sign of the time of his manifestation, how then can the Jews
expect yet a temporal King for their Messiah, the Scepter already departed and
gone, their Kingdom and Priesthood defaced, their City and Temple destroyed,
themselves scattered amongst all Nations, and so have continued almost this
sixteen hundred years, yea such a fatal and final desolation by Gods just
judgment brought upon that woeful Nation, and that not many years after the
death and passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, Luke 19.42
according to his prophecy in his life time, as may fully settle our faith in
this point.

The Prophecy of Moses.
THe fourth is that of Moses to the people of Israel, Dut. 18.13
The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from among
you, even of thy brethren, unto him ye shall hearken, etc. and in the verses
following, Ver. 18.
I will raise them up a Prophet from among their brethren like unto thee (says
God to Moses) and will put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto
them all that I shall command him, and whosoever will not hearken unto my
words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. Which words
cannot be understood of any other Prophet that ever lived after Moses amongst
the Jews; but only of the Messiah, as appears most plainly in another place
in Deutrenomy, where it is said, There arose not a Prophet in Israel like unto
Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.30
whom the Lord knew face to face, in all the miracles and wonders which the
Lord sent him to do, etc. no such Prophet except the Messiah ever after to be
expected: but the Messiah he it is that must match and overmatch Moses every
way, he must be a man as Moses was in respect of our infirmities, even
according as the people of Israel themselves desired the Lord in Horeb, saying,
Deuteronomy. 18.14
"Let me hear the voice of the Lord God no more, Deu. 18.16.
nor see this great fire any more, that I dye not. And the Lord said unto
Moses, they have well spoken, I will raise them up a Prophet from among their
brethren, like unto thee. etc. He must be a Lawgiver, as Moses was, but of a
far more perfect Law, as hereafter shall appear, he must be such a one whom the
Lord has known face to face, as he did Moses, but of a far more divine nature.
Isa. 53.8.
For as it is in Isaiah, Who shall declare his age? Lastly, he must be approved
to the world by miracles, signs and wonders, as Moses was, which the Lord shall
send him to do, as he did Moses. But no such Prophet has ever yet appeared in
the world, nor ever shall, who has so fitly answered this type, so perfectly
observed the Law of Moses (which Moses himself could not do) giving us instead
thereof a far more excellent Law, as was prophesied long before, that he should.
And finally, so miraculously approved himself to the world, to be sent from
God, by signs and wonders done both by himself and his Apostles, as hereafter
shall appear) except this Christ which we profess, therefore he alone is the
true Messiah, and no other to be expected.

The Prophecy of David.
THe fifth, is the Prophecy of David, a type also of the Messiah, who for that
he was a holy man, a man after Gods own heart, out of whose lineage the Messiah
was to come, had this Mystery most manifestly revealed unto him, for the
assurance whereof as of a great mystery, even that of Christ and his Church,
God binds himself by an Oath, saying, Psalm. 89.3.
I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant, thy
seed will I establish for ever, and set up thy Throne from generation to
generation, Selah. Which words although the lattter Jews will apply to King
Solomon (and so in some sort they may, for that he also was a type of the
Messiah) yet properly these words, I will establish the throne of his kingdom
for ever, 2 Samuel 7.13
so often repeated, cannot be verified of Solomon, whose earthly Kingdom was
rent and torn in pieces, straight after his death, by Jer^boam, and not long
after, as it were extinguished, but they must needs be understood of an eternal
King and Kingdom, 1 King. 12,
as must also those other words of God in the Psalms: Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee, ask of me, and I will give
thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy
possession, Thou shall crush them with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel: which prophecy was never fulfilled in Solomon, nor in
any other temporal King in Jury after him. And much less this that follows,
Psalm. 72.5.
They shall fear thee as long as the Sun and Moon endures, from Generation to
Generation. In his days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of peace
so long as the Moon endures. Verse. 7.
His dominion also shall be from Sea, to Sea, and from the River unto the ends
of the Earth. They that dwell in the Wilderness shall kneel before him, and his
enemies shall slick the dust. The Kings of Tharshish, and of the Isles shall
bring presents: the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts, yea all Kings
shall worship him, all Nations shall serve him. His Name shall be for ever, his
Name shall endure as long as the Sun, all Nations shall be blessed in him, and
shall bless him. And blessed be the Lord God, even the God of Israel, which
only does wondrous things. And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let
all the Earth be filled with his glory, Amen, Amen. And so he ends; as it
were, in a trance, ravished beyond measure, with the sweet and Heavenly
contemplation of this spiritual and everlasting Kingdom of the Messiah, for to
him, and to no other can all these Circumstances, and Hyperbolical speeches of
David (rapt with the Spirit of Prophecy) properly and primarily appertain,
though literally the Jews understand them of Solomon, as they do many other
places in like case, applying them only to the type, never looking to the
substance, whereof those types and fitures were but shadows and semblances; God
of his mercy in his good time take away the veil from their hearts, that at
length they may see the true Solomon in all his royalty, not any longer to
grope at noon days, winking with their eyes against the clear Sun like their
Forefathers, as it is in Isaiah: a most fearful judgment of God laid upon
that Nation of old, objected to them many times and often, both by Christ and his
Apostles, but in vain, Go and say unto this people, Isa. 6.5.
ye shall hear indeed but shall not understand, ye shall plainly see and not
perceive, make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut
their eyes, least they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and
understand with their hearts, and convert And be healed. Whereupon ensues
(even upon this winking and wilful obstinasie) a most severe denunciation of
final desolation. Lord how long (says the Prophet) and he answered, Until the
Cities be wasted without inhabitant, the houses without a man, and the Land be
utterly desolate, etc. But yet a tenth reserved to return, a holy seed remainig
in due time to be converted. This judgment and desolation has been a long time
upon them, they feel it and groan under the burden of it, as their forefathers
did in Egypt under Pharaoh, and yet winking, shut their eyes, and will not see
it, I mean, acknowledge the true cause of these so great judgments revealed
from Heaven upon them, even the contempt of Gods holy Prophets sent unto them
from time to time, but especially of the Messiah, whose blood lies heavily
upon them, even to this day, as their forefathers desired, His blood be upon us
and on our Children, which all the world sees is come to pass yea they
themselves feel it, yet winking with their eye they will not see it. But there
is a tenth to return, etc. The rest which will not this Messiah to reign over
them, let them look into that Parable in the Gospel, there shall they find a
far more fearful destruction denounced then the former. The first being but for
a time, but a type of the other, but a beginning of woes, the other eternal,
for ever and ever. The first he pronounces with tears over Jerusalem, the
second he denounces as an angry Judge, provoked at length to execute his
fierce wrath upon them, without any compassion at all. His words are these,
Luke 19.27
Moreover, those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them
bring them hither, and slay them before me. Which words of our Savior although
they will in no wise believe, no more then they did the former, yet shall they
find his words one day, as truly fulfilled to them in the one as they have done
already in the other. And howsoever hitherto they have esteemed of him as a
false Prophet, a Deceiver, yet has he been to them but too true a Prophet in
all their calamities both first and last. And so after this long digression I
come to the next.

The Prophecy of Jeremy.
THe sixth, which confirms the former, is that of Jer. 23.5. Behold the days
come, says the Lord that I will raise up unto David a righteous branch, and a
King shall reign, etc. And this is the name whereby they shall call him, The
Lord our righteousness.

This was spoken of David's seed about 400. years after David was dead and
buried, which proves manifest, that the former promises were not made unto him
for Solomon his Son, or any other temporal King of his line, but only for the
Messiah, who was called so peculiarly the Son and Seed of David.

The Prophecy of Ezekiel.
THe seventh which also confirms the other, is that of Ezekiel. 34.23. I will
set up a Shepherd over them, he shall feed them, even my servant David, etc. In
which words the Jews themselves do confess in their Talmud, that their Messiah
is called by the name of David, for that he shall descend of the seed of David,
and so it must needs be, for that King David being dead so long before, could
not now come again in his own person to seed them himself.

The Prophecy of Isaiah.
THe eighth is the Prophecy of Isaiah, 2.2. It shall be in the last days, that
the mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all Nations shall flow
unto it, etc. For the Law shall go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from
Jerusalem. He shall judge among the Nations. Which very words Michah repeateth,
Chap. 4.1. and are applied there as also here unto the Messiah, they can have
no other meaning, by the judgment of the Jews themselves. Isa. 4.2.
In that day shall the Bud of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit
of the earth shall be excellent. Isa. 9.6.
Unto us a Child is born, and unto us a Son is given, and the Government is
upon his shoulders, he shall call his name Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty
God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, the increase of his
Government shall have none end. And in the 11. Chapter, There shall come a rod
forth of the stock of Ishai, and a graff shall grow out of his root, and the
spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. Behold your God comes, etc. Then
shall the eyes of the blind be lightened, and the ears of the deaf shall be
opened; then shall the same man leap like a Heart, and the dumb man's tongue
shall sing, etc. Chap. 35.4. 'And he said, It is a small thing that thou
should be my servant, to raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
desolations of Israel. I will also give thee for a light of the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation unto the ends of the earth, Chap. 49.6.

Out of all which places before aledged, I conclude, first the coming of a
Messiah, which the Jews will not deny: secondly, that he must be King, as well
of the Gentiles as of the Jews, which they cannot deny: thirdly, that he must
be a spiritual and a temporal King, as they imagine. It follows next to be
proved, that he must be both God and man, even the Son of God: the second
person in Trinity to be blessed for evermore, which also they shall not deny.

That the Messiah must be both God and Man.
THe Jews at the first agreed with us in all, or most points, as touching the
Messiah for to come, denying only the fulfilling or application thereof in our
Savior, but since the latter Jews finding themselves not able to stand in that
issue against us, they have devised a new plea, saying, that we attribute many
things unto Jesus, that were not foretold of the Messiah to come, namely, that
he should be God, and the Son of God, the second person in Trinity, which we
will prove both by Scriptures, as also by the writings of their own
forefathers. For Scriptures, it is evident by all (or the most) alleged
before, that the Messiah must be God, even the Son of God, endued with man's
nature, that is, both God and man. Genesis, where he is called the seed of the
woman, it is apparent he must be man, and in the same place, where it is said,
he shall break the Serpents head, who can do this but only God? So in Isaiah,
Isa. 4.2.
where he is called the bud of the Lord, his Godhead is signified, and when he
is called the fruit of the earth, his Manhood. Isa. 7.14.
And so in another place. Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bare a Son and thou
shall call his name Immanuel, that is to say, God with us; which name can agree
to none, but to him that is both God and man. And who can interpret these
speeches, That his Kingdom shall be everlasting, Isa. 9. That his name shall be
for ever, it shall endure as long as the Sun and the Moon. That all Kings shall
worship him, all Nations serve him, Psa. 72 worship him all ye Gods, Ps. 97.
That no man can tell his age, Isa. 53, That he must sit at the right hand of
God, Ps. 110. Who, I say, can understand or interpret them but of God, seeing
in man they cannot be verified, with which place of Scripture the Evangelists
do report, that Jesus did put to silence diverse of the learned Pharisees: for,
says he, If the Messiah be David's Son, how did David call him Lord? signifying
thereby, that albeit he was to be David's Son, as he was man yet was he to be
David's Lord, as he was God, and so do both Rab. Jonathan, and their own public
Commentaries interpret this place. Michah 5.2
Michah is plain, His going forth is from the beginning, and from everlasting.
And Isaiah is bold to proclaim him by his own name, even God, and to give him
his right style, with all additions, (as Herolds to great Kings and Princes use
to do) He shall call his name Wonderful, Councellor, Isa. 9.6.
the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, etc. In vain
therefore is that objection of the Jews, that El, or Elohim, signifying God,
is sometimes a plied to a creature, here it cannot be so, nor in the next place
following, Ps. 45.6. Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever. etc. Wherefore God
even thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows:
Which cannot, be applied to Solomon, but as a type of the Messiah. Howsoever
the name JEHOVAH, which is of such reverence among the Jews, that they dare
not pronounce it, but in place thereof read Adonai, that I am sure they will
never grant to belong to any creature. Then what say they to that of Jer. 23.6.
where the Messiah is called in plain terms Jehovah, And this is the name
whereby they shall call him, Jehovah our righteousness. So likewise Chap. 33.16.
over again is he called by the same name Jehovah our rightousness. And so do
the ancient Jews themselves expound this place, namely, Rabbi Abba, who asks
the question what the Messiah shall be called, and answers out of this place,
he shall be called the Eternal Jehovah. The like does Misdrasch, upon the first
verse of the 20. Psalm. And Rabbi Moses Hadersan upon Genesis 41 expounding that
of Zephany 3 9. concludes thus: In this place Jehovah signifies nothing else
but the Messiah. And so did one of the Jews at unawares acknowledge to me,
alleging that place out of the Psalms, The Lord does build up Jerusalem, etc.
that their Messiah at his coming should build a new City and Sanctuary, much
more glorious then the former. So did he also interpret that place of Hag.
2.10. of a third Temple. Whereupon I inferred, seeing in those words he
alleged, The Lord does build up Jerusalem, the Hebrew word is Jehovah,
therefore by his own intepretation the Messiah must be Jehovah which he could
not well shift off, but said that Adonai (for Jehovah they dare not name) must
there be understood, which point of the Godhead of the Messiah the most ancient
Jews did ever acknowledge, proving by sundry places of Scripture, not only
that he should be the Son of God, but also the word of God incarnate.

First that he should be the Son of God, they prove out of Genesis 49.10. The
Scepter shall not depart etc. til Shiloh come. Which Rabbi Kimhi proves to
signify his Son, that is the Son of God Oat of Isaiah, Isa. 4.2.
where he is called, 'The bud of the Lord Out of the Psalms, where it is said,
Psalm. 2.7.
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And a little after 'Kiss the
Son least he be angry, and ye perish, blessed are all they that trust in him.
Which last words cannot be understood of the Son of any man, for it is written,
Cursed be the man that trusts in man, Jer. 17.5.

Secondly, that he shall be the Word of God, they prove out of Isaiah, as also
out of Hosea, Hos. 1.7.
where it is said, I will save them by the Lord their God. Jonathan translateth
it thus, I will save them by the Word of their God. So where it is said, The
Lord said to my Lord, Psalm. 110.1.
sit at my right hand, etc. The Lord said to his Word, Psalm. 107.20
sit at my right hand. Also where it is said, He sent his Word and healed them.
Rabbi Isaac Arama upon Genesis 47. expounds it to be meant of the Messiah, that
shall be Gods Word: So likewise that of Job, Job 19.16.
I shall see God in my flesh, etc. Rabbi Simeon upon Genesis 10. gathers
thereupon, that the Word of God, shall take flesh woman's womb. Another out of
these words; Deuteronomy. 6.4.
Jehovah our God is one Jehovah, proves the blessed Trinity, saying, by the
first Jehovah, is signified God the Father, by the next, which is Elohim, God
the Son, and by the other Johovah, God the Holy Ghost proceeeding of them both:
to all which is added the word one; to signify, that these three are
indivisible, but this secret (says he) shall not be revealed until the coming
of the Messiah. These are the words of Rabbi Ibda, reported by Rabbi Simeon in
a Treatise called Zoar, of great authority among the Jews, where also they said
Rabbi Simeon, interprets those words of Isaiah, Holy, Holy Holy, Lord God of
Hosts, in this manner. Isaiah by repeating three times Holy (says he) does
signify as much as if he had said, Holy Father, Holy Son, and Holy Spirit:
which three Holies do make but one Lord God of Hosts, which mystery of the
blessed Trinity. Rabbi Hacadosch gathers out of the very letters of JEHOVAH,
Ier. 13.6.
upon those words of Jeremy before recited, the two natures of the Messiah,
both Divine and Humane, his two filiations, the one whereby he must be the Son
of God, the other whereby he must be the Son of Man: concluding thereupon, that
in him there shall be two Distinct Natures, and yet shall they make but one
Christ, which is the same that we Christians hold. Philo that learned Jew shall
end this first consideration, touching the Nature and Person of the Messiah, as
himself writes in his Book De Exulibus, By tradition we have it, says he,
that we must expect the death of an high Priest, which Priest shall be the very
Word of God, void of all sin, whose Father shall be God, and this Word shall be
the Fathers wisdom, by which all things in this world were created, etc.
Therefore the Messiah must be both God and Man, both by the Scriptures, as also
by their own Writers they cannot deny it.

That the Messiah must change the Law of Moses.
AS the Messiah must be both God and Man, even the natural and only begotten
Son of God, and the very Word of God incarnate, void of all sin, able to
satisfy the wrath of his Father, and to fulfill the Law of Moses for us: which
Moses himself could not do, nor any other after him. It was a burdensome law
to the Children of Israel, Acts. 15.10
A yoke which neither they nor their forefathers were able to bear: so having
once in his own person most exactly accomplished the same here on earth,
together with all Rites, Ceremonies, Prophesies, Types, Figures and
Circumstances, of his coming clearly fulfilled in him, and by him. It was
necessary (I say) the substance being once come, those shadows and ceremonies
should cease and be abolished, I mean the ceremonial Law totally, for as
touching the moral Law, or the Commendments he says, I came not to destroy the
Law or the Prophets, but to fulfill them, only thus far has he abolished that
too, he has taken away the curse of it, hanging it on his Cross; even the
hand writing that was against us, together with himself crucified.

This ceremonial Law of Moses (I say) consisting of such a multitude of
Ceremonies, Figures, Types, Sacrifices, etc. all of them for the most part
pointing at the Messiah to come; for by those outward signs and services
appointed by God to his people, they were still put in mind of his Covenant,
and assured of his promise, that the Messiah should come. Moreover it being
proper and peculiar to one only Nation in all the world, namely Jury, the
exercise thereof permitted, but in one only place of that Country, namely
Jerusalem, whither every man was bound to repair three times every year, to
wit, at the Pasqua, Pentecost, and the Feast of Taberbernacles, there and no
where else to offer sacrifice. I say this Law of Moses, being altogether
Ceremonial, and peculiar to that Nation, it was necessary at the coming of the
Messiah, the same should be abolished, and a more general and perfect Law given
and established, a Law that should be common to all men, serve for all
countries, times, places, and persons, otherwise how could the Gentiles be made
partakers of the Covenant, as well as the Jews, how could all these nations so
far distant from Jerusalem, repair thrice every year thither, how should every
woman dwelling in the East or west India's repair thither for her purification,
after every Childbirth, as by the Law of Moses she was commanded, Levit. 12.
Therefore it is manifest, that this Law of Moses was given to continue but for
a time even till the coming of the Messiah, and then another to come in place
to continue, till the worlds end. This signified Moses to the people, after he
had delivered the former Law to them, saying, The Lord thy God will raise up
unto thee a Prophet like unto me, from among you, even of thy brethren, Deu.
18.15.
unto him shall thou hearken. As if he had said, ye shall hear me till he come,
who must be a Lawgiver as my self but of a far more absolute and perfect Law,
and therefore more to be reverenced and obeyed. And then he adds in the
person of God himself, this thundering sentence against all mis-believers:
Whosoever will not hearken unto my Word, which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him. Which words cannot be verefied in any other Prophet
after Moses until Christ, for that of those Prophets 'there arose none in
Israel like unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 34.10. They had no authority to be Lawgivers, as
Moses had, but were all bound to the observation of his Law till Christ should
come, whom Moses here calls a Prophet like unto himself, that is, a Lawmaker,
exhorting all men to hear and obey him. Hereunto the Prophets subscribe, none
of them all presuming to take upon them that privilege to be like unto him. A
Prophet like unto Moses, they must let that alone to the Messiah, whose office
it is to change the Law of Moses, given upon mount Sinai, and in stead thereof
to promulgate a new Law, to begin at Sion, as says the Prophet Isaiah, The Law
shall go forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. Isa. 2.3.
Which cannot be understood of Moses Law, published eight hundred years before
this Prophecy, and that from Sinai, not from Sion, but of the preaching of the
Gospel, which began at Jerusalem, and from thence was spread over all the world.
Which the same Isaiah foresaw, when talking of the Messiah, he says, Isa.
29.28.
In that day shall five Cities in the Land of Egypt speak the language of
Canaan, etc. In that day shall the Altar of the Lord be in the midst of the
Land of Egypt, and a pillar by the border thereof, unto the Lord. And the
Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and do sacrifice and oblation, and
shall vow vows, etc. which could not be verified of the Law of Moses, for by
that Law, the Egyptians could have neither Altar nor Sacrifice, but it was
fulfilled upon the coming of Christ, when the Egyptians were made Christians.
Also in another place, And the Isles shall wait for his Law. The same was
likewise foretold by God in Malachy, where he says to the Jews, and of the
Jewish Sacrifices, I have no pleasure in you, neither will I receive an
offering at your hands, Isa. 42.4. Mal. 1.10.
for from the rising of the Sun, until the going down of the same my name is
great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense shall be offered unto my
name, and a pure offering, for my name is great among the Gentiles, says the
Lord of Hosts. Wherein we see, first a reprobation of the Jewish Sacrifices,
and consequently of the Law of Moses, which depends principally thereupon.
Secondly, that among the Gentiles there should be a pure manner of Sacrifice,
more grateful unto God then the other, not limited either in respect of time
or place, as the Mosaical Law and Sacrifice was. For so says God in Ezekiel, I
gave them statutes which were not good, Ezekiel. 20.25
and judgments, wherein they shall not live, that is not good to continue
perpetually, nor shall they live in them any longer, but til the time by me
appointed. Of which time he determines more particularly by Jeremiah in these
word, Behold the days come, says the Lord, Ier. 31.31
that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and Judah, not
according to that Covenant which I made with their Fathers, etc. Where you see
a new Covenant or Testament promised different from the old, Whereupon I
conclude, the old Law of Moses by the Messiah must be changed into a New.

The time of his manifestation with all other circumstances.
NOw for the time of his manifestation, with all other circumstances, of his
birth, life, death, resurrection, ascension and those things also that fell out
afterward, if we shall consider how particularly, and precisely they were all
foretold by the Prophets, and how long before (some hundreds, some thousands of
years) before they fell out; as also how exactly they were all fulfilled in the
person of our blessed Savior: all directed like so many lines to one Center:
we shall (as it were in a mirror) see and behold both the truth of Christan
Religion settled upon a most firm and unmovable center; as also the vanity of
all other Religions whatsoever, especially this most vain expectation of the
Jews to this day, of their Messiah yet for to come, as vain and fond
altogether, as was that opinion of one of the Philosophers which the word
Center has put me in mind of, that the Earth, forsooth, did move, and the
Heavens stand still: and how far they are degenerate, not only from all true
light and understanding in heavenly matters, but also even from common sense
and reason it self in things of that nature tending thereunto.

And first for the time. Daniel who lived in the first Monarchy, foretold that
there should be three Monarchies more, the last the greatest of all, to wit,
the Roman Empire, and then the Eternal King or Messiah should come, his words
are these. In the days of these Kings, shall the God of Heaven ser up a Kingdom
which shall I never be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. And just according to this time
was the Messiah born, namely in the days of Augustus Caesar, Luke 2. (as both we
Christians account and the Jews acknowledge) even in those Halcyon days of
peace, when the Temple gates of Janus were commanded to be shut, and upon that
very day when Augustus commanded that no man should call him Lord, was this
Prince of Peace born. Therefore to him agrees this circumstance of time very
fitly, most vainly therefore do the Jews after this time expect another.

Secondly, Jacob who lived many years before, Genesis 49.10.
prophesied of this time very precisely, as already has been alleged, that
the Messiah whom he there called Shiloh, should come at that time, when the
Scepter or Government Regal was departed from the house of Judah, which was in
the days of Herod, and never till then, who first usurped that government, his
Father-in-Law King Hircanus with all his offspring of the blood Royal of
Judah, together with the Sanhedrim put to death. The Genealogies of the Kings
and Princes burned. A new pedigree for himself devised. In a word, all
authority regal whatsoever belonging to that Tribe, at that time, quite
extinguished. And just according to this time was our Savior born, namely in
the days of Herod, Mat. 2.1. Therefore to him agrees this circumstance of time
very fitly: most vainly therefore do the Jews after this time expect any longer.

Thirdly, God himself says by his Prophet Haggai, that the Messiah whom he
there calls The desired of all Nations: shall come in the time of the second
Temple, which was then but new built, far inferior in stateliness and glory to
the former built by Solomon, which the old men in the book of Ezra testify by
their weeping when they saw this second Temple, Ezr. 3.12.
and remembered the glory of the first. The words of the Lord by his Prophet
Haggai, are these. Speak unto Zerubbabel, who is left among you that saw this
house in her first glory, and how do you see it now? it is not in your eyes in
comparison of it as nothing? yet now be of good cheer O Zerubbabel, for thus
says the Lord of Hosts, yet a little while and I will shake the Heavens and
the Earth, and the Sea, and the dry Land. And I will move all Nations, and the
desire of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the
Lord of Hosts. The glory of this last house shall be greater then the first,
etc. which must needs be understood of the coming of the Messiah, to wit, his
personal presence in this second Temple, in whom is the fullness of glory, and
therefore could he and none other, fill it with glory, being himself indeed the
King of glory. Psalm. 24.7
Lift up your heads O ye gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting doors, and the
King of glory shall come in. So does Malachy prophecy in these words. The Lord
whom ye seek shall speedily come to his Temple, Mal. 3.1.
even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye desire, behold he shall come, says
the Lord of Hosts, etc. And so indeed he did, for Christ Jesus came into the
world during this second Temple, and did himself likewise foretell the
destruction thereof, which came to pass even in that age. Therefore to him
agrees this Circumstance of time very fitly, most vainly therefore do the Jews
after this time, to wit, the destruction of the second Temple expect any
further.

Fourthly, the Messiah by the true computation of Daniels Prophecy, accounting
his Hebdomades or Weeks for so many years to be multiplied by seven: that is to
say, Weeks of Years (as they must needs be understood) was to come just
according to the time before mentioned, his words are these: Seventy weeks are
determined upon thy people, and upon thine holy City: know therefore, and
understand, that from the going forth of the Commandment to bring again the
people, and to build Jerusalem unto Messiah the Prince, shall be seven weeks,
and threescore and two weeks. And after threescore and two weeks shall the
Messiah be slain and not for himself. And the people of the Prince that shall
come, shall destroy the City and Sanctuary, and he shall confirm the Covenant
with many for one week, and in the midst of the week he shall cause the
sacrifice and oblations to cease. Which Hebdomades, or weeks of years, whether
we account from the first year of Cyrus who first determined the Jews
reduction, or from the second of Darius, who confirmed, and put the same in
execution, or from the twentieth year of Darius, for that he then made a new
Edict in the favor of Nehemias, and sent him into Jury: every way they will
end in the reign of Herod and Augustus, under whom Christ was born, or in the
reign of Tiberius, under whom he suffered. And by no interpretation can it be
avoided, but that this time is now our, above one thousand five hundred years.
Besides this being a clear prophecy of the Messiah (howsoever somewhat more
intricate and obscure, in respect of the years, wherein the Prophet alludeth to
the Captivity of Babylon, as some think) must needs be interpreted according to
the former prophesies also of the Messiah. And so does the Prophet expound
himself in the former words, namely, That the Messiah should be slain, before
the destruction of the City and Sanctuary. Yet is there one week more to make
up the number of seventy, in the midst of which week the Messiah should be
slain, which came to pass accordingly, for in the midst of that week, that is,
about three years and an half after his baptism* Christ Jesus the true Messiah
was slain, and not for himself, for Pilate could find no fault in him: I find
no fault in the man, I find no cause of death in him, Luke 23.14.22. Mat. 27.
Isa. 53.5.
I am innocent of the blood of this just man, look ye to it. Not for himself,
but for us was he wounded (as says the Prophet Isaiah) He was wounded for our
transgressions. Therefore to him does this circumstance of time bear witness,
and consequently the Jews after these times by God himself appointed for the
Messiah, expecting yet for another, besides the vanity of this their
expectation, they make God himself a liar, yea and all their forefathers,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Ioh. 8.56. Act. 3.21. Chap. 8.44.
and all the holy Prophets (whose Children they hold themselves to be) who all
of them saw these days, and prophesied of them, Abraham rejoiced to see my day
(says our Savior) and he saw it, and was glad. All these make they Liars with
themselves whereby they show themselves, rather to be the Children of the
Devil, who is the Father of lies, then of Abraham, who is the Father of the
Faithful only. For so did that vile Serpent at the first, even dare to give God
himself the lie (as it is in Genesis) God says there to Adam: In the day that
thou eatest of such a tree thou shall dye the death: Genesis 2.17. Genesis 3.4. Mat.
3.7.
No (says the Devil) it is not so, ye shall not dye at all. So do these Imps
of Satan, Generation of Vipers, as John the Baptist in his time called them,
even just after the same manner. For says God by his Prophets, at such a time
will I send the Messiah into the world, and by such and such marks ye shall
know him: no says this froward Generation, it is not so, he has not yet sent
him, he is not yet come, we acknowledge no such marks, as that he shall be poor
and of no reputation in this world, put to death. We look for a magnificent
Prince, we will none of such a base fellow, as this Jesus to reign over us, a
false Prophet, a deceiver, and so forth, with whatsoever else their malicious
hearts can imagine, their blasphemous tongues being set on fire of hell, are
ready to utter to his disgrace. But let them look into that Parable of our
Savior, and there they shall find him another manner of person then they
imagine, I will repeat it unto them. Luke 19.27
Moreover those mine enemies who would not that I should reign over them, bring
them hither and slay them before me. God of his mercy give them repentance in
time of their heinous and high blasphemies, that they may mourn for him whom
they have pierced, every Family and Tribe apart. Repent for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand, And think not to say with your selves. We have Abraham to
our Father, for I say unto you, that God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. Now is the Ax put to the root of the Tree. The last
Trumpet will blow, and then it will be too late, when ye shall hear that shril
voice ringing in your ears, arise ye dead and come to judgment, that voice will
awake you out of all your dreams, and mate you arise whether you will or no,
when ye shall see the Son of man come in his glory, even your long looked for
Messiah, like a magnificent Prince indeed, but little to the comfort of those
that remain obstinate. Awake therefore to your salvation, Ephesians. 5.14.
that ye be not awakened hereafter to your condemnation; Awake thou that
sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light; shake off
all your idle dreams and foolish fantasies of our imaginary Messiah, fitter for
Children then Men of discretion; consider with your selves at length, how long
you have overslept your selves, how many ages are now past and gone, since both
by computation of Scriptures (as aforesaid) as also by the observation of your
own Doctors and Teachers, your Messiah was to come, and yet you see him not, no
nor any likelihood at all of his coming, more then at the first, yea rather
all evidences and probabilities to the contrary that may be; look into your
Talmud, and there you shall see plainly, if you be not blind there also, as you
are in the Scriptures, the vanity of vanities of this your expectation, for so
it is indeed.

It is often repeated in your Talmud, that one Elias left this Tradition, that
the world should endure six thousand years, that is, two thousand before the
Law, two thousand under the Law, and two thousand after that, under the
Messiah. Which last two thousand years, by all computation, could not begin
much from the birth of Jesus. And your Rabbis long since complained in that
their Talmud, that there seem-to them in those days seven hundred and odd years
past since the Messiah by the Scripture should have appeared; therefore they do
marvel why God so long deferreth me same, much more then may ye marvail upon
whom the ends of the world are come.

Another observation Cabalistical they have upon those words of Isa. 9 7. The
increase of his Government and Peace shall have no end, where the Hebrew word
is Lemarbeh, signifying to increase or multiply ad multiplicandum: In which
word, because they find mem to be shut, which is not usual in the middle of a
word they gather many secrets, and and among other, that seeing mem signifies
600 years, so long it should be from that time of Isaiah, until the time of the
Messiah, which account of theirs falls our so just, that if you reckon the
years from Acha^ King of Judah, in whose time Isaiah spoke these words, until
the time of Herod under whom Christ was born, you shall find the number to fail
in little or nothing.

A much like observation has Rabby Moses ben Maimon in his Epistle to his
Country men the Jews in Africa, concerning the time of the Messiah, which he
thinks to be past, according to the Scriptures above a thousand years (he
lived about the year or Christ one thousand, one hundred and forty) but that
God deferreth his manifestation for their sins, since which time, has passed
almost 500. years more and yet ye hear nothing of his coming. Consider this ye
Jews of Barbary, for to you partly seems this Epistle to be written. Will you
then stay still, and say still after so many hundred years past and gone, that
for your sins God refers yet his coming, putting it off from one five
hundred years to another, and so in infinitum? it is all one as if you say,
that for your sins God has broken his promise now, 1 thousand and six hundred
years; and consequently it may be for your sins the Messiah will never come,
this must be your last refuge, you may as well say the one as the other. But
howsoever you make your selves sinful, yea out of measure sinful, Psalm. 71.4.
Romans 3.4.
yet let God be just and righteous in his promise (as it is Written) make not
him a liar as you have done hitherto.

To this purpose also appertains the Narration of one Elias (as Rabby Josua
reports it in the Talmud) that the Messiah was to be born indeed according to
the Scriptures before the destruction of the second Temple, for that Isaiah
says of the Synagogue: before she travailed, she brought forth, and before her
pain came, Isa. 66.7.
she was delivered of a man child, that is, says he, before the Synagogue was
afflicted and made desolate, by the Romans she brought forth the Messiah. But
yet, says he, this Messiah for our sins does hide himself in the Seas and
other Deserts, till we be worthy of his coming. Which is as much in effect as
if he had said (the one as probable as the other) that perhaps for our sins and
unworthiness the Messiah may not come at all, but return to Heaven back again
from whence he came. And why I pray have you not stayed as well in Heaven all
this while, rather then in the Seas and Deserts for so many years, to no
purpose, I am persuaded if Balaams Ass were alive again, and did hear these,
and such like your idle fantasies and dreams touching your Messiah, the very
Ass would reprove you to your faces, and make you ashamed of them, whereof
though I have read somewhat in diverse Authors, yet could I hardly believe any
such absurdities to be delivered, much less defended by any reasonable
creatures, till I had heard something my self. I urged that place of Genesis to
one of them, to wit, that the Scepter should not depart from Judah till Shiloh
came, that is, the Messiah, which being so long since departed and gone, I
asked what reason they had, as yet to expect for a Messiah, he answered, the
Scepter was not departed, they had their Sheckes, that is to say, chief men of
their Tribes, in all parts where they inhabit. Moreover that some of the
Moors, forsooth had brought them word of a People or Nation of the Jews,
inhabiting in a far Country, he could not tell me the place where, but first
there is a River to be passed, two Trees growing on either side directly one
against another, which two trees every saturday, and no day else, do of their
own accord bow one toward another, making, as it were, a bridge for men to go
over. Now the Jews by reason that day is their Sabbath, may not attempt to pass
over it. But the Messiah at his coming shall bring them altogether, into the
Land of promise they know not how, rebuild the City and Sanctuary in a trice,
much more glorious then ever it was before. To which purpose he alleged that
place out of the Psalms, Psalm. 147.2.
The Lord does build up Jerusalem, and gather together the dispersed of Israel.
Hag. 2.10.
So likewise interpreting that of Haggai ( the glory of this last house shall be
greater then the first) of this third imaginary Temple. So literally applying
that of Isaiah, Isa. 11.6.
that in those days the Wolf should dwell with the Lamb the Leopard lie with
the Kid, the Calf and the Lion, and the fat beasts together, and a little child
to lead them, etc. That these things should thus come to pass literally,
according to the very Hebrew Characters. This is all the knowledge they have in
the Scriptures, the bare Hebrew letters, and no more. Yet can they not speak
one word of the true spiritual language of Canaan, but in stead of Shiboleth
(like those Ephraimites, Judge. 12.6
they pronounce Siboleth, no interpretation spiritual of the Celestial Canaan,
the Heavenly Jerusalem, of the spiritual Temple, of the mystical body of the
Messiah, that is to say, his Church no relish at all of the spirit of God, or
any spiritual worship amongst them. And yet, forsooth, they will be the people
of God alone, and who but they, the Children of Abraham, and of the promise,
and none but they, yea they are so vainly puffed up with the foolish pride of
this their high pedigree, that they think verily, and will speak it confidently
(I have heard it from them) that none of them, unless for very heinous
offenses, as Perjury or such like shall be judged after this life, or be in
danger of hell fire, they only to have their punishment in this world, and not
else. As though hell fire were only prepared for us Gentiles, and Heaven only
for the Jews, which unless they repent, they shall find quite contrary, if the
words of our Savior be found true, which hitherto they have found but too
true, to their woe, as I noted before. I say unto you that many shall come from
the East, and from the West, Mat. 8.11.
and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven,
and the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into utter darkness, there
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Where are now the Jews with their lofty
pedigree, Even as Esau sold to Jacob his birthright for a mess of pottage, so
have the Jews to us Gentiles their birthright to the Kingdom of Heaven, for a
mess of idle dreams and fantasies they imagine to themselves, Towers and Castles
in the air, Crowns and Kingdoms in expectance, even in this world, another
Paradise here on earth. But in the end they shall find themselves to have been
all this while in a fools Paradise, and as it were in a dream, which when one
awaketh vanishes, and so I leave them to their dreams and profound sleep, till
it shall please God of his mercy to awake them.

Thus then it is manifest both by Scripture, Tradition, and Observation of the
Jews themselves, that about the time before mentioned, to wit, in the days of
Augustus Caesar, the new Roman Emperor, and of Herod the usurper King of Jury,
who was the first that took away the Scepter from Judah, even in the time of
the second Temple, the true Messiah was to be born. And hence it was that the
whole nation of the Jews remained so accent at this time, more then ever before
or since in expecting the Messiah. Whereupon so soon as ever they heard of John
Baptist in the Desert. Ioh. 19.
The Jews sent Priests and Levites from Jerusalem, to ask if he were the
Messiah. And in another place it is said, 'As the people waited and all men
mused in their hearts of John if he were the Messiah, John answered and said
unto them, Lu 7.3.15.
etc. So that you see in those days the whole people of the Jews waited for his
coming, all men mused upon their Messiah, So did also John himself being in
prison, sent two of his Disciples to Jesus, Mat. 11.3.
demanding, Art thou he that shall come, or shall we look for another: and
again at the feast of the Dedication, they came flocking to him from all parts,
they came round about him, as it is in that place, saying, How long do thou
hold us in suspense, Ioh. 10.24.
if thou be that Christ tell us plainly. All which imports the great
expectation wherein the people remained in those days, of which fame,
expectation, and greedy desire of the people diverse deceivers took occasion to
call themselves the Messiah, Judas Galilaeus, Judas the Son of Hezechias,
Atonges a Shepherd, Theudas and Egyptus, all notable deceivers. But above all
one Barcozham, who as the Talmud affirms, for thirty years together was
received for the Messiah by the Rabbis themselves, till at last they slew him,
because he was not able to deliver them from the Romans. Which facility in the
people, when Herod saw, he caused one Nicholaus Damascenus to devise a pedigree
for him from the ancient Kings of Juda, and so he as well as the rest took upon
him the title of the Messiah, whom diverse carnal Jews that expected the Messiah
to be a magnificent King, as Herod was, would seem to believe and publish
abroad, whereupon they are thought to be called Herodians in the Gospel, who
came to tempt Christ. Mat. 22.16.
But all these deceivers are vanished and gone, their memorial is perished with
them: whereunto our Savior, seems to allude, Joh. 10.8.
where he says, All that ever came before me are thieves and robbers, but the
sheep did not hear them. I say all these false Messiahs with their followers,
they are vanished and gone; only Jesus Christ and his Religion, contrary to
all other Religions in the world, without either sword, spear or shield,
against all world strength and policy has increased and multiplied, and shall
do to the end of the world, as Gamaliel long ago prophesied to the Jews,
wilfully bent, put all in vain, even in the very first infancy thereof to have
destroyed it. His words are these. 'And now I say unto you, refrain your selves
from these men, and let them alone: for if this council, or this work be of men
it will come to naught, but if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, lest ye be
found even fighters against God.

Wherefore to conclude, at length this main point of the time of Christ's
appearing, which cutteth the very throat of the Jews vain expectation, seeing
at or about that time there concurred so many signs and arguments together,
Dan. 2.44.
as 1 the establishment of the Roman Empire newly erected (for then by Daniels
prophecy was the God of heaven to set up his Kingdom.) 2. The departure of the
Rod or Scepter from the house of Juda. 3. The destruction of the second Temple,
foretold by our Savior, and coming to pass accordingly even in that age. 4.
The just calculation of Daniels Hebdomades, or weeks of years. 5. The
observation of Rabbis. 6. The public fame and expectation of all the Jews
together with the palpable experience of more then sixteen hundred years past
since Jesus appeared; wherein we see the Jewish people in vain do expect
another Messiah, they being dispersed over all the world without Temple,
Sacrifice, Prophet, or any other pledge at all of Gods favor, which never
happened to them, till after the death of our Savior, for that in all other
their banishments, captivities and afflictions, they had some prophecy,
consolation or promise left to them for their comfort, but now they wander up
and down (God having set a mark upon them as he did upon Cain) as a people
forlorn, and abandoned both of God and Men.

His Lineage or Pedegre.
SEcondly, the Messiah by the Scripture was to be born of the Tribe of Judah,
and to descend lineally from the house of David. There shall come a rod out of
the stock of Ishai, etc. Isa. 11.1.
So did our Savior, as appears by his Genealogy set down by his Evangelists,
Mat. 1. Luke 3. as also by the Thalmud it self, which says, That Jesus of
Nazareth crucified, was of the blood royal from Zerabbabel of the house of
David, confirmed by the going up of Joseph and Mary his Mother to Bethlehem to
be taxed, 'Which was the City of David, Luke 2.4.
who was born there, as also it is manifest, for that the Scribes and the
Pharisees, who objected many matters of much less importance against him: as
that he was a Carpenters Son, etc. yet never objected they against him, that he
was not of the house of David, which could they have proved, would quickly have
ended the whole controversy.

His Birth with the Circumstances thereof.
THirdly the Messiah by the Scripture was to be born of a Virgin, so says
Isaiah, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bring forth a son: Isa. 7.14.
the Hebrew is He emphaticum, the Virgin. And Isaiah appoints this to Achaz,
for a wonderful and strange sign from God* therefore, says he, The Lord
himself will give you a sign behold, which he could not have done in reason, if
the Hebrew word in that place had signified a young woman only, as some latter
Rabbis will affirm, for that is no such sign nor strange thing, but very
common and ordinary for young women to conceive and bring forth Children, and
so did the elder Jews understand it, as Rabbi Simeon notes. And Rabbi Moses
Haddersan, upon those words, Truth shall bud forth of the Earth, says thus.
Here Rabbis Joden notes, that it is not said, Truth shall be engendered, but
Truth shall bud forth, to signify that the Messiah, who is meant by the word
Truth, shall not be begotten as other men are, in carnal copulation. To the
same effect, and after the same manner to be interpreted is that of Jeremy, The
Lord has created a new thing in the Earth, a Woman shall compass a Man. And
Rabbi Haccadosch proves by Cabala out of many places of Scripture, not only
that the Mother of the Messiah must be a Virgin, but also that her name shall
be Mary. Now the birth of Jesus Christ was thus, etc, that is to say, Mat. 1.18.
after this strange and extraordinary manner, therefore must he needs be the
true and undoubted Messiah.

The Messiah by the Scripture was to born at Bethlehem in Judea, for so it is
written by the Prophet. Mich. 5.2. Mat. 2.5.
And thou Bethlehem Ephrathah art little to be among the thousands of Judah,
yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that shall be the Ruler of Israel,
etc. which place the chief Priests themselves quoted to that purpose to Herod,
demanding of them where Christ should be born, and they answered him, at
Bethlehem in Judea, for so it is written by the Prophet, as before. So also
David after much restless study and industrious search to find out this
mystery, etc. I will not enter into the Tabernacle of my house, Psalm. 132.3.
nor come upon my pallet or bed, nor suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine
eyelids to slumber, until I find out a place for the Lord, etc. At length, the
mystery being revealed unto him, he does as it were, point to the very place in
the words following, Lo we heard of it at Ephratah, which is Bethlehem, Genesis
35.19. and found it in the fields of the Forest. Then adds, 'We will enter
into his Tabernacle, and worship before his footstool: foreshewing that divine
worship there afterward done to Jesus by those Magi or wise men, who came from
the East to worship him in that place, even in the Cratch, and before his
footstool, Presenting unto him gifts of Gold, Mat. 2.1.
Frankincense and mirrh: as was also prophesied in another place, that presents
and gifts should be brought unto him from far countries and by great
personages. Psa. 72.10.
The Kings of Tarshish and of the Isles shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba
and Seba shall bring gifts. Cyprian says, it is an old tradition of the
Church, that those Magi or wise men were Kings, or rather little Lords of
particular places, which is to be understood, such little Kings as Josuah slew
thirty in one battle: (...) 12.
howsoever it is manifest they were men of place and reputation in their
countries (neither are prophesies always so strictly and literally to be
understood) They brought with them a great treasure, Gold, Frankincense and
Mirrh, yea both Herod and all Jerusalem took notice of their coming. They had
private conference with the King, as touching the star that appeared unto them,
leading them to that most bright morning star whereof Balaam long before
prophesied, saying, I shall see him, but not now, I shall behold him, but not
near, Numb. 24.17.
there shall come a star of Jacob, etc. Jesus then being born at Bethlehem in
Judea (as was prophesied long before the Messiah should be) and indeed it
stands with great reason, that he that was to be the Son of David, should
also be born in the City of David: the circumstances also of his birth duly
considered both before and after, first the Angels salutation to his Mother
Mary, Luke 1.28. Chap. 2.21.
foretelling that his name should be Jesus, before ever he was conceived. So
Esdras prophesied in the person of God himself, saying, Behold, the time shall
come, 2 Esd. 7.26.
that these tokens which I have told thee shall come to pass, etc. for my son
Jesus shall appear, etc. and after these same years shall my son Christ dye: Here
is both his birth and passion, both his names, Jesus, Christ, plainly
expressed. Which book, though it be not canonical, yet was it extant in the
world before ever Christ was born. Also Rabbi Haccadosch proves by art
Cabalist out of many places of Scripture, that the name of the Messiah at his
coming shall be Jesus, and among other he adds this reason, that as the name
of him who first brought the Jews out of bondage into the Land of promise, was
Jesus or Josua (which is all one) so must his name be Jesus, that shall the
second time deliver them. Secondly, the Angels appearing to the Shepherds in
the night of the Nativity, with this joyful message from Heaven, Behold I bring
you tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people, that unto you is born
this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord: And this is
shall be a sign unto you, ye shall find the child swad' led and laid in a cratch.

Thirdly, the star that appeared, notifying his coming into the world, whereof
not only the wise men before mentioned, but also generally, all the
Astronomers and Soothsayers of that age took special notice, adjudging it to
portend universal good to the earth, some gathering thereupon, that some God
descended from heaven to the benefit of mankind, and for that cause had that
star an image erected to it in Rome, and as Plinies words are, Is Cometa unus
toto orb colitur. That only Comet in all the world is adored. Fourthly, his
presentation in the Temple, Luke 2.
according to the Law of Moses, where openly came old Simeon by the motion of
the spirit ( for he had a revelation from God, that he should not see death,
till he had seen the Lords Christ) took the child in his arms, acknowledged him
for the Messiah, prophesied that he should be a light to be revealed unto the
Gentiles, appointed for the fall and rising again o many in Israel, with other
events, which afterward came to pass. So did likewise Anne the Prophetess, as
it is in the same Chapter. Fifthly, that most pitiful murder of all the Infants
in and about Bethlehem, Mat. 3.16.
upon this occasion, as was prophesied by Jeremy, saying, A voice was heard on
high, mourning and bitter weeping. Rachel weeping for her children, and refused
to be comforted, Jer. 31.15.
because they were not, Rachel was buried in the way to Ephrath which is
Bethlehem: and for that cause those infants were called her children, Genesis
35.19.
albeit she were dead above two thousand years before they were slain, and
above one thousand and five hundred before Jeremy wrote this prophecy. Among
which Infants Herod also for more assurance, slew an infant of his own, for
that he was descended by the Mothers side, of the line of Judah. Which cruelty
coming to Augustus his ears, he said he had rather be Herod's swine, then his
son, for that he being a Jew, was prohibited by his religion to kill his swine,
though not ashamed to kill his Son.

Sixthly his flying into Egypt hereupon, as also to fulfill that prophecy, Mat.
2.13. Hos. 11.1. Isa. 19.^. Eusebius. lib.
'out of Egypt have I called my Son; which Isaiah enlarges further, saying,
Behold the Lord rides upon a light cloud (which is his flesh or humanity) and
shall come into Egypt, and all the Idols of Egypt shall tremble at his presence:
Which latter point Eusebius shows, was fulfilled most evidently in the sight
of all the world, for that no nation came to Christian Religion with so great
celerity and fervor, as did the Egyptians, who threw down their Idols before
any other Nation. And as they had been the first in Idolatry to other
countries, so were they the first by Christ his coming unto them that
afterward gave example of true return unto their Creator. It follows in
Isaiah, I will deliver the Egyptians into the hands of cruel Lords (these were
the Roman Lords and Princes, Pompey, Caesar, Antony etc.) 'And a migh-King shall
reign over them, etc. this must needs be Augustus the Emperor, who after the
death of Cleopatra the last of the blood of the Ptolomies, took possession of
all Egypt and subjected it as a Province to the Roman Empire. But after these
temporal afflictions threatened against Egypt, behold a most Evangelical promise
of deliverance: In that day shall five Cities of the Land of Egypt speak the
Language of Canaan, etc. In that day shall the Altar of the Lord, be in the
midst of the Land of Egypt, etc. They shall cry unto the Lord, because of their
oppressors, and he shall send them a Savior, and a great man, and shall deliver
them, etc. The Lord of Hosts shall bless them saying, Blessed be my people of
Egypt, etc. This blessing (I say) the Egyptians obtained by our Saviors being
in Egypt, whom here the Prophet calls by his own name Jesus, a Savior, a
great man. Finally the coming of John Baptist, his forerunner or Messenger, as
was prophesied, Behold, Mal. 3.1.
I will send my Messenger and he shall prepare the way before me, Chap. 4.5.
and the Lord whom ye seek shall speedily come to his Temple. And again, I will
send you Eliah the Prophet, that is to say, John the Baptist, in the spirit and
power of Eliah, as an Angel from Heaven expounds it, appearing to Zacharias
his Father in the Temple, sent to foretell him both of his birth, as also by
what name he should call him, even John, saying, Luke 1.13.
Thou shall call his name John, he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, he
shall go before him in the power and spirit of Eliah. And therefore out Savior
in plain terms he calls him Eliah, Mat. 11.14. And if you will receive it,
this is that Eliah which was to come, he that has ears to hear, let him hear.
And as our Savior gave him his due, before a multitude then assembled, calling
him Eliah: So did this Eliah also give our Savior his due, in acknowledging
him for the Messiah, not assuming unto himself that honor offered unto him by
the Jews, but refusing it absolutely, and laying it upon Jesus our Savior the
true owner. Then this is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and
Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, Ioh. 1.19.
who art thou? and he confessed and denied not, and said plainly, I am not the
Christ. I am not the Messiah; I Baptize you with water, but there is one among
you, whom you know not, he it is that comes after me, which is preferred
before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to unloose, These things were
done in Bethabara, beyond Jordan, where John did Baptize. The next day John
sees Jesus coming to him, and says behold the Lamb of God, which takes away
the sin of the world. This is he whom I said, after me comes a man that is
preferred before me, for he was before me, and I knew him not, but because he
should be declared to Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water. So John
bare record saying, I saw the spirit come down from Heaven, like a Dove, and
abiding upon him. And I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with
water, he said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the spirit come down, and stay
still upon him, that is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw and
bare record that this is the Son of God. According as it is, in the other three
Evangelists more at large expressed, how that Jesus when he was baptized came
strait out of the water, and lo the Heavens were opened unto him. Mat. 3.16.
Mar. ^.10. Luke 3.21.
And John saw the spirit of God descending like a Dove; and lighting upon him.
And lo a voice came from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased. The next day John stood again, and two of his Disciples, and he
beheld Jesus walking by and said: Joh. 1.31.
Behold the Lamb of God, and the two Disciples heard him speak, and followed
Jesus. All this was done at Bethabara, beyond Jordan, in the sight and hearing
of a number of people there present, as three of our Evangelists do report,
which they would never have presumed to have done, had not the matter been most
evident, and without all compass of denial or contradiction. And truly no one
thing in all this story of Jesus life, does more establish certainty of his
being the true Messiah, then that John the Baptist, whose wisdom, learning,
virtue and rare sanctity is confessed, and recorded by the writings of all our
adversaries, should refuse the honor of the Messiah offered unto himself, and
lay it upon Jesus, and also should direct those Disciples that depended upon
him, to the only following and embracing of Jesus doctrine which is most
evidently proved, that he did, for that so many followers and Disciples as
himself had, not one appeared ever after, that was not a Christian.

These circumstances I say of the birth and coming of the Messiah into this
world, so long before foretold by the Prophets, and fulfilled so exactly in the
person of our blessed Lord and Savior well considered; I may at length
conclude. Heaven and Earth concurring. Men and Angels with all other Creatures
applauding thereunto, yea and God himself from Heaven pronouncing it This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. That therefore as sure as God is God,
and cannot lie nor give Testimony to any untruth, so sure is Jesus Christ the
Son of God, the true Messiah and Savior of the world, no other to be expected.

His preaching or doctrine.
THus having evicted by the birth of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ,
together with the circumstances, both before and after, that he was by
birthright the only legitimate (as I may say) and true born Messiah, all others
that were before him, or since, have sprung up, or shall do hereafter to the
worlds end, but bastards and usurpers, yea thieves and robbers, and that in the
highest degree of thee very that may be, even robbing God of his honor* which
he will not impart to any other: it remains yet further to demonstrate the
same by his life, death, resurrection, and ascension, with all other accidents
and circumstances accordingly to be observed, which may make this mystery more
and more manifest, or rather palpable as the Apostle witnesses, saying that
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
these our eyes, which we have looked upon, and these hands of ours have
handled, etc. that I say which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you:
what can be more palpable?

After his baptism he began to preach (having before gotten his living (as
most conjecture) with his own hands, and eaten his bread with the sweat of his
brows, to show himself true man, and that he was made a curse for us (as it is
written, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread) and what was his
doctrine? of this world, or worldly delights, of pleasure, or profit, no, no,
quite contrary to the humors of this wicked world, and to the corruptions of
flesh and blood, which procured him the more hatred (as in all the four
Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, who recorded both his sayings and
doings may appear) wholly tending to the sincere service of God in spirit and
truth, to the exaltation of Gods glory, the beating down of man's pride, by
discovering his misery, to the contempt of this wicked world, and vain pomp
thereof, to the mortification of all sins in us, patience, peace of conscience,
etc. in a word, all directed to the manifestation of his Fathers will, and
amendment of man's life; tending wholly to this one ground or principle, Deuteronomy.
6.5. Mat. 22.37.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy soul, which is the first and
great commandment; and thy Neighbor as thy self, on which two hangs the
whole Law and the Prophets. The manner of his Doctrine was simple, plain, and
easy, altogether according to the evidence of the Spirit, not in the enticing
words of man's, wisdom, like the Heathen Orators and Philosophers, nor like the
Scribes and Pharisees, but with power and authority, without either fear or
flattery of any man's person, rebuking all men's sins even to their faces, which
(I say) procured him such a general hatred. It took away no one spiritual point
of Moses Law (but the Ceremonial only and Provincial, which by the coming of
the Messiah was to be taken away) yea rather revived, interpreted, and made
perfect the same, corrupted much by the Jews false interpretations and glosses.
That (as they taught) commanding external observance only, this adding internal
obedience also. For whereas that enjoined (according to the letter, and as they
interpreted) to love our neighbors and friends, and no further; this adjoyneth
love also your enemies, bless them that curse, you, Matthew. 5.43. Where that
prohibited actually to commit Adultry and no more (as they imagined) this
forbids the adultry of the eye, and of the very heart. And so of all the
rest of the decalogue, our Saviors doctrine is nothing else but a most exact
and sincere exposition, according to the true intent of the Lawgiver, God the
Father. Therefore I conclude this doctrine so quite contrary to the gross
humors of this wicked world, and so repugnant to flesh and blood, so wholly
devoted to Gods glory, and the sincere observation of his Law, is the doctrine
proper to the Messiah, which the Prophets of God foretold should be delivered
by him (at his coming) into the world.

His life and conversation.
FOr his life and conversation (the express Image of his Doctrine) it was
stainless, and without reproof, even by the testimony of his very enemies;
acknowledged also by the Devils themselves. A man of such gravity, as never in
his life he was noted to laugh, but often to weep: of such humility, as being
the Son of God, yet scarce took upon him the dignity of a servant; of so mild
and sweet a nature, as all the injuries of his enemies never wrested from him
an angry word, but on the contrary prayers and tears in their behalfs. In
prayer often; the day he spent in the Temple, and elsewhere, preaching to the
broken hearted, doing good to all men, healing all manner of diseases, as the
Prophets foretold the Messiah should do; the night on mount Olivet, and other
places in prayer. In fastings often, forty days and forty nights together, that
the Jews might know he was more then a man. Finally he was such a one as was
described by God in Isaiah so many ages before he was born. Behold my servant
etc. Isa. 42.1. Zach. 9.9. Porph. lib. De laud. Philo.
he shall not cry. A bruised reed he shall not break. As also in Zachary,
Behold thy King comes unto thee, he is just, and having salvation, lowly, etc.
Such an one I say was our Savior as touching his integrity sanctity, piety,
humility, and all other virtues, even by the testimony of his greatest enemies,
Porphyry, and others, yea of the Devils themselves, Ergo.

His Miracles.
FOr his miracles which he wrought for the confirmation of his doctrine, and
approbation of his person, as sent from God, the Jews themselves do grant, and
record the same in diverse places of their Thalmud; yea they make mention of
many wonderful things that Jesus did, which are not written by our Evangelists.
So does Mahomet in his Alcoran, affirming him to have been a great Prophet, and
to have wrought his miracles by the only power and spirit of God; and they were
such as first were foretold by the Prophets that the Messiah should work, as
namely, Isa. 35.5.
to give sight to the blind, to open the ears of the deaf, to make the lame to
leap, the dumb to speak, etc. Secondly, such as were altogether unpossible for
any mortal man to effect, but by the mere power and finger of God, as the
raising of the dead to life again, as he did Lazarus after he had lain four
days stinking in the grave. Jairus his daughter, a chief Ruler of the
Synagogue. Ioh. 11.17. Mark 5.22. Luke 7.11.
The widows son before the gates of the City Nain in the presence of a
multitude of people there assembled to the funeral, with many other strange
miracles recorded by such faithful witnesses (the Evangelists I mean) four in
number, though two or three had been sufficient in Law, Deu. 19.15.
who afterward sealed the truth thereof even with their dearest blood, as did
infinite others after them. Neither could the Jews of those times, compassed
about with such a cloud of witnesses, ever deny the truth thereof; the parties
themselves then living, and conversing amongst them, upon whom they were
wrought. They had no other evasion but this, to say (and that most
blasphemously, contrary to their own knowledge and conscience and therefore our
Savior lays it to their charge as that fearful sin against the holy Ghost
not to be prayed for) that he wrought these his miracles by the help of
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils. Whereas it is most apparent the Devil himself
had never that power given him to raise one from the dead; and though he had,
yet would he sooner by his good will take away both life and breath from all
men at once (if it were possible) wishing all men in the world had but one head
or neck, like that cruel Tyrant in Rome, rather then give life to any one; for
he is a murderer from the beginning. And yet the Jews themselves in their
Thalmud do acknowledge, that the Messiah at his coming shall be most wonderful
in working miracles. And in their public commentary upon Ecclesiastes they
have these words. All the former miracles of the Prophets or Saints shall be
nothing to the miracles of the Messiah when he comes. But such were the
miracles of our Savior, the whole multitude applauding hereunto: Mat. 9.33.
the like was never seen in Israel, he has done all things well; never man
spoke leke this man. Seeing also it is impossible, yea blasphemy to think that
God should give testimony to any untruth, it must needs follow that all was
true which Jesus affirmed, and therefore seeing he affirmed himself to be the
Son of God, and the Messiah, it must needs follow (I say) by these his
miracles, that he was so indeed, according to that speech of his to the Jews;
Ioh. 10.25.37.
the works that I do in my Fathers name, they bear witness of me: Luke 7.20.
And again, If I do not the works of my Father, believe me not, but if I do
them, though ye believe not me, yet believe my works. As also that answer of
his to John's Disciples sent to enquire of him as touching that mystery of the
Messiah, Art thou he that shall come? Luke 7.20.
etc. Jesus answered, Go and tell John what things ye have seen and heard, the
blind see, the halt go, the Lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, and the dead
rise again, etc.

The calling of his Apostles.
HEreunto (as an Appendix to his miracles) I may well annex the calling of his
Apostles, Disciples, and Followers, whereof Josephus makes mention as of a
great miracle, who being of diverse callings, states, and conditions in the
world, yet all on the sudden upon his call left both Father, Mother, Wife,
Children, and other temporal respects, and followed him, who had nothing to
give or promise them in this world, but crosses and afflictions: Mat. 16.24*
He that will be my Disciple, let him take up his cross and follow me. A man
that never spoke them fair, but ever crossed them in their humors favoring of
flesh and blood; Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me: Cha.
16.23.
His doctrine ever harsh, hard, and repugnant to flesh and blood; This is an
hard saying, who can hear it? Joh. 6.60.
A man in disgrace with the higher Powers, the Rulers, high Priests, Scribes
and Pharisees, Chapter 7.48.
Do any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believe in him? A man that had
neither friends in the world to bear him out, nor a house to put his head in:
Mat. 8.20.
The foxes have kotes, and the Fowls of the heaven have nests, but the Son of
man has not whereon to rest his head. And yet notwithstanding all this, that
worldly men and women, and some also notorious sinners, and loose livers
before, should leave all their worldly hopes, ease, profit, pleasure (and their
sweet sins too) to follow such a man, with so great inconveniences, losses,
dangers, and disgraces (as they did) and should continue with him in all his
afflictions, temptations, and persecutions, and be content to die, and lose
their lives, rather then forsake him, or abandon his service; this I say is
such a miracle, as never in the world fell out the like, and must needs be
granted by the enemy to be supernatural. We read of an Emperor that taking in
hand to conquer the world, made this Proclamation for winning men unto his
party: Plut. Apo. Prisc. regum.
Whosoever will come and be my servant, if he be a Footman, I will make him a
Horseman; if he be an Horseman, I will make him ride with Coaches; if he be a
Farmer, I will make him a Gentleman; if he possess a Cottage, I will give him a
Village; if he have a Village, I will give him a City; if he be Lord of a City,
I will make him Prince of a Region or Country; and as for gold, I will pour it
forth unto them by heaps and weight, and not by number. This was the
Proclamation of Cyrus the great King of Persia to his followers, very glorious
(as we see) in pomp of words, and to the eye of flesh and blood.

Let us now compare herewith the proclamation of our Cyrus, Jesus Christ, to
his Disciples and Followers; the entrance and preface whereof was this, Repent,
etc. Mark 1.15.
And then it follows (instead of whosoever will come and be my servant, if he
be a Footman, I will make him a Horseman) If any man will follow me, Mat. 16.24.
says Christ, let him forsake himself, and take up his cross and follow me;
not on horseback, as the Pope does, with all his proud Cardinals and Bishops,
in his pontificalibus; Eccl. 107.
I have seen servants on horses, and Princes walking as servants on the ground:
So did an Emperor barefooted to his Holiness: But what would Solomon have
said if he had seen a Prince hold his stirrup? and yet forsooth will this proud
Prelate be Servus servorum, a follower of Christ, and Peter's Successor.
Instead of possessing lands and Lordships, gold and treasures, he says, Mat.
10.9.
Possess not gold nor silver, nor money in your purses, nor a scrip for the
journey, neither two coats, neither shoes, nor so much as a staff in your
hands. Instead of these preferments and pleasures of the world, says Christ,
contrary to Cyrus, Ioh. 16.33.
In this world ye shall have affliction: Mark 13.9.
yea which is more, 'Ye shall be delivered up to the Councels, Chapter 13.13. Luke
21.16.
and to the Synagogues, ye shall be beaten, and brought before Rulers and Kings
for my sake, ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake, ye shall be
betrayed also of your Parents, brethren, kinsmen and friends. And which is most
of all, Ye shall be put to death; Mat. 36.25.
for whosoever will save his life, Luke 14.26.
shall lose it: Finally, If any man come to me, and hate not his Father and
Mother, and Wife and Children and Brethren and Sisters, yea and his own life
also, he cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever bears not his cross, and comes
after me, he cannot be my Disciple: For which of you minding to build a Tower,
sits not down before and counts the cost? etc. So likewise whosoever he be
of you that forsakes nor all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. This was
the Proclamation and Edict of Christ to his followers. This was the
entertainment proposed by Jesus to such as would come and serve under his
colors, with express protestation that himself was sent into the world not to
bring peace, rest, and ease to flesh and blood, but rather to be the cause of
sword, fire, Mat. 10.34.
and tribulation. Think not that I am come to send peace into the earth, I came
not to send peace, but the sword: and yet with these cold offers presented to
the world, first by himself to his Apostles and Disciples won thereby to follow
him, even upon the first call, they left all and followed him; and by them to
all others afterward: I say, by this Doctrine so cross and opposite to man's
nature, inclination, and sensual appetite, he gained more hearts unto him
within the space of forty years, then ever did Monarch in the world possess
loving subjects, by whatsoever temporal allurements they did or might propose;
which argues the omnipotent puissance of him, that contrary to man's reason in
so short a time could bring to pass so miraculous a conquest, were there no
other argument in the world of the truth of Christian Religion, this were
sufficient.

His Death and Passion.
FOr his Death and Passion, with all the disgrace, despite, and indignities
were done unto him by the Jews, it was also foretold by the Prophets, and so
expounded by their own Rabbis, as also by our Savior himself: Behold we go up
to Jerusalem, Luke 18.31.
and all things shall be fulfilled to the Son of man that are written by the
Prophet, Mat. 21.2.
etc. He made his entrance into the City upon an Ass, in all humility as was
prophesied the Messiah should do, Zach. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter Zion, shout for joy, etc. Fulfilled even at the
same time, when the people spread their garments in the way, cut down branches
from the Trees, and strewed them in the way, crying, Mat. 21.8.
Hosanna to the Son of David, etc.

He was betrayed by his own Disciple, Psalm. 55.13.
as David in diverse places had foretold, under a type of those his secret
enemies, in the days of Saul, and 109.4.
as also himself prophesied beforehand, saying, Mat. 26.^^.
He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, he shall betray me.

Being apprehended, he was most barbarously entreated by the Jews. according to
that of Isai, Mat. 26.67. Isa. 50.6.
I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to the nippers, I hid not my face
from shame and spitting.

After all this inhumane dealing, he was nailed to the cross hand and foot,
according to that of David: Luke 23.33. Psalm. 22.16. Zach. 12.10
They pierced my hands and my feet, I may tell all my bones; they beheld and
looked upon me, they parted my garments among them, and cast lots upon my
vesture. And in another place, They gave me gall in my meat, Psalm. 69.21.
and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.

Luke 23.32.
He was crucified between two malefactors or evil doers, one on the right hand,
the other on the left; according to that of Isaiah, Isa. 53.12
He was counted with the Transgressors; yea Barrabas, a murderer in the esteem
of the Jews, preferred before Jesus, and quit by a common consent, and cry away
with him, and deliver unto us Barrabas, Luke 23.18.
crucify him, crucify him.

He prayed for his enemies and persecutors; Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do, according to that of Isaiah, He bare the sin of many, Isa.
53.12.
and prayed for the trespassers.

Ioh. 19.36. Exo. 12.46.
Not a bone of him was broken, according to that Law of the Passover, a lively
type thereof.

To conclude, that Christ should die for the sins of the world, it was a
received opinion of the Jews in all ages, both prefigured and foretold
throughout all the Scripture prefigured by the sacrifice of Isaac, Genesis 22.1.
Number. 21.8.
the lifting up of the brazen Serpent, and by all other sacrifices in the Law.
Foretold not only by the Scriptures before mentioned, but also by Daniel in
most plain terms, Dau. 9.26.
After threescore and two weeks shall the Messiah be slain, etc. acknowledged
also by Caiphas himself, high Priest even the self same year that Christ
suffered; his words are these to the Pharisees, taxing their great blindness in
this point and in them the whole Nation of the Jews to this day: Ioh. 11.49.
Ye perceive nothing at all, nor yet do you consider that it is expedient for
us that one man die for the people, and that the whole Nation perish not, etc.
But he that will read the whole story of Christ crucified, with the particulars
described many hundred years before the same fell out, let him turn to Isaiah,
and acknowledge him for an Evangelist, who to signify the strangeness of the
case, begins first with a preface, Isa. 53.
Who will believe our report? etc. All which narration Rabbi Jonathan, the
author of the Chaldy Paraphrase applies to the murder of the Messiah by the
Jews, whereunto agree Rabbi Simeon, Rabbi Hadersan, and others: proving further
out of Dan. 9.27. That after the Messiah shall have preached half seven years
he shall be slain: which disagreeth little or nothing from the account of us
Christians. Also in their Thalmud it is set down for a principle, and the
sentence pronounced beforehand peremptorily, and in plain terms, that the
Messiah at his coming shall be put to death. So then I may conclude upon all
these particulars of Christ his Death and Passion, foretold by the Prophets,
prefigured in the Law, and so expounded and acknowledged by the Jews
themselves, the ancient Rabbis before mentioned, and finally, so exactly
fulfilled in our Lord and Savior (as by the quotations in the margent may
appear) together with the mild manner of his death, Mat. 27.
praying for his enemies, Father forgive them: and meekly recommending his soul
into the hands of God, Luke 23.
Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit, with other strange accidents and
circumstances, that miraculous eclipse of the Sun at that very instant, from
the sixth to the ninth hour there was darkness over all the land, the vail of
the Temple rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, and the earth did quake,
and the stones were cloven, and the graves did open themselves, and many bodies
of the Saints which slept, arose, etc. I say, upon all these particularities
and circumstances, I hope, I may conclude (as it is in that place) with the
Centurion, and those that were with him watching Jesus, who when they saw the
earthquake, and the things that were done, they feared greatly, saying, Truly
this was the Son of God. And all the people that came together to that sight,
beholding the things which were done, smote their breasts, and returned. So may
I conclude, Truly this was the Son of God, truly this is the Messiah, and let
all the people of the Jews come together again to this sight, and behold him
whom they have pierced, and smite their breasts, pricked in their hearts, Acts
2.37.
like those Jews in the Acts, and cry out. Men and Brethren, what shall we do?
and return to the Lord, and be baptized every one in the name of Jesus Christ
for the remission of sins, which God grant. And the Lord pour upon them the
spirit of grace and of compassion, that in soul and spirit they may look upon
him whom they have pierced, Zach. 12.10
and lament for him (as it is in the Prophet) every Tribe and Family apart.

His Resurrection.
FOr his Resurrection it was also foretold by the Prophets, and prefigured in
Jonas. David says in the person of the Messiah, of whom he prophesied in
diverse places, and was a type, Psalm. 16.^.
I have set the Lord always before me, etc. Wherefore mine heart is glad, and
my tongue rejoices, my flesh also does rest in hope, for thou will not leave
my soul in the grave, nor suffer thine holy One to see corruption. Also Hosea
says, Hos. 6.2.
After two days will he revive us, and in the third day he will raise us up. Us
in the plural number, pointing (as it should seem) both at the Resurrection of
our Savior the third day, as also the raising of a number of the Saints
together with him at the same time, prefigured in Jonas, together with the time
of his abode in the Sepulcher, Jonah 1.17
and foreshewed many times by our Savior himself to his Disciples, such and
such things shall be done to the Son of man: He shall be apprehended, evil
entreated, mocked, Luke 18.31.
scourged, put to death, but the third day he shall rise again. Also to the
Jews demanding a sign, he answered, Destroy this Temple, John 2.18.
and in three days I will raise it up again. And at another time, An evil and
adulterous generation seeks a sign, Mat. 12.38.
but no sign shall be given them, save the sign of the prophet Jonas: for as
Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales belly, so shall the Son of
man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. Which Prophecy
of his they full well remembering, and fearing the event, immediately upon his
burial they went to Pilate, saying, Sir, Chapter 27.62.
we remember that Deceiver said while he was living, within three days I will
rise again: Command therefore the Sepulcher to be made sure till the third day,
lest hit Disciples steal him away by night, and say unto the people, he is
risen from the dead: and so the last error be worse then the first. All which
was done according to their desire: a strong watch appointed, the Sepulcher
sealed up, all things made so sure by the Jews as might be: for they had gotten
from Pilate a special commission for that purpose to whom he was as forward to
grant it, as they to ask it, and that in as large and ample manner as
themselves knew or could devise. All which, notwithstanding after a most
miraculous manner, Mat. 28.2.
The Angel of the Lord descending from heaven with an earthquake, and rolling
back the stone from the Door of the Sepulcher, the Keepers astonished, and become
as dead men: Jesus our Savior according to the former prophesies is risen
again, and has appeared to his Apostles and Disciples his faithful witnesses,
a number of them, at diverse several times, Act. 1.3.
to whom he presented himself alive (as S. Luke writes) by many infallible
tokens, being seen of them by the space of forty days, and speaking of those
things which appertain to the Kingdom of God: howsoever the Jews suborned the
Soldiers, giving them largely, to say, His Disciples came by night and stole
him away, while they slept; which saying is noised among the Jews to this day.
How probably (the former circumstances considered) let the world judge.
Therefore I will conclude this point also (with that of Paul) touching the
Resurrection of our Lord and Savior, Romans 4.4.
He has declared himself mightily to be the Son of God by the Resurrection
from the dead, and consequently, that Messiah promised before by the Prophets
in the holy Scriptures, Romans 1.2.
as the same Apostle urges.

His Ascension.
FOr his Ascension, it was also foretold by the Prophets, and necessarily
follows upon his Resurrection to be believed* to wit, that having finished
the work of our Redemption here one earth, he ascended up into heaven, and
there sits at the right hand of God. Psa. 68.18.
David says, Thou art gone up on high, thou have led captivity captive, and
received gifts for men, etc. Psalm. 110.1.
And in another place, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand,
etc. which is the place alleged by our Savior, wherewith he put the Jews to
silence, both as touching the Deity and the Humanity of the Messiah; for says
he, If David call him Lord, how is he then his Son? Where we may see David
acknowledges him his Lord, and consequently his God, even the Son of God,
sitting at the right hand of God (for the present, as touching his Divinity)
afterward to be accomplished also in his Humanity, which David believed as
verily should come to pass, and foresaw by the eye of Faith, as did Thomas,
when it was come to pass, putting his hand into his side, and crying, My Lord
and my God; so says David here, my Lord: The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. I
say, this article of our Faith, as touching his Ascension, it follows
necessarily to be concluded upon his Resurrection it needs no other proof.
For that whosoever sees and acknowledges that Jesus being dead could raise
himself to life again, will easily believe also that he was able to ascend up
to heaven at his pleasure. And hereof we have also all his Apostles and
Disciples for witnesses, eye witnesses; in whose presence and sight he
ascended: as it is in that place, Acts 1.10
They looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went: and in witness thereof gave
up their lives, and sealed the same with their blood.

Therefore I conclude upon all these premises so necessarily following and
depending one upon another, to wit, his birth, life, doctrine, actions, death,
resurrection, and ascension; seeing nothing has happened in the same which was
not foretold by the Prophets of God, nor any thing foretold by the same
Prophets concerning the Messiah, which was not fulfilled most exactly in the
person of our Savior; We may most certainly assure our selves, that as God is
truth, and therefore can neither foretell an untruth, nor yield testimony to the
same; so it cannot be but that these things which have been showed to be so
manifestly fore prophesied, and so evidently accomplished in the person of this
our blessed Lord and Savior; must needs (I say) assure us Christians, that he
was indeed the true Messiah: and quite confound the Jews in their vain
imagination and expectation of another.

The sending of the holy Ghost, with the first Plantation, and wonderful
increase of the Church.
NOw for those things that followed after his Ascension, as arguments and
effects of his Divine power, they were also foretold by the Prophets: to wit,
the sending of the holy Ghost (that Comforter) from on high, with the sudden,
strange, and miraculous increase of his Church throughout the world, even
against all worldly power and policy, by the only power and ministry of his
word, confirmed with signs and wonders that followed, wrought by his Apostles,
Disciples, and other his faithful servants and witnesses in the Primitive
Church: then the which there can be no greater argument in the world of the
truth of Christian Religion; if we consider how all other Religions in the
world have grown and been maintained by force of Arms, Fire, and Sword; this
only by the preaching of Christ crucified, in all Nations has increased and
multiplied, and shall do more and more to the end of the world; this must
increase, all others decrease; howsoever the Turks have possessed the greatest
part of the world at this day, Mat. 24.14.
yet our Saviors prophecy in the end shall be found true: this Gospel of the
kingdom shall be preached throughout the whole world, for a witness unto all
Nations Now for the first increase of it, Luke 24.47
How small a number were there gathered together after the ascension at
Jerusalem, from whence they were to march (even the twelve Apostles, no great
army God wot) to conquer the world? Isa. 2.3.
as it is in that place, The Law shall go forth from Zion, and the Word of God
from Jerusalem. There was the Rendevous, there they stayed, there they rested,
there they continued in prayer and fasting, Ioh. 14.26. chapter 15.26. and 16.7.
till such time as Christ after his ascension, according to his promise, sent
them the Comforter, even the holy Ghost, enduing them with power from on high,
and arming them at all points for so great a work. When and where being
gathered together, Acts 2.4.
all with one accord in one place, suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as
of a mighty wind, and filled all the house where they sat. And there appeared
unto them cloven tongues like fire, and it sat upon each of them, and they
were all filled with the holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as
there is mentioned. And with these fiery cloven tongues these twelve silly
souls without any means, men, money, or munition, in a very short time
conquered a great part of the world; insomuch that at one Sermon of S. Peter,
at the same time there were added to the Church three thousand souls: and so
multiplied successively from time to time, and from place to place, spreading
it self from one Country to another, and from one Nation to another and so at
length into all Nations: There is neither Speech nor Language where their voice
is not heard, Their line is gone forth through all the earth, and their words
into the ends of the world: as we see it is come to pass this day. Of which
coming of the holy Ghost in the time of the Messiah, Joel prophesied saying;
Joel 2.28.
And it shall be in the last days, that I will pour out my spirit, etc. and on
my servants and on my handmaids I will pour out my spirit, etc. It filled all
the house where they sat, and it sat upon each of them, and they were all
filled with the holy Ghost Here is a deluge of Gods grace poured upon the world
immediately upon the ascension of our Lord and Savior. First upon his Apostles
and Disciples of those times in greater measure, as the first fruits of his
spirit by the which they wrought miracles, spoke all manner of languages,
healed all manner of diseases, cast out Devils, raised the dead, and lastly
sealed the same with their blood. Poor Fishermen and such like of no reputation
in the world, without learning, without credit, without means (as before) yet
by this means conquered the world to the subjection of their master Christ;
Psalm. 118 22 Act. 4 11.
that stone cast aside of the Builders, but now become the head-stone of the
corner; this the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

The sincerity of the Evangelists.
NOw for the Evangelists, or writers of the Gospel, that is to say, the
registers of his Birth, Life, Doctrine, and Death: It is to be noted, that our
Savior being God, took a different way from the custom of man, in delivering
unto us his Laws and Precepts. For that men who have been lawmakers unto the
world, knew no surer way of publishing their Laws, and procuring authority to
the same, then to write them with their own hands, and in their life time to
establish their promulgation So Lycurgus, Solon, and others among the Grecians,
Numa to the Romans, Mahomet to the Sarasins. But Jesus (to show his Divine
power in directing the Pen and Style of the Evangelists, would not leave any
thing written by himself, but passed from this world in simplicity and silence,
without any other show or osten^ation of his own doings. Meaning
notwithstanding afterward, to his glory, and the edification of his Church
here on earth, by four irrefragable witnesses or remembrancers (the four
Evangelists) every word should be established and recorded: as may appear by
that place where he says. John 14.25
These things have I spoken unto you being present with you, but the Comforter,
which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall bring
all things to your remembrance which I have told you. Whereupon I infer, that
the Evangelists and Apostolical writers were all of them guided and directed by
one and the same spirit, even the spirit of God, for the registring of all
things either said or done by our Savior, so far forth as seemed best to his
Divine will and pleasure, to be registered and recorded for the benefit and
edification of his Church; Joh. 20.30.21.25.
For there were many other things which Jesus did (as John the Evangelist
testifies) which are not written: that is to say, which the holy Spirit of God
thought needless to faith and salvation, but says he, These things are written
that ye might believe, that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that in
believing ye might have life through his name. Now for these Evangelists four
in number, (which some have resembled to the four Beasts in Ezekiel) the first
and last are Apostles, Ezekiel. 1.
that wrote as they had seen; the two middle are Disciples, who registered
things as they had understood by conference with the Apostles. The first Gospel
was written by an Apostle, Luke 1.2.
to give light to the rest; and the last also by an Apostle, to give authority
and confirmation to the former. The first was written in the Hebrew Tongue, for
that all those miracles which Jesus wrought were done in that Country; Mat.
15.24
He was not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, to the end that
either the whole Nation might believe them, or the obstinate impugn them,
which yet never any of their Rabbis took in hand to do. The other three were
written in the most famous and populous language of all Nations at that time,
to wit, the Greek Tongue. They wrote their stories in diverse Countries, far
distant one from another and yet agreed they all most exactly in one and the
same narration (as is to be seen) though diversely related, yet in truth and
substance all one: one sometimes supplying what another has not, according to
the discretion of one and the same spirit, wherewith they were all guided and
directed, like those four Beasts in Ezekiel. 1.12. Every one went straight
forward, whither their spirit led them they returned not. They wrote in diverse
times, one after another; and yet the latter did neither correct nor reprehend
any thing in the former, as Heathen writers use to do. They published their
writings when infinite were alive that knew the facts, and of them no small
number, who desired by all means to impugn them. They set down in most of
their narrations, the time the day, the hour, the place, the village, the
house, the persons, with all other circumstances, which the mo they are in
number, the more easy to be refuted, if they were not true. Neither did they
write of things done in far Countries or places remote, but in the same Country
where they were born, in Towns and Cities that were publicly known, in
Jerusalem it self, in Bethania and Bethsaida, Vilages hard by Jerusalem, in the
Suburbs and Hills about the City, in such a street, at such a gate, at such a
porch of the Temple, at such a Fish-pool, public places, familiarly known to
every one, Acts 26.26
for these things were not done in a corner, as says the Apostle. All which
circumstances duly considered (never yet impugned) methinks (should persuade
any man of reason to become a Christian: as Agrippa in that very place
acknowledges to Paul, saying, almost thou perswadest me to be a Christian.
They published their writings in their life time. They altered not their
writings afterward as other Authors are wont in their latter editions, nor
ever corrected they one jot of that which they had first set down. And (that
which never happened in any other writings in the world besides, nor ever Monarch
was able to bring to pass for credit of his Edicts) they gave their lives for
defense and justifying of that which they had written. Their manner of writing
is sincere and simple, as becomes so divine a History; without all art or
Rethorical amplifications, as Historians use. They flatter none, no not Jesus
himself, whom they most adore, nor in confessing him to be their God, do they
conceal his infirmities of flesh, in that he was man: as his hunger and thirst,
his being weary, Mat. 21.18. Luke 19.41. Mat. 14.33.
how he wept, his passions of fear, and the like. Nay, these Evangelists were
so sincere and religious in their narrations, as they noted especially the
imperfections of themselves, and of such others, as they principally respected.
Mat. 10.3. Mar. 14.67.
Matthew names himself Matthew the Publican. Mark ( Peter's Disciple) records
how S. Peter thrice denied his Lord and Master, and so of the rest. These men's
writings were published for canonical, and received for undoubted truth by all
that lived in the very same age, and were privy to every particular
circumstance therein contained. They were copied abroad into infinite men's
hands, and so conserved with all care and reverence, as holy and divine
Scripture. They were read in Churches throughout all Countries and Nations,
expounded, preached, and taught by all Pastors, and Commentaries made upon them
by holy Fathers from time to time. So that no doubt can be made at all either
of the authority of them, as originally and immediately proceeding from the
holy Ghost, or of the certainty: but that we have the very same incorrupt, as
the Authors left them, for that it was impossible for any enemy to corrupt so
many Copies over the world, without discovery and resistance. And thus much for
the credit and authority of our Evangelists.

The confession of Martyrs.
NOw for the Martyrs (or witnesses) appointed by God for the sealing and
delivery of this Doctrine of the Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ to
all the world, they were first and principally his own Apostles and Disciples;
Luke 24.48
Now ye are witnesses of these things: who both heard his Doctrine, and saw his
Miracles: as S. John testifies, 1 John 1.2.
That which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, etc. That I say
which we have seen and heard, 2 Pet. 1.16.
declare we unto you. And S. Peter, For we followed no deceivable Fables when
we opened unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but with our
eyes we saw his Majesty. This Doctrine (I say) of the glorious Gospel of our
Lord and Savior, Luke 1.2.
whereof they were so fully persuaded, they did not only profess it with their
mouths, yea even before Kings, Acts 23.12.
and were not ashamed, as God says to Paul, Chapter 27.24.
as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at
Rome: thou must be brought before Caesar: but in witness thereof they gave up
their lives, and by their deaths sealed and delivered to the world the truth of
that which in their lives they professed, they have sealed that God is true:
These are witnesses worthy to be believed, these are Martyrs. Next to these are
all those holy Disciples of theirs, all those holy Confessors of the Primitive
Church put to death with most exquisite torments, under those cruel Roman
Tyrants, during those ten famous persecutions upon record, called the ten
persecutions, Catexochen, in respect of the rage, fury and cruelty thereof: and
all against poor harmless and innocent Christians, daily torn in pieces, and
butchered by those Wolves, as Sheep appointed for the slaughter: whereof our
Savior long before had forewarned his Disciples: Mat. 10.16. Rev. 6.9.
Behold I send you as Lambs among Wolves etc. persecuted even to the death, for
the Word of God, and for the testimony which they maintained. In which extreme
and most incredible sufferings of Christians, three points are worthy of great
consideration. The first, what infinite multitudes of all estates, conditions,
sexes, qualities and age, did suffer daily for testimony of this truth. The
second, what intolerable and unaccustomed torments, not heard of in the world
before, were devised by Tyrants for afflicting this kind of people. Thirdly and
lastly, What invincible courage, and unspeakable alacrity these Christians
showed in bearing out these afflictions and torments, which the enemies
themselves could not attribute but to some Divine power, and supernatural
assistance.

The subjection of Spirits.
ANother consideration follows of his Divine power and omnipotency, declared
and exercised upon the spirits infernal, which in those days spoke in the
Oracles, and till that time had possessed and deluded all Nations. Hear the
complaint of one of them* Hei mihi, cogemiscite, hei mihi, hei mihi, Oraculorum
defecit me clari^as. Woe unto mes lament ye with me, woe, woe to me, for that the
honor of Oracles has now forsaken me. Which woeful complaint is nothing else
but a plain confession that Jesus was he of whom a Prophet said diverse ages
before, Zeph. 2.11.
He shall consume all the Gods of the earth, and every man shall worship him
from his place, even all the Isles of the Heathen. This confessed also the
wicked spirits themselves, when at Christ's appearing in Jewry they came and did
their homage to him, and besought him not to afflict or torment them before the
time, nor command them presently to return to hell, but rather to permit them
some little time of entertainment in the Sea, or Mountains, or among herds of
Swine or the like; which confession they made openly before all men, and
declared the same afterward by their deeds. For presently upon Christ his
death, and upon the preaching of his Name and Gospel throughout the World, the
Oracles in all places ceased, whereof the Poets themselves bear witness: Juv.
Sat. 6.
Cessant Oracula D^lphis. Whereupon Plutarch that lived within an hundred years
after Christ, Plut. de defectu Oraculor.
made a special Treatise to sift out the causes why the Oracles of the Gods (as
they deemed them) were ceased in his time. And after much turning and winding
many ways, at length resolved upon two principal points, or causes thereof. The
first, for that in his time there was more store of wise men then before whose
answers might stand instead of Oracles: and the other, for that perhaps the
Spirits accustomed to yield Oracles were by length of time grown old and dead.
Both which reasons, in the common sense of all men must needs be false, and by
Plutarch himself cannot stand with probability. For first in his Books which he
wrote of the Lives of Famous Men, he confesses, that in such kind of wisdom as
he most esteemed, they had not their equals among their posterity. Secondly in
his Treatise of Philosophy he passes it for a ground, that Spirits cannot die,
or wax old. And therefore of necessity there must be some other cause yielded
of the ceasing of these Oracles: which cannot be but the presence and
commandment of some higher Power: according to that saying of S. John, 1 John
3.8
for to this end and purpose appeared the Son of God, to wit, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil. Neither did Jesus this alone in his own person,
but gave also power and authority to his Disciples and Followers to do the
like; according to that their Commission in the Gospel. Luke 9.7.
Then called he the twelve Disciples together, and gave them power over all
Devils, etc. And not only to these twelve did he give this absolute power and
authority over unclean Spirits, but to the rest likewise; as may appear in the
next chapter following upon the return of their Commission: Luke 10.17.
And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the Devils are subdued
to us through thy Name. And he said unto them, I saw Satan like lightning fall
down from heaven: and so renews their Commission, saying, Behold I give you
power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy
(that is to say the Devil) Nevertheless (says he) in this rejoice not, that
the Spirits are subdued unto you, but rather rejoice because your Names are
written in Heaven. And this authority over the Spirits Infernal given by Jesus
to his Disciples in the primitive Church, extended it self so far, that not
only their words and commandments, Lact. l. 2. Div. Inst. c. 16.
but even their very presence did shut the mouths, and drive into fear the
miserable Spirits, as both Lactantius and others do witness; whence it
proceeded, that in all Sacrifices, Conjurations, and other Mysteries of the
Gentiles, there was brought in that phrase recorded by scoffing Lucian, exeant
Christiani, Let Christians depart, for that while they were present, nothing
could be well accomplished. And that professed enemy of Christianity, Porphyry,
Porph. l. 7. cont. Christ apud Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1. de prep. Evan.
who of all other most earnestly endeavored to impugn us Christians, and to
hold up the honor of his enfeebled Idols, yet discoursing of the great plague
that reigned most furiously in the City of Messi^a in Sicily, where he dwelt,
yeildeth this reason, why Aesculapius the god of Physic (much adored in that
place) was not able to help them in that extremity. It is no marvel (says he)
if this City so many years be vexed with the plague, seeing that both
Aesculapius, and all other gods be now departed from it by the coming of
Christians: for since that men have begun to worship this Jesus, we could never
obtain any profit by our gods. Thus much confessed this Patron of Paganism
concerning the maim that his gods had received by the power and coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ: which albeit he spoke with a malicious mind, to bring
Christians in hatred yet is the confession notable, and confirms that story,
which Plutarch in his forenamed Book does report, That in the latter years of
the reign of the Emperor Tiberius, a strange voice, and exceeding horrible
clamor, with hideous cries, screetches, and howlings were heard by many in the
Grecian Sea complaining, That the great God Pan was now departed. And this
affirms Plutarch (that was a Gentile) to have been alleged and approved
before the Emperor Tiberius, who marvelled greatly thereat, and could not by
all his Diviners and Soothsayers, whom he called to that consultation, gather
out any reasonable meaning of this wonderful accident. But we Christians
comparing the time wherein it happened, unto the time of Christ his death and
passion and finding the same fully to agree, we may more then probably persuade
our selves, that by the death of their great god Pan (which signifies all) was
imported the utter overthrow of all wicked Spirits, and Idols upon earth;
according to that Vision of our Lord and Savior before mentioned, I saw Satan
like lightning fall down from heaven, Joh. 12.31. 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2.
etc. and again in another place, Now is the judgment of this world, now shall
the Prince of this world be cast out, even this great god Pan, who in another
place is called the god of this world, the Prince that rules in the Air, and
therefore may well be said by our Savior to fall down from heaven, being
before time worshipped in those Idols Oracles, and heathenish Prophanations, as
a God in all the world and exalted (as it were) into the highest heavens. But
behold as Dagon, that Idol of the Philistims, 1 Samuel 5.2.
fell flat on his face (and that twice) his head and hands dismembered before
the Ark of God in Ashdod; so did Satan this great god Pan, the god of this
world, the Prince of the Air, etc. (let me give the Devil his due, yea rather
more then his due, as does the holy Scripture) so did Satan (I say)
immediately upon the coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ into this
world, and preaching of his Gospel (the Ark of his everlasting Covenant) fall
flat on his face to the ground, his head and hands dismembered: according to
that first promise and covenant to our first parents, which was this: that he
(to wit the Messiah) should break the Serpents head, Genesis 3.15.
etc. which he had done not only in his own person, by subduing Satan with all
his whole legions of Devils and Powers infernal, trampling them under his feet,
but also in his members, to whom he gave like authority; as before, he gave
them power and authority over all Devils; yea over all the power of the enemy:
which argues again the power and omnipotency of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ, who not only in his own person here on earth but also in his servants,
disciples, and followers, was able to conquer and subdue even the Devils
themselves, as they themselves acknowledge; Jesus I acknowledge, and Paul I
know, Acts 19.15
etc. And thus much of the subjection of Spirits.

The punishment of Enemies.
NOw rests this his Divine Power and Omnipotency yet further to be
manifested, by another consideration of his Justice and severity showed from
heaven upon diverse his greatest enemies here on earth, after his departure out
of this world: Jos. Ant. l. 17. c. 10.
as we may read in Josephus of Herod the first, who persecuted Christ even in
his cradle, and slew all those Infants in and about Bethlehem: and that other
Herod, Tetrarch of Galilee, who put John Baptist to death, Luke 23.12.
and scorned Jesus before his passion: himself scorned afterward by the
Emperor, and disgracefully sent into exile: lib. 18. c. 9.
first to Lions in France, and after that to the most desert and inhabitable
places in Spain, where he with Heredias wandered up and down in extreme calamity
all their life time, and finally ended their days, as forlorn and abandoned of
all men. In which misery also it is recorded, Niceph. l. 1. cap. 10.
that the dancing daughter of Herodias, who demanded John Baptists head, being
on a time to pass over a frozen River, suddenly the Ice brake, and she in her
fall had her head cut off by the same Ice, without hurting the rest of her
body. So likewise it is recorded in the Acts of Herod Agrippa, Acts 12.1.
Who stretched forth his hand to vex certain of the Church, killed James the
brother of John with the sword, and imprisoned Peter, how immediately thereupon
(as it is in that chapter) going down to Cesarea, he was there in a solemn
assembly stricken from heaven with a most horrible disease, Jos. Ant. l. 19. c.
7.
whereby his body putrified, and was eaten of worms: as also Josephus makes
mention. Eutr. Hist lib. 7.
Pilate that gave sentence of death against our Lord and Savior, we read that
after great disgrace received in Jurie, he was sent home into Italy, and there
slew himself with his own hands. And of the very Emperors themselves who lived
from Tiberius (under whom Jesus suffered) unto Constantine the great, under
whom Christian Religion took Dominion over the world (which contained the space
of some three hundred years or thereabouts) very few or none escaped the
manifest scourges of Gods dreadful justice, showed upon them at the knitting up
of their days. Whereas since the time of Constantine (whiles Emperors have been
Christians, as one has observed) few or no such examples can be showed, Evag.
Schol. l. 3. hist. c. 41
except upon Julian the Apostata, Valens the Arrian heretic, or some other of
like detestable and notorious wickedness. And thus much of particular men
chastised by Jesus. But if we desire to have a full example of his justice upon
a whole Nation together, let us consider what befell Jerusalem, and the people
of that place, for their barbarous cruelty practiced upon him in his death and
Passion. And if we believe Josephus and Phylo, the Jewish Historiograpers, who
lived in those times, it can hardly be expressed by the tongue or pen of man,
what insufferable calamities and miseries were inflicted upon that people
presently after his ascension, first of all by Pilate their Governor under
Tibarius* and then again by Petronius under Caligula, after that by Cumanus
under Claudius, and lastly by Festus and Albious under Nero; through whose
cruelties that Nation was enforced at last to rebel, and take arms against the
Roman Empire: which was the cause of their utter ruin and extirpation by Titus
and Vespasian. At what time, besides the overthrow of their City burning of
their Temple, and other infinite distresses (which Josephus an eye witness,
protests, that no speech or discourse humane can declare) the same Author
likewise records eleven hundred thousand persons to have been slain, and
fourscore and seventeen thousand taken alive: who were either put to death
afterward in public Tryumphs, or sold openly for Bondslaves, into all the
parts of the world: And in this universal calamity of the Jewish Nation, being
the most notorious and grievous that ever happened to any people or Nation either
before or after them (for the Romans never practiced the like upon others) it
is singularly to be observed, that in the same time and place in which they put
Jesus to death before; that is, in the time of P^scha when their whole Nation
was assembles at Jerusalem, from all Parts, Provinces and Countries, they
received th^^ their most pitiful subversion and overthrow, and that by the
bands of the Roman Casar, to whom by public cry they had appealed from Jesus
not long before: We have no King but Caesar, Joh. 19.15.
etc. Yea further it is observed, that as they apprehended Jesus, and made the
entrance to his passion upon Mount Olivet, where he used much to pray and
meditate: So Titus (as Josephus writes) upon the same Mount planted his first
siege for their final destruction. And as they led Jesus from Caiphas to
Pilate, afflicting him in their presence; so now were they themselves led up
and down from John to Simon (two seditious Captains within the City) and were
scourged and tormented before the Tribunal seats. Again, as they had caused
Jesus to be scoffed, beaten, and vilanously entreated by the Soldiers in
Pilates palace: so were now their own principal Rulers (as Josephus writes)
most scornfully abused, beaten, and crucified, and that by the Soldiers: Which
latter point of crucifying or vilanous putting to death upon the Cross, was
begun to be practiced by the Romans upon the Jewish Gentry, immediately after
Christ his death, and not before. And now at this time of the war, Josephus
affirms, that in some one day, five hundred of his Nation were taken, and put
to this opprobrious kind of punishment: insomuch that for the great multitude,
he says, Lib. 5. c. 28
Nec locus sufficeret Crucibus, nec Cruces corporibus. This dreadful and
unspeakable misery fell upon the Jews about forty years after Christ's
ascension, when they had showed themselves most obstinate, and obdurate against
his Doctrine delivered unto them, not only by himself, but also by his
Disciples; of which they had now slain S. Steven and S. James, and driven into
banishment both Peter and Paul, and others that had preached unto them. This
then was the providence of God for the punishment of the Jews at that time. And
ever after their estate declined from worse to worse, and their miseries daily
multiplied throughout the world. Whereof he that will see a very lamentable
Narration, let him but read the last book of Josephus, De Bello, Judaico,
wherein it is reported, besides other things, That after the War was ended, and
all the public slaughter ceased, Titus sent threescore thousand Jews as a
present to his Father to Rome there to be put to death in diverse and sundry
manners. Others he applied to be spectacles for pastime to the Romans that were
present with him. Whereof Josephus says, that he saw with his own eyes two
thousand and five hundred murdered and consumed in one day, Jos. de Bell. l. 7.
c. 20, 21.
by fight and combat among themselves and with wild Beasts, at the Emperors
appointment. Others were assigned in Antioch, and other great Cities, to serve
for Faggots, in their famous Bonfires at times of Triumph. Others were sold to
be Bondslaves. Others condemned to dig and hew stones for ever. And this was
the end of that war and desolation.

Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssi,
Temperet a Lachrymis?
After this again under Trajan the Emperor there was so infinite numbers of
Jews slain and made away by Marcus Turbo in Africa, and Lucius Quintus in the
East, as was wonderful And in the eighteenth year of Adrian the Emperor one
Julius Severus being sent to extinguish all the remnant of the Jewish
generation, destroyed in a very short time ninety and eight Towns and Vilages
within that Country, and slew five hundred and fourscore thousand of them in
one day. At which time also he beat down the City of Jerusalem in such sort, as
he left not one stone standing upon another of their ancient Buildings, but
caused some part thereof to be re-edified, and inhabited only by Gentiles. He
changed the name of the City, and called it Aelia, after the Emperors name.
Aelius Adrianus.
He drove out all the Progeny and Offspring of the Jews forth of all those
Countries, with a perpetual Law confirmed by the Emperor, That they should
never return, no nor so much as look back from any high or eminent place to
that Country again. And this was done to the Jewish Nation by the Roman
Emperors, for accomplishing that demand which their principal Elders had made
not long before to Pilate the Roman Magistrate (after he had washed his hands
before the multitude to clear himself, at least wise in outward show, from the
blood of Jesus, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just man, look you
to it:) Then answered all the people and said, His blood be upon us, Mat. 27.24
and upon our children: and so it came to pass accordingly, even in that very
age. Then the which what greater argument of the Deity and Omnipotency of our
Lord and Savior, who from heaven was able in so short a time, and that in so
full measure, to revenge himself upon his enemies here on earth. Yea, a whole
Nation together brought to final desolation. And so much for the punishment of
enemies.

The fulfilling of Prophesies.
THe last consideration follows, and so an end; which is, The fulfilling of
Prophesies, all those Prophesies uttered by our Lord and Savior, while he was
here upon earth: Especially this one of the destruction and desolation of the
Jewish Nation already declared, might suffice for all, which over and over
while he was conversant among them, he denounced against them: and foretold
should shortly be accomplished upon them, in most fearful manner, as namely at
one time, after a long and vehement commination made to the Scribes and
Pharisees (in which he repeateth eight several times that dreadful threat, Woe)
he concludes, That all the Righteous blood injuriously shed from the first
Martyr Abel, Mat. 23.35
and so successively, should very shortly be revenged upon that generation:
Verily I say unto you, all these things shall come upon this generation: and in
the next words threatens that populous City Jerusalem, that it should be made
utterly desolate. Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest
them that are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy children
together, as the Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not.
Behold, your Habitation shall be left unto you desolate. And at another time,
even that solemn time of his Entry and Riding into Jerusalem before his
Passion, it is said in the Gospel, That when he was come near, Luke 19.41.
he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, O if thou had even known at
the least in this thy day, those things which belong unto thy place, but now
are they hid from thine eyes; then denounces that fearful desolation
following, That not one stone should be left upon another, but all thrown down
even to the ground: Executed upon them, and made good by Titus the son of
Vespatian, and finally, accomplished by Julius Severus, who in the days of
Adrian (as before is rehearsed) utterly defaced the very ruins of that City in
such sort, as he left not one stone standing upon another of all their ancient
Buildings, but laid them even with the ground. Again at another time, as some
spoke of the Temple, how it was garnished with goodly stones, and consecrate
things, he said, Luke 21.6.
Are these the things you look upon? The days will come wherein a stone shall
not be left upon a stone, that shall not be thrown down And yet more
particularly in the same chapter he foretells the signs whereby his Disciples
should perceive when the time was come: When ye shall see Jerusalem besieged
with Soldiers, Luke 21.20.
then know ye that her desolation is at hand. This foretold Jesus of the misery
that was to fall upon Jerusalem, and upon that people (by the Romans) when the
Jews seemed to be in most security, and greatest amity with the Romans, when
they could away with no other government but that: We have no King but Caesar;
Joh. 19.15 verse. 12.
He that makes himself a King speaks against Caesar: and consequently at
that time they might seem in all humane reason to have less cause then ever to
misdoubt such calamities. And yet how certain and assured foreknowledge, and
as it were most sensible feeling Jesus had of these miseries, he declared by
those pitiful tears he shed upon sight and consideration of Jerusalem (as
before is mentioned) when he wept over it; as also by that tender speech he
used to the women of that City who wept for him as he was led to be crucified,
Luke 23.28.
persuading them to weep rather for themselves, and for their children (in
respect of the miseries to follow) then for him. All which Prophesies and
Predictions of Jesus, with sundry other his speeches, foreshewing so
particularly the imminent calamities of that Nation, and that at such time when
in human reason there could be no probability thereof; when a certain Heathen
Chronicler named Phlegon (about a hundred years after Christ's departure) had
diligently considered, having seen the same also in his days most exactly
fulfilled (for he was servant to Adrian the Emperor, by whose command the final
subversion of that Jewish Nation was brought to pass) This Phlegon (I say)
though a Pagan, yet upon consideration of these events, and others that he saw
(as the extreme persecution of Christians foretold by Christ, and the like, he
pronounced, That never any man foretold things so certainly to come, or that so
precisely were accomplished, as were the predictions and prophesies of Jesus.
And now albeit these predictions and prophesies concerning the punishment and
reprobation of the Jews, fulfilled so evidently in the sight of all the world,
might be a sufficient demonstration of his divine prescience and foreknowledge
in things to come; yet were there also many other things besides fore-shewed by
him, which fell out as exactly as these did, which by no humane reason or
learning could possibly be foreseen; as for example, The foretelling of his own
Death, Resurrection, and Ascension, with all their several circumstances; the
manner time, place, and all other particularities, as precisely as if they had
been already accomplished: and that not only to his own Disciples, but even to
the Scribes and Pharisees, who came of purpose to tempt him; as he that shall
but examine the quotations following, which for brevity sake I have but only
cyphered, and (as it were) pointed at in figures) may easily perceive. First to
his Disciples, Matthew. 16.21. chap. 17.9.22. chap. 20 17. chap. 26.1.11.31.45.
Joh. 13.33. chap. 16.16. and 13.3. and 18.4. and 14.2.28. Then to the Scribes
and Pharisees, Matthew. 12.38. chap. 21.38. Luke 13.31. John 2.18. chap 3.12.
chap. 7.33. chap. 8.21.28. chap. 12.31. Also how his Disciples should be
scattered and forsake him: John 16.32. Of Peter's denial. Matthew. 26 34. And by
what manner of death he should glorify God, John 21.18. How Judas one or his
own Disciples should betray him, John 6.64.70. chap 13.10.26. chap. 17.12.
Matthew. 26 21.49. Of the sending of the holy Ghost* John 7.38. chap. 14.16.26.
chap. 15.26. chap. 16.7. Luke 24 49. Of his his Disciples Miracles which they
should work in his name, Mark 16.17. Luke 10.18. John 14 12. The cruel
persecution that should arise to the Professors of his Name in all places,
Matthew 10.16. chap. 24.9. John 16.1. The building of his Church notwithstanding
(in despite of the Devil, and all oppositions) upon a rock, with this sure word
of promise never to fail, That the gates of hell shall not overcome it, Matthew.
16.18. And again, I am with you always, even to the end of the world, Matthew.
28.20. The signs and tokens that should go before the end of the world; as
first, the false Christ's, and false Prophets that should arise here and there
with the Church, yea and in the Church: that abomination of desolation spoken
of by Daniel the Prophet, to be set in the holy place; Matthew. 24.5. 11.15.23.
Meaning (and so I think would the holy Ghost have all men to understand it,
when he adds this parenthesis; Let him that reads consider it) even that
arch Antichrist, now sitting in that holy place, or church (for so it was in
times past whose Faith was one so famous in all the world, Romans 1.8. Wars, and
rumors of wars, Pestilence, Famine, and Earthquakes, Matthew. 24.6. Persecution,
as before; Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted, and shall kill you,
and ye shall be hated of all Nations for my Names sake. Matthew. 24.9. So were
Christians in the Primitive Church under the Roman Emperors those cruel
Caesar's; and so have been of latter times also, under the Tyranny of this arch
Antichristian Caesar, that abomination of Desolation, now sitting in the self
same place, drunken with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6.
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, whose destruction sleeps not,
Come I will show thee the damnation of the great Whore* etc. Finally, the
preaching of the Gospel to all Nations, Matthew. 24.14. and the uniting and
gathering together both of Jew and Gentile into one Fold, under one Shepherd
even that great Shepherd of our souls, that there may be one Sheepfold, and one
Shepherd John 10.16. This is one of the last signs foretold by our Savior,
and but in part remains to be accomplished: and what hinders? Even that
abomination of Desolation before spoken of, which has been a stumbling block
to all Nations hitherto, both Turks and Jews, for coming to Christianity; which
the Lord in due time will remove* For Babylon shall fall (as it is in the
Revelation) It is fallen, it is fallen, Rev. 18.2.
Babylon that great City: In part it is fallen already, and what hinders but
that daily and hourly we may expect the final desolation thereof? Daily and
hourly I say, for with such celerity and violence (when it shall please God to
put in their hearts whom it may concern, to fulfill his Will, Rev. 17.17.) shall
this sentence be executed, chap. 18.8.
In one day shall her plagues come upon her, death, and sorrow, and famine; and
she shall be burnt with fire, etc. In one hour she shall be made desolate. Rev.
18.1^.
Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets; for God has
given your judgment on her. And a mighty Angel took up a stone, like a great
Millstone, and cast it into the Sea, saying: with such violence shall that great
City Babylon be thrown down.

And here I might cast up together in like manner (making but one total sum of
all) the Prophesies of all those holy Apostles, and Disciples of our Lord and
Savior; both as touching diverse particulars whereof they prophesied in those
times, fulfilled most exactly* as also touching the general state of the Church
successively in all ages, even to the end of the world and of the end of the
world it self. First for the particulars, I will but point at them, as before.
One of those holy Prophets prophesied of a general dearth to fall out in those
times: which happened accordingly under Claudius Caesar, Act. 11.27. Also of
Paul's Imprisonment, Acts 21.10. Paul in his sailing toward Rome, foretells
the Centurion and the rest, of the tempestuous weather to ensue, Acts 27.10. Of
their shipwreck; but yet with safety of their lives, verse. 22. and precisely
the place where they should be cast ashore; to wit, upon a certain Island,
verse. 26. In one of his Epistles he prophesies of his own death, 2 Timothy 4.6.
So does also Peter. 2 Pet. 1.14. Secondly, for the future state of the Church
in these last days, with the coming of Antichrist into the world, and all his
damned crew, those hellish Furies: See how precisely these holy Apostles and
Prophets foretell of these times, these perilous times, and how lively they set
him out in his colors, with all his additions (as well becomes such an
infernal King) the Angel of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9.11.
whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, in Greek Apollyon: That Antichrist, that man
of sin the son perdition, that wicked one, etc. with all other adjuncts, and
circumstances so lively described, as if he had been then already come; for
even in these days (as the Apostle speaks did this mystery of iniquity begin
to work. See then I say, 2 These. 2. 1 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 4. 2 Pet. 2. 1 John 2.18.
chap. 4.1. 2 John v. 7. yea the whole Revelation is nothing else but a
continued prophecy of all such things as should happen to the Church militant,
even from the Apostles times to the end of the world. All which prophesies we
see accomplished* except before excepted, the final destruction of Babylon, and
the calling of the Jews, whereof both our Savior himself, as also Paul has
prophesied, Romans 11. both which we daily expect: and then (as it is in the
Revelation) Come Lord Jesus. Rev. 22.20.
Of which second coming, or general doom, with the manner of it, and all other
circumstances, we have also sundry prophesies both of Christ and his Apostles,
which here I will join in one as proceeding all from one and the same Spirit;
for here all prophesies must come to a full period, nil ultra. I will only
quote them as formerly, Matthew. 16.27. chap. 19.28. chap. 20.1. chap. 24. chap.
25. chap. 26.64. John 5.25. etc. 1 Cor. 85. 1 These. 4.14. chap. 5.1. Jam. 5.8.
1 Pet. 4.7. 2 Pet. 3. Jude v. 6. and 14: Rev. 21. where you shall see a new
heaven, and a new earth etc. New Jerusalem descending from God out of heaven,
prepared as a Bride trimmed for her Husband.

Thus have I brought you at length (as after a long and tedious passage by Sea)
to see land, and as it were the Sea-mark whereunto after so many variable
winds, and so often tacking to and again, we have directed our course, even
from the first Prophecy made to Adam in Paradise, Genesis 3.15. to the very last
period of all Prophesies in the Revelation, shut up in the second Adam, Jesus
Christ; who is the first and the last, Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
ending; in whom all Prophesies kiss each other, and have their consummation.
Luke 14.44
These are the words (says he) which I spoke unto you while I was yet with
you: That all must be fulfilled which are written of me in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, etc. Thus it is written, and thus it
behoved Christ to suffer* and to rise again from the dead the third day; and
that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. I say from this Jerusalem, which now lies
desolate, I have brought you to the New Jerusalem, coming down from heaven, as
a Bride adorned for her Husband: from an earthly, to a heavenly Paradise, and
there I leave you.

A Collection DEMONSTRATIVE, OR Sum of the former Proofs.
THe Messiah must be a spiritual King to conquer the Devil, ^eath, and Sin:
b^th by Scripture, as also by the Interpretation of the ancient Jews
themselves, upon that place of Genesis, He shall break thine head: Genesis 3.15.
Therefore not a Temporal King, as the latter Jews imagine.

The Messiah must be King over the Gentiles as well as the Jews, both by
Scripture, as also by their own Writers: Therefore not a Temporal King, to
reign ^ver the^ only; much less to subdue the Gentiles to the servitude of
Jewry, as some of them imagine

The Messiah must be both God and Man, the Son of God, the Word of God
incarnate, The second person in Trin^ty, both by the Scriptures, as also by
their own Writers: Therefore no such earthly Monarch as they expect.

The Messiah at his coming (being to be both King of Jew and Gentile) must
change the Law of Moses, to wit, the Ceremonial and Provincial proper to the
Jews only, and instead thereof, give a general Law to both, absolute and
p^rfect, to serve for all persons, times, and places, to endure even to the end
of the world: therefore no such Temporal Monarch^ to be expe^^ed, as they look
after For one and the same conclusion follows upon all the premises, beating
upon their main gro^nd (to wit a temporal or Earthly Kingdom* which being once
shaken, the rest falls to the ground.

All Prophesies whatsoever, with every particular circumstance foretold by the
Prophets of the Messiah, were both substantially and circumstantially fulfilled
in the person of our blessed Savior; both as touching his Birth, Life,
Doctrine Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Ascension; and other effects afterward
of his Divine Power, in sending of the holy Ghost, and the miraculous increase
of his Church, etc. Therefore was he indeed the Messiah, no other to be
expected.

The Messiah, by Daniels Prophecy, was to appear immediately upon the
establishment of the Roman Empire: for (says he) In the days of these Kings,
shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall not be destroyed, Dan.
2.44. which must needs be understood of the Kingdom of Christ, or the Messiah.
And in these days was our Savior born, even in the days of Augustus Caesar;
Therefore in him is the circumstance of time verified.

The Messiah by Jacobs Prophecy was to appear immediately when the Rod or
^cepter was departed from the house of Judah. Then appeared that Star of Jacob,
our Lord and Savior; Ergo.

The Messiah by the Prophecy of Haggai (as also by their own Thalmud) was to
come during the second Temple: Then came our Lord and Savior, Ergo. And
consequently the Jews after this time (to wit the destruction of the second
Temple) in vain expect another.

The Messiah by the true account, and calculation of Daniel's Hebdomades, or
weeks of years, was to come just according to the times before mentioned: So
did our Savior (as is aforesaid) therefore to him does this circumstance of
time bear witness: And consequently the Jews, after these times by God himself
appointed for the Messiah (or rather one and the same time, for there is no
other difference, but only in adjuncts and circumstances) expecting yet for
another; besides their vain expectation make God himself a Liar.

The Messiah by the Scriptures was to be born of the Tribe of Judah, of the
house of David, So was our Savior: Therefore he alone the legitimate and true
born Messiah by Birthright (as I may say) as also by Prescription, after so
long time of peaceable possession no other to be expected.

The Messiah by the Scripture, as also by their own Rabbis, was to be born of
a Virgin, so was our Savior: Ergo,

All other particulars foretold of the Messiah, see them fulfilled as
follows, to wit,

Prophesies. fulfilled. Mich. ^.2. That the place of his Birth should be
Bethlehem. Luke 2.4. Jer. 31.15. That at his Birth all the Infants thereabouts
should be slain. Mat. 2.16. Psalm. 72.10. That Kings or great Personages should
come and adore him, and offer gold, and other gifts unto him. Mat. 2.1. Mal.
3.1. That he should be presented in the Temple of Jerusalem, for the greater
glory of that second Temple. Luke 2.22. Hos. 11.1. That he should flee into
Egypt, and be called thence again. Mat. 2.13. Number. 24.17. That a Star should
appear at his Birth to notify his coming into the world. Mat. 2.9. Mal. 3.1.
and 4.5. Isa. 40.3. That John Baptist (who came in the power and spirit of
Eliah, and therefore was called Eliah. Luke 1.17. Matthew. 11.10.14.) should be
the Messenger to go before him, and to prepare the way, and to cry in the
Desert. Mat. 3.1 Isa. 42.2. That he should begin his own Preaching with all
humility, quietness, and clemency of Spirit Mat. 5.1. Isa. 53. That he should
be poor, abject, and of no reputation in this world Luke 2.7. Isa. 35.5. That
he should do strange Miracles, and heal all Diseases. Mat. 4.23. Isa. 53.12,
Dan. 9.26. That he should die and be slain for the sins of his people. Mat. 27.
Psalm. 55.13. That he should be betrayed by one of his own Familiars Mat 26.47.
Zac. 11.12. That he should be sold for thirty pieces of silver. Mat. 26.15.
Zac. 11.13. That with those thirty pieces there should be bought afterward a
field of Potsheards Mat. 27.^. Zac. 9.9. That he should ride into Jerusalem
upon an Ass. Mat. 27. Isa. 50.6. That the Jews should beat and buffet his face,
and defile the same with spitting. Mat. 26.67. Isa. 53.5. That they should
whip, rend and tear his body before they put him to death. Mat. 26.27 Isa.
53.12. That he should be put to death among Thieves and Malefactors. Luke
23.33. Isa. 53.7. That he should be silent before his enemies, as a sheep
before his shearer. Mat. 27.14. Isa. 53.12. That he should pray for his enemies
and persecutors. Luke 23.34. Psalm. 22.18. and 69.21. That they should give him
vinegar to drink, divide his apparel, and cast lots for his upper garment. Mat.
27.34. Psalm. 22.16. Zac. 12.10. That the manner of his death should be
crucifying, that is, nayling of his hands and his feet to the Cross. Joh.
19.18. Zac. 12.10. That his side should be pierced, and that they should look
upon him whom they had so pierced. Joh. 19.34.37. Exo. 12.46. That not a Bone
of him should be broken, figured in the Passover by that spotless Lamb without
blemish, a type thereof; and therefore is he called in the New Testament, The
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world: The Lamb slain from the
beginning of the world. Joh. 19.36. Psalm. 16.9. Hos. 6.2. That he should rise
again from death the third day. Mat. 28.1. Psalm 68.18. and 110.1. That he
should ascend into heaven, and there sit at the right hand of his Father
tryumphantly for ever. Luke 24.51. Act. 7.55, 56.

All these particulars foretold of the Messiah, see (I say) and examine how
exactly they were all fulfilled in our Savior: and therewithal consider those
things which fell out afterward as effects of his Divine power; to wit, the
sending of the holy Ghost immediately after his Ascension; with the miraculous
increase of his Church even in the midst of persecution. The severe punishment
of all his enemies, especially that of the Jewish Nation. The subjection of the
Devil, with all his Infernal power under his Apostles and Disciples feet,
together with the ceasing of Oracles. And finally, the fulfilling of all his
Prophesies (with those likewise of his Apostles and Disciples) most exactly. I
say, all these, with the former, put together, and well considered, may settle
the heart of any Christian man, against all Judaism, Paganism, yea and Atheism
too, in the most undoubted Truth of his profession, to wit, the Christian
Religion; with this full and final persuasion (wherewith I will knit up all)
That there is no other Name under heaven given to the sons of men, whereby to
be saved, but the name of Jesus Christ. And therefore to Him be the honor of
our Salvation ascribed, and to no other. To Him (I say) with the Father, and
the Spirit, even that blessed Trinity, Elohim, be all Honor and glory, now and
evermore, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
Table of the Contents of the several matters of this Book.
OF the Promises and Prophesies of old 1 Gods promise to Adam 3 Gods promise to
Abraham 3 The Prophecy of Jacob 5 The Prophecy of Moses 6 The Prophecy of
David 9 The Prophecy of Jeremy 15 The Prophecy of Ezekiel 15 The Prophecy of
Isaiah 16 That the Messiah must be both God and man 18 That the Messiah must
change the Law of Moses 26 The time of his Manifestation, with all other
circumstances 33 Of his Lineage or Pedigree 56 Of his Birth with the
Circumstances thereof 57 Of his Preaching and Doctrine 71 Of his Life and
Conversation 75 Of his Miracles 77 Of the Calling of his Apostles 80 Of his
Death and Passion 86 Of his Resurrection 92 Of his Ascension 95 Of the sending
of the holy Ghost, with the first plantation and wonderful Increase of the
Church. 98 Of the sincerity of the Evangelists 102 Of the Confession of Martyrs
109 Of the subjection of Spirits 111 Of the Punishment of Enemies 118 Of the
fulfilling of Prophesies 128 A Collection Demonstrative, or the sum of former
Proofs. 142

