A PARALLEL OF The SPIRIT of the PEOPLE, WITH The SPIRIT of Mr. Rogers.AND An
Appeal thereupon Unto the READER, Whether the Spirit of the People, or the
Spirit of Men like Mr. Rogers, be the fitter to be trusted with the Government.

By James Harrington.

LONDON: Printed by J. C. for Henry Fletcher, at the sign of the three Gilt
Cups in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Parallel, etc.
MR. Rogers first Character of himself is, that he is one through grace kept
under many sufferings a faithful servant to Jesus Christ, his Cause and the
Commonwealth.

The Character that by men of his judgment is but too often given of the
People, is, that they are profane wretches, haters of the godly, or of a
persecuting spirit. Whereas if the Jayls be looked into under any Commonwealth
that is Popular, the most of the prisoners will be found to be in for matter of
Crime, few for Debt, and none at all for Conscience: the contrary whereof is
known in other Governments. And this is matter of fact, whereof every man, that
does not like Mr. Rogers give his spirit wholly unto Passion, and never think
himself bound either to give or take any one Reason or Example, is a competent
Judge.

But men skilled in common conversation know, that if the People be offended by
a man upon whom they live, they are very patient; but if they be offended by a
man upon whom they do not live, they are very apt to fly out; and their common
expression upon this occasion is, What care I for him? I can live without him.
From the common and vulgar expression of this Reason or Truth, the whole Spirit
of the People, even as to matter of Government, may be defined, which in the
definition (because there are but too many who in like comparisons boast their
Spirit for righteousness, godliness and justice above that of the People) I
shall make bold to parallel with that of Mr. Rogers.

The Spirit of the People, where they live by a King, will obey a King very
faithfully. Mr. Rogers is not for a King upon any terms whatsoever.

The People, where they subsist by Lords, are always faithful unto their Lords;
and where they are under the power of a few by whom they subsist not, never
desist from shaking that yoke.

The spirit of Mr. Rogers is not for the Government of Lords, or such as might
pretend any such reason of their Government; but for the Government of a Few,
that cannot pretend any such reason of their Government; which therefore can
have no justice nor bottom.

A people that can live of themselves, neither care for King nor Lords, except
through the mere want of inventing a more proper way of Government; which till
they have found, they can never be quiet: wherefore to help a people at this
straight, is both the greatest charity to our neighbor, and the greatest
service that a man can do unto his Country.

The spirit of Mr. Rogers is not only to have a people that can live of
themselves, to be governed by none other but such as himself; but throwing away
all modesty, is a professed enemy to any man that at such a straight, shall
fairly offer a charity to the people, or a service unto his Country.

Whether he be wronged thus far, I leave unto the Reader in what follows; where
what the sense is, we must guess; but the words are certainly Mr. Rogers. He
takes me up, after having handled Mr* Baxter like himself, in this manner:

But in the winding up of our discourse, I am surprised or waylaid with Mr.
Harrington's correspondence with Mr. Baxter against an Oligarchy, (I wish he
had been as much against Anarchy Mark his Art in slandering: he dares not to
call me Atheist, because by my Writings all Men may know that I am none.
or Atheism) if he means by it the Parliament, or such a Parliament, or the body
of adherents to the Cause, as one of them I believe he must, and some say all;
(wherein Mr. Baxter and he agree.) But when he tells us his meaning without
mumping and scoffing, (which we must understand before we reply) he may hear
further.

I ever understood and explained Oligarchy, without mumping or scoffing, to be
the reign of the few, or of a party, excluding the main body of the people: yet
says he, From their old Mumpsibus, and his new Sumpsibus, good Lord deliver
me. He should be fined 5 l. By the new Sumpsimus, he intimates that he means
the Government by a Senate and by the People: and the reason why he deprecates
this by his Letany, is, that most undoubtedly it must bring in a Single Person.
This consequence he pursues with much Greek, in which you shall see how well
he understands that Language, or indeed any ancient Commonwealth or Author.
His first Greek Quotation, as you may find at length in his 72. page,
imports that in Lacedemon no man stood up by the way of Honor, but to a
King, or to an Ephore. This without mumping or scoffing, he Englisheth thus,
None stood or were raised up (meaning in the Commonwealth of Lacedemon) but a
King and the Ephore; whence he infers, That a single Person had an Executive
Power there. Then out of Heraclides he sets down a Text which shows, that the
Thesmothetae in Athens were sworn not to take Bribes; or if they did, were to
pay a Statue of Gold to Apollo; and this he Englisheth thus: The The smothets
were not to take Bribes, nor to set up the golden Image, which he understands
of a King: and finding a King-Priest in that Commonwealth, (as in ours there is
a King-Herald) he concludes that they did set up a King; and so, that the
Senate and the People is a Government inclining to set up a single Person. Nor
is there much of his Quotations out of ancient Authors, that is less mistaken,
and it may be out of Scripture. You shall have but one piece more of him, which
is concerning Rotation: of this says he,

Whether this way be not (of any) the most liable to an Ostracisme, let any
judge? by discouraging, laying aside, or driving out of the Land, the most
publicly spirited Worthies Well bowld M. Rogers!
that are in it; Men of the greatest Ability, Gallantry, and Fidelity (by which
means a many brave Governments have been utterly destroyed:) As the Athenians,
Argives, Thebans, Rhodians, and others. It is said in Athens, (...). That
Hippias played the Tyrant, and he brought forth the Law of Ostracisme; but
others were cast into exile by it, such as Xantippus, Aristides, etc. Nor can
we but foresee, how fast the Wheel of their Rotation would Boult or fling out
the best and ablest in the Commonwealth, for Bran, leaving the worst behind In,
of all others. And yet of this must his Cake be made, which (after it is baked)
he would have divided Steal a little more, and say, His Cake is dough.
by silly Girls! A pretty sport for the Mummers indeed, or those nimble-witted
House-Wives (that with Vice can outvie the Virtues of the best) to learn so
lightly the whole mystery of a Commonwealth, and most abstruse Intrigues or
Cabals of State (page 13. Oceana) that when these Joans are weary with their
Bobbins, they may bob our ears bravely, with a Garrulous Rule; and when they
lag in their Bone-lace, they may lace our bones, (for Logger-Heads,) to let
them lay down the Distaff, and take up the Scepter; leave the Spindle, and
divide the Spoil; yea, then sit like Meg-pies at their doors, Dumb Saints in
their Idols Churches! Goats in their Gardens! Devils in their Houses! Angels in
the Streets! and Sirens at their Windows! as they say of the Italians; for when
they can live no longer by their work, they shall live by their wits, in Mr.
Har's Commonwealth, that sifts out the best, and keeps in the worst to make his
Cake with. But in Lacedemon, (...). Lycurgus the Son of Eunomus, willing to
endow the Lacedaemonians with their dues in Righteousness and Justice, took not
away any worthy or good Reward from any one. And the Thebans, to encourage
Dignity, and keep up the Honor of Magistracy from contempt, made a Law, Vt
nemo habilis esset, ad Honores Reipublic. suscipiendos, nisi December Annis a
Mercatur a destitisset, etc. That no man should be accounted qualified for the
honors of the Commonwealth, (i. e. in Magistracy) unless he had first left his
merchandising ten years: Such a care had they to keep out the Joans and Toms,
which Mr. H. admits (by turns and times) as the Rotation boults them into the
Government, and their Betters out. And what was said of Clisthenes an Athenian,
(...), might possibly be applied to Mr. H. were their Rogation effected; that
he was one of the first that introduced this Government by Ostracisme, and one
of the first that felt it, and would have retro-duced it; The first that
brought it in, and the first that it wrought out. Therefore let him secure his
Mark the ingenuity of these men: that I have written the Commonw. of Israel,
t^^y will take no notice; nor that from thence especially Rotatation is derived.
own Bull, before he baits another, and take his Play! (...).

Lastly, I would willingly be informed how his New Platforms or Principles
Paganish or Popish, fetched from Athens, or from Venice, can (without
cruciating extremities and applications) be adequated to our Commonwealth under
Christian profession? so that Quae semel possidebant Papiste, semper possideant
Rapiste; what the Papists once had, Rapists and Ravenous ones would ever have,
viz. our Rights and Liberties from us;) nor could it be acquired (I think)
without greater advantages to Papists and Atheists then to us, seeing the very
interest of the Son of God, and Saints in the Nation, the best and noblest
cause on earth (in all the integrating Parts thereof) and No! find then
another way for liberty of conscience.
Adherents thereto, is not taken notice of in his Platform; neither in the
Balance nor the Wheel; in the Ballot nor Rotation, (or Rogation) of it; so that
Differs curandi tempus in Annum? Quicquid delirant Reges, Plectuntur Achivi. I
may conclude with Mr. B. p. 240. That God having already given us the best
Fundamental Laws; Let us have but good Magistrates, and we shall have good
Derivative Laws (or humane.) It was a Law amongst the Cretians, that (...),
etc. that their children should learn their Laws with Melody; that from the
MUSIC they might take great pleasure in them, and more easily commit them to
memory. We need no such Law, to endear or dulcifie our cause or the Laws of it
in the Commonwealth. If the foundation of it be that, which the hand of the
Almighty has laid amongst us both for Church and State; from Christian
Principles, rather then from Paganish or mere Morals; it will make most
excellent Harmony in the ears and hearts of all men and Christians; And the
Governors of Judah shall say in their hearts, The Inhabitants of serusalem
shall be my strength, in the Lord of Hosts their God, Zach. 12. 5. Thus our
Governors thought (of them) in the days of straits (and will again see it) one
of their best interests, to have their Prayers and their God, as well as their
Purses and Blood engaged for them; and not disoblige them (upon jealousies
suggested by the enemy) who for their virgin fidelity, and untainted adherence
to the Cause, may be called (...), as the Lacedaemonians did their wives after
their innocence did break out, and get above the clouds of suspicion and
reproach. But if (after all) they will be planting and founding us again in the
spirit of the Nation, as if God had owned no cause, or made no signal
discrimination; or shaken no such foundations of the earth, etc. (which their
Lord General pretended as one ground of their interruption) which Mr. H. and
others would hurry them into, to the endangering of the Cause, and the
disobliging the Adherents; then will the Jehovah, that keeps Covenant with
his people, and not alter the thing that is gone out of his lips, Psalm. 89. 34.
Act. 2. 30. and 3. 20, 21. raise up others in their stead, to carry on this his
cause, both in the civils and the spirituals; and to form another people for
himself to show forth his praise, Isa. 43. 21. Then they that rule over men,
shall be just, ruling in the fear of God; and they shall be as the light of the
morning when the Sun arises; A morning without clouds, and as the tender grass
that springs out of the earth, by a clear shining after rain, 2 Samuel 23. 3,
4. which that these may be, agrees better with my Prayer, then with his
Proposals I am sure. But thus I leave him whom Mr. B. had Coyted as a
stumbling block before me: whom I am not only gotten over, but I presume have
given a good lift to the removing of him out of others way, (as to the right
foundation of the Commonwealth, and stating of the cause.)

You might have more; but because it is no better, here is enough. I could
never yet find among men like Mr. Rogers, that my spirit is likely to pass
with them for any more then a moral spirit: and there is nothing more usual
among Divines that make mention of me, then to call me Madman or Atheist. On
the other side, Mr. Rogers, and most of them that thus use me, hold themselves
to be men of sanctified spirits. Yet without boasting, and upon provocation, I
submit it unto the Reader, whether Mr. Rogers or my self be of the better
spirit: nor do I blame him so much for emptying himself lustily of that which
burdened him; Passion in a man is far more pardonable then Malice. He accuses
me in his Title Page, of Venom and Vilification toward the honorable Members
now in Parliament; which, for any thing he has said, or can say to prove it,
is not only to bear false witness against his Neighbor, but in seeking the
destruction of his Neighbor by false witness, to blast a Cause which he is no
otherwise able to invade. Let this be considered: for if it prove to be the
truth of his meaning, it must be from an evil spirit. However, the Reader may
now easily judge, whether the spirit of the people, excluding no man; or the
spirit of Mr. Rogers and such like, which is that which he would have,
excluding the people, be the fitter to be trusted with the Government.

Septem. 2. 1659. Reader, I entreat your pardon: I know well enough that this
is below me; but something is to be yielded to the times: and it h^th been the
Employment of two or three hours in a rainy day.



FINIS.

