TRUE, But Sad and Doleful News FROM SHREWSBVRY.

Expressed in two several LETTERS: Whereof, The one was written to a Gentleman
of the Inner Temple: The other, To a friend in London, relating at large the
several Passages of the late skirmish at or near Worcester, between a Party of
each Army, viz.

Under the Command of Prince Robert on the one side, and of Colonel Sands on
the other.

Confirmed by a Letter sent from Prince Robert to His MAJESTY. September. 24.

With diverse other Circumstances of several Passages at that time. With the
Cornets Mottoes.

October. 10. 1642.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

Imprinted at York, and now reprinted in London. Octo 19th1642.

Sad and doleful News from SHREWSBVRY.
The first Letter.
SIR,
I Do believe you have heard of the flight between His Majesty's Forces and my
Lord of Essexes; but yet I think you have not heard the truth, or any true
relations thereof; for we have them in print here with us from London: Your
Diurnall says Prince Robert is dead, and his brother dangerously hurt, and
most of the Cavaliers cut off, nay that thanks are given to God for it, but
believe it not: For now even their friends begin to be ashamed of their lies.
And therefore I will relate the very truth of it.

Sir John Byron was in Worcester with two Troops of Horse and some Foot, Prince
Robert marched away from his Majesty with 8 Troops of Horse, and came to
Worcester upon Friday, about four of the clock in the afternoon; and as he
was marching through the Town, News came that about 12 Troops of Horse, and
about 500 Dragoneers were marching to the Town: Whereupon, Prince Robert sent
Sir John Byron with two Troops of Horse to view the Enemy, and the Prince in
the mean time set his men in a Battalia, and Sir John Byron retreating back to
the Prince, they marched toward the Enemy and met them, upon the Top of a Hill
they stood looking about half an hour one on another. At length, they coming
nearer together, Sir Alexander Douglas discharged his Pistol against Sergeant
Major Byron, but mist him, for it was about seven yards distance; but Prince
Robert commanded ours not to charge the enemy just until they came to their
Breasts, the which they did well observe; For the Front of the Parliament
Troops discharging at too uncertain a distance, did no execution; but the
Front of Prince Roberts Troops coming on, discharged just at their breasts,
and quite cut off the Front: Sergeant Major Byron shot a bullet into Douglas
belly; Prince Robert his Brother, and Sir Lewis Dives slew each a man; Colonel
Wilmot singled out Colonel Sandys, and gave him his deaths-wound, though he
like a valiant Commander fought while he had one drop of blood. The Parliaments
forces endured two shots well, but at the third they were routed, and the
Prince had them in chase half a mile. The Parliaments 500 Dragoneers were
placed upon a Bridge, about a quarter of a mile off; but their Horse being
routed, came to the Bridge to get over, so that then the Dragoneers all fled,
but with their making too much haste, there were about 60 drowned; which fell
over the Bridge. There were about 350 slain and drowned, diverse common
Troopers taken prisoners; but their Horse and Arms taken from them, they were
set free again, because they were not worth their breed.

We have here prisoner one Captain Wingate, Burgess for Saint Albans, and he
fought valiantly. We lost but four men; the one was a Cornet to Master
Hastings Troop, and brother to my Lord Beaumond. Prince Robert is very well;
though he ventured as far as any Trooper of them all; Prince Maurice is wounded
in the head, but no danger; Sir Lewis Dives was shot through the Arm,
Commissary Wilmot cut in the back, but all of them were with the King abroad
the next or within two days after the fight.

When the Marquess of Hartford is come, and my Lord Strange we shall march
forward; We expect them on Monday at night; My Lord Strange would have been
here before this, but only that he is talking with Manchester, and then we make
no question but we shall be able to march through England.

Colonel Sandys behaved himself like a Gentleman and a soldier, for he
charged upon us valiantly, and at the hour of his death, said, That we had cut
off the flower of their chivalry and dyed very penitently. Prince Robert sent
his Chaplain. Doctor Wats to him, to whom he confessed his disloyalty to the
King and the Church, praying God and the King to forgive him. I pray you
remember my love to our friends at Moregate, and tell them I am very well, and
hope to be with them within these three weeks. So with my love to your self,
etc. I rest,

Shrewsbury, September. 30. Yours, B. H.
Postscript.
Captain Brown, Colonel of the Dragoneers ran away at the first.

The Welsh-men come in apace.



The Second LETTER.
I Have written to you the last week, which I presume you have received,
whereby I informed you of my safe arrival here. Since that time I have been in
some part of Wales, and am last night returned here: Where the King is with his
Army, the Earl of Essex is also at Worcester: Where for his first
entertainment, the vant carryers of his Army were shrewdly handled by Prince
Robert, who with 8 Troops of Horse routed a thousand of the Parliaments forces,
killed 300 in the place, brought six Cornets with him here, taken in the field,
and one Parliament man taken; Colonel Sands and other Commanders were slain,
and the rest taken or drowned in the river, and all this only with the loss of
four men on the Kings side, and Prince Maurice slightly hurt with a sword in
the head, with some others, but without danger of death. The King is here very
strong, and they flock to him in multitudes. There is at Bridgenorth some two
or three Regiments of the King, where last night some of his Excellencies Army
came and made a bravado, and valiantly ran the same way they came. It is
expected that in a short time there will be a Battle, the King has already
defied the Earl, and it is expected, some twelve days will decide the
quarrel.

Farewell.
A True Copy of a Letter sent by Prince Robert to his MAJESTY.
SIR,
THe Bearer will with all your Circumstances tell your Majesty our Proceedings
at Worcester, I shall only say this, That upon your Majesty's Commands to
succor the Town, we went thither with our Forces, and found the Rebels on
both sides of the Town, no Ammunition, nor nothing fitting to entertain so
great a Force as the Lord of Essex would have brought that Night. But all
things in so great a disorder, that certainly we had all been lost, had we not
by a great chance met with ten Troops of their Horse, and five of their
Dragoneers, which we did entirely rout, and killed most of their chiefest
Officers. The Manner and the Names I leave for the said Bearer to tell you.
Your Majesty will be pleased to accept this as a beginning of your Officers and
my Duty; and I doubt not, as (certainly) they behaved themselves all very
bravely and gallantly, that hereafter Your Majesty shall find the same
behavior against a more considerable number. Of this Your Majesty may be very
confident, as also of the endeavors of

SIR, Your Majesty's Most obedient Nephew, and humble Servant, ROBERT.
From Bodfort this 24. of Sept. 1642. Sir,
This Gentleman has behaved himself so gallantly, That I must needs humbly
desire your Majesty to knight him; which will encourage him and all others to
continue the Affection for your Service.



The Circumstances related by Master Crane, who is knighted. He is (I hear)
Prince Roberts Cornet.
THat at the first Charge, Prince Robert, Prince Maurice, Master Fox, and two
more, charged and defeated a Troop, whom they knew not to be enemies till they
were upon them, by their Orange color Scarfes.

That seven Cornets are taken some I saw.

That several Officers are killed on their side, particularly, Douglas and
Sandys; that the last repented before his Death, for having borne Arms against
the King.

That several men are taken, as Captain Wingat of the House of Commons, and
others.

That we have but three killed in all.

That but three of ours of qual^ty have been hurt; Master Wilmot in the back,
and the worst of any, but yet he marches in a Coach and is merry Sir Lewis
Dives through the shoulder; M. Byron (a brother of Sir John's) over the face. I
heard he has said, that Prince Maurice is a little hurt, but I understood him
but those three.

That Captain Brown, who commanded in chief as Colonel of the Dragoneers,
was one of the first that ran away.

That our men are very hearty with the victory, and the spoils of the killed
(as Horses, Arms, Buff-coats, Money in their pockets) and the Enemy (as they
hear) much disheartened, and not likely to make so great haste from about
Worcester as they meant.

The Cornets MOTTOES.
PRo Rege and Regno. Exurgat and Discipabuntur. Pro Rege and Religione. Si pro
Patria Merior, non Moror.
The rest were so torn, the Mottoes could not be read.

FINIS.

