GOOD NEWS to all PEOPLE.

GLAD TIDINGS for all MEN.

God good unto All, AND Christ the Savior of the World: OR, The general Point
faithfully handled by way of Exercise: OR A Sermon preached at Buckingham upon
the 25 of March, being (as so called) Easter Day.

By WILLIAM HARTLEY.

1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge
of the truth.

Heb. 2.9. We see Jesus who was made a little lower then the Angels, by
suffering death, crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man.

LONDON, Printed by John Macock for Lodowick Lloyd, and Henry Cripps, and are
to be sold at their shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1650.

For his beloved Cozen, Captain Francis Freeman.
SIR,
WHen I call to mind the glorious refreshing Beams, distilled from the men of
your generation, on Saints seeking after God, it is hard to say, Whether the
remembrance does minister greater comfort or sadness, seeing such hideous
Clouds have overwhelmed our Horizon, that we are given to believe, the Sun is
upon the Equinoctial Point, passing into the ecliptic Line: Nescio quis
tineros oculus, etc.
Whether the misty Vapors of our own Climate, or that fruit-nipping North-East
wind, has occasioned these Fogs interposing; Supposition grants no
Conclusion: and how Titan will be able to dispel these obstructive Mists before
he dippeth himself into the Tingere in altum Sol ita videtur navigant. Vir.
Sea: It Is Wisdom to praise a fair day at night: To Morrows generation may
Calculate; whether Justice follow you, or you follow Justice. Sir, I ask pardon
for digression, and present you this Discourse from the Press, of which you
were a Hearer in the Speech; and beg resentment therein (so far) of your
Spirit, as it has a witness from truth in the Spirit. I am,

Your unworthy Kinsman, William Hartley.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Am deeply sadded when I consider the great rents the particular and general
Point has made in the Church of Christ, and what sad disaster has followed
for want of holding forth the truth in love. (By providence) having an
opportunity to declare my thoughts touching the Universal Love of God to
mankind, I was mis-apprehended by diverse of my Hearers (whom I judge to be
godly:) and Mr Birdits promise to inform the Auditory touching his and their
misprision, being not (to my knowledge) yet effected; To wipe off the prejudice
that Mr Birdit infused in the people, not only of my self, but the doctrine, I
have (at the desire of my friends) put this ensuing Treatise unto public
view; although the Subject matter therein contained has been managed (ex
superabundanti) by many able and knowing men in the Scripture, yet I humbly
take liberty to cast my mite into the treasury: I am not ignorant how
contemptible this small piece offered will appear in the eyes of some, and how
slighted of others, because not coined with the current stamp, yet (I presume)
all rational and unbiassed professors will judge the metal of this discourse
according to its weight, or worth, in the balance of Reason, and Touchstone
of the Word of God; which is the ultimate request of him, whose desire is to
know truth:

Stonystrat. April 4. 1649. WILL: HARTLEY.

GOOD NEWS to all PEOPLE; GLAD TIDINGS for all MEN.
ACTS 17.30. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, but now he
commands all men every where to repent.


IN the former part of this Chapter we read of Paul's practice, viz. that as he
passed from place to place, his manner was to go into the Synagogues of the
Jews, (there being a concourse of people); he made it his business, by
arguments and reasoning from Scripture, to declare Jesus Christ to have
suffered and risen again from the dead: and that this action of Paul's (to wit,
his going into the Synagogues) is warrantable, see a president in Christ
himself, Luke 4.16.
And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up, and as his custom was,
he went into the Synagogues, and stood up for to read, etc. It is evident from
this place of Scripture, and many more, That Christ, who taught the people upon
the Mount, in a Ship, at the Sea side, taught also in the Temple and Synagogues
of the Jews; not in relation to any sanctity in the places, but in reference to
an opportunity, there being an Assembly of persons: Herein the Apostle Paul
professes his integrity, That he had shuned no occasion, having taught the
Word publicly, and from house to house, Act. 20.20.

As all endevors, tending to the glory of God, are incident to obstruction; so
this enterprise of the Apostle meets with no small opposition: Two sorts of
Adversaries are recorded; The Jews, those who worshipped the same God: The
Church of Christ has no greater Enemies then those who spring from her own
bowels: That which Christ speaks of a man's foes, is most true in relation to
Saints, Their Enemies are of their own household: Christian against Christian,
Believer against Believer.

Secondly, Lewd fellows, those of the baser sort, uncivilized men, who are
adversaries to all goodness and good men, these run open mouth at Paul; but
devout and moderate people, the men of Berea, neither distasted his person, or
doctrine, but searched the Scriptures, whether these things were true or no:
This Idolizing of persons, places, and forms, has done no small prejudice to
the power of Truth, and mystery of the Gospel.

At Athens (though a City wholly given to Idolatry) yet there Paul is drawn
forth to preach the Gospel; they being a people affected with Novelty, unto
them he declares the glad news of Jesus Christ.

It Is remarkable, that such a Heathenish people, Philosophers of the
Epicureans, Stoics, etc. should admit of a debate, as Verse. 19, 20. May we
know what this new Doctrine, whereof thou speak, is? For thou bring
certain strange things to our ears; we would know therefore what these things
mean, etc. I promise ye, Sirs, this civil deportment has not been found in
many of our Divines (so called,) who in stead of embracing conference to argue
out the Truth (secundum pondus) cry out, with the invective Jews, Away with
such a fellow, he is not worthy to live.

The Apostle having gained audience, convinces the vanity of the Athenian
worship, by interposition of the true, taking notice of an Altar erected to an
UNKNOWN GOD: Whom therefore (says he) ye ignorantly worship, him declare I
unto you.

And the times of this ignorance God winked at, Acts 17.30.
but now he commands all men every where to repent. Before we proceed to the
Doctrinal part of the Text, I shall open these three things:

First, What is meant by Times: You are to understand, 1. What is meant by
Times.
that when Time or Times are attributed to God, it is spoken in reference to
the capacity of the Creature, God in himself being above and beyond all Time: A
thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday: And again, One day with the
Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. Now to the
Creature, a thousand years are a thousand years, and one day is one day; but
with God it is not so: All times, persons, and actions, whether past, present,
or to come, are (as at one instant) in his view; as you may instance: Simile.
A man standing upon a hill, and an Army marching in the Vale, to them that
march, some are in the Van, some are in the Rear, some are in the Battle; but
the person on the hill sees them all at one prospect: So, to us mortals, one
generation passes, another follows, a third hastes after; but all in Gods
view at once.

Times of ignorance] That is, when persons are unacquainted with the knowledge
of Christ (though never so wise in other things) yet their life, and time, is a
life and being in ignorance: When the Apostle accounted all things as dung and
dross in comparison of the Phil. 3.8.
Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, we cannot imagine that he excluded
worldly wisdom; for he that will be wise in the sight of God, must become a
fool, that he may be wise.

Secondly, What we are to conceive of Gods winking: 2. How to understand Gods
winking.
In the times of this ignorance God winked: Praeterire fecit Deus, says the
Original; a Metaphor taken from our vulgar expression: Sir, you are to wink at
(or take no knowledge of) small matters.

Thirdly, What it is to repent: 3. What it is to Repent.
He commands all men every where to repent: Repentance, in the proper
signification of the word, does imply a change of the mind: Contrition,
weeping, or sorrow for sin, is a sign or fruit of repenting, but not Repentance
it self: Sorrow was found in Judas, as well as Peter; and profane Esau shed
tears, when (Englishman-like) he was wise afterward. A Malefactor at the Bar
takes on heavily for fear of punishment, when happily his heart sits as close to
his lust as ever; for being let loose, he follows his old trade afresh. True
Repentance is Conversion of the heart, Acts 3.19.
Repent and be Converted, which properly consists in renovation of the mind,
Romans 12.2.
Be ye transformed by renewing of your minds; which is pertinently set forth
by the Apostle, Romans 6.19. As ye have yielded your members servants to
uncleanness and to iniquity, unto iniquity; even so now yield your members
servants to righteousness, unto Holiness.

In the times of ignorance, etc. The subject matter of this Text may be this;
Ye men of Athens, that do so desire after news, I declare unto you, That ye
have spent your time in ignorance and blind devotion, which God is willing to
pass by, provided ye be converted and changed in your minds; which thing God
commands to be done by you, and all men every where in the world: This being
considered, we shall draw this general Conclusion from the words of the Text:
Doctrine.
It is the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, that every Creature should
come to the attainment of Life and Salvation.

That which is spoken of the Peace of God, is most true of his Goodness, It
passes all understanding; that is, the narrow capacity of the Creature is not
able to comprehend the infinite love and kindness that is in God.

It is too much given to the Creature to limit the goodness of God: and when
Gods universal Love unto all Mankind is declared, then are arguments drawn of
improbability, not unlike that of Abraham's, Genesis 17.7. Shall a child be born
unto him that is an hundred years old? And shall Sarah that is ninety years old
bear?

That God should manifest love and kindness unto good and godly men, an account
is easily rendered; but that God should declare his mercy and compassion to the
ungodly, that cannot be understood; although the Parable of the lost sheep be
read unto them every Sabbath day: The sick are the proper object of the
Physicians cure: Christ came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to
Repentance.

The Doctrine of Predestination: viz. That God, before all Eternity, did elect
and choose some persons to Salvation (and themselves included in the number)
pleases very well; but that God chooses only through faith, and reprobates
none but in reference to disobedience of faith, is not relished:
notwithstanding they know the Scripture where it is said, He that believes
shall be saved, he that believes not shall be condemned, John 3, 18.
because he believed not in the only begotten Son of God.

That Jesus Christ came into the world to redeem some (and they the persons) is
well resented; but that Jesus Christ came into the world to save All, yea that
which was lost, is not so well approved of.

The Prophet David, speaking concerning the goodness of God, Psalm. 145.9.
informs how far it does extend; The Lord is good unto All, and his tender
mercy is over All his works: It does not read, good unto some, or exercising
mercy unto part of his works, as diverse would give it out.

Our Savior in his Sermon upon the Mount, Mat. 5. concludes the Chapter with
these words, Be ye Merciful, as your heavenly Father is Merciful: Which
perfection did consist in loving our enemies, doing good to them that hate us;
and it is thus reasoned, That if we love our friends that love us, or do good
to them that do good to us; Heathens, Publicanes, are capable of such a
Ingratus est qui gratiam.
degree of righteousness: But the Saints of God must go further, their love and
goodness must not only extend to friends, but enemies also, and that from a
president in God their Father: Who makes his Sun to rise upon the evil, and on
the good, and sends rain upon the just, and on the unjust; that is to say,
upon All, as was minded before from the Psalmist, His tender mercy is over All
his works.

This tender mercy (I offer my judgment) has relation unto Jesus Christ, who
is proposed, or set forth by God the Father, an Universal Tender of Love to the
whole By Creation or Creature understand Mankind.
Creation: The Argument Paul gives, why prayers for Kings, and such as were
invested with authority, though (as we have ground to believe) were (for the
generality) wicked and ungodly persons, was acceptable in the sight of God, is
concluded from Gods indefinite love to mankind; 1 Timothy 2.4. Who will have All
men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth: For there is one God,
and one Mediator betwixt God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for All, etc. And as the Apostle renders it in another place,
Heb. 2.9.
That he (to wit, Jesus Christ) through the grace or free gift of God tasted
death for Every Man; whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, male or female. Here
is no limitation or restriction either of Nations or persons, but according as
Christ makes it out, Joh. 3.14. As Moses lifted up the Serpent in the
Wilderness, so shall the Son of man be lifted up, that Whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting life: For God so loved the World,
etc. In this similitude Christ brings to our understanding a Mystery: In the
History Numb. 21* 9.
we read of bodies bitten by Serpents, and cured by a miraculous Ordinance of
God: We find also in the Mystery of the Gospel that all have sinned, and are
venomed by the poison of that fiery Serpent the Devil; and Jesus Christ is
constituted and set forth as an Antidote to that poison, and Remedy against
that sting: 1 Cor. 15.
So the Apostle has it, The sting of death is sin, the strength of sin is the
Law; but thanks be to God which has given us victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ.

This incomprehensible mercy was occasioned through Gods love to the World, God
so loved the World, that Whosoever believes, etc. Under consideration of the
word World you may understand Gods indefinite Love to all mankind; and by
Whosoever, no man (as a person) by any intention of Almighty God is debarred
from the benefit of his Love: 2 Cor. 4 4.
If Christ or the Gospel be hid, it is unto those that perish; whom Satan, the
god of this world has blinded, etc. Jesus Christ being sent on purpose, that
Whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life.

Object.
But this World that God so loved, is to be understood the world of Elect, and
not all mankind?

Answ.
I answer: That where ever you find the word World mentioned in Scripture, it
does either imply the whole Creation, as, God made the World; The World passes
away, etc. or the major part of men in the World, The World lies in
wickedness: We cannot understand the Apostle included himself and the Saints,
but the generality of people then living in the World.

Moreover observe it, the world World is so far from admitting any construction
in relation to Saints, Elect, or Believers, as that it is generally quoted in
direct opposition to them; The World shall hate you: John 17.
Ye shall weep, but the World shall rejoice: The World has not known thee:
They are not of the World, etc. So then it is evident, That the World is no
where rendered for Elect, or Saints; and the World here spoken of, does
comprehend all mankind: The better to rectify this misprision, see 1 John 2.2.
He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins only, but for the
sins of the whole World: This the Apostle infers to declare the large extent
of Christ's Mediatorship; from the benefit whereof the whole World has no
ejectment: for says 2 Pet. 3.9.
Peter, He is not willing that any should perish; which Negative produces this
Affirmative, but that all should be Saved, and come to the knowledge of the
truth: This Scripture, with others before cited, may invite your credence to the
Observation we are dwelling upon, viz. It is the good will and etc.

Although the Scripture in its self be a sufficient testimony to confirm every
truth therein comprised, yet we find many Arguments by way of Illustration,
used as Grounds and Reasons for further conviction; as we may instance in our
Savior, when he refuted the Sadduces doctrine of non-resurrection; God (says
he) (as you grant) is the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob: Now God is not a God of the dead, but of the living; if so, then of
necessity there is a Being after death: And likewise to his Disciples for
prevention of immoderate care, A Sparrow (says he) does not fall to the ground
without the will of your heavenly Father; and it is he that clothes the Lillies
in their royalty. Now consider* Does the providence of your heavenly Father
extend to Sparrows? and does he so beautify the grass in the fields? and do
you think he will be unmindful of you (O ye of little faith?)

I suppose (my beloved friends) the Scriptures quoted may evidently manifest
the truth of the Doctrine, yet I crave leave to offer to your consideration
some Arguments for your further confirmation.

The first Argument that gives me to apprehend, 1 Argument grounded from Gods
propriety.
That it is the good Will and Pleasure of Almighty God that every Creature
should come to the attainment of Life and Salvation, is grounded upon the
propriety or interest that God is said to have in all Creatures: Luke the
Evangelist recording (ab origin) the descent of Christ from Joseph to Adam,
shuts up the genealogy in these words, Which was the son of Adam, which was
the son of God. Luke 3.38.
That the Creature had a Being in God, was acknowledged by those heathenish
Poets, and asserted by Paul, Acts 17.29. Forasmuch as we are all of his
Offspring, etc. We shall only add that expression of Moses in his prayer, O
God, thou art the God of the Spirits of all flesh. Numb 16.22.
The scope and purport of these Scriptures is to declare God to be the Creator
and Father of all Spirits.

Abraham is said to beget Isaac, Isaac Jacob, etc. that is, the formative
virtue, which did create hands, feet and limbs, did proceed from the persons
mentioned; but the Spirit, which gives Essence and Being to the Creature,
comes from God: Simile.
A Window is said to light the house when it is the Sun, for if the Sun
withdraw his light (as in dark nights may be observed) the window lights the
house no more then the wall: In this sense, God is said to open the womb of
Rebecca, when he gave life to the formative virtue; so then, men are said to
beget men, when it is God that is the Father of all Spirits.

If a man have never so many children, he wishes the welfare of all; as may be
instanced in Abraham, who provided not only for Isaac and Ishmael, but for
those children also that he had by Keturah, Genesis 25.5.
unto whom he gave gifts, and sent them into the Wilderness: How did David
lament over Absalom, an undutiful son? Now if we that are wicked desire the
welfare and happiness of our own children, can we have such hard thoughts of
God, as to create a Soul on purpose to destroy it: Behold (says the Lord) All
Souls are mine, the Soul of the father, and the Soul of the son: I have no
pleasure in the death of him that dies.

2 Argument grounded upon Gods Invitation.
The second Argument is grounded upon the several Invitations of God to the
Creature: we read, Prove. 1.10. these expressions; Wisdom cries without, she
utters her voice in the street: How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity, and scorners delight in scorning, and fools hate knowledge? Turn ye
at my reproof, etc. Under favor (my Masters) this Wisdom here spoken of cannot
be interpreted as a Herald or Crier publishing such an Oration in a City,
Palace, or such like convention of people; but it is the voice of God fixed or
proclaimed in the market place, or heart of every Creature (that is to say, of
mankind) where the assembly and concourse of the affections have their place of
meeting, and the faculties of rationality sit in council; there the voice of
Almighty God is present by a manifestation of his Wisdom, or motions of his
holy Spirit, reproving and condemning all adverse and repugnant intentions of
our hearts in dissonancy or contrariety of his Will. I pray answer me this
question; What is that which gives a check to yours and my Conscience, when we
intend evil against God, or our Neighbor? and whether or no, upon the
commitment of sin, there has not been a voice of God speaking in every one of
our hearts, this ought not to be done? I think the worst of men will acknowledge
it; (only such excepted who liked not to retain God in their knowledge) such
indeed are given up to strange delusions. Romans 1.


Satan (as he dealt with Eve) presents the beauty of the apple; but God said,
In the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dye: Mark this well, Satan pleases
the fancy of the Creature, the better to accomplish his ruin; God informs
the judgment of man for his preservation: I remember a precious expression in
the Prophet Isaiah, Look up unto me all ye the Isles of the earth, and be
saved: Isaiah 45.22.
Here you may perceive the plenitude of Gods Tender, even unto all Nations upon
the face of the earth; All men every where (as the Text has it.) Observe (my
beloved Friends) if God commands all men to repent and turn unto him, wishes
all Nations to look up to him for Salvation; certainly God has not mental
reservation, but (as we say) speaks the Truth from his heart, willing None
should perish, but All to partake of everlasting life: Ho, every one that
thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money: Isai. 55.1.
come ye, buy, and eat, etc. Whosoever will, Rev. 22 17.
let him take of the water of life freely: By which Scriptures you may
apprehend, that Almighty God (lest the Creature should plead ignorance or
unworthiness) makes proclamation of his free goodness unto mankind, without
restriction or exception of any (as persons) and that from these words, Ho and
Whosoever.

And now from this argument I thus infer; If God, by his wisdom, which is the
voice of his Spirit to the heart within, and if God, by his Word or Ministry
(which is his outward means) wooeth and inviteth all Mankind to partake of his
Love and Goodness; is it not to declare the truth of the Doctrine now insisted
upon? viz. That it is the good will and pleasure of Almighty God, that every
Creature should come to the attainment of Life and Salvation.

The third Argument is drawn from the sorrow or complaint that Almighty God is
said (according to the Scripture sense) to take up, 3 Argument drawn from Gods
sorrow or complaint. Deuteronomy. 5.29.
upon consideration of the deviation or destruction of the Creature; Oh that
there were such an heart in them: Oh that my people would but harken: Why will
ye dye, O house of Israel? See here Gods expressions of love, not only
desiring Isreal's conformity, but argues out the case; Why will ye dye? What
reason have you to destroy your selves? Is there any cause that necessitates
you to perish? Its strange to me it should be so: As I live, says the Lord,
Ezekiel. 33.11.
I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked should turn
from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways; for why will ye
dye, O house of Israel? etc. Here the Lord does declare his disaffection to the
Creatures ruin by Oath, which (as the Apostle has it) is used for
confirmation and ending of all strife; As I live, says the Lord, I desire not
the death, etc.

It is recorded of a Roman Emperor, when he pronounced sentence against a
Malefactor, he used this language, Utinam nescirem Leg^s. Nero.
Would to God I had not known the Laws? Whether there be truth in this story,
or reality in the expression, it matters not; but most sure it is, that
Almighty God, the great King of Heaven and Earth, proceeds not to sentence
for sin, without reluctance: The Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations reads
thus; He does not afflict WILLINGLY, Lam. 3.33.
nor GRIEVE the Children of men.

It is worthy of our serious consideration, to observe what sorrow of heart and
tenderness in affection our blessed Savior expressed over Jerusalem, when he
sentenced their ejectment, or rendered them incapable of any further favor; O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, Mat. 23 37.
and stonest them that are sent unto thee, How often would I have gathered thy
Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens, and ye It Is not said, Ye
could not.
Would not? Behold, your house is left desolate: If thou had known in this
thy day the things that belong to thy peace, but now they are hid from thine
eyes: When he approached near the holy City (says the Evangelist) he wept over
it: Strong are those affections that break forth in Weeping, and great was that
LOVE that drew Tears from the Son of God.

I pray consider by what pertinent similitude our Savior makes out his Love
to Jerusalem, As a Hen gathers her Chickens, etc. Amongst other Creatures
that are indulgent for procreation, the Hen is observed, by great diligence, to
bring her brood to maturity; how careful is she to cover her charge! and during
time departs not therefrom, unless necessitated by extreme hunger: when her
charge is brought to perfection, how does she endevor to rally her young ones
together! never at rest longer then they are under covert of her own feathers;
and in case violence be offered to her young, what creature is it that with
undaunted courage she will not fly in face on?

Much more might be said by way of illustration; but ye are to understand, that
the end of Similitudes or Parables is to declare, not to compare, as may be
instanced by the Parables of the unjust Steward, unjust Judge, etc. So here, the
similitude of the tenderness of the Hen over her young does manifest something
of Christ's Love; all comparisons in the world being too low to parallel the
extent thereof. Luke 15.
I remember when Christ was accused by the Pharisees for having society with
Publicanes and sinners (taking boldness to paraphrase upon the Discourse) he
reasons after this manner; Well, Sirs, (says he) I perceive I am the object
of your discontent, and that in reference to my familiarity among wicked and
ungodly men: Come now, let us debate the matter; I conclude you be
sheep-masters, I would see that man amongst you, having an hundred sheep, and
losing but one of that hundred, which will not leave his ninety and nine in the
wilderness, to seek that one sheep, and having found it, he rejoices more for
the recovery of that one sheep, then at the possession of ninety nine that
strayed not: Is this history true touching your sheep? and cannot you
understand this mystery? All creatures in the world, all men and women in the
world, are my heavenly Fathers, if any person break the fold, or wandereth in
evil ways and bypath of sin or ignorance, he carefully endevoreth to regain
him; which if accomplished, There is more joy over one sinner that repents,
then over ninety nine just persons, who need no repentance. I might add
something touching the lost groat, but I shall not multiply presidents, lest I
burden your memories; only give me way to speak a word or two to the Parable
of the Prodigal, and then I shall proceed.

Although the Parables of the lost sheep and groat were sufficient to reprove
the Pharisees of their harsh sentence, yet our Savior (for their better
conviction) adds this comparison of a man having two sons, the younger
demanded his portion, Luke 15.12.
went into a far Country, wasted his patrimony, etc. and when he returned home,
his father was so far from calling him to account for his Prodigality, as that
he used all expressions of love unto him, met him in the way, kissed him,
richly clothed him, put shoes to his feet, gold to his hand, (all which, as
also the Parable it self, is of spiritual construction,) and when the eldest
Son repined at his younger Brothers entertainment, his Father silenced him with
these words; It is meet that we should make merry, and be glad; for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and is found.

It would ask more time then I have (by Gods permission) to spend at this
present, to unfold the mystery of the whole Parable; only take notice from the
grudgings of the elder brother, as also the evil eye of the laborers in the
vineyard, upon their masters kindness to their fellow servants, Matthew. 20.
How subject Creatures are to repine at the goodness of God conferred upon
their brethren.

He was dead, and is alive, (says the Text:) Observe, my beloved Friends, the
life of man does not consist only in exercising the faculties of Nature, as
breathing, speaking, acting, etc. but chiefly in the enjoyment of God, without
which the Creature, though alive to the world, yet is he really dead in
himself: Simile.
A tree that is newly felled, may have boughs and blossoms answerable unto
other trees, yet is truly dead, as being separated from the root: even so,
says the Apostle, they that live in pleasures, are dead, while they live.

He was lost, and is found: Every Soul, departing from God, loses it self,
though never so sensible of the way it walks in. Jonah knew whither he went
when he marched to Anathoth, yet lost himself, having received Orders for his
advance to Nineveh. The heart of man is a notable Sophister (giving heed to
Satan's Logique) fills the Microsmos, or little Universe of Man, full of
misprisions, that when he thinks he stands, he falls; when he thinks he
saves his life, he loses his life: when he thinks he has a good bargain,
he loses himself in the purchase. In this sense, He truly buys gold too dear,
that wins the world with the loss of his Soul.

Pardon, I pray, this circumlocution, and take notice with me, from the Parable
of the Prodigal, this one thing; That if it be an undubitable matter of
rejoicing to receive a dead child to life, or for a child that was lost to
find the way home again, (the grief of both Parents in such a condition being
great, but especially of the latter, if you have heard the sad complaint of
diverse in London, and elsewhere, who have been made sensible of such an
affliction,) then certainly we may see what our Savior thus methodically gives
us to understand by the similitude, to wit, That it is well pleasing to
Almighty God, that every Creature should come to the attainment of Life and
Salvation.

But methinks I hear some object and say, That they cannot believe that Christ
dyed for the World, or that God is so open-handed unto all Creatures; but
rather (according to the Doctrine of the Reformed Churches) that God
predestinateth some to life and Salvation, and of those there is an
impossibility of perishing: Others he has appointed to death and destruction,
and of such no possibility of Salvation: And for their Faith in this particular
there are many warrants from Scripture; viz.

Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, 1 Object.
the wicked for the day of evil: From whence it is reasoned, That God (acting
from a principle of his own Will) made all things for his glory, and
consequently the wicked for the day of evil, that his power may be manifested.

Jude 4. There were certain men crept in, 2 Object.
who of old were ordained to this condemnation: From this Scripture is proved
the Doctrine of Reprobation, viz. That God of old, or from all Eternity, did
ordain, or appoint, certain persons unto condemnation.

Romans 9.13. Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated: 3 Object.
From this Text it is manifest, That God, in his Decree of Election (before
they were born, or had done good or evil) did appoint Jacob and his seed to
Life and Salvation, Esau and his posterity to Hell and Destruction. So then,
taking the Scriptures together; First, that in Prove. 16. proves the
sovereignty of God, in making the wicked for the day of evil. Secondly, that in
Jude proves, That in the determinate Counsel of God certain men were appointed
to Destruction. Lastly, that of Romans 9. manifests Gods free Election, in
choosing Jacob, and refusing Esau: Which being considered, how can the Doctrine
be closed with, that has been delivered? viz. That it is the good will and
pleasure of Almighty God, that every Creature should come to the attainment of
Life and Salvation.

Now, Sirs, ye have heard the strength of the Objection, let me crave your
attention to the Reply; Indeed the Scriptures produced (through
misunderstanding) may have some seeming opposition, but if rightly weighed,
they infer no such thing: Therefore we shall answer to the several Objections
in order.

Answer to the first Object.
To the first, Prove. 16.4. The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, the
wicked for the day of wrath: where, from Gods plenipotency over the Creatures,
is argued, That God made wicked men, Genesis 1.
and appointed them to Destruction; we answer, That all God made was good, yea,
says the Scripture, exceeding good; and that persons be degenerated, is
through prevarication of their own hearts; for God made man righteous, but he
sought out his own inventions: Therefore, as the Apostle James has it, Let no
man say, Iam. 1.
when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God; for God tempts no man, etc.
And that wicked men taste of destruction, is not from a necessity of God
willing it so, but by reason of their own impenitency; he having no pleasure in
the death of him that dies, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness
and live: And whereas it is said, That Wicked are for the day of wrath, it may
have allusion to Paul's words, Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but
God, etc. So wicked persons for destruction, and destruction is a fit and
proper place for wicked men, not that God wills that any should perish, but
all should come to the knowledge of the Truth.

Answer to the second Objec.
To the second Objection, Jude 4. Certain men were ordained of Old unto
condemnation: From whence is gathered* That God from Eternity did appoint some
persons to destruction; be it answered from the same Verse, That those certain
persons were ungodly men, turning the grace of God into wantonness; so their
condemnation did arise from their ungodliness and unprofitableness under the
means of grace, turning it into lasciviousness, and not barely as they were
persons.

Object.
But you will say, Those Persons were condemned of OLD, (that is to say) before
they were born, or in a capacity to act ungodliness, or prevaricate grace
tendered.

Answ.
I answer, That the condemnation, here preceding, has wholly relation to the
evil in those men, and not at all to the persons (as simply considered in
themselves,) I shall give you an instance; Suppose there were an Act of
Parliament made in this year, That Drunkenness should be punished with death;
Are not all Drunkards (though it be five hundred years after) condemned to dye
by that Law? not as they are Richard, Thomas, or John such a one, etc. but as
Drunkards or persons offending such a righteous Law?

The Decree, or Predestination of God from Eternity, was, That he would wound
the hairy scalp of every one that goes on in iniquity: And the Ungodly shall
be turned into Hell, and All that forget God: This Decree, or Ordination, does
not condemn any as Persons, but has solely reference to Transgressors:
Therefore I say to every Soul here present, that is enquiring after the
Doctrine of Predestination, as Saint Paul does of the Law, 1 Timothy 1.9. It is
not made for a righteous man, but for the disobedient, for the ungodly, for
unholy and profan^: And will thou not be afraid of the power? do that which is
good, Romans 13.3.
and thou shall have praise of the same: And rest satisfied of this undeniable
Truth, That there is predestined, Tribulation to every Soul that does evil,
Romans 2.
upon the Jew first, and also of the Gentile: Glory, honor, and immortality
upon every Soul that works Righteousness, upon the Jew first, and also of the
Gentile; for God is no Respecter of Persons: That is to say, He will reward
every man according to his works.

And lastly, to the third Objection, Answer to the third Object.
grounded upon Jacob and Esau, from whence is inferred Election and Reprobation
of persons before they had a Being: I thus proceed to answer (not to trouble
you with the Translators formality in rendering the 11 Verse, inclusively a The
sense is current from Verse. 10. to 12
Parenthesis) which is an interposition of a word, or sentence, not precisely,
or of absolute necessity, contingent to the Discourse) you are to understand,
the words had no relation unto the person of Esau or Jacob, but to their
posterities, and not to their posterities in point of Salvation and Damnation,
but in relation to outward Lordship and outward Vassallage; and this I hope to
clear, and for your better satisfaction turn to the 25 of Genesis, and about
verse. 20. you shall have this story recorded, viz. That Rebeccah, in the time
of her childbearing of Jacob and Esau, was exceedingly troubled with
strugglings within her, and in her distress makes application unto God in
these words, Lord, why am I thus troubled? The Lord (who is always ready to
hear the desires of his people) makes her this Answer, The Elder People shall
serve the Younger: which words we may safely interpret after this wise; Thy
Burden in thy womb is two male children, from whose lineage shall arise two
Nations, and those people that shall proceed from the Elder Brother, shall be
in subjection to those people that shall spring from the Younger Brother; the
certainty of the event whereof is now typified by the now striving and
struggling of the children in thy womb: So here, you see the Prophecy,
manifested to Rebekah, had no cognizance to the persons of Esau and Jacob, but
posterities, and in their posterities no further extent then outward domination
and subjection: For consider, Jacob was Esaus servant, and Es^^. was Jacobs
lord; but in the revolution of time, David, 2 Samuel 8.10.
who was of the descent of Jacob, subdued Edom, For in all Edom put he
Garrisons, that is, kept the Edomites in subjection, who were of the race of
Esau; and there you have a period to that Prophecy* And to rectify that
mistake that is apt to be harbored from this Text, take notice, That that
which the Lord told Rebekah (before the children were born) was this; The Elder
People shall serve the Younger; and not Gods fore-intentional hatred of Esau,
or love to Jacob; for that the Apostle declares he found written afterward, as
in diverse places of Scripture, for diverse causes, take Amos 1.11. For three
transgressions, and for four of Edom, I will not turn away the punishment
thereof, Because he pursued his brother, etc. Obad. 10. For thy violence
against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, etc. By these Scriptures it
appears, That Esau, who was a Fornicator and profane person, and his
posterity also an ungodly and oppressive generation of men, for violence and
oppression of their brethren, are said (in the Scripture sense) to be hated or
rejected of God in the same manner, (as I apprehend) that God is said to reject
Mark Reader God equally hated wicked men of Jacobs race, as well as of Esaus.
Saul in Samuels time, and to hate the hypocritical new moons in Isaiahs
generation, and wicked men in David's time; God hating, or rather not having
pleasure in the workers of iniquity: For you are to understand, that many
expressions in Scripture do declare some manifestation of the dealings of God
in the Creatures language, the better to condescend to his capacity, and not
that there is a different qualification in one entire Essence, (as the
Schoolmen have it,) Simplex non fit compositum.
Whatsoever is of a simple Being, cannot admit of Composition; Light cannot
comprehend darkness, neither can darkness comprehend light. So then, it is the
creatures misapprehension to conclude, That God (who is perfect Love in his own
Essence) can produce effects of anger or hatred. Simile.
A prisoner at the Bar looks upon the Judge as angry and hasty to destroy his
life, when the Judge (as he ought) is of the prisoners counsel, and out of love
and tender pity to the prisoner shows him all the favor the Law will admit:
We Adamites, through guilt of our own consciences, for breach of a righteous
Law, behold God as angry or displeased, but the Lord is Kind and Merciful, and
of his Goodness there is no end. Simile.
In gloomy weather we are apt to say, the Sun has not shined, when Clouds and
Vapors only interpose; the Sun being wholly composed of light never cease to
put forth his beams: If we taste not of the loving kindness of God, or behold
not the comfortable light of his countenance, our iniquities are the clouds
that separate these good things from us, and not the Will or Ordination of
Almighty God, who is Goodness it self; and How often would I, and ye Would not,
etc.

Again, If you take up, from these words, viz. Jacob have I loved, and Esau
have I hated, this conclusion, That Jacob and his posterity (simply as persons
fore known) were the objects of the Love of God, and consequently appointed for
Salvation; and Esau with his posterity objects of Gods Hatred, and so
undoubtedly reserved for destruction: I pray, my Masters, give me your thoughts
of these Scriptures, Isaiah says, Though Israel be as the sand on the Sea, yet
a Remnant shall be saved: Our Savior says, That Many shall come from the
East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and sit down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; and the Children of the Kingdom shall be thrust
out: To which I add that of Paul; Jew and Gentile, male and female, are All One
in Jesus Christ: Which (as to other Nations) so to us Englishmen, is a comfort,
though we should be of the race of Certain it is, we are not of Jacobs
posterity.
Esau. And thus I hope I have plained this Mountain, which so frequently (with
such confidence) is set in opposition to the Doctrine, viz. It is the good Will
and Pleasure of etc.

But the whole substance of the Chapter does imply Election and Reprobation of
persons* 4 Object.
as Verse. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy; I will have
compassion on whom I will have compassion. Verse. 18. Therefore he will have
mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

I give my judgment, Answ.
That the main drift and scope of the Apostle in these words is, to take off
the self-conceit or privilege that the Jews took to themselves touching their
descent from Abraham, with their imaginary righteousness by the works of the
Law, and to fix them upon expectation for righteousness from free grace in
Jesus Christ; and that no action of the creature can merit or challenge any
privilege in the favor or love of God, because when we have done All, We are
unprofitable Servants; which the Apostle does illustrate from the Speech of God
to Moses, when he desired to see the face of God: Exodus 33.19.
I will be merciful to whom I will be merciful; I will be gracious unto whom I
will be gracious: We may apprehend, that the words were spoken to declare, That
although Moses was a faithful Servant in all his house, yet the favor granted
him was not out of consideration of any merit in Moses, but an act of grace
from God: for says the Lord, I will be gracious unto whom I will be gracious,
etc. and for the positive conclusion, viz. I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy, and whom he will he hardens. To prevent the preposterous
administration of Love and Judgment which (from these words) many conclude to
be in God, Exodus 20.
the Scripture shall unty this knot: The Lords will and pleasure is to Have
Mercy on such that fear him; and those that like not to retain God in their
knowledge, 2 Command.
such he is said to harden, Romans 18.
or rather gives them up to a reprobate sense; to perish through their
wickedness.

5 Object.
But is it not in express words said, GOD hardened Pharaohs heart?

Answ. Cooks Instit. page* 27.
I make answer to this Objection, as a learned Lawyer did of the Law, When any
point (through Nicety thereof) does admit of a doubtful interpretation, such a
construction is to be made, as may avoid absurdity. All you that hear me will
go along with me in this, That it was an evil in Pharaoh to have a hard heart
against the Commands of Almighty God; if so, will it not be absurd to conclude
God the Author of this evil? Again, you all grant, That it was just with
Almighty God to destroy Pharaoh for his hard heart against the Israelites, and
will it not be preposterous for you to make God the Author both of the evil and
the punishment? Simile.
If a Colonel should command a party of his Regiment to march out upon a
design, and afterward cause them to be condemned at a Council of War for being
out of their Quarters, were not this unequal? My beloved Friends, That Moddel
of Righteousness and Justice which is in Mankind, is but a glimpse or beam of
the God of Righteousness placed in the creature, having allusion to the
Apostles words, The Foolishness of God is Wiser then the wisdom of men; then I
say, That the unrighteousness of God (if such a thing could be imagined) is
more righteous then the righteousness of men: So then, you may perceive how
obscaene and absurd it is, to conclude God the Author of sin and punishment in
the Creature; this is the only property and practice of Satan, man's adversary,
and not of God, who is a Lover of all mankind: And I give my judgment, That the
Lord cannot be said (without absurdity) to harden Pharaohs heart, as by putting
therein a malevolent disposition contrary to his will; but the Lord ceasing to
exercise further patience, and his goodness standing in the abstract unto
Pharaoh; in that sense God is said to harden Pharaohs heart. Simile.
A man that is towing a Barge up the river, letting go the cord, is said to
send the vessel down the water, but it is the stream that carries the Barge
away: So the Lord ceasing to draw, or make use of cords and administrations of
his Love, (the creature being left in the corrupt channel of his own
affections) is hurried down the stream to destruction, by force of the strong
current of his lustful inclinations. Neither do we read, that the Lord does
inflict this Judgment of desertion upon Pharaoh, or any others, till a manifest
opposition does appear against the way and light of God made known in them:
Take the Apostles words before cited, Even as they did not like to retain God
in their own knowledge, so God gave them over to a reprobate sense, etc. And
touching Pharaoh the Scripture reads thus: And when Pharaoh saw there was
respite, He Hardened his Own heart, Exodus 8.15.
and hearkened not unto them, etc. Unto which you may add the argument that the
Priests of the Philistines used to their Princes, about sending away the Ark of
God to its own place; Judge. 6 6.
Wherefore then do you harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh
hardened their hearts, and would not let the people go, etc. By the harmony of
these Scriptures you plainly see, That the evil qualification, viz. hardness in
Pharaohs heart, did arise from the aversness of his own will; and as the Wrath
of man shall turn to the praise of God, so the Lord got him a name upon Pharaoh
and his Host, and rewarded their stubbornness in the Red Sea; and so I hope my
Doctrine will appear firm, viz. It is the good Will and etc.

If God gave Christ to All, and Christ dyed for All, 6 Object.
then All of necessity must be saved, for GOD, or CHRIST, did nothing in vain.

I reply, That although God gave Christ to All, Answ.
and Christ dyed for all, yet the benefit of this act in Gods Love, and Christ's
indefinite Tender of Salvation is appropriated only to Believers, such persons
as through faith apprehend the same: God so loved the World, that Whosoever
Believes, John 3.12.
etc. By these words you may perceive, that although the act in God was free,
and Tender in Christ Universal, yet the benefit is conditional through
believing: As for instance, Simile.
God has placed the Sun in the Firmament to be a light to all the World, and
there is sufficiency of light distilled from the Sun for the whole Universe;
does it therefore follow, that men closing their eyes, or walking under ground
in dark places, receive the benefit of this light? And thus I hope you see the
vanity of this Objection.

7 Object.
Well, suppose it be granted, That Gods Love, or Christ's Tender, be proposed
indefinitely to All, yet when you say the benefit thereof is conditional on
believing, does not this Doctrine establish Free Will?

Answ.
I humbly conceive there cannot be imagined to be in any creature such a thing
as Free Will, being God alone is Independent, acting from a principle of his
own Mind, (For Who has been his Counselor?) but man mediately from a power of
God. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that
works in you, Phil. 1.
etc. Here the creature is concerned in action, and God in power. A Tree is
concerned in fruit-bearing, and the planter in manuring of the same. Take a
similitude of the Vineyard, spoken in reference to the children of Israel, in
Isai. 6. which after God had planted, hedged and manured, putting it into a
capacity of bringing forth good grapes, complaint is made of the Vineyard, that
it brought forth wild grapes: By this allusion you may gather, That God gives
man a capacity to act, and man according to this capacity is to make
improvement: Mark it well, you never read of any condemned for want, but
mis-use of power; as you may observe from the Parable of the Talents in the
Gospel.

8 Object.
If GOD be good unto All, why then does He condemn some?

Answ.
The condemnation of ungodly persons is no diminution of his goodness, no more
then the just expulsion of a profane person in a godly family does prejudice
the reputation of the religious governor thereof: The wickedness of the
creature cannot prevaricate the goodness of God; as the Apostle has it in
another sense, Unbelief cannot make the promise of none effect. Simile.
A General is good to his Army, though he sentenceth death to the Mutineers
thereof.

In all humility I leave my Answer to these Objections to be seriously
ruminated according to the strength of your understandings in the things of
God, and crave favor to be patiently heard in what shall be offered in the
applicatory part of this Discourse.

Thus far we have gone, viz.

Text. And the times of this ignorance God winked at, Sum of all.
but now he commands all men every where to repent.

Doctr. It is the good will and pleasure of Almighty God that every Creature
should come to the attainment of Life and Salvation.

1 Reason grounded upon Gods Propriety in all Creatures. 2 Reason grounded upon
the several Invitations of God to Mankind. 3 Reason grounded upon the sorrow
God is said to take up upon the Creatures ruin.
The Objections with their Answers you have heard, now I come to Uses.

As Observation is the life of Understanding, so Application is the very Marrow
of all preaching: As every line points at the Center, so all Sermons center in
Application.

Now if it be an undeniable truth, That it is the good will and pleasure of
Almighty God that every Creature should come to the attainment of Life and
Salvation, what Use then may you and I gather out of this?

First, This may be an Application of Comfort to every Soul here present, when
he considers the extent of the goodness of God: 1 Use.
Is God good? and good unto All? Did Christ suffer? and suffer for All? Oh what
comfort may the consideration of this be to our Spirits? How should we be
ravished with admiration? as Paul was of his thoughts of these words, viz. That
God had concluded all under sin, that he might have mercy upon All: Oh the
height and the depth of the goodness of God! How unsearchable is his wisdom,
and his ways past finding out! Now we may say with Peter, God is no Respecter
of persons; for he is not the God of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also.
What say you to this, ye fleshly Abrahamites? Cease your boasting: The
partition wall is broken down; She that was desolate has more children then
she that has an husband, which children cry, Abba, Father; the Spirit
witnessing with their spirit, that they are the sons of God; if sons, th^n
heirs of God, and coheirs with Jesus. Hallelujah.

2 Use.
In the second place, May not this reprove the generality of the Clergy (so
called) whose teachings are, That God is good indeed, but it is but to some;
Christ dyed indeed for the whole world, but it is to be understood for some of
the world, which had a prerogative before they were born. If the Apostle Paul
or Peter, when they went forth to preach the Gospel, should have told their
hearers, My Masters, We are sent to preach the Gospel of Salvation unto you,
but there is not one amongst ten that is permitted to receive the benefit
thereof; we are commanded to declare Jesus Christ unto you to be the Savior of
the world, but you must understand he dyed only for a few persons that were
elected from all eternity: I marvel what entertainment or comfort such a
doctrine could have of their Auditory. Simile.
Suppose you and I, with four or five hundred more, were slaves in Turkey, if a
Merchant should come and say, That the States of England had taken care to
release some few of us, but the names of the parties to be released that was
not known, what could this yield to the prisoners more than a doubtful hope?
But if the States Agent should tell the enslaved fellow Natives, Here is a
Release come for you all, will not every prisoner joyfully conclude, If for
all, then for me also?

The Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation (simply as persons) leaves the
creature in a continual suspense, sometimes he thinks he has a right to
Christ by election, at another time he is at a stand in himself, questioning
what reason he has to think so, when the Doctrine of Gods Free Grace to All
gives him credence of Gods Universal Love to the World, or all Mankind, and
consequently unto him: The consideration whereof puts him upon a duty of
striving to make his Calling and Election (in that love) sure by good works.

Again, Mark, my beloved Friends, how many Absurdities this Doctrine of
Predestination and Reprobation of Mankind (simply as persons) casts upon
Almighty GOD.

1 Absurdity.
First, The Doctrine of Reprobation charge God with Injustice: Abraham, in
capitulation with God about the destruction of Sodom, gathers this
conclusion, That thou should destroy the righteous with the wicked, that be
far from thee: Which words, though spoken by interrogation, yet contain a
positive conclusion, viz. That it is far from God to condemn the righteous with
the wicked, and the Judge of all the World will judge righteously: Now if
Judgment take place before the Fact, or condemnation precede the being of the
person, is it not to charge God with maladministration of Justice? And as the
Apostle has it, Where there is no Law, there is no Transgression; and sin is
variation from a rule, which is transgression of a Law.

Secondly, The Doctrine of Reprobation of men (as persons) charge God with
Partiality: 2 Absurdity.
One of the ill consequences that should follow a King in Israel was, that he
should make some of their sons Captains, others he should make Cooks and
Confectionaries, without any consideration had to the qualification in persons
unto such an office, only such men were appointed unto such employments, merely
because it was his will: As great personages will dignifie one man's child with
the name of his Page, and others must be his Foot-Boys. If you will believe
Peter, God is no such Respecter of persons, but he that serves him shall be
accepted; and whosoever fancyeth Election and Reprobation in God (simply considered
as persons) rendereth God partial, and a Respecter of persons.

Thirdly, Remisness.
The Doctrine of Predestination and Reprobation of men (simply as persons) is a
Doctrine of Remisness, Security and Carelessness: Take a creature when he has
concluded himself to be a predestined person, and so consequently of
necessity must be saved; if Conscience checketh him ever so much for his uneven
walking, he presently flies to this Refuge, The best of Gods Children are
subject to fall: God sees no sin in his People: Whom God loves, he loves to
the end; (all which Scriptures are true in their places, but not Arguments for
Remisness.)

Again, A man that concludes himself an elected person, Security.
though he wilfully continues in a notorious sin, upon check of Conscience
(which is the witness of God in us) he sings his Soul this Requiem, Lot,
David, and Peter had their gross failings, yet Children of GOD; and so fancieth
to himself Security.

Once more, Take a profane person, Carelessness.
when he has been taught this Doctrine, That some (as persons) were chosen to
life, and others appointed to death, merely out of Gods decree, and without any
respect had to obedience and disobedience: what (...) conclusions does this man
draw? If I shall be saved, I shall be saved; if I was appointed to be damned, I
shall be damned; what need I care how I spend my time? Was not the Thief upon
the Cross a Chosen Vessel? And thus, poor Soul, he bolstereth himself in his
careless walking, which if it were taught him, That God Electeth or Chooses
the Righteous man to himself, and rejects and turns the Ungodly into Hell,
he would soon endeavor to turn over a new leaf, and no more take up these
preposterous expressions (used in our generation) concerning a lewd person, I
am sorry God gave him no more grace; and of one that commits felo-in-se
becoming his own executioner, That he was born to such an end, and ordained so
to do; but rather speak the Apostles language, where he says, Romans 1.21.
That when men know God, and worship him not as God, hence it is that they
become vain in their imaginations, committing evil with greediness.

Lastly, It contradicts Scripture. 2 Samuel 22.27.
Lastly, The Doctrine of Election and Reprobation, (simply as persons)
contradicts the whole scope and generality of Scripture: With the upright man
thou will show thy self upright; with the pure thou will show thy self pure;
with the froward thou will deal frowardly, 1 Samuel 2 30.
etc. And touching Eli's sons, who were of the lineage of Aaron, see what God
says, Them that honor me, I will honor, and them that despise me, shall be
light esteemed: And (as I give my judgment) that Doctrine which John the
Baptist preached, Mat* 3.
should be seasonable for our times; Now is the ax laid to the root of the
tree; and every tree that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewed down,
and cast into the fire: And so to put men upon trial of their faith in the
Gospel, by performance of Works answerable to the Gospel. The Papists Incidit
in Sillam qui vult, etc.
Silla was to set Works supereminent above Faith; I wish the Protestants
Charibdis be not to erect Faith without Works: The Apostle James makes them
paramount in Abraham, demonstrating that Faith and Works ought to be equivalent
in us. Now I have done with this subject; I crave (my Text leading me thereto)
a word or two by digression.

In the times of this ignorance God winked, etc. From which observe, with me,
the Apostles method; you understand whom he spoke to, a Heathenish people,
wholly given to Idolatry; yet take notice with what mildness of spirit he
reproved them, uses no railing at all, but in love, by way of argument,
convinces the vanity of their worship, telling them (by way of encouragement)
that God (...) willing to pass by, or wink at, their former ignorance, provided
now they would be changed in their minds and repent: wherein you may observe,
that the Gospel of Christ is to be declared by way of meekness and affable
persuasions: The Apostle has an expression, 2 Cor. 5.20. Now we are
Ambassadors of Christ; we pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled unto God.
May not this then reprove the Legal Teachers in our generation, who present the
terrors of the Law to reduce persons to the obedience of the Gospel; and by
coercive power (if they had it) beat men's spirits into a conformity: Christ
satisfied Peter that his Kingdom was not of this world; From which I apprehend
we may gather, That majesterial or worldly power has no cognizance over the
things of God.

Paul tells Timothy (who, as all conclude, was a famous Bishop) 2 Timothy 2.24,
25. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle; in meekness
instructing those that oppose themselves, if peradventure God will give grace
to repentance: How unsuitably then do those persons act, who (under pretense of
^Nab^th blasphemed, etc. only a slight to get his Vineyard. Cave C. O.
Heresy and Blasphemy) condemn men first, and give them time to repent
afterward?

Harken unto me ye fiery Zealots, let us reason the matter; suppose there were
in this Congregation one that is a Jew, pleading for a necessity of Sacrifices,
Circumcision, etc. Another a Turk, pleading the interest of Mahomet; A third of
Aristotle and Pythagoras his Judgment, denying both Diety and Resurrection: I
pray let me ask you this question; Is it not more Christian-like to instruct
these men then destroy them? Should not these poor Souls be objects of pity,
rather then fury, seeing they must all stand at the Judgment seat of Christ?
and to torment them before the time, is to do that to them, which (as I
understand Scripture) Christ permited not to be done unto Devils. Now if such
civility is to be used unto Aliens and Foreigners, who are Strangers in person
and Religion, will you that be fellow Natives desire Laws of cruelty to be
exercised upon those that are nearer by affinity, both in birth and judgment?

Again, Coercive power at the best makes men but Hypocrites, when persuasion
through love makes a change in the mind: and what is it to drive the person
of a man into a little outward conformity, when in his mind he is always free
to affect that which his judgment gives him to be truth? Simile.
A Lion chained is a Lion still; the chain mitigateth not, but exasperateth the
fierceness of the creature: Outward forcings only chain the out side, it is
love only that can change the mind.

Saint Paul exhorts Titus to be gentle, and show all meekness unto all men;
and by a self-experiment he encourages him to that duty: For, says he, Tit.
3. We our selves also were sometimes disobedient, serving diverse lusts, etc.
but after the kindness of the love of God appeared, etc. Then there was an
alteration: If the men of our generation, that style themselves Ministers of
the Gospel, had labored to beget love in the people toward God, by presenting
the Love of God in our Savior to the people, in a gentle and meek way,
according to the Gospel, the rent amongst themselves would not have bin so
great, and Bellum episcopale, hinc iliae lachrymae.
divisions of the people less.

One thing more observe from the connection of this Discourse; The precedent
Verses speak, that these Athenians worshipped the true God after an ignorant
way: As God may be truly worshipped by a form; so the true God is often
worshipped in a form, after a false manner: I pray God the whole Kingdom be not
guilty of it.

The outward deckings and adornments of you that hear me, speak forth a good
time, or some high It was Easter day in the afternoons Exercise.
day; but how fitted and prepared your hearts be for reception of the substance
of these formalities, God and your Consciences are your Judges: The Apostle
Paul tells the Colossians of us rising with Christ, as well as the rising of
Christ; Col. 3.1.
If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things that are above, etc.

To believe Christ in history, as to be born, dead, and risen again at
Jerusalem, Rome, Spain, France, acknowledge as much, yea, the Devils believe,
confess it, and tremble: but the Unity and participation in the mystery of this
history, is that which must be of Soul-concernment unto every one of you; Prove
your selves, whether you be IN the Faith or no; Know ye not, that except Jesus
Christ be IN you, you are reprobates?

If you know any thing of the new birth of Regeneration, or of Christ being
formed in us, by a manifestation of God in Our flesh, then you may keep
Christmas at Mid-Lent: Or if you know what it is to have your conversation in
Heaven, and understand that of the Apostle, Col. 2.12. Buried with him in
Baptism, wherein also you are risen with Him by faith, through the operation of
God; then you may keep Easter and Good Friday all of a day. I know many of you
here have this morning observed the solemnity of the Passover, by eating, or
breaking bread, (God forbid that I should discourage you in any thing that you
apprehend to foe of God in this Form;) but give me leave to declare, what Bread
the Apostle would have the Corinthians observe the Passover with; 1 Cor. 5.8.
Therefore let us keep the feast, not with the Leaven of malice and wickedness,
but with the unleavened bread of Sincerity and Truth: And further, when he
speaks as to wise men, 1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of blessing, which we bless, is it
not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ? By which expressions you may observe the
Apostles drift was, to fix their hearts upon the Substance, which is Spirit and
Life in it self, and the very Soul of the Sacrament.

One word more to the Military part of this Auditory, for whom this Discourse
was (more precisely) intended: Gentlemen, having been your fellow-Soldier in
the Nations cause, I take the more boldness and freedom to speak a word of
Exhortation to you: You have heard what has been pressed, viz. Gods Goodness
unto Mankind; The consideration whereof (taking impression upon our spirits)
will be a strong motive and provocation to us for to repent, and be changed in
our minds, from the love of the world to the love of God: If this duty be to
be practiced by all, then more especially by you that be Soldiers: I have
observed one notable stratagem of Satan, in transporting the mind of the
creature above its proper sphere: Take it for granted (in the generality) that
those societies of men that are in most danger of death, are most careless in
their living; Quatuor aut septem si sit latissima ^aeda.
Seamen and Soldiers, in what ha^ard do they lead their lives! yet how vainly
do they spend their time, and how improvidently fitted for death! My Masters, I
knew the time when the hearts of well-affected were refreshed to hear the
goodness of God manifested in your meetings; but how have you sadded the
spirits of good men, to observe so much Apostasy in you of this nature! has
the power of God in you (through your friends compliance) not rendered you in
subjection to the Votes of man? Take heed how you flight the Ordinances of
Almighty God: Has God given you your lives in the field, and will you destroy
your Souls in your quarters? Has God fought for you against man, and will you
take Satan's part against God? Sin, or disorderly conversation, is Rebellion
against the Gospel: Beware then, that while you are Soldiers and Conquerors of
men, you prove not fighters and rebels against God: You are ready to say, The
Cavaliers were Swearers, Drunkards, and Oppressors of the Kingdom, and so God
cut them off: Do you think long to prosper, if ye shall begin to tread in their
steps?

It Is too much given to us all, that when any remarkable Judgment falls upon
any of our fellow creatures, to foster and cherish up our own spirits, in
apprehension of self-excelling righteousness, and not only revive, but censure
the iniquity of the afflicted: For prevention of this male-application of our
brethrens misery, Christ teaches the Jews what observation they must make of
Herod's massacring the Galileans, and those that perished by the downfall of a
Tower, suppose you that these be greater sinners, Except ye repent, you all
shall likewise perish: If others for their wickedness have been made spectacles
of Gods Justice to you, take heed, lest through deviation of righteous
principles, you render not your selves objects of Gods fury unto others: Be
confident of this, God will not be mocked by you, or any generation of men
whatsoever; and it is not strength (though united with policy) but
righteousness (coupled with sincerity) that knits your interest in the people:
I am drawn forth in the bowels of my affection to speak this home to you, not
to shame you, but as my beloved friends, so to warn you: And let me put this
one truth in your bosoms; The augmentation of Gods mercy, in the conquest of
your enemies, will prove an aggravation of Gods Justice to be inflicted upon
you, if you improve not the end of these Victories to the glory of God, and
welfare of the people, unto whom you (so solemnly) stand engaged. The Prophet
Amos, upon Isreal's prevarication, uses this expression, Amos 3.2. You only
have I known of all the Families of the earth; I will punish you for your
iniquities.

As Gods love gives cognizance in Mercy; so Apostasy augments Propriety in
Judgment. I shut up all in the words of Samuel to the people, 1 Samuel 12.24.
Fear the Lord, serve him in truth, and consider how great things he has done
for you; But if you shall do wickedly, you shall perish, both ye, and your
King. So say I to you Gentlemen of the Soldiery, Let the Lord be your dread,
serve him in the sincerity of your spirits, keep the great deliverances he has
given you in thankful remembrance; and take heed you be not weary of well
doing; For if in stead of serving God, you serve your lusts, and in stead of
making your boast of God, you make your boast of your Sword, and your Bow, etc.
and do so wickedly, Ye shall perish, and your Commanders also.

Reader, Upon a Conference in London touching the Contents of this Treatise, I
was rendered one of Mr Goodwins Disciples, of whom I have no further cognizance,
saving that I was Febr. 11. present at a Dispute betwixt Mr Goodwin and Mr
Simson, where (notwithstanding the prejudice offered by the Moderators, and Mr
Powel) the truth of Mr Goodwins Position, and his abilities in the management
thereof, was sufficiently demonstrated.

FINIS.

