A Lash for a Liar: OR, THE STAYNER STAINED.

BEING An Answer to a false and scandalous Pamphlet, Entitled The Triumph
Stained.

Lately published by Mr. GEORGE MASTERSON, (pretended Preacher of the Gospel
at Shore-ditch.) Wherein is contained A clear Discovery of the said Mr.
Mastersons Treachery and falsehood, there being no less then xxj.

Lies in the compass of One sheet of the said Pamphlet, as appears by the
testimony of many honest men, given under their hands, and presented to the
Parliament, Febr. 21. 1647.

Written by Jah: Norris, a hater of Treachery, and an opposer of tyranny and
injustice.

Prove. 14. 25. and 19. 20. and 26. 22, 25. The words of a Talebearer are as
wounds, and when he speaks fair, believe him not; for there are seven
Abominations in his heart. An ungodly witness scorneth judgment, and a
deceitful witness speaks Lies -- London, Printed for J. HORNISH, Febr. 22.
1647.

Truths triumph, vindicated* OR, THE STAYNER STAINED.
Being a Reply to a Scandalous lying Pamphlet, set forth by GEORGE MASTERSON,
pretended Preacher of the Gospel at Shore-ditch.

WHen I perused the scandalous Pamphlet of Mr. Masterson, and remembered what
Coat he wears, I could scarce free my self from suspicion that he was one of
the lying Spirits that came out of the mouth of the false Prophet to deceive
Kings or States, he comes forth with a deceivablenesse of unrighteousness
working lying Wonders or wondrous lies; and I held a dispute within me, whether
I should Vindicate the reputation of that worthy Gentleman Mr. Wildman, whom he
endeavors to asperse and blemish. Sometimes I thought Mr. Wildman himself
would answer him, but my reason gave a sudden check to those thoughts, telling
me it was beneath the honor of a man in whom is so much worth, to struggle
with a false accuser, from whose Lips and Pen, not only wisdom bu^ truth
itself is banished; sometimes I thought there was nothing in his Papers but
what was despicable to every eye* and that the smoke of his calumnies would
vanish of it-selfe; yet lest he should impudently insult, I shall endeavor
that every one may understand what manner of man he is*

I shall observe his own order and begin with his Title, which is The Triumph
Stained: And if you ask the Author whose triumph; he will answer you in the
next line, Truths Triumph: and if you further question by whom* he will tell
you (toward the latter end) by GEORGE MASTERSON, Preacher of the Gospel, etc.
And now I beseech you Gentlemen, judge whether it corresponds with the
profession of a Preacher of the Gospel, to stain the just Triumphs of Truth.

But surely the Gentleman has received the mark in his forehead by the
imposition of the holy Romish hands by succession, and truth is become his
pretended Merchandise, and he is Angry that any one who has not received the
same mark in his hand or forehead, should presume to name Truth; It being
proper only to men of his own tribe to buy and sell that Merchandise.

But let me trace you a little further, A Pamphlet so called, etc. Truly before
I have done with you, I believe I shall clear it to the eye of all that are
ingenious, that it was not only so called* but was indeed really the same, and
if I mistake not, you do your self confess it and much more. The title of
the book you pretend to stain, was Truths Triumph, or Treachery Anatomized,
being a Discovery of the false and treacherous information of Mr. Masterson,
etc. And you your self acknowledge to have given in to the Lords at their
Bar, Ianuar. 18. an Information of dangerous and bloody consequence against
L. Col. Lilburne, and Mr. John Wildman: What was of dangerous and bloody
consequence, The Information of Mr. Masterson, against whom? L. C. Lilburne and
Mr. I. Wildman? So that not only out of the mouths of two or three witnesses
but out of your own mouth you shall be jugded.

And now give me leave to ask you this question, Mr. Masterson did it; or does
it become George Masterson a Preacher of the Gospel, to have a hand in such a
treacherous bloody design to make a bloody and dangerous information without a
word of truth in it against any though his enemies and Heathens, much less
those which neither he nor any other can adjudge less then faithful, and as
deep Proficients in the School of Christianity, as he himself, the pretended
Preacher of the Gospel which leads me to the next part of his Title, where he
(to set the fairer gloss upon his Treacherous and faithless, bloody and
dangerous Information) styles himself an Evangelist, or Preacher of the
Gospel at Shore-ditch etc. If an Evangelist or Preacher, where is your
Commission? Are you of Paul or Apollo, or of Cephas, or of the Twelve? It Is to
be feared (nay to be proved) that you are of neither; for they were never
Informers, nor Persecuters, nor false accusers of the Brethren; Christ said *,
Mark. 13. 9, 10.
That they should be taken by men and carried before the Councels; not that
they should take others and carry them and accuse them? before the Councels. A
Preacher, should be a preacher of peace and reconciliation* not of division
and dissension, a declarer of glad tidings* not of Bloody and dangerous
Informations? But let us examine a little further; Mr. Masterson says, he is a
Preacher of the Gospel, I wish he would tell us what Gospel he is a Preacher
of now? For sure I am he was a Preacher of the Bishops Gospel, within a few
years he was a Levite, but that growing out of fashion, he altered his cut,
and became a Gadite, and rambled (some say) to Linne Regis, where he continued
so long as it was Royal, but that being reformed he was reformed also; and
grew as zealous for the Scotch Presbytery as any of those, whose Religion was a
fat Benefice; by which seeming show of Sanctity and the help of a special
friend, in or about Shore-ditch, he got to be admitted not to be pretended (
Pastor or Curate) but real Priest of Shore-ditch; where he has (by his own
confession) endeavored to weed out the Nettles (and plant Elders in the room
thereof) until such time as the Army, with an Independent Axe hewed them down
by the roots, and then Mr. Masterson was enforced to borrow some seeds of
Independency of a dear friend of his in Coleman-street, who had enough to
spare, to begin a new Plantation! In which he has made so large a progress,
that he is now become Goodwins darling, and shall be Canonized for his zeal to
the cause, in his Calendar of Worthies.

But to leave his Title, and proceed to his Proeme* wherein he with gilded
oratory seems to adorn fair Truth, he calls her The eldest daughter of
Heaven, of blood with the Son of God made man, etc. and yet bespots her
afterward with the foulest calumnies that either envy or falsehood can invent;
he manifests more of a Poet then a Preacher, in his Vivat illa! as he calls it;
and truly, J think it were better and fitter employment for him, of the two;
to write Songs then Sermons.

But leaving his Proem, which is stuffed with nothing but impertinencies, and
inconsistencies, being Billinsgate, or rather language of the Spittle
Houndsditch, or Hogsdon, (only taking notice of his justification of himself
in the latter end thereof;) to which I may be bold to affirm that, His own
conceit is greater then the report of others; for many (nay most) have,
always reputed him a politic Priest, and a flattering Orator, but few have or
do adjudge him either a conscientious Pastor* or a man doing that himself
which with such earnestness he presses as a duty upon others; He is indeed
very zealous in outward appearance, just Priest-like boasting of his
anointing, but indeed a very careless Practitioner; He is one of those that
Preaches another should not bear false witness, but he may and does? another
should not lie, but he does? (witness 21 palpable lies in the following
Discourse, which will evidently appear to be no less then so many treacherous
lying forgeries pieced up together to make an Information; To the end that he
might appear indeed (not a Preacher of the Gospel) but a servant to the State.

It seems Mr. Masterson has two Trades to live by, and I confess it is good
wisdom; A Preacher of the Gospel* that is a servant to the Church, and a
servant to the State, that is an Informer; I wonder which is the most
beneficial; are you a servant in Ordinary, or Extraordinary? Extraordinary
sure, for I do not read or hear (though many Priests have pretended to be
reformers) that they were ever so base before as to turn informers. But it may
be the promise of a better benifice or of be made a Statesman in that Common
wealth of Church Governors, and to receive four shillings per diem, did
incite you to do this so remarkable service, truly if it were so, you are to be
excused, for charity begins at home, and truly such a stipend and honor
beside, has corrupted greater Zealots then your self; and if Judas could be
seduced to betray his Master for thirty pieces of silver, well might you betray
your brethren for three hundred.

You take great exception that you should have the name of Treachery fastened
upon you, as if you did not indeed deserve it; but truly I believe, when it
shall be considered that Mr. Masterson came privately in to the Room, and
stood sneaking in a corner to hear what was said, and neither asked a
question, nor objected against what was delivered or spoken, but caught at
several broken sentences, and patcht them together to make up an Information;
truly I believe in the eye of reason, this demeanor cannot deserve a fairer
name then premeditated Treachery, or a Design to betray; if any advantage
could be gotten.

But leaving your Proem I come now to your Information it self, which being
long and full of eyes, will take me up more time then I am willing to bestow
upon such a worthless subject as your self, or relation; but because I would
be loath that your lies should pass for current, as so many Oracles of truth;
I will trace you a little further. And first, In your relation you affirm,
that at a meeting in Well Yard, and L. C. Lilburne, and John Wildeman (with
many others were debating a Petition, when you and Robert Malb^n came in) and
at the Bar he affirmed that Mr. Wildman was speaking of tumults in Wiltshire,
which is a clear contradiction.



Lilburne with saying, that when the House should be fit to take an impression
of justice, we should force them to grant us those things which we desire. All
which is as contrary to truth, as light and darkness, for what was spoken in
relation to the particular charge was in relation to the votes of the Houses
against the King; In which he said, If the Houses did proceed according to
those votes, they would be necessitated to act according to those Principles in
the Petition, and to grant the desires therein contained.

Now give me leave to demonstrate the irrationality of Mr. Masterson in laying
such words to the charge of L. Col. Lilburne, that he should endeavor to
persuade the people, that the Parliament should be forced to grant their
desires, when both he and all rational men know, that a forced act is no act,
and if the Parliament should be enforced to grant our desires, what were we
the better; since such a grant would be a greater grievance then a denial; as
for example. The ^at^ Ordinance for the Militia, being forced by violence from
the House, was null in it self, and they that obtained it in a much worse
condition then if they had never obtained it by such a way, when on the
contrary, had the Parliament, for their own safety been necessitated to pass
the said Ordinance, voluntarily of themselves, it had been effectual, and
yielded more safety and satisfaction to the persons desiring the same: so that
it is not only false but irrational, for Mr. Masterson, to affirm, that was
so spoken by L. Col. Lilburne, was intended in any such way, or bore any such
sense, as the Informer maliciously puts upon the Gentlemen, having both of them
been evident abhorrers of that force.

Lilburne did affirm, that the people of London had appointed ten or twelve of
them Commissioners, etc. and that the honest blades in Southwarke, did not like
the word Commissioners, etc.

This is another falsehood, for he said so many were appointed in the nature of
a Committee, and that the honest Blades in Southwarke did not like that name,
etc.

John an Oaks, viz. a plain man, namely that he should say to Mr. Lilburne,
that the people being wicked, (if by sending your Agents abroad, etc.) which is
altogether false; there being never any such thing as sending, or intending to
send Agents, the method observed in the carrying of it on being before
prescribed: as you may plainly see in the letter which you have printed
directed into Kent, etc. observe how he composed his information (omitting and
adding at pleasure) as he does his Sermons; for his own advantage, for the
truth is one at the meeting, hearing of the tumults of the Poor in Wiltshire,
enquired how they that were accounted Independents, etc. should be safe, in
case tumults should be more general.

Lilburnes answer though not as he spokely it, but as it will best serve your
own turn. And that appears by your own words; at the Bar, and in your
book, at the Bar you did affirm that Mr. Lilburne should say* That he that
had the Petition in his hand, and a blue Ribband in his Hat, should not need to
fear his throat cutting. And now in your book you play the jugler, and salve
up the sore of your stinking memory, with an (or) this Petition in your hand,
will be as good as a blue Ribband in your Hat; to preserve your throat from
cutting. And herein I see the Proverb verified, viz. That a liar had need of an
excellent memory, for you are in two mistakes already; for said Mr. Lilburne,
if God should not please to prevent a general confusion, yet he was confident,
that those who should be known to have promoted the Petition, which was of
equal concernment unto all, should be most secure, then he that should wear a
blue Ribband in his Hat, etc.

Crumwell, was Harrie, and now you come, with this Gentleman his son is of his
Christian name (as they call it) nay it is you that call it, for it is your
trade to make others Christians, though you your selves are worse then Jews,
for they had a veil before their eyes, but you hold the truth in
unrighteousness.

a noble Feltons resolution, when the words were: he was resolved to become
another Felton, etc. and thus you endeavor to insinuate unto the people, that
Mr. Lilburne did approve of Peltons Act* in committing murder; which I am
confident his soul abhorres.

Wildman, viz. That he knew three other men that at the same time had taken up
the same resolution, which is altogether false, as will afterward appear by
the testimony of several persons of as known intergrity, and better
conversation then any this Informer can or does produce. Wildman should say, he
would never trust honest man again for Crumwells sake: which how unlikly let
any man judge, for if Mr. Wildman was resolved never to trust honest man more,
because one had deceived him, with whom would he converse afterward? certainly
he must converse with knaves* and if the deceitpfull dealing of one seeming
Saint was so irksome to him, what would the palpable and avowed dishonesty of
so many professed Devils? he had not need to converse with Priests* for they
are generally a very compendium of deceit, nothing but seeming sanctity, they
seem to be clothed with Lambs Skins; but they are indeed ravening Woolves. I
believe Mr. Masterson you were mistaken, Mr. Wildman said he would never trust
Priest more for your sake: but to be serious, he did say that he should never
trust any man upon bare professions for L. Geralls sake* and therefore I advise
you when you intend to inform next, trust not to your memory but take notes
(as you do when you take upon you to preach) for if you cannot remember the
truth which you pretend to know, you will never remember a falsehood which you
take by Hear say.

It was the most rational piece that they had seen: In which particular you do
most grossly pervert the sense, and only patch up several broken sentences,
together spoken at several times, and upon several occasiosn, viz. that the
Petition was of such equal concernment unto all; That the very Malignants
would be so far from opposing it, that (setting aside some few that were
link unto the Kings interest, by personal engagement) many would join in the
promoting of it.

And now Mr. Masterson is this such a transcendent crime in your bill of
sinners, for a man to promote a Petition that tends to the uniting even
enemies, much less friends and brethren, who have been deluded to a bloody
contest each with other and have been almost consumed in a flame of you, and
your brethrens the Priests kindling? certainly if you were as you pretend a
preacher of the Gospel, you would preach reconciliation to the Gentiles, and
peace to Jerusalem, and not repine at those, nay endeavor the ruin of those
that labor to heal the wound that you have made, by your dividing principles.

But the irrationality of this will appear, when the great contrariety betwixt
the Principles of those Gentlemen, and the principles of those which they call
Malignants, are put into the balance together: for there is an absolute
inconstancy betwixt them* the one by that Petition endeavoring to destroy the
poor of the King, in relation to his dissent to laws, and the other
endeavoring to maintain it.



A bad Informer; And a worse memory: for at the Bar you affirmed, that Mr.
Wilaman spoke these words, and this was all you could charge him with, and yet
now in your Pamphlet you affirm that Lieutenant Col. Lilburne spoke them;
what, contradiction upon contradiction? This is as good, as a former passage,
one or other or both affirmed* etc. Is not this a fine way of accusing; some
body said something, Mr. Musterson or some body, or both, did tell a lie at the
Lords House* and one and twenty in the House of Commons: by which you may see,
he is his Crafts-master* he has taken his degrees* and is a perfect proficient
in the art of hyperbolizing; for this is as gross a deviation from the truth*
as possible may be, as is apparent by the following attest of several honest
men which were at the meeting, given in to the House of Commons under their
hands* etc.

page you have these words; George Masterson; etc. now if it be an account to a
syllable it is not only the sum or sense, but the totum or whole of the
matter; But if you please to call to mind you may remember that you affirmed at
the Commons Bar that Mr. Lilburne did say, that they used the name of the
Parliament in the Petition, but at a cloak or color, till they could heighten
the spirits of the people, to rise and cut their throats; but it seems your
conscience has given your tongue the lie in that particular, and in many more,
or else your witness will not stand to you in it, and now therefore you go
about to mince the matter, and flam us off with a story of a Cock and a Bull; I
cannot omit your subtle aspersing the Parliament, by your publishing this
relation of yours, for let any rational man put all that you have set down,
and laid unto the charge of those gallant men, into the evenest balance, and
weight them against the stricktest Law, and all will not amount to so great a
crime, as deserves the name of misdeameanour, muchlesse of treasonable, and
destructive; especially Mr. Wildman, to whom he lays nothing. And what
indignity do yea put upon the Parliament, that they should upon such an
Information commit men to prison; no no Mr. Masterson, certainly this is not an
account to a syllable, for it is notoriously known, that your information was
stuffed with such dangerous and inveterate premeditated charges, as that
honorable house could not but apprehend great cause of fear, and your
impudent persisting* (being once engaged) enforced you to speak that then
which now you shame to own, and truly when men consult with rage, not reason*
they are often hurried to such extremes, as not only occasion danger, but
shame also.

Curat of Windham, and pretended* Gentleman of the life Guard, etc. for the
first, I dare affirm that it is but a pretense* there neither being, nor ever
was the least colorable ground for any such aspersion, he might as well and
better affirm, that you George Masterson was not only a pretended, but a real
rebel in Linne Regis, when it was kept against the Parliament, and that now
(though you were a Presbyterian*) you are now a seeming Independent, and a
real hipocrite, And for the second, They at know him can testify that he was
more then a pretended Gentleman of the Life Guard: and only discerted them when
they discerted righteousness, and though not in the fighting days, yet Mr.
Masterson know he has undergone as evident hazards in fights, as most of
those, and that he is so much of man, that he dare cudgel your Canonical
Coat into better manners, and then you will have little reason to surfeit your
spleen, or make your self merry, etc. suport the Authority and honor of the
House of Commons.

And because it is so evident to all the world, you wave i^, and only fall upon
some single expressions spoken in relation to his own imprisonemt, and these
you would enforce, as so many arguments to prove that he did not really desire
or endeavor to support the Authority aforesaid.

As if Mr. Masterson should say, Mr. Wildman does indeed by promoting that
Petition, endeavor to invest the house of Commons with the supreme and sole
law-giving power, but because (according to the present state of affairs) he
will not yield to be imprisoned, upon the lying, malicious information of a
single Priest, contrary to the Parliaments own declarations, and the
established Law of the Land, viz. without having a legal ^^ime laid to his
charge, or a legal Mitimus; which the law of the land directs: therefore he
does not endeavor to support the Authority of Parliament; believe it a good
conclusion, an Orthedox observation, but if you raise no truer conclusions for
the instruction of your Parrish, then you do for the Information of the
kingdom, truly you will scarce deserve the tenth of the Piggs, much less of
the proffits of those which you exercise your trade amongst, I mean of
Preaching, (not of Informing, for I believe you will be found a man of so
corrupt a memory) that the Parliament will do by you, as you said Mr Wildman
would do by L. G. Crumwell; namely, never trust a Priest more for your sake,
and truly if they consider all, they have little reason, for if ever they did
any thing whereof the Kingdom have cause to complain, sure I am, you and your
brethren were the promoters and procurers of it.

Wildman confessed many things which L. C. Lilburne, denied etc. which is a
most notorious falsehood, for they did neither of them differ as touching the
passages at the meeting in any thing, but only L. C. Lilburne did declare more
at large what he himself had spoken at the meeting, then Mr. Wildman did, he
mentioning nothing of Mr. Lilburne at the Bar* but only that passage
concerning L. G. Gru^well being promised to be made Earl of Essex, etc.

In the next place, you begin to heigthen your conceit with an argument of
satisfaction in the houses drawn from Mr. Wildmans Timidity, Tremblings 20 ly
and Astonishment: though he were not astonished* well he might have been, to
consider that a man of Mr. Mastersons coat, and profession should dare in the
face of the supreme Authority, to affirm such notorious falsehoods.

But this is only a mistake, for it was Mr. Masterson that was astonished, and
conscience staring in his face, forced him to such an ecstasy, that he had
forgotten what he had the day before so avowedly declared ad unguem; so that
the House was enforced to wring that out of him by questions which he had
before given in as matter of charge.

But on the contrary, Mr. Wildmans confidence and constancy mixed with respect
and civility, did so clearly appear to the whole House, that many of them were
surprised with delight and others with admiration. Neither would he have
voluntarily gone to the House (if he had feared the Informer or any crime he
could lay to his charge) and at the Bar related more concerning the Meeting
then the Informer could say against him.

But Mr. Wildmans constancy and courage in struggling with opposite Powers
(though in those whose frown would create another soul in the Informer, is to
all that know him so evident) That your scandalous report of his demeanor
herein cannot blemish his honor; but render your self an absolute Cretian, i.
e. Always a Liar.

Wildman delivered all that at the House of Commons which fills up the best
part of seven Pages.

As if you should say, I know it, but I would not have you believe it you must
not suppose etc. It seems you dare not affirm he did not speak so much, but
you are loath the People should believe he did, and therefore you charge them,
not to believe it: But you proceed to weaken the Peoples belief, and asperse
the manner of the delivery of Mr. Wildmans language at the Bar, which you say
was with such stumbling, interfeering* and downright Halting; fie Mr.
Masterson, the eloquence of the Genr. is well known, only his exact care to
relate the truth made him pause at several periods to recollect things though
you might power out your falsehoods without fear or wit: Know you not that the
best part of Oratory is Deliberation, and it was not timidity that caused Mr.
Wildman to take such deliberation, but he remembered the saying in the
Scripture, A wise man weighs his words in the balance, but the fool
speaks rashly.

And believe me Mr. Masterson, if you had followed his example, and been more
ready to hear then offer the sacrifice of Fools, I am confident you would
have been taken (if not for a better Statesman* yet for a better Preacher and
have kept up your repute in the world of being wise, though not honest, but
truly now you have discovered your want of both.

But you come at last to the catastrophe of all, namely that There was no need
of witnesses, for he appeared, (I Will spare your Greek for you have but a
little) self condemned, etc.

For what I wonder? All your Information against him amounts not to a crime
according to Law* and if not; by what will you condemn him? Do not you pass
a Sion sentence upon him I beseech you; and canonize him among your bundle of
Heretics; pray do not excommunicate him. And then he will be so far from
condemning himself, that it will be above the reach or power of your self or
all your Seminaries, (whose interest he is an enemy to) to condemn him.

In the last place, you seem to take exception, at his wonder, that he should
be committed without Witnesses, and that the witnesses should not be called in:
And here you take upon you to domineere, as if you had got the victory before
you have begun the fight.

First, you begin to question the truth of Mr. Wildmans relation touching your
Witnesses acknowledgement that nothing was spoken at the Meeting but what
tended to advance the Parliaments honor. etc.

Upon this you begin to run division, and in the first place you take upon you
to ask a question* Whether the two persons which the Informer brought as
pretended witnesses, confess this.

It is not yet evident that they have by Oath proved the contrary; but suppose
one of them did confess it before Witness, surely that is su^^icient to
clear the truth in that particular, and to demonstrate to the world that truth
is not so strong on your side as you would make them believe.

And I am so satisfied in the truth in this particular, that I shall make bold
to wipe off that stain from the face of Truths triumph, and return you scoff
with this advantage:

Truth now has got a Stain but it is your Lie*
Be spots her robe of godlike Majesty. --
In the second place you proclaim the Chastity of one of your witnesses, (It
seems you suspect the other for a Strumpet,) he is true Roman, you say; but
how shall we know it? He is but Secretary yet, neither to the Parliament, nor
us; for he never declared what or how much he could witness to be true of your
Bloody dangerous Information, O but he is valiant too, the man is not yet borne
that ever dare tamper with him about it; mark J beseech you, either Mr.
Masterson was never borne, and therefore a Monster; or else Mr. Wilison is a
Coward; now which of these will you believe, one is a Lie for a certain. Mr.
Masterson without doubt has tampered with him about it, or else he had never
given him that learned Certificate under his hand to support his weak credit
with the people. But what will you say Mr. Masterson, if your witnesses did
acknowledge what Mr. Wildman affirms without tampering withal, and to a man
of as much credit, and valor as any of those you so much boast of; This I will
undertake when you dare to make good, and truly then if your Witness will say
one thing and swear another, I shall hardly think him either valiant or
honest, but only one of your Disciples that can alter his tone, as occasion is
offered.

But waving the rest I come now to the pleasantest part of the story, viz. the
certificate, which methinks savours of the Priest, for sure I am; it was the
product of nothing less then spleen and inveteracy which no witnesses should
be fraught withal, But I desire the reader to observe how impertinent this is
to the proving of Mr. Mastersons relation true, he gives us a certificate, as
he pretends wherein Mr. Willison affirms he spoke not such and such words? but
I conceive it would have been more authentic, if he had got Mr. Willison and
his other witness to attest under their hands that this relation, or
information of Mr. Masterson was true: for truly priests are grown to that
pass now, that it is not safe to believe any thing they say without two or
three witnesses.

But by this time I think if you cast up your account you have little reason
to insult over Triumphant truth, especially when you shall have weighed this
following testimony, not of one, but of many men, both valiant and faithful,
who have done more for truths vindication in the face of authority, then either
your self or your witness dare do, in a private vestry to asperse her.

To the Honorable the chosen and be trusted Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in
PARLIAMENT Assembled* the humble Petition of diverse well-affected Freeborn
people of England, inhabiting in and about EAST, SMITHFIELD and WAPPING, and
other parts adjacent.
Shows.
THat as this Honorable House was chosen by the people to redress their
grievances; so we conceive it our native right to meet together to frame and
promote Petitions, for your better information of all such things as are by
experience found burdensome and grievous to the Commonwealth, That
accordingly this honorable House has declared, that it ought to receive
Petitions, though against things established by law. That in the use of this
our native and acknowledged right we (together with Lieutenant Col. John
L^lburne, and Mr. John Wildman) were met together in East Smithfield upon the
17. of January last, and discoursed upon these ensuing perticulars, viz. Some
scrupled the very pettioning this house any more, As a thing from wh^no^
[notwithstanding their having hazarded th^i^ lives for their freedoms] they had
hitherto received nothing but reproaches ^^d injuries, and were answered [by
one of the persons before named] to this effect. That it was their duty
always, and their wisdom, in this juncture of time, to use their utmost
diligence to procure the settlement of the Commonwealth, and that war, famine,
and confusion could no other way in [probability] be prevented. And it was
generally concluded, that the most visible interest of the people was, to
uphold the Honor of this House, and to preserve it from contempt.

2. There was likewise an occasional discourse about the right of the Lords to
the Law giving power, And herein was debated the danger of such an Arbytrary
Authority [as that in its own nature] residing in any persons during life, and
much more of its descending as an inheritance from Generation to Generation,
and something was added from our sad experience of the mischiefs which have
ensued hereupon, In particular, it was declared how their exercise of that
claim might be charged in reason with all the precious blood that has been
spilt in the late war, because the King had never had opportunity to levy an
Army against the People and Parliament, if the Lords ^^d not deferred so long,
after many solicitations by the Commons to pass the Ordinance for settling the
Militia.

3. It was also accidentally wondered at why Lieutenant General Cromwell and
Commissary General Ir^t^^, should now of lite urge that no more addresses
should be made to the King, whereas they had formerly pleaded, that he might be
brought in even with his negative voice. Whereupon Col. Lilburn related a
story, That a member of the House of Commons [having information from a
credible person, that the King had promised Lieut. General Cromwell, a blew
^^bo^d with a George, and the Earldome of Essex, besides other places of honor
and profit to his Son. Com. Genesis Ireton] resolved rather to become another
Felton then to suffer his Country to be so betrayed: But the Gentleman b^ing
dissuaded by friends, and intelligence her of being sent to the Lieut.
General, a Fast ensued at the Head quarters, and so he concurred with the
House in the la^^ Votes against the King. Nevertheless in Mr. Wildmans
opinion, he was necessitated into s^^h a turn, because the Scots have bid
Higher for the King then he had done, his offer was rejected, and they reli^d
on.

4. Some consideration was had about proportionable assistances toward the
charge of Printing our Petitions.

5. It being among other things enquired, whether there were any truth in this
rumor, That the Lords sent to Lieu Col* Lilburne, and offered him 3000. l to
desist in the large Petition now abroad. The Lieut Col. answered, that it was a
false groundless report, and that he knew no occasion for it, unless it were
because a Lord had sent to tell him, he would send him a toke^ of his love, if
he thought it would be accepted, To which he answered, That he would not be
eng^ged ^r any Pattente Lord, and some other words to that effect.

6. There was a relation made by a person, that some poor people in the
Country aid meet together in Companies, and did violently take away the corn
as it was going to Market, saying that it was their great necessity caused them
so to do: where upon, we fearing lest the calamity might be more general, did
ask how we should best preserve our selves in case of such Tumults, because we
bore the names of Roundheads Independants etc. for adhering to the Parliament?
and were satisfied by Lieut. Col. Lilburne to this purpose. Friends, The only
way for you to be secured is to promote this Petition to the House, that so
when the people come to be informed (by the Petition) of your real intentions
to the common good of the whole Nation, as well as to your own, you will be
thereby safer then those which have Blew Ribons in their hats, that being the
Generals* colors and the modern badge of protection.

7. It was lastly delivered as from a good hand, That some Lords were willing
their Law-giving power should not descend as an inheritance to their posterity,
and that they were willing to part with their privilege of freedom from
arrests.

This being the sum and principal matter of what passed at the aforesaid
meeting, as we are ready to attest upon our oaths, if we shall be thereunto
called. And understanding that our said dear Friends Lieut. Col. John
Lilburne, and Mr. John Wildman [who are therefore dear to us because they have
manifested themselves faithful to the Publique] stand committed by this House,
^n relation to the said Meeting as Treasonable and seditions practise^s against
the State, We cannot but be extremely troubled, not only in regard of their
particular suffering and our own equal concernment, especially upon the
consequence thereof, as tending in a great measure to the dis* infranchisement
of the Nation, from whom the liberty of complaining must then be taken away,
when most cause is given them to complain,

Wherefore your Petitioners do most humbly pray, may be forthwith enlarged,
etc. That L-C. Lilourne and Mr. John Wildman And your Petitioners shall pray,
etc. Ia. Worts. Rog. Sawyer. Hen. Gidiag. Tho. Chapman. Valent Elsing. Dennis
Liddall Geor. Brown. Ed. Pardo. Tho. Goddad. Tho. Cullet. Tho. Williams. John.
Merihust Mich. Reeve. J. North. I. Wells. Ed. Floyd. Rob. Bagesse. Rob. Levite.
A. Dedm^n.


Now let the Reader-judge, whether sounds the most like truth, whether is the
most authentic; the testimony of a single Priest, and two other pretended*
Witnesses, which are not in the least visible, or this which we affirm and
justify by such sufficient visible testimony, this foregoing Paper being in
the name and under the hand of the Subscribers, sent into the House in a
letter, after a fortnights attendance to get it in the nature of a Petition.

But to trace you a little further in the next place, to fill up the measure of
your wickedness* you take upon you to comment upon a Letter which you say was
sent by several Gentlemen into Kent. The maine thing that you seem to startle
at was this, viz. That after seven years waiting for Justice and Freedom,
they (meaning the men of London) will receive no denial in their requests.

And here you take upon you to Catechize us, what no denial? Though all
authority joined with all the Representative reason of the Kingdom should vote
against your Petition* etc.

Truly though we are not bound to answer you in this particular; yet might such
a resolution be justifiable from the example of the importunate Widow and the
unjust Judge; And I think the visibility of evident ruin to this Nation for
want of the establishment of Justice and Freedom* might well excuse if not
justify the most vigorous demands of the performance of that duty from those
which had received power from us unto that end, and yet neglected it.

But to draw to an end, for I am weary of tracing you in your laborinth of
folly, It were to be wished that you made use of the counsel which you give
Mr. Wildman* viz. Not thus to absent your self from that people which pay so
dear for your company: cannot you be content with the Appearances of those
goodly Angels, and comfortable dispensations which you fleece your Flock of,
but you must ramble from the fold, and like a greedy Wolf worrie other men's
Sheep? The man you speak of is none of your Canonical cut, he can he
content to be a law unto himself, and strive not to be a law to others, and
in that he has had sufficient discovery of the comeliness* and all
sufficiency of Christ, which is formed in him, And in his behalf (whose soul
J am confident sorrows for your sin) I shall offer up this Petition, viz.
That the Lord would cause his Spirit to Evangelize or Preach a Gospel of peace
and pardon, and to make out himself in such precious and glorious discoveries,
That your soul may be enamoured with his glory, and confounded with the
apprehension of your creature actings, and in that Spiritual rapsody may be
penitently enforced to cry out; You have sinned, betrayed innocent blood* Math*
27. 4. Have mercy upon me O God, according to thy loving kindness, according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies, blot out my transgressions, etc.
Psalm. 50. 1.

FINIS.

