A LETTER UNTO Mr. Stubs In answer to his Oceana weighed, etc.
SIR, to begin with the best piece of your work: your quotations in the title
page spoiled with ill application, I shall first set right. You see that all
Councils, all things are upon the Rota, upon the wheel: from that Rota only
which I suppose you mean; what came forth, came forth unfoiled, and as it went
in. We do not by this trial despair* but with a little fense, the right
institution of such a society may come to compare with Picadilly, play houses,
or horse-matches, but if these be yet preferred, then indeed

-- Amphora caepit
Institui, currente Rota, cur urcens exit?
Thus applied there may be sense in this quotation: So for your other, had it
been affixed unto your former book, and applied to your self, or those unto
whom you wrote journey work for Oligarchy, it might have been well said as in
Asinar:

-- Nunc enim hic est
Negotiosus interdius: videlicet Polon est
Leges ut conscribat, quibus se populus non teneat Gerrae.
Qui sese parere apparent hnjus legibus, profecto
Nunquam bonae frugi stent.
Thus taken you know it is true: And so your Title page being in part
rectified, I come

To your Preface.
Mr. Harrington says, That without a national Religion there can be no
liberty of conscience. And you answer, That in Athens and Rome there were
National Religions; therefore in Athens and Rome there was no liberty of
conscience; which is so much the more absurd in that you cite Petit: for
confirmation of your consequence, who affirms the contrary, and that by
undeniable authorities, as may be seen in the second, third, and fourth pages
of his discourse upon the Attick Laws, the sum whereof amounts unto thus much,
That albeit there were in Athens Laws for the National Religion, yet it by Law
was in the Areopagites also to give liberty unto any other way of worship,
which liberty so given was Law, and became a man's right, whether it were to a
public or private way of worship in which manner it is affirmed and proved by
the same Petit, that into Athens, besides the National Religion of that
Country, were introduced the Religions of almost every other country. The
same he affirms of Rome, where notwithstanding the National Religion therein
established by Romulus, it is vulgarly known that scarce any Country was
subdued by them whose Religion they did not insert into their own.

And where is your truth, who say, That Mr. Harrington entertaines us with
discourse of Paul's trial at Athens. Where does he say that Paul was tried
there? or what says he of Paul's preaching there, other then is affirmed by
other pens, as that particularly of Grotius? But out of this you fall merrily,
as thus: Once upon a time there was a man called William Thomas, therefore
William and Thomas must for evermore be one and the same man.

This is your way of disputing, which you carry on in like manner, for example
thus.

Every man is to be taxed for that estate whereof he is not owner.

Now Oceana is an estate whereof Mr. Harrington is not owner.

Therefore Oceana is an estate for which we are to tax Mr. Harington.

If the minor be denied, as that Oceana is an estate whereof Mr. Harington is
not owner, your discourse implies this or the like proof of it.

Where any one man and no other is the constant defender of one and the same
estate or propriety, that one and the same estate or propriety is not his but
some others.

But Mr. Harington and no other is the constant defender of Oceana.

Therefore Oceana is no estate or propriety of Mr. Harringtons, but of some
other. Now if it please you

To the Body of your Work.
Sir, to a man who pretends not to understand a language, it is no shame not to
understand that language: but it is a shame to a man, and a Scholar who
pretends to sense, not to understand sense. If I shall make it plain that in
this point you come short, I shall have vindicated the Greek of your Authors
from your ignorant application of the same, without troubling the Reader with
any more languages then his mother tongue. You, in pretending to have found
Oceana light, weigh only Sparta, nor that truly.

First, Because the Senate of Sparta was instituted by Lycurgus, you argue,
That it was not instituted eligible by the people; whereas all Authors,
particularly Aristotle, lib. 4. cap. 9. affirm, That the Magistracies in Sparta
were all chosen by the people, as that of Senator; or chosen, and also born by
the people, as that of Ephori.

For the mistakes you lay unto Mr. Harrington in the Greek, as, That the Tribes
in Lacedemon were pre-existent to the Oracle, what makes that to the purpose?
And that the word Obae does not signify Linages, you will hardly persuade,
seeing Aymiot, thought to be as good an Interpreter of the Greek as Mr. Stuls,
in rendering the Oracle, has these words, Aprez que tu auras divise le peuple
en ligniees. But I will not trouble the Reader with foreign Languages; things
indisputable shall hereafter be brought for interpretation of the words you
dispute at a dear rate, giving so much Greek for two pence as you have made not
worth an half penny. Mr. Harrington states the Commonwealth of Sparta, thus,

Lycurgus instituted a Senate eligible by the people for life, with right to
debate and propose, and a popular Assembly with power to resolve. To which he
adds the place in Plutarch. Lycurgus having thus tempered the form of this
Commonwealth: it seemed nevertheless to them who came after, that the small
number of thirty persons (and for life) whereof this Senate consisted, was the
cause of greater force and Authority in the fame then was convenient; for which
cause to hold in this same Senate, they (the people) gave them the Senate, (as
Plato says) the curb, which was the Power and Authority of the Ephori,
Magistrates created about* one hundred and thirty years after the death of
Lycurgus, in the time of King Theopompus, who to his wife reproaching him in
disdain, that he must thus basely leave his Kingdom less unto his Successors,
then he had received of his Predecessors; Made Answer, That he should leave it
greater, in regard that it would be more firm and durable.

Hereby it is apparent, when the Senate upon these advantages of fewness, and
for life, began to propose perversely unto the people, then the people began to
add, diminish, pervert and evert what the Senate proposed, that is, they began
(as in like cases is inavoidable) to debate. And the people thus taking upon
them to debate, Polydorus and Theopompus being Kings, endeavored to add unto
the fundamental Law, That if the people did not determine well, then the
Senators and the Kings should stop the procedure. Hereupon, for the defense of
their fundamental Laws, the people erected the Court of the Ephori, consisting
of annual Magistrates chosen by and out of themselves, and with power to
question any of their Kings or Senators upon their lives, that should go about
to pervert those Laws. Thus by this patch of the Ephori, came that flaw in
Sparta (wherewith Mr. Harrington for that reason proposing otherwise, is not
concerned) to be amended. And this is the account he gives of that
Commonwealth, which you, perverting the whole story, go about to weigh
otherwise.

1. Inferring that the people were guilty of those miscarriages, which it is
plain proceeded from the Senate, and were rectified by the people, in the
institution of that Curb upon the Senate (as is plainly shown by Plutarch) in
the institution of the Ephori.

2. You infer from you know not what, that the Senate had a Negative Vote, and
yet confess that the people had no right to debate. Whereas to leave words or
Canting, (for yonr Greek, as you use it, amounts to no more) and come as I said
to the undeniable Testimony of things or of sense. If the popular Assembly had
no right to debate, how should the Senate have a Negative? Or if the popular
Assembly had right to the result only, then who but themselves could have the
Negative? Contra rationem nemo sobrius, contra experientiam nemo sanus. For
that which you allege out of Demosthenes, as that he calls the Senate of
Sparta Lords of the people, it can (considering the nature of this
Commonwealth, which Isocrates to the Areopagites affirms to be popular) be no
otherwise understood, then as they who have the like function, I mean of
debating and proposing unto the Parliament in Scotland, are called Lords of the
Articles. Lord in this sense as you (in great letters setting a mark upon your
ignorance, and not interpreting your text) would imply, does not signify
Sovereign, for neither are the Lords of the Articles sovereign, nor does
Demosthenes affirm that of the Senate of Sparta. But where the Proposers are
few, and for life, as in Lacedemon; and as the greater Nobility or Officers in
Scotland, they may in some sense be called Lords of the people, though not
they, but the people have the result.

To conclude, Mr. Harrington has long since showed that among the Greeks, the
words Oligarchy and Democracy were understood in such manner, that where the
popular Assembly had the result only, there the Commonwealth was sometimes
called Oligarchy, especially if the proposing Counsel consisted of few, and for
life, as in Sparta; and where the people had not only the result but debate
also, that was called Democracy, as in Athens. Hence that an Oligarchist in
your sense, or one that has endeavored to make Helots and Gibeonites, or
servants of such as are now his Lords and Masters, is no Idiot, there is no
consequence, even for what has happened in our days. Quid verba audio, cum
facta videam? etc.

March 6. 1659.
FINIS.
LONDON, printed for J. S. 1660.


