THE Necessity of some NEARER Conjunction and Correspondency amongst
EVANGELICALL PROTESTANTS, for the Advancement of the NATIONAL CAUSE, AND
Bringing to pass the Effect OF THE COVENANT.

London Printed, 1644.

THE Necessity of some Nearer Conjunction and Correspondencie amongst
Evangelicall Protestants, for the Advancement of the National Cause, and
bringing to pass the Effect of the Covenant.
AS the desperate and malicious Attempts of implacable Adversaries to the true
Reformed Religion within the three Kingdoms, is a most just and necessary
Ground for all true Protestants, under the Authority of the State, to enter
into a League and Covenant one with another, for their mutual Defense, and the
Preservation of their Religion: So the Bond by which Religious souls in the
profession of the same Truth, through the Communion of Saints, are knit
together in God, is a most Laudable, Lawful and Powerful Inducement to move
them to pray earnestly unto Almighty God, and to endeavor really, amongst all
Godly men, that all other Churches and States, either oppressed, or in danger
to be oppressed by the same Antichristian Tyranny, may be brought unto the
same, or the like Union and Covenant, for the Enlargement of the Kingdom of
Jesus Christ; for their own Safety under the Ordinances of the Gospel, and for
the Preservation of Christian Kingdoms and States from the Troubles and Ruins
which the incroaching Power and subtle Plots of wicked Enemies do intend to
bring upon them.

These things being sufficiently expressed, and fully intended, the one in the
Preface, the other in the Close of the National Covenant, (the first, to
warrant the Undertaking; the second, to confirm the prosecuting of this
Religious National work) do give me cause to make a Motion, which may, by Gods
Grace, become an Effectual means, not only to help forward the Business to
this Period and Issue which may prove the final Overthrow of Antichrist in
Europe; but also to open a way, through a near Correspondency and Conjunction
of Protestants amongst themselves, to dilate the Bounds of Christ's Evangelicall
Church, so far, as to offer, in due time, the Light of Saving Truth both unto
Jews and Gentiles, who as yet are in the shadow of Death and Darkness.

Nor ought any to think that this Aim is too Vast and Large, Romans 11. (...)
seeing it is clearly revealed to be Gods Will to bring it to pass: And it may
be made apparent, that no Means are so likely and proportionate to produce such
an Effect, as these which are now in Gods hand, and most seasonable to be
applied unto the fulfilling of the Covenant, and fittest to be raised upon the
Endeavors necessary for our own Preservation.

For if any will rationally consider the Troubles of all States and Churches in
Europe, he may easily observe that they proceed Originally from three Causes.
The first is, the Affectation of a Spiritual Absolute Power over Men's Souls.
The second, an Absolute Temporal Monarchy over Men's Estates and Bodies. And
the third is, the want of Union and good Intelligence amongst those, who,
laboring to free themselves from the one and the other Yoke, and Maintaining
their Religious and Natural Rights and Privileges in a distracted and
confused way, rather weaken then strengthen one another hands in all their
Enterprises.

The Spiritual Absolute Dominion over Men's Souls, is the Aim of the Pope and
his Adherents; amongst which, we must reckon our Lordly Bishops.

The Absolute Temporal Monarchy has been the Aim of the House of Austria,
till Sweden and France came in to break his Strength and frustrate his
Intentions; which they have done.

These Papal and Austrian Designs, have divided the Affections of all Men in
Europe; either in respect of Conscience, or of Civil Interests. As for the
Austrian Designs, they are no more henceforth Formidable: But the Papal
Intentions are deeper laid. Nor is the strength of his Counsel and his way
duly regarded; and therefore it is also Prevailing, because not rightly
resisted.

The Pope, in opposition to Protestancie, which has almost overthrown his
Hierarchy, does labor to preserve himself, and regain, in the Unsettlement of
Protestant States, and the Overthrow of their Churches, his former Power,
chiefly in Germany, and in Great Britain, the two principal Seats of the
Protestant Religion.

His Way is twofold: The first Political, the second Ecclesiastical. By the
first, he does Unite all Popish Princes in one Way and Counsel against those
Princes that he calls Heretics; to weaken them, to corrupt their Counsels,
and to keep them under, lest they should come to have the Managing of Affairs
to his disadvantage. Thus he made the Princes of Germany conspire, contrary to
all the Fundamental Laws of the Empire, and Rights of Princes, to translate
the Electorall Dignity from the Palatine to the Bavarian House, that the
Protestant Voices might be Weakened in the Supreme College of State, and by
that Means all Affairs managed for the Advantage of Papists, who now have
distributed the States of Protestants amongst themselves, and to serve his Ends
they maintain their own Interests.

By the second, he divides the Spirits of Protestants, and increases all the
Disorders and Confusions which are amongst them; partly by Emissaries of all
sorts, which he does send forth; some out of his Colleges de Propaganda, some
out of other Orders and Societies: partly by Treaties tending to patch up
Matters of Difference under General Terms, wherein he may find his
Advantages. The Emissaries, they undermine the Affections chiefly of the Common
sort; And those that are instructed to treat, deal Principally with such as are
in Places of Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical, either to discover their
Counsels, to disappoint them; or to Corrupt their Inclinations, if they find
them Pliable.

And all this the Papal Conclave does prosecute, with undefatigable Diligence,
with innumerable Agents, with infinite Cost and Charge, with all manner of
Crafty Insinuations, and fair Pretenses, and with all the Zeal that the Opinion
of Deserving Heaven, and the Hope of Temporal Greatness and Gain can breed in
Superstitious, in Ambitious, and in Covetous Minds. Nor is there any, as yet,
amongst the several Bodies of Protestants, who is set to Watch over his ways,
and to walk contrary to him for their Common Interest, laboring to disappoint
his Plots, by Means opposite to his Designs.

This want of Conjunction of Protestants, not minding his Practices, has given
him a mighty Advantage against them: nor is it possible to Accomplish his
Overthrow, except this Fault be mended: nor can this Defect otherwise be
mended, but by some nearer Correspondencie of Protestants amongst themselves,
for their mutual Preservation against his Enterprises.

Now to set this correspondency on Foot, none have so great cause, and so good
an opportunity as the British Nation, and this present Parliament of England.
For all the Popish power of Europe is now stirred up, and bent to hinder that
work of Reformation, which they have taken in hand: therefore they may justly
and ought also to move all Protestants to join with them as in a Common cause,
wherein they are all jointly concerned. Now to bring this to pass, as already
by Virtue of the National Covenant, there is a Tie betwixt the Nations, and in
the Committee of both Kingdoms, and Assembly of Divines, there is a door
opened to settle a further course of brotherly correspondency, as well in
Temporal as Spiritual Matters, between the British Churches: so by virtue of
the last clause of the same Covenant, and by Reason of the Joint both
Spiritual and Temporal Interests, which all Protestant Churches have in
Common, and ought to follow sociably for their mutual Safety and Edification,
there may and should be a further tie of Religious Communion betwixt the
British and their Neighbor Protestants beyond the Seas, because the truth of
Religion cannot well be preserved in the one, without the concurrence of the
other. Therefore some course of correspondency in Spiritual matters should be
settled and thought upon to move Neighbors to join in Councels with us, and in
some concurrent endeavors to cross the Practices of the common enemy. And to
make these Councills and endeavors more effectually considerable and really
profitable, to the Protestant cause in foreign parts, it would be of great
use to take the Palatine cause in hand which has a direct influence upon all
foreign Protestants, and wherein the Papal faction does most directly oppose
abroad, the Increase of our Religion. For seeing this house has for the
defense of the Protestant Religion suffered the loss of all, it is just that
they which will own the cause of Religion, should intend to make it
considerable again, and the head of the common Interest among forraigners in
opposition to Popery and the Austrian designs.

And to do this, some of the Committee of both Kingdoms with some Divines of
the Assembly, joined to them by Order of Parliament, might be appointed to
assist the Prince Elector in Council, as a more special Committee for the
advancement of this design, to which effect also some Agents might be
subordinate to them, and joined to them, to Negotiate the Work abroad,
preparatorily, till a more perfect league might be framed with Forraigners.

Now to lay a sure foundation for such a correspondency (whether it be intended
with a respect to him or no, (there is no better way, then to begin with the
Churches of the Low Countries, our next Neighbors, and therein with a
settlement of the British Churches in these parts, that in the Communion of
Spiritual Counsels, tending to the public good and proceeding from the
Assembly of Divines by Order of Parliament unto the British Churches in the
Nether-lands, the Churches and Divines (together with us) of these parts may be
drawn to a concurrence in strengthening of the hands of other Protestants, who
have born the weight of persecution these many years in Germany, and yet lie
under the burden of many pressures, which are utterly like to oppress them if
no remedy be found.

This Brotherly correspondency with the Churches of the Low Countries, as it
might advance greatly the Councills of Ecclesiastical Reformation now in hand
in England, and be a great strengthening unto all the Proceedings and
Resolutions of Parliament tending that way: so it would mainely sonder the
affections of all men, and draw their hearts to the love of the cause, and
consequently facilitate all the Parliamentary Civil undertakings for the
settlement of public affairs; it would dishearten or disappoint all the Plots
and endeavors of our enemies abroad, whereby they labor to make our
Neighbors disaffected with us, and clog the supplies of help which would
otherwise proceed more readily for our relief then now they do. And in a word,
it would through the means of spiritual Union and holy Communion (which God
has recommended to be carefully entertained by his children in going about his
Work) draw down a powerful blessing from heaven upon all our undertakings.

FINIS.

