THE EVERLASTING Joys of HEAVEN: OR, The blessed life of a Christian, in Grace
here; and in Glory here-after. Set forth for the comfort and encouragement of
all those that desire to fear the Lord; By JOHN HEART, a Servant of JESUS
CHRIST. Recommended to the Reader, by Obadiah Sedgewick, and John Downam,
Ministers of the Gospel.

PHIL. 3.20. Our Conversation is in Heaven.

1 COR. 2.9. As it is written, eye has not seen, or ear heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that
love him.

London, Printed for John Andrews, at the White Lion in the Old Baily. 1656.

JOHN HEART, D. D.


Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? And there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee. My heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart and my portion for ever.

TO The Right Honorable Noble and Virtuous Lady, Most Worthy of all HONOR,
ELIZABETH, COUNTES and DOWAGER of EXCETER etc.
Right Honorable,
GRACE, as I conceive it (under Correction) is nothing else but a Compound of
GLORY, and GLORY is nothing else but a Compound of Sanctification, whilst the
soul receiving out of Christ's fulness Grace for Grace, is transformed into
the same Image from Glory to Glory (one degree of Sanctification to another)
until at length (like fire mounting upwards unto its proper Orb) the higher and
purer it grows, partaking of the Divine Nature, spreading it self, perfumed
with Myrrh and Frankincense, and all the spices of the Merchant, it vent it
self sorth in all the Divine Virtues of Him who has called it out of Darkness
unto his mavelous Light.

Now God out his Infinite rich Goodness and Mercy having conferred upon your
Honor all the rare endowments both of Grace and Nature, with a rich and
plentiful Estate, and which is more then all, a large Heart to use it well for
the Glory of God, your own Comfort, and the Miseries and Necessities of others,
whereby you have Purchased your self that High Honor, to be a Mirror to all
the Great Ladies of this Age, of unparalleled Worth, shining forth in Religion
and Piety, to the admiration of all.

I therefore being taken in this number, have adventured to present unto your
Honor, this short discourse and pithie, of Grace leading unto Glory, that it
might give you yet a further insight into things invisible, Comfort you now in
your Journey homewards, Mount you one Step higher upon Jacob's Ladder, to view
your Heavenly Country, to have a Glimpse of that Infinite Glory provided for
you, for which the great Body of Saints so sigh and groan daily, and which in
Gods good time you shall enjoy Eternally for ever, when your Corruptible shall
put on Incorruption, and your Mortal Immortality, to be swallowed up of Life,
which is, and shall be ever the Wish, Prayer, and desire of

Your Honors humble Servant to Command, J: H:

I have perused this Book, entitled Grace leading unto Glory, or a Glimpse of
the Glory, Excellency and Eternity of Hea^^^; being a collection of many
heavenly and comfortable Fruins, which by Gods blessing, in hope that it might
do much good, and encourage many in their heavenly journey. I have therefore
allowed thereof to be Printed.

Imprimatur, Obadiah Sedgwick.

To the Reader.
GRace leading unto Glory is the subject of this ensuing discourse: Grace is
Glory, Grace leads unto Glory, Grace of Necessity must end into Glory, and
without Grace we shall never come unto Glory. A truly justified person cannot
stand still, but must go further and further, and add Grace to Grace, ere he
can come to glory; Seeing the New Creature, which aspireth unto heaven, admits
of no measure or stature thereof high enough until it be in Heaven, having
attained unto the age of the measure and stature of the fullness of Christ.

Which how it comes to pass, to manifest unto the world, is the scope and aim
of this little Book: how Grace, wherein is included the beauty of Holiness in
the Fabric of the News Creature, is justly by Christ in that his Heavenly
Prayer called Glory: because it is nothing else, but imperfect Glory; and Glory
it self, nothing else but the perfection of Sanctification; unless there may be
added there unto some extra ordinary shining luster, such as Moses had a
tincture of when his face shone so, as the people could not look upon him,
after be came down from the mountain, Wherefore whether we respect Grace which
is imperfect Glory, or the Glory of Heaven, theper, ection of Glory, which this
discourse points at; in the full enjoyment and fruition of the Beatifical
Vision; both (no question ma) yjustly invite thee, to peruse this small
treatise, an hope to reap some profit hereby. For here stands no affrighting
Cherubims with a flaming sword to guard thee from this Paradise of Glory: but
all possible invitement unto thee to enter boldly in, by that new and living
way prepared for thee. And when thy heart and mounting miditaions shall be
lifted up and warmed in the sweet apprehensions and ravishment of the joys of
that Glory to come, herein mentioned, with joyings and stronger resolutions in
the prosecutions attending so glorious and eternal an inheritance, not to
loose or hazard the same for a few transt^^^^lying vantries. Then remember
those in thy best thoughts by whose means this has been conveyed unto thee by

Thy unworthy servant in Christ Jesus. J. H,

To the Book, expressing the Sum thereof.
SERAPHICK wings it first assumes to fly,
Saints all among, who are both great and small,
Anoints their eyes, Heavens eye salve with, to see
The wonders great it does present to all;
How their great peace freeing them so from thral,
Acquitted full by Heavens most high Decree,
From storms and tempests all has set them free;
Crushing for them, Sin, Hell, Devil, Death, and all:
How then their mounting, sad, and changing states,
By ebbs and flows of strong and heavenly graces,
With sour, sweet joys and sighs he interlaces;
It tells them till they come to Heavens gates.
Redoubling force then helps them how to scale
The Heavens, and lifts them up whitin the veil.
Christian Reader.
THere is no subject of our thoughts and meditations, nor of our discourse and
writings, more sweet and comfortable unto those who by a lively faith are
interessed in them, then the eternal joies and happiness of that heavenly
Kingdom which God, in his rich mercy through and for the merits and mediation
of his dear Son, and our alone Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, has prepared
for his elect and faithful sons and servants: for what can be more pleasing and
full of ravishing joy unto us, in the sea of this miserable world, wherein we
are tosted in storms and tempests, endangered daily to be spilt and wracked
upon rocks and sands, and to be robbed and rifled with merciless Pirates, then
to be assured that within a while we shall safely arrive at our wished. Haven,
where we shall be eternally secured from all these perils, and enjoy perpetual
peace and reft? what can replenish us with more delight, and fill our hearts
with invincible courage in our spiritual warfare, than having fought the good
fight of faith, in assurance of victory, to meditate with hopeful expectation
on that glorious crown which God has infallibly promised to those that
overcome? what can be more plea^ing in the time of our nonage, then to think on
that rich inheritance which we shall enjoy when we come to full age? and what
can more cheer and refresh us in our tedious pilgrimage, then to meditate on
the joys and delights which we shall shortly attain unto in our heavenly
country? neither is this conversing in heaven, whilst we are here upon earth,
more pleasing than profitable. Seeing if our thoughts be thus taken up with
these heavenly excellencies, we shall not judge any thing too much which we can
do or suffer for God glory, from whose free grace we expect the full fruition
of such inestimable happiness. Nothing can more inflame our hearts with the
fervent love of our dear Savior, then to consider, that by his merits and
bitter passion he has purchased for us this heavenly inheritance. Nothing can
more confirm our patience in our light and momentary sufferings in and for
Christ, than to have our thoughts taken up with that far exceeding and eternal
weight of glory prepared for us, with which, the afflictions of this present
life are not worthy to be compared. Nothing next unto Gods glory, can be a more
effectual intentive and motive unto all holiness or conversation, than this
rich wages, with which this our good and bountiful master will of his free
grace reward our worthless service and weak endeavors. And therefore seeing
our Author in this book does piously and profitably discourse on this subject,
which is so pleasant and useful, and (as it seems to me) not in a verbal
manner, but with a sweet relish and experimental feeling of these heavenly
joys in his own soul, unto which he inviteth others, (being already approved
and licenced by an abler hand and better judgment) I also commend it
(Christian Reader) to thy perusal, and pray that thou may reap that fruit
and benefit in thy reading, which the Author intends in the writing of it.

Thine in the service of Jesus Christ. John Downam.

GRACE Leading unto GLORY.
FAith sees all this World on fire, as holy Jerome thought he always heard
the sound of the last Trumpet sounding in his ears, arise ye dead and come to
judgment: and therefore suits its actions, affections, and meditations,
according to the report of that wonderful and matchless admiration: yea, and
helps it self in all the exigents of this life, with supportation and
strength to pass through all the afflictions and occurrences thereof, with the
excellent surmounting thoughts of the Life and Glory to come. Wherein my desire
was, now, in the decaying of this our earthly house, and of all outward things,
to stir up both my self and others to meditate upon the more high and enduring
substances which fade not away but endure for ever. Now the end of faith being
the salvation of our souls, that grand business we have to agitate and eye in
all our actions, being in all, to plot for possession of that eternal glory
promised, reserved for us in the heavens: whereunto by the mighty power of God,
we are kept by faith unto salvation. 1. Pet. 1. 3. I therefore (though the
unworthiest of all to meddle in so high and transcendant a Subject) by Gods
assistance undertook to lanch forth the frail barque of my weak endeavors into
this great and vast Ocean, knitting together some old and new store gathered
from some of our late most eminent and spiritual Divines, touching the great
and strange operations of the blessed Spirit, as he assures salvation unto
glory: even until those strange and extraordinary sighings and groanings which
he stirs up in the Saints, longing to the full enjoyment of heavenly Glory.
Honey we know is gathered out of the sweets of diversity of sweet flowers; and
what is sweeter then honey, or the Honeycomb, save Gods word, which in
sweetness far surmounts all the Aromatic fragrancies and sweets whatsoever.
Therefore we, even out of diversity of gifts, may pick out much sweetness and
delight, finding some rarities, and much strength therein, as a bunch of arrows
knit together, is of more strength than one or two of them. Wherefore as, 1 Samuel 14. 27. Jonathan having tasted a little honey on the end of his rod, had
his sight revived: So no question, if we please to put forth our selves to lick
deeply of this ensuing honey pot, vented in this discourse, we may also by Gods
blessing, attain to have our eyes further so anointed and cleared with this eye
salve, as we shall so much the more clearly see into things invisible, tasting
how gracious the Lord is, who before the foundation of all the world, had
provided for us, eternal habitations in so great and superabounding glorious
mansions for ever: and so be stirred up unto so much the more thankfulness,
unto the everlasting praises of our good God, who has done and still does for
us so abundantly above all that we are able either to think or speak: so
becoming the more perfect upon earth of our everlasting work in heaven,
whilst, not certain of any thing here, we rest assured of what we shall enjoy
eternally there. For,

Certain it is, That we can never yield to part with this life, until we be
assured of a better; and that the assurance of the certainty and excellency
of that future glorious Estate to come in Heaven for ever, is the only
Antidote unto a Believer, to make him out face Death, looking beyond it, and
all other incident crosses in the way unto it. As we know Saint Paul did, who
seemed to take care for this only one thing (as the sum of all things) to know
Christ, the virtue of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his affliction,
being made conformable unto him in Death; if by any means he might attain unto
the Resurrection of the dead, Phil. 3.10, 11. This seems also that one thing
which holy David desired, and says, he would require, that he might dwell in
the house of the Lord all the days of his life, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to visit his temple; to be hid in the secret place of his Pavillion,
and to be set upon a Rock. Psalm. 27.4, 5. That a day in Gods courts is better
than a thousand every where, Psalm. 84. And in another place (eying Heaven and
the glory to come) he affirms, that a thousand years, in Gods sight, are but as
yesterday, and a watch in the night, Psalm. 90. v. 4. And Psalm. 39.6. when he
has showed that man walks in a vain shadow, disquieting himself in vain,
with heaping up these earthly things, he adds; And now, Lord, what wait I for?
mine hope is even in thee. So, Job 19.25. he there flies out in the midst of
all the tempest of his afflictions, supporting himself with the hope of the
life and glory to come, and his interest therein; For I am sure that my
Redeomer lives, etc. And what is more frequent in all the Scriptures than
still (upon all occasions) to raise up our thoughts from hence unto Heaven? I
will only instance a few more places: that, 2 These. 1.7. He comforts that
distressed estate they were in, with that everlasting rest they should enjoy,
when the Lord Jesus should show himself from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in
flaming fire against wicked men etc. When he shall come to be glorified in his
saints, and made mavelous in all them that believe. and 2 Pet. 3.13. after he
has spoken of the heavens and the earth to be burnt up, and renewed, which now
are, he adds, But we look for new heavens, and a new earth, (according to his
promise) wherein dwells righteousness. And Christ in all his exhortations to
the seven Churches in the Revelation, still points them unto those glorious
things to come; where he promises the overcomers, To eat of the tree of life,
which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: not to be overcome of the
second death: to have a Crown of life: to eat of that Manna which is hid: to
have a white stone, and new names written upon them: to write upon them the new
name of God, the City of God, the new Jerusalem: and to sit with him in his
Throne, as he overcame, and sits with the Father in his Throne. All which I
have only named, to show a glimpse of that support the Scriptures afford in
general, for comfort against afflictions here; and wherewith the former darling
Saint, in the ancient times (in the days of their flesh) have stayed and
supported themselves: and to show that in all our destractions present, We must
soundly anchor in heaven, ere we can find true comfort upon earth; or be
thoroughly armed against the fear of death.

To which effect it is written Heb. 2.14. That forasmuch as the children were
partakers of flesh and blood, Christ himself also likewise took part with them,
that he might destroy through death, him that had the power of death, that is
the Devil; and that he might deliver all them, who through fear of death, were
all their life time subject to bondage. In which case, we must not look upon
death alone, without Christ, who by his death has perfumed the grave for us;
otherwise (without him) it is a passage only unto the King of terrors and
everlasting death; but as it is subdued by Christ: as it is (...) Cor. 15.
swallowed up in victory: O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy
victory? and as it is a smooth passage unto heaven and blessedness, to go
home unto our fathers house: as it is a sleep after the weary toils of this
life: a gathering unto our people and fathers again, from whence for a while we
have been estranged: and as it is a passage from mortality, to put on
immortallity, to be swallowed up of life. Thus must we look upon death, as upon
a stinglesse Serpent, which now only affrights, but has no sting to hurt; and
as upon our best friend, who rids us, in a moment, for ever, of all those
Amalekites, and vexing Perrizites, (those fins and cares) as thorns in our
sides; that, as Sampson, we may be contented to lose our lives with these
Philstims: of all which, and the like vexations whatsoever, we may then
confidently and rejoycingly say, as Moses did of those Egyptian Persecutors of
the Church of God. Exodus 13.14. Fear ye not: stand still and behold the
salvation of the Lord, which he will show you this day; for the Egyptians whom
you have seen this day, ye shall never see them again, a wonderful comfort to
be freed from all at once.

And it seems, that the Saints in Scripture, upon their removal hence, make
thus much good, in their unmoved departures. How quetly did Jacob and Joseph
die, having finished all their earthly business? with what peace did Moses and
Aaron die in their appointed Mounts. And what shall we say of holy David. I
Chron. 29.10. Who departed hence so cheerfully blessing God, after that he had
given order for them Temple building: and old Barzillai, when he would no more
remain at Court, craves leave to go home and die, all whom with Steven (amongst
a shower of stones) saw unto the other side of Death, so making a peaceable
resignation of this life, to exchange it for a better. And so I make no
question others may, if their whole life, has been so spent in meditation, and
engrossing the Scripture comforts against that day. But yet the surest, and
most lasting comfort against that encounter, is, to be often (every day) washed
in the fountain of Christ's blood, with the seasonable right application of his
everlasting Righteousness unto the soul, which will Comfort, that we being in
him, and he in us, by the habitation of his spirit, That there is no
Condemnation to such Romans 8.1. And that they already sit with him their head in
heavenly places. Ephesians. 2.6. When being transformed into his blessed image from
Glory to Glory in this life, and having put on the Lord Jesus in all his holy
virtues, being thereby pertakers of the Divine nature. 2 Pet. 1.3. they need
not to fear, but being transplanted from nature to Grace and planted with him
in regeneration, unto the similitude of his death, but they shall be also made
like unto the similitude of his Resurrection. Romans 6.5. So that Christ the
head, being in heaven, he must of necessity quicken and draw all his members
after him, who is said to be the Resurrection and the life. John 11.25. and
therefore must raise and quicken all again.

But this is not our intended work at this time to treat of death (though I
have bordered upon it, and could not shun it, it standing so just in our way,
as we are now in our journey toward life) but to outface it, look through and
beyond it, at the Certainty and excellency of heaven and the glory to come,
thereby to arm us against it, that we may see what a royal exchange we shall
make, with parting from our earthly house, for That building not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens: in the Certainty of which building (as I
take it) there is a Double certainty. 1. The Certainty of the thing, that there
is such a building: 2. Our Certainty of attaining unto it.
For the first.

The Certainty, that there is such a Place as Heaven.
I Will be short therein; for besides what the Scriptures speak thereof, which
should abundantly satisfy us, and which is wonderful large, The whole frame
of Nature it self, proclaims with a loud voice, That there is such a place and
mansion of Eternity, called Heaven; the Eternal dwelling of God, Angels, and
blessed souls departed: which Building, even the outside thereof, David, Psalm.
8. admires; O Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all the world! which have set
thy glory above the heavens: When I behold thine heavens, even the work of thy
singers, the moon, and the stars which thou have ordained; What is man, say I,
etc. And Psalm. 19.1. There he shows, that the heavens declare the glory of God,
and the firmament shows the work of his hands, day and night uttering the same,
running through all speeches and langauges unto the ends of the world: wherein
he has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which compasses round the whole earth in
a miraculous manner: which earth now by the mighty power and word of God, in
the middle of the heavens stands, supported and hanging upon nothing, All which
Gods wonderful and mavelous works, proclaim the miraculous dwelling place of
the Almighty in heaven, provided above all his visible works to welcome and
entertain man, in, before and (after the Resurrection) for ever. Wherein Faith
whose nature is (like a Vine) to take hold of every little help (besides the
Scriptures) even by strength of natural reason, takes advantage to fortify it
self by that, Even Nature it self might lead us unto the God of Nature, and of
all things by a strong argument, drawn from our mortality and change: from
whence it strongly concludes, The Creation of man, and consequently, of The
whole frame of nature, thus.

Whatsoever has a being independent of it self, Argument from the course of
nature, proving the Diety.
were able also by virtue of that independency and being, to have kept if self
in that being from mutability and change.

But no creature since the creation ever yet had that power by virtue of its
being, to have kept it self in being from mutability and change.

Therefore, it had a Creator, which is the Almighty Jehovah, only able to give
a being to his words, the same for ever: Alpha and Omega.

And thus we leave The Certainty of the building: to draw near therefore unto
the building it self, and The Certainty of our knowledge of a future glorious
estate therein for ever, attainable by us.

God in Trinity, blessed for evermore, who had sufficiently from all eternity
lived in all Glory and Contentation: being that infinite wisdom set up from
everlasting from the beginning, and before the earth and works thereof were
made, minding at length to have a Creature made, which should bear his image,
be Lord of all the creatures to be made, and able to conceive and reflect back
again his excelle^cies, at length to be taken up from the earth into heaven for
ever, into the association and participation of the heave^ly Quire of Angels,
in his fullness of time (even then rejoicing in the habitable part of the earth,
having his delight with the sons of men in resolution and intention created,
Prove. 8.27.) prepared the heavens, and set his compass upon the deep,
established the clouds above, when he confirmed the fountains of the deep, had
given a decree to the Sea, that it should not pass his Commandment, and
appointed the foundations of the earth, having furnished the heavens with all
the hosts of them, and the earth with all useful creatures therein, fitted for
recreation, comfort, and delight of his new guests to be created: at length,
(when all things were fitted for him) created Man, his last and greatest work
of wonder: for whose sake, and for reflection of his glory, in inioying of his
works of wonder, all these things created before him, were given to him, these
visible heavens with all the creatures showed unto him, with a use of, and
insight in them: and manifestation and revelation (after his fall) of a Heaven
of Heavens, the mansion of the Beatifical vision (revealed in the Scriptures)
wherein he should at length be received, having finished his course upon earth:
called, for the sublimity and exceeding height thereof, Gods dwelling place,
The high and losty place of him who inhabiteth eternity. Isa. 57.15. and by St.
Paul, a building not made with hands, but eternal in the heavens, of the
assurance whereof he speaks confidently: For we know, etc. and this is put
without all peradventure. 2 Cor. 5.1. For (says he) we know: and therefore in
this we sigh earnestly: wherein there is a Certainty set down, That in this
life we may come to be assured of a future glorious estate to come, (says he)
we know.

Theresore, though already we be come near, and on our way to view this
glorious Building, not made with hands: yet seeing we are a pretty distance
off it, (to comfort our selves in our way thither) let us take a brief survey
of this Knowledge St. Paul so confidently speaks of, what it is. [For we know:]
In unfolding whereof (if I be not mistaken) these four things will discover it.
1. A Description of the Qualification and 2. How this is known of us. How we
may know that we know what we know. 4. How to try the
By help whereof, we may by Gods blessing attain to the knowledge here meant.
For the First,

The Subject wherein it resides usually, and Qualifleation thereof.
There commonly ushers the same A strong Conviction, called by our Savior,
Joh. 16.8. The Conviction of the Spirit, which Threefold; 1. A Convincing of
Sin. 2. Of Righteousness. 3. Of Judgment;
then there is a full way opened unto this knowledge spoken of ( We know. 1
Conviction of the spirit.
Now for this 1. Gonviction; We must know, That there is nothing in this world
so difficult, then to convince us of these two things, 1. How wicked we are,
and how good God is., which is the sum of the two first convictions, to
convince us of these two things, 1. How out of measure sinful sin is. How
miserably besotted we are with it, in this our depraved nature: in how great
danger we are thereby of everlasting damnation: how dangerous it is to retein
it: how insupportable the burden thereof would be, without Gods great: mercy
to us; and that the sooner we leave it, is, and will be the better for us.

But the second is greater then this, 2 Conviction of the spirit.
(for it is an easier matter to throw us down, then to raise us up again being
fallen; the Devil will both help to pull us down, and keep us so being
dejected, when he sees us a going.) But to convince us, that notwithstanding
all this misery that we are in, That there is an everlasting righteousness
attainable, freely purchased for us, and given unto us of free gift, by Christ
who has redeemed us from death and condemnation, satisfied the fathers Justice
unto the full, infinitely far in value beyond all the sins of the world, who
being the only be gotten son of God, assumed our flesh, and in that nature
has appeased divine justice; so as henceforth, whosoever will lay down the
weapons of their rebellion, and ensigns of their disobedience, believe in him,
and sue forth their pardon, living, and being hereafter governed by the laws of
his Kingdom, like good subjects submitting themselves thereunto, that they
should have a pardon of all their sins and inherit eternal life: having
freedom to come and drink freely of the water of life. Of all which (and a
great deal more) the spirit convinces us of: Because Christ (our surety) is at
liberty, having paid all our debts, and returned in our nature and flesh into
heaven, now set down at the right hand of the father, pleading our cause, and
making good there his purchased redemption, by his continual intercession for
us in heaven, putting sweet incense and odors into our prayers, that they may
be accepted.

But this is not all, for yet a main thing remains, though we be convinced of
the forementioned two things; yet here are The sons of Anak to be encountered
with, Principalities and powers to wrestle against, strong oppositions within
and without us, of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, concerning our
continuance and holding out unto the end, in all these tumults, we are to pass
through and war against so many dangerous enemies. Third Conviction of the
Spirit.
Here then in the next place, comes that third conviction of the Spirit, to
convince our best judgments, that our fears are in vain, and that we shall
notwithstanding all the rubs in our way, overcome all, and triumph over all, as
Christ our head has done for us, so shall we conquer all in him: as it is Romans
8. nay, that in all these things we are more than conquerours in him who has
loved. Us. For the Prince of this world is judged: meaning, that as a condemned
man has no power, no sentence, no voice, no freedom, but is limited, bound,
and manacled: so is it with the Devil, who is judged, chained, and fettered up
from hurting us; and therefore that Christ, as he is the Author, so he will be
the finisher of our faith. Heb, 12.2. And that Christ will no fail, nor be
discouraged, until he bring forth judgment unto victory; that is, plant in us
such a victorious sanctification in the soul, which shall overcome all adverse
powers in its way betwixt us and heaven. This is that third Conviction of the
spirit, where with the two former, going on in a holy frame of sanctification
in newness of life, then our souls are soundly seasoned, then are we rightly
qualified, to know that which is the second thing propounded: That which
knowledge our Savior calls, life eternal: John 17.2. To know God thus
revealed in the high perfections of Jesus Christ, in a Practical way; which we
may certainly attain unto; as it is clear by the whole current of the
Scriptures: and those many gracious promises, and many trials of the same
interest we have in, set down to examine our selves by, al which were in vain,
if no such certainty of our future estate to come were attainable. But to name
a few trials only, passing by the Promises, which are so abundant.

(We know)

having the spirit of Christ, or else to be none of his. Romans 8.9. In our not
walking after the flesh but after the spirit. Romans 8.1. Of our being new
creatures. 2 Cor. 5.17. Of endeavoring to purify our selves even as he is
pure. 1 John, 3.3. Of having heavenly mounted affections, where Christ is at
the right hand of the father. Colloss. 3.1. Of being translated from death to
life, becaused we love the brethren, 1 John, 4 13. Of loving one another, v.
17. By conformity with him in his sufferings. Romans 6.5. Of putting on the Lord
Jesus, and making no provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof. Romans
13.14. Of being partakers of the Divine nature, in being full of gracious
goodness, having eschewed that corruption which is in the world through lust:
2 Pet. 1.3. whereby, and many other the like Trials, whereunto gracious
exceeding rick and precious promises are belonging. True (like God himself) we
may come to know and have assurance of a future glorious estate to come in the
heavens, having these and other the like qualifications (all of them branches
of The new Creature) as witnesses of the truth of our sanctification, in our
renewed estate, following upon our justification, which (if in truth) is
inseparably accompanied with sanctification, spreading it self universally
through all, all the parts, and powers, and faculties of soul and body, though
in every part not totally renewed. And then in the next place.

(We may know that we know)

1 By Gods spirit witnessing with our spirit, that we are the children of God,
Romans 8 16. 2 By the immediate testimony of the spirit sometimes by it self
alone, not joining with our spirits, or the word.
Which are both mentioned. 1 John, 5.7, 8. For there are three which bear
record in heaven, The Father, The Son, and The Holy Ghost, and these three are
one: and there are three which bear record on earth, The Spirit, The Water, and
the Blood, and these three agree in one, in discovery whereof, it may a little
help us in this great business, To distinguish these witnesses, how and when
they witness. The witness of Gods spirit, from the witness of our spirit
upon earth; and betwixt the immediate witness of The Spirit (as it were)
immediately from heaven: from the witness of the same spirit, with our
spirits, which may help to clear this (in show) intricate discovery, under
correction I take.

1. The Witness of our Spirit, To be nothing else, but The Reflecting Testimony
or Answer of a good Conscience in our sincere upright walking according unto
the Rules prescribed in the word of God, whereof it seems St. Paul speaks, Act.
24.15. of his keeping a good Conscience before God and Men, because he looked
for a Resurrection both of the just and she unjust. And Ioh 3. This whole
chapter is nothing else but the Witness of his Spirit, in his Uprightness and
sincerity of his Obedience throughout the Commandments. So David, Psalm. 18.20.
he makes use of the Witness of his Spirit, testifying his Obedience and
Uprightness. And so 1 Samuel 12.3. he makes use of the Witness of his Spirit
this way unto the people, clearing himself from oppression and briberie [Whose
Ox or whose Ass have I take? Or to whom have I done wrong?] And the whole
Church it self is brought in clearing her self, though she were beaten down
into the Den of Dragons (as it were) and covered with the shadow of death,
Psalm. 44.17. That for all this she had not dealt falsely in the Covenant, nor
stretched out her hands to look after a strange God: whereby it seems, that
there is a twofold Witness of our Spirit.

The witness of our Spirit in a Calm.
The witness thereof in a Tempest.
The former whereof, is without difficulty and ordinary; the usual answer, and
reflecting testimony of a good conscience, directed upon all occasions by the
rules of the word, when we are not hardly and sore put to it, by grievous
trials, of dissertions, damps, intermissions of the spirit, and the like, with
sore long and heavy crosses: then our spirits, witness goes on in a Calm,
before it come to sore trials. But when God seems to frown and lowr upon us,
the comforts, and our refreshing wonted feelings to decay: when God seems to
beat us with the strokes of an enemy, to fight against us, when he seems
covered with a cloud that our prayers should not pass through, and the spirit,
with his reports and comforts, with draws himself for a while (as Jeremy
speaks) like a wafering man that cannot help in a strange land. Then our
spirits are hardly put to it, to hold our and make use of the strength of our
spirits witness, in those extremities, as that instance of the Church named,
Psalm. 44. which was then in a great storm and yet held out with as great
strength: and it seems David was in a great storm, Psalm. 77. when yet he
communed with his own heart, and his spirit made diligent search, being hardly
put to it, to dispute the case of Gods goodness unto him, ere he come to see
his infirmity. And Ioh. 19. there it is showed what a wonderful strait His
Spirit was put to, ere he brake forth, with that wonderful admirable
expression of his Redeemer, ver 23. which instances may serve, to show the
exigents our spirits are many times put to in storms, ere Gods spirit come to
witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God. Now when the soul is
rightly qualified, having these internal indowments of obedience and
sincerity, (reflexes of a holy conversation) when it believes in these storms
and streights, and upon believing, the heart encounters and closes with the
promises, joying in them, and hoping for mercy, for all these storms, and in
midst of these exigents, believing one contrary in another, then comes
usually (I say not that it never witnesses with our spirits, but then which
were too high a point for me to meddle in.)

2. The witness of Gods spirit, witnessing with our spirits.
To discover his comforts afresh, that things and promises believed, are truly
so indeed; that we are the children of God; that flesh and blood has not
revealed these things unto us, but God by the habitation of his spirit; that
those supernatural endowments, and habits of grace we have attained, as they
are from Heaven, so they shall at length bring us thither; and that we shall
grow in Grace, from Grace to Grace, and be transformed from Glory to Glory, by
the self-same spirit. 2 Cor. 3.18. Beautifying daily Gods image in us, who has
wrought the same in us, and that we cannot nor shall ever perish, but hold out
unto the end, and at length be raised up with all Saints to eternal glory for
ever. Wherein the spirit elevates and raises the comfort and assurance of The
witness of our spirit, to a much higher degree of assurance and consolation,
making deeper and more lasting assurance, and impressions of our comforts, with
additions of new joies, and by his constant revealing unto us, the use and
mysteries of Christ's high perfection and actions when he was upon earth; and
now in heaven, interceding for us at the right hand of the father; he does
thereby (he dwelling and abiding in us, and we having assented, unto and
believed the promises) Seal all unto us, with the holy spirit of promise, which
is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the possession
purchased unto the praise of his glory. Ephesians. 1.13. which earnest of necessity
must be made good, by his constant and perpetual assistance of us, dwelling in
us, strengthening of us with revelations suitable and seasonable unto all our
exigents: In which case, though the spirit dwell in us, witness, and have
sealed us up, unto this day of Redemption, with an indefesible stamp. Yet are
not his clear revelations and discoveries always alike in degrees and measure,
during then me, for we have many interruptions, dissertions, eclipses of damps,
sometimes (in his retirings for our good) after which his testimony revives
again, with more lasting joys and comforts after his seeming absence and hiding
of himself, suffering sometimes our support to be, By the witness of our
spirit, the water in our sanctification; the second of the three concurring
witnesses upon the earth: and when this water is muddy (as oh it is too often
so) as we cannot comfort our selves thereby, having our evidence so blotted,
that we cannot read it clearly, or forgotten it, the suffering us to have
recourse unto the third witness, The blood in justification, which is the most
lasting and constant with us, and wonderful sure, a fountain ever open,
running alike clear, pure water of life, never muddie, unless we by our
ignorance and infidelity, throw mud therein and trouble it. But yet, whether
the spirit shine clearly in the soul witnessing, or whether darkly, as he does
many times; yet having once sealed and set his stamp on us, the print thereof
remains sure for ever.

Of these things at his first possession habitation and entry in the soul, he
ever assures and makes impression of.
where he is in any measure, he always reigns so, as sin shall have no Dominion
over us. 2. That he will not, nor may not by his Office (being sent for, to be
our Comforter, Testifier of Christ Jesus; and Revealer of, and Leader of us in
all Divine Truths) remove his dwelling finally from us; though he withdraw his
assisting Comforts and feelings of his Presence when we grieve and vex him; as
friends sometimes withdraw themselves and bar us their presence, upon just
discontents given, when yet the constancy of their love is the same, to shine
forth as clear, or clearer then ever, in due time, 3. That as when Christ sent
him unto us be to our Comforter, it was expedient for us, Christ (in his bodily
presence) should return to Heaven (to show al his work was done, our Redemption
finished, Principalities and Powers, Hell and Death conquered; as our Head in
our Nature, to take possession thereof for us, to make continual Intercession
for us at the right hand of the Father, and to perfume our weak Prayers,
offering them up with much sweet Odours in the golden Censer, upon the golden
Altar which is before the Throne, Revel. 8.1, 2.) so that it is expedient for
us, for him sometimes to seem to make some progress from us, and absent himself
(as it were,) 1. To chastise our neglects of him, and grieving of him. 2. Least
constancic of his presence should make us (like the Israelites) loath this
heavenly Manna. 3. To enhance and raise the price and valuation of his former
Presence and Comforts, 4. To set an edge upon our desires for his return. 5. To
inflame our love him the more abundantly at his Return, with resolution to hold
him faster then ever; 6. To grieve him no more as we have done, but to study
how to cherish him by all means. 7. That his fresh renewed joys may far
surmount all our sufferings in his absence.
And lastly, that we might long and groan to be in heaven, where we shall enjoy
for ever the fullness of his presence in all ravishing sense of surmounting
joys, in the inspection and sight of the beatificall vision for ever. prayer
for his return: then making large increase of our stock of grace, beyond our
expectation. Isa. 60.16. howsoever, increasing, continuing, and perfecting
seasonably (out of his infinite wisdom) in all our vicissitudes and exigents,
our heavenly race, and guiding us with his counsel in all things, until he
bring us unto glory. All which is, for the witness of Gods spirit, witnessing
with our spirit (in the first place) That we are the children of God. But there
is yet further, a second thing.

The immediate witness of the spirit (as it were) from heaven, without the
joint testimony and joining of the word, etc.
Which is a more strange sudden joy coming, and rushing into the soul, with a
surmounting contentation of delight, causing in a fuller manner (as it were)
then within his ordinary witnessing our spirits, that peace of God which
passes all understanding. Phil. 4.7. With that joy unspeakable and glorious, 1
Pet. 1.8. so that it causes us as we read of Jacob. Genesis 45.27. when he heard
overcomming reports of Joseph's safety, and entertainment he gave, say [I have
enough.] Thus we read of St. Augustine in his Confessions, that he had felt
sometimes such astonishing ravishing joys, that if they should have continued,
he knew not what should be added thereto in the life to come; Lib. 13.
but there complains, that they lasted not, but vanished away again quickly:
for indeed, the old vessels of our frail bodies, were not able to contain such
strong new wine, but they would crack: what a case were the disciples in at
Christ transfiguration? Mark. 9.5. They would have Tabernacles built there,
they were afraid, and knew not what they said: And 2 Cor. 12.3. Paul says, of
his rapture into Paradise, whether in the body or out of the body he knew not,
God he knows. This kind of witness and testimony is a sure one, and more then
all the testimonies of men and Angels: when as David prays, Psalm. 35.3. God
does therewith say unto our souls, I am thy Salvatian. This is that white stone
of Acquittance, accompanied with that new Name written therein, which no man
knows save he who has it, Revel. 2.17. And when God does give unto any this
joy, as by the former witness of the Spirit with our Spirits. he assures us of
our Salvation and future happy estate to come; so he does hereby give unto us
(as it were) Livery and seizing of the Everlasting joys of the blessed, and
makes unto us a kind of Heaven upon Earth; that as Paul was caught into
Paradise, and heard words unutterable; so a man in this case feels joy
unspeakable. If we consider the Matter of this joy, it is Certain, no man can
take it finally from us. Ioh. 16.22. But if we look unto our apprehensions and
feeling of the same, with the clear manifestations thereof, it comes and goes,
ebbes and flows, it lost and found; We rejoice in the hope of the Glory of God
(says the Apostle,) Rom, 5.2. and this Hope (as he afterward adds) makes not
ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad by the holy Ghost which is
given us.

If Hope then be an Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast, pitching within
the Vail, Heb. 6.19. If many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods
drown it, Cant. 8.7. It the holy Ghost which is given unto us be not a Brook
(which may be dried,) but a Well of water, springing up unto everlasting life;
then cannot the water of our joy ever finally fail, though many never feel the
same in that fullness again, as at their first conversion; and we must
acknowledge it to be our own fault (in not performance of that which God
requires at our hands) that it ebbes and flows, comes and goes so often;
because, as it is written, Rejoice evermore, 1. These. 5.16. Rejoice always;
Again I say Rejoice. Phil. 4.4. yet we labor not as we ought to be thankful,
to maintain this joy, being careless and ignorant how to recover the sweet
sense thereof again, when in appearance it is diminished, lost, and gone. And
thus, not only (We know) and (may know that we know) and be assured of the
certainty of a future glorious estate to come for ever: but now in he last
place.

How shall we know that this knowledge is no counterfeit Illumination.
Seeing the Devil can transform himself into an Angel of light, as Pharaos
Magitians did for a while counterfeit Moses true miracles. Exodus 7.11. Of this
I suppose there are three sure trials, By what goes before it. 2. By that which
accompanies the same when it enters into the soul with it. 3. By those
impressions this testimony and joy leaves behind it upon the soul.
For the first, it is sure that usually long, sore and great afflictions, and
sharp trials, usher the same, great sufferings, and after much striving and
wrestling, as Jacob obtained his new name. Genesis 32.28. after he had power with
the Angel, by wrestling, weeping and prayer, Hos. 12.4.

2. How it comes into the soul? David says, Psalm. 8.3. when I behold thy
heavens, even the works of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou have
ordianed: What is man say I, etc. so this sudden joy and testimony, may come
into the soul also by good conferences, as to the disciples traveling to
Emaus, when their hearts burned, when Christ entered into conference with them,
Luke, 24.32. So this joy may enter into the soul in some such meditations and
conferences, dwelling upon the excellency of heavenly things compared with
earthly. Or, when as it fell out with Daniel, that whilst he was a fasting and
praying, confessing his own sins and the sins of his people, then the man
Gabriel (whom before he had seen in the similitude of a man, chap. 8.16.) came
and touched him, reporting how that his prayer was heard, that at the beginning
thereof the commandment came forth, and (says he) I am come to show thee that
thou art greatly beloved. Dan. 9.23. Howsoever certain it is, that it always
comes with the performance of holy duties, in Gods ways. 3. By what
impressions, it leaves behind upon the soul. Extraordinary favors from God in
the sense of the sweet feelings and ravishings thereof (intimating Gods love by
immediate reports of the spirit) still leaves behind them great impressions of
humility, as Ierem. 33.9. he shows the effect of Gods wonderful favors
showed unto them, And they shall fear and tremble for all the goodness, and
for all the wealth that I show unto this City. O, says Isaiah, when he had
seen the Lord upon his Throne: Woe is me, for I am unclean, etc. for mine eyes
have seen the King the Lord of Hosts, Isa. 6.5. and when God (according unto
Jobs wish) drew near to confer with him: then he could say, I have heard of
thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eyes sees thee, wherefore I abhor
my self, and repent in dust and ashes, Job 4 2.5. This is the first, That
humility imprints and leaves upon the soul. The second is, Thankfulness, these
two accompany one another: I am less then the least of all mercies says
David; and Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits
toward me? as though there were not enough to render) I will take the cup of
salvation and call upon the name of the Lord, even now in the presence of all
his people. And thus not only the spirit witnesses with our spirits, that we
are the children of God: but also is pleased now and then to show himself with
more immediate stronger ravishing joies, and testimonies of Gods favor, (as it
were) immediately from heaven, ravishing the soul, and giving it here some
taste (in an extraordinary manner) of its future eternal joies, so much as
mortality is capable of, whereof some of the Saints have most experience at
their first conversion in such a taste and measure, as perhaps they never
attain in all their life, or seldom the like again in degree.

And yet, as the Sun in heaven, (though sometimes it has flashes of
extraordinary brightness, heat, and shining) when it does not always shine
alike in brightness, during the clouding damps, and eclipses thereof, is still
the same, and lightens the whole world with its height though it do not shine
forth with its glorious beams) being the same in it self, successively never
leaving us, without some light: so the spirits residence in the renewed soul,
is still the same in himself and us, though he shine not forth in our night
seasons, always alike with his beams upon us, for our comfort; yet the light
thereof shed abroad, in the whole parts and powers of the soul, still
enlightens and upholds the life of Grace in us in its life and being: shining
out brightly upon us again, with its comfortable beams, when the storms,
tempests, and mists are gone, which occasioned these clouds and damps: and when
we are so weaned from sense and feelings, that we are contented to live by
faith, and to wait the Lords leisure for his extraordinary favors (for then we
are best fitted to receive extraordinary favors and mercies from God, when we
are contented to sit down Saint-like at his feet, and to be contented of his
allowance whatsoever, Deuteronomy. 33.2. so that his constant residence with the
Saints, is ever (one way or other) firm and perpetual according unto Christ's
promise, never leaving them comfortless altogether, manifesting and revealing
himself unto them in all their exigents, according unto his infinite wisdom
for their good: making all things work for the best unto them, Romans 8.28. and
all his works (in his dissertions ebbings and flowings, returns,
manifestations,) witnessing less and more, darkly or more clearly, alone or
with our spirits, making all beautiful in time, when all the ends of our
crosses shall meet together, Eccles. 3.11. bringing meat from our eaters, and
strength from our strongest crosses, bringing his mavelous light out of our
darkness, and separating the light from the darkness, as at the Creation,
Genesis 1.4. so in this new Creation, which he is a perfecting like the morning
light, that it may shine more and more until the perfect day, Prove. 4.18. so
at his good pleasure and at our need bringing all our comforts unto our
remembrance. John, 14.26. yea and inhansing and raising the estimation, taste,
and price of them daily in his flesh and new Revelations for our joy and
comfort. 1 Cor. 2.10. all which things are wrought by one and the self-same
spirit (as Paul speaks) distributing to every man severally as he will, 1 Cor.
12 11. and guiding them with his counsel, until he bring them unto glory. Psalm.
37.24

And thus not only (We know) and (Know that we know) that this knowledge of our
assurance of a better life to come is not counterfeit, by Gods spirit
witnessing with Our spirits, that we are the children of God: sometimes in a
more high lofty and rare immediate strain of ravishing joy by himself (as it
were) from heaven: and always (when he pleases to join with the witness of
our spirits, sometimes again in a sweet, more often and lasting manner unto the
end. The difference being, That the former is a more strong and vehement
ravishing joy, coming and felt rarely upon extraordinary occasions and hard
trials, making short abode with us; at the time, heavens feasting days of
extraordinary favors. The other by turns; in some diverse degrees and measures,
sweet, more temperate, very sure, and holding out with us oftener in those his
reports and manifestations unto the end: so ballancing the excessive vehemence
and measure of the former, in its more mild lasting continuance in the latter.
And thus at length by the assistance of this blessed spirit, we are drawing
near to view this matchless Building, not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens.

But O! who is sufficient for these things? what tongue of Men or Angels can
show forth the same? wherefore, O thou great Architect of wonder; who
thunderest with thy voice, and can do mighty things which we know not: who
has made the earth by thy power, established the world by thy wisdom, and
stretched out the Heavens by thy discretion, who measurest the waters by thy
fist, who have comprehended the dust of the Earth in a measure, weighed the
mountains in a weight, and the hills in a balance, who can make weight to
the winds, and weigh the Waters by measure. Thou before whom all nations are as
nothing, and less then nothing and vanity, before whom the mountains tremble
and the hills melt, at whose sight the world is burned up, and all that is
therein. O thou who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain, like a molten
looking glass, and has spread them out as tents to dwell in who have
commanded all their armies, counting the stars, and calling all the hosts of
them by their names, who leads the blind by a way that they have not known,
making darkness light before them. O do thou take us by the hand, and lead us
along unto this heavenly building of thine, making darkness light before us,
who are ignorant how to pass along in these heavenly Labyrinths; and pave us a
passage in this unpaved way, opening our eyes and apprehensions to see and
understand some of the wonderful things contained therein. We know, that in the
day of our flesh, all that we can have of Thee, and of this Building, is but a
taste of thy gracious goodness, and that eye has not seen, ear heard, and that
it cannot enter into man's heart, what thou have done for them that love thee,
and fear before thee (even before the sons of men) much more in heaven. But
seeing thy spirit fearcheth all things, even the deep things of thee our God,
who know the course, with the height, and breadth, and depth, and length of
heaven and earth, and can set the rule thereof on the earth, and can by him
reveal unto us, what it pleases thee to make known of these unknown wonderful
things. O Let thy good spirit guide and lead us along into this land of the
living, this heavenly building of thine, and guide us from room to room, joy to
joy, glory to glory, astonishment to astonishment thereof, in some ravishing
astonishing way, as our hearts may ever thereafter, be taken up with delight
admiration, and vvonder: so as the svveet tastes, ravishments, joies, raptures,
and glory thereof (though we wander upon earch into the wilderness of this
world) may make us remove to dvvell in heaven, with heavenly conversation and
affections more then ever. O discover somevvhat of the excellency thereof unto
us, and suffer us, if it be thy good pleasure) to peep a little into the
eternity thereof, which may make us groan earnestly for the full manifestation
of the same, with a discovery of all those considerations, which may bring and
lead us aloft; unto this high high and lofty place of eternity, to dwell with
thee for ever. But now (in the first place) let us come to view.

The excellency of this Building in general.
be a Building prepared: as here when Princes and Noblemen intend magnificent
entertainment, though they have diverse houses of note, yet they have one
mansion house above all the rest, which they furnish and prepare for
entertaining of their choice, and chief respected beloved friends, as
Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.27. of his Palace, is not this great Babel, which I
have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and the
honor of my Majesty. So God to show forth to the Saints the glory and
magnificence of his power, has prepared this magnifique Building, to entertain
them for ever, wherein he has showed the strength, power, and invention, to
make it suitable to the Builders eminency, most magnifique and excellent, which
must the more excel above all other structures and buildings, which ever were
or can be imagined, as the Master builder thereof is beyond all others, in art,
skill, riches, invention, and power.

And then secondly, The excellency The unvaluable price of that purchase that
was paid for it; such a ransom, as nothing else could purchase it, but the
blood of the eterual Son of God, yea, more than Heaven it self. It was thought
a wonder, and a great matter, whereat Israel was sore grieved, when the King of
Moab sacrificed his, the King of Edoms eldest son, for a burnt offering in his
distress, 2 Kin. 3.27. Amos. 2.1. But oh! here is more cause of admiration,
That God should become Man, suffer and die, incarnate in our nature, and be
sacrisiced for our sins upon the Cross, that ignominious and cursed death, and
al by the appointment and dererminate counsel of God. And therefore the
Apostle may well come. 1 John 3.^. with his admiration, Behold what love the
father has given us, that we should be called the sons of God; no love like
unto this, which is further set forth by an unexpressible expression. John
3.16. For God so loved the world, that he has given his only begotten son,
and that whosorver heleeveth in him shall not perish, but have everlasting life.

Thirdly the excellency thereof The fullness extent and accomplishment of all
the rich, and exceeding precious promises; for here we have many great and rich
promises made, the extent whereof in their promised fullness) are not fulfilled
in this life, what then? shall they be in vain? oh no; they must be fulfilled
either here or in heaven: for no word of God proceeding out of his mouth, must
return again, until it have performed that for which it was sent. Isa. 55.10.
Here then must needs be an excellent place, where the full extent and
accomplishment of all promises (as they came from heaven) shall all in a
concurrence meet and fully be accomplished unto us, in the largeness of their
extent whatsoever.

Again, this is such a Building, wherein we shall fully fill up all the powers
and faculties of the soul, and satisfy the same unto the height of
contentment; for here, we cannot satisfy any one faculty of the soul, but it
has emptiness, and some further desire: the eye is not satisfied with seeing,
nor the ear filled with hearing, Eccles. 1.8. nor is the heart, with enjoying,
but that it has further inlargements. But there the whole soul, and all the
powers and faculties thereof, shall be filled with a satisfactory contentation.
Not like that enforced upon us in this life (wherein in afflictions and crosses
we look up unto God) and sit down under the same i^ patience, because God (we
know) will have it so, therefore submitting our selves unto his good pleasure
in all things.) But with a high joyful free contentation, satisfactory to fill
up the utmost of all the powers and faculties of the soul, so as it shall be
impossible to have a thought beyond it.

And further, in this glorious Building, the soul shall not only be satisfied,
unto the extent of all satisfactory fullness: But, it shall be also satisfied
to wonder and admiration, at the surpassing excellencies thereof: as it is
said, 2. These. 1.10. of Christ, that he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be made mavelous in all them that believe; mavelous indeed,
for then we shall see marvells beyond admiration, and beyond the disciples who
wondered at the goodly stones of the material Temples, a type hereof. But yet
more distinctly to describe this glorious Building, we must instance them in
diverse particulars.

1. In the Titles given unto it
His Fathers House. Travelers in hot countries, have Tents and Tabernacles, to
rest in for a while, where they stay nor long; but here is a mansion house, an
abiding and resting place, and therefore now we may well be bidden to arise to
go hence: for here is not our resting place, until we come unto this Mansion
house, our fathers house; where we must needs expect all the free kindnesses
whatsoever, and to receive them abundantly: for, he who spared not his own son,
but gave him for us all to death, how shall he not with him give us all things
also? Romans 8.32. And then again it is a City in opposition to our Earthly
Tabernacle, which is the reason rendered. Herbr. 11.9, 10. Why Abraham was so
willing to dwell in Tents: for he looked for a City, which had a foundation,
whose builder and maker is God. So it is Heb. 13.14. That here, we have no
continuing City, but we look for one to come, and as in a City, there are
gathered together, the confluence and riches of all the good things in the
Country round about it, besides that it is a settled resting place, (not like
Tents and Tabernacles, flecting up and down, here to day, and away to morrow.)
So in heaven, The City of the living God, the Celestial Jerusalem, there must
needs be the abundance of all heavens surmounting excellencies. And varieties
of unconceivable beauties) so amaze our spirits; and the fearful and
wonderful making of our earthly houses, so transport (as David confesses of
his fearful and wonderful making: how much more admirable is this rare
Building, Mansion, and resting place of the Almighty? all things being so much
the more excellent, as God shows himself to be a immediate agent and actor
therein.

2. The Situation thereof.
For lo, lo how it stands (as it is said) of Gods Mountain (the Church) exalted
above the hills. Isa. 2.2. and above the tops of the Mountains, yea as though
Mountains were set above Mountains of the top of one another; yet this high and
lofty place is far above all the heaven of heavens, above all storms and
tempests, and vexations whatsoever, so high and safe, as no thief can come to
dig through and steal, and where our treasures may safely lie, in the highest
elevation that may be situate; not amongst briars and thorn, as our houses
are; or amongst strangers and oppressors, but where we shall be most beloved
and welcome, amongst all our friends and kindred, where Christ's is with all the
Saints and Angels. This shall be heaven to be with Christ wheresoever he is; to
follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes: Father, I will that those whom thou have
given me be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory, John 17.24. and
so, To be ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. Then also the praise of a building
is, to be situate in a pleasant, not in an unpleasant dirty place, as those
cities were which Solomon gave to Hiram King of Tyrus, 1 King. 9.11. (which he
therefore refused) but this building is placed where pleasures abound for
evermore; called Psalm. 35.18. the Rivers of his pleasures, far before the
rivers of that earthly Paradise, which had but one Tree of Life, guarded with
Cherubims and a flaming sword, watered with four Rivers running through it,
whereof whosoever drunk might thirst again; but, here there runs along a
pure River of water of life, of which whosoever tastes and drinks, shall
never thirst again, but be in them a well of water springing up unto
everlasting life, with a Tree of Life growing on each side thereof, guarded
with no flaming sword, or affrighting Cherubim; but free to enjoy the full
virtue thereof, to live for ever. And then again, In our houses we love to have
our buildings with excellent lights (which is a commendation to them;) but in
Heaven, in this buildings, this commodity shall be in the perfection thereof,
Col. 1.12. called The inheritance of the Saints in light; out of all morral,
artificial, and natural darkness, even the Sun it self being darkness,
compared with the light thereof: always light, and light all over, lightened by
Christ the Lamb, who is the light thereof; not like the Sun, which lightens
but a part of the world, and leaves the other dark; but light all over, and
nothing but light: no light like unto this, always and ever light, and many
times lighter than that of the Sun, mentioned Isaiah 30.26. which is said,
should [be like the light of seven days, when the Lord binds up the breach
of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound. The next Consideration
is,

The Materials, Form, or Matter of this Building.
It is immaterial, not made of stone, or marble, or any such like substance, a
building not made with hands: far surpassing all other Buildings, as God is the
most cunning Master Builder; we know not what it is, but it is set forth unto
us, Revel. 21. in the highest expressions of all things which with us are
accounted excellent, as Gold, Pearl, Diamonds, with all other precious stones
whatsoever, and the pavement of Gold, as a shining glass. Whereby the
Holy Ghost would have us enlarge and stretch forth our meditations unto the
furthest extent of comprehension, by things within the compass of our reach,
to meditate upon things incomprehensible: that by all things which are pure and
precious, excellent, durable, attractive, and admirable, we might be in love
with, and long after things far above all expression of Men and Angels. Another
thing is.

4. The Capacity and Extent of this Building.
For it is large and has room enough for all, as Christ speaks John. 14.1.
In my fathers house are many dwelling places, wherein none shall be straightened,
as it was with Abraham and Lot, whom the land could not bear, because of their
substance. Genesis 13.6. and betwixt Isaac and Abimelech. Gen 26. who were
therefore forced to divide and part dwellings: but in heaven is largeness and
room enough for all: not like Tophet. Isa. 30.33. which by the Prophet is said
to be, a place, deep and large; not for any refreshing, but for the Torments
and misery therein, but none for conveniencie and comfort; where, for all this
largeness, they shall be so straightened, as if there were but room for one
only, whereas in heaven, there shall be such largeness of room, as though
heaven were but for one only, there shall be such room for all. And then we
have to confider.

5. The Furniture of this Building.
For in our houses here, usually the glory of them is, the riches of their
adorning inwardly (in heaven is expressed there to be lasting and enduring for
ever, all the furniture thereof) whereas ours are transitory, and subject
either to corruption and vanishing, or both; where Thieves may dig through and
steal. Mat. 6.19. And therefore the Saints are said to have endured joyfully
the spoiling of their goods, because they had in Heaven a better and more
enduring substance. Heb. 10.34. And 1 Cor. 7.13. He would have us to use this
world, as though we used it not, because the fashion of stage play thereof
passes way. But the riches of this building are such, as shall endure for
ever, where no worm can come to eat or consume the furniture thereof, which we
know not till we see it, but it is expressed by Crowns, Treasures, Whiterobes,
and the like, all understood which may be infinitely comprehended thereby, when
we enjoy the same. The next is to look upon,

6. The Company we shall enjoy there.
Ill Company-torments our Spirits much; Solomon says, that it is better to
dwell on the house top, than with a contentious woman in a large house. And
David (a holy man) was weary of dwelling in Meshec, and having his habitation
in the Tents of Kedar. And in Sodom, their unjust conversation did vex Lots
righteous soul. And Ier. 9.2. He wishes for a Cottage of wayfaring men in the
wilderness, that he might leave his people, being all Adulterers and Rebels,
rather than to live in such ill company But here in heaven, The excellency of
the Company far exceeds the building: The presence of God himself in our
Fathers house, of Christ and the holy Ghost in Trinity, not enjoying them as
here, only in our assistance of the spirit, but then an hundred times more
clearly than now: they shall dwell with us, and we shall have full and clear
immediate Communion with them; and so with all the holy Angels, who here are
said to be ministering Spirits unti us, Heb. 1. (a very great favor) but then
we shall see much more clearly into their nature and excellency, and know much
better what they are, and have done for us. And so to have society with the
Saints, the Family of Heaven, all of one Nature, Will, Affection, Mind, Desire,
Aim, and Endeavor; without any crossnes, burden, or distemper to one another,
as here. Though as it is said, Ezekiel. 2.6. we dwell here amongst rebels, thorns
and scorpions, yet there shall be no such annoyance, where of all things that
offend, shall none trouble. There shall be no Goats in that Fold; no no
Scorpions to bite, no Thorns and Briars in our sides to prick, no mockers,
slanderers or backbiters, no tares or darnel or chafe among that wheat, no
offensive or unclean thing can, or shall enter there: all shall be pure and
holy. Another Consideration is,

7. Our employment there.
This also sets forth the excellency be idle there; For even in the estate of
Innocence, Adam was set and appointed to dress and trim Paradise. The soul it
self is not capable of rest, but must have some employment. And though it be
said Rev. 14. That the dead are fully blessed, because they rest from their
labors, (which is only meant of their irksome toyling upon earth) and is not
said to bar us from an employment in heaven, suitable unto that estate we shall
enjoy there. For of those described, Revel. 7.13, 15. who had made their long
Robes white in the blood of the Lamb, (having gone through many tribulations)
it is said, That [Therefore they are in the presence of the Throne of God, and
serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on the Throne will
dwell among them.] So that as here, it is our duty to serve God continually, so
there, it shall be our honor, reward, and delight (when all other relations
and services shall have an end) to be perpetual spectators and actors of so much
ravishing excellency, all which service shall be done and continued with much
freedom and joy, and without any pain or weariness unto us, because as in the
Lord Jehovah, there is everlasting strength; so we shall from him receive
everlasting strength, and perpetual refreshing from him, so as we shall never be
weary of our employment, but it shall be our delight and joy to serve and
praise God for ever. For, though he has no need of our service, yet we shall
thus be perpetually honored and delighted by it. It shall be our ravishing
delightful employment to serve God in Christ continually. The last main
consideration of this Building which is a great one.

8. The possession and enjoying.
For, this makes up the pitch of all our Blessedness (not the possession
only) but the comfortable enjoying of what we do possess, in a joyful
manner. For in the midst of riches, and abundant outward things, yet a man
possessed of them may live in want, having no comfortable possession of them,
or quiet enjoying of them: as it is one thing to live, and another thing to
live joyfully, and as a man may be old, and yet not said to have lived long,
when he has not enjoyed his life comfortably. So it is here, in all which has
been said of this Building, if we enjoyed not what we possessed and that fully,
there were no blessedness in it. This is the Crown of all to enjoy what we
possess. But there, in a special manner, we shall enjoy the presence of God
in Christ, with the holy Ghost, being present to our sight and understanding,
fully and clearly unto all eternity. On earth, the Saints have no Communion or
fellowship with the Trinity, God in Christ and his blessed spirit, but what is
joined with distractions and interruptions of their comforts and feelings,
having times of dissertions, and withdrawing of their comforts. But it shall
not be so in heaven, where, we shall have a full ravishing intelectual
understanding of the blessed Trinity; as it is wicked men's misery to he without
God in the world, who know, and can speak many good things, but have no true
taste and inioyment of the same, wanting the heavenly influence and comforts
thereof: and as in this life it is a Godly man's affliction, to want Gods
presence, being scanted in his favors, so there (on the contrary) it shall be
our everlasting blessedness that we shall fully see and enjoy, with all the
whole powers and might of the soul, with an actual intellectual full sight, the
fullness of God in fruition of the Beatifical vision for ever. as it is 1 John,
3.2. Dearly beloved now are we the sons of God, but yet it is not made
manifest, what we shall be, and, we know that when be shall be made manifest,
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. It is true indeed, that
God the father is invisible, that no man has seen God at any time, and that he
cannot be seen, no not with our eyes glorified; but we shall have a full clear
distinct sight and understanding of the fullness of God in the Beatificall
vision, in Christ Jesus, The Bea^^^ call vi^^e^
who is said to be the ^uage of the invisible God in whom dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in whom the fathers pleasure was, that all
fullness should dwell: Colos. 1.15.19. and 2.9. A clear understanding of God in
Christ, with the fullness of an intelectual knowledge, that we shall (as it
were) be pitched and rolled upon the continual intuition of the satisfactory
fullness of that our knowledge and enjoying of that beatifical vision for ever.
Which it seems is that which the Apostle aims at 1. Cor. 15.28. And when al
things shall be subdued then shall the Sun himself also be subject, unto him, who
did subdue al things under him that God may be all in all. So resigning his
Mediatorship, to live as an heir with us in one body, in the beholding of this
infinite ravishing astonishing glory of the fullness of God (the loadstone of
heaven) which shall fasten and draw the eyes of this whole great body upon it,
as we see put Iro^ in the fire, and within a while it shows not Iron, but red
all fire, being defused through the same. So the love of God, and those
glorious influences of heavenly rays coming from him, shall set the whole soul
so a fire with the love of God, as it shall show all love to him, with suitable
returns of what continually flows from him, reflecting upon us. As the Ocean
(out of its fullness) fills and flows into the rivers: which continually
return of that fullness back again into the Ocean, so shall it be continually
betwixt God and us. And to fill up the fullness of this blessed enjoyment,
there shall be withal a full report made unto the soul, that all this joy and
blessedness shall be so for ever without any end. It were else a dimunition of
this fullness of joy, and enjoyment thereof, if therewith there should not be a
report made unto the soul and assurance of the endless continuance of the same
for ever, in that same degree of fullness and ravishing joy.

But this is not all, we have not yet done, for this discovery of heavens
blessedness, in that excellent estate to come, yet summoneth us ere we pass
from thence: to consider of Five Particulars more, for now having touched the
handles of this door, my pen must yet drop down myrrh, and my fingers pure
myrrh for a while.

First, In this life, we know, understand But in heaven, the soul shall have
that which shall fill the understanding, and all the powers and faculties of
the soul to the outmost, with that clearness and fullness of unerstanding,
that it shall possess all it sees, and enjoy all in that fullness, that it
shall not be able to have, a thought, wish or, desire beyond that it sees,
enjoys, possesses, and apprehends, without admission of any addition
whatsoever: even from that one end and coast of heaven to the other, as the
Lord said to Joshua of Canaans possession, Josh. 1.3.

And secondly our actions in this life are all performed with some labor and
weariness, Eccles. all the works that are done under the Sun, are vanity and
vexation of spirit, there is care its getting, care in enjoying and keeping,
and sorrow in parting with them. But in heaven all our actions shall be
performed with freedom and ease, without any weariness, as we see the Sun
shines freely upon us; and without weariness: yea there is labor and some
toil in our be stactions meditation and prayer, some wrestling and striving
therein, but in heaven all shall be done freely with ease, and without any care
or weariness.

Thirdly, In this life we enjoy many temporal and spiritual blessings are
apprehending the full use of them, as of our health life, liberty, maintenance,
besides many spiritual mercies we are encompassed with about: and so not
understanding them, we have not a full enjoying of the comfort of them, and so
fall short of being thankful for them. But in heaven we shall see fully and
clearly, into, round about, and through all our mercies, having a full under
standing and comfort of all if comfort be not to mean an expression for our
estate in heaven, where shall be nothing to interrupt, lessen, or make an
addition unto that blessed estate; where in we shall be above all co^forts,
enjoying the God and fountain of all comfort and consolation) when also shall
be effected that prayer of the Apostle: that being rooted and grounded in love,
we shall understand, and be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth and height, and the love of Christ, which
passes knowledge, that we might be filled with all the fullness of God. Ephesians.
3.18. understanding the mystery of that knowledge which from the beginning of
the world has been hid in God, and the riches of this glorious inheritance
among the Saints. Ephesians. 1.18 Then we shall see into and know all this, and the
utmost reach of all our mercies distinctly and have an everlasting insight into
them all.

And more fourthly, here we hope, or, and have great expectation of many
things, having excellent and strong conceits of them, al which when we possess
and enjoy, they answer not our hopes, and prove far under our expectation,
giving us no suitable contentation: but in Heaven we shall find al things far
beyond, and surmounting al our thoughts, wishes, hopes, expectations, and
imaginations: that like as the Queen of Sheba, when she saw how far Solomon's
royalty and magnificence exceeded the report thereof, that half thereof had not
been told: much more shall we find it so in heaven, where al things shall far
surmount that, which now here we can imagine or think of, for if eye has not
seen, ear heard, neither has it come into man's heart, what things God has
prepared for them that love him in this life, 1 Cor. 2.6, A taste whereof if
they be known unto us by Revelation of the spirit in this life, how much more
fully shall all be revealed in the strength of their excellency in the life to
come: when he who does for us here abundantly above all that we are able to
think or speak; shall much more make heavenly things be and appear so in the
life to come.

all those mercies and comforts we do enjoy here, they are but successively and
by peecemeal enjoyed, one after another. But in heaven we shall have the full
sight, clear enjoying and possession of all our mercies at once, which shall
superabundantly fill up the measure of our joys, when all shall appear at once
unto us, never having any thing more present themselves successively by pieces
unto us: but a full clear understanding of all at once: all which put together
and thought of, may well encourage and hearten us to look joyfully on the other
side of death, unto

This Building given of God not made with hands what excellency may there be in
this, were not the heavens and earth we enjoy and see also made without hands?
yes, But, this expression adds wonderfully unto the excellency of this
Building: distinguishing it to be far before all the rest, as being not made
with hands: this earth and heavens we enjoy being but as the work of man
compared with the exceeding excellency and glory of this heaven of heavens. The
strange Masterpiece of God not made with hands, the curious magnificent
Palace of all his most royal entertainments: a strange building (as was said
of Melchizedec) without father, without mother without any known beginning or
ending. Such a place also, wherein all our mercies are conveyed by God himself,
unto us without hands for ever. And thus by assistance of Gods blessed spirit,
we are at length come to peep into

The Perpetuity and eternity of this Building.
Eternal in the Heavens, what eternal, and eternal in the Heavens! an hour in
Heaven were more then eternity upon earth, O says David a day in thy Court is
better then a thousand every where, I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house
of my God, then dwell in the Tabernacles of wickedness, Psalm. 84.10. Now,
Eternity is that which shall endure for ever: that is, shall never have an end.
And then it shall never have any intermission, nor period, pause, eclipse, or
any cloud to overshadow it: as in this world, in all our most excellent
enjoyments we have, as Solomon says, Eccles. 7.18. Here we have still, this
set over against that, that here we might find nothing after us. But there, in
heaven it is not so, all things shall be after us, and after us without any
overshadowing, cloud, or intermission whatsoever, and an estate without any
end: which thus extends it self, that though we may out live our estates, yet
there we cannot outlive our happiness. Eternity being 1. A pure continued 2.
An universal
this no man upon earth can act, with all the powers of the soul at once, but
still there must be a cessation of one or other power thereof, when the other
acts, but there all shall act at once, without intermission of any one faculty
or power of the soul.

And lastly, for the Degree, it shall be ever the same, and shall admit of no
descent, of the least degree thereof, no ebb or dimunition at all here we enjoy
not our best comforts still in the same degree, we have vicissitudes of ebbing
and flowing, sometimes sad, and sometimes mad for laughter; we dance and leap
like the Creple healed, Acts 3. and by and by we are quiet again. And even our
best joys of the Spirit have their ebbings and flowings: at our first
conversion and after, they are not the same in Degrees, but have their eclipses
and sunshines; much ado we have to tune our hearts and spirits for meditation
and prayer, and much more ado to keep them in compass being tuned; we rejoice
and are sad again; we have feeling, and anon again, ere long we complain for
want thereof. But in Heaven, our joys stand still in the same height and degree
eternally for ever; For, look what height of taste, sense, joy, delight, or
ravishment we have and feel at first, (after the extent of many millions of
years that we have been in Heaven) it shall ever be at the same height and
degree of fullness, without any descent or ebb. This Manna shall never be
loathed, but be eternally the same, in all full sensible contentment of Degree
for ever, So as we shall taste Eternity every moment. And that this is so of
necessity,

That no other Estate can fit the Saints but an Eternal Estate.
It is clear by diverse reasons, First In regard of God. And then Secondly, Of
the Saints themselves. First, In Because of the end of the Creation, That all
things were made for his Glory, and he must be eternally glorified by us in
Heaven; therefore he must confer upon us an eternal suitable estate, enabling
us to give him glory for all eternity. One cannot here glorify God, but as he
receives from him Glory to return unto him: and therefore we glorify him here,
because we first receive glory from him; as the returns of waters to the sea,
are suitable unto those floods which they receive from it: therefore our estate
in this heavenly Building must of necessity be an eternal Estate, to fit and
enable us to give In regard that no other Estate suits with the promises made
unto us, but an eternal Estate, agreeing unto the promises of eternity. We do
in this life, and shall in that to come, receive nothing but by virtue of some
word of God past in promises made unto us, as 1 John 2.25. it is said, And this
is the promise which he has promised us, even Eternal life in whom we are, who
is true, even Jesus Christ, the true God, and eternal life, 1 John 5.20. Now,
all the exceeding rich and precious promises being made for Eternity, and God
being Truth it self, whatsoever he has promised must of necessity come to
pass, and so our estate in this house be for Eternity: Otherwise, whatsoever
should come short of Eternity, should come so far short of the promises, which
is impossible. The next is, thirdly, From the love of God which is Everlasting:
For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great mercies will I gather
thee: In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer,
Isa. 54.8. If Gods love then be eternal, that Estate which he bestows upon his
people must be perpetual and eternal. For God is goodness it self, and
whatsoever he does is good, even in wrath remembering mercy, all he does being
for our good, as it is, Isa. 27.9. This being all the fruit, even the taking
away of our sin, which is the fruit of all his doings and our sufferings, to
make us partakers of his holiness, yea as David confesses all his works
through out whole life time, are nothing else but mercy and truth, says he,
through all my life thy favor is; and this is a prime act of divine love,
where once it loves, to love for ever, John, 13.1. so that the eternity fo his
love, is like unto Our estate there must needs be eternal, in regard of the
infinite invaluable price whereby it was purchased: otherwise, it should not
answer the price, and God should not render us according unto it, and so be
unjust. For, he was exact in his justice to have satisfaction for sin to the
utmost. And therefore, to suit his Justice, he must needs be just to give unto
us an eternal estate, according to the price paid, and accoring to our
capacity. So he, as it is, Heb. 9.14. Having offered up himself through the
eternal spirit, gives unto us an estate suitable his ever-lasting
righteousness: and so our estate in heaven by his purchase, must be suitable
unto it, an eternal inheritance.

And so also, in regard of the Saints of our condition, our estate there, must
needs be eternal; for diverse respects. 1. Considering, that the constitution of
the Saints is a glorious condition, and therefore must needs have an estate of
satisfaction. Now if a man in that estate might see the end thereof or beyond
it, it were not satisfactory for the soul. Other creatures have no capacity
beyond their present estate, and therefore are satisfied therewith. But it is
not so with man, who has a reach beyond all he possesses, or can see, even to
eternity: it being impossible to satisfy an eternal constitution with finite
things. Therefore we must have an eternal Estate, God having stamped upon the
soul an impression to look after that only which is Eternal and Infinite:
therefore being now in a finite Creature, it must look for an eternal Estate
hereafter (at its departure hence) which is [Eternal in the Heavens.] Again,

As it is a new Creature, there is a principle in the soul to be contented with
nothing but Eternity; and therefore, according unto this Spiritual eternal
principle, it thirsts after, and must have an Eternal estate. For, as its
original is not of Corruptible seed, but of Incorruptible, by the word of God,
who lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet. 1.2 3. so must we needs have an Eternal
Estate suitable.

In regard that the Saints hopes are Eternal, and so nothing else save Eternity
can answer the same, seeing they are begotten again [to a lively hope, out of
Gods abundant Mercy] by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; [To an
Inheritance immortal and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven
for them] 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. Seeing then in this life, it is a grievous thing to be
disappointed of our hopes (which the Saints pray against) but would much more
be so in heaven, seeing here we have no continuing City, but we look for one
to come. Therefore our Expectation being strongly upon that Inheritance to
come, and the hope deferred (as Solomon says) being the fainting of the heart;
if our desires and hopes should miss of this tree of Life in Eternity, We
should be Sick in Heaven, which is impossible: and therefore our Estate there
must of necessity be an Eternal Estate, suitable to our lively hopes. Now

This Meditation of Eternity, where it fastens upon the soul, works great
Matters into it.

The Meditation (I say) of our Change, and Eternal Glorious Estate to come for
Eternity: it works, stamps, and makes strange impressions of wonderful matters
having hearts more in heaven then on earth.

2. Then again it makes us do all Ephesians. 1.4. To redeem the time. But the
Saints on the other side, as they improve their time so they desire to do all
things exactly with subordination unto heavenly things (especially heavenly
things more immediately ushering eternity.) Whereunto as all their thoughts and
meditations bend, so do they tend toward eternity in all things, because, in
all their actions, they have a design upon eternity, doing all things as though
they were to answer all at the last day, when yet they know, that their sins
before that time, are done away and covered, Jerem. 31.34. Micah, 7.18. And
this meditation of death, and eternity of heaven after the same, it makes us
also abundant in the work of the Lord, knowing that our labor shall not be in
vain in the Lord: and makes us work through all difficulties unto this eternal
estate, doing all things unto that end, not drawing back or indenting with God.
For, seeing it knows, that there is no determination-of this estate, it makes
(what it ca^) a suitable endeavor of Eternity upon earth, to work in all things
toward the same. And yet more (it fills the soul full of honorable thoughts
not to be contented to sit down any more doting upon these earthly things on
this side of eternity] as we have formerly done, setting our eyes upon that
which is vanity and vexation of spirit, nothing, yea less then nothing,
compared with eterninity. For here as David speaks Psalm. 119.19. We may see
an end of all perfection and earthly glory whatsoever in this life. But of this
heavenly perfection, as there is no, so we can see no end thereof. And this
meditation of death, and eternity following after it, makes this impression
upon the soul also (as is usual in disputations) To state the grand business
of heaven and earth aright, to weigh all things in the balance of the
Sanctuary, wherein they are found light, nothing yea less then nothing
compared, with this eternity of heavenly glory to be revealed: and so to look
for, or expect no great matters, where they are not to be found, But to use
this world, and all things therein as though we used them not and there fore
lays this conclusion for an invincible ground, that all the afflictions of
this life, are not worthy of that glory which shall be showed unto us, so great
that the whole creation is said to groan and wait for the revelation theoreof,
with the manifestation of the sons of God. Romans 8.18. Called therefore the
fervent desire of the creature, waiting, groaning, and traveling in pain with
them, to be delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty
of the sons of God. And therefore in all the murmurrings and tossings of the
body in this life, it quiets the same with holy Bernard his speech unto his
body, to be contented to suffer and wade through all the exigents of this life
patiently, because the time of the body is not in this life, but in the world
to come, wherein our frail bodies shall be made like unto Christ's glorious body,
Phillip. 3. And it (further to comfort us in our weary journey) assures us,
That all this life time is nothing else, but a time to sit and prepare us for
to be Inhabitants of Heaven for ever, to learn the language of Canaan in; to be
endowed with those supernatural habits of heavenly graces; putting on the Lord
Jesus Christ in all his holy virtues; so by viewing of the exceeding rich and
precicious promises, [to be partakers of the Divine Nature.] And as it was said
of those Virgins that were to be brought unto King Ahashuerosh, Est. 2.12. They
were first to be fitted and persumed a year, one half thereof with Oil of
Myrrh, and the other with sweet Odors. So this Impression of Eternity shows
us, that all our life time here, is nothing else but our persuming time, to fit
us with the fragrancie of all heavenly graces and endowments, that then
willingly and cheerfully we may mount up out of the Wilderness of this world,
as it is said of the Church, Cant. 5.6. perfumed with Myrrh and Incense, and
all the Spices of the Merchants; fraught with the full fragrancie and
sweetness of all Heavenly Graces.

And Lastly, It makes us that not only we are not content to sit down quietly
doting on these earthly things on this side of eternity (as is said) but
further, It enflames the soul, sets it on fire, and furnishes it with grounds
and arguments to attain to a habit of sighing and groaning earnestly to be
clothed with our house which is from heaven, not only from the excellencies
of all that glory and eminence showed of this heavenly house (which is
abundantly enough to make us to long after the same) but also, in regard of
those grievous and heavy pressures, and burdens wherewith we are pressed down
in this life: as what can we name wherewith we are not more or less pressed
down or burdened? so that that we have just cause to sigh and groan earnestly
for this our heavenly house.

The body it self, is a heavy lumpish corruptible body, subject to much toil
labor and weariness, which makes us to sigh and groan much; besides the
trouble and noisomenesse of so many troops of diseases and sicknesses, which
accompany the condition of our frail bodies, causes of continual sighing and
groaning. But in heaven all sicknesses and diseases shall haven an end, with
perfection of health for ever, and the body shall be no more lumpish or heavy
as now, but a nimble spiritual body, Philip. 3.21. Where they shall follow the
Lamb wheresoever he goes, it being heaven wheresoever Christ is, or shall show
himself; the body then being nimble and spiritual, able to mount upwards or
downwards, backwards or forwards, as swift as thoughts are now.

David, Lot, and Jeremiah, were so grieved and burdened. And from others also
we endure Slanders and Persecutions of all sorts; yea, and it is also some
burden unto us, unto others, and help them in their miseries. But in heaven
all these things shall have an end, all shall love and joy alike, all be of one
will, mind, and affection; no misconstructions, passions, distempers,
mistakings can be there; no Slanders, Tale-bearers, or reports shall vex there;
no Sorrow, Grief, or Want shall be there, no objects of our compassion to
grieve us, all shall have enough with a conversation suitable unto heaven.

And here our spirits have grievous burdens, vexing our spirits: and our
affections of love and joy, are disordered, either set on wrong objects, or
doting too much on earthly things, or coming far short in joying or loving of
God, whom we should joy in with all our might, and love with all our strength
and delight, and can never joy in, or delight too much: these press us down,
as was said of Christ, that his soul was heavy even unto death, so these
depresse us, and make us lumpish, and (as it were) rounds his about with
sorrow. Now a Man that has a little glimpse of the glory excellency and
eternity of this heavenly estate by faith, knowing that then all sorrows and
tears shall be washed and done away, cannot choose but groan earnestly to be
clothed with its house which is from heaven. Because in heaven there shall be
no more erring in our affections, which shall all be placed on the right
object; and then there shall be no more fear of doting upon the creature, or of
the excess, degree, or measure of our love to God, or joying in him, whom we
cannot too excessively love: for as on earth we cannot love him too much, so in
heaven we shall not be able to love him too little.

And here our ignorance is great, and a burden to us, a great toil and labor
to attain knowledge, and a burden to be such non-proficients to profit so
little and slowly in search thereof; yea having attained a little knowledge,
then it is a burden to know so little of that we should know, and that so much
remains yet to be known; we are ignorant of. And when our knowledge is here at
the height, then is our burden greatest of all, because then we most of all
see into our own misery and want in knowledge (especially in heavenly things)
so that that falls out to be true which Solomon says, that he who increases
knowledge, increases sorrow. But in heaven, the soul shall not be capable of
any ignorance, but as soon as the interposing veil, betwixt the soul and heaven
shall be removed, as soon as this curtain shall be drawn, it shall be filled (as
it were) in a moment with perfection of all knowledge, more then all this world
ever had since the creation, were it altogether in one: so that now both our
ignorance and knowledge, when we know are a great burden unto us, and causes
of groaning earnestly, and sighing for our house, which is from heaven.

Our callings are also some burden unto us, be what they will, on way or other
there is wearisomnesse or vexation in them, and even the ministry it self a
great burden to undergo, as Paul speaks of himself, undergoing the care of
all the Churches. But in heaven no burdens, wearisomenesse, or pressures
shall be in any thing we go about, but all done with ease, and much facility and
cheerfulness.

Then also, there is a bondage of corruption in the will, refractory unto all
goodness, prone unto al evil, in all holy duty still going whither our flesh
would not, which is unruly and untamed, so as we have great warring betwixt the
flesh and the spirit, which is a terrible burden, not to be able to perform
that good we would, and led captive unto that we would not. But in heaven the
will shall be renewed changed, and newmolded, that there shall be no reluctance,
or drawing back nor the least jot of any inclination to depart from the exact
will of God in all things. Because by this time we being perfectly holy, Gods
will and ours must of necessity be all one, and so the current of our
affections run for ever in one channel.

And unto all these more then all the rest, we not only burdened, pressed
down, and wearied with the many actings of sin, and surrounded about also and
environed, with the dwellings thereof in us in this body of death: which though
sometimes it lie still ready as an Army round about us in readiness to ambush
and come upon us, we know not how, where, nor when, like a lurking serpent
still waiting to sting and suddenly surprise us, which body of death made St.
Paul, though otherwise a man of an invincible courage to master vanquish and
overcome all afflictions, and make a tush and light matter of them, as
sorrowing (says he) yet always rejoicing; as having nothing and yet
possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6.10. being a strong man to master these and all
other crosses, yet cry out on this (as too hard for him) Romans 7.24. O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. But in heaven
there shall be no more sorrows, crying tears, or cause of complaints. Our
death, will be the death, of this body of death, no sorrow or shame, or
complaints in heaven, no ambushes of sin can lie there, nor Serpent shall creep
in into that Paradise to seduce us anymore: we shall for ever be freed from
this body of death, and have a body like unto Christ's glorious body. In all
which respects and many more, these meditations and impressions of eternity of
glory in the life to come, makes such reflections upon us, to make us to sigh
and groan earnestly, to be clothed with our house which is from heaven unless
in,

Some Cases when Believers otherwise very good men, cannot thus sigh and groan
to be clothed with this their house which is from heaven.
Which may appear, both in regard of others and our selves. First, for others:
Many believers are contented to spare this Sighing and Groaning (at least
suspend the same) Because they would live to do more good unto others, to see
some fruit of their labors and seed sown, how it grows; to see the prosperity
of the Church, as David did, Psalm. 106.4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor
of thy people, visit me with thy Salvation, that I may see the felicity of
thy chosen, and rejoice with thy people, and glory with thine inheritance.
Paul, are very able to comfort and help others, and therefore are sparing to
Sigh and Groan for this heavenly house, because they may be profitable unto
others; as Paul, though in regard of himself he could have been contented to
have flowne into heaven; yet in regard of Others, he armed himself with that
wonderful self denial, to be contented to live for their sakes. And so also
may many other good Christians linger and draw back from earnest groaning after
this heavenly house, in regard of Others. Parents sometimes would live to see
their children bred and brought up in the fear of God, and see the prosperity
of other friends, and are not so earnest in Sighing and Groaning after their
Dissolution.

Secondly, For our selves; We earnestly for the same which we are ignorant of
and know not, and yet for all this, may be good Christians and Believer, though
they fail and come short in these meditations. David, a holy reconciled man
after Gods own heart; yet Ps. 38.4. when God suffered his sins to stare him in
the face, he then complains, [Mine Inquities are gone over my head, and as a
heavy burden, they are too heavy for me:] and so prays, Ps. 39.19. [Stay thine
hand from me, that I may recover my strength, before I go hence and be not.]
Now, a sense of sin and wrath now and then being given unto the Saints, they
cannot then groan earnestly to be clothed with this heavenly house. Fourthly,
And again, Lot, a good holy man, yet what ado was there to draw him away from
Sodom, that whilst he prolonged the time, he was in a manner pulled out of
it; and when he was pulled away from it, yet he makes intercession for Zoar,
which was one of those Cities, that his soul might live, Genesis 19.20. And
sometimes again, Fifthly, self, nor able to look after heavenly things, having
much ado to wrestle after these encumbrances, when it is unfit to sigh and
groan earnestly after heavenly things, yea, not to manage earthly comforts;
as it fell out with the children of Israel, Exodus 6.9. that though Moses told
them excellent things of the Egyptian bondage and captivity yet (it is said
there) That they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of Spirit, and for cruel
Bondage; So that vexations of earthly encumbrances and wants, are great
impediments unto this sighing and groaning earnestly after heavenly things in
this our house which is from heaven.

and groaning after this heavenly house, because we look on death, under wrong
notions and apprehensions, and therefore run from it, as Moses fled from his
staff when it was turned into a Serpent, until God quiet our spirits, and bid
us to take it up again, showing us that there is no danger in it, and making us
in love with it. For indeed, Death is a part of the Saints portion, 1 Cor. 3,
22 all things are yours says he, whether it be Paul or Apollos, or Cephas or
the World, or life, or death, whether they be things present or things to come;
all are yours, etc. what great matter is this for death to be ours? O yes, a
great matter as it is ordered, as the Grave is sanctified and perfumed by
Christ, and as it were an inlet unto Glory, being the door of life; this also
is Ours, and a great part of our portion, one of Christ's prime Legacies. It
seems that Job had no Cross, or bad apprehensions of Death, Job. 6.11. What
power have I (says he) that I should endure? or what is my end if I should
prolong my life? And David he says, Mark the upright man, and behold the just;
for the end of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. and indeed if we look through
the Scripture Glass upon Death, it is nothing to a Believer, apprehending it
rightly. For, then we see it to be nothing else, but A sleep, Death what.
A peaceable rest, A gathering to our fathers and people, The funeral day of
all our sins, and final destruction of all our enemies, The gate of heaven, as
it were, Our Coronation day, and the Resurrection of all our comforts, with
which, and the like apprehensions, we may come (as it were) to bury death it
self. The Apostle we see speaking of death, he passes it over slightly, and
mentions only the clothing after it: insisting upon that which we shall have
when we have put off this earthly Tabernacle. And in the Phillipians speaking
of Death, he passes over it and mentions only our being with Christ.

In all these and many more cases (too tedious now to insist in) the soul
cannot sigh and groan earnestly to be clothed with this heavenly house, though
otherwise Believers and good Christians; wherefore in these and the like cases,
we must not be at quiet with our selves, until we have shaken off these lazy
pressing down habits of our distempers, with holy David chiding our selves as
he did his soul, Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted
within me? wait on God, for I will yet give him thanks; he is my present help
and my God.

But at other times, Times when the soul can sigh and groan for Heaven.
when it pleases him to say unto our souls I am thy Salvation, when he
anoints our eyes with spiritual eye salve to see a far off into things
invisible; when heavens gates are opened unto us by a powerful preaching and
opening of the word of truth unto us, our believing breaking forth into
rejoicing, when with an enlarged heart we can run the ways of his
commandments, the feet of them that bring glad tidings being beautiful upon
the mountains unto us. And Christ coming by them, leaping by the mountains and
skipping by the hills of our sins to comfort and stablish us: when the water of
our sanctification is clear and not muddie, so as we can read our evidences in
brightness, with many strong reports of the spirit, joining with our spirits,
when the blood in our justification runs fully and clearly before us, that we
can powerfully apprehend the same. And when in meditation wrapped a little,
heaven and heavenly things seem great and glorious unto us, and earthly things
(compared with them) mean and contemptible, when Christ becomes that precious
pearl known and beloved above all things; for which we are contented to sell
all; when we have got some sight and assurance of heaven, and eternity of
glory, having been victorious in some sharp crosses, trials, and afflictions:
having sacrificed our Isaacs and attained unto some good measure of self
denial, in uprightness and sincerity, being humbled Saintlike, to sit down at
Gods feet, and be whatsoever he will have us to be. Then, then, the soul cannot
choose but sigh and groan earnestly to be clothed with its house which is from
heaven.

And very great reason there is to sigh and groan earnestly for (a house of
glory) such a house as will keep us out of all dangers, and supply all our
wants. This is that clothing we so sigh and groan earnestly so, To be clothed
with our house which is from Heaven: of which our Garment clothing us, there
is a threefold consideration. That clothing we had in the Estate of
Innocence, which covered our shame and nakedness, and which we kept not; for
sin discovered our shame, so that it was the garment and clothing of Christ's
righteousness in Justification and Sanctification, consisting in Holiness and
Righteousness, mentioned, Isa. 61.10 called the garment of Salvation, and robe
of Righteousness; cause of great rejoicing to the soul, to joy in God, being
clothed with the garments of Salvation, and covered with the robes of
Righteousness. There is under this notion of clothing, the Glory of Heaven
understood and looked at. Christ his Righteousness is indeed a garment of
Glory, making us all glorious, which garment we are now clothed with, I
whereunto when there shall be added a tincture of Glory in Heaven, then are we
clothed with our house from Heaven; for the soul wishes not to be rid of that
garment of Grace is now wears, but to have it beautified and adorned to the
height of all excellency, when it shall be clothed with a tincture of Glory,
to make it appear most of all excellent. Which glory even Christ himself in the
days of his flesh prayed for, Job. 17.5. And now O Father, glorify me with
thine own self, with that glory which I had with thee before the world was:
that is, that the glory of the Divinity might shine forth (joined with his
Humanity) as bright as ever.

Now this clothing, Our heavenly clothing.
is first a most rich and precious clothing above all other clothing
whatsoever, exceeding that of the lillies spoken off, which surpassed Solomon's
glory in all his excellency and royalty. And the secondly, It is a durable
clothing, which shall never wear, nor wax old, but be new and alike fresh for
ever: as it was said of the children of Isreal's garments and shoes, in their
journey unto that earthly Canaan (a Type of the heavenly) not only that these
did not wear, but were as fresh and new as at the first. And then thridly, It
is a lovely garment, which shall be perfected with Gods comeliness, and that
beauty he shall put upon it, mentioned Ezekiel. 16.14. which if he call it perfect
upon earth; In how much more perfection of beauty shall this clothing be in
heaven, where the fullness of glory does so abundantly shine forth about the
Beatificall vision? And as for Excellency, so for Use, this garment of glory,
is such a clothing, as shall cover all our shame and all our nakedness. For
if the estate of innocence knew not shame (till sin discovered it) much less,
shall there be any shame in heaven, where this garment of glory, so far excels
surmountingly our first garment of innocence. Such a garment, as we shall
always keep close about us; where no winds, troubles or temptations, shall be
to make us any more in danger, to loose our garments, as here. And then, [such
a garment as shall keep us warm for ever: such a house and garment as shall
preserve us for ever, from all outward encumbrances and troubles, supplying all
natural wants, without natural helps,] doing all these things to us so, as we
shall never have need of them any more. A house clothed with the glory of
heaven, far beyond all earthly cloathings and furnitures. And such a clothing,
as shall make an everlasting distinction betwixt us and wicked men for ever,
whatsoever imputations now lie upon us conversing amongst them. Malach. 3.18.
such a house (like Christ himself the glory of that house,) from w^om and every
thing in the house, we may at all times fetch whatsoever we want to supply all.
So that Heaven is all things unto us: as God is the universal good so has he
the fullness of all to supply us with, which he can convey when and by what
means it pleases him. All things are ours, because Christ is ours, who is all
things unto us, and has all things, his whence at all times we may fetch every
thing we want, out of this heavenly glorious house: for which the soul
therefore in its most excellently composed temper, sighs and groans, (as has
been said) that our garment of salvation, and robe of Righteousness we are now
clothed with in this our natural condition, may be heightened up to the full
perfection of heavenly beauty, with a superadded tincture of Glory in that
highest place of eminency and excellency, far above all.

[Not that it would be uncloathed, Why the soul would not be uncloathed.
] this is not the cause of the sighing and groaning, but [cloathed upon.] The
soul in this case has no peremptory desire to die, not any pleasure of
complacencie that way: Oh Life is precious, and long life is a blessing from
God; To live long in the Land, and to have opportunity to do much good, and to
recover a great deal of the blessed Image of God. It knows Death to be of it
self an enemy, and the last enemy which shall be destroyed, and no man will
willingly cast himself in the jaws of his enemy, which (without a garment of
Grace) will but lead us unto the King of Terrors, into that Eternity of that
tormenting Tophet for ever. No it is not willing to uncloath it self of this
garment of Grace, Christ's Righteousness, but to gird and keep it faster and
faster about us; for in that great day, Christ must see us thus clothed, or
else we can have no clothing upon the same with a garment of Glory. And
therefore in this life, it is willing to submit it self unto the Will of God
here, in all Active and Passive Obedience: and though it be forced to live here
a sinful life, where it cannot choose but sin; yea, and sometimes an
unprofitable life (laid by as it were) good for nothing, yet it knows, the
sins shall be forgiven, and the good actions be all recorded in mind, and it to
be an high act. of our holiness, even to submit to God, and live in such an
estate as does sin, wherein we must suffer. For we can be in no such Estate
here in this life, but we may bring Glory to God, and glorify him, whilst our
patience is attaining unto its perfect work in us, that we may be entire,
wanting nothing. O but this is the matter, and cause of this sighing and
groaning (That mortality may be swallowed up of Life. Causes of this sighing
and groaning.
) That is, that all this whole body of death, with all the effects, causes,
forerunners, attendants, and followers thereof, that all possibility of dying,
all necessity of dying, all fear of dying, or sinning any more, the whole body
of sin and death, with all the relations and apurtenances thereof, may be
swallowed up of life, quite abolished and taken away for ever. Even as it was
in the case of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, with all the families and goods of
all which, nothing was to be seen, when the earth had swallowed up all, and
closed up again, or as Revel. 12.16. It is said that the earth helped the
woman, and swallowed up the flood, which the Serpent cast out against the
woman. So it is here, [the soul in sighing and groaning after a heavenly estate
sighs and groans to be freed of all the acts of sin, and whatsoever it looks
on as fruits of sin, which are pressing down burdens unto it, in this body of
mortality.] And as this mortality is a remembrance, and witness of sins
contagion and filthiness, it sighs and groans to be freed from it, and would
have all memorials and witnesses of sin done away. etc. It is sin, and is
attended with the fruits of sin. This with all the relations thereunto, it
sighs to have done away, that all manner of impurity may be so abolished, as
nothing thereof may remain either in thought or action. when our spirits are
mounted up, and would fly unto heaven and converse there, this mortality
pulls us down again, and hinders us from spiritual actions and meditations,
not to perform them with any life or comfort.) In this case also the soul sighs
and groans to be gone. And as the soul desires further union and communion
with God; It groans and sighs earnestly that its mortality may be swallowed up
of life. And yet more, It sighs to be at home in Heaven, because there shall be
an explanation, and full discovery of the extent of all the word of God, and of
the utmost fulfilling of all the promises, with a sight and apprehension of
Gods goodness, what God and Christ have done for us, and that we thereafter
might never have any thought, motion, or desire, contrary unto the will of God
All which, in all these cases, are warrantable and spiritual grounds for the
soul betrothed unto Christ, here to desire, sigh, groan, and long for the
consumation of the marriage with him in heaven. For, [the more holy,
spiritual, any one is, and gracious, the more they desire this union and
communion with Christ in Heaven.] As Rev. 22.20. [Even so come Lord Jesus come
quickly. Until the day break and the shadows fly away, return my wel-beloved,
and be like a Roe, or a young Heart upon the mountains of Bethel.] Cant. 2.17.
And thus, the souls of the faithful here, though they would not be uncloathed,
yet sigh and groan earnestly to be clothed upon, that mortality may be
swallowed up of life. Which ardent desires in them are both wrought, continued,
nourimed in them, and perefcted by the spirit. 2. Cor, 5.5. Which makes
request for them according to the will of God. Romans 8.27. And thus by Gods
mercy and assistance of his blessed spirit, we have been led along to have a
glimpse of this heavenly building, not made with hands, but eternal in the
heavens, and of the glory, excellency, and eternity thereof: with both the
causes and lets of sighing and groaning after it.

And now, that we are come unto a full point in discovery of this Heavenly
House, being descended from this transfiguring mount, to wander a while longer
into the wilderness of this world, ere we can attain thither to live for ever,
what is now finally to be done? Can we, or shall we now part with a sight
thereof, without looking back to have a review of the same (as men do with a
sight of beloved friends at p^^^ing to have them in eye so long as we can) O
yes, now that the impressions thereof are new and strong, let us make some use
of all, ere we part with the sight and sense of such excellencies.

First, ^se, 1.
Let us joy in, love, delight, and admire those inhabitants, and expectants of
heaven, whilst they are amongst us, upon earth, who shall be our companions in
glory; for whose sakes all the Angels are said to be ministering spirits:
therewith thinking and studying what to do for them, the King of Heaven so
honors, as to have built a house for them, so gorgiously adorned with all
matchless excellencies, in such magnificent height, safety, and state, not
made with hands, but eternal in the heavens. For this eternity, is that, which
as it sours all wicked men's comforts, so it is that which sweetneth all the
sorrows and miseries of this life unto the Saints, having such an eternity in
it, as they shall taste of eternity every moment. And withal let us give glory
to God, and be much wrapped up in servent love to Jesus Christ, who has
purchased for us, this eternal inheritance, walking suitably, ^s those who
profess themselves to be heirs of this great salvation in this Heavenly House.

Secondly, Use, 2.
Let us infrom and reform our judgments soundly in this grand point, (which
has been so fully proved now) that only Believers, are in a very happy
condition, and that whosoever loses, yet that in all estates they are
gainers, even by afflictions and death it self. For by affliction, Heb. 12.10.
so by death, they come to be partakers' of his glory. John. 17.24. for which
Christ did so earnestly pray; and unto which they attain, after the momentary
sufferings here. And therefore we must assure our selves, Thatsoever we lose
here, which brings us in Grace, and sets us nearer unto glory, is good for us.
In all which, Sampsons riddle is verified, Iud. 14.14. Out of the eater came
meat, and out of the strong came honey. So after death which consumes all, at
length comes life, glory, and immortality, and by those strong crosses we
wade through at length comes death; which brings us thither.

And therefore in the next place, seeing Our greatest sorrows bring us nearest
unto our greatest joys, our everlasting glorious estate, let us never look upon
death, but whither it carries us, at somewhat coming after it, looking
through it, at the glory and eternity whither it leads us, and learn to die
before we die, that like wicked men, we may not die after we are dead. And
therefore, a short and frail life, a life full of weakness and diseases,
clogged with, afflictions, (...)should be Music unto a Godly man's ears, who
then with a fixed heart assures himself, that now there are great possessions
at hand, a coming, wherewith we shall be invested in Heaven for ever. And
therefore, all these and the like, reports, should make us contented joyfully
to leave this smoaky earthly house, for This building given of God, not made
with hands, but eternal in the Heavens: as Paul did, whose care was for nothing
else, but How he might finish his course with joy, win and know Christ,
attaining thereby unto a joyful Resurrection of the dead, Phillip. 3.10.
whereby we may assure our selves, that there stands but a little betwixt a
Believer, and his eternal estate; a little breath, a frail short life (not two
lives) but one, and that is our own.

Thirdly, Use, 3.
If there be so much Glory, Excellency, and Eternity in this heavenly building
as is showed, then let us never hereafter take on, and so mourn for the
departure of our Christian friends hence, as those who have no hope; surely it
is a token we felt not Gods love, nor received such comforts from his hand as
we ought to have done. If we should not thankfully give back to God things
received, as Hannah did Samuel; and whilst we plead our love to husband, wife,
children and friends, what unkindnesse do we bewray to God, as though he were
not the only wise God, to know the fittest and best time to come in and go out
of this work? Oh what mourn we for? because they are escaped the storms and
tempests of this life, in Abraham's bosom, their warfare at an end, at rest
from their labors, freed for ever from sin and Satan, set with spirits of just
and holy souls, come to perfection, at the Fountain head, drinking fully of the
water of Life, never to thirst again, fraught with all heavenly knowledge and
understanding, enjoying the fruit of all their labors, prayers, sighings,
sufferings, and meditations, in the full fruition of the Beatifical vision for
ever? Oh, is this love! this is usually self-love in us, not love to the dead;
for love in its excellency aims at the best good of the beloved; and as it
comes from heaven, so it envies no friend of heavenly Glory. In which case, our
Savior pleads excellently to purpose with his Disciples, (sad at the news of
his departure hence from them) Ioh. 14. If ye loved me, ye would rejoice when I
said I go unto the Father. Still it argues, that the heart was too much glued
and knit unto that it was so loath to part with: for our life is often too much
in the life of our friends, as Judah told Joseph of Jacob, that Jacobs life was
bound up in Benjamins, which God takes unkindly; for how many friends have we
in him, who, rather than we should want friends, can make our enemies our
friends? and this is an everlasting Rule, That the heart which is most pitched
and rolled upon God, is l^osest from the Creature, or excessive mourning;
wherein our bustling and tossing hinders us from inspecting into Gods
excellent working, agravates the loss, unhooketh the soul from its most noble
temper, quietly to submit to God in all things, and shows that we relied or
trusted too much upon that removed from us; for the Creature too much relied or
doted upon beyond the Creator, or thought of, in whatsoever cases, does so far
Deifie it, and so justly procure it removal from us, for whom (certainly)
nothing is longer good, than God will have us to enjoy the same: Happy were we,
if once we could atrain unto this high pitch of faith and confidence in God, To
believe that he as he is only wise, so nothing is done, but that it is in the
height of wisdom effected, and in the most seasonable time, for our
everlasting good, in this life and in that to come.

Now these with the like considerations, will wean us from the world, and with
the Church clotted with the same, makes us to tread upon the Moon, viz. (All
earthly things) being strong in the Lord, and having his joy for our strength,
Nehem. 9. Be armed against all sufferings, by this piece of spiritual armor
ready. The Helmet of our Salvation, Ephesians. 6. The hope of Glory. Being enflamed
with that constraining love of God, to long to be at home with him, and work
upon us suitable impressions according unto that subject we rest upon,
accounting all here below nothing in regard of heaven: causing us (having this
bright Sun light) not so to rejoice any more as we have done in the moon and
stars light of this world, when there appears unto us, as far greater glory.
Yea, as it is Job, 5.21.22. making us to laugh at famine and destruction, and
not to be afraind thereof when it comes, or any other terror at hand. And
hereby also we shall learn with Christ to despise and pass by the shame of the
Cross, by these overmastring meditations, in all things looking unto him, who
endured such contradiction of paners, for the joy and glory that was set belore
him, Heb. 12.3.

And now to conclude all (in the last place) let this be the upshot of all,
with holy Abraham and Job, to stand in our Tent doors waiting for the coming
of Christ, for the consumation of the marriage with him for ever (this whole
lifetime being but our betrothing and perfuming time to fit us for him) so with
Job, all the days of our appointed time waiting until our change shall come
(which will nothing hinder our sighing and groaning after heaven, for the same
and that may stand together) but every day increase the same the longer waiting
for his coming is delaied, quickening our appetite for it, and giving us so
much the more time to treasure up grace, that we may be vessels sitted and
prepared to engrosse a great deal the more of his excellent glory for ever. And
let us hereafter look upon heaven, as the finisher of all our sorrows, crosses,
cares, turmoiling thoughts, vexations, wants and the like whatsoever, where
shall be fullness of joy, and society of all, which desires, thoughts, hopes, and
expectations, beyond all expression: learning to spiritualize all things and
occurrences unto heavenly ends: admiring as is said at the love of Christ, who
has freely given and purchased unto us this inheritance; knowing this, that
all the sweetness of this life is nothing but bitterness, unless he season
the same; and that the meditation of him in his excellencies and high
perfections, what he has done for us here, and shall do for us in endless
Glory, is that which only is able to sweeten all the sour things of this life
unto us. And now that we know and are convinced of these things, let us do as
God commanded Abraham, when he gave him the promised Land, Genesis 13.17. Arise,
and walk through the length and breadth of this heavenly Canaan, given unto us,
from the one end of Heaven to the other. To rouse up our spiritual meditations
by Faith, often walking from room to room, joy to joy, astonishment to
astonishment, Glory to Glory, raising our meditations daily aloft, to think of
it often, and to joy in the same with mounted affections thither. But what do I
say of raising our affections and meditations thither. O rather in good earnest
let us resolve Saintlike to dwell in heaven, where our conversation should
chiefly be. For so it is said of those holy ones oppressed by Antichrist (whom
he made war against,) Revel, 13.6. That they dwelt in heaven, having much and
constant intercourse of heavenly conversation and affections bent mounting
thither, which is, to dwell in heaven, even whilst we are conversant upon
earth. By which meditations though thereby we cannot yet take full possession
of our heavenly inheritance, yet they will make us the better to taste of the
milk and honey of that promised land; as Moses by faith did of the land of
Canaan, which God showed him, yet he tasted of the sweetness and fullness
thereof, and fed himself with the milk and honey of it: suitable whereunto is
that which the Prophet David speaks so confidently of, Psalm. 63.4. Thus will I
magnify thee all my life, and lift up my hands unto thy name: my soul shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and my mouth shall praise thee with
joyful lips. But when shall this be effected: when I remember thee upon my
bed, and when I think upon thee in the night watches. So that often meditations
of the promises of heavenly things, turns them as it were unto marrow and
fatness, to be substantial and conatural with us, when unto others they are
like unto dry bones. So may we in our journies through the wilderness of this
world, feed our selves fat, and fill our bones (as it were) with this
strengthening marrow, attained by these heavenly meditations, marching from
strength to strength, faith to faith, and glory to glory until at length we
come to be transformed into the blessed image of Christ, in holiness and
righteousness this mortal having put on immortality, and this corruption
incorruption to be swallowed up of life: there to enjoy for ever with a strong
enlightened intellectual understanding the mystery of the glorious Beatificall
vision, in a ravishing and overcoming joy unspeakable and glorious. And (which
is the sum of all, which has been, or can be said) as it is, Ephesians. 3.19. To
be filled with all the fullness of God, which is more for ought we know then
Saints and Angels are fully capable of.

FINIS.
L'ENVOY To Eternities, Eternity.
RApt up in wonders, wonders Glories Maze,
Where endless end the period is of time
My ravished soul do rise thou mount and clime
Where million millions joys themselves bewrays,
With Saints and Angels in their glancing rays
Near beauties Throne, and that eternal light
where never shall come appear darkness or night
View if thou can eternities last days.
Let numbers rise and mount to highest pitch
And stretch beyond and numbers: O yet then
This date outdates the strength of any pen,
Nor can it multiply its utmost reach.
Since then no pen can cipher out this story
What can suffice for to attain this glory.
The Table.
HOw to look on death, page 10. The Certainty of Heaven. page 15. Nature
leading us to God. page 17. Our certain knowledge of this Building. page 19.
The Vshers unto our knowledge. p. 22. Trials of our assurance and knowledge. p.
23. How to know that we know, that our knowledge be not counterfeit. page 32.
The distinction betwixt the witness of our spirit, and the immediate witness
of Gods spirit, by it self. pa. 32. (...) The witness of our spirit in a Calm,
2. The witness thereof in a Tempest. p. 33. Gods spirit witnessing with our
spirit. p. 36. The sealing of the spirit. pa. 37. Impressiions of the spirit at
his first possessing of the soul. page 40. The immediate witness of the
spirit, as it were from heaven above. p. 43. How to know that our knowledge is
no false illumination. page 48. The excellency of heaven in general. p. 62. In
the titles given unto it. p. 68. The situation of heaven. page 70. The
matterials, form, and matter of heaven. page 73. The capacity and extent of
heaven. p. 75. The furniture of heaven. p. 76. The company we shall enjoy there.
pa. 80. The possession and enjoying of heaven. p. 82. Five considerable
perticulers therein. p. 87 The eternity of heaven. p 94. Reasons why no other
estate can fit the Sainss but an eternal estate. pa. 97. What great matters the
meditation of eternity setles in the soul. p. 104. What use this our life time
is for. p. 109. Pressures and weights hindering our sighing and groaning for
heaven. p. 110. Cases wherein very good men cannot sigh and groan for heaven.
p. 119. Cases wherein the soul cannot choose but sigh and groan for heaven. p.
127. What reason the soul has to sigh for a house of glory. pa. 129. Our
heavenly clothing what it shall be pa, 131. Why the soul would not be
uncloathed p. 135. The true causes of the souls sighing and groaning. p. 137.
Uses, 4.1. To admire heavens inhabitants among us and love them. p. 142. 2.
That only Believers are happy people. pa. 143. 3. To tread upon ear^hly
things. p. 145. 4. To wait and expect for the coming of Christ. p. 150.

FINIS,

