CONSIDERATIONS TENDING To the Happy Accomplishment OF ENGLANDS Reformation in
Church and State.
Humbly presented to the Piety and Wisdom of the High and Honorable Court of
Parliament.
Right Honorable Senators,
AS I have been long ago convicted of this Truth, that my Life is not mine own
but Gods, and that God appoints the Use of it to be returned unto Him in Christ
through his Body, which is the Church visible: So I make account that I can
have no true delight in the enjoyment of this Earthly Life of mine any further,
then I find my self Useful to others thereby in Christ's Way. Therefore I dare
not desire either the continuance or comforts thereof any longer, then I may be
serviceable therein to the Commonwealth of Israel. And although I know not
what service in this Kind I have hitherto done, or may do hereafter, (for I am
no competent Judge of this matter) yet I am comforted herein, that I have the
testimony of my Conscience assuring me, that I have sincerely spent and laid
out my self wholly to this effect. And that although I have been careless of
my self as to this world (sine invidia lucri) yet I have seen always Gods
hand in the midst of many straits and difficulties supporting me, and showing a
way to proceed, when I found my self at a stand. Now because of late this has
been more eminently apparent then ever, by the special Providence of God in
moving the Goodness and Justice of the Houses to Order my present maintenance,
and future support; I think my self highly obliged by all the bonds of
Gratitude, to be so much the more Zealous, Free and Earnest both toward God
and Men, to endeavor the Advancement of his Glory, and your Felicity, which I
am fully persuaded may be done by such Motions and Proposalls as these are,
which some (who are not much swayed by the Interests of flesh and blood) having
concurred with me to put to Paper, I suppose may have an effectual influence
upon those Honorable Friends of mine in the Houses, who are pleased to look
upon me as a Servant to every one for the Public Good of All. Therefore in
requital of their care for me, I find my heart enlarged with cares for them,
and by the advantage of most thankful Affections and Respects I would gladly
give you All occasion to be Isntrumental toward Your own Happiness, and the
perfect Ways of such a desired Reformation both of Church and State, as may by
Gods blessing thereon in due time ferment the rest of the world; Which by the
ensuing Discourse will appear in some measure feasible, if the Things offered
therein can be set afoot here; I say, if they can be set a-afoot here; not
that I doubt of the Possibility thereof in themselves. (for I know that
elsewhere the Matters here mentioned, have been practiced by piece-meale, and
therefore there is no reason why they may not be all at once jointly made use
of amongst Us) but that I am somewhat in doubt of the season, Whether the
Spirits of this Age be not too much as yet (to say no more) discomposed and
scattered to entertain such Overtures. But let Men be as they will, such seeds
as these must be sown in their hearts, and presented to their thoughts. Who
knows what they may work? Sure I am the effect is in Gods hand, and he can
make this honest endeavor to become (as it is intended without partiallity) a
Help and Expedient to that Regular Settlement, which all such as are upright in
heart wish and long for. And I hope that such as seek not to make their own
will, but the Word of God the sole Rule of our Reformation will all contribute
to such designs as these, for the composure of needless differences. And that
the Lord who is Wonderful in Council, and Excellent in VVorking, may bring
all this to pass, I shall not cease to be restless before his Throne with my
Prayers, who am the meanest of all that serve the Public; but in truth, and as
long as I breathe professedly

Right Honorable Senators, Your most obliged, humble and faithful Servant,
SAMVEL HARTLIE.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE Concerning The Accomplishment of our REFORMATION: Tending to
show, That by an Office of Public Address in Spiritual and Temporal
Matters, the Glory of God, and the Happiness of this Nation may be highly
advanced.
WE have exceeding great cause to bless the Lord our God, who has blessed us
in many things far above our Forefathers; but chiefly in this, that we have
the everlasting Gospel of Jesus Christ revealed unto us, more evidently, then
ever they had in former times. And although many of our neighbour-Nations
partake of this great blessing with us, yet in Two Things the people of this
Island, and chiefly that of England does exceed all the rest.

First, herein, that this Parliament, and such as join with it in this Public
Cause, are more solemnly and strongly engaged to advance the Glory of God by
the Reformation of this Church and State, then any other Protestants are.

Secondly, in this, that God has put into the hands of this Parliament
sufficiently all the Means and Advantages that may enable them to discharge
their duty in order to this engagement.

If then this good and mighty hand of God, which hitherto has done so many and
so wonderful things for Us, will graciously continue to lead our Leaders on,
in the way wherein they are entered, till they finish their course succesfully;
it is evident, that our Happiness may be completed for our Age in a full
measure, and without interruption propagated afterward for many Ages unto our
Posterity: And lest we should seem to be careless of so great an Advantage,
let us look upon our State, to make a discovery of Gods dealing with Us, to the
praise of his Name, and the increase of our hopes.

First then, this our making of a National Covenant in so solemn a manner with
Almighty God, with our Neighbour-Nation, and with each other in reference unto
God, as it is an extraordinary engagement to bind our souls unto his public
Service; so it has been from him to Us the conveyance of an extraordinary
blessing upon our proceedings, by Scattering all our adversaries before Us, and
breaking al their plots and enterprises against Us; by which means also our
engagement toward God is more strongly confirmed and increased, because he
has not only delivered Us from the deadly fears of our most dangerous and
desperate Enemies; but has manifested his acceptance of our Persons, and
approved of our ways and undertakings by a success, which is every way
admirable.

In the second place, the Advantages which by this success he has put into
our hands to effect that whereunto we are engaged, are no less obliging
toward the Advancement of his Glory, then the Covenant it self. For this very
tie whereby God has bound Us to himself before other people Nationally, and
called upon Us to make a solemn Profession of our purpose to live reformed
under his Ordinance as Members of Christ's body, has obliged Us before others,
to mind not Our selves alone, but the Communion of his Saints also in all the
Reformed Churches.

Then this other Advantage, that by our success he has made our Parliament
eminently Honorable, and his great Trustee of the greatest and most
uncontrollable Power and Authority which is in any Protestant State on earth;
does bind Us so much the more to be mindful of his Honor, to advance it with
all the power and authority which he has bestowed upon Us.

Moreover this, that he has put into the hands of our Parliament, the right
and privilege to Set a work, to Address and to Dispose of, more large
Spiritual Talents; and Intellectual Abilities, and of more plentiful
Temporal Means and Helps for Spiritual Uses, then other Nations have, and
withal, that offer he does at this time also more convenient opportunities and
occasions to Us, then to any others, to improve all these blessings to his
Glory, to our own Good, and the Comfort of many; This (^ say) that God does
all this for Us by our Parliament, is evidently a more effectual drawing and
engaging of Us to himself, then is our voluntary binding of our selves over
unto him by our National Covenant. Therefore as we may gather that our guilt
for this reason will be above other Nations extreme heavily increased upon
Us, in case we neglect the duties of so many and strong Obligations; so we may
hope that our Happiness in case we answer this great call, and discharge the
trust which God has reposed in Us faithfully, will be upon Us and our
Posterity, more then upon others, for ever also increased. From which
Consideration we must conclude, That Three Things will be required of Us to
acquit our selves of all these engagements.

The First is that which the National Covenant does bind Us unto within and
toward Our selves, for the redress of Public Evils.

The Second is that which the Universal Kingdom of God in the world, and the
Church Visible does require of Us toward all, for the address of every one to
partake of Public Blessings.

And the Third is that, which the Communion of Saints does oblige Us unto,
toward our Protestant Brethren at home and abroad, for the Common Advancement
of Religion, and against the Common Enemies thereof. Upon the Conscionable
performance of our Duties in these Three Relations, the continuance and
enlargement of our Happiness will consist: Let us then briefly consider of the
Ways by which we should acquit our selves of these engagements.

The National Covenant does bind Us for the redress of our Evils, to settle
our Church, our Civil State, and our particular Persons in a Reformed
condition. The Reformation of our Church is specified in the settlement of
Truth by a Common Confession of Faith and Catechism: in the settlement of
Righteousness and good Order by a Common Directory for Worship, for
Government, and for Discipline; and in the overthrow of Error, of
Unrighteousnes, and of Disorder, by the abolishment of Popery, of Prelacy, of
Superstition, of Heresy, of Schism, and of all Profanesse. The Reformation of
the Civil State, is also specified in the maintenance of that Authority
whereby Justice is to be administered unto the Nations; in the preservation of
that Peace and Unity, which is settled between the Kingdoms, in the suppression
of all evil Instruments that disturb the Public Peace between the King and his
People, or between the two Nations; and in the faithfulness of every one, to
persevere in these endeavors, and to maintain those that prosecute the same.
And the Reformation of Our particular Person is specified lastly, in the
Humiliation of every one for his own sins, the sins of the Nations; and in the
care which every one of Us does bind himself unto, to Reform his own life
according to the Gospel of Christ, and to watch over all those that are under
Our charges to the same effect.

Now when all this is done, and Nationally agreed unto, as is expressly
mentioned in the Covenant, yet even then all will not be done, which of Us
Nationally God does require for the Advancement of his Glory. For the very
Reformation itself (if truly completed) will oblige the Nation more
effectually, then ever hitherto it has bin; to mind a further Interest both in
the general Communion of Saints, and in the Universal Kingdom of God: For
then Christ's saying will take place in Us, Luke 12.48. Unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall be much required; and to whom men have committed much, of
him they will ask the more. Therefore whatever blessing through redress of our
Evils in our Reformation shall be attained by Us, or advanced to Us within this
State, God will not confer it upon us, that it should rest there and lie dead
as a Talent buried in the ground; but he will expect that we should trade with
it, and make it useful in his service toward All for the enlargement of his
Kingdom; because the maine engagement which he does put upon those whom he
has delivered from their Enemies, is this, namely, That they should serve him
without fear in righteousness and holiness all the days of their life, Luke
1.24, 25. For if by this Reformation of our Church, State and Lives, he does
intend to convert Us unto himself; He will not do it upon any other terms,
then it was done to his Apostle Peter: to whom he said, Tu Conversus confirma
fratres, When thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren, Luke 22.32. So then
our Obligation to the whole Body of Christ (for whose sake God does all things
to every one) will not be satisfied by that discharge of our duty to the Body
of this Nation; but that which in this Nation is brought home unto God by the
Truth and Settlement of the Holy Profession therein; must be according to the
Rule offered up again unto him, dedicated unto his service, and applied unto
the use for which he has bestowed it upon Us; else we shall rob him of the
fruit of all these blessings, and deserve to be deprived of the same: For God
deals with a whole Nation in respect of his Kingdom, as he does with a single
Man: He does not give to any particular man the gifts of his Spirit for
himself alone, but he gives them, as the Apostle says, To profit withal,
that he should minister the same unto others, as a Steward of his Grace: even
so we must judge of the National blessings bestowed upon Us in the hand of
the Parliament; that Gods undoubted meaning is not that we should ingrosse his
gifts as our own, peculiar to our selves alone but that we should become
faithful Stewards thereof for the Universal Kingdom of his Son, that it may
be propagated, and for the general Communion of his Saints, that it may be
entertained.

It will be therefore the Wisdom of Us all, that make Conscience of our ways,
both in the Parliament, and in the whole Nation (whether we have taken the
National Covenant or not) to lay this Truth to heart, That the only ground of
all Our Standing and prosperity is this, even Our Public Interest in Christ's
Universal and Communicative Kingdom; and that by this Interest we are bound to
raise Our Resolutions to some Duties of a larger extent then those are, which
the solemn League and Covenant does require of Us. These indeed must needs be
done, but these other of a larger extent must not be left undone: these are
necessary to remove the rubbish of scandals and impediments, that the
Foundations of many Generations may be laid: but these other are no less
necessary, that the superstructures of Gold, Silver, and Precious Stones may
be erected unto a Spiritual Tabernacle upon these foundations.

Although then some of Us may perhaps scruple at some of the particulars
mentioned in the National Covenant, yet it cannot be well imagined, that any
will scruple to concur with his Brethren in those Duties, which without all
controversy are Righteous, Holy, Harmless, and Acceptable, and which will
work upon all the main Effect, and profitable use of the Covenant it self,
namely, a Real advancement of that Truth which is after Godliness; and a
Confirmation of that Peace which is the fruit of Righteousness.

Now what these Duties are, and How they may be performed, (...) suppose will
be a part of our duty to seek out, to discover and propose, that such of Us as
are capable of thoughts raised above our selves, and can discern a Concernment
more Public then what the Vulgar does apprehend, may have occasion to stir
up within Our hearts such faithful and dutiful resolutions as will answer and
come up to the main engagements which God has laid upon Us: and to the end
also, that the wisdom of this Parliament may see the offer of a Peaceable
Overture and Motion made, whereby all those that are under their power, of what
degree and quality soever, may be addressed, directed, and employed to serve
the Public Good, by all their useful gifts, without scruple to themselves or
disturbance to any, although in some particulars their strain may be different
from others who walk up more exactly equal to the Solemn National Engagement.

To speak then clearly of this Matter, We must propose distinctly that which We
have already intimated more then once, namely, That the main Duty comprehending
the whole engagement, whereunto by all these blessings God has called Us
beyond the tie of our National Covenanted Reformation, is this: That we
should Study to make our Talents serviceable unto his Glory, by the advancement
of his Universal Kingdom, and of the General Communion of his Saints. And
the Principles from which this Truth does evidently flow, are these.

1. The Duty whereunto God by his gifts does chiefly enable every one of Us, is
that Duty whereunto he does mainly call Us: but the gifts Spiritually and
Temporally bestowed upon Us, by this success of our Affairs do chiefly
enable Us to the Advancement of his Universal Kingdom, and of the General
Communion of his Saints. Therefore this is the Duty whereunto we are mainly
called.

2. The Duty whereby God is most eminently glorified, is that whereof the
performance is mainly required, and to which we are chiefly engaged, But God
an be glorified in nothing by Us so much, as in the Advancement of his
Universal Kingdom, and of the generally Communion of his Saint,: Therefore
nothing but this is mainely required of Us, and nothing but this will answer
fully the high Engagement whereby we are bound to serve him.

3. The Duty which being performed will settle and increase our present, and
continue to Posterity our future Happiness; and therein raise the glory of this
Nation above our Neighbors; is that Duty, which should be Mainly and Nationally
intended and prosecuted by Us more then by our Neighbors. But this is the Duty
which will, and nothing but the performance thereof will (by the Advancement of
Gods Glory amongst Us) do all this unto Us above our Neighbors: Therefore this
is the Duty which should be mainly prosecuted by Us.

And least any might make a doubt of this last Position, let Us a little
enlarge our selves thereon, to make it more apparent from the Undoubted Maxims
and Reasons of a true Reformed Christian State, such as we are now called to
be, if we take notice of our condition.

First then We conceive that the Glory and Happiness of a State go hand in hand
together; so that every thing which may add unto the true Glory, is also fit
to increase the Happiness, and vice versa, on the other side, whatsoever does
add unto the true Happiness, is also Fit to increase the Glory of a State.

Secondly, we conceive that no Happiness can be counted true, which is not
settled; and that no Happiness can be counted settled to a Nation that is not, or
cannot be dilated unto all the Members thereof, and continued in after times
unto their Posterity.

Thirdly, that neither true Glory nor Happiness can befall to any People or State
without the Gospel and Kingdom of Christ.

Fourthly, that the Ways and Means by which the Kingdom of our God, and the
Gospel of Jesus Christ (which are inseparable) is advanced most really unto
all, and in all respects unto every one; are the only fittest to settle true
Happiness and the Glory of a Nation.

Fifthly, that the Gospel and Kingdom of our God cannot be really advanced unto
all, and in all respects unto every one, except it be advanced purely for it
self; and all other things made subordinate to it.

Sixthly, that if it be thus advanced indeed, without any particular mixture of
wordly State ends; then we may be sure that Christ will reign in that State;
and that God will be truly glorified in it, because he can be no where
glorified, but where his Son does reign, and if he be glorified in it, we may
be also sure, that he will glorify it in himself, by his comeliness, which he
will put upon it. For all the promises made unto his peculiar People will be
made good unto it. The Peace therefore shall be extended as a mighty river;
the Righteousness thereof shall go before it; and the glory of the Lord shall
be a rereward unto it.

To conclude then in a Word, the whole Happiness and the Glory of this State
will depend upon the Wisdom and the Piety of this great Parliament in
discharging this great Duty: The large Means which he has put into our hands
do enable Us hereunto, the high Aim of his Glory does require this service of
Us; and therefore this will be the main and blessed result of our National
Reformation and Settlement according to the Covenant. For as it cannot be
imagined, that a house can be raised to last without a foundation, so nothing
can be in this kind really attempted by Us toward all, except first within Our
selves, the Fundamental Part of the Reformation, which is in hand, be in some
competent Measure established for which cause before We proceed unto
Particulars, We must once for all premise this, that nothing in the sequel of
this discourse is intended or proposed otherwise, then as it is consistent
with, and a sequel of our National and Domestical grounds of Reformation.

Now then to fall from these Generals, unto such particulars as may show Us the
Way by which the propagation of Gods Glory in his Universal Kingdom, and in
the General Communion of his Saints, may redound unto the constant enlargement
and continuance of his blessings over this Nation we shall reflect as briefly
as may be upon these Heads.

1. What is meant by the Universal Kingdom of God, and by the General
Communion of his Saints?

2. What the Particular Duties are whereby Gods Glory is to be Advanced in this
Universal Kingdom and General Communion?

3. What the Means are, by which God has enabled our Leaders, and called them
to the performance of these Duties?

4. And lastly, what the Way and Method of proceeding may be, to make Use of
these Means, for the accomplishment of the Works whereunto the Duties do
oblige Us? Which Way will end in an Office of Address, of whose Method and
Usefulness is finally to be spoken.

Of the First.
BY the Universal Kingdom of God, is to be understood that Administration of
his Power, of his Justice, and of all his Good Gifts toward Mankind; whereby
all men may be made sensible of his Soveraignity and Providence over them: and
so wrought upon, to depend upon him, by his Outward Ordinances both Temporal
annd Spiritual, as to fear him, to love him, and to give themselves up to be
directed by him, for to reap comfort to themselves, and to increase the good of
Humane Society.

The Advancement of this Kingdom is the proper sphere of a Christian Reformed
Magistrate: First, as he is Gods Vicegerent over men, as they are in the
condition of nature, and Inhabitants of the world. Secondly, as he is a
Nursing Father to the Church within his dominions; to protect it, and provide
for it all Outward Helps and Comforts. For his Relation to the World is under
God to be their Leader in the things which may settle their Society in
Righteousness and Love, that every one may be Useful to his Neighbor by his
abilities. And his Relation to the Saints is to be their Brother and
Fellow Servants in the Kingdom of Christ for the Glory of God their Common
Father in Him.

By the Communion of Saints, which is called General, is understood the
administration of Grace through that intercourse of Love and Care for mutual
good in Spiritual and Temporal things which ought to be amongst the Members
of Christ's Body visible, that every one may reap the fruit of other gifts
freely for his edification in knowledge and in virtue; and that all receiving
each other to the Glory of Christ, even as Christ received Us unto the Glory of
his Father, the common Burdens of all may be borne by every one, and the common
Enemies of all, opposed by the joint strength of the whole Body at once.

To entertain this Communion is the proper work of faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, who walking before others according to the Rule of the New Creature
without partiality deny themselves; and holding forth the word of Life unto
all, labor without prejudice to provoke every one unto Love and to good Works
without giving offense unto any.

So then by these Two States whereof the one relates the Outward, the other the
Inward man directly; yet neither separate in their relations from the other;
all the Glory of Gods goodness is by certain degrees to be advanced to such as
are capable thereof. The Apostle says, That which is Natural is first, and
then afterward that which is Spiritual; therefore the Magistrates
Administration in the first place is to be ordered for the Outward Things of
this life, and first to the Natural and then toward the Spiritual Man, and
afterward in the Second place the Ministers Administration for Spiritual
Things is to be ordered, first toward those that are at home, and within the
Household of Faith, and then also toward others, that are abroad and without
the same.

Of the Second.
IN the next place the particular Duties whereby these Aims in each State may
be gained, come into Consideration, We shall only name them to show the Order
wherein they should be ranked in the thoughts of those that are about to settle
a wel-reformed State, and to discover the Perfections which in their Order they
will add unto the Happiness of our intended Reformation, if they be carefully
attended.

Now as both States by their Aims answer the Manifestation of Gods Glory, so
by their Duties they answer and reach at their Aims; and as their Aims in
their direct relations toward their proper Objects are distinct from each
other, and yet in their Collateral respects are not separate but stand United
together, so their Duties are in some things several and distinct, and in some
things to be united and jointly performed, though each does act in his own
Sphere differently.

The State then of the Magistrate as a Magistrate does bear the sword of
Justice to execute wrath upon evil doers, which sin against the Laws and
Light of Nature: and he bears the Scepter of Authority to reward and
encourage those that do well according to the same light and laws.

And if he does understand that his Calling does bind him not only to resist
and banish evil out of the Commonwealth, but in it to further and maintain
all that is good: then his Care and Duty should be not only to rule Men, so
as he does find them, but he should look upon their ways, to order them, so
as they should be, to become partakers of that Happiness which this life does
afford, whereunto he is bound to give them address.

His Duty then is to look unto all, as well to the direction of the Young ones,
as of those that are of Age, both in respect of their Civil and of their
Religious Public walking.

His Duty toward the Young ones; it is to Order the Means of their Education
aright, to which effect he should see Schools opened, provided with Teachers,
endued with Maintenance, regulated with Constitutions, and he should have
Inspectors and Overseers to look to the observance of good Orders in this
business. The Schools should be of Four several Kinds or Degrees. The First
for the Vulgar, whose life is to be Mechanical. The Second for the Gentry and
Nobles, who are to bear Charges in the Commonwealth. The Third for Scholars,
who are to teach others Humane Arts and Sciences. And the Fourth for the sons
of the Prophets, who are a Seminary of the Ministry. And the right Ordering of
these Schools is to be looked upon as the Maine Foundation of a
Reformed-Common-wealth, without which no other work of Reformation will ever
be effectual.

His Duty toward those that are of Age is to see that none who have strength
and abilities for employment, be without some profitable Work, and none that
want strength and abilities to work for themselves, be without necessary
relief.

And to fulfill this part of his Duty, all Vulgar Trades belonging to
Husbandry, to Manufactures, to Merchandise and Commerce by Sea or Land in the
several kinds of Useful Commodities; or employments about Commodities and
all Honorable Offices and Charges belonging to the Commonwealth in General,
or to any part of it in Country and City in Particular; are to be ranked in
their proper places: and all the Unlawful and Unprofitable Ways whereby Men or
Women get a livelihood, or spend their time in Idleness, in riot and vanity,
are to be taken notice of; that such Employments as foment naughty
Superfluities causing Pride and Sin to abound in a Nation, or such persons as
live disorderly, and cannot be reduced to any certain Employment, may be
banished the Commonwealth, Even as weeds are to be rooted up and cast out of a
fruitful garden.

Then to such as are not able, for Age or otherwise to entertain any
Employment, if they be poor, relief is due unto them; and the Rules by which
Hospitalls are to be ordered aright, will be of singular Use in the
Reformation of this State.

The Duty of the Magistrate toward the Religious Conversation of his Subjects,
is in this: That open Contempt of Religion and Profaneness be restrained, That
the Public Ministry be Protected from injury, Preserved from contempt, and
Maintained comfortably; and that a just Liberty of Conscionable Profession be
not denied to such as walk orderly in the things wherein they differ from
others about Religion.

Here then some Ways of Conference and Rules of Unblameable behavior are to
be determined and authorized, for the preservation of Love, and of the Unity
of the Spirit; and for the avoiding of endless and quarrelling Disputes.

The Duties whereby the General Communion of Saints is to be entertained,
belonging to the Charge of Ministry more particularly, are either such as
relate the Society of Ministers amongst themselves, or such as relate all other
Professors, or such as relate the state of the Gospel abroad.

Toward their fellow-Ministers their Duty is to stand united in Love, and to
walk by Conjunction of Counsels in matters of Ministerial Concernment; and to
that effect to keep the times of appointed Meetings for Mutual Edification in
the charge of Gods House.

Toward all other Professors, their Duty is, as free from all to become
servants unto all, to gain every one in their several degrees of growth and
religious standing.

Toward the State of the Gospel in Foraine Parts their Duty is, to listen
after the Welfare of the Churches; to lay the Common Interest thereof to heart;
to Concur with them in Prayers, in Counsel and Assistance for their Comfort;
and to this effect, upon informations received from abroad, to Contribute the
fruit of all their abilities, as shall be expedient or necessary for the
Common Cause of Religion, to maintain the Peace and Prosperity thereof.

These are the Heads of Duties whereby each State should attend his own charge,
and reach his proper Aim by himself; there be Objects of concurrence in Duties
wherein both States should Consult and Cooperate jointly for mutual
assistance in things which cannot be well effected by either apart. Those are,

1 The Reforming, Ordering and Constituting of Schools.

2 The settling of Courses to Prevent or Remedy Public Scandals and
disturbances of the Peace in matters of Religious Concernments.

3 The maintaining of the Liberties which are void of offense in such as differ
and walk orderly for Edification.

4 The Advancement of Public Helps to Knowledge, and encouragements to Virtue
toward those that are within the Kingdom.

5 The Propagation of the Gospel toward those that are without, and void of
the knowledge of Christ, as Jews, Turks, and Heathens.

6 The Entertaining of Brotherly Correspondency, Intelligence and Commerce with
Neighbour-Churches, to trade in Spiritual Matters with them; for the
Enlargement of Christ's Kingdom, and the support of his Truth against the
Enemies thereof.

Of the Third.
THe Third Thing to be opened in this Matter is to show, that as the Aim of
the Magistracy and Ministry in their several Spheres, does oblige them to
intend the performance of these Duties in order to the Manifestation of Gods
Glory; so all the Means whereby they are enabled to effect the work it self
are in their hands; so that nothing is wanting but the Actual Contrivance of
the Course, which may be followed in applying their Abilities unto these their
proper Uses. This Means is the power of the Parliament, able to set themselves
and all others in such a way of Acting for the Public Good, as is most
expedient for their own Happiness. It is needless to speak of the
Al-sufficiency of Humane Abilities bestowed upon this Parliament by the
blessing of God for our Reformation. It is evident that our Leaders now fitting
in it, have received from Him all Right and Supreme Authority to Order all
things without control within this Kingdom. This their Right and Authority is
settled upon the Undoubted faithfulness and fullness of Counsel, which is in
their Assembly; and is backed with all Competency of outward Means and
Instruments; to attend the execution of their decrees, which this Nation is
furnished withal, as much as any in the World. Nor is there any Power
apparent, or in being, able to let or hinder any thing, which upon mature
Deliberation they shall determine to be done. They are not limited to any
Objects of Deliberation, but such as they shall propose unto themselves; and
such no doubt they will take readily into consideration, which shall be offered
unto them, by fit Instruments, and in a fit way for the best Ends: Therefore if
these Objects can be but fitly insinuated unto those that are most
Conscionable, grave and zealous for the Public Good and Glory of this Nation,
that by their Means others may be seasoned thoroughly with this necessity of
Aiming at such a Reformation (as being the Main Service whereunto God does call
Us at this time) and if upon such an effectual insinuation the Way to
introduce and settle by little and little the performance and execution of
these Duties by Authority of Parliament, can be proposed void of all exception;
there is no cause to doubt of the success of this Enterprise in due time. All
the matter of difficulty will be in these Two Things: First, How to make the
Proposal free from Prejudice, and from the respects of Humane Partiality. And
Secondly, How to bring the Way of Deliberating upon these matters in the
Houses; into a just frame and course, which may at fit seasons and intervalls
be continued and renewed to carry on the Design with that steadfastness which
the importance of the Work deserves. And truly whether we look upon God, or
upon the Work, or upon our Unsettled Condition, or upon the Parliament and the
Power and Abilities in it, which are under God to be the Means of our Happy
Settlement, there can be nothing conceived or proposed of greater importance,
and more befitting the thoughts of Wise and Conscionable Men in Parliament,
then the Determination of these Duties. If therefore any respect either to God,
or to Our selves, or to Posterity, can raise Men's thoughts above Particular and
Private Interests, to mind the settlement of a Public Good, in a Way which is
unblamable, the worth of these Duties, and the obligation whereby God does
engage Us all, but chiefly our Leaders to desire the fulfilling of them, should
raise both their and our thoughts to the entertaining of such deliberations,
Certainly Gods Aim in bestowing upon Us this Parliament, and upon the
Parliament all Power and Ability to Act whatever it will in the Kingdom, is
none other then this, to make them and Us, under Himself Isntrumental in Our
own Felicity, by serving him in his Kingdom: but if we should not care to
mind the settlement of his Kingdom amongst Us, are we not unworthy of all
these blessings? And shall they not be taken from Us deservedly? if we serve
our selves only; or a particular Party of Men which we affect; with our
Interest in the Public Power; and if we make Use of the Means which we are
entrusted withal, and set our thoughts only to find Ways thereby to make
Our selves and Our Party great; we shall be found in the day of Accounts
Unfaithful Stewards, and naughty Servants to so good a Lord and Master: For it
is most Undeniably apparent, that these forementioned Duties are the true and
proper Works of his service whereunto we are called: and the only Means to
deliver Us from the danger of our Confusions, will be to Deliberate maturely
of the performance thereof. Therefore as Mordecai said to Ester in another case,
so we may say with a small charge of the expression, to those that fit in
Parliament, He said to her, And who knows whether thou art come to the
Kingdom for such a time as this? But we must say to Our Senators, And Who
knows not, that the Kingdom is come unto You for such a Work as this?
Therefore You are bound to mind it, and use Means to advance it; and if You
will not, know nevertheless that this dispensation is committed unto You; and
that God will find some others to do this Work without You; but that You and
the People which is led out of this Way, will certainly be destroyed. But we
will cheerfully Hope, and by the Grace of God confidently Expect that upon a
more full discovery and faithful Insinuation of the Way How to proceed in the
prosecution of this Enterprise: there will be ho neglect in the Undertaking,
nor impediment in the execution. Let Us then proceed to the Fourth and Last
Point in hand, to show How the Parliament should apply their Authority,
Counsel and Abilities, to the accomplishment of these Duties; and this we shall
intend to do (if God permit) by showing the true Contrivement, the right Use,
and the Incredible Advantages and Benefits of an Office of Public Address,
which may be easily and without delay erected and set afoot among Us.

Of the Fourth.
THe Honorable House of Parliament are the Great Committee of the whole
Kingdom for the Universal Reformation thereof: and by the Deputation of Power
given to them in their Members, from every part of the Kingdom, the whole Power
of all is contracted in their Body, as in the Headship of the Nation; for
Counsel and Justice, and from thence all Power has again an influence upon
every part of the Kingdom as need required. Now by virtue of this Supremacy or
Power summed up in them, and in reference to the necessity of things to be
done under them; they have a right to confer Power, and make Deputations of
Authority unto others to Act for a Reformation, so as by them they shall be
directed: nor is it lawful for any without leave and commission from them, to
act toward a Reformation in a Public Way; so that properly the Work of
Reformation is radically seated in the Body of the Houses, and no Committee can
be with any just title termed a Committee for Reformation, but the Houses
themselves, because none have any right to mind and act a Reformation in the
General but They. Yet this notwithstanding it is Lawful no doubt for all Men
to entertain the thoughts and wishes of a General Reformation; and would to
God every one in his place were acting something, as a preparative toward it,
more then seems to be intended. If then it should be moved, that the Houses
would depute some of their Members (without excluding any from partaking of the
same cares) to mind not so much a particular Task in the Work of Reformation
(which is Ordinary in the appointment of all Committees) as to seek out the
General Rules and Maxims by which the Course of a settled Reformation should
be steered and guided at all times: that those Maxims might be proposed and
debated in the Houses, and laid as Grounds of the Righteous Ways by which all
their Government is to be established under God: I suppose it would be a great
advantage both to their proceedings in Counsel, and to the direction of all
such as being subordinate unto their Power, desire to act knowingly according
to their just intentions. For the Main Fundamental Rules of all just
proceedings once being settled and received; not only the Subordinate Agents,
but the Senators themselves in doubtful Cases of Advice, will be thereby able
to find Light what to resolve upon; and in dark matters of Judgment they will
be directed thereby, What Sentence to give Conscionably according to their own
Uncontrollable Principles.

This Committee for Rules of Reformation should have power, and be ordered to
call unto them for Consultation the most Learned, Godly, and Experienced
Divines of the Kingdom; whether in or out of the Assembly; to put them upon
the thoughts of Resolving such Queries and Doubts from the Word of God and
clear Principles of Reason, as they shall think fit to propose unto them for
the framing of those Maxims of Reformation, which they shall prepare to be
proposed unto the Houses; to be upon debate received, as Universal Rules to
walk by, in the pursuit of such an Evangelicall Settlement and Reformation as
we should now aim at.

And although Men be never so able in Parts, never so much read in all Authors,
never so deeply grounded in all Sciences, never so largely experienced in all
Affairs, and never so much seen in all the World, and consequently every way as
much qualified as men can be for a work of such high Consequence as this will
be to this State; yet except they have some helps to enable them, to look upon
Matters near at hand, and with some special relation to the changes of Times,
Things, Persons, and Occasions, whereunto their endeavors are to be applied
(that they may discern the native properties thereof by all Circumstances
discoverable) they will be but like Physicians, who without regard to the
particular Symptoms of their Patient, prescribe a general Remedy for the
disease, which seldom is effectual to work a good or speedy Cure; and if it
does any good, it is to be ascribed rather to chance then wisdom. For the
Theoretical part of general Rules may by Men of abilities be delivered at
large, but to make these Practically appliable for the Main End of an
Effectual Reformation unto a State that is liable (as all States are) unto
perpetual changes, is the Matter, which the Wisdom of this Committee should
mainly apply themselves unto, which necessarily requires a special Insight and
Discovery of Affairs near at hand. Therefore if to these Men, and to all
others of the Parliament that desire to look fully and fundamentally into the
Affairs of this Kingdom, and of this Church in all the Members and Motions
thereof, and into the Affairs of Neighbor Churches and States as they may
relate toward these, to be able to Compare and lay things together: (If I say,
to these Men) a Help can be given whereby they shall be enabled to look not
only upon the Outward Parts, but as it were, upon the very Anatomy of all the
inward bowels of the Church and State as they are at all times, and from time
to time existent, in their native features and lineaments, and upon all the
Vital Motions and Actions of these Parts and Bowels; If (...) say again, an
easy Help can be found for such a discovery, will it not be an exceeding great
advantage to them to open their eyes in all Counsels and Resolutions? Certainly
it will; and such as shall have this insight in matters, will be able upon all
occasions to walk, as it were, at noon day in the light, when others will be
constrained to do things but at random, and grope in difficult Cases, as it
were for the wall at midnight. Now this help may be had in an Office of
Spiritual and Temporal Addresses, whereunto all Men for their own
Convenience, Advantage and Profit, will be made willing, and invited to
repair as to a Common Center of Repose wherein they may expect satisfaction
for all their Lawful desires, so much as may be had by any Humane Contrivance
in a wel-ordered Commonwealth.

And to make this apparent that an Office may be erected to this effect, which
may be of Infinite Usefulness to the State, and especially to the Work of
Reformation, We shall endeavor to set down the Sum of it; together with the
right Uses thereof; and the Way by which it may be established easily and
without noise or delay.

Of the Office of Address.
WE would advice then that a Certain Place should be designed by the
Authority of the State, whereunto all Men might freely come to give Information
of the Commodities which they have to be imparted unto others; and some body
should be set in that Place to receive these Informations to the end that he
may give address to every one that shall repair to him, to make enquiry for
such Commodities, Where and How to find the same. His proper Charge then and
Duty should be to enable himself to direct all men to the attainment of such
desirable things, as the Society of Mankind in the Commonwealth where he lives
can comfortably yield unto them: so that this Office should be erected
properly for the Relief of Humane Necessities; and to accomplish the effect of
a wel-ordered Society; that all things which are Useful and profitable in a
Commonwealth for Public and Private Accommodation, and the Contentation of
Soul or Body, being known where they are to be found, such as stand in need
thereof may know whither to repair to get speedy notice thereof, how to come by
them lawfully. As for example: A man of good parts would fain serve a Master,
He comes to the Office and enquires whether it knows of any Gentleman that
desires a Servant; if the Register of the Office can tell him of any, he gives
him Address where to find him: if he can tell him of none, then he should
leave his name to be Registered with a Memorial expressing his desire, and the
place of his abode, and such other Circumstances as he shall think fit to
inform the Office of, that as soon as any does inquire for a Man of his
quality, he may be directed to him. In the like manner a Gentleman desires a
servant of such and such qualities, he comes to the Office to inquire after
one, and the Master of Addresses should be able to tell him whether or no, and
where any is to be found: and in case none is to be found or known at that
present, then the Gentleman leaves a Memorial to be kept for an Address to
any that may afterward present himself. And when these that have made enquiry
for some Commodity have gotten it by the Address of the Office, they should
be obliged within the space of 24 hours to give notice thereof unto the
Office; that the Register may be disburdened of their Memorial, lest some body
be addressed in vain unto them. Suppose a Man would let out his house or his
ground at a certain rent, or sell it, another would feign take a house or
parcel of ground for rent, or buy it; both these run up and down, and make
inquiry here and there at adventures for that which they want, and perhaps
never light one upon another, till the convenient season be past, and they for
want of Accommodation have taken some courses less advantageous for their
Affairs, then their mutual encounter would have been; but if the Master of
Address had been informed of both their desires, he would have instantly
directed the one of them to the other, by which means both would have been
accommodated. And thus in all other Cases Whatsoever, which fall within the
Compass of Humane Conveniences, which the Society of Men in a Commonwealth
can afford for Contentation of the mind in Spiritual or Bodily Concernments.
From whence we may see that such an Office will be the only Proper Remedy and
Help to that disorderly and confused condition of Life wherein we may lie for
want of profitable Contrivements begetting sociable encounters and
communications. And if we will consider, that nothing does make nature
fruitful in all things, but the only Address of Proper Agents to their
Patients to cause them meet seasonably together; and that nothing does cause
Trade flourish in great Cities, so much as the Use of Exchanges and Meeting
Places, where Merchants may come together at certain times to transact Matters;
and that without this Contrivement of Mutual Converse, all Trade would be so
clogged and retarded, that it would be almost impossible to bring businesses to
any issue Conveniently and in due time: If, (...) say, we consider this, we
shall find that what Convenience the Use of Exchange-meetings does bring to a
Particular sort of Men who are called Merchants; the same, and far greater
will this Office bring to the whole Society of all Men, for all their Mutual
Occasions and Accommodations wherein they have need to encounter with one
another; so that this Office will be a Center of all Men's satisfactions to
gain their Interest in each other for mutual help. The Advantages which
Post-houses and Exchange-places since they have been in Use (for of Old they
were not) have brought unto those that trade, and to all Men's private
dispatches are almost innumerable; but the Advantages, which such an Office as
this is, will bring to the Society of Mankind, will be altogether innumerable;
for all that which is good and desirable in a whole Kingdom may be by this
means Communicated unto any one that stands in need thereof; and if it is
evident that the benefit of Mutual Communication in good things is the Chief
fruit of all Society; and that to facilitate the Ways thereof unto a People, is
one of the Chief Duties of a faithful Magistrate, whereby he may make
himself Powerful, and his People Happy, whereby he may address all Men to
profitable Employments; and know what every ones employments are, and by this
Means be able to prevent and rectify an infinite number of disorders which
arise in a State to the great disadvantage thereof, for want of such Employments
as the idle People might be put to. Therefore it belongs to none but to a
supreme Magistrate to establish such an Office, and to Order it for the Proper
Ends and Uses whereunto it should serve.

Let it then have Two Parts or Branches: the One for Bodily, the Other for
Spiritual Matters, and these should have each of them a Warden or Master of
their several Addresses, who should be Regulated and directed in their Ways by
such Constitutions and Orders, which should prevent all danger of Abuses, and
make them Unblamable and Comfortably Serviceable to every one.

The Office of Bodily Addresses, should be appointed to Meddle with all Outward
Things concerning this present life, for the relations of men to each other in
worldly Concernments, and may be called the Address of Accommodations. But the
Office of Spiritual Addresses should be appointed to meddle with all Inward
things concerning the Souls of Men, and the Ways whereby they may be helpful
one to another in Matters relating the same, which may be called, The Address
of Communications. Their Main and Proper Objects of Employment will be
different; but their Ends and Ways to do service will be the same, and some
things Collateral to their Main Objects, will be common to both, and in these
Collateral Matters, they should be appointed to keep Mutual Correspondency
with each other for the Advancement of their Public Services.

The Office-bearer in each of these Offices should be warranted and authorized,
each in his Sphere to make Inventaries, and keep Registers of all Commodities,
Persons, Employments, Offices, Charges and Things which are Actually in being,
and Usefully considerable in the Commonwealth, and which may be a matter of
information to any for Address to that which he in any kind shall enquire
after. Of these Inventaries and Registers some should be Perpetual standing
and the same; so far as the things which they contain are existent in the
Commonwealth, but some other Registers and Books must be kept of Changeable
Matters also, wherein daily Occurrences of New Accommodations and Communications
to be imparted from one Man to another, are to be recorded and kept for
Information. These Occasional Registers (for so they should be called) should
be of Two Sorts; the One Common and open to all to be looked upon, containing
the Summary Intimation of that whereof Information is to be given, to such as
shall desire it. The other secret, and reserved for more special Use,
containing the particular point of that Address, which is to be given to such
as stand in need to be informed of it.

Besides these Registers which will admit of some further Subdivisions, there
must be Alphabeticall Tables of the Heads of Matters; whereof Informations are
to be given both for Accommodations and Communications, so as may be needful,
which should be openly hung up in the Office-House with a Reference to the
Register-bookes: and some of these Tables must be perpetual and standing
Unchangeably; Others must be, as the Occasional Register-bookes will be,
alterable.

The Office of Address for Accommodations, although it may be exceeding
useful unto all, and can be prejudicial to none, if he, that is entrusted
therewith, will not purposely abuse his trust; yet it will be above all others
most useful for the Poor, to help them to employment, and to distinguish the
Industrious from the Idle: and for the Supreme Magistracy in all purposes of
State, but chiefly in that of a healthful Reformation: because it may be in
his hand (if he will make use of it) an Engine to reduce all into some Order
which is confused; and to discover what the Chief Inconveniences of the
Subjects are, which are to be Remedied, which Two Things are the Pillars of an
outward Reformation. The other Particular Uses of this Office of
Accommodations, with the Way to Regulate it, to Oversee it, and to Improve the
Advantages, which it will yield to the State in matters of Public
Consultation, and in Cases of Resolution to be taken concerning Neighbor
Nations in times of Peace and War, need not here to be mentioned distinctly.
A Man of Wisdom by that which has been said, will easily discern this, and in
due time Particulars may be mentioned, when it shall be requisite.

The Office of Address for Communications, is as far beyond that of
Accommodations in Usefulness, as the Matters of the Mind are above those of
the Body. It is then to be erected for Addresses and Informations in matters
of Religion, of Learning, and of all Ingenuities, which are Objects of
Contemplation and delight unto the Mind, for their strangeness and usefulness
unto the life of Man. The Warden of this Office should be authorized to have
and keep not only all manner of Registers, Inventaries, Catalogues and Lists
containing the Peculiar Objects whereof he should furnish Information for
Address to such as shall desire it (such as have been mentioned heretofore,
and named, Perpetual and Occasional Registers) but he should be Authorized
also to negotiate for Spiritual Intelligence; and to maintain a
Correspondency and Learned Trade with all Men of Abilities within and without
the Kingdom, about the things belonging to the Sphere of his Office; so that
he should be allowed not only to give Information of things elsewhere to be
found, (which is properly the work of Common Addresses) but also of that,
which should be in his own peculiar Possession and Custody, which he should be
allowed to gather up and keep concerning all Matters of Religion, Learning and
Ingenuities, as a peculiar Stock belonging to his Office, to communicate the
same by way of Spiritual Trade and Commerce to whomsoever he should think fit
and expedient, only for the Ends whereunto his Commerce in this kind is to be
directed.

Now the Ends should be these:

First, in Matters of Religion he should intend, 1 To Facilitate the Means of
Rectifying Mistakes, and of Preventing the Increase of Divisions and Disorders
about Matters of dispute whether in Opinion or Practice. 2 To stir up and
waken the sense and love of Piety, of Charity, and of the profession of
Edifying Knowledge in the Minds of all Men without partiality.

Secondly, in Matters of Humane Sciences, the End of his Negotiation should be,
1 To put in Practice the Lord Verulams Designations, De Augmentis Scientiarum,
amongst the Learned. 2 To help to perfect Mr. Comenius Undertakings, chiefly in
the Method of Teaching, Languages, Sciences, and of Ordering Schools for all
Ages and Qualities of Scholars.

Thirdly, in the Matters of Ingenuity his End should be to offer the most
profitable Inventions which he should gain, unto the benefit of the State,
that they might he Publicly made use of, as the State should think most
expedient.

And that he may be able to proceed clearly and work toward these Ends
effectually, Certain Rules and Directions should be given him, whereby he
should be instructed and obliged to walk in his Calling Unpartially, and
answerable to the Scope of Common Edification. So then his Office of
Communication should be made a Center and Meeting Place of Advices, of
Proposalls, of Treaties and of all Manner of Intellectual Rarities freely to
be given and received, to and from, by and for all such as may think
themselves concerned to receive or to give notice of the best Helps and
Overtures, and of the most Profitable Undertakings, Discoveries, and
Occurences; whereby Godliness, Truth, and Peace, and all the Ways and Means
tending to the harmless Advancement of Divine and Humane Wisdom and
Perfections may be set forward in Church and Commonwealth.

His way of Negotiating should be free and obliging, he should make his
Address toward all that are of eminent Parts, or of any singular Abilities
and Strains; whether in Public Places or not; within or without the Kingdom;
to give them some Objects to work upon, and exercise their faculties in; that
the gifts of one may be provoked and stirred up by another, according to the
difference or similitude of their Strains; to the end that all Knowledge may
abound in Love, and the discovery of one Truth may beget another. Thus
Forainers may be made partakers of Domestic, and such as are at home, of
Forain Strains; that all may in their several Abilities be set a work, and
contribute unto the Stock of Learning, that which may be useful to every one,
in their several Occasions: And amongst all other his special Correspondency
should be with the Chief Library-keepers of all places, whose proper
employments should be to Trade for the Advantages of Learning and Learned Men
in Books, and M. S. to whom he may apply himself to become beneficial, that
such as Mind the End of their employment may reciprocate with him in the way of
Communication.

But to improve the fruit of this Agency, both for the Advancement of our own
Reformation, and for the General Advancement of Learning; he should be
obliged from time to time:

First, to impart the Profit of all his Purchases, and the Substance of all his
discoveries (especially concerning Religion, and State or Church Government)
unto the Committee for Rules of Reformation; whose Wisdom should direct them
to revise every two or three Months once; the State of his Negotiation, to
take the cream of it for their Use, and to direct him in the prosecuting of
his Purchases and Communications, for the better Advantage of the Public.

Then Secondly, he should yearly once at a certain time be obliged to give
up the account of his Annual Negotiation, to the Professors of all Sciences in
both Universities, and to the Heads and Masters of Colleges and Halls, who
should be made a Special Committee and appointed, according to their several
Faculties, or all jointly to meet, and to take into Consideration the things
which he shall produec that such pieces as shall deserve to be put into the
Public Libraries, to be made Common unto Scholars, or otherwise published in
Print for the benefit of every one, may by their advice be applied unto their
proper Uses; for the advancement of Divine and Humane Learning, according to
the Counsel and Design of the Lord Verulam, to whose structure, by their
joint advice, every year some stones should be added. And to this effect a
more special Way of Concurrence and Correspondency amongst the Professors and
Heads of Colleges themselves should in due time be contrived and proposed.

Hitherto we have considered these Offices of Address in their Intrinsecall
Frame and Usefulness, whereby they may be serviceable unto all degrees and
qualities of Persons; but especialy unto the designs which the Parliament
should Advance for our complete Reformation: Now one word more is to be added
concerning the Extrinsecall Frame and Constitution thereof, and then We have
done.

In the Affairs of this world, where Instruments and Agents must be employed,
nothing can be done without Expenses. Men must live in the Body, and Money
must answer for all; nor can those that serve the Public (although they may
bestow freely their own pains, without cost to the Public, yet they cannot
command others) without Means maintain those whom they must set a work, and
without whose help the business cannot proceed. Therefore as it is just, so
it is necessary that the Employments which redound to the benefit of all,
should be maintained by Public Revenues.

And as there is no Charity so commendable, as that which reaches unto All,
and does confer or procure the benefits which without all comparison are the
best, so there is nothing so answerable to the Duty, and so commendable in the
care of a Christian Magistrate, as to bestow his Charity upon such Objects. And
although the maintaining of these Offices of Address in one respect may be
commended to the State, as the greatest Work of Charity, which can be
bestowed upon the whole Nation, that is upon themselves in their Members, yet
in another respect the Charges which will be laid out this way by them, will
be found the most profitable and richest Trade that they can drive, to
increase their own worldly Substance: For it will direct them both to preserve
without loss, and manage all that they have within the Kingdom to the best
advantage; and also to increase their Stock every way by all the Negotiations
which are afoot amongst their Subjects, within themselves, or toward their
Neighbor Nations. So then there is nothing more Just, nothing more Charitable,
and nothing more Profitable in order to Trade it self, then to bestow that cost
which will be necessary to maintain these Offices, and the Agents belonging
unto them.

The First Thing then which is to be bestowed upon them, is a House in a place
which shall be found for each of them most convenient. And for the Address of
Accomodations, no doubt London will be the most Centrall place. But for the
Address of Communications, Oxford should be made the Center, besides other
Reasons for this, because the Great Library being there, more Strangers for it
resort thither, and the Keeper thereof may be a great help unto the
Negotiation of the Warden of Addresses for Spiritual Matters.

The Warden of the London Office should be furnished with a House and Means
to set up and furnish his Office with all Necessaries; to him Maintenance
should be allowed to attend his Charge without distraction; and because his
work will be principally to oversee his Clerks, and to make Observations of
Matters fit for the States benefit and Information; he should be free from all
other Employments, except that which is proper and subordinate unto the Charge
of Addresses, or Collateral thereunto in the Way of Trading and Employing
People that are out of employment. His Clerks may be sworn unto Him, and He
to the State, to be faithful according to the directions which should be
given him. The Clerks should have some Competency allowed them, that without
incroaching upon the Subject, or burdening the work of Address, they may be
able to live; and if any benefit be allowed them out of the Work which they
do, it should be no more at the most, but a penny or two, for some Extract in
Writing, to be given in matters of profit, by such as are rich; but to the
Poor all is to be done freely; and if any Clerk be convicted to have
refused to communicate the Address which shall be desired of him by any, he
shall be most severely punished and lose his place without mercy. And as the
Warden of Addresses for Accommodation is over his Clerks, so over Him some
others should have an inspection to this intent, to see Matters carried
faithfully and truly for the Public Good, to help the Warden with Advice and
Counsel in Cases of Importance; and to consider the Occasions of his Ordinary
and Extraordinary Expenses (if any should be for the State) that some way may
be thought on to refound the same unto Him, as is just, and to this effect
some Revenue of the State should be nam^^ to bear such burdens.

The Warden of the Oxford Office may have some College or Hall appointed for
his Office-place; and the Revenues thereof for his maintenance to support him
in his Charge. His Clerks that keep his Registers, should be maintained under
him, and also such as he shall have need of for his Negotiation to Copy out
Matters, to write Letters for Correspondency as he shall direct them; and to
give Extracts freely to all such as he shall appoint them to give unto.

And as without his knowledge and appointment the Clerks for his peculiar
Negotiation should not be permitted to impart any thing to any, so the other
Clerks must be obliged to deny nothing unto any that shall desire Information
of things Contained in the Standing and Occasional Registers.

The Extraordinary Expenses which he shall bring to the States account, the
Committee of Professors and Heads of Colleges shall consider and allow to be
paid, as they shall see Cause, out of some Revenue which may be designed for
such an Use. And seeing there can be nothing proposed of a more Public and
Useful nature, then this work is; We suppose it would be an injury done to
the zeal and integrity of this Parliament, which has received so many
blessings at Gods hand, which is so deeply engaged to his service; and which
has undertaken so great things, and so succesfully advanced our Reformation so
far hither to; to think that such an Enterprise as this, will not find favor
in their eyes, and sufficient Means to support the Charges necessary for the
Undertaking and prosecuting thereof. For suppose the Charges should be far
greater then at first they need to be (because a small foundation may give a
beginning to this work) yet what difficulty can there be to allow them, where
so many and large Revenues are by Gods Providence for such Ends abundantly put
into their hands, and cannot justly be otherwise disposed of then to Public
Uses? The Ecclesiastical Estates and Revenues, which are so Vast, and now to
be disposed of, to what Public Uses can they be more profitably applied,
then to the Advancement of the Ways of Piety and Learning? And if in process
of time the Occasions in this Work of Public Expenses grow greater (as no
doubt they will, when the Communication being enlarged, the benefit thereof
will invite all the Learned to a Concurrence) then also more Means may be
raised to bear the same, which diverse ways may be effected; whereof we
shall not need to speak; but to make Way for the increase of a Competent Stock
hereafter in due time, Feoffees in trust may be appointed by the Houses, to
receive such Legacies, Donations and Contributions which will cheerfully
proceed from the Charity and zeal of the Lovers of Religion and Learning
toward the Maintenance of a Trade for the Advancement of the same.

Now to have the matter carried on easily and without delay. It should be
imparted unto all, or as many as are eminently and truly zealous for the Glory
of God, that are free from Selfe-ends and partiality, and that Love Learning,
and have power with others in the Houses. If not all, but only three or four
of these be thoroughly possessed with this design, and they can be brought to
lay their Heads together, to move for the Erecting of such an Office in the
Houses, and get the Contrivement thereof Referred unto some few, who for Piety,
Prudency, and Learning are most commendable unto all, no doubt the thing may
be speedily brought to pass, and a foundation laid, which by the
accomplishment of our Reformation will be a blessing unto all Posterity:
Whereunto our prayers shall be offered as a daily Sacrifice, and what else God
shall enable us to contribute; to whom the success of all our Wishes is to be
referred in Christ; to Him be Glory and Honor for ever. Amen.

Psalm. 50.23. He that Orders his Conversation aright, shall see the
Salvation of God.

Philip. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are
of good report; if there be any Virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things.

Anno 1647.

THE PERFECT Weekly Account: Containing, Certain Special and Remarkable
Passages from both Houses of PARLIAMENT; And Collections of several Letters
from the Armies.
From Wednesday May 19. to Wednesday the 26. of May. 1647.
WEDNESDAY, May 19.
ONe evil drives forward another, as one wave follows another, troubles are
always present, and the shadow of what is good deceives us: It is the custom
of the vulgar sort to despise the present, desire the future praise, and extol
that which is past.

Both houses of Parl. past the Ordinance for Indemnity, and ordered it to be
printed, Wherein it is ordained and declared, that no person or persons
whatsoever who have sinc the beginning of this present Parl. acted or done, or
commanded to be acted or done, any act or thing whatsoever by authority of
this present Parl. or for the service or benefit thereof, by Sea or by Land,
ought to be indicted, prosecuted, or molested for the same: And that every such
person or persons whatsoever, are and shall be hereby fully acquitted, and
discharged of all actions, suites, indictments informations, prosecutions,
judgments, executions and molestations whatsoever, for or concerning the same.
And all Judges, Justices, Sheriffs, Mayors, Bailiffs, Jurors Officers, and
Ministers of Justice whatsoever, are thereby required to take notice thereof,
and duly observe the same. And for the ease of such persons who are or shall be
sued, indicted, prosecuted, etc. they may plead the general issue
non-culpable, and if the verdict pass with the defendant, he shall have treble
costs: and if any be unable to defend a suit at common law, or find themselves
a grieved in the proceedings thereof, a Committee of Lords and Commons are
appointed to hear the same, and receive appeals from the parties.

The Names of the said Committee are these:
Earl of Northumberland. Earl of Kent. Earl of Rutland. Earl of Pembroke.
Earl of Lincoln. Earl of Nottingham. Earl of Suffolk, Earl of Salsbury.
Earl of Warwick. Earl of Denbigh. Earl of Middlesex. Earl of Manchester.
Earl of Mulgrave, Earl of Stamford. Viscount Hereford. Viscount Say. Lord
De-la-ware. Lord Berkly. Lord Wharton. Lord Willoghby. Lord North. Lord
Hunsdone. Lord Gray of warke. Lord Roberts. Lord Howard. Lord Bruce. Commons.
Mr. Hollis. Col. Birch. Mr. Swinson. Mr. Maynard. Mr. Boys. Mr. Recorder. Mr.
Soliciter. Col. Purefoy. Col. Harvey. Sir Phil. Stapleton. Col. Morley. Sir
Will. Allenton. Livet. Genesis Massey. Mr. Whitlock. Sir Gilbert Garard. Sir
William Waller. Mr. Edwards. Mr. Challener. Livet. Gen: Crumwell. Mr. Tate. Sir
William Massau. Sir Sam. Luke. Mr. Lisle F. M. Genesis Skippon. Mr Fr. Allen. Col.
Walton. Mr. Rigby. Sir Ionn Maynard. Mr. Seldom. Mr. Got. Sir Will. Breurton,
Mr. Grimston. Mr. Darley. Mr. Dove, Sir Fr. Bampfield. Lord Monson. Sir Mich.
Livesey. Sir Thomas Widdrington. Sir Ar. Hazilrigge. Mr. Bainton. Mr. Nicholes.
Mr. Weaver. Mr. Not: Fines. Col. Rainsbourough. Major. Harison. Mr. Wall. L^ng.
Mr. Hollows. Mr. Mich. Corbet. Col. Thomson. Mr. Drake. Sir Thomas Middleton.
Mr. William Perpoint.

These, or any five of them, are a Committee for relief of such persons, in
such cases aforesaid.

Thursday May 20.
In my last I made mention of a Letter that came from the King, concerning his
Answer to the Proportions, which being the substant all part of the Letter, I
shall not vary from the words I received it, viz.

C. R.
In answer to all the Propositions concerning Religion, His Maj. proposes that
he will confirm the Presbyteriall Government, the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, and the Directory, for three years, being the time set down by
the two Houses, so that His Maj. and His Household be not hindered from that
form of Gods Service which they formerly had; And also, that a free
consultation and debate be had with the Divines at Westminster (twenty of His
Maj. nomination being added unto them) whereby it may be determined by His Maj.
and the two Houses, how the Church shall be governed after the said three
years or sooner, if differences may be agreed. Touching the Covenant, His Maj.
is not yet therein satisfied, and desires to respite His particular answer
thereunto until His coming to London, because it being a matter of conscience
he cannot give a resolution therein till he may be assisted with the advice of
some of His own Chaplains, which have hitherto bin denied him and then he will
make clearly appear, both his zeal to the Protestant Profession and the Union
of those two Kingdoms, which he conceives to be the maine drift of this
Covenant. To the 7. and 8. Propositions, his Majesty will consent, to the 9.
His Majesty doubts not but to give good satisfaction, when he shall be
particularly informed how the said penalties shall be levied and disposed of To
the 10 His Maj. Answer is, That he has bin always ready to prevent the
practices of Papists, and therefore is content to pass an Act of Parl. for
that purpose etc His Maj. will give his consent to the Act for the due
observation (...) the Lords Day, for the suppressing of Innovations, and those
concerning the preaching of Gods Word and (...) Non Residence and Pluralities
and his Majesty will yield to such Act or Acts, as shall be requisite to raise
moneys for the payment and satisfying all public debts, expecting also that
his will be therein included.

As to the Proposition touching the Militia, though his Maj. consent unto it in
terminis as it is proposed, because thereby he conceives, he wholly parts with
the power of the Sword entrusted to him by God and the Laws of the Land, for
the protection and government of his People, thereby at once divesting himself,
and dis-inheriting his Posterity of that right and prerogative of the Crown
which is absolutely necessary to the Kingly office, and so weaken monarchy in
this Kingdom, that little more then the name and shadow of it will remain: yet
if it will be only security for the preservation of the peace of the kingdom
after the unhappy troubles, and the due performance of all the agreements which
are now to be concluded (which is desired) which his Maj. always understood to
be the case, and hopes that herein he is not mistaken, his Maj. will give
abundant satisfaction, to which end he is willing by Act of Parl. That the
whole power of the Militia both by Sea and Land for the space of ten years be
in the hands of such persons as the two houses shall nominate, and afterward
to return to the proper channel again, as it was fn the times of Q. Eliz. and
K. James of blessed memory. His Maj. therefore desires, that his two houses of
Parliament would seriously descend into these considerations, and likewise
tenderly look upon his condition herein, and the perpetual dishonor that must
cleave to him, if He shall thus abandon so many persons of Condition and
Fortune that have engaged themselves with and for Him, out of a sense of Duty,
and propounds as a very acceptable testimony of their affection toward him,
That a general Act of Oblivion and free Pardon be forthwith passed by Act of
Parliament.

Concerning the Officers mentioned in the 19. Article. His Majesty when he
shall come to Westminster, will gratify his Parliament all that possibly he
may, without destroying the alterations which are necessary for the Crown. His
Majesty will willingly consent to the Act for the confirmation of the
Privileges and Customs of the City of London, and all that is mentioned in
the Propositions for their particular advantage.

This day the Commons had a large debate on the Petition I mentioned in my
last, and it was voted that the said Petition should be burnt on Satturday
next, in the Palace Yard, at Westminster, and against the Royal Exchange
London. And it was voted that a VVarrant should issue to the Sheriffs
accordingly.

This day the Committee it Goldsmiths Hal made report to the House, concerning
the Compositions of Mr. Perey, Mr. Kercher, and Mr. Trinenlet which were
confined by the House.

The Kings Letter being taken into consideration by the house of Peers, a vote
passed that his Maj. shall come to Oatlands, so soon as the house can be made
ready, and that the concurrence of the house of Commons be desired, etc.


Friday May 21.
This day we received the result of the Army, or the Soldiers Reply to
Field-Marshal Gen Skippon, the heads whereof I shall here give you, viz.

FIrst, that whereas it pleases the honorable houses of Parl. upon
mis^information falsely suggested unto them, to declare and immediately publish
in print to the Kingdom, that the Petition of the Army, being but only an
intention, did tend to put the Army into a distemper and mutiny, to obstruct
the relief of Ireland, and to put conditions upon the Parl. and declaring the
Petitioners, if they shall proceed therein, no less then enemies to the State,
and disturbers to the Public Peace, which said heavy charge remaining upon
record, as a Memorandum of infamy upon us to posterity; we cannot choose but be
deeply sensible thereof, and with amazement, wonder how so humble and innocent
adresse, intented to the General, could beget so strange an interpretation,

2. That whereas those persons that have attempted to beget and attempt and
foment divisions between the Parl. and their Army, by their surrepticious
obtaining and misrepresenting our Petitions, and by producing other scandalous
Letters from unknown hands by them produced, the Authors whereof are concealed,
and not brought forth to make a judicial proof of those things laid to our
charge, which we cannot but look upon as a just cause of grief, that the
suggestors of such untruths seem to be encouraged, and we who are innocent
remain unjustified.

4. That diverse Officers of the Army of public and known integrity, have bin
(upon what grounds we know not) sent for to the Parl. as delinquents; Some
whereof do at this present attend there, and cannot procure a trial, having
nothing considerable laid to their charge, etc.

4. That whereas we understand that the Parl. has voted a sudden disbanding of
the Army, not having made sufficient provision for the auditing of our
arreares, and stating of our accounts, our own reason, and experience of
others, makes us sensible, how difficult, chargeable, and uncertain the
obtaining thereof will be after our disbanding, and therefore justly make us
sensible thereof.

5. That they stand in sear of being pressed, etc.

6. They desire that the Parl. Declaration, in respect of freedom to those
that were Apprentices, may be put in force against such masters as refuse it.

7. That widows who have lost their husb^nds, and children their parents in
this service, are not sufficiently provided for a future livelihood.

8. That notwithstanding the great care of the Committee and Treasures of the
Army, and the cheerful readiness of most Counties for the paying of
Assesments, as those where we now quarter do affirm, nevertheless the private
soldiers are necessitated to take free quarter for the present, which is very
irksome unto us to be so burdensome to our friends.

The house of Commons taking the premises into consideration, passed several
votes to this effect, viz,

1. That the Soldiers arrears shall be speedily audited* etc. 2. That the
Ordinances concerning Prentices shall be made good. 3. That an Ordinance shall
be drawn up, to exempt those from pressing for any foreign service, which have
voluntarily served the Parliament in the late wars. 4. That an Ordinance shall
be brought in for maintenance of maimed Soldiers, widows, etc. and as to the
point of vindication, and other things, the House ordered to debate the same on
Tuesday next.

Satturday, This day the house sat not, and for the Intelligence abroad, we
will refer you to Monday.

Monday By Letters from Ireland, we received a ratification of some good
services lately performed by the L. Inchiqueene, as his taking of Dromany,
Caperqueen, and Dungarvan, in which he had Ammunition and other good prize,
besides many brave head of cattle which he took from the Rebels. But on the
other side its certified, the Rebels are exceedingly enraged that Dublin is in
the power of the Parliament Forces, and that there was lately a plot betwixt
them and some Irish in the City of Dublin to have betrayed the same; for which
design being discovered, 14. Irish were lately hanged in Dublin. They have
taken Carlos 30. miles from Dublin, and are in hopes to draw nearer it, if not
timely prevented.

Out of Scotland we understand, that Lieut. (...) ly makes his near approaches
on the Enemies quarters, (...)he season now affording forage for his horses,
we are likely to hear of action shortly.

A Letter was intercepted (and brought up to the Part.) going to the King from
Mr. Ashburnham his Majesty guide wherein he advises the King not to make any
absolute agreement with the Parl offering se^erall reasons both from and the
near agreement of peace there is between France and Spain, by which means the
King might as^ure himself of a great Army. His Excellency Sir T. Fairfax is
returned from London to his headquarters, where his Officers met him, greatly
congratulating his coming down to them* we are further certified from thence
that the Army is in a very mild and peaceable condition, keeping good order and
discipline, and read, to obey command from their Superiors.

Thus have you this Weekly Account of

The several Votes of the House, in answer to the complaints and a grievances
of the Army, and other further proceedings touching their vindication. The Copy
of the Kings Letter to the Parliament, And a Letter of adv^ce to his Majesty
from Ashburnham, With particulars thereof. A plot for betraying of Dublin* and
14 hanged about the same. With the last intelligence from Scotland.


