SAMUEL HARTLIB HIS LEGACY: OR An Enlargement of the Discourse of HUSBANDRY
USED IN BRABANT and FLAUNDERS; Wherein are bequeathed to the COMMONWEALTH of
ENGLAND more Outlandish and Domestic Experiments and Secrets in reference to
Universal HUSBANDRY.

Psalm 144. verse 13, 14, 15. That our Garners may be full, affording all
manner of store, that our Sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in
our Streets.

That our Oxen may be strong to labor, -- that there be no complaining in our
Streets.

Happy is that People that is in such a Case: YEA, HAPPY is that People whose
God is the Lord.

Psalm 4. verse 6, 7. There be many that say: Who will show us any Good? Lord,
lift thou up the light of thy Countenance upon us:*

Thou have put gladness in my heart, more then in the time, that their Corn
and their Wine increased.

Entered according to the late Act concerning Printing.

LONDON, Printed by H. Hills, for Richard Wodenothe at the Star under St.
Peter's Church in Cornhill, 1651.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THe Discourse which I did formerly publish concerning the Brabant-Husbandry,
was somewhat imperfect, nor was the Author thereof then known unto me; but
since I have learned who the Author was, I have also lighted upon a more
perfect Copy, which I intend to offer to the Public in a Second Edition; that
such as have entertained that first offer with liking and acceptance, may find
the benefit of a clearer and fuller satisfaction in that which shall further be
imparted unto them. And to the end that Ingenuity and Industry may want no
encouragement, in the mean time accept of these Enlargements upon the same
Subject; wherein you will find diverse other ways, and no less (if not more)
profitable, then that which was left by Sir RICHARD WESTON (the Author of the
Brabant-Husbandry) as a Legacy to his Sons: Whose Introduction to that
Discourse, I have here premised to this, to bespeake thee in his words to his
Sons, and to gain thy affections more fully to these ways of advantaging
both thy self and the Public. And I could wish, that God would put it in the
heart of those Worthies that manage the Public Trust, that by their Influence
and Authority, these and such like Means of Industry, may not be left wholly
to the uncertain, disorderly and lazy undertakings of private men, so as not
to have an eye over them, and over that which in their proceedings does so
mainly appear to be a Public Concernment. Therefore let us all join to
entreat and petition them, that in order to the Public and General Welfare
of this Commonwealth, these two things at least may be thought upon and settled.

1. In respect of the known unto wardnes of the Major part of the People; who
being wonderfully wedded to old customs, are not easily won to any new course,
though never so much to their own profit, that two or more fit Persons of
approved skill and integrity may be made Public Stewards or Surveyors; one of
the Husbandly, the other of the Woods of this Commonwealth, and empowered to
oversee and take care of the preservation of what is, and by all good
improvement to procure and provide for what is wanting to the present age: and
(except some such Expedients be used) it is more then likely will be wanting to
suceeding ages.

2. That according to the usual custom in Flaunders, a Law may be made of
letting and hiring Leases upon Improvement; where the manner is, That the
Farmer covenanteth on his part, to improve the land to such or such a greater
Rent, by an orderly and excellent management of Husbandry, as well as Building.
The Landlord on the other side covenanteth on his part, at the expiration of
the said Lease, to give so many years purchase of the Improvement (according to
the agreement) which is 3. or 4. years or some times more, or to give out of it
such a parcel or moity of Ground. As if land formerly going for 6. 8. an Acre,
be upon Improvement worth 10. 8. or 13. 8. 4. d. an Acre. The Landlord is to
give 4. or 5. 8. upon every Acre, more or less, according to the agreement. If
it please God to bless these Motions, and that accordingly the National
Husbandry of this Commonwealth be improved; we may hope through Gods blessing
to see better days, and to be able to bear necessary and Public burdens
with more ease to our selves, and benefit to Humane Society then hitherto we
could attain unto. Which more and more to advance, in reference to a Public
and Universal Interest, as subordinate to Higher things; and which though less
visible and sensible, are more permanent, and to truly Rational and Spiritual
Husbandmen as perceptible, shall be the uncessant prayers and endeavors of

Thy faithful Servant SAMUEL HARTLIB.

Sir RICHARD WESTON late of Sutton in the County of Surrey his Legacy to his
Sons etc. Anno Dom. 1645.
My Sons,
I Have left this short ensuing Treatise to you as a Legacy; if I shall not
live my self, to show you (what therein is written) by examples, which I know
instruct far more then precepts; yet precepts from a dying Father, instructing
of his Children what he has seen and known, and received information of from
witnesses free from all exceptions, should make such an impression on them, as
at least to believe their Father writ what he thought was true; And therefore
suppose those things worthy to be put in practice by them, which he himself
would have done, if it had pleased God to have granted him Life and Liberty;
Especially seeing the matter it self, which is required by him to be done, is
in show so profitable, and so easy to be effected, and with so little charge,
considering the great gain that is proposed by it, that not any thing can
restrain a rational man from trial thereof, but not giving credit to the
Relator.

The whole Discourse shows you, how to Improve barren and heathy Land, and how
to raise more then ordinary profit thereof, by such ways and Means as are not
practiced in England: but as commonly in some parts of Brabant and Flaunders,
as the Husbandry of Wheat and Rye is here. By that means you may nobly
augment your estates, and will receive so much the more profit and praise, by
how with more industry and diligence you govern your affairs; and will not
only be imitated, but also honored by your Neighbors, when they shall see
your labors prosper so far, as to convert barren and heathy ground left
unhusbanded for many ages, into as commodious arable land, with Pastures and
Meadows, as any be in this Kingdom. And certainly, that man is worthy of
praise and Honor, who being possessor of a large and barren Demeasne,
constraines it by his labor and industry to produce extraordinary fruit; which
redounds not only to his own Particular profit, but also to the Public
benefit. Cato says, It is a great shame to a man, not to leave his Inheritance
greater to his Successors then he received it from his Predecessors: and that
he despises the Liberalities of God, who by Slothfulness loses that which
his land may bring forth, as not seeming willing to reap the fruits which God
has offered him. Nay he threatens the crime of high Treason, to those that do
not augment their Patrimony so much as the Increase surmounts the Principal. It
is a thing much celebrated by Antiquity, and thought the noblest way to gather
Wealth, for to employ ones Wit and Money upon his Land, and by that means to
augment his estate. If you observe the Common Course of things, you will find
that Husbandry is the End, which Men of all estates in the world do point at.
For to what purpose do Soldiers, Scholars, Lawyers, Merchants, and men of all
Occupations and Trades, toil and labor with great affection, but to get
Money? and with that money when they have gotten it, but to purchase Land? and
to what end do they buy that land, but to receive the Fruits of it to live? and
how shall one receive the fruits of it, but by his own Husbandry or a Farmers?
So that it appears by degrees, that what course soever a man takes in this
world, at last he comes to Husbandry, which is the most Common Occupation
amongst men, the most Natural and Holy, being commanded by the mouth of God to
our First Fathers. There is Care and Diligence requisite in Husbandry, as there
is in all the Actions of the World; and therefore as a Captain has a
Lieutenant to command his Soldiers in his absence, or for his ease: So must
you provide some able honest man, to whom you will commit the execution of such
things, as you your selves cannot do without too much labor: whereof you must
often take an account, and confer with him (as occasion shall require) about
your business, that nothing may be left undone for want of Providence. To such
a man you must give good wages, with intent to advance your own gain, and take
the more ease by reason of his honesty and knowledge.

You will find this Husbandry (after you have once had experience of it) to be
very pleasing to you, and so exceeding profitable, that it will make you
diligent: For no man of any Art or Science (except an Alchymist) ever pretended
so much gain any other way, as you shall see demonstrated in this ensuing
Treatise. The Userer doubles but his Principal, with Interest upon Interest in
seven years; but by this little Treatise, you shall learn how to do more then
treble your Principal in one years compass. And you shall see how an
Industrious man in Brabant and Flaunders would bring 500. Acres of barren and
heathy Land, that was not worth at the most above 5. l. a year, to be worth
7000. l. a year, in less time then seven years. I know no reason, why the like
may not be done in England: for we are under as good a Climate as they are; Our
heathy Land that is neither Sand nor Loame, is as good a soil as their barren
ground is. We have not only Dung to enrich our Land, but also Lime and Marle,
of which they know not the use, where they sewe their gainfullest Commodities
mentioned in this ensuing Treatise, nor of any other Manure, but only Dung. In
fine, I am certain, there is none of their Commodities but grow in England, as
they do in Brabant and Flaunders, but ours are not of the same kind, as
theirs, nor put to the same use. What cannot be vented at home, may as well be
vented from hence into Holland, as the like Commodities are from Flaunders
thither. I will say no more of this Subject in the Preface: only it remains
to tell you, that you must not expect either Eloquence or Method in this
ensuing Treatise; but a true Story plainly set forth in the Last Will and
Testament of your Father, which he would have you execute: but before all
things, to be sure you lay the Foundation of your Husbandry upon the Blessings
of the Almighty God, continually imploring his divine aid and assistance in
all your labors: for it is God that gives the increase: and believing this as
the Quintessence and soul of Husbandry, Primum quaerite Regnum Dei; et postea
haec omnia adjicientur vobis. These things being briefly premised, I will leave
the rest to this short ensuing Treatise, and commit you all with a Fathers
Blessing to the Protection and Providence of Almighty God.

Thus far Sir RICHARD WESTON'S Introduction to the Discourse of
BRABANT-HUSBANDRY; which is shortly to be published in a Second Edition
corrected and enlarged.

If any desire to have the great Clover of Flaunders, or the best sorts of Hemp
and Flax-seeds of those parts, or Saint Foine, LaLucerne, Canary-seeds, or any
sorts of Seeds of this kind: Let them enquire at Mr. James Long's Shop at the
Barge on Billingsgate; and they shall upon timely notice have them procured
new, and very good from France or Flaunders at reasonable Rates.

The greater Faults escaped in Printing.
PAge 11. line 29. for Raith Rape, read raith (or early-ripe) Rape. p. 22. l.
ult: for these in Northamptonshire. I know. r. these. In Northamptonshire I
know etc. p. 41. l. 26. for a hundred hands, r. a thousand hands. p. 57. l. 17.
for Spine, r. Spain. p. 78. l. 4. for how ill they manage, r. how they till,
manage. p. 87. l. 16. for putrifyed r. petrefied p. 93. l. 13. for go tound, as
the causes of their operations. r. go round, as an horse in a mill, and
endeavor very little to advance or know the causes of their operations. p.
ead. l. 17. for the is, r. is the. p. ead l. ult. for on, r. our. p. 94. l. 31.
for dence, r. pence. p. 99. l. 23 for Maram's works. r. Markam's works. p. 105.
l. 20. for mentioned, r. as mentioned. p. ead. l. 29. for avdance, r. advance.
p. 126 l. 23. for The Professors of Art and Industry prefer their private
gain, r. The Professors of Art and Industry, besides their private, aim also
at a public good; these prefer their private gain etc.

A Large letter concerning the Defects and Remedies of English Husbandry
written to Mr. SAMUEL HARTLIB.
SIR,
According to your desires, I have sent you what I have observed in France,
about the sowing of a seed called commonly. Saint Foine, which in English is as
much to say as Holy-Hay, by reason, as I suppose of the excellency of it. It Is
called by Parkinson in his Herball, where you may see a perfect description of
it, Onobrychis Vulgaris, or Cocks head; because of its flower, or Medick
Fetchling: By some it is called Polygala; because it causes cattle to give
abundance of milk. The plant most like unto it, and commonly known; being
frequently sown in gardens, is that which is called French Honey-suckle, and
is a kind of it, though not the same. France although it be supposed, to want
the fewest things of any Province in Europe; yet it has no small want of Hay,
especially about Paris; which has necessitated them to sow their dry and
barren lands with this seed. Their manner of sowing it, is done most commonly
thus: When they intend to let their Corne-lands ly; because they be out of
heart, and not situate in a place convenient for manuring; then they sow that
land with Oats and these seeds together about equal parts; the first year
they only mow off their Oats, leaving the Saint Foine to take root and
strength that year; Yet they may if they please, when the year is seasonable,
mow it the same year it is sown; but it is not the best way to do so: the year
following they mow it, and so do seven years together; the ordinary burden is
obout a load or a load and a half in good years, upon an Arpent, (which is an
100. square Poles or Rods, every Pole or Rod being 20. foot) which quantity
of ground being nigh a 4th. part less than an English Acre; within a league of
Paris, is usually Rented at 6. or 7. s. After the land has rested 7. years;
then they usually break it up, and sow it with Corn till it be out of heart,
and then sow it with Saint Foine as formerly: for it does not impoverish land,
as Annual Plants do; but after seven years, the roots of this plant being
great and sweet, as the roots of Licorish, do rot, being turned up by the
Plough, and enrich the Land. I have seen it sown in diverse places here in
England; especially in Cobham-Park in Kent, about 4. miles from Gravesend;
where it has thriven extraordinary well upon dry Chalky banks, where nothing
else would grow: and indeed such dry barren land is most proper for it as moist
rich land for the great Trefoile or great Clover-Grasse (although it will grow
indifferently well on all lands) and when the other grasses and plants are
destroyed by the parching heat of the Sun; because their roots are small and
shallow; this flourishes very much, having very great root and deep in the
ground, and therefore not easily to be exsiccated; As we have observed Ononis
or Rest-Harrow commonly to do, on dry lands; but if you sow this on wet land,
the water soon corrupts the root of it. This plant without question would much
improve many of our barren lands, so that they might be mowen every year once,
at least 7. years together, and yield excellent fodder for Cattle, if so be
that it be rightly managed; otherwise it comes to nothing; as I have seen by
experience. I therefore council those who sow this, or the great Trefoile or
Clover-Grasse, or any other sorts of grasses; that they observe these Rules.

1. That they do make their ground fine, and kill all sorts of other grasses
and plants; otherwise they being native English will by no means give way to
the French ones; especially in this moist climate; and therefore they are to be
blamed; who with one ploughing sow this or other seeds; for the grass
presently grows up and choaketh them, and so by their negligence, and ill
Husbandry, discourageth themselves and others.

2. Let them not be too sparing of their seeds; for the more they sow, the
closer and thicker they will grow, and presently fully stock the ground, that
nothing else can grow. And further, the seeds which come from beyond the Seas,
are oftentimes old and much decayed, and therefore the more seed is required.

3. Not to expect above 7. years profit by it; for in that time it will decay,
and the natural grass will prevail over it; for every plant has his period;
some in one year; some in 2. others in 3. as the common Thistle; and therefore
after 7. years, let them either plough the land up, and sow it with that same
seed again, or with other Grain as they do in France.

4. Let not sheep or other cattle bite them the first year, that they may be
well rooted; For these grasses are far sweeter then the ordinary grasses; and
cattle will eat them down, leaving the other; and consequently discourage their
growth.

5. The best way, if men will be at the charge, is to make their ground very
fine, as they do when they are to sow Barley, and harrowe it even; and then to
how these seeds in alone without any other grain, as the Gardiners do Pease;
yet not at so great a distance; but let them make the ranges about a foot's
breadth one from another, and they shall see their grasses flourish, as if they
were green Pease; especially if they draw the how through them once or twice
that summer to destroy all the weeds and grasses: And if they do thus, the
great Clover and other seeds may be mowen even twice the first year, as I have
experimented in diverse small plots of ground.

There is at Paris likewise another sort of fodder, which they call La Lucerne,
which is not inferior, but rather preferred before this Saint Foine, for dry
and barren grounds; which has been lately brought thither, and is managed as
the former; and truly every day produces some new things, not only in other
Countries, but also in our own. And though I cannot but very much commend these
plants unto my Countrymen, knowing that they may be beneficial to this Nation;
yet I especially recommend unto them a famous kind of grass growing in
Wilshire 9. miles from Salisbury, at Maddington, which may better be called one
of the wonders of this Land, then the Hawthorne-tree at Glassenbury, which
superstition made so famous: for diverse of the same kind are found elsewhere.
You may find this grass briefly described in a Book called Phytologia
Britannica, (which lately came forth, and set down even all the plants which
have been found naturally growing in England Gramen Caninum Supinum
Longissimum, which grows 9. miles from Salisbury, Mr. Tuckers at Maddington:
where with they fat hogs; and which is 24. foot long, a thing almost
incredible; yet commonly known to all that Shire. Now without question, if the
seed of this grass, be sown in other rich Meadows, it will yield
extraordinarily, though perchance not so much, as in its proper place. I wonder
that those that live there abouts, have not tried to fertilize their other
Meadows with it: for it is a peculiar species of grass; and though some
Ingenious men have found about 90. species of grasses in this island: yet there
is none like to this, that can by any means be brought to such an height, and
sweetness. And truly I suppose, that the thorough examination of this grass,
is a thing of very great importance, for the improvement of Meadows and
Pastures; and it may excel the great Trefoile, Saint Foine, La Lucerne, or any
exotic plant whatsoever. And though I am very unwilling to exceed the bounds
of an Epistle; yet I cannot but certify you, wherein the Husbandry of this
Nation in other particulars (as I suppose) is greatly deficient, which I will
do as briefly as may be; and likewise, how ingenious men may find Remedies for
these deficiencies.

First he would do the honest and painful Husbandman 1. deficiency concerning
ploughs and carriages,
a very great pleasure, and bring great profit to this Nation, who could
facilitate the going of the Plough and lighten our ordinary Carriages. I
wonder, that so many excellent Mechanics, who have beaten their brains about
the perpetual Motion and other curiosities, that they might find the best ways
to ease all Motions, should never so much as to honor the Plough (which is the
most necessary Instrument in the world,) by their labor and studies. I suppose
all know, that it would be an extraordinary benefit to this Country, if that
1. or 2. horses could plough and draw as much as 4. or 6. and further also,
that there is no small difference in ploughs, and wagons, when there is scarce
any sure rule for the making them; and every Country, yea almost every County,
differs not only in the ploughs; but even in every part. Some with wheels,
others without; some turning the Rest (as they call it) as in Kent, Picardy and
Normandy,) others not; some having Coulters of one fashion, others of another;
others as the Dutch, having an Iron wheel or circle for that purpose; some
having their sheares broad at point; some not; some being round, as in Kent,
others flat; sometying their horses by the tail, as in Ireland. So, likewise
Wagons and Carts differ: some using 4. wheels, others two only; some carrying
timber on 2. wheels in a Cart, others with 4. wheels, and a long pole only
between, which is the best way; some plough with 2. horses only, as in
Norfolk, and beyond seas in France, Italy, where I never saw above three
horses in a Plough, and one only to hold and drive: but in Kent I have seen 4.
6. yea 12. horses and oxen; which variety shows, that the Husbandman, who is
ordinarily ignorant in Mechanics, is even at his wits end in this Instrument,
which he must necessarily use continually. Surely he should deserve very well
of this Nation, and be much honored by all, that would set down exact Rules
for the making of this most necessary, yet contemned Instrument, and for every
part thereof: for without question there are as exact Rules to be laid down for
this, as for Shipping and other things. And yet in Shipping, how have we within
these 6. years out-stripped our selves, and gone beyond all Nations? for which
Art some deserve eternal honor. And why may we not in this? I know a
Gentleman, who now is beyond seas, where he excels even the Hollanders, in
their own business of draining; who promised much in this kind, and I think,
he is able to perform it; I could wish, he were called on to make good his
promise. In China, it is ordinary to have wagons to pass up and down without
horses or Oxen, with sails as ships do: and lately in Holland a wagon was
framed, which with ordinary sails carried 30. people 60. English miles in 4.
hours. I know some excellent scholars, who promise much by the means of
Horizontal sails (viz.) to have 3. or 4. Ploughs to go together; which shall
likewise both sow and harrow. I dare not being ignorant in these high
speculations, engage my self to do much thereby; but wish these Gentlemen,
whom I know to be extremely ingenious, would attempt something, both for the
satisfying of themselves and others. There is an ingenious Yeoman of Kent, who
has 2. ploughs fastened together very finely, by the which he plougheth 2.
furrows at once, one under another; and so stirs up the land 12. or 14.
inches deep, which in deep land is good. Near Greenwich there lives an
Honorable Gentleman, who has excellent Col. Blunt.
Corn on barren land, and yet plougheth his land with one horse, when as
usually through Kent, they use 4. and 6. These things show that much may be
done in this kind; and I hope some in these active times, will undertake and
accomplish this work of so great importance.

There is a Book long since Printed made by Sir 2. Deficiency, about digging of
land, Setting and howing in of Corn.
Hugh Plattes, (the most curious man of his time) called Adams Art revived,
wherein is showed the great benefit which would accrue to this Nation, if all
land which were fit to be dug, were so ordered, and their corn set. Mr.
Gab. Plattes likewise has written much of this kind, and promises that men
shall reap 100. for one; all charges borne which are very great. That this may
be true, he brings some probable Reasons, supposing that less then a peck of
Wheat will set an Acre. I dare not promise so much as these Gentlemen do,
neither can I commend M. Gab. Plattes setting Instrument: For I know there are
many difficulties in it, which he himself could never wade through; but
concerning digging and setting and howing in of Corn, these things I dare
maintain.

1. That it is a deficiency in Husbandry, that it is used no more.

2. That one good digging, because it goes deeper than the Plough, and buryeth
all weeds, kills the grasses; is as good as three ploughings, and if the Land
be mellow, not much more chargeable.

3. That it would employ many 1000. of people, that a third part of the seed
might be saved. As I have found by experience, that all the weeds and grasses,
might be more easily destroyed thereby, and the ground better accommodated for
other crops; and to conclude, the croppe considerably greater. Yet thus much I
must further say, concerning setting of Grain, That great Beans are even of
necessity to be set, and that small Beans in Surrey and other places, are
likewise set with Profit, for the reasons above mentioned; that to set Pease
(unless Hastevers) Oats, Barley, is a thing even ridiculous: that Wheat
although in diverse grounds it may be set with Profit; yet to How it in (as the
Gardiners speak) as they do Pease, though not at the same distance, but about a
foot the ranges one from another, is better then setting, for these Reasons.

1. Because to set Corn is an infinite trouble and charge; and if it be not
very exactly done, which children neither can nor will do, and these must be
the chief setters; will be very prejudicious.

2. If worms, frost, ill weather, or fowls, destroy any part of your seed,
which they will do; your croppe is much impaired.

3. The ground cannot be so well weeded, and the mould raised about the roots
by the how. Which 3. inconveniences are remedied by the other way.

Further I dare affirm, that after the ground is dug or ploughed and
harrowed; even it is better to how Wheat in, then to sow it after the common
way; because that the weeds may be easily destroyed by running the how through
it in the Spring, and the mould raised about the roots of the Corn, as the
Gardiners do with Pease, it would save much Corn in dear years, and for
other Reasons before mentioned. Yea it is not more chargeable; for a Gardener
will how in an Acre for 5. s. and after in the spring for less money run it
over with a how, and cut up all the weeds, and raise the mould: which charges
are not great, and you shall save above a bushel of seed, which in dear years
is more worth then all your charges.

Further 1. s. 6. d. an Acre for the sowing and harrowing of an Acre in Kent is
accounted a reasonable price; but if any fear charges let him use a
Drill-Plough. I therefore cannot but commend the howing in of Wheat, as an
excellent piece of good Husbandry, whether the ground be dug or ploughed;
not only because it saves much Corn, imployeth much people; and it is not
chargeable; but it also destroys all weeds, fitteth grounds for after crops,
and causes a greater increase, and in my apprehension is a good Remedy against
Smut and Mildew. There is an Ingenious Italian, who wondereth how it comes to
pass, that if one sets a Grain of Corn, as Wheat, Barley, etc. it usually
produces 300. or 400. as I have tried: yet if you sow Wheat after the
ordinary way, 6. or 8. for one is accounted a good crop; what becomes of all
the Corn, that is sown, when as the 50th. part, if it do grow, would be
sufficient? For answer to this.

1. I say, much Corn is sown, which nature has destinated for the Hens and
Chickens, being without any considerable vegetative faculty.

2. Worms, Frosts, Floods, Crows, and Larkes, (which every one does not
consider) do devour not a little.

3, Weeds, as Poppie, May-weed, and the grasses growing with the Corn, do
destroy much.

Lastly, when Corn is so sown after the ordinary manner, much is buried in
the furrows; especially if the ground be grazy: much is thrown on heaps in
holes, and consequently starve and choke one another. Most of these
Inconveniences, are to be remedyed by this way of setting, and howing in of
Corn.

Gardening, though it be a wonderful improver of lands, as it plainly appears
by this 3. Desiciency concerning Gardening.
that they give extraordinary rates for land (viz.) from 40. s. per Acre to 9.
pound, and dig and how and dung their lands, which costeth very much; Yet I
know diverse, which by 2. or 3. Acres of land maintain themselves and family,
and employ others about their ground; and therefore their ground must yield a
wonderful increase, or else it could not pay charges; yet I suppose there are
many Deficiencies in this calling.

1. Because it is but of few years standing in England, and therefore not
deeply rooted. About 50. years ago, about which time Ingenuities first began
to flourish in England; This Art of Gardening, began to creep into England,
into Sandwich, and Surrey, Fulham, and other places.

Some old men in Surrey, where it flourishes very much at present; report,
That they knew the first Gardiners that came into those parts, to plant
Cabages, Colleflowers, and to sow Turnips, Carrets, and Parsnips, to sow
Raith, Kape, Pease, all which at that time were great rarities, we having few,
or none in England, but what came from Holland and Flaunders. These Gardiners
with much ado procured a plot of good ground, and gave no less then 8. pound
per Acre; yet the Gentleman was not content, fearing they would spoil his
ground; because they did use to dig it. So ignorant were we of Gardening in
those days.

2. Many parts of England are as yet ignorant. Within these 20. years, a famous
Town within less Gravesend.
then 20. miles of London, had not so much as a mess of Pease but what came
from London, where at present Gardening flourishes much. I could instance
diverse other places, both in the North and West of England, where the name of
Gardening, and Howing is scarcely known, in which places a few Gardiners might
have saved the lives of many poor people, who have starved these dear years.

3. We have not Gardening-ware in that plenty and cheapnesse (unless perhaps
about London) as in Holland and other places, where they not only feed
themselves with Gardiners ware, but also fat their Hogs and Cowes.

4. We have as yet diverse things from beyond Seas, which the Gardiners may
easily raise at home, though nothing nigh so much as formerly; for in Qu. Eliz.
time, we had not only our Gardiners ware from Holland, but also Cherries from
Flaunders; Apples from France; Saffron, Licorish from Spain; Hopps from the
Low Countries: And the Frenchman who writes the Treasure Politic says, that
it is one of the great Deficiencies of England, that Hopps will not grow,
whereas now it is known, that Licorish, Saffron, Cherries, Apples, Pears,
Hopps, Cabbages of England are the best in the world. Notwithstanding we as yet
want many things, as for example: We want Onions, very many coming to England
from Flaunders, Spain; Madder for dying comes from Zurick-Sea by Zealand; we
have Red Roses from France; Anice-seeds, Fennell-seeds, Cumine, Caraway, Rice
from Italy, which without question would grow very well in diverse moist lands
in England; yea Sweet Marjorame, Barley, and Gromwell-seed, and Virga Aurea,
though they grow in our hedges in England.

Lastly, Gardening is deficient in this particular: that we have not Nurceries
sufficient in this land, of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Vines, Chestnuts,
Almonds; but Gentlemen are necessitated, to send to London many 100. miles for
them.

Briefly, for the advancement of this ingenuous calling, I only desire, that
Industrious Gentlemen would be pleased to encourage some expert workmen into
the places where they live, and to let them land at a reasonable rate, and if
they be poor and honest, to lend a little stock; they will soon see the benefit
that will redound, not only to themselves, but also to all their neighbors,
especially the poor, who are not a little sustained by the Gardiners labors
and Ingenuities.

4. Our Husbandry is deficient in this, that we know not how to remedy the
infirmities of our growing 4. Deficiency in Smut and Mildew.
Corn; especially Smut and Mildew, to instance in these two only, which
oftentimes bring great calamities to these Nations: Smut in wet years, Mildewes
in dry. These distempers in Corn, are not only in our Country; but also in
other places. A learned Author says, that Smuttynesse of corn, which makes
it smell like a Red Herring, was not Helmont.
known in France, till about 1530. at which time the great foul disease began
to break forth, which he conceives from hence to have some original; as also
the campe-disease. Mildewes are very great in the Kingdom of Naples, which often
stick to the sithes of those that mow grass and Corn: and (God be thanked)
we are not troubled with Locusts, which is a great flying Grasse-hopper, nor
Palmer-wormes, which is a kind of great black Catter-piller, nor with great
hail in summer, nor with great drought, which stifleth the ear in the stalk;
which Calamities in hot Countries, do very often totally destroy the honest and
patient Husband-man's labors: neither are we troubled with extreme colds,
which in New England and other cold Countries, do often destroy the Corn. But
to return to our purpose.

And first briefly to show you my opinion concerning the Causes of Smuttynesse.
I desire not to fetch Causes a far off, and to tell you of the sad
Conjunctions of Mars and Saturn (for I think, Quae supraenos, belong not to us)
when as we have enough at home: This is certain, ethat there are many evident
Causes of this corruption of Corn.

1. A moist season about Kerning-time: which moisture either corrupts the
roots of the Plant, or the nourishment of it, or the seed in its Embrio: or
perhaps in some measure all these.

2. Low, moist, foggy ground, for the reasons above mentioned.

3. Dung'd land. In Vineyards it is observed, that dung causes more increase in
quantity, but less in goodness, so that the ill taste of the dung may easily
be discerned; because wine has an high taste, without question the same
happens to other Plants, although it be not so easily discerned for the
ferment or ill odor of the dung, cannot be over-mastered by the Plants, as we
see also in Animals, that corrupt diet causes unfavory tastes in the flesh: so
hogs in New found-land, were they are nourished by fish, may by their tastes be
called rather Sea-porpusses, then Land-swine.

4. The sowing of Smutty Corn often produces Smuttynesse; the Son like unto the
father; I account Smutty Corn an imperfect or sick Grain, and suppose that by
a Microscope the imperfection may be discerned.

Lastly, the sowing of the same seed often on the same field, causes
Smuttynesse; because that nitrous juice, which is convenient for the
nourishment of the Grain, has been exhausted in the precedent years; and
therefore it is excellent Husbandry every year to change the species of Grain,
and also to buy your Seed-Corne, from places far distant. I am informed of a
Gentleman, who did sow some Wheat which came from Spain, where the Grain is
usually very hard and flinty, and as it were transparent, and far weightier
then ours (as it appears by a measure at Amsterdam which holds about 3.
bushels, and if our Wheat in the Northern parts weighs 160. the Southern
Corn weighs sometimes 180. 200. 220:) and had a crop beyond expectation.

The usual Cures of Smuttynesse, besides those mentioned before, are these.

1. To lime your ground, which warmeth and dries the land.

2. To lime your Corn, which is done thus. First slack your lime, and then
moisten your Corn or lime, and stir them together till your Grain be as big
as a small Pease. This liming preserves Corn likewise from birds and worms,
and is found a very good Remedy against this disease: others make a strong ly
with common salt, and steep their Corn in it all night, and then draw away
their ly for further use; which seldom fails of its desired effect. Whether
this strong ly does by its corrosivenes, mortify the weak and imperfect Corn,
so that it will not grow; Or whether it be a Remedy, to cure the imperfections
thereof, is worth the enquiry? I suppose that this ly does exsiccate the
superfluous humidity, which is the cause of this corruption. If Corn be
brought into the barn very Smutty, in Kent they usually thrash it on dry
floores planked with boards; by which means, the Smuttynesse is beaten away,
and sticks not to the Grain, only a little blacknes appears about the
eye, but if it be thrashed on a moist floor, the blackness sticks to the
grain, which therefore appears dark, and is sold at a lower rate to the
Bakers.

Mildew is without question an unctuous dew, which descends from above, about
Midsommer; it abounds in dry years, as Smuttynesse in moist. I cannot think
that there is ordinarily any Malignity in this dew, but it produces its effect
by manifest causes, viz. from an oily viscous quality which stops the pores
of the husk wherein the Wheat lies, and depriveth it from the Air, and
consequently from nourishment: for the Air is the life of all things. I have
heard and do believe, that if you streake any ear of Wheat with oil, it will
produce the same effect. I am sorry that I never tried, that I might better
understand the nature of this sad calamity; which often undoeth the Industrious
Husbandman; and causes great scarcity in this Isle. It is to be observed
further, that Wheat only suffers considerable damage by Mildew; because it
lies in a chaffy husk, which other Grains do not. The Grounds most subject to
Mildew are these.

1. Those that are enclosed with trees and high hedges. And truly this is the
only great Inconveniency I find by enclosures.

2. Low velleyes. I have seen very often in the same field, the banks fine,
bright Corn; and all the lower parts, though greater in straw; yet little
worth by reason of the Mildew.

3. Dung made of straw, I have observed to dispose much to Mildew, and
Sheeps-dung to be a kind of Antidote against it: as also Pigeons-dung; because,
as I conceive, these, 2. last sorts abound much in Niter, which produces a
firm, hard, bright Corn, not easily to be putrefyed; but the other being more
oily and Sulphurous causes a dark Spungy Corn, soon corruptible. And 2.
Because straw is a part of the same kind corrupted which is always in some
measure hurtful to the same species both in Ammals and all Vegetables; and
therefore rotten sticks or the earth proceeding from them, is found hurtful to
the roots of trees; and trees will hardly grow, where the Roots of other trees
have formerly been corrupted.

The Remedies for this Accident, briefly are these. (Not to speak of Bees, who
questionless make most of their Honey from these Honies or Mildews: for they
gather very little, in comparison of that which falls.)

1. The best way is to cut down the trees about your ground, and your hedges
low, that the wind may ventilate your Corn.

2. To sow early; that your Corn may be full Kerned, before these Mildewes
fall. I am informed, Sir Jo. Culp.
that an Ingenious Knight. in Kent, did for curiosity sow Wheat in all months of
the year and that the Corn sown in July, did produce such an increase, that
it is almost incredible; and truly I think it a great fault in many places,
that they sow late, for many reasons: I am sure in France, they usually sow
before Michaelmas.

3. Some use (and with good profit) to draw a line over their Corn, and to
strike off the Mildew, before it be inspissated by the Sun; This ought
especially to be done before sunrising: 2. men in an hour will easily run over
an Acre; the Mildewes usually fall like a thick fog, or a Misty rain; if you
go to your Bees, you will soon perceive it by their extraordinary labor, very
early in the morning.

4. The use of a kind of bearded Wheat, is an excellent Remedy: for the beard
shoveth off the dew, that it does not so easily insinuate it self into the
ear, and likewise causes the ear to shake by the least wind. There is a kind
of Wheat in Buckingham-Shire called Red-straw-Wheate, which is much commended:
it is a strong-stalked Wheat, and does not soon lodge, and therefore excellent
for Rank land, where Corn is apt to lodge, and consequently to Mildew; but I
question whether it has any property against Mildew. This I am very confident
of, that if this Wheat, or any other, were without the Chaffy husks exposed
bare to the Air; as Barley and Rye are, Wheat would not be afflicted with
Mildew: Perhaps such Grain may be found by diligent enquiry. I have casually
picked out of a Wheate-field some stalks, which have had 2. ears on them: and
though Barley usually has been 2. ranges; yet I have seen some sorts with 4. 6.
and there are many great varieties in grains not yet discovered. Truly, if any
one knows better ways then these, how to cure this Malady of Mildew, he is
much to blame, if he do not publish it for the good of his Countrymen,

I will not here set down the diverse manners of 5. Deficiency, cocerning the
planting of Apples, Pears, Cherties, and Plums.
Graftings and Inoculations, which nevertheless is an art absolutely necessary
in Planting; for every book of Husbandry does show it, and every Gardener can
teach it those who are desirous to learn it; Neither will I set down all the
sorts of Apples, Pears, Cherries, Plums, etc. for it would be too tedious a
discourse; and Mr. Parkinson has already very excellently done it, in his Book
called Paradisus Terrestris, where at leisure you may read it. I will only
point briefly at the Deficiencies, which I find in this part of Husbandry, and
the best ways to Remedy them.

1. I say, that it is a great Deficiency in England, that we have not more
Orchards planted. It Is true, that in Kent and about London, and also in
Gloucester-Shire, Herford, and Worcester, there are many gallant Orchards, but
in other Countries, they are very rare, and thin: but if there were as many
more, even in any Country, they would be very profitable. I know in Kent, that
some advance their ground even from 5. s. per Acre to 5. pound by this means,
and if I should relate, what I have heard by diverse concerning the profit of a
Cherry-Orchard, about Sittenburne in Kent, you would hardly believe me; yet I
have heard it by so many, that I believe it to be true: Namely; that an Orchard
of 30. Acres of Cherryes, produduced in one year above a 1000. pound, but now
the trees are almost all dead; it was one of the first Orchards planted in
Kent. Mr. Cambden reports, that the Earl of Leicester's Gardener in Qu.
Eliz. time, first began to plant Flemish Cherryes in those parts; which in his
time did spread into 16. other Parishes, and were at that time sold at rgeater
rates then now; yet I know that 10. or 15. pound an Acre has been given for
Cherryes, more for Pears, and Apples.

2. There is a great Deficiency in the ordering of Orchards, in that they are
not well pruned, but full of Moss, Misletoe, and Suckers, and oftentimes the
ground is packed too thick of trees; for they should stand at least 20. foot
asunder; neither will ill husbands bestow dunging, digging, or any other cost
on Orchards, which if they did, might pay half their rents in some places. One
told me for a secret, a Composition for to make Trees bear much and excellent
fruit, which was this: First in an old tree, to split his root; then to apply a
Compost made of Pigeons-dung lees of wine, or stale Urine, and a little
Brimstone, (to destroy the worms,) it has some probability of truth: for
experience I know, that a bushel of Pigeons-dung, has caused a tree to grow
and bear, which for diverse years before stood at a stand; but concerning
splitting the roots, I know not what to say. Some old Authors affirm this ought
to be done; because that the roots may as well be hide-bound, as other parts of
the tree, and not able to attract his nourishment, and when the Root is split,
it will speedily send forth diverse small fibrous roots, which are the principal
Attractors. It were good that some would give us an exact account of this
Experiment. But Some will object against Orchards, that they spoil much
ground, and therefore ought to be planted only in hedges. To this I answer.

1. That Plumtrees and Damsins, may very well be planted in hedges, being
ordinarily thorny plants; this is used very much in Surrey and Kent, where the
Plums usually pay no small part of their Rent; yet I never saw in these
Southern parts of England, any Apples or Pears thrive in an Hedge, unless a
Crab or a Wilden, or some Sweeting of little worth. How they thrive in
Hereford-Shire and those places, I know not.

2. The Inconveniences of Orchards, planted at 20. or 30. foot distance, is not
worth speaking of: for this is the usual course in Kent, when they plant any
ground, they exactly place them in rank and file, and then plough their lands
many years, and sow them with Corn, till the Orchard begins to bear fruit;
then they lay them down for pasture, which Pasture is not considerably sour;
but has this advantage above other Pastures.

1. That it is sooner grown by 14. days in the spring than the Meadows, and
therefore very serviceable.

2. In Parching Summers here is plenty, when other places have Scarcity

3. They are great shelters for Cattle, especially Sheep, who will in those
places, in great snowes scrape up meat, which in other places they cannot do:
and if the pasture were sour; yet the loss is not great; for it will be a
convenient place for the Hogs to run in, who must have a place for that
purpose, where there are no Commons.

4. I say, that the Benefits are so many by Orchards, that you ought not like
an ungrateful man to thrust them up to the hedge: for they afford curious
walks for pleasure, food for Cattle, both in the spring early, and also in the
parching Summer, and nipping snowy Winter: They affoard fuel for the fire, and
also shades from the heat, physic for the sick, refreshment for the sound,
plenty of food for man, and that not of the worst, and drink also even of the
best, and all this without much labor, care, or cost, who therefore can justly
open his mouth against them?

3. Deficiency is, that we do not improve many excellent Fruits, which grow
amongst us very well, and that we have as yet many fruits from beyond seas,
which will grow very well with us. I pass by the general and great ignorance,
that is amongst us, of the variety of Apples, of which there are many sorts,
which have some good and peculiar uses; most men contenting themselves with the
knowledge of half a score of the best, thinking the virtues of all the rest are
comprehended in them: as also of the variety of Pears, which are incredibly
many. A Friend of mine near Gravesend, has lately collected about 200.
species. I know another in Essex (Mr. Ward) who has nigh the same number. I
hear of another in Worcerster-Shire, not inferior to these in
Northamton-Shire. I know one, who has likewise collected very many. So that I
dare boldly say, there are no less in this Island then 500. species; some
commended for their early ripeness; some for excellent tastes; some for
beauty; others for greatness; some for great bearers; others for good Bakers;
some for long lasters; other for to make Perry, etc. But to our purpose: I say
many rare Fruits are neglected; to Instance.

1. in the Small-nut and Filbird, which is not much inferior to the best and
sweetest Almonds.

2. The great Damsin or Pruin-Plum, which grows well and bears full in
England.

3. Almonds, which grows well and bears good fruit, as I have seen diverse
bushels on one tree in my brothers Orchard.

4. Wal-nuts, which is not a fruit to be despised.

5. Vines, and Mulberries, but of these presently in another place. I might
likewise add Currants, Raspeses, of which excellent drinks may be made.

6. Quinces, of the which I cannot but tell you that a Gentleman at Prichenell
in Essex, who had a tree from beyond Sea, has the best in England, and has
made above 30. pound of a small piece of ground planted with them, as I have
heard from his own wifes mouth. And therefore it is by reason of our ill
Husbandry, that we have Quinces from Flaunders, Smalnuts from Spain, Pruins
from France, and also Walnuts and Almonds from Italy, and Chestnuts (which I
had almost forgot) from Portugal. And now I cannot but digress a little, to
tell you a strange and true story, with my opinion of it. In diverse places of
Kent, as at and about Gravesend, in the Country and elsewhere, very many of
the prime Timbers of their old barnes and houses are of Chestnut-wood, and yet
there is scarce a Chestnut-tree within 20. miles of that place, and the people
altogether ignorant of such trees. This shows that in former times those
places did abound with such timber; for people were not so foolish surely in
former times, to run up and down the world, to procure such huge mastey
timbers for barnes and such buildings when as there was plenty of Oaks, and
Elmes, at their doors: And further, it shows, that these Trees will grow
again with us to a great bigness. This puts into my mind, the story of the
moore-logs, which are found in diverse places of the North of England, in moors
many foot deep; which logs are long and black, and appear to be a kind of
Fur, or Pine; and yet in those places, people are altogether ignorant of
these Trees, the Country not producing any of these species. The first story of
Kent, which I know to be true, causes me to wonder the less at the latter:
for I see that a species of wood, may be destroyed, even totally in a place. And

2. I know, that in Virginia and New England, that Pines and Firres and Cedars,
do grow wonderfully thick in such Moors or Swamps, and being light wood, and
easily wrought, they are continually used, while they last, for buildings.
Further, I suppose, these Moors, are Commons, to the which the poor have used
to resort for firing, and how soon great woods will be consumed by them, every
one making what havoc he pleases, all men know. As concerning their being so
deep in the ground, and blackness; I suppose that when wood, was abundant in
those places, every one did cut what they pleased, and left what was not for
their turns, which being in moist places, was soon glutted with moisture, and
made ponderous; by which means it soon buried it self, as ships do, on
quicksand, or perhaps the turffe (which has a peculiar faculty vegetative, for
where it is exhausted, it soon grows again) in time has grown over them;
the people permitting it, because that wood, once sobb'd in wet, is of little
use, as we see by Piles on the marshes-side, scarce any man vouchsafing to
carry them home. The blackness of this wood proceeds, as I suppose, from the
sooty fume, or evaporation of the black turffe, which endeavors, as all
earths do, to reduce all things into it is own nature; which though it be not
able fully to accomplish; yet it introduces diverse dispositions, and
qualities, as blackness in the wood. Some suppose, that these moore-logs have
lain there ever since the flood, with whom I will not contend; seeing that any
wood, if it be kept from the Air continually moist or dry, will endure even
thousands of years without putrefaction.

6. Deficiency, is the Not-improving of our Fruits for the best ends and
purposes. Normandy, which The 6. deficiency, concerning not improving our
Fruits.
produces but little wine, makes abundance of Cider and Perry, which they
estimate equally to wine, if it be made of good fruit. The ordinary Perry is
made of Choaky Pears, very juicy, which grow along by the high-way-sides,
which are not to be eaten raw. In Biscay in Spain, where wine is scarce, they
make Cider of a certain sweet Apple, which has a little bitterness in it, and
is like to our snonting, and the Cider is very good. And truly here in England,
if we would make Cider and Perry of the best sorts of Fruits, which is rarely
done, (for we think any fruit good enough for that purpose) we might make
drinks no ways inferior to the French wines, which are usually spoiled before
they come over the seas to you, their spirits soon evaporating. There are two
ways of making Cider and Perry: one, by bruising and beating them, and then
presently to put them into a vessel to ferment or work (as it is usually
called) of themselves: The other way, is to boil the juice with some good
spices, by which the rawnesse is taken away, and then to ferment it with some
yest, if it work not of it self, this is the best way: and I have tasted Cider
thus made of an excellent delicate taste. Neither let any complain of the
windiness; for it is only want of use: When I had for 2. or 3. years
continually drunk wine beyond Sea, the strongest beer for 2. or. 3. weeks, was
as windy to me, as Cider will be to any; and afterward when I went to Paris,
the wine of that place was as troublesome as English beer for a little time:
how much wine might be saved and also malt if Englishmen did take these good
courses, which other Nations do, and consequently how much advantage would this
Island reap thereby? If I were an housekeeper in the Country, I would make
excellent Beer, Ale, Cider, Perry, Metheglin, Wine, of our own grapes, and if
my Friends would not drink these, they should drink water, or go away a
thirst: I would scorn to honor France so much as men do usually; and the
Spaniard and Italian should not laugh at us, and say that we can as well be
without bread, as their wines, Currents etc. Thus may many other excellent
drinks bemade out of our Fruits: not to speak of those which are made of our
Grain, as Barley, Wheat, etc. yet I must tell you, that I know an Ingenious
man, who can without malting Barley, make a drink not inferior to wine, and a
greater quantity of Aqua-vitae out of them, and with less cost, then by the
ordinary way, by a peculiar fermentation of his own; which time will discover.
There is another Ingeuious man, who out of Damsins, and other fat and sweet
plums, can make a drink not inferior to the best wines, and abundance of
Aqua-vitae. Many Ladies know how to make Cherry, Raspes-wines; and Sir Hugh
Plattes in his Closet for Ladies, discloseth many secrets of this kind; as also
for Conserves, Marmalades, which are things both delightful and profitable. I
have a kinsman, who can even out of black-berries, make a very pleasant drink,
which curiosity he is unwilling to publish. Glauber an excellent Chemist has
diverse secrets of this kind, even to the advancing of Hawes, Hips,
Canker-Berries, Slowes, to excellent Aqua-vitae's, drinks, vinegers, which he
himself first invented. In Russia in the springtime it is an usual custom to
pierce the bark of the Birch-trees, which at that time will weep much liquor,
and yet like children be little the worse; this the poor ordinarily drink for
necessity, Helmont
it is a pleasant healthful drink; and also the rich men, because it is an
excellent preservative against the stone.

The means to advance this profitable and pleasant work, are these.

1. To advance Nurceries of all sorts of Pears, Apples, Plums, Cherries, which
Gentlemen may do for a small matter, and then plant out these trees, when they
are grown great enough. The best and cheapest ways to raise all Nurcery wares
is done thus. Plums may be raised either of stones, which when you have eaten
the plums, may be presently pricked into the ground, or by Slips, which you
will find about the old trees. Apples may be raised from Kernels (Crab kernels
are the best) which ought to be preserved in dry sand, till the spring, least
they grow moldy: or Crab-stalke may be fetched out of the woods, and grafted.
Some Trees as Sweetings, Codlings, Quinces, will grow very well of slips.
Cherries are very well raised by stones, (the Black-Cherries are the best)
which so soon as you have eaten them, are to be howen into Beds made very
fine, the ranges a foot distant; beware least you let them heat, and take heed
of the mouse. I have seen Cherry-stones and Apple-Kernels grow 2. foot and a
half in one year; and consequently in few years they would be fit to be
transplanted. The Art of Grafting, Inoculating a Gentleman will learn in two
hours.

2. For the advancing of Ingenuities in this kind, as that making of
Vinous-Drinks, out of Apples, Plums etc. I counsel all Ingenious Gentlemen to
try diverse experiments in these kinds; with these Cautions.

1. That he attempt not great quantities at first, which perchance will be
chargeable and troublesome; for by a gallon he may have as much certainly, as
by a hogshead.

2. Not to be discouraged, if they succeed not well at first dash: for
certainly there are many Ingenuities in these fruits, which time will discover.

3. Proceed by fermentation: for every liquour which will ferment, has a
vinous spirit in it, and without fermentation even the best fruits will have
none.

Lastly, fermentation is done either in liquido, or humido; and herein consists
some Mystery. I have forgot to speak of Apricocks, Peaches, Melicotores, which
are fine pleasant fruits, yet very dangerous; and therefore called by the
Italians, Mazzofrancese, that is, Kill-Frenchman; and wish Ladies, and others
to take heed of surfeiting by these and some other dangerous plums.

I cannot without much tediousness, relate the diverse sorts of Vines, which
are even Infinite; The 7. deficiency, concerning Vines.
Rome having in it usually, 40. or 50. sorts of Vines, and all very good: Other
places of Italy, Spain, and France, have also great varieties; I therefore
pass them by, as also the manner of managing of them; because it is described
in the Countrey-Farme, and also by Bonovil a Frenchman, who at the command of
King James wrote a short treatise of Vines and Silk-wormes, for the instruction
of the plantations of Virginia. I shall only according to my method show you
the Deficiencies amongst us in this particular plant, and the best Remedies for
it.

And first, although I think that the wine is the great blessing of God, which
Hot Countries especially enjoy, as temperate Countries do Milk, Butter, Cheese
in abundance, and the coldest and Barrennest Foul, and Fish in an incredible
number; God of his goodness distributing some peculiar blessings to every
Country; Notwithstanding I dare say, it is probable, that Vineyards have
formerly flourished in England, and that we are to blame, that so little is
attempted to revive them again. There are many places in Kent called by the
names of Vineyards, and the ground's of such a Nature, that it seems
probable, they have been such. I hear further by diverse, people of credit,
that by records it appears, that the tithes of wine in Glocestershire was in
diverse Parishes considerably great; but at length Gascony coming into the hands
of the English, from whence comes the most of the strong French wine, called
high-Countrey-wine, and customs being small, wine was imported into England
from thence, better and cheaper then we could make it, and it was thought
convenient to discourage Vineyards here, that the greater trade might be driven
with Gascoine, and many ships might find employment thereby.

Some fond Astrologers have conceited, that the earth being grown older and
therefore colder, has caused the sun to descend many degrees lower to warm
and Cherish it, and one argument which they bring for this opinion is, that
Vines and Silke-wormes are found in those Countries, wherein former times they
were unknown: But if these fond men, had considered the good Husbandry in
these times, with the blessing of God on it, they had not run into such foolish
imaginations. This is true indeed, that the Roman soldiers, who had Alsatia
given them to live in, which is one of the best and most Southern places of
Germany, mutined; because they thought it so cold, that Vines would not grow
there, and that therefore they should be deprived of that delectable liquor;
whereas we find at this present day Vines flourishing many hundred miles more
toward the North, both in France, Loraine, and Germany; and that they are
crept down even to the latitude of England; for the Renish-wines grew within a
degree of the West-Southern places of this Isle, and Paris is not 2. degrees
South of us, yet Vines grow three score miles on this side Paris, at Beaumont;
yea the Vines of these places are the most delicate; for what wine is preferred
before the neat Renish for Ladies, and at table; and truly in my opinion,
though I have traveled twice through France; yet no wine pleased me like Vin
D'ache and of Paris; especially about Rueill, which is a very fine brisk wine,
and not fuming up to the head, and Inebriating as other wines: I say therefore
that it is very probable, that if Vines have stepped out of Italy into Alsatia,
from them to these places, which are even as far North as England, and yet
the wines there are the most delicate, that they are not limited and bounded
there. For a 100. miles more or less causes little alteration in heat or
cold, and some advantages which we have will supply that defect. But not to
insist too long on probabilities, Isay, that herein England some Ingenious
Gentlemen usually make wine very good, long lasting, without extraordinary
labor and cost*s. To instance in one, who in great Chart in the Wild of Kent,
a place very moist and cold, yearly makes 6. or 8. hogs-heads, which is very
much commended by diverse who have tasted it, and he has kept some of it 2.
years, as he Sir Peter Ricard.
himself told me, and it has been very good; Others likewise in Kent do the
same: and lately in Surrey a Gentlewoman told me, that they having many
grapes, which they could not well tell how to dispose off, she, to play the
good House-wife, stamped them to make verjuice; but 2. months after drawing it
forth, they found it very fine brisk wine, clear like Rock-water, and in many
other places such experiments have been made. I therefore desire Ingenious men
to endeavor the raising of so necessary and pleasant a commodity; especially
when French Wine is so dear here, and I suppose is likely to be dearer, I
question not, but they shall find good profit and pleasure in so doing, and
that the State will give all encouragements to them: and if the French Wine pay
excize and customs, and the Wines here be toll-free, they will be able to
affoard them far cheaper, than the French can theirs, and supply the whole
Isle, if they proceed according to these Rules.

1. To choose the best sorts of grapes, which are most proper for this Isle,
and though there are many sorts of grapes amongst Gardiners; yet I commend 4.
sorts especially to them; and I desire that they be very careful in this
particular: for it is the foundation of the work; if you fail in this, you
fail in all; for I know that Burdeaux-Vines which bear very great grapes,
make verjuice only at Paris, and that the tender Orleans-Vine does not thrive
there.

The first sort is the Parsely Vine or Canada-grape; because it first came from
those parts, where it grows naturally; and though the Country be intolerably
cold; yet even in the woods without manuring, it so far ripeneth his fruits,
that the Jesuits make wine of it for their mass; and Racinee (which is the
Juice of the grape newly expressed, and boiled to a Syrup, and is very sweet and
pleasant) for their Lent-provision, as you may read in their Relations: and
this Vine seems to be made for these Northern Countries, because it has
it is leaves very small and jaggy, as if it were on purpose to let in the sun,
and it ripeneth sooner than other grapes, as I have observed in Oxford-Graden.

2. Sort of Vine is the Rhenish-grape; for it grows in a temperate Country,
not much hotter in summer then England; and the wine is excellent as all know.

3. Sort is the Paris-grape; which is much like the temper of England, only a
little hotter in summer: this grape bears a small bunch close set together,
very hardy to endure frosts and other inconveniences, and is soon ripe; so
that the vintage of Paris, is sooner ended then that of Orleans or Bordeaux;
and though it be not so delicate to the taste, as some other grapes; yet it
makes an excellent brisk wine.

4. Sort is the small muskadell; which is a very fine pleasant grape, both to
eat and to make wine. In Italy it usually grows against their houses walls,
and of this they make a small pleasant wine, a month or 2. before the ordinary
Vintage. It is a tender plant in respect of the other Vines in the fields:
these Vines I know are the most convenient for this Isle; because they bear
small bunches, and grapes soon ripen, and are hardy to endure frosts and ill
weather.

2. To choose convenient places. For this end I council them, First to plant
Vines on the Southside of their dwelling-houses, Barnes, Stables, and
Outhouses. The Gentleman of Kent, whom I mentioned before, uses this course:
and to keep the Vines from hurting his tiles, and that the wind may not wrong
his Vines, he has a frame made of poles or any kind of wood, about a foot
from the tiles, to the which he tyeth the Vines; by this means his Vines
having the reflection of the yard, sides of the houses and tiles, do ripen very
well, and bear much; so that one old Vine, has produced nigh a hogshead of
wine in one year: and I wish all to take this course; which is neither
chargeable, nor troublesome, but very pleasant; and if all in this Island would
do thus, it is incredible, what abundance of wine might be made, even by this
petty way.

2. If that any Gentleman will be at the charge of making a Vineyard, let him
choose a fine sandy warm hill, open to the South-East rather than to the
South-West: for though the South-West seems to be hotter; yet the South-East
ripeneth better, as I have seen in Oxford-Garden; because the South-East is
sooner warmed by the Sun in the morning; and the South-West winds, are the
winds which blow most frequently, and bring rain, which refrigerate the
plants: and such a place is very requisite; for in other places Vines do not
thrive, even in France: for if you travel betwixt Paris and Orleans, which is
above 30. leagues, yet you shall scarcely see a Vineyard, because it is a
plain Champion-Countrey. So likewise betwixt Fontarabia to Bordeaux, in the
Southern parts of France, for an 100. miles together; because the land is
generally a barren sandy plain, where only Heath abounds and Pine-trees, out
of which they make Turpentine and Rozen, by wounding of them; and Tar and
Pitch, by the burning of them: and if any find such a fine warm hill, and do
dung and fence it well, he has a greater advantage of most of the Vineyards of
France by this convenience, than they have of our Isle, by being a hundred
miles more South; for most of their Vineyards are in large fields not enclosed,
on land that is stony, and but indifferently warm. But some will say, that the
wet weather destroys us. It Is true, that the wet will destroy all things;
Sheep, Corn, etc. yet no man will say, that therefore England will not
produce and nourish these Creatures; and if extraordinary wet years come, they
spoil even the Vines in France: but take ordinary years and our moisture is
not so great, (though some abuse us, and call England, matula Coeli) but the
Vines, especially those I have mentioned before, will come to such perfection
as to make good wine: and if extraordinary raines fall; yet we may help the
immaturity by Ingenuity, as I shall tell you anon: or at worst make vinegar or
verjuice, which will pay costs.

Further these advantages we have of France.

1. This Isle is not subject to nipping frosts in May as France is; because we
are in an Isle, where the Air is more gross than in the Continent; and
therefore not so piercing and sharp, as it plainly appears by our winters,
which are not so sharp as in Padua in Italy: neither are we subject to such
storms of hail in summer, which are very frequent in hot Countries, and for
many miles together do spoil their Vines, so that they cannot make wine of the
grapes: for those grapes which are touched by the hail, have a Sulphurious and
a very unpleasant taste, and only fit to make Aqua-vitae. Further sometimes in
France, caske for their wines is so dear, that a tun of wine may be had for a
tun of caske: and the custom and excize which is laid on wines here, is as
much again as the poor Vigneron in France expects for his wine. Not to speak
of the ill managing of their Vines, especially about Paris, where poor men
usually hire an Acre or 2. of Vines, which they manage at their spare hours,
and most commonly pack in so many plants on their ground, for to have the
greater increase, that the ground and Vines are so shaded by one another, that
I have wondered, that the Sun could dart in his beams to mature them; and
therefore I cannot but affirm again, that we may make abundance of wine here
with profit, the charges of an Acre of Vineyard, not being so great as of Hops:
an hundred sets well rooted, at Paris cost usually but 4. or 6. sous or pence,
where I have bought many: 2000. will plant an Acre very well, 50. s. a year is
the ordinary rate for the 3. diggings with their crooked Instrument called
Aventage, and the increase usually 4. tuns for an Acre, which will be profit
enough: and though I refer all to Bonovil and others, who have written of the
managing of Vines; yet I council to get a Vigneron from France, where there
are plenty, and at cheaper rates then ordinary servants here, and who will be
serviceable also for Gardening.

2. I will briefly tell, what I have seen. In Italy through all Lombardy which
is for the most part plain and Champion, their Vines grow in their hedges on
Walnut-trees, for the most part: in which fields, they speak of 3. harvests
yearly viz.

1. Winter-Corne, which is reaped in June etc.

2. Vines and Walnuts, which are gathered in September.

3. Their summer-graines, as Millet, Panicle, Chiches, Vetches etc.
Buck-wheate, Frumentone, or that which we call Virginia-Wheate, Turnips, which
they sow in July when their Winter-corne is cut and reaped, they reap in
October. In France, their Vines grow 3. manner of ways; in Provence they cut
the Vine about 2. foot high, and make it strong and stubbed, like as we do our
Osiers; which stock bears up the branches without a prop.

2. about Orleans, and where they are more curious, they make frames for them
to run along.

3. About Paris they ty them to short poles, as we do hops. In France they
usually make trenches, or small ditches, about 3. or 4. foot from one another,
and therein plant their Vines, about one and a half deep, which is a good way,
and very much to be commended; but if we here in England, plant Vines as we do
Hops, it will do very well, but let them not be packt together too thick, as
they do in France in many places, least they too much shade the ground, and one
another. In Italy when they tread their grapes with their feet in a cart, they
power the juice into a great vessel or Fat, and put to it all their husks and
stones which they call graspe, and let them ferment, or (as we say) work
together 12. or 14. days, and usually they put 1. third of water to it, this
makes a wine less furious, Garbo or rough, and therefore a good stomack-wine;
but it spoileth the color, and takes away the pleasant brisk taste. In France
so soon as they have pressed out their liquor with their feet, they put it in
hogsheads, and after in their press squease out what they can, out of the
graspe; which serves to fill up their hogsheads while they work, which is
usually 3. or 4. days, and then stop them close: this is also the way used in
Germany, and is the best, for it makes a fine gentile wine with a curious
color. In Germany, when their grapes are green, they make fire in their
sellars in stoves, by the which means, their wines work extraordinarily, and
do digest themselves the better: This course we must also take here in England
some years; for it helps the rawnes of all liquors very much. There is an
Ingenious Dutchman, who has a secret, which as yet he will not reveal, how to
help maturation by a compost applied to the roots: The compost which I have
spoken of before, made of brimstone: pigeons-dung, is very excellent for that
purpose, as also lees of wine, blood, Glauber.
lime used with moderation. He also knows how to make sour grapes produce
good wine; I suppose his way to be this, all juice of grapes newly expressed is
sweet, and which may by it self alone be made into a sweet syrup, which the
French call Racinee: further in the Evaporation of liquors, which have not
fermented or wrought, the watery part goes away first.

3. Fermentation gives a vinous taste, and makes a liquor full of spirits.

You may then easily guess at the way, and perhaps he may add also some sugar
and spices, as the Vintners do when they make Hippocras. I know a Gentleman,
who has made excellent wine of raisins well boiled in water, and afterward
fermented by it self, or with barme, its called usually Medea. I likewise
know, that all sweet and fatty Juices will make fine vinous Liquors, as
Damsins, if they be wrought or fermented ingeniously: but whosoever goes about
such experiments, let him not think that any thing is good enough for these
purposes: but let him use the best he can get: for of naughty corrupt things,
who can expect that which is excellent and delicate.

The Deficiency of us in this kind is so obvious, that all the world takes
notice of it, and it is (next the 8. Deficiency concerning Hemp and Flox.
neglect of fishing) the greatest shame to this Nation; for all know that we
have as good land for these seeds as any can be found in Europe. and that the
sowing of them requires neither more labor, cost or skill than other seeds.
And further that the materials made from these are extremely necessary: for how
miserable should we be without Linen, Canvases, Cordage, Nets? how can we put
our Ships to Sea, which are the bulwarks of this Isle? And yet we are
necessitated to have these Commodities, from those who would destroy (I will
not say the Nation, but I may boldly say) our Shipping, and Trade. I hope that
this will more seriously be considered by those at the Helm of our State. I
will freely and plainly relate, how this Deficiency may easily be Remedyed,
according to my judgment.

1. To compel by a law, that all Farmers, who plough and sow 50. or 100.
Acres of land, should sow half an Acre or an Acre of Hemp or Flax, or to pay
5. s. or 10. s. to the poor of the Parish where they live, or some law to this
purpose; for there is no man but has land fit for one of these, Hemp
desiring, a stiff land, Flax that which is light.

For there is so much irrationality in some professions that they must be
forced even like brutes to understand their own good. In King Edward the 6.
days something was enacted to this purpose, as I am informed. In Henry 8.
days, there was a law enacted that every man should sow his lands, and that
no man should enclose his lands, least he should turn it to Pasture; for we
have had great dearth in England through the neglect of Tillage, which laws
even as yet stand in force; yet there is, nor needs there be any force to
compel men to till and sow their lands; for they have at length found the
sweetness, and willingly go about it for their own profits sake, and now we
suppose (and not without cause) that Enclosing is an Improvement: and so
concerning Hemp and Flax, I say, if they were once accustomed to sow them,
they would never leave it, as I see Farmers do in East-Kent; scarce a man but
he will have a considerable plot of ground for Hemp, and about London far
greater quantities of Flax is sown then formerly.

2. It were convenient, that every Parish through the Nation should have a
stock for to set their poor to work, that the young children and women might
not run up and down idle, and begging or stealing (as they do in the Country)
of Apples, Pease, Wood, Hedges, and so by little and little, are trained up for
the Gallows.

3. That a severe law should be enacted against those who run up and down and
will not work: for if all know, that they may have work at home, and earne
more within doors honestly, then by running rogueing up and down, why should
they not compel them to it? and though some may think the Parishes will lose
much by this way; because that the stock wrought will not be put off, but with
loss, as perhaps 10. l. will be brought to 8. l. yet let them consider how
much they shall save at their doors, how many inconveniences they are freed
from; their hedges in the Country shall not be pulled, their fruits stolen,
nor their Corn purloined; and further, that the poor will be trained up to
work, and therefore fit for any service: yea and in their youth learn a
calling by the which they may get an honest lively hood; and I dare say, their
Assessements for the poor, would not be so frequent, nor the poor so numerous:
and the benefit which redownds to the Nation, would be very great.

4. The charitable deeds of our forefathers, ought to be enquired after, that
they be not misplaced, as usually they are, but be really bestowed for the good
of the poor, that are laborious (as in London is begun) and if there be any
that will not work, take Saint Paul's rule, who best knew what was best for
them. I dare not advise to take in part of Commons, Fens, etc. and to improve
them for this use, least I should too much provoke the rude merciless
multitude. But to return to my discourse. I say, that sowing Hemp and Flax,
will be very beneficial.

1. To the Owners of land: for men usually give in diverse places 3. l. per
Acre, to sow Hemp and Flax (as I have seen at Maidstone in Kent, which is the
only place, I know in England, where thread is made: and though nigh a hundred
hands are employed about it; yet they make not enough for this Nation,) and yet
get good profit. How advantageous will this be to those who have drained the
Fens, where questionless Hemp will flourish, and exsiccate the ground, (for
Hemp desires stiff moist land, as Flax light and dry,) and like wise to
those in the North of England, where land is very cheap? I hope in a little
time Ireland will furnish us with these commodities, if we be idle; for there
land is very cheap, and those seeds need no enclosure; for cattle will not
touch them, neither does it fear the plunderer either in the field or barn.

2. It Is profitable to the sower. I know that they usually value an Acre at 10.
or 12. l. which costeth them usually but half the money. Whether there be
Flax, that will yield 30. or 40. l. per Acre as some report, I know not.

3. To the place where it is sown; because it sets many poor to work. I wish
it were encouraged more in the North than it is; because there be many poor,
who could willingly take pains: and though spinning of linen be but a poor
work; yet it is light, and may be called Women's recreation, (and in France and
Spain the best Citizens wives think it no disgrace to go about spinning with
their Rocks) and though in some part the poor think it nothing to earne 4. or
6. d. per day, and will as soon stand with their hands in their pockets, as
work cheap; yet in the North they account it well to earne 3. d. or 4. d. by
spinning, which they may do.

Lastly, it would be very beneficial to this Nation, and save many thousand
pounds, I may say 100. thousands, which are expected, either in cash or good
Commodities; and we should not be beholding to Holland for fine linen and
Cordage, nor to France for Poldavices, Locrams, Canvaces, nets, nor to
Flaunders for thread; but might be supplied abundantly with these necessary
Commodities even at our own doors.

There is no small Deficiency in dunging and manuring lands, both because that
all manner of manuring 9. Deficiency, concerning Dunging, and Manuring Lands.
and amending lands, is not known to every one, and also that they do not
employ all they know to the best use. I will therefore set down most of the
ways I have seen here in England, and beyond Seas, by which land is improved,
and the best ways to use the same.

1. To begin with Chalk, which is as old a way as Julius Cesars time, as he
himself reports in his Commentaries. Chalk is of 2. sorts.

1. A hard, strong, dry Chalk, with which in Kent they make walls, burn lime
etc.

2. Kind is a small unctuous Chalk: this is the Chalk for land, the other
helps little; only it makes the plough go easier in stiff lands: broomy
land is accounted the best land for Chalk and lime, but it helps other lands
also; especially, if you Chalk your ground, and let it ly a year or 2. which
is the way used in Kent; that it may be matured and shattered by the sun and
rain, otherwise if it be turned in presently, it is apt to ly in great clods,
as I have seen it 20. years after. Chalk also sweetneth pasture, but does not
much increase it, and kills rushes and broom.

2. Lime, which is made of diverse sorts of stones, is an excellent thing for
most Lands, and produces a most pure grain: 160. bushels is usually laid on
an Acre, but I suppose that if men did lay but half the dung on the ground, as
they usually do, as also lime and Chalk, and dung and lime it oftener, it
would be better Husbandry: for much dung causes much weeds, and causes Corn
to lodge; and too much Chalk does too much force the land, so that after some
good crops, it lies barren many years. It Is good Husbandry likewise to lay
down lands before they be too much out of heart; for they will soon recover;
otherwise not.

3. Ordinary Dung, which every one knows; but let it not be exposed to the
Sun too much, nor let it ly in an high place; for the rain will waste away
it is fatness. It Is observeable, that earth the more it is exposed to the Sun,
it is the better, as we see that land is much bettered by often ploughings: for
the Sun and dew engender a nitrous fatness, which is the cause of fertility;
but dung is exhausted by the Sun, as it appears by the foldings of Sheep,
which profit little, if it be not presently turned in; therefore a Shepherd if
his time would permit, should turn up the ground with an how for to sow
Turnips, as Gardiners do. I have seen Ordinary Dung on dry lands in dry years
to do hurt, and it often causes weeds and trumpery to grow.

4. Marle. It Is of diverse kinds: some stony, some soft, some white, some
yellewish, but most commonly blew. It Is in most places in England, but not
known by all: the best marks to know it, is to expose it to the Air, and to
see if the Sun or Rain cause it to shatter, and if it be unctuous, or rather to
take a load or 2. and lay it on the midst of your fields, and to try how it
mendeth your lands. It Is excellent for Corn, and Pasture; especially on dry
lands. In Essex the scourings of their ditches they call Marle, because it
looks blew like it, it helps their lands well,

5. Snaggreet: which is a kind of earth taken out of the Rivers, full of small
shells. It helps the barren lands in diverse parts of Surrey. I believe it is
found in all Rivers; It were well, if in other parts of England, they did take
notice of it.

6. Owse out of marsh ditches, has been found very good for white Chalky land:
as also Sea-mud and Sea-Owse is used in diverse parts of Kent, and Sussex.

7. Sea-weeds.

8. Mr. Carew in his Survey of Cornwall relates, that they use a fat Sea-sand,
which they carry up many miles in sacks, and by this they have very much
improved their barren lands. It were worth the while to try all manner of
Sea-sands: for I suppose, that in other places they have a like fertilizing
fatness.

9. Folding of Sheep, especially after the Flaunders manner, (viz.) under a
covert, in which earth is strewed about 6. inches thick, on which they set
diverse nights: then more earth must be brought and strewed 6. inches thick, and
the Sheep folded on it, and thus they do continually Winter and Summer. I
suppose a shepherd, with one horse will do it at his spare hours, and indeed
sooner then remove his fold; and this folding is to be continued, especially in
Winter, and does the Sheep good; because they ly warm and dry: and truly if I
am not mistaken, by this means we may make our Sheep to enrich all the barren
dry lands of England.

10. Ashes of any kind. Seacoale-ashes with horsedung the Gardiners of London
much commend for diverse uses. It Is great pity, that so many thousand loads are
thrown into waste places, and do no good.

11. Soote is also very good, being sprinkled on ground* but it is too deer, if
it be of wood; for it is worth 16. d. or 2. s. a bushel.

12. Pigeons or Hens-dung is incomparable: one load is worth 10. loads of other
dung, and therefore it is usually sown on Wheat, that lies a far off, and not
easy to be helped: it is extraordinary likewise on a Hop-garden.

13. Malt-dust is exceedingly good in Corne-land: blood for trees; also
shavings of horns.

14. Some commend very much the sweeping of a Ship of Salt, or drossey salt and
brine: it is very probable; because it kills the worms, and all fertility
proceeds from salt.

15. I have seen in France, poor men cut up Heath and the Turffe of the
ground, and lay them on an heap, to make mould for their barren lands. Brakes
laid in a moist place, and rotted, are used much for Hop-grounds, and generally
all things that will rot, if they were stones, would make dung.

16. In New England they fish their ground, which is done thus: In the spring
about April, there comes up a fish to the fresh Rivers, called an Alewife;
because of it is great belly: and is a kind of shade, full of bones; these are
caught in wiers, and sold very cheap to the planters, who usually put one or
two cut in pieces into the hill where their Corn is planted, called
Virginia-Wheate, for they plant it in hills, 5. grains in an hill, almost as
we plant Hops (in May, or June; for it will not endure frosts) and at that
distance; it causes fertility extraodinary for two years, especially the
first: for they have had 50. or 60. bushels on an Acre, and yet plough not
their land, and in the same hills do plant the same Corn for many years
together, and have good crops: besides abundance of Pumpions and French or
Kidney beans. In the North parts of New England, where the fishermen live,
they usually fish their ground with Cods-heads; which if they were in England
would be better employed. I suppose that when sprats be cheap, men might mend
their Hop-grounds with them, and it would quit cost: but the dogs will be apt
to scrape them up, as they do in New England, unles one of their legs be tied
up.

17. Urine. In Holland they as carefully preserve the Cowes urine, as the dung
to enrich their land: old urine is excellent for the Roots of trees. Columella
in his book of Husbandry, says, that he is an ill husband that does not make
10. loads of dung for every great beast in his yard, and as much for every one
in the house, and one load for small beasts as hogs. This is strange husbandry
to us: and I believe there are many ill husbands by this account. I know a
woman who lives 5. miles South of Canterbury, who saves in a paile, all the
droppings of the houses, I mean the urine, and when the paile is full,
sprinckleth it on her Meadow, which causes the grass at first to look yellow,
but after a little time, it grows wonderfully, that many of her neighbors
wondered at it, and were like to accuse her of witchcraft.

18. Woollen rags, which Harford-shire-men use much, and Oxfordshire, and
many other places: they do very well in thin Chalky land in Kent for 2. or 3.
years. It Is a fault in many places, that they neglect these, as also
Linnen-raggs, or Ropes-ends, of the which white and brown paper is made; for
it is strange that we have not Linnen-raggs enough for paper, as other Nations
have; but must have it from Italy, France, and Holland.

19. Denshyring, (so called in Kent, where I only have seen it used, though by
the word it should come from Denbigh-shire,) is the cutting up of all the Mr.
Cambden.
turffe of a Meadow, with an instrument sharp on both sides, which a man with
violence thrusts before him, and then they lay the turffe on heaps, and when
it is dry, they burn it, and spread it on the ground. The charge is usually 4.
Nobles, which the goodness of a crop or 2. repayeth.

20. Mixture of lands. Colum. an old writer says, that his Grand father used
to carry sand on clay, and on the contrary to bring clay on sandy grounds, and
with good success, the Lord Bacon thinking much Nature. Histor.
good may be done thereby; for if Chalk be good for loamy land, why should not
loame be good for Chalky banks?

21. I may add Enclosure as an Improvement of land: not only because that men,
when their grounds are enclosed, may employ them as they please; but because it
gives warmth and consequently fertility. There is one in London, who promised
to mend lands much by warmth only, and we see that if some few sticks ly
together, and give a place warmth, how speedily that grass will grow.

22. Steeping of Grains. The Ancients used to steep Beans in salt water: and
in Kent it is usual to steep Barley, when they sow late, that it may grow the
faster; and also to take away the soil: for wild Oats, Cockle, and all save
Drake will swim; as also much of the light Corn, which to take away is very
good. If you put Pigeons-dung into the water, and let it steep all night, it
may be as it were half a dunging: take heed of steeping Pease too long; for I
have seen them sproute in three or four hours.

23. Is the sowing of Course and cheap Grain, and when they are grown to
plough them in. For this purpose the Ancients did use LVPINES, a plant well
known to our Gardiners: and in Kent sometimes Tares are sown, which when the
cattle have eaten a little of the tops, they turn them in, with very good
Improvement for their ground.

I will not deny, but that we have good Husbands, 10. Deficiency, concerning
the not Improvement of our Meadows.
who dung and Marle their Meadows and Pastureland, and throw down all Mole
and Ant-hills, and with their spud-staffe, cut up all thistles and weeds, and
that they likewise straw ashes on their grounds to kill the Moss; and salt for
the worms, and they do very well, but yet there are many who are negligent in
these particulars, for the which they are blameworthy, but the Deficiencies,
of which I intend to speak of, are these following. Cato, one of the wisest of
the Romans, says, that Pratum est quasi paratum; always ready, and prepared;
and prefers Meadows before the Olive-Gardens, (although the Spaniards
bequeath Olive Trees to their children, as we do cotages) or Vines or Corn;
because Meadows bring in a certain profit, without labor and pains: but the
other requires much cost and pains, and are subject to Frosts, Mildew, Hail,
Locusts: to the which for the honor of Meadows, I may add, that the stock of
Meadows, is of greater value, and the Commodities which arise from them, are
diverse and of greater value, than Corn, as Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides,
Beef, Wool; and therefore I may conclude, that England abounding in Pastures
more than other Countries, is therefore richer; and I know (what others think I
care not) that in France Acre for Acre is not comperable to it, Fartescue
Chancellor of England, says, that we get more in England by standing still then
the French by working: but to speak of the Deficiencies amongst us.

1. We are to blame, that we have neglected the great Clover-grasse, Saint
Foine, Lucerne.

2. That we do not float our lands, as they do in Lombardy, where they mow
their lands 3. or 4. times yearly, which consist of the great Clovergrasse.
Here are the excellent Parmisane-cheeses made, and indeed these Pastures far
exceed any other places in Italy, yea in Europe. We here in England have great
opportunities by brooks and Rivers in all places to do so, but we are
negligent; yet we might hereby double if not trebble our profits, kill all
rushes etc. But he that desires to know the manner how to do this, and that
profit, that will arise thereby, let him read Mr. Blithes Book of Husbandry,
lately printed.

3. That when we lay down land for Meadow or Pasture, we do not sow them with
the seeds of fine sweet grass, Trefoiles, and other excellent herbs.
Concerning this you may read a large Treatise of the Countrey-Farmer; for if
the land be rich, it will put forth weeds and trumpery, and perhaps a kind of
sour grass little worth, if it be poor, ye shall have thistles, May-weed and
little or no grass, for a year or 2. I know a Gentleman, who at my entreaty,
sowed with his Oats the bottom of his Hay-mowe, and though his land were
worn out of heart, and naturally poor; yet he had that year not only a crop
of Oats; but he might if it had pleased him, have mowen his grass also, but
he spared it, which was well done, till the next year, that it might make a
turffe and grow stronger. By this Husbandry lands might be well improved,
especially if men did consider the diversity of grasses, which are 90. sorts,
and 23. of Trefoile: I know a place in Kent, which is a white Chalky down,
which ground is sometimes sown with Corn a year or 2. and then it rests as
long or longer: when it is laid down it maintains many great Sheep and very
lusty, so that they are even fit for the Butcher; and yet there does scarce
appear any thing that they can eat, which bath caused diverse to wonder, as if
they had lived on Chalke-stones: but I more seriously considering the matter,
thoroughly viewed the ground, and perceived that the ground naturally produces
a small Trefoile, which it seems is very sweet and pleasant, it is commonly
called Trifolium luteum, or Lupilinum, that is, yellow or Hop-Trefoile: and I
am persuaded, if that the seed of this Trefoile were preserved, and sown with
dates, when they intend to lay it down, it would very much advance the Pasture
of that place; therefore I desire all Ingenious men, seriously to consider, the
nature of the Trefoiles, which are the sweetest of grasses, and to observe on
what grounds they naturally grow: and also the nature of other grasses, which
(as I have said before) are no less then 90. sorts, naturally growing in this
Isle; some on watery places, some on dry, some on clay, others on sand, Chalk
etc. some on fruitful places, others in barren; by the which means I suppose a
solid foundation might be laid, for the advancing the Pasture-lands of all
sorts, through this Island: for I know some plants, as the Orchis called
Bee-flower etc. which will thrive better on the Chalky barren banks, than in
any garden, though the mould be never so rich and delicate, and the Gardener
very diligent in cherishing of it: and why may not the same propriety be in
grasses? for we see diverse benty grasses to thrive, especially on barren
places, where scarce any thing else will grow. J must again and again desire
all men to take notice of the wonderful grass which grows near Salisbury,
and desire them to try it on their Rich Meadows.

It Is a common saying, that there are more waste lands in England, in these
particulars, than in all 11. Deficiency, concerning waste Lands.
Europe besides, considering the quantity of land. I dare not say this is true;
but hope if it be so, that it will be mended. For of late much has been done
for the advancement of these kinds of land; yet there are as yet great
Desiciencies. In the times of Papistry, all in this Island were either
Soldiers or Scholars; Scholars, by reason of the great honors, privileges,
and profits, (the third part of the Kingdom belonging to them) and Soldiers,
because of the many and great wars with France, Scotland, Ireland, Wales. And
in those times Gentlemen thought it an honor to be careless, and to have
houses, furniture, diet, exercises, apparel, etc. yea all things at home and
abroad, Souldier-like: Music, Pictures, Perfumes, Sauces (unless good
stomachs) were counted, perhaps unjustly, too effeminate. In Qu. Elizabeth's
days Ingenuities, Curiosities, and Good Husbandry began to take place, and
then Salt Marshes began to be fenced from the Seas; and yet many were
neglected, even to our days, as Hollhaven in Essex, Axtel-holme Isle in
Yorkshire: many 1000. of Acres have lately been gained from the Sea in
Lincolne-shire, and as yet more are to be taken in there, and in other places.
Rumsey-marsh in Kent, consisting of 45000. Acres and upwards, (as Cambden
relates) is of some antiquity, where the land is usually let for 30. s. per
Acre, and yet 1. d. per week constantly is paid, through the whole levil, for
the maintenance of the wall, and now and then 2. d. whereas ordinary salts are
accounted dear at 5. s. or 6. s. per Acre; so that the improvement is very
considerable: the same I may say of Fens, especially that great Fen of
Lincolne-shire, Cambridge, Hungtingdon consisting as I am Informed of 380000.
Acres, which is now almost recovered; and a friend of mine told me very lately,
that he had proffered a mark per Acre; for 900. Acres together, to sow Rape
on, which formerly was scarcely valued at 12. d. per Acre; very great therefore
is the improvement of draining of lands, and our negligence very great, that
they have been waste so long, and as yet so continue in diverse places: for the
improving of a Kingdom is better than the conquering a new one.

2. I see likewise no small faults in this land, by having so many Chases and
Forests, where brambles, brakes, furzes do grow, when as these trumperies
might be cut up, and potashes made of them; and the ground employed profitably
for Corn, or Pasture. I know a Forest by Brill in Buckingham-shire taken in,
and the land is usually let being now well enclosed, for 4. or 5. Nobles per
Acre.

3. Sort of waste-land, is dry heathy Commons. I know that poor people will
cry out against me, because I call these waste-lands; but its no matter: I
desire Ingenious Gentlemen seriously to consider, whether or no these lands
might not be improved very much by the Husbandry of Flaunders, (viz.) by sowing
Flax, Turnips, great Clover-Grasse, if that Manure be made by folding Sbeepe
after the Flaunders way, to keep it in heart?

2. Whether the Rottenness and Scabbinesse of Sheep, Murrein of Cattle,
Diseases of horses, and in general all diseases of Cattle do not especially
proceed from Commons?

3. If the rich men, who are able to keep great stocks, are not great gainers
by them?

4. Whether Commons do not rather make poor, by causing idleness, than
maintain them; and such poor, who are trained up rather for the Gallows or
beggary, than for the Commonwealths service?

5. How it comes to pass, that there are fewest poor, where there are fewest
Commons, as in Kent, where there is scarce 6. Commons in the County of a
considerable greatness?

6. How many do they see enriched by the Commons; and if their Cattle be not
usually swept away by the Rot, or starved in some hard winters?

7. If that poor men might not employ 2. Acres enclosed to more advantage;
than twice as much in a Common?

And Lastly, if that all Commons were enclosed, and part given to the
Inhabitants, and part rented out, for a stock to set all the poor on work in
every County; I determine nothing in this kind: but leave the determination for
wiser heads.

4. Parkes. Although I cannot but reckon Parks amongst lands, which are not
Improved to the full; but perceive considerable waste by them, by brakes,
bushes, brambles etc. growing in diverse places, and therefore wish there were
fewer in this Island; yet I am not so great an enemy to them, as most are: for
there are very great Uses of them, as.

1. For the bringing up of young cattle.

2. For the maintaining of Timber, so that if any have occasion, to use a good
piece of Timber either for a Mill-post, or a Keele of a Ship, or other special
uses, whither can they go but to a Park?

3. The skins of the Dear are very useful, and their flesh excellent Food.
Not to speak of the Medicinal Uses, nor of Acornes for hogs etc. But some will
object, that the plough never goes there. To the which I answer, Its no
matter: for I cannot but Preemminence of English laws.
say as Fortescue Chancellor to Henry 6. does, That God has given us, such a
fruitful land, that without labor we have plenty; whereas France must dig
and delve for what they have. And I suppose, that I could maintain 2. things
which are thought great Paradoxes, (viz.) that it were no loss to this Island,
if that we should not plough at all, if so be that we could certainly have
Corn at a reasonable rate, and likewise vent for all our Manufactures of Wool.

1. Because that the Commodities from Cattle, are far more stable than Corn:
for, Cloth, Stuffes, Stockins, Butter, Cheese, Hides, Shoes, Tallow, are
certain even every where: Corn scarcely in any place, constantly in none.

2. Pasture imployeth more hands, which is the second Paradox; and therefore
Pasture does not depopulate, as it is commonly said: for Normandy and Picardy
in France, where there are Pastures in a good measure, are as populous as any
part of France; and I am certain that Holland, Frizeland, Zealand, Flaunders
and Lombardy, which rely altogether on Pastures are the most populous places in
Europe. But some will object and say, that a shepherd and a dog formerly has
destroyed diverse villages. To this I answer, that we well know what a shepherd
and a dog can do, (viz.) look to two or 300. sheep at the most, and that 2.
or 300. Acres will maintain them, or the land is extremely barren; and that
these 2. or 300. Acres being barren, will scarcely maintain a plough (which is
but one man and 2. boys,) with the horses: and that the mowing, reaping, and
threshing of this Corn, and other work about, will scarcely maintain 3. more
with work through the whole year. But how many people may be employed, by the
Wool of 2. or 300. Sheep, in Picking, Sorting, Carding, Spinning, Weaving,
Dying, Fulling, Knitting, I leave to others to calculate. And further, if the
Pastures be rich Meadows, and go on dairing, I suppose all know, that 100.
Acres of such land imployeth more hands than 100. Acres of the best Corne-Land
in England, and produces likewise better exportable Commodities. And further,
if I should grant, that formerly the shepherd and his dog did depopulate; yet I
will deny, that it does so now: for formerly we were so unwise, as to send over
our Wool to Antwerpe and other places, where they were Manufactured; by which
means 1. pound often brought 10. unwrought to them; but we set now our own poor
to work, and so save the depopulation. Yet I say, it is convenient to encourage
the plough; because that we cannot have a certainty of Corn, and carriage is
dear, both by sea and land, especially into the Inland-Countreyes; and our
Commodities by Wool do cloy the Merchants.

5. Rushy lands. Blithe tells us, good Remedies for these Inconveniences,
(viz.) making deep-trenches, often mowings, Chalking, Liming, Dunging, Ploughing.
I know where hungry guests Horses soon make an end of them.

6. Furze, broom, heath, these can hardly be so destroyed, but at length they
will up again; for God has given a peculiar propriety to every kind of
earth, to produce some peculiar kinds of Plants, which it will observe even to
the worlds end, unles by Dung, Marle, Chalk, you alter even the very Nature of
the earth. In Gallitia in Spine, where such barren lands do very much abound,
they do thus: first they grub them up as clean as they can; of the greater
Roots and branches they make firewood; the smaller sticks are either
employed in fencing, or else are burnt on the ground; afterward the land being
ploughed twice at least, they sow Wheat, and usually the crop is great, which
the Landlord and Tenant devide according to a compact; then the ground rests,
and in 3. or 4. years, the Furze or broom will recover their former growth,
which the paineful Husbandman grubbeth, and does with it as formerly. I set
this down that you may see how laborious the Spaniard is in some places, the
poverty of the country compelling him to it.

7. There are other Inconveniences in land, besides weeds and trumpery (viz.)
Ill tenures, as coppyhold, Knight Service, etc. so that the Possessor cannot
cut any Timber down, without consent of the Lord; and when he dies must pay
one or 2. years rent. But these are not in the power of the poor Husbandman to
remedy; I therefore pass them by: yet hope that in little time, we shall see
these Inconveniences remedied; because they much discourage Improvements and
are (as I suppose) badges of our Norman slavery.

To conclude, it seems to me very reasonable, and it will be a great
encouragement to laborious men, to improve their barren lands, if that they
should have recompense for what they have done, according as indifferent men
should judge, when they leave it, as is the custom in Flaunders.

I have likewise observed some Deficiencies in Woods, which I shall briefly
declare, with the best 12. Deficiency, in Woods.
way to Remedy the same.

1. It Is a great, fault that generally through the Island the Woods are
destroyed; so that we are in many places very much necessitated both for fuel,
and also for timber for building and other uses; so that if we had not Coals
from New Castle, and Boards from Norwey, Plough-staves and pipe-staves from
Prussia, we should be brought to great extremity: and many Mechanickes would
be necessitated to leave their callings.

2. Deficiency, is that our Woods are not ordered as they should be; but though
Woods are especially preserved for timber, for building and Shipping; yet at
this time it is very rare to see a good Timber-tree in a Wood.

3. That many of our Woods, are very thin, and not replenished with such
sorts of Wood, as are convenient for the place.

4. That we fell continually, and never plant or take care for posterity.

These Deficiencies may be thus Remedyed.

1. To put in execution the Statutes against grubbing of Woods, which are
sufficiently severe. It Is well known, we have good laws; but it is better
known, they are not executed. In the Wild of Kent and Sussex, which lies far
from the Rivers and Sea, and formerly have been nothing but Woods, liberty is
granted for men to grub what they please; for they cannot want firing for
themselves, and they are so seated, that neither firewood, nor timber can be
transported elsewhere. I know a Gentleman who proffered there good Oake-timber
at 6. s. 8. d. per tun, and the land in those parts in general is very good.
About Tunbridge there is land which formerly was Wood, is now let for 30. s.
per Acre; so that to keep such lands for Wood, would be both loss to the
owner and to the Island: But in other parts of the Island it is otherwise, and
men are much to be blamed for destroying both timber and fuel. I have seen at
Shooters-hill near London, some Woods stubbed up which were good ground for
Wood, but now are nothing but furze, which is a great loss, both to the owner
and to the Country: For the land is made worse then it was formerly. I
conceive there are lands, which are as naturally ordained for Woods, viz.
Mountainous, Craggy, uneven land, as small hills for the Vines and Olives;
plain lands for Corn; and low moist lands for Pasture: which lands if they be
stubbed, do much prejudice the Commonwealth.

2. That all Woods should have such a Number of Timber Trees per Acre,
according to the Statute. There is a good law for that purpose, but men delude
both themselves and the law, that they every felling cut down the standers
which they left the felling before, least perchance they should grow to be
Timber, and leave 12. small standers, that they might seem to fulfill in some
measure the Statute; but it is a mere fallacy, and causes the Statute to fail
of it is principal end, which is to preserve Timber.

3. The best Remedy against thinness of woods, is to plash them and spread
them abroad, and cover them partly in the ground, as every Countreyman can
direct; by this means the wood will soon grow rough and thick. It Is good
Husbandry likewise to fill your woods with swift growers, as Ashes, Sallow,
Willow, Aspe, which are also good for Hop-poles, Hoopes* Sycamore is also a
swift grower. In Flaunders, they have a kind of Salix, called by them
Abell-tree, which speedily grows to be timber.

4. That some law be made, that they which fell, should also plant or sow. In
Biscay there is a law, if that any cut down a Timber-tree, he must plant 3.
for it, which law is put into execution with severity: otherwise they would
soon be undone; for the Country is very mountainous and barren, and depends
wholly on Iron Mines, and on Sbipping: their Woods are not copsed there, but
only Pollards, which they lop when occasion serves. I know one, who was bound
by his Landlord to plant so many trees yearly, which according he did, but
always in such places that they might not grow. In France, near to the
borders of Spain, they sow Ashkey, which when they grow to such a greatness,
that they may be slit into 4 quarters, and big enough to make Pikes, then they
cut them down; and I have seen diverse Acres together thus planted: hence come
the excellent Pikes, called Spanish-Pikes. Some Gentlemen have sown Acornes,
and it is a good way to increase Woods. Though the time is long, I doubt not but
every one knows, that it is excellent to plant Willowes along the waters side,
and Ashe*s nigh their houses for firing: for they are good pieces of Husbandry;
and it is pity that it is not more put in practice. There is a Gentleman in
Essex who has planted so many Willowes, that he may lop ^000. every year: if
others were as Ingenious, we should not want firewood; Osiers planted in low
morish grounds do advance land from 5. s. per Acre to 40. s. 50. s. 3. l. and
upward; it is much used Westward of London: these Osiers are of great use to
Basket-makers. There is a sort of small Osier or willow at Saint Omars in
Flaunders, which grows on Islands which floate up and down; its far less
then that which the Western men call, Eights, with this they make their
curious fine Baskets: this plant is worth the procuring, being so nigh: John
Tredescat has some plants of it. There is a plant likewise in England, called,
the sweet Willowes; it is not only good for shade and firing; but as I am
informed, the leaves do not sour the grass, but that the cattle will eat them
sooner than Hay: if this be so, it may be of singular use for Meadows.

5. That those things which mightily destroy Woods, may be restrained, as
Iron-workes are; therefore the State has very well done to pull down diverse
Iron-workes in the Forest of Deane, that the Timber might be preserved for
Shipping, which is accounted the toughest in England: and when it is dry as
hard as Iron, the Common People did use to say, that in Q. Eliz. days the
Spaniard sent an Ambassador purposely to get this Wood destroyed: how true this
is I know not; but without question it is admirable Wood for Shipping, and
generally our English Oak is the best in the world for Shipping; because it is
of a great grain, and therefore strong: but the Oaks of other Countries have
a finer grain, and more fit for Wainscot; and in this kind our Forefathers
have been very provident; for we have an Act of long standing, prohibiting
Iron-workes within 20. miles of London, and within 3. miles of the River of
Thames: though you may find Iron-stone in diverse places, as in the great
gravil-pit at Woolwhich. There are some Ingenious men, who lately have got a
Patent for making Iron with Sea-coale: I hope they will accomplish their
desires; for it would wonderfully advance this Island, and save Wood. There are
2. faults in Sea-coale, in respect of melting Iron-oare:

1. That it is apt to bake together, or cake.

2. It has a sulphurious fumein it, which is an enemy to Metal, and consumes
it as we see by our Iron-Bars in Windows at London; so that the Metalline
nature of the Iron-stone is much wasted by it, and that which remains is very
brittle, and will be Could-shire. I know that by the mixture of Coal beaten
with loame and thoroughly dried, one (if not both of these Inconveniences) may
be taken away. In the Duke of Cleveland's Country they use half Turffe, half
Charcoale. There is a way by making a kind of Barter with Loame, Urine etc.
which will cause Charcoale to last very long, as I am informed: but these
discourses belong to another place.

It Is a great Deficiency here in England without 13. Deficiency, of Bees.
question, that we have no more Bees, considering that they are neither
chargeable, requiring only a few strawes for an house, nor troublesome: and
this Island may maintain ten times as many: for though a place may be
over-stocked with these Animals, as with the greater; yet I know no part of
this land, that is so: and I know diverse places which would maintain many 100
hives, yet scarce one to be seen.

2. Our Honey is the best in the world, and Wax a staple Commodity. Further we
know, that cold Countries, not comparable to ours as Moscovia, have far
greater quantity than we have; so that it is incredible what quantity is found
in the Woods, if the story of the man be true, who fell up even to the ears in
Honey, and had there perished, had not a Bear, on which he caught hold, pulled
him out. Now I have enquired, how it comes to pass that there is so great
store of Honey in Moscovia; considering the Winters are extreme cold, and also
very long: and I am credibly informed that first, the spring when it begins,
comes extraordinary fast, that the days are very long, and the Summers far
dryer then ours here in England, so that the Bees are not hindered by continual
showers; as they are some years here in this Isle: and lastly, that the
Country abounds much with Firs, and Pine-trees, which the Inhabitants
usually cut, that the Gum, Rosinous or Turpentine substance may sweat forth,
to which places the Bees do come, and presently fill themselves, and return
laden: and perhaps for these very reasons, Bees thrive very much in New England.

2. We are Deficient in the ordering of them. Not to speak of the negligence
of particular men, which is very frequent: nor to write a general story of the
ordering of them; because it requires much paper: and Mr. Leveret and Butler;
especially the latter, has written so exactly, and upon his own experience,
that little can be added to it: only in a point or 2. I differ from him; of
the which I will speak briefly.

1. That we must take and destroy all the Bees for their Honey, and not drive
them, as they do in Italy once or twice yearly.

2. That if a swarm be poor, with little Honey, that that swarm ought to be
taken; because it is poor; so that the rich stocks are destroyed, because
they be rich, and the poor swarms, because they be poor: so that be they
rich, or be the poor, they must be destroyed. An Italian reports, that in
the City of Askaly, there was a law made, that none should destroy a swarm of
Bees, unless he had a just cause; accounting it a part of extreme injustice
and cruelty, to take away without cause, both the goods and lives of such good
and faithful servants. I am credibly informed, that an English Gentleman beyond
the Seas, gets many 100. l. yearly, by keeping Bees after a new and
Ingenious Manner, which is thus. He has a room made very warm and close; yet
with glasse-windowes, which he can open at his pleasure, to let the Bees fly
abroad when he pleases, where he keeps his Bees, and feeds them all winter
with a sweet composition made of Molessoes, Flowers, sweet Wine, Milk,
Raisins, etc. (for with such things as these, they usually feed the Bees in
Italy) and oftentimes in summer, when the weather is rainy, windy, or so
disposed, that the Bees cannot conveniently go abroad, he feeds them at home,
with diverse sweet things, and gathers diverse flowers, and lays them amongst
them, and sticks up many fresh boughs in diverse places of his Rooms, that
in swarmingtime, they may settle on them; by these means he preserves all his
swarms, and gathers an incredible quantity of Honey and wax; and truly this
way seems to me very probable: for

1. We know the Bees, (even as we say of the Aunts) will work continually,
even night and day; winter and summer, if that they were not hindered by
darkness, cold, and moisture.

2. That Bees do not only make Honey, (for I suppose, that they have a
peculiar propriety of making Honey, as the Silk-wormes Silk) out of Mildewes or
Honey, but also out of all sweet things, as Sugar, Molossoes etc.

3. That many sweet things may be had, far cheaper than Honey; which (I
suppose) the Bees will transmute into perfect Honey. This way, I conceive,
would be very advantageous to us in England, for the preserving of late
swarms, and also for the enriching of old stocks, so that we need not destroy
them, but might drive them from hive to hive, and set them to work again; and
truly I think there is no place in the world so convenient for this purpose as
England; because that though our Winters be long, yet they are not very cold;
but Bees would be stirring in them: and further our Summers are so subject to
winds and raines, that many times there is scarce a fine day in a whole week:
and Further Molossoes, Refuse Sugar, Sweet Wort, Milk, etc. may be had at
reasonable rates.

I hope ere long to give an exact account of this experiment, and desire those
who have any Ingenuities in this kind, freely to communicate them. I have not
observed many things more of importance concerning Bees, in my travels; only
in Italy they make their hives of thin boards, square, in 2. or 3.
partitions, standing either above one another, or very close side to side, by
the which means, they can the better borrow part of their honey when they
please. In Germany their hives are made of straw, to the which they have a
summer-doore, as they call it, which is nigh the top of the Hive, that the Bees
when they are laden, may the more easily enter and discharge themselves of
their burdens.

3. We are to blame, that we do not employ our Honeys in making Metheglim: It Is
true that in Hereford-shire and Wales, there is some quantity of this liquor
made; but for want of good cookery it is of little worth; but usually of a
brown color, of an unpleasant taste: and as I suppose commonly made of the
refuse honey, wax, dead Bees, and such stuff, as they ordinarily make it
elsewhere: for the good house-wife thinks any thing good enough for this
purpose; and that it is pity to spoil good Honey by making Meade: but I know
that if one take pure neat honey, and ingeniously clarify and scum and boil
it, a liquor may be made not inferior to the best Sack, Muskadine, etc. in
color like to rock-water, without ill odor or savor; so that some curious
Pallates have called it Vin Greco, rich and racy Canary, not knowing what name
to give it, for its excellency: This would bring very great Profit, not only
to the Public by saving many 1000. l. disbursed for Wines through all the
world, but would be very advantageous to private families, who use to
entertain their friends very Nobly, Wines being at present intolerably dear
and naught; I hope therefore ere long to see it put in execution. An excellent
drink not much unlike this may be made of Sugar, Molossoes, Raisins etc. of
the which I have already spoken, yet think it fit to put you in mind of it
again.

It Is a great Deficiency here in England, that we do 14. Deficiency, concerning
Silk-wormes.
not keep Silke-wormes (which in Italy are called Cavalieri,) for to make
Silk. I know that is a great Paradox to many, but I hope by this short
discourse to make this truth to appear plainly: The first original of
Silke-wormes, by what I read in Histories, is from Persia, where in infinite
numbers they are still maintained; and the greatest profits of that great
Monarch do arise from hence: China also abounds very much with Silk. In
Virginia also the Silke-wormes are found wild amongst the Mulberry-woods, and
perhaps might be managed with great profit in those plantations if Land were
not so scarce and dear. I suppose this Silke-worme of Virginia is produced by
the corruption of the Mulberry-tree, as Cochinneale, from ficus Indica or
Indian figiree: for some Ingenious and curious men who have strictly observed
the generation of Insects, do find that every plant has an Insect which
grows out of its corruption, (as diverse sorts of lice from Animals, and that
these Insects do usually feed on that plant, out of which they were made, as
Lice on the same Animals from whence they were engendered. I know a Gentleman
here in London, who has 3. or 400. Insects, and can give a very Mr. Marshal.
good account of their original feedings. And also Mr. Moriney in Paris, has a
large book of the same subject. But to return to our purpose: I say that we
had Silke-wormes first from Persia. In Justinian's time about 1000. or 1100.
years ago, some Monks presented a few to him at Constantinople; where in his
time they began to plant Mulberries: from thence it came to Italy, about 3. or
400. years since: for the Ancient Writers of Husbandry, as Cato, Pallad,
Columell, do not so much as mention these creatures: and at length these have
passed over the Mountains into France within an 100. years; where they flourish
so much, that if we will believe their own Authors, they bring greater profit
than the Wine and Corn of that large Country. I know that France has Silk
enough to maintain their excess of apparel, and to export Plushes, Velvets,
etc. Now then if that these worms can thrive, not only in the parched Persia;
but also in Greece, Italy, yea in France; which differs not much from the
temper of England; why should we think, that they are confined to that place,
and must move no farther Northward? for they have come many 100. miles toward
the North, why not one 100. or 2. more? and further we see that Mulberries,
which is their food, thrive here as well as in anyplace. But some will object
that our Air is too cold and moist. To which I answer.

1. That those who write of Silk-wormes, say, that you must take heed, that you
make not the place too hot: for too much heat may destroy; and therefore that
you must set the windows open to let in the cold air.

2. We know, that moistness of air rather increases such Insects, and
nourishes them. Indeed if moisture hurts, it is because that it too much
corrupts their food, and causes a flux amongst them: but this easily is
prevented, as I shall show you anon. But to be short, it is not only my
opinion that Silke-wormes will thrive here; but the solid judgment of King
James and his Council confirms the same: as you may see by his letter to the
Deputy Lieutenants of every County; wherein also many weighty reasons are
contained to convince men of the same; which letter follows anon.

Lastly, we find by experience, that Silke-wormes will thrive here, and
therefore the matter is out of question: for diverse Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Scholars, Citizens, etc. have Nursed up diverse worms to perfection, though
they have had little skill in the managing of them; and likewise not such
accommodations as are necessary for them; and more would they have done, if
they could have had Mulberry-leaves. I am informed that one near
Charing-Crosse makes a good living by them: as also another by
Ratliffe-Crosse; and therefore if we can bring up an 100. why not a 1000. yea,
100000. if we had food for them? Truly, I know no reason to the contrary,
neither could I ever find one that could speak any thing to the purpose
against the business. And further I must tell you, that the ordering of this
worm is very easy, none need to be bound prentize to the trade; the special
business is to be careful in feeding them, and keeping them sweet; which
things children use to do. He that would learn this Art exactly let him read
Boneil, or an Author W. S. Printed 1609. about Mulberries, and sold in Paul's
Churchyard, by Eleaz* Edgar; but because that the books are out of print, I
will give you a few Rules.

First endeavor to get store of Mulberry-trees, which are of 2. sorts the
white and the black. The white grows greatest, and has a fine leaf, and
sweetest, and therefore fittest for the young worms. This is easily propagated
by Slips, as Quinces, Codlings. The Black Mulberry is difficultly propagated by
Slips; but must be raised from seeds, sown either at Michaelmas, when the
Mulberries are eaten: or kept in dry sand till the spring; and then sow or
how them in, as other seeds and stones, and must be diligently weeded. This
grows not to be so great a tree as the former: the leaves are rougher and
harsher, and fittest for the worms. When they are strong and ready to spin,
when your trees are grown to a good bigness, you may plant them forth, as is
usually don for Walks or Orchards, or in waste places, as they do in Italy,
(for the Fruit is little worth, only the Leaves are useful,) where I have
seen the trees as bare of leaves at Midsummer as at Midwinter. There are 2.
sorts of Silke-wormes, the Spanish, and Calabrian. The Spanish is the smaller
and more tender, and makes a finer silk. The Calabrian is greater and more
hardy, and makes more Silk, but courser. This sort seems to be the best for
this Country. When the Mulberry-trees begin to bud, take the eggs of your
Silke-wormes, and lay them on a piece of stuff or say, (some use to Bathe them
first in warm Malmsy, and say that it makes them stronger,) and carry them
about you in the day in a Box, in the night lay them under your Bed, or in a
warm Oven, till the worms begin to come forth, then lay a piece of paper of
the wideness of the box, cut full of holes, on them, and on the paper lay
Mulberry-leaves, and as fast as they hatch they will crawle forth, and stick to
the Mulberry-leaves; which remove into other boxes, till all be hatched: then
when they have past their second sickness, feed them on shelves 2. foot broad
and 18. inches one from another: the Room where you keep your Worms, must
neither be a low place, nor nigh the tiles; but a middle Room, warm and dry,
yet sometimes a little cold air is good.

Take heed of Rats and Mice, as also of Hens, Robinred-brests; Sparrows, and
other birds; for they will eat them.

They have 4. Sicknesses, the first 12. days after they are hatched; and from
that time at the end of every 8. days: their sickness lasts 2. or 3. days,
and then they are to be fed but very little.

The whole time that the worms do feed, is about 9. weeks: feed them twice
daily at least: at the first when they are small, give them a few leaves; and
as they grow greater, more, and feed them oftener. Let your leaves be dry and
well aired upon a Table or cloth before you give them; and gather not your
leaves, till the dew be off; and in dry seasons if you can possibly, you may
keep your leaves gathered 3. or 4. days or longer.

Keep your shelves and boxes very clean: but take heed you touch not your
worms with your hands, when you remove them; but move them not when they are
sick.

In cold moist weather, set a Pan of Coals in the Room, and burn a little
Benjamin, Juniper, etc. especially when they are young, (viz.) the first 5.
weeks; but afterward, unless it be extraordinary cold, give them Air, and
keep them not too hot, and let the Room be well sented with Herbs.

Let not your Worms be too thick on the shelves: if any die or be sick,
speedily remove them, least they infect the rest.

As soon as by the clear Amber-colour of your worms, you perceive that they
would spin; make Arches betwixt your shelves, with heath made clean, branches
of Rosemary, Lavender etc. where the worms will fasten themselves, and make
their bottomes in 2. or 3. days, and about 12. or 14. days after, will come
forth: before which time, you must take away the bottom, which you will use
for Silk, and kill the worm within, by laying the bottomes in the sun 2. or
3. days, or in an hot Oven.

The bottom which you will keep for seed, lay in a warm place, till the
worms come forth; which put on some pieces of old say, Grogran, Velvet, made
fast to some wall: there they will engender, and the Male having spent himself
falls down and dies; so the Female, when she has laid her eggs, which eggs
when they are gray, you may gently take them off with a knife, and keep them
in a piece of Say in a dry place, till hatching-time come.

The winding of the Silk off the bottom requires a peculiar wheel, which an
Artificer must make: 1. l. and 2. ounces of the bottom yields from 1. ounce
to 3. of Silk.

An ounce of Spanish seed yields ordinarily 8. or. 10. l. of Silk, and the
worms will eat 250. l. of leaves: the Calabrian worms being greater, do eat
nigh 300. weight, and yield 11. or 12. l. of Silk.

To conclude, I desire all men seriously to consider, what Advantage this
business will bring to this Island, if it be brought to perfection. Truly I
know nothing does hinder but want of Mulberry-trees, which will in little space
come to a considerable greatness. And though I commend those, who endeavor to
advance this work in Plantations, and prefer it before Tobacco; yet I know
that it cannot be for want of hands; whereas here in England we have plenty of
women, children, old folks, lame, decrepite, etc. who are fit to be overseers
of this work. And I wonder Gentlemen do not go obout a thing so pleasant and
profitable, (for 3 4. or 5. at the most will attend as many worms, as will
make 40. or 50. l. worth of Silk in 2. or 3. months) and the worms eat only
leaves, which are of no value: neither is there any considerable trouble about
the worms unless it be the 12. or 15. last days. I hope, if that particular
men will not endeavor to advance this work, for their private profit; yet the
State will for the Public Good; it being the best way I know, to set all the
poor children, Widows, old and lame people on work: and likewise will save
this Nation many 100. thousand pounds per annum. And further, the way to
accomplish this work may be done without grievance to the Subject, (viz.) to
command every one to plant or sow so many Mulberry-seeds which may easily be
procured from beyond Seas etc. But I leave States-matters to Statesmen, I am
none.

A Copy of King James's Letter to the Lords Lieutenants of the several Shires
of England, for the increasing of Mulberry-Trees, and the breeding of
Silke-wormes, for the making of Silk in England.
JAMES REX. Right Trusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well.
IT is a principal part of that Christian care, which appertains to
Sovereignty, to endeavor by all means possible, as well to beget, as to
increase among their people the knowledge and practice of all Arts and Trades,
whereby they may be both weaned from idleness and the enormities thereof,
which are infinite, and exercised in such industries and labors as are
accompanied with evident hopes, not only of preserving people from the shame
and grief of penury; but also raising and increasing them in wealth and
abundance, The Scope which every freeborne spirit aims at, not in regard of
himself only, and the ease which a plentiful estate brings to every one in
his particular: but also in regard of the honor of their Native Country,
whose commendations is no way more set forth then in the people's activenesse
and industry. The consideration whereof having of late occupied our mind, who
always esteem our people's good our necessary contemplations: We have
conceived as well by the discourse of our own reason, as by information
gathered from others, that the making of Silk might as well be affected here,
as it is in the Kingdom of France, where the same has of late years been put
in practice. For neither is the Climate of this Isle so far distinct or
different in condition from that Country; especially from the hither parts
thereof, but that it is to be hoped, that those things which by industry
prosper there, may by like industry used here have like success* and many
private persons who for their pleasure have bred of those worms, have found no
experience to the contrary, but that they may be nourished and maintained here,
if provision were made for planting of Mulberry-trees, whose leaves are the
food of the worms. And therefore we have thought good thereby to let you
understand, that although in suffering this Invention to take place, we do show
our selves some what an Adversary to our profit, which in the matter of our
customs for Silk brought from beyond the Seas, will receive some diminution:
Nevertheless, when there is question of so great and Public Vtility, to come
to our Kingdom and Subjects in general; and whereby (besides multitudes of
people of both Sexes and all Ages) such as in regard of impotency are unfit for
other labor, may be set on work, comforted and releeved; we are content that
our Private Benefit shall give way to the Public; and therefore being
persuaded, that no well-affected Subject will refuse to put his helping hand to
such a work as can have no other private end, in us, but the desire of the
welfare of our people, we have thought good in this form only to require you
(as a person of greatest authority within that County,) and from whom the
generality may receive notice of our pleasure (with more convenience then
otherwise) to take occasion either at the Quarter Sessions, or at some other
public place of ineeting, to persuade and require such as are of abil^ty,
(without descending to trouble the poor, for whom we seek to provide) to buy
and distribute in that County, the number of ten thousand Mulberry plants,
which shall bedelivered unto them at our City of etc. at the rate of 3.
farthings the plant; or at 6. s. the hundred, containing five score plants. And
because the buying of the said plants at this rate may at the first seem
chargeable to our said Subjests, (whom we would be loath to burden) we have
taken order that in March or April next, there shall be delivered at the said
place a good quantity of Mulberry-seeds, there to be sold to such as will buy
them; By means where of the said plants will be delivered at a smaller rate
then they can be affoarded being carried from hence: having resolved also in
the mean time, that there shall be published in print a plain Instruction and
Direction, both for the increasing of the said Mulberry-trees, the breeding of
the Silke-wormes, and all other things needful to be understood, for the
perfecting of a work every way so commendable and profitable, as well to the
planter, as to those that shall use the Trade. Having now made known unto you
the motives, as they stand with the Public Good, wherein every man is
interessed; because we know how much the example of our own Deputy-Leintenants
and Justices will further this cause, if you and other your neighbors will be
content to take some good quantities hereof, to distribute upon your own
lands: we are content to acknowledge thus much more in this Direction of ours,
that all things of this nature tending to plantations, increase of science, and
works of industry, are things so naturally pleasing to our own disposition, as
we shall take it for an argument of extraordinary affection toward our person:
Besides, the judgment we shall make of the good dispositions in all those that
shall expres in any kind their ready minds, to further the same: And shall
esteem, that in furthering the same, they seek to further our honor and
contentment; who (having seen in few years space past, that our Brother the
French King, has since his coming to that Crown, both begun and brought to
perfection the making of Silks in his Country, where he has won to
himself honor, and to his Subjects a mavelous increase of wealth) would
account it no little happiness to us, if the same work which we begun among
our people, with no less zeal to their good, (then any Prince can have to the
good of theirs) might in our time produce the fruits which there it has done:
whereof we nothing doubt, if ours will be found as tractable and apt to further
their own good, now the way is showed them by us their Sovereign, as those of
France have been to conform themselves to the Directions of their King.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the sixteenth of
November, in the sixth year of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the
two and fourtieth.

15. Deficiency, is the Ignorance of the Husbandry of other 15. Deficiency,
concerning the Ignorance of the Husbandry of other places.
places (viz.) what seeds, what Fruits, what Grasses they use; what Ploughes,
Harrowes, Gardening-tooles they have; how ill they manage and improve their
lands; what cattle they have; how they feed and fatten them; and how they
improve their Commodities etc.

For there is no Country, where they are such ill Husbandmen, but in some
particular or other they excel: as we see even in the several Counties of this
Island, every County has something or other, wherein they outstrip their
Neighbors. And that much profit may arise from hence in this Nation, is
manifest by that excellent Treatise which is published by you concerning the
Husbandry of Flaunders; wherein briefly are set down diverse particulars very
useful for us here in England, and formerly unknown. And without question
France, Spain, Italy, Holland, Poland, Germany, etc. have many excellent
things both for Husbandry, Physic, Mechanics, worth the manifesting, and very
beneficial to us: so likewise there are diverse things in our plantations worth
the taking notice of, in Husbandry. To pass by the Southern Plantations, as
Barbados, Antego, Saint Croix Christopher, Mevis, Monferate, where the
Commodities are only Cotten-woolls, Sugars, Gingers, Indicoes, which our cold
Climate will not produce; and also Tobacco, which grows also with us, about
Norwich and elsewhere. We will only sail upon our Northern Plantations,
Virginia, New England, and instance in a few things. Why may not the
Silke-grasse of Virginia, the Salsaperilla, Sassafras, Rattlesnake-weed (which
is an excellent Cordial) be beneficial to us, as also their Cedars, Pines,
Plum-trees, Cherries, great Strawberries, and their Locusts (which is a prickly
plant, a swift grower, and therefore excellent for Hedges) be useful to us? So
for New England, why should we think, that the Indian Corn, the Marsh-wheate,
that excellent Rye, the Pease, (which never are eaten with magots) the French
or Kidney Beans, the Pumpions, Squashes, Water-Mellons, Musk-Mellons,
Hurtleberries, wild Hemp, Fir etc. of those parts, are altogether useless for
us? as also the Cramberries, (which are so called by the Indians, but by the
English, Beare-Berries; because it is thought the Bears eat them in winter, or
Bar-Berries; by reason of their fine acid taste like Bar-Berries) which is a
fruit as big and as red as a Cherry, ripe only in the winter, and growing
close to the ground in bogs, where nothing else will grow? They are accounted
very good against the Scurvy, and very pleasant in Tarts. I know not a more
excellent and healthfuller fruit.

But some will object, that they will not grow here with us, for your
forefathers never used them. To these I reply, and ask them, how they know?
have they tried? Idleness never wants an excuse; and why might not our
forefathers upon the same ground, have held their hands in their pockets, and
have said, that Wheat, Barley, would not have grown amongst us? and why should
not they have been discouraged from planting Cherries, Hops, Licorish,
Potatoes, Apricockes, Peaches, Melicotones, and from sowing Rape-seeds,
Colliflowers, great Clover, Canary-seeds etc. and many more of this kind? and
yet we know, that most of these have been brought to perfection, even in our
days: for there is a Vicissitude in all things, and as many things are lost,
which were known to our forefathers, as well the Purple color, etc. as you
may read in Pancivoll: so many things are found out by us, altogether unknown
to them, and some things will be left for our posterities: for example, not to
speak of Gunpowder and Printing, nor of the New-world and the wonders there,
which notwithstanding are but of a few 100 years standing: I say 20.
Ingenuities have been found even in our days, as Watches, Clocks, Way-wisers,
Chains for Fleas, diverse Mathematical Instruments, Short-writing,
Microscopes, by the which even the smallest things may be discerned, as the
eggs, eyes, legs, and hair of a Mite in a Cheese: likewise the Seleno-scope,
which discovers Mountains in the Moon, diverse stars, and new planets, never
seen till our days. But to return to our purpose, I say that in Husbandry it
is even so. For the Auntients used diverse plants which we know not; as the
Cytisus-tree, so much commended for Cattle; as also their Medick fodder, which
Colum. says, endures 10. years, and may be mowen 4. years, 7. times in a
year: and one Acre he esteems enough for 3. horses. This fodder likewise is
accounted very sweet and healthful, whereas the plants which are usually
called Medicaes with us, are Annual plants, and have no such rare proprieties.
So we are ignorant what grain their Far, or fine Bread Corn was, what their
Lupine, Spury, and a 100. of this kind, as you may read in Matthiol. or
Dioscorides: so on the contrary, infinite are the Plants which we have, and
they knew not; as well appears by their small and our large Herballs; and
daily new Plants are discovered, useful for Husbandry, Mechanichs and Physic,
and therefore let no man be discouraged, from prosecuting new and laudable
Ingenuities. And I desire Ingenious Gentlemen and Merchants, who travel beyond
Sea, to take notice of the Husbandry of those parts (viz.) what grains they
sow? at what time and seasons? on what lands? how they plough their lands? how
they dung and improve them? what cattle they use, and the Commodities thereby?
Also what books are written of Husbandry, and such like? And I entreat them
earnestly, not to think these things too low for them, and out of their
callings: nay I desire them to count nothing trivial in this kind, which may
be profitable to their Country, and advance knowledge. And truly, I should
thank any Merchant that could inform me in some trivial and ordinary things
done beyond Sea, (viz.) how they make Caviare out of Sturgeons Rows? in
Moscovia, how they boil and pickle their Sturgeon, (which we English in
New England cannot as yet do handsomely)? how the Bolognia Sausages are made?
how they ferment their bread without yest? of what materials diverse sorts of
Baskets, Broomes, Frailes are made? What seed Groute or Grutze is made of? and
also how to make the Parmisane Cheeses of Italy, which are usually sold here
for 2. s. or 2. s. 6. d. per pound? or the Angelots of France, which are
accounted better Cheeses than any made in England? as also the Holland Cheeses,
which are far better then our ordinary Cheeses; and yet these sorts of Cheeses
are made not of Mares milk, as some think, but from the Cowes; and our
Pastures are not inferior to theirs etc.

2. I desire Ingenious men to send home whatsoever they find rare of all sorts;
as first Animals, the finewoolled Sheep of Spain, Barbary Horses, Spanish
Sonnets etc. and so likewise all sorts of Vegetables not growing with us, as
Pannick, Millet, Rice which grows in the Fenny places of Milan; and why may
it not grow in our Fens? and the best sorts of Grains or Fruits in use amongst
us? perhaps there is Wheat that is not subject to Smut or Mildew; perhaps other
seeds will give double increase, as Flax, Oats, Pease; and diverse other things
of Importance there are beyond Sea, which may be useful to us; as the Askeys,
the Cork, Acornes, the scarlet Oak, sweet Annise, which grows abundantly
in Milan, Fenel etc. Tilia or Linder-tree for basse Ropes etc. Spruce, Pines
for masts and Boards, seeing that they are swift growers, and many will stand
in a small piece of ground: they have formerly grown here, and some few do
flourish in our Gardens and in Scotland. I suppose that this ought seriously to
be considered: for although we have plenty of Oaks, yet what will it profit
for Shipping without Masts? and how difficult it is to get great Masts above
22. inches diameter, is very well known. Many things I might add of this kind,
but for brevities sake I reforre you to Mr. John Tredescan, who has taken
great pains herein, and daily raises new and curious things.

3. Consider that these new Ingenuities may be profitable, not only to the
Public, but also to private men; as we see by those, who first planted
Cherries, Hops, Licorish, Saffron, and first sowed Rape-seeds, Colliflowers,
Woad, Would, Early Pease, Assparagus, Melons, Tulips, Gilliflowers, etc. and
why may not we find some things beneficial to us also?

16. Deficiency, is the Ignorance of those things, which 16. Deficiency, of the
Ignorance of things taken from the Earth and Waters of this Island.
are taken from the earth and waters of this Island.

Although it may seem to many that these things do little concern the
Husbandman, who usually is not a Naturalist, but only endeavors to know
his own grounds and the seeds proper for it, and seldom pierces into the
bowels of the earth: yet if we consider, that out of the earth he has Marle,
Lime, Stone, Chalk, for the enriching his lands; and also Loame and sand for
his buildings; oftentimes fuel for fire etc. it will plainly appear, that it is
necessary for him to know even all Subterrany things, and to be a petty
Philosopher, and that the knowledge of these things will be very beneficial for
him. And here I cannot but take notice of a great Deficiency amongst us, (viz.)
that we have not the Natural History of all the Sands, Earth, Stones, Mines,
Minerals, Metals, etc. which are found in this Island: It would not only
advance Husbandry; but also many other Mechanic^ Arts, and bring great profit
to the Public. I hope some Ingenious man will at length undertake this task:
For the Lord has blessed this Island, with as great variety as any place that
is known, as shall in part appear anon: and it may be proved by that great
variety which is found near the Spaw-waters in Knares-borough, as Doctor Deane
relates in his Book called the English Spaw: Or the glory of Knares-borough,
springing from several famous Fountains there adjacent (called the Vitriol,
sulphurous and dropping well) sand also other Mineral Waters: Whose words are
these: Here is found not only white and yellow Marle, Plaster, Oker, Rudd,
Rubric, Freestone, an hard Greet-stone, a soft Reddish stone, Iron-stone,
Brimstone, Vitriol, Niter, Alum, Lead, and Copper: (and without doubt diverse
mixtures of these) but also many other Minerals might (perhaps) be found out by
the diligent search and industry of those who would take pains to labor a
little herein.

Printed at York by Tho. Broad being to be sold in his shop at the lower end
of stone gate, near to Common-Hall-Gates, 1649.
This letter will not permit me to make a complete Natural History of the
things of this Isle; yet I shall relate diverse things which may be as hints, to
set some others to work, which I have found in Mr. Cambden and others: and
shall briefly Instruct the Husbandman what he ought to take notice of, for his
own and others good. And first, if he live nigh the Sea; let him take notice of
those things the Sea casts up: for it has even with us, cast up Ambergrease,
which is worth so much Gold; with the which not long since a fisherman of
Plymouth greased his boots, not knowing what it was: sometimes it casts up
Jet and Amber, as at Whitbey oftentimes. In former times we had Oysters, which
had very fair great pearls in them, of good worth; and at this time some of
them are found in Denbigh-shire; Copperas-stone likewise is found along by the
seacoasts of Kent, Essex, Sussex, Hampshire, out of the which Copperas is
made; a thing very useful for Dyers, Curriers, etc. further Sea-weeds are not
to be slighted; for in Jersey they have no other fuel amongst them; and here
in England it is burnt to make Kelpe for Glassemen, and is also very good
manure for diverse lands; also Sea-owse is not only good to lay on land, but at
Dover, and other places, the inhabitants make brick thereof, called
Flaunders-brickes etc. Sea-sands in Cornwall do very much enrich their lands;
and in Cumber-land out of a certain kind of sand they extract salt etc.

2. Let him take notice of all sorts of Waters, which issue forth of the earth
differring from the ordinary, in Color, Odor, Taste: for it is well known,
how advantageous these waters are; oftentimes not only to particular men, but
also to the Country about; yea to the whole Island, as appears by the waters
of Tunbridge in Kent, and of Epsham in Surrey, Knares-borough-Spaw in
Torke-shire, and by the Allum-waters in Newenham in Warwickshire, like milk
in taste and color, and are excellent for the Stone and Wounds: and also it
appears by the Salt-fountaines in Worcestershire and Cheshire, which furnish
all those parts, with an excellent fine white salt: by the hot Bathes in
Summerset-shire, and the lukewarm waters by Bristol etc. At Pitchford in
Shropshire, is a fountain which casts forth liquid Bitumen which the people
use for Pitch etc.

3. Let him not despise the sorts of Sands, which he finds: for some sands
are for buildings, as the rough sorts; others for scouring; others for casting
fine metals, as Highgate-sand, others for the Glassemen, as a sand lately found
in Sussex. In Scotland there is a sand, which contains a considerable
quantity of Gold: and in diverse Countries fine Gold abounds very much in
sands; and if we may believe an excellent Dutch Chemist, there is scarce any
sand without it. ^lauler.


4. Let him take notice of the Earth, Loames, Clayes etc. which have diverse and
necessary uses: as first, the stiffest Clayes, as New Castle, and Nonsuch, are
for the Glassemens pots, for Crucibles, melting-pots: the less stiff for
ordinary Earthen wares, Brewers, Tiles, Bricks, etc. white Clay is for
Tobbacco-pipes: Marle of diverse Colors and stiffnesse is excellent for
Husbandmen: Fullers earth is found in Kent, Surrey, and lately in diverse other
places, for the great benefit of the Clothier: Rub and Rubric in Yorkshire,
as also diverse other in Oxford and Glocestershire excellent for Painters etc.
Turffe for firing may be found in most parts of this Isle, if people were
Industrious: necessity now and then compels them to be Inquisitive; as it
did lately at Oxford, and Kent, where it is found in good quantity. In Holland
they have little fuel, save what is taken out of theit ditches; and therefore
it is truly said, that their firing, is as it were fished out of the water, and
it is indifferent good fuel: Coals are found in very many places, yet diverse
places are in great want of them.

5. Let him take notice of the several stones found in this Isle, as of
Free-stones for building; Cobbels and rough hard stones for Paving,
Toombe-stones; soft sandy stones commonly called fire-stones, because that they
will endure strong fires, and therefore fit for Iron furnaces; and this
propriety these soft stones have, that when they are white hot, a steel
Instrument will scarce touch them to hurt them: Alabaster is found at Burton on
the Trent, and in Staffordshire and at Titbury-Castle: xcellent Marble at
Snothill in Hereford-shire: a course Marble near Oxford, in Kent, also at
Purhick in Dorsetshire: Millstones in Anglesey, in Flintshire, Darby shire,
Lime-stones: Chalk in very many places, for diverse uses: Allum-stone is found
in Anglesey, but especially at Gisborrow in Yorkshire, where the Allum-workes
are, which serve this Island: Lapis Calaminaris is lately found in
Summerset-shire, by the which Copper is made Brass: Manganese for those that
make white Glass, lately found in the North: the best Emery for polishing Iron
in Jersey: Plaster at Knares-borough: Black-leade in Cumberland, and no where
else in Europe: There is a stone in Durham out of which they make Salt:
Diamonds are found about Bristole and Cornwall, very large, but soft: There is
a stone near Beaver-Castle like a Star. In Yorkshire another like a Serpent
Putrefied: and also other stones round like bullets, which being broken, have
as it were a serpent in them without an head etc.

6. Of all Minerals and Metals Iron-stone is found almost in every County, and
is profitable where wood is plentiful* the best is found in Lancashire, one
load and a half making a tun of Iron: it has been transported into Ireland to
mix with poor Mine. In Richard the 2. time a Copper Mine was found in Wenlock
in Shropshire, but exhausted: in Queen Eliz. days one was found at Keswick in
Cumberland: and lately in Staffordshire, Yorkshire, and near Barstable in
Devonshire, one which some Gentlemen intend speedily to work: Lead is found
in Durham-wall and Devonshire: Brimstone in Yorkshire and Wales, Antymony in
Staffordshire: a Silver Mine in Cardiganshire: a Gold Mine was discovered in
Scotland in King James his time: and many rich Mines, might be discovered in
England, if that the King's prorogative (which was to take all Royal Mines to
himself, (viz.) Silver, Gold and Copper) were so certainly abolished, that
they which should find these Metals in their own lands, might safely dig
them. But some will object and say, that many things are of little worth and
profit. To these I Answer, that God has made nothing in vain: every thing
has his peculiar use, and though some things seem to be of little worth and
contemptible, as Sand, Loame, Chalk; yet it has pleased the wise Creator to
make these things very necessary for man's comfortable subsistence, which they
that want these things can testify: As for example in New England, where there
is no Chalk nor Limestone, they are compelled, to burn Oyster shells,
Cocles, to make Lime; or else they could hardly build any houses. The like I
may say of Sand and Loame in diverse places, where they are wanting.

2. I say that most of those things I have spoken of, are very profitable in
one place or other. To instance in some of the meaner sort; at London Brick-men
give 50. l. per Acre, only for loame to make brickes, and pay 3. l. per Acre,
of yearly Rent, and are to leave the land worth the same yearly Rent; likewise
I know a Chalke-cliffe in Kent not 2. Acres of ground, valued at many 100. l.
and that one Colume of Chalk which is 10. foot square, is valued at 40 or 50
l. at 8. d. per load: The Oker Mines of Oxford and Gloucestershire are of
great value: and so would others of that kind, if they could be found; so is
the Black-leade Mine. Also the pits of Clay, Marle, Coal, Turffe etc. And
therefore I desire all Contrymen to endeavor to know all sorts of Stones,
Clayes, Earths, Oars, and to teach their children the use of them, that they
may know that this sand is for building, this loame for brickes, this clay for
pots, this Marle for Corn-land: and if that they shall find any Stones,
Earths, which they know not, that they would lay them up, till that they meet
with some ingenious man, that can inform them. The richest Mines of the world,
have been found out by these means, if we will believe Histories. And this I
am sure of, that by this means, they may much advance their knowledge, and be
more profitable to the Public, their Neighbors, and also to themselves.

17. Deficiency, is the Ignorance of the Vegetables of 17. Deficiency, of the
Vegetables of this Island, and their Virtues and Uses.
this Island, and their Virtues and Uses.

And the first Deficiency that I take notice of, is the Ignorance of the
ordinary seeds which are commonly sown amongst us: for usually the
Countryman contenteth himself with one or two sorts, and knows no more,
when as there are very great varieties; some of which agree with one sort of
ground, some with another: as for example, there are very many sorts of
Wheates, some called White Wheat, some Red Wheat, some Bearded, (which, as I
have said before, is not so subject to Mildewes, as others) others not: some
sorts with 2. rows, others with 4. and 6. some with one ear on a stalk,
others with double ears, or two on the same stalk; Redstalke-wheate of
Buckinghamshire, Winter-Wheat, Summer-Wheate, which is sown abundantly in
New England, in April and May, and reaped ordinarily in 3. months; and many
sorts more. Not to trouble my discourse with Spelt, Zea, Tiphine-Wheate, or
Olew, Far, Siligo, Alica, which were used amongst the Auntients; but now
unknown not only to the Countryman, but even to the learned-est Botanicks:
so I may say that the ordinary Yeoman is ignorant of the diversities of
Barleys, for there is not only the ordinary Barley, but also Big, Sprat-Barly,
which has lately been sown in Kent with good profit; also Winter Barley sown
in winter, Barley with 4. 6. rows, naked Barley, which require diverse
dispositions of land: some delighting in finer, others in stiffer grounds. So
there is also Winter and Summer-Rie, and 20. sorts of Pease, the ordinary
s^chew, the raith or Early-ripe Pease, the Roncivals, Hastivers, Hotarses,
Gray-Pease, Green-Pease, Pease without Skins, Sugar-Pease, whose shells are
sweeter then the Pease it self, and have been within these 10. years
plentifully sown in Lincolne-shire with profit; also Fulham, Sandwich-Pease,
etc. which require diverse sorts of land and seasons: so also there are diverse
sorts of Oats, White, black, naked, which in New England serves well for
Oatemeal without grinding, being beaten as they come out of the barn; Scotch,
Poland, etc. Also Buckwheate, Lentiles: diverse sorts of Tares, of Hemp and
Flax, altogether unknown to most Contrymen: but I hope that hereafter they
will be more inquisitive after them: for diverse of them may be of good use on
their lands.

2. Deficiency in this kind, is, that they are ignonorant of the Plants and
Grasses which naturally grow amongst us, and their Uses, which likewise were
made for to be food for Cattle, and also for the service of man. This ignorance
causes them to admire and to esteem even as miraculous, ordinary and trivial
things; as for example, how it comes to pass that in one Meadow an Horse
thriveth very much and speedily, and yet a Bullock will not in that place: and
contrariwise in a Meadow close by the former, the Bullock will thrive, and the
Horse not: so also how it comes to pass that Conyes and Sheep will thrive
well, where there is scarcely any Pasture, and yet come to nothing on Commons,
where there is a greater quantity of Pasture; which proceeds from this cause,
that somekinde of Plants are more agreeing and sweeter to one sort of Cattle
then to another, and every beast almost has some Plant or other, which they
love exceedingly. I suppose, that the observances of this kind, might be very
useful in Husbandry. These Deficiencies I will draw to 3. heads.

1. I say that diverse Plants (not to speak of Fruits, because we have already
spoken of them) that grow naturally in our Island, may be very serviceable to
the Husbandman, both for his Pastures and Corne-lands. To instance in some few:
we see that diverse sorts of wild Vetches, Chiches, Tares, etc. grow wild in
diverse places, which though they bear not so great and large crops, as some
others already used; yet who knows what they would do, if they were manured
as other grains, and in land proper for them: for we see that the
transplanting of Plants into Gardens, does very much meliorate or better them;
and without doubt all those grains, which are in use with us, were at first
picked out of the field and woods; and by Ingenious men found useful for man or
beast; and of late diverse have been found, not known to our Forefathers, as
Saint Foine, Lucerne; and why may not we find diverse Grasses, Vetches,
Medicaes, Wild Pease, etc. which as yet are scarce taken notice of?

2. There grow diverse sorts of wild Pease, but to speak of 2. only.

1. Sort which grows on the stony beaches of the Sea, where there is little
or no earth, the roots are many foot deep in the ground. In Queen Mary's
days in a dearth, the poor people gathered diverse sackes full of them, and
they were no small relief to them: who has tried, whether they would thrive
better on better land?

2. sort grows on dry barren land, and is commonly called the everlasting
Pease; which continually grows out of the same root. In Gardens I have seen
it grow 10. years together, and larger at the 10. years end, then at the
first. I have also seen it flourish on barren grounds, where Oats were burnt
away: who knows but these and other Plants may be serviceable, if not for man
at least to beasts, or Pigeons? for in New England, the great flights of
Pigeons are much maintained by these; I am sure it were good to make
experiments on these, and diverse others.

2. Head, is the Ignorance of the Mechanical Uses of Herbs and Trees; for even
for these Uses most Plants have some peculiar propriety. To instance in a few.
We know that Elm is for Wheels; and the best wood for to make Herrings red,
Oak is for the Shipwright, Joyner, Tanner; Horne-beames Beech, for the
Millwright; Line-tree for base ropes, Old Elder without pith is very tough and
fit for Cogs of wheels, Tooth Pickers; Pear Tree for Mathematical Instruments
and Engravers etc. Osiers for Baskets; Walnut for Gunstockes; Aspe for Hoopes;
Box, Ash for a 100. uses; and much more might be spoken of this kind, if time
would permit. So likewise diverse Plants are for Painters, as you may see in
Batte's Experiments: some for the Dyers, but as yet we know but 4. (viz. Woade,
Would, Green-wood, and Madder) amongst 1200. plants and upward, which grow
wild with us. I could wish some Ingenious man would take the pains to search
out the Mechanical Uses of Plants; surely it were a good way to advance
Mechanickes, who in their callings usually go round, as the causes of their
operations. I know a Gentleman, who promises some things in this kind, and I
hope will be as good as his word.

3. Head, the is ignorance of the Physioal Uses of Plants: for though very many
100. Plants do grow amongst us; yet but few of them are used Physically: whereas
there is scarce any one, but may be useful in this kind. And truly in my
opinion it is a great fault, that we so much admire those things, that are far
fetched and dear bought; when as oft-times they are gathered in unseasonable
times, and corrupted by long voyages by sea, counterfeited by Merchants; yea we
have very often Quid pro quo, and rank poisons, and do neglect those Medicines
which God has given us here at home. I am credibly informed, that in former
times, Virga Aurea was in great use with us, and usually sold for 8. d. per
ounce, and brought from France: but so soon as it was found growing
plentifully in our hedges, it was cast forth of the Apothecaries shops, as of
little virtue. And though some will object, that our Plants have little virtue:
I say it is false; for God has tempered them for on Complexions: and we see
that very often one simple Medicine does more good then the great Compositions of
the Ancients, which are rather ad pompam then for health, and seem to savor
somewhat of the Mountebanke; because Opium is always an ingredient. And
further we see, that where any Endemicall or National disease reigns, there
God has also planted a specifique for it: As the Cochleare or Scurvy-grasse
for the Scurvy, in the Balticke Sea, where it is very frequent, and also in
Holland, England. So in the West Indies, (from whence the great Pox first came,
and where it reigns very much, that not only man, but other Creatures are
infected with it, so that even Dogs dye of that disease in our Northern
Plantations, perhaps catching this infection, by mingling with Indian dogs,)
there grow the specifiques for this disease, as Gujacum, Sassaperilla,
Sassafras, and the Salvages do easily cure these distemper. Further we see,
that even the Irrational Creatures, can find not only meat, but also
Medicines for themselves; as the Dog, Couchgrasse for a vomit: the Dove,
Vervein; the Weasell, Rue; the Swallow, Celandine; the Toade Plantine; and
where is our reason, that we cannot?

I therefore desire all Countrey-people, to endeavor to know these Plants
which grow at their doors: (for God has not planted them there for no
purpose; for he does nothing in vain,) and to collect together the plain
simple Medicaments of their Grandame; by this means they may save many a 40.
dence: I mean preserve themselves and families, and Neighbors, in good health
Some small Treatises have of late been written, to show the Use of our Plants,
in Physic; and I hope Ingenious men will daily more and more communicate the
Secrets of this kind, which they have in their hands, for the Public Good.

They that write of 4 footed beasts, do reckon about 18. Deficiency, concerning
Animals.
120. species of them: half of them are scarcely known amongst us. I do
suppose therefore, that diverse species are wanting, which may be useful. To
instance in some: And

1. To begin with the Elephant, the greatest, wisest, and longest-lived of all
beasts: which abound very much in the Eastern parts of the world; as China,
India: and are accounted very serviceable, both for the wars, and for
carriage (15. men usually riding on his back together,) they are not
chargeable to keep; why may they not be of use even here, when I am credibly
informed, an Elephant lived diverse years here in a Park? so that they can
endure the coldness of this Climate.

2. The Buffle, which is as big as an Ox, and serviceable both for the plough,
and for their milk: their skins make the best buffe, they will fare very hard,
and live in Fens and bogs, where nothing else can. In the Duke of Floernce's
Country near Pisa, are many of them.

3. The honest and patient Ass, which was very much used in the old time for
carriage, (as the Horse for the war, and the Ox for the plough,) and in many
Countries at this time, they will eat thistles, and live even with nothing.
They may save poor men (who are not able to keep an Horse, because he is a
great feeder,) much labor.

4. Mules, which is a very strong and proud beast, and will carry far more then
an Horse, and are more sure-footed. I suppose, that they might be serviceable
to the Carriers here, as they are beyond the Seas.

5. Black Foxes, may be profitable; whose skins have been fold from 20. l. per
skin to 90. l. I might add diverse more of this kind: as Muske-cats, Sables,
Martines, Minkes, Musk Squash, Guiney-pigs, and a sort of Cony, which some few
have in Hamp-shire, whose Furr is worth 2. s. 6. s. or 3. s. per skin, being
little inferior to Beaver, etc. but for brevities sake I pass them over: as
also diverse sorts of Fowls, of good use; as a kind of Ducke with a Crooked
bill, which lays constantly as Hens do, as also Hawks of diver; sorts, of
good value, which perhaps the Countreyman loves not; because they are enemies
to his Poultry.

2. Deficiency, is that we do not endeavor to advance the best kinds of these
Cattle, which are amongst us. And

1. To begin with Horses. The Frenchman that writes a book called the
Treasure Politic, says, that in England in Qu. Eliz. days, we had not above
3. or 4000. Horse worth any thing for the war, and those only in Noblemens
stables; which thing perhaps did the more encourage the Spaniard to invade us:
but at this time we are known to have very many 1000. of Horse, not inferior
to the best in the world: yet I suppose, that we might much meliorate our breed
by Spanish Jennets, Barbary, etc. And we are not so careful to increase good
Horses, as we should be.

2. We are too negligent in our Kine, that we advance not the best species: for
some sorts give abundance of milk, and better then others: some sorts are
larger, more hardy, and will sooner fat, etc. Lancashire and some few Northern
Counties, are the only places, where they are a little careful in these
particulars.

3. We are not curious in procuring the best sorts of Sheep, for greatness,
foundnesse, and fine wool. I wonder that some of our Sheep-masters have not
procured of those exceeding fine-woolled Sheep of Spain; whose wool costeth
the Merchant nigh 10. s. per pound, before it is exported: I suppose, that it
would for a time mend our wool, if not continue so for ever: for these Sheep
were first carried forth out of England, if we may believe stories, Spain not
affoarding such Sheep before. Dutch Sheep are reported to have 2. or 3.
Lambs ordinarily. Dutch Sheep are very great with great tales; but their
wool is very course, not only because of their course feeding; but also
because in hot Countries, they ordinarily mingle with Goats; and therefore in
Venice ordinary Porters will scarcely eat any Mutton. And here I cannot but
relate, that all strangers very much wonder at 2. things in our Sheep, (not to
speak of the finenesse of wool.) And

1. That our Sheep if they be sound, seldom or never drink, even in Summer;
though they go on the dryest Chalky lands: as it plainly appears in Kent,
where there is scarce water for the great cattle; which proceeds from the
moisture of our air, and abundance of Raines and dewes.

2. That our Sheep do not follow their shepherds, as they do in all other
Countries: for the shepherd goes before, and the Sheep follow like to a pack
of dogs; this disobedience of our Sheep, does not happen to us, as
Papist-Priests tell their simple flocks; because we have left their great
shepherd the Pope; but because we let our Sheep range night and day in our
fields without a shepherd; which other Countries dare not for fear of Wolves
and other ravenous beasts, but are compelled to guard them all day with great
dogs, and to bring them home at night, or to watch them in their folds.

3. Deficiency in this kind, is the neglect of Fish Ponds, which are very
profitable: for Fish usually live by such worms and flies as are engendered in
the ponds, and require no charge. Concerning the ordering of them, and the
profit of them, Read Mr. Vaughans Golden Grove. And surely it would be a great
benefit to this Island, if we had Fish at reasonable rates. I cannot therefore
pass by two extreme Abuses, which exceedingly destroy Fish, and are in no
wise to be permitted.

1. That diverse poor men keep many Swine, and in nets, or otherwise catch
many bushels of the young fry of Fish, and feed their Swine with them.

2. That the Fishermen in the River have the meashes of their nets so
straight, that they take many sorts of Fish when they are too small, and do
destroy far more Fish then they take. I hope these Abuses will be reformed
with all severity. To this head I may add Decoyes, which are very frequent in
Holland, and profitable; but very rare with us in England: yet may be very
profitable and delightful.

4. Dificiency, is the Ignorance of the Insects of this Island. And though it
may seem ridiculous to many, to affirm that Magots, butterflies, should be of
any importance; yet I desire them to consider, that we have our Honey, the
sweetest of foods from Bees, which are cattle of this kind: also all our
Silks, Sattins, Plushes, and bravery from the poor Silke-worme, which may be
called a Magot, Caterpillar, or Butter-flie etc. the richest of our Colors
from the Cocheneile, which is one of this sort. Gum-lac is made by Aunts, some
are used for food, as Locusts, etc. as you may read in Musset's Book de
Insectis. Many of these likewise are used in Physic, as Cantharides,
Wood-sowes, Lice, etc. Some think, that Medicines transcending even the
Chemists, may be had out of these; for every Plant, which has a Medicinal
virtue, is also sublimed up into this living Quintessence: and therefore I
commend diverse ingenious men, as Mr. Marshal and others, who have collected
many hundred sorts of these; and I hope they will communicate ere long their
experiments to the world.

19. Deficiency concerning diverse things necessary for the 19. Defiency,
concerning diverse things necessary for the good of Cattle.
good of Cattle.

1. That we are ignorant of the diverse Diseases of Cattle and their Cures. Not
to run over all the Diseases of Cattle and their Cures, which would be too
long, and you may read them in Mr. Marram's works, The Countrey-Farmer, and
others. I will instance only in two, which some years sweep away Cattle, as
the Plague does men, (viz.) the Murreine amongst Great Cattle, and the Rot
amongst Sheep. And though diverse have wrote concerning the Cures of these
Diseases; yet we do not find that effect which we desire: and therefore I hope
some will attempt to supply this Deficiency, and write a good Treatise about
the Diseases of Cattle. Of these 2. Diseases, I shall briefly declare my mind:
And

1. Of the Murreine, which proceeds from an Inflammation of the blood, and
causes a swelling in the throat, which in little time suffocateth the cattle.
The especial Causes of this Disease, are an hot and dry season of the year;
which dries up the waters, or at least does so putrefie them, that they are
unwholesome: and also the letting of Carrionly unburied. This Disease is
thought to be infectious; but perhaps it may proceed from one Common Cause, as
the Rottenness of Sheep. The best way to keep your cattle from this Disease,
is to let them stand in cool places in Summer, and to have abundance of good
water, and speedily to bury all Carrion: and if any of your Cattle be infected,
speedily to let them blood, and to give them a good drench etc. by these Means
diverse have preserved their cattle; when their Neighbors have perished.

2. Concerning the Rot of Sheep: not to speak of the Pelt-Rot, or Sheep that
are starved; but of the Ordinary Rot, called by some the White Rot; and is a
kind of Dropsey: their bellies are full of water and their liver discolored.
I have seen out of the livers of Sheep tending to Rottenness, living
creatures leaping like small Flounders: which without question in little time
will destroy the liver, and consequently produce an indisposition not unlike to
the Rot. The common people say, that these worms are caused by the
over-heatings of Sheep, and that Rottenness proceeds from a plant called
Cotyledon, or Marsh-Penny-wort, which is of a very sharp taste, and therefore
not likely that Sheep will eat it; but it may be a sign of wet rotten land,
as broom is of sound and dry land. This is certain, that in wet moist years,
Sheep die very much of the Rot; and in dry years on the same ground, they hold
sound: and yet I have heard that in Ireland, which is far moister then
England, Rottenness of Sheep is not known. It were therefore well worth the
labor of an Ingenious man, to inquire into the Causes of these Indispositions
in Sheep.

The Means, which have been found very effectual for the curing these
Diseases, are these: first, to drive your sheep up to dry lands, or to keep
them in the fold, till the dew be off the grass, or to feed them some days
with fine dry hay, especially of Salt Meadow, or to put them into Salt-Marshes;
for in those places Sheep never Rot, or to drive them to some salt River, and
there to wash them, and make them drink of the water, this will kill the Scab;
and also the tickes, and fasten the wool; but if you have not the
conveniences before said; then Rub their teeth with salt, or rather make a
strong pickle with salt and water, and force them to drink thereof. Some dry
pitch in an oven, and add to the pickle, and have found very good success: for
these Medicines do exsiccate the superfluous humidities, open obstructions, and
kill worms. Some commend the Antimoniall Cup, as a Catholic Medicine against
all Diseases of Cattle.

2. We are Ignorant of diverse Ingenuities, concerning feeding and fatting of
Cattle and other creatures. To instance in some: And

1. Of the Horse who is a great feeder. In Kent and Hartford-shire they usually
cut all their Oats and Pease small, and give them with their Chafe; by this
means the Horses sooner fill themselves, and eat all the straw up: some put
this Horsemeat into a bag, and so order it that a little only lies in the
Manger; which when that is eaten up, more falls down, and not before; by this
way Horses do not blow their meat, nor throw it out of the Manger with their
noses. A further good piece of Husbandry they use, which is this, when their
Horses are well fed at night, they fill the rack with Wheat or Barly-straw,
and so leave them; the Horse perceiving that that which is in the rack is not
very pleasant, lies down and takes his rest, which is as good to him as his
meat: if he rise in the night, and fall to the rack and Manger, as he usually
does, and finds nothing but straw, he sleeps till the morning; but if it be
Hay, Tares, or Pease, the Jade will pull it all down and spoil it, and
likewise will be hindered from his rest; by the which double damage does ensue.
Currying and dressing of Horses ought not to be forgot, it is half as good as
their meat. Brimstone and Elecampane roots are the especial Ingredients for
this Physic.

2. Of the feeding and fatting of Cowes. We usually feed Cattle with straw in
rackes in the yard, or turn them to the fields, and there let them feed as
much; and how they please; which has many Inconveniences: as first, cattle
spoil as much with their heels as they eat, especially if the ground be
moist, or if the fly be very troublesome, and they blow and stench and tumble
much, and if the fly be busy, they run up and down, and over-heate
themselves, and fat very little; so that oftentimes in June or July they fatten
as little as at Christmas, and most of their dung is lost by these means etc.
But in Holland they do thus: They keep their cattle housed Winter and Summer;
for the Winter-provision, they lay in not only hay, but also grains, (which
they buy in the Summer, and bury in the ground:) and also Rape-seed Cakes, and
sow Turnips, not only for themselves, but their Cowes also; with the which
Turnips being sliced, and their tops, and Rape-Cakes, and grains etc. they
make Meshes for their Cowes, and give it them warm; which the Cowes will slop
up like Hogs, and by this means, they give very much Milk. In the
Summertime, they mow the great Clover-grasse, and give it them in ra^kes; so
that their cattle are not troubled with the pinching frosts, nor rains, nor
with the parching Sun in Summer, neither with the fly, nor do they over-heate
themselves or spoil half so much meat; and are always as fat as their
Masters, or Bacon-hogs. The Dung and Urine they charily preserve, and thereby
keep their Meadows of Clover-grasse (which are constantly mowen twice or
thrice yearly) in good heart: and indeed cattle ought not to go amongst
Clover-grasse, because it usually grows with long Haume (as they call it)
like Pease, which if it be broken will not thrive. In Barmudaes they have a
peculiar way of fattening their cattle, not used any where else that I know,
which is with Green Fennel, that grows in that Island plentifully.

There is a plant in Essex called Myrchis, or Cowpursley, which grows fast
and early in the spring, which they give their cattle at the beginning of the
year, and they eat it well.

It is an ill custom that is used almost every where, to let Hogs ly in their
Dirt and Dung, when they are fattening; for all creatures Generally do hate and
abhor their own Dung: and an Hog is the cleanliest of all creatures, and
will never dung nor stale in his Sty, if he can get forth, which other
creatures will: and though he tumble in the dirt in Summer; yet that is partly
to cool himself, and partly to kill his Lice, for when the dirt is dry, he
rubbeth it off and destroys the Lice thereby.

Sir Hugh Plattes in his writings sets down diverse Ingenious ways, of
Fattening Poultry etc. and more may be found out daily. The Jews have a
peculiar way of fattening Geese, with Milk, Figs, Raisins, and other sweet
things; by the which they make the liver of an extraordinary greatness, and is
a dish much valued by them.

In Moore-fields there is one that keeps many 100. of Conyes, with grains
and branne: and some others who keep the great laying Duckes, with these
things and blood, to their great advantage. I have seen a Book translated out
of French, which teaches how to gain diverse 100. l. per annum. by 50. l.
stock in Hens. I suppose that about London, where eggs are so dear, great
profit might be made by them. Turkeyes may be kept with good profit, where
there are many Meadows, as in Soffolke. In Barke-shire many keep tame
Pheasants, and have gained well thereby.

3. We do not know how to improve the Commodities proceeding from Cattle to the
highest: as for example, our ordinary Eutter might be better sented and tasted:
some Ladies have fine Ingenuities in this kind. We cannot make Cheese
comparable to the Parmisan, nor so good as the Angelots of France: our ordinary
Cheese is not comparable to the Holland Cheeses, where also diverse sorts of
Cheeses are made of diverse Colors: but I cannot much commend their Green
Cheeses, which are made of that Color by Sheepes-dung etc. but I hope that in
little time, our good Housewives will scorn that any shall excel them.

20. Deficiency, is The want of diverse things, which 20 Deficiency, Of the want
of diverse things, which are necessary for the accomplishment of Agricuture.
are necessary for the accomplishment of Agriculture -- As

1. That we have not a Systema or complete Book of all the parts of
Agriculture. Till the latter end of Qu. Eliz. days, I suppose that there was
scarce a book wrote of this subject; I never saw or heard of any. About that
time: Tusser made his verses, and Scot wrote about a Hop-garden, Gouge
translated some things. Lately diverse small Treatises have been made by diverse,
as Sir Hugh Plattes, Gab. Plattes, Markham, Blithe and Butler, who do well in
diverse things; but their books cannot be called complete Books, as you may
perceive by diverse particular things, not so much mentioned by them. The
Country Farmer translated out of French is enough, if not more than enough;
but it is no ways framed, or squared for us here in England: and I fear, the
first Authors went on probabilities and hearsaies rather then experience. I
hope some Ingenious man will be encouraged, to undertake a work so necessary
and commendable.

2. Deficiency is, that Gentlemen try so few Experiments for the avdance of
this honest and Laborious Calling; when as many Experiments might be made for a
small matter: for half a Pole square, will give as certain a demonstration, as
an Acre; and a Pottle as a Hogshead. I hope in time there will be erected a
College of Experiments, not only for this, but also all other Mechanical Arts.

3. Deficiency is, That Gentlemen and Farmers do not meet and communicate
secrets in this kind, but keep what they have experimented themselves or known
from others, as Sybils leaves, I mean as rare secrets not to be communicated. I
hope that we shall see a more Communicative spirit amongst us ere long. And
Sir, I cannot but desire you, if you have any things more in your hands of
Gabriel Platte's, or any men's else, that you would with speed publish them.

4. Deficiency is, That we want a Place, to the which men may resort for to
find such Ingenious men, as may be serviceable for their ends and purposes; and
also know where to find such seeds, and plants, as they desire, as the great
Clover-grasse, Saint Foine, La Lucerne, etc.

5. Deficiency, That men do usually covet great quantities of Land; yet cannot
manage a little well. There were amongst the Ancient Romans some appointed to
see that men did till their Lands as they should do, and if they did not, to
punish them as Enemies to the Public; perhaps such a law might not be amiss
with us: for without question the Public suffers much, by private men's
negligences; I therefore wish men to take Columell's Council; which is,
Laudato ingentia Rura, Exiguum Colito. For melior est culta exiguitas etc. as
another says, or as we say in English, A little Farm well tilled, is to be
preferred: for then we should not see so much waste Land, but more Industry,
greater Crops, and more people employed, then are at this present, to the great
profit of the Commonwealth.

21. Deficiency is, That by reason of our sins we have 21 Deficiency, That
because of our sins we ha^ not the blessin of God upon our Labors.
not the blessing of the Lord upon our Labors.

And this is the reason, that although the Husbandman has been laborious and
diligent in his calling these last years; yet our Crops have been thin, his
Cattle swept away, and scarcity and famine has seized on all parts of this
Land; and if we had not been supplied from abroad, we had quite devoured all
the creatures of the Island, for our sustenance, and yet we could not have been
satisfied, but must have devoured one another. And therefore to conclude;
though I desire the Husbandman to be diligent and laborious in his calling, yet
I council him to break off his sins by Repentance, to have his eyes toward
him, who is the Giver of every good thing, and to pray daily to him for his
blessings, who gives freely to them that ask, and upbraideth not. And
although all callings ought to look up to him that is on high; yet the
Countryman especially; for he has a more immediate dependence on him then
any other: for if the Lord withold his fat dew of Heaven, or the former or
latter Rain, it is in vain that the Hushandman rise up early, and go to bed
late, and eat the bread of carfulness: for we know, that it is the Lord that
makes barren places fruitful, and he likewise that turns fruitful Lands into
barrenness, (as the Land of Canaan, which was very fruitful even in the time
of the Canaanites, but now a barren desert) and therefore, I again desire the
Countryman to walk as it becomes a Christian, in all Sobriety,
Righteousness and Godliness: not to trust to his confidence, in his own
labors, and good Husbandry; but on the Lord that has made all things: for
though even Paul himself does plant and Apollo does water; yet it is only the
Lord that gives increase and plenty, which he will not deny to those that fear
him: for they shall want nothing that is good.

And thus Sir, I have written to you very largely my thoughts concerning the
Husbandry of this Island, and partly what I have seen in many travels. Good
Sir, be not offended at my long and impertinent stories, my rude language and
unmethodical discourse. It was, if not to satisfy; yet somewhat to gratify the
universal goodness of your spirit, and care of the Public, which God has
enriched you withal. And these are only my first thoughts, which in haste I
have hudled up together. I hope (if the Lord send life and health) my Second
thoughts shall be better: But whatsoever I have done, pray look on it, as
coming from one who is desirous to serve you, and to advance the Public
Good, according to the talent the Lord has given him. Thus I commit you to the
protection of the Almighty: And rest

SIR Your, -- --
Anno 1651.
Copies and Extracts of more letters written to Mr. Samuel Hartlib: They all
tending very much to the great Improvement not only of Agriculture, but of
true and real Learning, and Natural Philosophy.
SIR,
The several things observed and set down during my stay in the Country, are
these.

1. I learned the whole way and Art, of making and ordering of Woad, viz. the
time when they sow it, when first they weed it, and cut it. I saw the manner
of their gathering it, grinding, balling, drying it, and after sweating and
curing it. Informing my self of the whole charge and profit of it: Have made
diverse Annotations on it: And taken order for some seed to be sent to me, for
other more Compendious and Profitable trials, answerable to the Nature and
Philosophy of it.

2. This and some other things gave me occasion to make the best inquiry I
could, of House-wives and of Fowlers, for all sorts of dying weeds, and herbs,
used in the dying of wool, or of nets, which I have carefully collected to
improve to a more then ordinary use; some being very remarkable.

3. Among other General Inquiries and Adventures, I heard of one at Ware, that
charr'd Sea-coale; procured an errand and Commendations thither; went, was
civilly used; and satisfied in the truth and manner of the thing, and found the
Gentleman who was the first Author of it, to be one Aires, now dead, an
Ingenious man, a great Malster, made much profit of it: It drying Malt as
sweet, as if the Sun it self did it: Is cheaper then either Wood, or Straw;
and may be many other ways applied.

4. I went into the Isle of Ely, to see one of the Holland-mills, for dreyning;
though set up there and kept by certain Frenchmen. The Invention seemed to me
but mean and rude, and Mr. Wheeler's way much more Ingenious.

5. I saw at Wicklesen the manner of your Holland Sluices. The ruins also of a
Cochlea, for the emptying and dreining of water, of which Vbaldus has writ a
whole Treatise. Likewise a petty kind of Pinnace with ordinance, somewhat like
a close Litter, but Flat-bottom'd; which rowed with wheels instead of Oars,
employed it seems formerly with admirable success, for the taking in of
Crowland, and which gave me a proof of what I for many years have thought
possible, and of very great use and service, and still think it of unknown
value, if it were skillfully indeed framed, and applied as it might be.

6. The Lord F. W. assured me of a Gentleman in Norfolk, that made above
10000. l. sterling. of a piece of ground, not 40. yards square, and yet there was
neither Mineral or Metal in it. He after told me, it was only a sort of fine
Clay, for the making a choice sort of earthen ware; which some that knew it,
seeing him dig up, discovered the value of it, and sending it into Holland,
received so much money for it: it is a story not to be despised.

7. His Lordship told me the way of making of Spunke or Touch-wood.

8. Mr. H. His Lordship's Bailiff, showed me a small plat of ground, scarce an
Acre and half, wherein he assured me, he had in one year 21. hundred of Hops;
and falling out then to be scarce in other places, he made of that small parcel
of ground 9. score l.

9. At Milton, I saw a Spring, that might have been made big enough to serve a
large Town; which my Friend Wheeler had newly discovered, and broke up; every
man opposing him in it, and deriding his confidence, till he made it appear,
and ashamed them. Hereupon he gave me several marks of knowing and finding out
Springs under ground.

10 From Springs we converted our discourse to Pipes, for the carrying along of
water under ground to any House, or Town; wherein he imparted some secrets to
me, both of the fittest Wood and Trees for Pipes, and preserving them whole
ages from corruption, by ways extremely rational and not hitherto observed or
found out by any.

11. This drew on some Discourse of Woods, their Differences and several
Applications: in which he told me many singular Observations.

12. After this, I saw at Milton an Excellent Model of a Garden, Orchard and
Walks; and being further curious, my Friend related a Witty Invention he once
put in Practice, to plant an Orchard in a Moorish place, where never grew a
Tree.

13. I casually met with one Boughton, a most singular rare man, in carving or
cutting out Figures in small or in great of Stone; and for that reason servant
in ordinary to the late King: Who acquainted me of many excellent Ingenious
men, and promised to seek me at my lodging.

14. Being in Camebridge-shire, I examined more particularly the Husbandry,
planting, ordering and curing of Saffron.

Some other things came in my way, not without notice: But these are the chief.
My own Improvements, and comments upon all which, I shall more at large give
you, when we meet together; being always

SIR, Yours -- --

Quere's sent into France about the Seed called La Lucerne.
WHen one N. N. was last in France, being in discourse with Doctor D.
concerning Saint Foine, he was then told by Doctor D. that (for the Improvement
of barren grounds) there was (in those parts of France about Paris) another
seed that did far excel that of Saint Foine, and that the name of that more
excellent seed was La Lucerne. I am desired by a friend of mine (to whom N. N.
related this passage of Doctor D.) that by your kindness he may be spoken to
of this La Lucerne: and his direction's desired, where the said seed is to be
had? for what price? how much is usually sowed upon an English Acre? what time
of year it is sown? whether it be sown alone; or with any other ordinary
Corn? and with what Corn? and with what kind of land it best agrees with?
and finally what other particulars he can direct more then is here set down?

The Answer to the Quere's from Paris.
I Have been with Doctor D. about Lucerne, who tells me that it grows best in
wettish grounds, that the best time of sowing it in England will be in February
at the same time that Oats are sown, with the which also it may be sown, but
best alone; that to the sowing of an Arpent, which is much what the same with
an English Acre, there will go 12, or 15. l. of the Seed, the which uses to be
sold here at 8. or 9. sols the pound.

More Quere's concerning Lucerne.
I Desire further to know, what kind of wet grounds are best for it? whether
Moorish or clay? whether Poor or Rich? whether it must be sown yearly? or
whether it will continue over a year in the ground? and if more then a year,
then how many years it will continue without being new sown? whether it be
only good for Meadows, or for Pasture? and if for Pasture, then whether the
Sheep or Cattle be suffered to go upon it? or whether it be carried off green
as the Clover-grasse is in Flaunders?

Lastly, for what Cattle it is most proper?

Another Answer from Paris.
I Thought to have sent you 9. l. of the seed of Lucerne for the sowing of
three Acres, Doctor D. having told me, as heretofore I told you, that 3. l.
would sow an Arpent or Acre; But as I was going about it, I met with a
Gentleman an acquaintance of mine, who some years since (but unknown to me
hitherto) has had some Acres of Meadow of Lucerne upon his Ground, to whom
having casually spoke of my business, and told him all that Doctor D. had told
me about the Lucerne; he answered me, that Doctor D. was most grossly mistaken
in the quantity of the Seed required for the sowing of an Acre; and that it
would not take up 3. l. but two whole sacks, each sack containing the full
load of a strong Porter; after which rate the quantity of Seed for the sowing
of 3. Acres would fill a great dry-fat, the sending whereof by land would come
to excessive great charges, and therefore necessarily to be sent by Sea in my
opinion. You will be pleased to impart these things to your Friend, and to let
me know his final resolution upon them, the which shall be faithfully
accomplished by me; and in the mean while I will get him a perfect and full
Answer upon all his Quere's, not from Doctor D. (whom I dare trust no more in
this business, having found him guilty of such gross mistakes about it) but
from that other Gentleman, who told me he could himself resolve most of those
Questions; but that for to be the surer, he thought it best to confer first
with his Farmer about it. You make Apologies for putting me upon these
Inquiries; but I pray you to believe, that at any time I shall most readily and
cheerfully perform any service that shall lie in my power, for you or any of
your Friends for your sake. And I were very unreasonable, to think troublesome
any thing that you require of me, when as continually I put you to so much
trouble my self.

The last Answer concerning Lucerne.
THe information about the Lucerne that I have got from my Friend, being a very
particular one, and containing a very full Answer to all the Questions
propounded by your Friend; is such as follows: It requires a rich ground,
but somewhat loose and light, so as a stiff Clay, and such other tough grounds
are no ways fit for it; The ground must not be over-dry nor over-moist, but in
a mean; yet somewhat more inclining to moisture, then to the contrary. It must
be ploughed three times; the first time in October, and the second and third,
toward the Spring. Naturally it does not love Dung, and comes much better in
a ground that is sufficiently rich of it self, then that which has been
enriched by Dunging; and where Dung is made use of, it must be very stale and
well rotten, and long before the sowing-time. It cannot endure the cold, and
therefore must not be sown till the cold weather, and all the danger of it, be
quite past, viz. about the beginning or midst of April. The Quantity of the
Seed, is the Sixth part of Corn, that the same ground would require: so as
only one Bushel of Lucerne is to be sown on that space of ground, which would
require six Bushells of Corn. It must be carefully weeded, especially in the
beginning. And to the end that it may take the more firm root, some Oats must
be mixed with it, but in a very small proportion. It is to be cut as soon as it
begins to flower, which in the hot Countries (Provence, Languedock, and
Spain) it does five or six times, and some years seven and eight times in a
Summer: but in this Climate it uses to be cut but twice a year, about the end
of June, and about the end of September: Being cut, it must be turned very often,
that it may dry the sooner, and be carried off the ground the soonest that may
be; and it must be kept in close barnes, being too tender for to be kept in
reeks, open to the air, as other Hay. It is good for all kind of Cattle, Kine,
Sheep, Goats, and as well for the young ones (Calves, Lambs, Kids) as for the
others; but above all it agrees best with Horses. It is much more feeding then
any other Hay: insomuch as any lean beasts will soon grow fat with it; and to
Milch-beasts, it procures abundance of milk: but it must never be given
alone, especially to beasts that have not been long used to it: but must ever
be mixed with Straw, or with some other Hay: for otherwise it over-heateth
them, and fills them too much with blood; and that so suddenly, as it greatly
indangereth their health, and their life too; which it does principally to
Kine: to whom it is more dangerous, if too plentifully given, then to any other
Cattle. After the last cutting, you may let your Cattle graze on your
Lucerne-fields, and that all Winter long, until the beginning or middle of
March. Of once sowing you will have your Meadow continue good for 10. or 12.
years, and until 15. and afterward too, it will still continue to bear; but
the herb will then notably decay in goodness. Wherefore it is best to turn in
then to some other use. Kine must never eat of this herb green; but only
dried, and that moderately too, as has been said. But Horses eating their fill
of it green in the Spring, are purged thereby, and grow fat by it in 8. or 10.
days time: If one desire to have of the Grain, one may let such a proportion
of the Meadow, as one will, grow up to seed, after the second cutting, any year
except the first only: and when the seed is ripe; the tops of the herb, with
the coddes wherein the seed is enclosed, must be cut in a dewie morning, and
put into sheets, for fear of loosing the seed, and must be beat out with
Flails upon the same, when that it is well dried: and afterward the remaining
part of the herb must be mowen close to the ground; after which it continues
to sprout out again after the usual manner. The Hay on it will keep good two or
three years; and one Acre is sufficient to keep three Horses all the year long.

A Postscript to the last Answer concerning the Lucerne.
SIR,
THe Gentleman, who had given me the Note about the Lucerne, has told me since
two particulars more, which he had forgot to put into it: The one, that not
only to other Cattle, but even to Horses, with whom that Hay agrees best, of
all other beasts: it is not to be given but in Winter; because that in the
Summer it would too much heat their blood: And the other, That this Hay must
be perfectly well dried, before it be carried off the ground; and to that end
turned very often: because that being put up with any the least moisture, it
will quite spoil much more then any other Hay. Now these, and all the other
particulars, which I have had from that Gentleman, have been confirmed to me by
many others. And yet within these 2. or 3. days I met with a Physician of
Rochell, who assuring me that the Lucerne was very common in his Country, made
me a relation of it agreeing with the former, only in these three points, viz.
That of once sowing it will continue 10 or 12. years; That it is cut twice a
year, serving afterward for Pasture all Winter; And that it wonderfully
fatteneth all kind of Cattle; but very much different from it in all the
others, and in some of them point blank contrary to it. For he says, that it
is to be sown in the beginning of March; that it desires a temperate ground,
but rather dry then wet, and no ways fat nor clayish, but stony and gravily;
that it need not be mixed with any other Hay, but may be given alone, and all
the year long; in Summer as well as in Winter; not only to Horses, but to Cowes
and other Cattle. He added, that the proportion of the seed, is the charge of a
Porter for four Arpents or French Acres. Which particulars I thought good to
impart unto you; that your Friend comparing them with the other's, might make
his best profit of them; and this Rochellois; (or Rocheller) who has lived 3.
or 4. years in England, thinks that the Lucerne will come admirably well in
that Country.

NOTE.
THe meaning of these Words -- The quantity of the Seed is the sixth part of
Corn that the same ground would require -- is this, That whatever quantity of
Wheat or Barley an Acre of ground would require of the seed of Lucerne, you must
take but the sixth part of that quantity of seed of Lucerne; so as that ground
which for its sowing requires six bushells of Corn, does require but one
bushel of Lucerne-seed.

An Arpent de terre (which how much it is in English measure COTGRAVE'S
Dictionarie will perfectly tell you) requires 10. l. of that seed, as several
Grain-sellers (of whom I went to enquire for it) have unanimously told me: the
seed being exceeding small, and to be sown wonderfully thinly. As for Saint
Foine or Holy Hay, I have seen it grow here about Paris in several places, in
rich fat grounds, and those both high and dry, and others low and Marshy. It is
cut but once a year, much-what about the same time of other Hay, and a great
deal of the seed of it is required for sowing the ground with it. But being
once sown, it lasts 10. or 12. years, as well as Medica or Lucerne, wherewith
also it correspondeth altogether in its Virtues and Uses.

A Copy of a Letter, relating a Proof or Experiment of an English Husbandry.
Honored SIR,
I desire your acceptance of this small present, may be according to the real
worth of the thing; not as at first sight it may appear to be (viz.) straw or
stubble. This is I assure you, no other then the true and real Experiment of
what by the blessing of God the native fertility of our English ground, rightly
husbanded, will bring forth: nay I can upon most probable grounds affirm, that
had I used all the Art and Care which I could and might have done (had I not
been otherwise taken off) it could hardly have failed to have been double,
treble, or quadruple to what it is. And it is also most true, that any
reasonable good ground well managed may yield one, ten, a hundred, etc. Acres,
in which there shall be very many superior to the biggest root of these, and
hardly one inferior to the best, but one; by which account it will easily
appear, how much beyond the old way, this is the increase, there being between
two and five quarters on the Acre; and the product of this way will be rarely
under 10. quarters, not rarely 16. or 20. and the same for most grains; yet
will this dull age as to goodness not believe it without some testimony, and
perhaps scarce suffer themselves to be convinced by this so eminent an
Experiment; wherein it plainly appears, That out of one fingle Barley -Corn is
sprung about 80. Ears, of which near 60. had, some 38. some 36. 34. 32. 30. and
hardly any less then 38. which in all is above 2000. for one: And truly, the
charges to be bestowed on a Acre of this sort is no way double to the common
way. Accept it therefore, and reserve it as a real Rarity, and a jewel only
fit for a Public and Pious Spirit, as yours is: till I shall by Gods
assistance be able next year to produce you more abundant examples of God's
wonderful power and bounty that offers, and man's ingratitude that neglects,
or refuses such honest means, of the truest and most justly gotten humane
wealth, honor, and happiness.

Your most faithful and obliged Friend and Servant --
September 26. 1650.
An Extract of A Letter from Amsterdam dated the 28. of November 1650. in
answer to the former Communication, with an other Experiment of a French
Husbandry.
SIR,
J am much obliged unto you for sending me the Discourse of the
Braband-Husbandry, which I have perused. Not long ago I was told of certain
Men which would feign have morgaged some thousand Acres of Heathy grounds which
lay here and there as Commons. But the late Prince of Orange by the advice of
his Council durst not entertain any such Propositions, the Lands belonging to
the Communalty. On the other hand the Undertakers would not be contented with
less for imparting of their Secret. It appears unto me by all circumstances,
that it was the same design of Husbandry with yours, the parties (if I
remember well) being Englishmen. From Paris I am advertised (for certain) of
one, who did last year (1649.) ferment one Grain of Wheat, which this year has
produced him 114. Ears and within them 6000. Grains, which is more then 80.
Ears, and 600. Grains of your English Friend's. This year (1650.) he has a
great many fermented and sown.

An Answer to the foregoing extract of a Letter from Amsterdam.
SIR,
J Have received from you a Relation of a very great and wonderful Production
or Increase, which your Friend at Amsterdam relates to be done in France. I am
far from lessening the admirable greatness of that person's skill and
success. Only since I find my self taken notice of by the same party, and the
Experiment I made the last year of Barley weighed in the scales with this, and
found too light; I shall take leave to say, that (besides all difference that
is or may be conceived to be, betwixt the Soyles; that of France has a
manifest advantage in the elevation and powerful operation of the Sun.) That it
is probable he did use all possible Means both to the Ground and Seed to make
them both fruitful, which I did not at all; but quite contrarily I chose the
worst seed I could procure, and my ground was as barren as any whatsoever in
the parts adjacent. I added nothing to either; all I did was after the blade
was sprung up. And whereas your Friend mentions 600. out of 80. ears, those
ears contained, one with the other at the least 30. single corns, which is
2400. That besides that, Wheat is no whit inferior to Barley, but rather more
inclined of its proper nature to branch and spread. It is also allowed as long
time again to grow, and therefore may better spread to many ears then Barley.
That my ears of Barley rated at 30. one with the other, (which they were at
least, some having 38. a thing I suppose rarely (if ever) seen in England
before) are full as high as his Wheate-eares rated at 52. And the seeming great
difference between 2400. and 6000. when looked into, will prove not to be in
the number of ears, which differ no more then as 14. to 10. but in the nature
of the Grains, there being universally as many more in an ear of Wheat as in
an ear of Barley. That if (as it is most like) he in France did only try
conclusions, to what height nature might possibly be scrued by Art, and that
what is here related, was the effect of that trial; that holds not comparison
with mine, which is generally practicable, without any considerable expense of
time or stock more then in the common-way. Lastly I affirm, in all possible
humble reference and submission to God's good pleasure, power and providence;
that when I shall make use of good Seed rightly prepared, good Land in right
condition, and all other helps which I know and can use; I shall not doubt for
smaller numbers of the same grain (viz.) Wheat to produce 200. or 300. ears,
and in them 10000. 12000. or 15000. corns, (and somewhat like that, for whole
fields together, and that here in England,) howsoever let us always remember
to give all possible praise to God, whose blessing only makes rich.

SIR, I am your faithful Friend and Servant --

Another Letter from Paris, discovering the secret of the forenamed French
Husbandry.
SIR,
J Do with much impatience desire the Treatise or Discourse published by you
about the Braband-Husbandry, and do very much admire the industry of that
English Gentleman your Friend, who has found out the ways of making Corn
multiply so prodigiously. The Parisian Experimenter of Corn's multiplication I
know not: but a Friend of mine very well acquainted with him, assures me to
have had the following Description of his Secret from himself; and to have seen
the experience of it very fully in the year 1649. not in any great quantity,
but in a Garden, only for trials sake.

Pour into quick or unslak't Lime as much Water as suffices to make it swim
four inches above the Water; And unto ten pounds of the said Water poured off,
mix one pound of Aqua-vitae, and in that liquor steep or soake Wheat (or Corn)
twenty four hours: which being dried in the Sun or in the air, steep again
in the said liquor 24. hours more, and do it likewise the third time:
Afterward sow them at great distances the one from the other, about the
distance of a foot between each grain. So one grain will produce 30. 36. 38.
42. 52. ears, and those very fruitful, with a tall stalk, equalling the
stature of a man in height.

Another Extract of a Letter from the Lowe-Countries.
SIR,
THese are to give you special thanks for communication of the Parisian
Experimenter's Secret. Water (if he means Cold water) poured into quick or
unslak't Lime cannot work much in one hour upon the Lime; but if it be boiled
with it, and that the water be poured always afresh upon the Lime, then it
will come to be so strong at last that an egg may swim in it, as I learned
by tradition from Doctor Hartmannus, but could never make any trial of it for
want of unslackt Lime in the place where I live. This perhaps may be yet
better; but Experience goes beyond Reason in these cases. The often macerating
or steeping, and drying of grains I like very well. I have only according to
Mr. Gabriel Platt's directions steeped them 24. hours in turned or tained
Raine-water and Cow Dung, and afterward sown them thus wet; which on Sandy
grounds has produced such goodly corn, as if it had been very good Land. Some
here use Saltpeter, which also does much good; but is found likewise in
Sheepes-dung, as may appear by its fertility. I have lost the Book of Husbandry
of Mr. Plats, which was called, A Discovery of Infinite Treasure hidden since
the world's beginning; Whereunto all men of what degree soever are friendly
invited to be sharers with the Discoverer. For having lent the same to a
Friend, that it might be translated into High Dutch, I could never see it
again. I am told it is out of print. But if you could help me to another, you
would do me a pleasure. I have nothing to add for the present, but that the
Genius of this Age is very much bent to advance Husbandry; and that in all
Countries I hear there are found Gentlemen; that study professedly these
Improvements more then in former times. I rest always

SIR, Yours -- --

Another Letter expressing the Reasons, why the Experimenter of the
Barly-Corne, thinks it not fit or expedient to part with his secret as yet, for
a more common use.
SIR,
I Find daily more and more, that it is too true, that most men love money,
that they even worship it in their hearts, as the only Summum Bonum. I need
not go far for a proof, since they have brought one to my hand. That (having
so fair and just offers made, in order to the Corne-business; as I have
presented to them by your hands,) will by no means (though so very much to
their own profit and the Public Good) part with their moneys; and yet stick
not to demand (in effect) the discovery from me of that talent of knowledge,
which God has made mine by his free gift; as the reward of my Industry, and
faithful love to my native Country; (An Estate, if I mistake not better gotten
then by any of the common means; by which men grow rich daily.) Surely the
commodities cannot be less then equal. The most wise and virtuous men that
ever lived, have preferred Art, Industry and Ingenuity far before money.
Money (especially the Abuse of it) is become the very Poison of the world,
against which Art and Industry is an Antidote or Cordial. Money is counted and
enjoyed by thousand thousands, Art and Industry but by a few. And things of
excellent use are accounted Jewels, especially when rare and scarce. The
Professors of Art and Industry prefer their private gain (too often) before
the being and well being of the whole world; nay of their own sold. These are
ever ready to part with unvaluable treasures upon easy conditions: Those will
not upon any conditions whatsoever (but such as please themselves, or are full
of oppression) part with their moneys (no not to save a Brother's, or hardly a
Father's, or a Child's life.) And finally, if they judge it improvidence to
part with a little of their estates, only for a time, to return again to
them shortly, like Noah's Dove with an Olive Branch, a double branch of Peace
and Prosperity: I desire to be excused, if I upon better grounds, hold it
profane to sell a better right then a birthright for less then a mess of
pottage; even for just nothing, and for ever. I can never forget the exceeding
great Ingenuity to the world, showed and given by Mr. Gabriel Platt'es, as will
more fully appear, when you shall have printed those writings of his which he
left to your trust and custody) and the world's base Ingratitude, that let such
a man fall down dead in the street for want of food, without a shirt to his
back; none (but your self that want not an enlarged heart, but a fuller hand
to supply the world's defects) being found with some few others, to administer
any relief to a man of so great merit. In a word, that God that has forbid to
muzle the Ox that treads out the fodder, has appointed every man to use his
blessings (next to his Glory) for the providing for and preservation of his
family, which he that can do and does not, is worse then an Infidel. I dare not
give away this means of obteining outward blessings to my self and family,
till I have found a way to make it instrumental to that end; and that end once
effectually attained to, I dare not deny God's mercy and bounty to me, nor
longer restrain the Public Use of this universal good: I remain

SIR, Yours -- --

A Secret practiced with very good success in England, concerning sowing of
Wheat, to prevent it from being Smutty.
FIrst take your Wheat, pour the same into a tub of Water, and stir it about;
take off all the Corn that swimmeth on the Water, and pour the rest upon a
floor, letting the Water run off. Then make a strong brine of Bay Salt, and
pour some of the brine on the Corn upon the floor; and take to half a
quarter of Corn, half a peck of Salt, and strew it on the Corn, and stir and
mix it continually, as you pour thereon the brine, and strew the Salt thereon,
until the Corn be all wet and overstrowed with Salt.

Then take to a half Quarter of Corn, half a bushel of Vnslak't Lime, and
strew that likewise over the Corn, mingling it well together; which done, you
may sow the same the next day. The brine must be cold when you pour it on the
Corn, and you must prepare no more Wheat, then you intend next day to sow.

Another Secret practiced in Germany for the enriching of Meadows.
A Meadow yields 6. times more Hay, when it is turned up with a plough, and
sown thick with ashes burned out of the substance thereof, but the rain must
fall first. Afterward sow your Meadow with the seed of Trefoile, and plough
and harrow them in. The first grass which grows thereon, let it be very
ripe, that the seed may fall off it self; then let some go over it, and with
rakes stir it, that it fall out. Afterward let it be mowen off, and carried to
a certain place where it may be dried, so the Grass will grow presently
again, and may be mowen again in three weeks.

How to make Rushy ground to bear Grass.
Break the Rushy ground, and rake the roots and the rushes together, and
burn them or carry them away, Then spread upon that ground, Turffeashes, or
Pigeons-Dung, Chalk or Lime, according to your ground. Try of every one of
these upon a little plot of your ground: you may use other Ashes, Marle, or
Dung for experiments: and that which you find does kill the Rushes and other
Weeds best, use it: you are to make gutters or draines to carry away the water
from the ground: you may destroy Rushes or Fern, if you will; but cut or mow
them down in the beginning of June, and so use to do it 2. or 3. years
together at that time.

For planting or sowing Walnuts.
IN the season when they are full ripe on the trees, a few days before they
would fall, as near as can be guessed, let them be gathered or beaten off; and
in the green husk, or without it, put them into good ordinary earth in a
barrel or basket: So let them continue until the beginning of March following:
as soon as that month begins, get as much warm Milk from the Cowes as will
steep them 24. hours: after they are steeped, set them in ground well dug,
and judged natural for such fruit, with their little end, or their prickled
sharp end upwards, about 3. or 4. inches deep in the earth, and not one of
28. will fail, as has appeared by experience. This may make dry Walnuts also
prove trees: the Nuts used as above said, as far as may be, set them near
one foot a-sunder, and in a right line to weed them. The Walnut breeds good
Timber, good shadow, good smell, good fruit. At 4. years growth transplant
them.

Mr. Lanyon's Description of the usual manner of planting and transplanting
(according to that of Flaunders) of those Trees called Abeales, impanted for
Public Good.
THey are first planted from any even the least part of the Root of the same
Tree: you must divide the root, by slipping each part from the other, and not
by cutting it in sunder: you may take those parts from those trees whilst they
grow, and without danger to them, rob them of all the small sprigs of the
root, and leave only the Master-Roots; but the most usual way is to multiply
them, when they are transplanted; which time is at their growth of 5. years:
their season is in March. They are first planted in the way of a Nursery, in
loose earth, moist and sandy, or inclining to it: their distance is 10. inches,
one from another (the earth being first prepared as for a Garden): you are to
make holes with a stick, the depth of the length of the part you have to set
setting him so that you may only see a part of it above ground, the earth
being closed about them; they are to be kept weeded as any other plants. The
second year in February you are to prune off all from the Master or Middle
shoot, and so to the 3. and 4. year: the 5. you may transplant them, so as
they like the ground of their Nursery. Their usual distance one from another is
10. foot: you may drive a stake with them when you transplant them, to secure
them stiff against the wind; for that they will grow very tall in those
years, and so be much exposed to the winds. They may without much prejudice (to
Corn) be planted in the furrows where it grows; so as the ground be moist,
and you keep them well pruned, and leave only a bush at the top of the tree.
No stiff Clay grounds will admit them to thrive, they will grow in moist Clay
ground, but only in height, and will not burnish for want of room to extend
their roots. This tree if he likes his ground; will be at full growth in 20.
years. He is valued in Flaunders after 7. years growth, worth every year 12. d.
until his time be up. He grows very straight without boughs, only a bush on
the top, and so exceedingly well becomes a Walk. This Timber is uncomparable
for all sorts of wooden vessels, especially Traies; Butchers-Traies cannot well
be made without it, it being so exceeding light and tough. Some years ago there
were ten thousand at once sent over into England, and transplanted into many
Counties. Mr. Walker at Saint James can give the best account of them to all
such as desire further to be directed in this particular.

FINIS.

