AN ELEGY UPON THE DEATH OF THE MIRROVR Of Magnanimity, the right Honorable
Robert Lord Brook; Lord General of the Forces of the Counties of Warwick,
and Stafford, who was slain by A Musket shot at the siege of Liechfield, the
second day of March, 1642.
BAck blushing morn, to thine Eternal bed,
Ruffle for ever the tresses of thine head
In some thick Cloud, and thou whose rays do burn
The Center of the Universe, return:
For if thy head beyond its Porch appears,
Thy self, thy self must needs melt into tears.
Bright Saint thy pardon, if my doleful Verse
Do seem in sighing ore thy glorious Hearse
To envy death; for fame it self now wears
Griefs Livery, and only speaks in tears.
Brave Brook is dead, like Lightning, which no part
O 'th body touches, but first strikes the heart,
This word has murdered all; it can a shower
Enforce from every eye, it has a power
To alter natures course, how else should all
Run wild with mourning, and distracted fall.
Is It not a gross unttuth to say, thy breath
Expired too soon? or that impartial Death
Thy Corpse too soon surpised? No, if thy years
Be numbered by thy Virtues, or our tears,
Thou did the old Methusalem outlive;
Though Time not forty years account can give
Of thine abode on earth, yet every hour
Of thine unpattern'd life, by Virtues power
A year in length surpast, each well-spent day,
The body makes young, the soul makes gray.
Ah cruel Death! who with one cursed Ball,
Did make the Atlas of our State to fall,
In one thou all have slain, whose death alone,
A death will be unto a Million.
Could none but his sweet Nectard blood appease
The fire-sprung Bullets heat? Must it needs seize
His sacred face, it self there to enshrine,
Not in an earthly, but a Tomb divine.
See lucklesse Liechfield that thou do not hide
The precious blood, which from the wound did slide
At this Lords death, it may not Cloistered be
In thy frail earth, always impuritie
It did abhor, therefore in Sacrifice,
Send it unto its head above the skies,
And for an Altar whereon it to lay,
A thousand thousand souls through grief this day
Themselves to death have wept, whom thou may take,
And them conjoyne thine Altar for to make.
But lift not up thine head, least that the skies
In weeping showers of blood put out thine eyes.
And is this blessed Brook (whose Cristall streams
Sweld with such store of Grace, whose blissful beams
Enlightened all) is it so soon drawn dry,
Leaving its ancient current, to fill each eye
With mournful tears, surely in Paradise
It self it now dischannels, where no vice
Or shade of it appears, a place most pure,
Where all such Saints for ever must endure.
I might relate thine actions here on earth,
Thy mystery of life, thy noblest birth,
Outshin'd by nobler virtue, but how far
The have taken thy journey 'bove the highest star
I cannot speak, nor whether thou art in
Commission with a Throne, or Cherubin.
I might unto the world, great Lord repeat,
Thine own brave story, and tell it how great
Thou were in thy minds Empire, and how all
Who out live thee, see but the Funeral
Of glory: and if yet some virtuous be,
They but weak apparitions are of thee.
Thine actions were most just, thy words mature,
And every scean of life from sin so pure,
That scarce in its whole history we can
Find Vice enough to say thou were but man.
It Is past all mortals power, then much more mine,
To tell what virtues dwelt within this shrine,
Yet if illiterate persons walk this way,
And ask what jewel glorifies this clay,
Say, good Brooks ashes this Tomb has in keeping,
Then lead them forth, lest they grow blind withweeping.
Tell but his name, no more, that shall suffice,
To draw down floods of tears from dryest eyes,
Our griefs are infinite, therefore my Muse,
Cast Anchor here, mine eyes cannot effuse
Any more tears, this for thy comfort know,
Fate cannot give us such another blow.
Ex opere (praesertim) Henrici Haringtoni, (...) London printed for H. O. Anno
Dom. 1642.


