THE Harmonious Consent OF THE MINISTERS OF THE Province within the County
Palatine OF LANCASTER, With their Reverend Brethren the Ministers of the
Province of London, in their late Testimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, and
to our Solemn League and Covenant: As also against the Errors, Heresies, and
Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them.

LONDON, Printed by J. Macock, for Luke Fawn, at the sign of the Parrot in
Paul's Churchyard. MDCXLVIII.

THE Harmonious Consent OF THE Ministers of the Province WITHIN THE County
Palatine of Lancaster, etc.
IT is a saying of Solomon worthy to be written in letters of gold That a friend
loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity Prove. 17 17
: And therefore though God need not the witness of men, nor truth our
testimony, yet when his name is blasphemed, the truth contradicted and opposed,
the faithful friends of God, and the sincere lovers of the truth, will (as in
all ages they have done) stand up in his cause, which they then see in such
apparent hazard. In the Scriptures we read of, a cloud of witnesses Heb. 12. 1.
that appeared for God, and bare witness to his truth, though for so doing some
of them had trial of cruel mockings and scourgings, yea moreover of bonds and
imprisonments Heb. 11 36, 37, 38.
, etc. In the Apostasy of the ten tribes Elijah and Elesha were zealous for
God against the false Prophets of Baal. Jeremy at Jerusalem, and Ezekiel in
Captivity bore witness against the whoredoms of the house of Judah, as is most
evident throughout their whole Prophesies. Peter and the other Apostles, though
commanded not to teach any more in the name of Christ, yet did not therefore
forbear, resolving rather to obey God then men. Acts 5.28.
. The two witnesses prophesied one thousand two hundred threescore days, all
the while the Gentiles did tread under-foot the holy City Rov 11.2, 3.
Arrius met with great Athanasius, and when the whole world wondered at it self
that it was become Arrian, the general Council Of Nice Concentrate a^tem pratie
in un^^lles d^^^llus de p^^lyi^^ose phupt united li^e^^ll it (...) di^^n, ^in^^
^i^sani^^^ale and miru^^^ it ^^vi^a^^^um ^^npin^^^l^m s^^tntiaplane admyab^les,
etc. Binius vol. 1. Pay. 262
met and laid an anatheme on that pernicious Heresy. In latter times God had
many in this Land, who loved not their lives unto the death Rev. 12 11.
, and gave testimony to the truth, not in ink but in blood, and who (though
they be dead) yet speak Heb. 11.4.
, as their names will live for ever. When the Accomplices of Arminius grew many,
some from the several reformed Churches convened in the general Synod of Dort,
and accursed his pestilentious Errors. And yet more lately, The Sea the Pre.
face to the Protestation May 5.1641
designs of Priests and Jesuits, and other adherents to the Sea of Rome
against the true reforuted Protestant Religion in his Majesty's Dominions
established, the introducing of diverse innovations and superstitions into the
Church, together with the driving out of multitudes out of his Majesty's
Dominions, amongst other reasons brought forth the Protestation, for the
defense, as of other things, so also of the true reformed Protestant Religion
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and
Popish innovations within this Realm; wherein not only the Parliament it self
was engaged, but according to the Sea the Order of the House of Commons May
5.1641. concerning the printing of the Preamble and the Protestar'en, and
sending down the Copies printed by the Knights and Burgesses, who were to
intimate with what willingness all the Members of the House made the
Protestation, and further to sign fie, that as they jutisie the taking of it in
themselves, so they cannot but approve it in all such as shall take it.
Order and See the Voce of the House, July 30.1641 wherein they declare, that
what person soever shall n^^t^ke the Protestation is unsit to hear Other in the
Chuch or Common wealth.
Vote of the House of Commons, the generality of the Kingdom were engaged too.
The The Preface of the solenm League and Covenant, published Sept. 27.1643.
calling to mind, the treacherous and bloody plots, conspiracies, attempts and
practices of the enemies of God, against the true Religion and professors
thereof in all places, especially in these Kingdoms ever since the Reformation
of Religion, and how much their rage, power and presumption had been of late,
and were at that time increased and exercised, did in a great trial of
affliction Cor. 8.2.
, induce these Kingdoms to enter into asolemn League and Covenant, as for other
thing, so also for the defense and Reformation of Religion and Extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and Profaness, etc. by which,
so, the Protestation and Covenant, as there was care taken for the better
defense of the truth, so there was also a glorious confession of it made before
God, Angels and men. And now when men of perverse spirits and corrupt minds,
reprobate concerning the faith had resisted the truth 2 Timothy 3.8.
, this stirred up the zeal of our reverend and godly brethren, the Ministers of
the Province of London, to give testimony to the truth of Jesus Christ,

And therefore that we the Ministers of Christ within the Province of the
testimony of them that have gone before us, considering that we cannot but be
sensible of the strange and woeful Apostasy of sundry from the Faith; the great
opposition made against the Government and Discipline of Jesus Christ; the sad
Divisions and Rents in this tattered and torn Church; that an universal
Toleration of all, even the most execrable doctrines, that ever were hatched in
hell or broached in the world, is earnestly labored after by many; and that the
solemn League and Covenant, sworn with hands lifted up to the most high God, is
with many buried in oblivion, as it is not only neglected and slighted, but
also contemned, scorned, derided, and most palpably voilated and trampled on by
not a few; and that its manifest that God is hereby shamefully dishonored, most
highly provoked, neighbor Churches justly scandalized, all fundamental and
saving truths in danger to be plucked up by the roots, and our several slocks
to be poisoned with the spreading Errors of the times.

The claim that is laid to truth by the three glorious persons in the blessed
Trinity The Father is called The God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32.4. the Son the truth,
Jo 14 6 the holy Ghost the Spirit of truth, Jo. 14.17
; the high price and account that is worthy to be set upon it, being to be
bought Prove. 23 23
though at never so dear a rate (how ever now a days esteemed of with many as a
refuse commodity): the high thankfulness we ow to God for keeping truth so
chaste and pure so long under an adulterous Church Government; the trust
reposed in us by Jesus Christ as his messengers, ambassadors and steward of the
mysteries of the Gospel, of whom it is required that they should be faithful 1
Cor. 4.1, 2
; the duty we ow to our several flocks as being watchmen Ezekiel 33.7, 8.9, etc.
to give them warning, and that as standard-bearers we may encourage them
earnestly lude 3.
to contend for the faith once delivered to the Saints; the care over their
immortal souls redecmed 1 Pet, 1, 18, 19.
with the precious blood of Christ; the conscience of our Solemn League and
Covenant binding us in our places to endeavor the Reformation of Religion, and
the Extirpation of the contrary; our fears lest the Reformation so earnestly
longed for, so joyfully covenanted, so much suffered for, and of late times so
much bled for, should after so many sharp throws, and such hard labor, prove an
abortive birth; the worthy, renowned and much encouraging example of our
reverend brethren the Ministers of the Province of London going before us (and
whom to follow in witness bearing to the truth, and so far as they follow
Christ 1 Cor. 11.1.
, we count it but our duty;) The multitude of them that in these days do oppose
the truth, by whose great numbers it is in danger to be born down, if contrary
endevors to the utmost be not used by the united strength of all that love it,
to hold it up; and lastly that we may wash our hands from the guilt of
betraying by our sinful silence so precious: treasure as truth is, and may not
judge our posterity unworthy thereof for our sakes, if we should not own it,
plead for it, and hold it fast: These things we say, in this juncture of
affairs, do draw us forth publicly to declare our selves in those main things
witnessed to by our brethren in their late Testimony to the Truth of Jesus
Christ, and to our Solemn League and Covenant; As also against the Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times, and the Toleration of them.

I. As touching the necessity of a platform of Doctrine of Confession of Faith,
we shall need to say nothing, it having been found so useful for the Church in
all Ages, from the primitive times even until now, not only that the ignorant
might thereby be informed concerning the main points needful to be known and
believed by them unto salvation, but also for the better preserving of the
truth, detecting and discovery of Heretics and Seducers, and to testify
consent and agreement in that one Faith.

Here only we think it needful to declare, that we do highly approve of the
humble Advice of the reverend and learned Assembly of Divines concerning a
Confession of Faith, judging it not only to be orthodox, sound, solid,
substantial, and pious, but also to be veryful, and in especial manner useful
for these times, as that which does obviate those many dangerous Errors that do
swarm in this Age; and therefore as we do assent unto the whole, so we also do
concur with the reverend Assembly and our See the Teto the truth of Jesus
Christ, page 3.
reverend brethren, the Ministers of the Province of London, in our humble and
hearty desires that it may receive the approbation and sanction of authority,
as the joint Confession of Faith for these three Kingdoms in pursuance of our
Covenant.

II. In the next place, we do hereby openly profess before God and the world,
that we cannot but tremble and be amazed to consider, that in a Land engaged in
such a Covenant; professing so much for Reformation; made partakers of so many
special mercies as England has been; such blasphemous, execrable and horrid
doctrines should ever be publicly broached, printed, maintained and defended
as are at these times. We shall not need to recite them particularly, because
that work is so fully done already to our hands by our brethren in their late
Testimony See the Catalogue of Errors in the Testimony to the Truth of Jesus
Christ, page 5, to 23.
; although to the great grief and wounding of our hearts we may declare, that
as they only there intended to give a small taste of their wormwood and gal
Ibid. p 23.
, so we are assured their Catalogue of Errors might be much augmented, if there
were any necessity to rake any further into the dunghil-books whence they might
be gathered, and that many more authors might be quoted, to make it more fully
evident; that there are indeed such Errors and Heresies amongst us as are by
them recited. But here we cannot but blush, wonder and be astonished at our
strange revolt. We remember the times when under the Prelatical tyranny,
Arminianism, Antinomianism, and the Innovations that were introduced into the
worship of God, were generally cried out against by all that party which was
then esteemed truly religious: but now, as though Errors and Heresies had
changed their natures, and were grown better because the persons professing,
patronizing and countenancing them in these days pretend to more piety and
holiness then was to be found in the Fautors of them heretofore, such kind of
Errors as would then have been abhorred by every one truly conscientious: to
the great dishonor of God, scandal of Religion, and shame of our Church and
Nation, do now take sanctuary and shroud themselves under the shadow of many of
those that challenge to themselves the name of the godly party.

And as we cannot but take notice of the just hand of God out against us in
seting open the floodgates to let in this sea of Error, wherewith this Church
is in danger to be overflown, thereby to punish our former lukewarmness and
coldness in defense of the truth, unprofitablenes under the means of grace,
disesteem and slighting of the truth, our not valuing as we ought the
inestimable benefit of the Gospel; our not laboring for the purity and power
thereof, and not endeavoring to receive Christ in our hearts, nor to walk
Worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sias and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us; so we cannot but express our
deepest sense hereof and sorrow for the same; this alone being sufficient to
move us to roll our selves in the dust, to rent our hearts and not our
garments; as the Honorable Houses of Parliament hereupon saw cause both for
themselves and the whole Kingdom to be humbled for the growth of Errors, See
the Ordinance of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament concerning the
growth and spreading of Errors, Heresies, and Blasphemles, seting apart a day
of publikel lumili^tion to seek Gods asustance for the sappresting and
preventing the same, and which was ordered by the Lords to ba pr^med Die Jovis,
Feb 4.1646. and to becamed down by the Sherists, and under. Sheriff, and
delivered to the several Ministers of very parisn Church and Chapel within
this Kingdom, who were required to take notice of the same.
Heresies and Blasphemies when they published their Ordinance' to that purpose:
As also for to seek Gods assidance for the suppressing and preventing the same,
and which put us in hopes that there would have been long before now an
application of some effectual means of remedy. And although we cannot but from
the bottom of our hearts lament, and pity all those that are entangled in the
dangerous and deadly snares fo the Errors of these times, yet considering that
unsound and heretical doctrine Will eat as does a canker 2. Tim 2.7.
or gangrene; and therefore does manifestly tend to the razing down to the
ground the true Christian Faith, the extirpating of all true Religion and the
power of godliness, the poisoning and undoing of precions souls; is the pest of
a Church; the weed that will over-grow Gods garden, and so choke the plants of
the Lords own planting; does highly provoke God to anger; and that the
fuligmous vapors thereof which have of late risen up out of the bottomless pit
(as they have greatly eclipsed) so are they in danger to grow into thick clouds
to the utter datkening of the heavens over our heads, that we should not behold
any more the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ; we do therefore
hereby testify with our brethren Teslimony to the Touth of Jesus Christ, page
33.
to all our flocks, to all the reformed Churches, as our great dislike of
Prelacy, Erastianism, 'Brownism and Independency; so our utter abhorrency of
Antiscripturism, Popery, Arianism, Socinianism, Arminianism, Antinomianism,
Anabaptism, Libertinism, and Familism, with all such like now toorife amongst
us; and more particularly all those Errors witnesses against by our brethren,
and recited by them in their Catalogue of infamous and pernicious Errors in
their late Testimony.

And we do hereby, as the Watchmen of God and Ministers of Jesus Christ, give
warning to our several flocks, Mat 7 5.
That they take heed of the wolves in sheeps clothing, of all 2 Pet 2 1.
false Teachers that do privily bring in dumnable Heresies, even denying the
Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, and that
therefore they follow not their pernicious ways, that the way of truth may not
be evil spoken of; that 2 Ioh. v 10, 11
if any man come unto them and bring not the doctrine of Christ, they receive
him not into their house, neither hid him God speed; that so they be not
partakers of their evil deeds; that Romans 16, 17
they mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine
which the they have learned, and avoid them: And do earnestly exhort them in
the bowels of Jesus Christ, That they labor to get sound knowledge, and to be
well grounded in the principles of the oracles of Heb. 5.12.
God (the want whereof is the cause why so many are seduced and turned aside;
and being Ephesians. 4.14.
but children in understanding are tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men and cuning craftiness of those
that lie in wait to deceive) Acts 17.11.
That they search the Scriptures with those good Bereans whether those things
they hear be so or no; 1 John 4.1.
that they believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of
God, because many false Prophets are gone out into the world; I These. 5.20, 21
that they despise not prophesying, but yet prove all things, and hold fast
that which is good; Ephesians 4.15.
and that speaking the truth in love, they grow up into Christ in all things
which is the head: Most humbly beseeching Ephesians. 1.17.
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ the Father of glory, that he would give unto
all his people the Spirit of wisdoms and revelation in the knowledge of him:
Ephesians. 3.16.
That he Would grant unto them according to the riches of his glory, to be
strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, that they may be kept
from every evil way of error and sin, and may always have something to say for
the truth, and nothing against it; that all those that go astray may be
brought into the Way of truth; and that we our selves, our several flocks, and
the whole Church of God every where may be found blameless at the day of
Christ. And however we cannot but for the present deplore the sad condition of
the Church of God in this Kingdom, in respect of the poysonful Errors it is
infected with, yet we hope that that God which often works by contraries,
making scandals the trial and triumph of his chosen, is for the present doing
his people good by the means of Errors growth, thereby ^tying their sincerity
and love to truth, stiring them up to prize it the more, and more to search
after it. There must be Heresies, says the Apostle, that they that are appoved
may be made manifest C^s.11 19
. Open enemies and false brethren (by the wise ordering of God, who can make
sovereign mithridate of the flesh of vipers) do always advantage the Non (...)
do ^^slo q^od nes^unt, s^d ad ^^^un, qu^^readum ca^^^les, ad (...) ap^^^idu^
scin^^tua^^^ ^^^^^cos exci^a^do. An^u^^^ de vera ^^li^^ (...). (...) cap. 8.
Church.

And we do further trust, that when God, by his thus suffering the growth of
abominable and pernicious Errors for a time, has thereby fully accomplished
the work he has to do upon the hearts of his people, he that knows how to
bring light out of darkness, order out of confusion, good out of evil, as he
made the pride and tyranny of the Prelates the means to cast them forth, so
also in much mercy to England will at length, by this most unlikely and contraty
means in it self, make the Reformation of these Kingdoms much more thorough and
glorious.

III. But before we pass on any further, we are here led to express with what
astonishment and horror we are struck when we seriously weigh what endeavors
are used for the establishing of an universal Toleration of all the pernicious
Errors, blasphemous and heretical doctrines broached in these times, as if men
would not sin fast enough they were biden; or as if God were not already enough
dishonored except the throne of iniquity were set up, framing mischief by a Law
Psa. 94.20.
, or as if men were afraid that Error (a goodly plant to be cherished) would
not grow fast enough except it were made much of; or as if it might as justly
lay claim to the privilege of being defended as truth it self; or as if there
were danger that Satan would not destroy souls enough, except he might do the
same without all restraint. For our own parts, as we can never sufficiently
admire and wonder that any that have taken the Sole^^ League and Covenant,
should either have so quickly forgo^^nit, or else imagine that the establising
a Toleration of Heresy and Schism by a Law, should be the way to extirpate
them; so also here we shall take occasion to declare what our apprehensions are
concerning such a Toleration.

We have searched the Scriptures, looked as impartially as we could into those
authentic records, and yet we cannot, find that ever such a thing was
practiced with approbation from God, from the time that Adam was created upon
the earth unto the fealing up of the sacred volume, the ceasing of visions and
all new divine revelations. But on the contrary, that those were blamed,
reprehended and checked, that did but connive and wink at the practice of those
things that were displeasing unto God Rev. 2 14, 15, 20.
; that the not taking away the high places is mentioned to be a defect in their
Reformation, of whom yet God himself gives testimony, that their hearts were
upright 1 King. 15.14.2 Chro. 33.17.
; and that those that quite took all away what ever was distasteful to him,
were by God himself highly honored and much commended 2 Chro 17.6. and 31.1.
and 343, 4.
: And therefore we cannot see how such a kind of Toleration as is endeavored
after in these times, can any ways consist with a thorough Reformation
according to the Word of God, there being nothing more contrary to Reformation
then Toleration.

Besides what else would this be but a seting up the image of jealousy that
provokes to jeadousie Ezekiel. 8.3.
, and a putting upon God (who knows how many) corrivals.

It would be a giving Satan free liberty to set up his thresholds by Gods
thresholds, and his posts by Gods posts Ezeck 43.3.
, his Dagon by Gods Ark, which how dishonorable it would be to God and Jesus
Christ his only Son, we leave all men to judge. They that search diligently
cannot find in it love to God, or love to his Truth, or love to men's precious
souls; Nay, it strongly savours of leaving of first love Rev. 26.
which Christ hates; of lukewarmness and want of zeal, for which Christ
threatens to spue out of his month Rev. 3 16.
, of love to Error, and an apprehension of some amiableness and worth therein
for which it were to be desired, or else why should there be a pleading to have
it tenderly dealt with and indulged? even as it argued a love to Baal in them
that pleaded for him against Gideon, because he hand cast down his altar and
cut down the grove that was by it judy 6.30, 31
. It would be no part of Englands thankfulness unto God, after so many
deliverances and mercies received from him, to grant men open liberty to
blaspheme God at their pleasure, wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction
Pet. 3.16.
trample upon his holy ordinances, slight and contemn all ministry, despise
his messengers, commit all manner of abomination, and for every one to go a
whoring after his own inventions, which yet would be the effects of a lawless
Toleration.

Add yet further, that a Toleration would be the putting of a sword into a mad
man's hand li there were a company of mad men tuning up and down the streets
with knives and swords in their hands endeavoring to mischieve and kill, must
we do nothing to restrain them? Buroughs heat-divisions, page 24. See more in
him there to this purpose at large.
a cup of poison into the hand of a child; a leting loose of mad men with
firebrarnds in their hands; an appointing a City of refuge in men's consciences
for the devil to fly to The devil must not be lot alone though he get into men's
consciences, God has appointed no City of refuge for him; if he flee to men's
consciences as Joab to the horns of the altar, he must be fe^cht from thence,
or fallen upon there; something may be done to men to keep them from evil, and to
reduce them notwithstanding the plea of their consciences. Buroughs
heart-divisions, page 19, 30. See him there also more at large.
; a laying of the stumbling block before the blind; a proclaiming liberty to
the wolves to come into Christ's fold to prey upon his lambs; a Toleration of
soul-murther (the greatest murder of all other,) and for the establishing
whereof, damned souls in hell would accurse men on earth. Neither would it be to
provide for tender consciences, but to take away all conscience; if evil be
suffered it will not suffer good; if Error be not forcibly kept under, it will
be superior; which we here the rather speak of, to undeceive those weak ones,
who under the specious pretext of liberty of conscience (though falsely so
called, and being indeed, as is well observed by the general Assembly of the
Church of Scotland See the Declaration and Exhortation of the General Assembly
of the Church of Scotland to their brethren in England, page 4.
, Liberty of Error, Scandal, Schism, Heresy God, opposing the Truth,
hindering Reformation, and seducing others) are charmed by Satan into a better
liking of an unconscientious Toleration. We also dread to think, what horrid
blasphemies would be belched out against God; what vile abominations would be
committed; how the duries of nearest relations would be violated; what
differences and divisions there would be in Families and Congregations, what
heart-burnings would be caused; what disobedience to the civil Magistrate that
might be palliated over with a pretense of conscience as well as other opinions
and practices; what disturbance of the civil peace, and dissolution of all
humane society Pertinax ^i^ in doctrina sidei dissensio et diffractio totius
societatis humanae perturbationem secum trahit, ejusque tranquillitatem
subvertit. Synopsis purior, theolog, disp. 50. these 61.
, and of all Government in the Church and Common wealth, if once Liberty were
given by a Law (which God forbid) for men to profess and practice what opinions
they pleased; yea, sin would be then committed without any restraint or shame,
although the more liberty to sin the greater bondage. The establishing of a
Toleration, would make us become the abhoring and loathing of all Nations, and
being so palpable a breach of our Covenant, would be the high road-way to lay
Englands glory for ever in the dust, and awaken against us the Lord of hoasts
to bring a sword upon us to avenge the quarrel of his Covenant Lev. 26.25.
A Toleration added to our sins would make us to God an intolerable burden; he
would doubtless think of easing himself, he would be weary of repenting. And
when Jesus Christ should come to judge both quick and dead, the very lukewarm
Prelates whom Christ has spued out of his mouth (who in their times would
never have consented to such a Toleration asis now desired) would rise up in
judgment against us and condemn us. And therefore however there are some And
from brethren, in things of the mind, we look for no compulsion, but that of
light and reason; in other things God has put the sword in the Parliaments
hands for the terror of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well, etc.
See a Letter sent to the House of Commons and printed 1645. going under the
name of Oliver Cromwell and set down by Mr Rutherford in his survey of the
spiritual Antichrist, page 250. part. 1.
that do conceive that in things of the mind the sword is not put into the
hands of the civil Magistrate for the terror of evil doers and the praise of
them that do well; Yet because we judge the Toleration of all kind of opinions
and professions in matters of Faith (Errors therein being in the number of
those evil works to which the Magistrate is to be a terror Row. 1^. 3, 4
to be impious and wicked, and would be a tender nurse to give suck to and
cherish the foul, ugly monstrous and misshapen births of our times, as it
would bealso desturctive to the Common wealth, though we shall easily grant,
men are not to be punished by the Magistrate for their internal opinions which
they do not discover his (...) adjlipulamun qui sicuti, beminum (...) is esse
ajust, it a (...) de side opiniones a magis^^^ain (...) esse (...) quanves
(...) bo miman (...) non esse puniendas largiamur, (...) tamia de rejpubluae
exitialem, religlonis proseljiunem a magistratu quibuslibet civibus ese
^^mitterdam negamus. Synops. purior, theolog, disput, 50. these 60.
yet with our reverend brethren we do here profess to this Church, and to all
the Churches of God throughout the whole world, That we do detest the
forementioned Toleration See a Yestimony to the Truth of Jesus Christ, page 34.
. And what ever others may expect to the contrary, yet we hope that God will
never suffer the Parliament of England ever to be so unmindfut of either solemn
League and Covenant, or of their own formet Declarations and Remonstrances The
bonoiable House of Commans do thus remonshare, They insuse into the people that
we mean to abolish all Church Government, and leave everyman to his own fancy
for the service and worship of God -- And then afterward they dicl^re And we
do here declare that it is farfiom our purpose and desire to let loose the
golden telns of Di^cipline and Government in the Church, to leave private
persons or particular Congregations to take up what form of diviven service
they please, for we hold it requifie: that there should be throughout the whole
Realm a consormity to that order which the Laws enjoin, according to the Word
of God. See the Remonstrance of the State of the Kingdom December 15.1641.
, Protestations and Professions, as once to give a liltening car to such as
might move for such a thing; and that they might be kept from being guilry of
so great a sin, shall be out earnest prayer for them unto God continually night
and day.

IV. And thus having expressed our deepest sense concerning the Errors and
Heresies of these times, and the Toleration of them, which to us is so hateful
and abominable, we are now carried on to declare what we conceive to be the
cause of the spreading of our freting leprosy and eating gangrene.

If we make inquiry into our selves, we must needs acknowledge, our not prizing
truth as we ought, not improving precious opportunities for good that have
been put into our hands, the great decay of the power of godliness, leaving
first love, lukewarmness, sleighting and undervaluing the means of grace, and
barrenness under them, (faults, generally to be found in the better sort of
people) together with the many other grievous sins that are committed in the
Land, are just causes why we should be scourged with such a spiritual plague;
but yet these hinder not but that we may also as truly number, the not fettling
a well ordered Church Government for so long a time after the old rotten
building was polled down, amongst the causes of the growth and spreading of
pemicious Errors. Anarchy will cause confusion in the Church as well as in the
Common wealth. And therefore we do profess, that without a well ordered Church
Government, that we here may use the words of the general Assembly of the
Church of Scotland See the Exhortation of the general Assembly of the Church of
Scotland, page 12. where they use these expressions in reference to the
Preshyterial Government, which we do also with them fully and freely own.
We know no other proper and effectual remedy against the present dangers of
Religion in this Kingdom, or for purging the Church from Scandals which are
destructive either to sound doctrive or godliness; and are therefore thankful
to the Parliament for ordaining of late, the speedy divission of all the
Counties of the Kingdom into Classical Presbyteries See the Ordinance of
Pailiament for the speedy dividing and settling the several Counties of this
Kingdom into distinct Classical Presbyteries, and orderedd to be printed Jan.
29. 1647.
: Discipline and Government in the Church being the golden Reins (whereunto
this present Parliament has well likened it) serving to curb and restrain men,
who are by nature like a wild asses colt Job 11, 12.
affecting unbridled liberty; it is the rod wherewith to correct petulant and
froward children; the shepherds crook which the faithful Pastors cannot want,
but to the spiritual prejudice of their flocks; the keys opening the doors for
the admitance in of those whom Christ would have to be admited into his Church,
and the shuting out of whom he would have kept out; it is the hedge or wall to
keep the ravenous beasts from entering into Gods garden and vineyard; the means
to take the soxes, the little soxes that spoil the vines ^s Cant. 2 15.
and to purge out the leaven that other wise, though but little, yet would
leaven the whole lump, z Cor. 5.6.
And if not a little Family, no Common wealth or society of men can consist
without the bond of Laws or Discipline Steri a societ^^ into (...) a demus quae
vel (...) samiliam ^^beat comtinon in recto statu sin dis^po^^^ potell, eam
esse multo magr^^^ (...) esse. Calvin lto. 4. insti^. cap. 12.1. ct 1. Si^ut
use samiliane^ respublier (...) societas sine legum and dise^pl^^^ (...) ^^^do
consistere potest, (...), ^^^lesae ch^^^li (...) in hoe (...) po^^st constare,
a^st ^^rto ^g^^ini, at queidoreis legibus in adsba^^, per quae ordoejus and
(...) adverj^^ c^ms, mondi sathanae, f^aues ac m^i^^toc^^^ ^rvlate consirve^ui.
Synopsis pu^or, the dog. Disp 48. thef. 1.
, how can it be expected but want of Church Government will soon bring the
Church to ruin: Therefore seeing Government is so neccessry for the Church, we
cannot but judge, that the want of it, for so long a time, has been and is one
main cause of those great evils with which this sick and languishing Church is
so much distempered. And as we are fully persuaded, with the reverend and
learned Assembly of Divines, from clear Scripture grounds Isa 9, 6, 7 1 Timothy
5.17. Act, 20 87, 28. Heb. 1; 7, 17, 24. 1 Cor, 12. 28 Mat 28. 18, 19, 30.
That the Lord fesus as King and head of his Church has therein appointed a
Government in the hand of Church Officers distinit from the civil Magistrate
See the humble Adivice of the Assembly of Divines concerning, a Confestion of
Faith, chapter 30. sect. 1. page 52.
and that it is hi upon Whose shoulders the government is -- who sits upon the
throne of David and upon his Kingdom to order it and establish it with judgment
and justice from henceforth even for ever; having all power given to him in
heaven and in earth by the Father Who raised him from the dead and set him in
his own right hand -- and put all things under his feet See the humbly Advice
of the Aflembly concerning Church Government, page. 3
: So also with our reverend brethren the Ministers of the Province of London
See a Testimony to the Truth of lesus Christ, page 24.
we are well assured that Jesus Christ has siufficiently revealed in his Word
how he will have his Church governed now under the New Teclament: and that the
Presbyterial Government (truly so called) by Presbyteries and Synods in a due
line of subordination of the lesser to the greater (with procperous success
exercised in the best reformed Churches,) is that Government which is most
agreeable to the mind of jesus Christ revealed in Seripture.

And if this Government were but fully established and settled a throughout
this Kingdom, we do not doubt but through the bles^ing of God in the sincere
and faithsul exercise thereof, the mists that do at present overshadow and
obscure this Church would be soon dispelled; the Errors that do boldy walk up
and down without control, would not dare to peep forth; or if they did, would
be soon suppressed; looseness and profaness would be more restrained, the power
of godliness more advanced, many scandals prevented and removed, sundry
stumbling blocks would be taken out of the way of the weak, to the healing of
our divisions; and so the Spouse of Christ, that at present is black over,
would look with another manner of face then now she does. The experience of the
reformed Churches, and especially of Scotland, confirms the successfulness of
this Government abundantly for the weeding up of Errors, and keeping the
Church of Chirst chaste from being drawn aside to commit spiritual fornication
with the idols of the brain. We also our selves in the exercise of this
Government, according to those cautions and considerations premised by us See
the deliberate Resolntion of the Minislers of the Gospel within the County
Palatine of Lancaster, with their grounds and cautions according to which they
put into execution the Presbyterial Government upon the present Ordinances of
Parliament, Pieston, November. 17. 1646.
have to the praise and glory of God cause to acknowledge it in some measure
successful amongst us in the exercise of that part thereof that is alrealy
settled, for the stirring up of the ignorant to endeavor after more knowledge,
and the restraining of the scandalous; but much more fruit we apprehend would
be reaped from it, if in all the parts thereof it were in its full force
established. But in the mean time, we cannot but bewail that there are so many
that are prejudiced against it, do asperse it, speaking evil of what they
understand not; and that sundry do not only refuse to submit to it themselves,
but do with tooth and nail oppose and hinder the establishing of it in the
Kingdom. Here also we do further signify, that we cannot only our selves
submit to what the reverend and learned Assembly of Divines have presented to
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, as their humble advice concerning this
Government (judging it to be very consonant to the Word of God, and well
agreeing with the Government and Discipline of other reformed Churches;) but do
also unfeignedly and heartily desire in pursuance of our Covenant, that the
three Kingdoms may be brought to that uniformity for Discipline and Govenment
that is advised to there, not without much regreet disapproving of the
new-coined titles of distinction of a Scottish and English Presbytery.

V. As for our Solemn League and Covenant for the defense of our Religion, and
to endeavor Reformation, we cannot but here call to mind the manifold
encouragements given us to take it, it being (when it was by authority pressed
upon us) thought a fit and excellent means to acquire the favor of almighty God
toward the three Kingdoms; See the Ordinance of Parliament Feb. 2.16.41. for
the ta^^^ the Covenant.
and for the better encouraging of all sorts of person to take it, was by the
Parliament, in the tenth instruction for the taking of the Covenant,
recommended to the Assembly of Divines, to make a brief Declaration, by way of
Exhortation, to all sorts of persons to take it, as that Which they judged no
only lawful, but (all things considered) exceeding expedient and necessary for
all that wish well to religion, the King and Kingdom, to join in, and to be a
singular pledge of Gods gracious goodness to all the three Kingdoms, and was
accordingly urged by the Assembly, as the sovereign and only means to recover
an embroiled bleeding remnant See the Exhortation for the taking the Covenant,
ordered by the House of Commons to be p^^ated Feb. 9.1643.
: and yet further, that in the Declaration of both Kingdoms joined in Arms,
ordered to be printed Jan. 30. 1643. such as would not take the Covenant are
declared to be public enemies to their Religion and Country, and that they are
to be censured and punished as professed adversaries and Malignants; all which,
as they did lay strong engagements on us to take it, so to see it so urged and
pressed, made our hearts within us to leap for joy. We remembered our servitude
and bondage under the Prelatical Taskmasters, how the Doctrine, Discipline,
and Worship had been corrupted, and this Covenant for Extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and Profaness, and for Reformation of
Religion in Doctrine, Discipline, Government and Worship, not only recommended,
but also commanded, and so strongly pressed by the higher powers to be taken
throughout these three Kingdoms, did in the midst of our troubles, at that time
lying on us, mightily revive, and cheer our drooping spirits, and was as life
from the dead Romans 11 15.
. We also shall never forget, how the taking of this Covenant was by our selves
pressed and urged on our several Congregations, how lolemnly it was sworn, and
what rejoicing there was at the Oath, sundry at the taking of it weeping for
joy. And when the Covenant was thus taken, we thought within our selves that
surely now the Crown is set on Englands head; we judged the day of entering
into this Covenant to be Englands Coronation day; as it was the day of the
gladness of our hearts, and wherein God wiped away the reproach cast upon us by
Separatists before, for the want of an express Covenant. We do also remember,
how Copies of this Covenant were sent abroad into neighboring reformed
Churches, by whom as they were received with great joy, so doubtless then their
expectations were raised, to see England shortly brought nearer unto them in a
thorougher Reformation according to the Word of God, those things being abjured
which had been formerly as a partition-wal set up betwixt them and us. And let
us never let slip out of our minds, how God from heaven smiled upon our Armies,
from the first day of entering into this Covenant, until through the good hand
of our God upon us for good, the whole power of the enemy was quite broke in
pieces; and therefore if so soon as we have reaped such fruit and benefit from
it we cast it away, who knows but we may be forced to take it up again to save
our lives? And yet for all this, we wish we had not cause for to complain, that
this Covenant thus strongly urged, thus solemnly sworn, thus blessed with
success, is contemned, slighted, most palpably broken, scorned and derided.
Where an holy and religious Covenant, once made, is regarded as it ought, it
will be reverently spoken of, neither will the earnest and pathetical pressing
the not casting it away, be any matter to quarrel or scoff at. And yet besides
sundry other unsavory and reproachful expressions used, tending plainly to
bring the Covenant into disgrace (to say no worse of them) The first thing you
complain of under the head of omission is no less then the Solemn League and
Covenant, and here you do abound with your pathetick inter^ogations, to affect
the hearts of those whose eyes are in their howels, whose understandings are
drowned and swallowed up in their passions after this manner. And shall the
Covenant, which is as solemn a Vow which creatures on earth can make to God in
heaven etc. And again, shall the Covenant for the preservation etc. And again
(like the Papists which hold up their idolatrous Eucharist in the eyes of the
people, that they may fall down to worship it) shall the Covenant which both
Houses recommended to the Assembly of and. Yet again (as if here lay all your
bait to catch gudgeons) shall our mutual and solemn league and Covenant
subscribed by the Parliaments of both Kingdoms etc. Once more yet (for if this
spring fails all our sport will be lost), shall the Covonant even with those that
took it be already out of date? etc. Scot^ish ^aift dispeld, page 22.
some there are that liken the earnest and often pressing of not laying aside
the Covenant to the practice of the Papists holding up the idolatrous Eucharist
in the eyes of the people that they may sal down and Worship it. The Covenant
binds to endeavor Reformation according to the Word of God, and to bring the
Churches in these Kingdoms to nearest uniformity in matters of Religion; and
yet the earnest pressing uniformity, according to the Covenant, is made by some
But secondly, why do you make the solemn League and Covenant, the uniicum
necessartum, the balance of your sanctuary, and the golden reed to measure
your temple; you have not a tutle of the word of God; but all your cry is the
solemn League and Covenant, in stead of the Word of God; the Jew has his
Talmud, the Turk his Alcharon, the Papist his Mass Book, the Prelate his
Service Book, and must we have the solemn League and Covenant in stead of the
Oracles of Heaven, the Word of God? Better it is that this brazen serpent
should be broken to pieces and ground to powder, then that men should fall down
and worship it; It was the hypocritical Pharisees pretending to heaven, though
minding the earth, who making void the Law of God did teach for doctrines the
tradition of the Edders; let us not put up man's posts, the Covenant, by Gods
posts, the holy Scriptures. Scottish mist dispelled, page 26, 27.
, a substituting the Solemn League and Covenant in the room of the Oracles of
Heaven, aseting up of man's posts, the Covenant, by Gods posts, the holy
Scriptures; and is compared to the Jew having his Talmud, the Turk his
Alcharon, the Papist his Mass Book, the Prelate his Service Book; which kind of
expressions and comparisons, as we cannot but with greatest indignation detest
and abhor, so in that they set the Covenant (that makes the Word of God the
rule of all Reformation and Uniformity that is sworn to there) at hostile
opposition with the Word of God, it is very evident to what purpose they tend,
sc. that the covenanted Uniformity in matters of Religion should not be
insisted on or urged, for that were to set up man's polls, the Covenant, by Gods
posts, the holy Scriptures, and were to be like the Jew having his Talmud, the
Turk his Alcharon, the Papist his Mass Book, etc. and therefore the conclusion
is, better it is that this brazen serpent should be broken to pieces and ground
to powder, then that men should fall down and worship it, though formerly an
healing benefit was received from it. Are not these plain evidences in what
mean account the Covenant is with some persons, when the earnest pressing the
not laying it aside is so scorned and slonted at, and when the urging of
covenanted Uniformity will not be endured? And is not this Covenant also most
palpably broken, when not only Uniformity is cried out against, but a
Toleration of all kind of Errors; Heresies and Schisms, in stead of endeavors
to extirpate them, is earnestly pursued by diverse? to say nothing of the great
increase of Errors of all kinds, the woeful divisions and rents in the Church
(which never were more or greater then since the Covenant was taken) nor of the
abominable looseness and profaness of the times; which certainly is not for to
amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of areal
Reformation, according as was professed and promised.

For these things we see cause to hang down our heads and blush, and that our
eyes should run down with tears continually, as our hearts at the consideration
hereof may be astonished and swallowed up with grief; Oh what dishonor is
hereby brought to God! What scandal given to Religion! What matter of reproach
and scorn is this like to be unto us from our common enemy! What an
unparalleled blot is hereby laid upon this Church and Nation, never like to be
washed out in this Age nor in the Age of our children after us! and what danger
of swift destruction, if there be not repentance in time! May not the Lord
complain of us, as once he did of Israel, When he slew them, then they sought
him, Psa. 78.34, 35, 36, 37
and they returned and inquired early after God, and they remembered that God
was their rock, and the high God their Redeemer; nevertheless they did slatter
him with their mouth, and they lied unto him with their tongues, for their
heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant: And
may it not be said of us, as in the days of Josiah it was said concerning
treacherous Judah that had made a solemn Covenant with God for Reformation 2.
Chron. 34. 31 32
, that she turned not to God with her whole heart, but feignedly Ier. 3.6, 10.
. And besides all this, neighbor Churches take notice of our strange breach of
Covenant, and are amazed at it. Our dear brethren of Scotland, who upon our
taking this Covenant were induced to embark themselves with us, and run a
common hazard in the same cause, do sadly complain See the Exhortation of the
general Assembly of the church of Scotland to their brethren in England, page
5, 6, 7.
of the crying sin of breach of Covenant -- and that the staves of beauty and
bands, covenant and brother hood are broken by many in this Kingdom, and are
much cast down in themselves and grieved, fearing lest they should lose the
fruit of all their sufferings and hazards for our sakes, sc. the establishment
of Reformation and Uniformity in Religion in these three Kingdoms according to
the Word of God, and example of the best reformed Churches; and which,
notwithstanding all suggestions whatsoever to the contrary, we dare neither be
so injurious nor uncharitable toward them; as not to judge was the main end by
them proposed when they first engaged with us; especially when we consider
whence came the first stirrings of the Wheels of Christ's chariot in great
Britain of latter times, and who it was that first sounded the retreat to
return from Babylon, which posterity will know to the second coming of Jesus
Christ, thoughwe should not own it, of which we are modestly put in remembrance
by one Mr Rathe. sord in his survey of the spiritual Antichrist, in the Epistle
to the Reader page 6.
whose name is famous throughout the Churches whilst he is alive, and whose
works will abundantly commend him to posterity when he is dead. The things that
have been already mentioned in reference to breach of Covenant, are matter of
deepest sorrow to our hearts, especially if we do further consider what guilt
of perjury Neh. 1^ 29.
spiritualadultery Jer. 50. 5.
, high treason against the God of heaven is hereby brought upon our Land; and
that also breach of Covenant is a thing which God complains of Psa 78.10.37. 2
King. ^1.15 ler. 11. 10.
, threatens severely Lev. 26.25. Deur. 29 20, 21, 22, 10, ^5. let. 22.8, 9.
, and for which he has inflicted sore Judgments on his people in former times
2 King. 6.7, 15.
. As for our selves, though we cannot excuse our selves from failings against
our Covenant, for which we desire unfeignedly to be humbled, yet considering
that for the matter of it, there is nothing in it to be repented of, but that
the seed of Reformation and the foundation of the house of the Lord is in it,
and knowing also how solemnly, with hands lifted up to the most high God, it
was taken, and that it was made with the Almighty who will not be mocked, and
in his presence who is the searcher of all hearts, with a true intention to
perform the same as we shall answer at the great day when the secrets of all
hearts shall be disclosed; we do therefore by the grace of God resolve, that we
will not suffer our selves either directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
combination, persuasion or terror to be ever withdrawn, either in whole or in
part, from this sacred League and Covenant, that was so solemnly and Cheerfully
sworn by us, in the time of Englands low estate and sad hour of temptation, but
shall, all the days of our lives, zealously and constamly continue therein
against all opposition, and promote the same according to our power, against
all lets and impediments whatsoever, being fully assured there is none on earth
that has that power our consciences, as to discharge us at their pleasure,
from the bond of this sacred Oath; and that therefore the parties engaged in
it, what ever some men's intentions might be when they took it, and how ever the
common enemy (whose prevalency and power, together with our low condition in
this land before, first occasion the entering into it) be now suppressed, are
notwithstanding still as firmly bound to their utmost to endeavor, according
to their places, the performance of all the several things therein contained
and sworn, (and that yet have not received their accomplishment because the war
is ended) as at the first taking of it. And therefore, though we cannot but
heartily lament, that any should be so strangely deluded as to First, I do not
conceive the parties to that League intended thereby to be everlastingly bound
each to other; the gounds of striking it, being merely occasional for the
joining in a war to suppressed the common enemy, accordingly we did join; the
enemy is (if we be wise) suppressed, and the was (as you see) ended, what
should the Covenant do, but like an Almanac of the last year, show us rather
what we have already done, then what we be now to do. Set the Independency of
England endeavored to be maintained by Henry Marten, a Member of the
Parliament there, etc. page 11.
conceive so much, yet we do abhor that it should be so much as once imagined,
that when the common enemy is suppressed, this Convenant then forthwith should
be out of date, and but like an Almanac of the last year, showing us rather
what we have already done, then what we be now to do. And because, as when it
was first enjoyed to be taken, it was thought a fit means to acquire the favor
of God; so we now are fully persuaded, being kept and observed, it would make
England the delight of God, the rejoicing of al true hearted Saints at home and
abroad, a corasive and vexation to the Devil, Antichrist, all Popish profane
and Malignant persons at home and abroad, and a mirror of incomparable mercy.
We shall therefore (as by the Order Die veneris, Jan. 29.1644. Ordered by the
Commons Assembled in Parliament, that the Solemn League and Covenant be on
every day of Fast and public humiliation, publicly read in every Church and
Congregation within this Kingdom, and that every Congregation be enjoined to
have one of the said Covenants fairly printed in a fair letter, in a table
fitted to hang up in some public place of the Church, to be read.
of the Honorable the House of Commons, we are appointed to read it every Fast
day) in our places, by stirring up our several Congregations, to be always
mindful of it our uttermost endeavor, that they may observe and keep it, not
expecting the blessing of God any longer on these Kingdoms, then in the
remembrance of it, and adherence to it. And as with the Reverend Alsembly of
Divines, See the humble Advice of the Assembly of Divines concerning a
Confession of Faith, Chap. 22. Sect. 4. page. 40.
we are assured, that an oath is to be taken in the plain and common sense of
the words without equivocation, or mental reservation, adjudging the contrary
opinion to lay a certain foundation for the cluding all or the, as such a salve
as this, that the Covenant may be taken in men's own sense, has given occasion
to some to except against the taking of it See the Reasons of the present
judgment in the University of Oxford concerning the Covenant, etc. page 22.23.
; so what ever any others may conceive to the contrary, with our Reverend
Brethren, then Ministers of the Province of London See a Testimony to the Tinen
of Jesus Christ. page 28.
, we do firmly believe, That neither this nor any other oath is otherwise to be
interpreted, then according to the common, plain and true grammatical sense of
it; accounting it a most absurd and wicked perverting of it, when it is so
interpreted, as to engage, to defend and maintain any kind of Religion
whatsoever, without any inquiry at all how orthodox it is, if established by
them who have all the authority that is visible to choose for themselves,
(which is the construction that is put upon it by some that profess to have
taken Secondly, what would it do were it renewed and made perpetual? thus much
it says in my opinion and no more; whenever you shall be violently hindered
in the execution of that Religion you had amongst you at the time of the
engagoment, and shall require out assistance, we must afford it you for the
removal of that violence. In like manner when we shall be hindered in the
excreise of that Religion which we according to the Covenant shall establish
here, upon request to you made for that effect, you are tied to assist us. and
so throughtout all the other clauses respectively and equally, carrying this
along with you, we are hereby obliged to the reciprocal defenco of one
another, according to the declaration of the party wronged in any of the
particulars there comprised, without being cavilled at, or scrupled by the
party involied, whather your Religion be the same it was, or ours the same it
should be; whether the bounds of your liberties or ours be not enlarged beyond
their then line, whether your delinquents or ours be justly so or no, for the
native Rights of both people being the principal, it not the only thing, we
looked on when we swore; we do not keep our oath in preserving those rights, if
we do not allow (...) master-right to each several people, (...) by to be sole
judges within themselves, what ^^^^gion they will set up, what kind of laws
they will have, what size, what number of Magistrates they hold fit to execute
those laws, and what offenders to be tried by them. Hereupon, you know, we did
not enquire at all how orthodox your religion was before we towed to maintain
you in it, that is in the quiet possession of it, (not in the theological
truth of it, a business for an University perhaps, not for a Kingdom) being
well assured it was established by them who had all the authority that is
visible to chase for themselves, and could not without apparent breach of
order, and in jury to fundamentals be disturbed in the exercise of what they
had to chosen. See the Independen^y of England edeavoured to be maintained by
Henry Marten a Member of the Parliament there, etc. page 11, 12.
it;) God having never given such an absolute power to any men on earth, to
establish what religion they please, and to require from any sort of persons in
any Kingdom whatsoever, (who are all to render an account to God for
themselves) that they should maintain and defend it upon such establishment,
without any inquiry at all, whether it be according to the Word of God or no;
as also, because the Covenant according to this interperation might be made the
bond of iniquity, to maintain and defend such Religions as are flat contrary to
the Word of God, as Judaism, Turcism, and even Paganism, yea Popery it self,
although by Covenant we be expressly bound to endeavor to extirpate it; if
established by them who have all the authority that is visible choose for
themselves.

And therefore, we are sure this can be none of those native rights of the
people of any of these Kingdoms which we looked on when we swear, and which by
this Oath or Covenant we are obliged to preserve.

Thus, fearing lest if we had altogether held our peace at this time Esther
4.14.
, God might have sufficiently vindicated his truth by other instruments, but
for our baseness judged us unworthy to be entrusted any longer with so precious
a treasure as truth is; we have therefore chosen rather to approve our selves
faithful to God, by joining hands with our brethren (who have witnessed such a
good confession in giving such a public and open Testimony to the truth of
Jesus Christ; to our Solemn League and Covenant; and against the Errors,
Heresies, and Blasphemies of these times; and the Toleration of them;) though
for so doing we should be never so much persecuted by men: then by our sinful
silence seem to be ashamed either of Christ, his Truth, or faithful servants,
boldly standing up in the cause of our great master, although thereby we might
be assured to gain the whole world. And now having discharged our consciences,
how ever our actions may be misconstrued by some, yet we knowing our witness is
in heaven, and that God is the righteous judge; we do not doubt but the
testimony of our consciences, (that herein we have aimed at nothing but the
glory of God, the defense of his Truth, the health and recovery of this
bleeding Church, the casting some discountenance upon the raging Errors of
these times, and testify our adherence to our Solemn League and Covenant,) will
abundantly support us, against the worst of evils that can befall us for
witness-bearing to the Truth.

Subscribed the 3d of March 1647. by us. Richard Heyrick Warden of
Christ-Colledg in Manchester. Richard Hollinworth Fellow of Christ-Colledg in
Manchester. Alexander Horrocks Minister of the Gospel at Deane. John Tilsley
Pastor of Dean. John Harper Pastor of Bolton. Richard Goodwin Minister of the
Gospel at Bolton. Richard Benson Minister of Chollerton. William Alt Min of
Bury. Robert Bath Pastor of Rachdal. William Assheton Pastor of Midleton. John
Harrison Pastor of Asshton-underline. Thomas Pyke Pastor of Radcliff. John
Angier Pastor of Denton. William Walker Minister of the Gospel at Newton-heath
Chapel. Toby Furnesse Min. of the Gospel. John Joanes Min. of Eccles. Edward
Woolmer Min. of Flixton. Robert Gilbody Preacher at Holcome. Jonathan
Scholefield Min. at Heywood. Thomas Holland Min. of Ringley. Thomas Clayton
Min. of Diasbury. Robert Constantine Min. of Ouldham. Peter Bradshaw Min. of
Cockey. John Brierley Preacher at Salford. Thomas Johnson Min. of the Gospel at
Halsal. William Bell Pastor of Hyton. William Dun Min. of the Gospel at
Ormeskirk. James Worrall Pastor of Aughton. William Aspinwal Preacher of Gods
Word at Mayhall. John Mallinson Min. of Gods Word at Melling. Robert Seddon
Min. of Gods Word at Alker. Will, Norcot Minister of West-Derby. Will. Ward
Min. of the Gospel at Walton. Nevil Kay Pastor at Walton Henry Boulton
Preacher at Hale. John Fogge Pastor of Liverpoole. Joseph Tompson Min. of
Sephton. Jo. Kyd Min. of Much-Crosby. James Bradshaw Pastor of the Church at
Wigan. James Starkey Pastor of North meoles. James Wood Preacher of the Word
at Assheton in Makersield. Robert Yates Pastor of the Church at Warrington.
Bradbey Hayhurst Preacher of the Word at Leigh. Thomas Norman pastor of
Newton. Timothy Smith preacher of the Word at Rainforth. John Wright pastor of
Billinge. Henry Shaw pastor at Holland. Thomas Crompton Min. of the Gospel at
Aslley. William Bagaley Min. of the Gospel at Burtonwood. William Leight
Preacher of the Word at Newchurch. Richard Mawdesley pastor of Ellins. James
Hyet pastor of Croston. Thomas Cranage pastor of Brindle. Edward Gee Minister
of the Gospel at Eccleston. Paul Latham pastor of Standish. Samuel Joanes
pastor of Hoole. Henry Welsh Min. at Chorley. Will Brownsword preacher at
Dugglas. James Crichley preacher at Penwortham. Edward Fleetwood pastor at
Kirkham. Isaac Ambrose pastor of Preston. William Addison Lecturer at Preston.
William ^ngham Minist at Goosenarghe. Matthew Moore minister at Broughton.
Christopher Edmundson pastor at Garstang. Thomas Smith preacher at Garstang
Chapel. John Breres minister at Padiam. Richard Jackson pastor at Whittington.
Nicolas Smith pastor of Tatham. Robert Shaw pastor at Cokeram. James
Scholecroft minister at Caton. Thomas Whitehead pastor at Halton. Peter
Atkinson minister of Ellel. John Jaques minister of Bolton. Richard Walker
minister of VVarton. Phillip Bennet minister of Vlverston. William Smith
minister of over-Kellet. Brian VVillan Minister of Coulton. Peter Smith
minister of Shireshead. Edward Aston minister of Claughton. Thomas Demi
minister of VViresdalle. Thomas Fawcet minister at Overton. Will. Garner
Preacher of the Gospel. John Smith Minister of Melling.


Errata. Page 4. line 10. for accursed read condemned.

FINIS.

