An Answer to lame Giles Calfines Mess of Pottage, which he terms in his
halting speech to be well crummed and seasoned, etc.

Proving that the Service-Booke is no better than Pottage, in comparison of
diverse weeds which are chopped into it, to poison the taste of the Children of
Grace, by the advice of the Whore of Babylons Instruments and Cooks.

In which small Tract you shall find such reasons given against it, as are
unanswerable by any man whatsoever.

For pure Prayer is Gods Temple, and where it is not so used, it is but
Idolatry and will worship.

By M. T. S. T. R. A. I. S. P. H.

Printed in the year 1642.

Being in the same year of confiding.

An Answer to lame Giles Calfines Mess of Pottage, which he terms in his
halting speech to be well crummed and seasoned, etc.
WHereas it seems to some lame in reason and blind in judgment, a great
indignity to call the Service Book Porrage, by a metaphore and similitude,
which will very well hold, considering the fat Cooks that first composed it
out of the Popes Kitchen, and have put thereinto weeds of Idolatry, thickened
with many tautologies and repetitions; yet because Similitudo currit quatuor
pedibus, Similitudes are more clear to illustrated than strong to prove, it
shall be here demonstrated that the Service-Booke is corrupted and unlawful,
and first from the name, then from the nature: for that which is called the
Liturgy is the same with the Mass, and so promiscuously called by the Papist
Jesuits; and is only but an English Mass, as theirs is in Latin. Now it is
known, that (...), names are the very images of things; so that this Liturgy
is either a Lethargy of worship, or a Mass of Idolatry: it is therefore the
Popes porrage, and his Idol of Ignorance, and we are not to offer to an
Idol: Ergo, We are not to offer it to God as a worship.

But that you may take a view of this Crambe recocta, this twice-sod pottage,
mark the ingredients thereof, and whereof it is made, and you shall find therein
no purity, but all papistrie; the common prayers taken out of the popish
Breviarie, out of the Papists Rituall is deduced the Administration of the
Sacraments, Burial, Matrimony; and Visitation of the sick; and then the
Consecration of the Lords Supper, Collects, Epistles and Gospels are taken out
of the Masse-booke; and besides, in all the essential and integrall parts
thereof it is omoregenous with the Mass; and therefore being taken and
translated word for word out of the popish Mass, it is not a book of Divine
Service and worship, but an abomination to God, and therefore to be abolished;
which may be proved out of these places of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 7.25. 2 King.
23.13. Ezra 9.1. and Esa. 44.19. Thus you see it is not taken out of the garden
of godliness, nor composed of pure wholesome herbs, as some ignorant Cooks
would pretend, but the old profane pot herbs of papistrie. Now you shall next
discern the matter of this porrage, which is false and erroneous in the
corrupt translations of the Word; as first, Psalm. 105.28. the book has it
thus, They were not obedient to his word; but the Scripture says, They were
not disobedient to his word. Another place is, Luke 10.1. After these things
the Lord appointed other seventie also, and sent them, two and two before them:
but the Service-booke reads, seventie two. Besides, there are many omissions,
as of Hallelujah in the 72 psalm: and for, Praise the Lord, seventeenetimes
omitted, the Book puts in, Gloria Patri, drowning also 160 Chapters, and in
stead thereof have placed the Apocrypha. Besides, in reading the Scriptures they
take but scraps and shreds. And thirdly, much superstitious action in reading
the Epistles and Gospels. Having thus proceeded against the Service-booke in
these accusations, of false translations, additions, omissions, and
mis-nominations, there are other faults in this book committed by
mis-application of Scriptures, by coining things, and by popish expositions,
and by pressing upon Ministers and people an heap of popish Ceremonies and
Tenants, as the prayer at the Burial of the dead, Crosses and Surplices, and
bowing and cringing to the Altar, and Christening Fout, all which being man's
invention, must needs be idolatrous: for, Quicquid praeter mandatum est Idolum,
Whatsoever is placed in Gods worship without the commandment of God, is an
Idol: besides, there are foppish foolish things in the book, as tautologies
and battologies, vain repetitions of words, and that mutual salutation
between priest and people, in these words, The Lord be with you, and with your
spirit; and women at the coming into the Church making a courtesy to the
Priest: besides all this there is a Letany, which is not a stump or limb of
Dagon, but the head of the Masse-book, in which there is nothing but vain
repetition, and a multitude of words, as, Lord deliver us, Hear us we beseech
thee, and ridiculous Invocations like Magic spells, and no better than
conjuring. And therefore if the matter of the Service Book be partly false,
foolish, ridiculous, and frivolous, therefore the worship therein contained
should not be presented unto God.

Now as for form, which is the essence of a thing, it is nothing but an
unformed heap of disorder, and will worship, the Minister using a strange and
ridiculous change of voice, posture and place; and then many short Collects, of
short shreds patched-up together, to make a wearisome Service upon the long
last, and much tossing or driving the Service between the Priest and the
people, praying with the Priest, or repeating his prayer, and adding some
responses and answers: Thus the name, original matter and manner of the
Service Book, has been showed to be naught, and corrupt, and there not to be
suffered, but abolished, which has been proved by nominall and real
Arguments, and now it shall be also clearly evinced from the proper and
necessary bad effects thereof, and the evil cause is worse than the effect. Nam
propter quod aliquid tale. etc. is a position in Logic and Philosophy: and
these evil effects are four, first it makes a number of Sir John's, mere
Surplice and Service Book men: also many non-residents and plurallists, who
take choice of Curates to serve their cures at a cheap rate; besides, it was a
great affliction to Conformists, and non-Conformists, so that the Service book
was in some sort like the Metheg Amath, the bridle of the Belly tract, or
strength of the Philistims; so this Service Book was the strength of the
Philistim Prelacy; and a bridle with a curbing bit to stop, to wind and turn
them at their pleasure; and some about this Service Book were committed to
Egyptian bondage.

In the second place, this Service book brooked up all preaching, Doctor Houson
affirming that preaching was no part of Divine worship; and thus Christ's Word
gave place to a fardell of men's devices: besides the Service Book entrenched
upon (...), the people, Religion, and Law, and especially upon the Law by
imprisoning and exercising jurisdiction in rebus non spiritualibus, in matters
that were not spiritual, and then good people suffered in this Furnace, in
spoiling their goods, loss of liberty, and forsaking their own Country,
Genio patriae plangente, as Lipsius says, the Genius of their Country
lamenting after them, or else laid in prison till their bones rotted, as Doctor
Abbot said Master Baits should be, who was afterward starved in the
Gate House. And thus the Furnace (for not adoring the Service Book, as
Nebuchadnezzar for not adoring his Idol) was ordinarily heated, and devowred
many that were cast into it, and all opposition in that kind was punished with
cutting, branding, slitting, whipping, pilloring, and fining. Then for bad
people, if ignorance be the mother of destruction, then much guilt lies in
many places of the Service Book, having in some parishes not had a Sermon in
many years: and in other places Sermons that were only Husks, and no bread to
feed upon, and all this proceeding from diverse places of the Liturgy and
Service-booke, wherewith the Common people and Priests of Ignorance were
enforced to be content.

The last evil effect of this Service Book is directly and immediately against
God. Calvin in his Letter to Frankford calls it, the leavings of the popish
dregs: and the Frankford book calls them burdens, yoaks, and clogs to Gods
people and his Service: this derogation from Gods service is their festival
days to Saints, and their kneeling at the Communion, for none but God can
appoint an holy day, and for kneeling at the Sacrament, it is a popish, modern
posture of but 400. years standing, and is mere will worship; for denying of
which some have extremely suffered: and in regard this kneeling is a respect
and adoration by or before a creature, it is Idolatry, and likewise there may
be many strong arguments urged against the Cr^sse, to prove it the mark of
the Beast. Lastly, the intercession of the Saints must be according to the
will of God, otherwise he hears them not: but the prayers of the Service
Book are not such, but delinquent and peccant, both in name, original, matter,
form, effects properly proceeding therefrom, therefore they have no acceptance
before God, they shall not by him be heard: and therefore are profanely and
superstitiously used, and being gross papistry, may be called the Popes
pottage, made of diverse weeds in stead of Herbs, preposterously served up by
the Priest, unwholesome for the soul, and displeasing to God, as being man's
Cookery, full of absurdity, contrary to Gods glory.

Thus lame Giles Calfine, I hope I have satisfied you in your halting and
Laodicean opinion: for whereas you say it is the true bread of Life, I do
think you are mistaken, and that you were an hungry, and wanted your Breakfast
at that time: and whereas you say, they are well seasoned, you are mistaken
also, unless you had put some flesh into your pot, or at leastwise the four
first letters of your name; which if you had done, they would have been
somewhat better crummed and seasoned. So in fine, good Giles Calfine, hopping
to an end, I Will leave you in the midst of your pottage; and for my part I will
put off my Doublet, and will swim to the meat, which is fitting for men, and
not for such Children as you are who are ignorantly brought up, and still are
as innocent in matters of Exposition, as all your generation was in matters of
state-affaires. And so much for this time.

FINIS.

