The royal Quarrel, OR Englands Laws and Liberties vindicated, and
maintained, against the tyrannical usurpations of the LORDS.

BY That faithful Patriot. of his Country Sr. John Maynard, A late Member of
the House of Commons, but now Prerogative Prisoner in the Tower of London.

BEING A legal Justification of him, and all those other Lords and Aldermen,
unjustly imprisoned under pretense of Treason, and other misdemeanors; the
proceedings against them being illegal, and absolutely destructive to Magna
Charta, and the Petition of Right.

ALSO His Protest against the Lords jurisdiction over him, and his Appeal unto
the Common Law, for trial, proved both reasonable, and legal.

By SIR RAHNIO, an utter enemy to tyranny and injustice

London, Printed for Ja. Hornish, February 9. 1647.

THE ROYAL QUARREL, Or Englands Laws and Liberties defended and maintained
against the usurpations of the Lords; By that worthy Patriot of his Country Sr.
John Maynard (a late Member of the House of Commons,) etc.
Gentle Reader.
QVimulta inquirit, est industrius, sed qui nihil curat torpidu^ est, et qui
nihil perc^pit stupidus, etc. He that searches out many things is industrious,
but he that cares for nothing is slow and dull, and he that perceives nothing
stupid or senseless.

And truly now, in these our days Ignorance is made the mother of dev^tion,
and he esteemed the wisest man that knows the least; England is Antipodized,
and every virtue has met a contrary, in stead of real righteousness, formal
professions, avarice and oppression* in stead of charity and compassion grace
is become a banquerout, and up start greatness plays the T^rant plain-dealing
is dead and flattery has the chief preferment, knaves are respected and
honest men persecuted, truth and loyalty is esteemed Treason Law is become
lust, and to be honest and open hearted is the only crime, Oh stupied
generation! who has bewitched you? Are Englishmen become like Esops Frogs? Are
you weary of enjoying the benefit of Law, that you are so forward to lend your
aid, to destroy it? Have you so freely drawn your swords against the Tirany of
one, and will you subject your selves, nay lend your lands to set up a hundred
Ti^ants? will you stand still and see your friends and fellow sufferers that
joined with you in your late cries for justice and freedom, and with all their
might labored to preserve you from being inslaved; they that with the hazard
of their lives and loss of their bloods always both in public and private,
opposed all arbitrary power whatsoever, whether in the King, Parliament, or
Army? will you I say stand still and see them made presidents of your own
ruin? can you be so sottish to fancy security to your selves, if you let them
suffer* If the law be not binding in one particular, it cannot in another, and
if it protect not one it cannot protect another. Have you not seen injustice
trample upon your laws? and Tyranny envassalize the persons of your friends?
Has not will prevailed against reason, and the lust of a prevailing faction
been made your law, and are not ^ll these actings become so many presidents
whereby you* and all the free borne people of England shall be made slaves unto
futurity?

May not another party whether foreign or domestique, prevailing by power or
policy, justify their imprisoning men's persons during pleasure, and without
laying any particular crime according to Law to their charge* by the
proceedings of Parliament against L. C. Lilburne and Mr. John Wildeman?

May they not if they be stronger then we, give us Laws, and force us to submit
unto the dictates of their own wills, and tell us if we complain, our own Army
did as much which were our servants.

Surely friends did you but really consider the evil consequence of these
actings, you would stand amazed, and wonder at your stupidity;

Have you not had examples enough within this seven years? Have not you been
vexed and perplexed with the Arbitrary proceedings of Commitiees? whereby your
very Property, and liberty was destroyed? what part of your estates could you,
or can you call your own? what Law can take place against their wills, for your
protection? and notwithstanding, all their Declarations, and solemn
imprecations, whereby they call the great God of Heaven and Earth to bear
record, that they had no other mark before their eyes, then the preservation
of the established Law of the Land, and the peace and prosperity of this
Nation; yet (as if they thought England had no Remembrancer, nor Israel no God)
they have falsified all engagements, and to keep up their rotten Interest,
have levelled our Laws, and are become Antimagistratticall, Antijusticiaries
and absolute Tirants, ruling by power and policy, not by reason or honesty: Sed
vindex erit Deus populi sui: The just God will be the avenger of his People,
and it is not twenty thousand armed men, that can secure a Tyrant Conqueror,
muchlesse tyranicall Statist's, being but so many trustees for the peoples
good, not ruin.

Magistratus velle non debet, nisi quod publiee expediat. The Magistrate ought
not to will or command any thing but what is expedient for the public good,
so says the scripture, The Magistrate is the minister of God, to thee for
Good; etc. and not for evil, for preservation not for destruction; and when
any person or persons in power, act not according to that rule, the very end of
their power is subverted; and they degenerate from the very essence of
Magistracy and become Tyrants.

But not to draw out time any longer in discovery of generals; I come now to
the present particular grievance, which though two or three particular persons
suffer under; yet every individual Englishmans interest is involved and bound
up in their sufferings.

But first give me leave to inform you, and I desire that you will always
hear in mind, that the Parliament have constantly pretended to endeavor the
preservation of the established Laws of the Land, contained in Magna Charta;
and the Petition of Right, especially those that concern the peoples
freedoms: and amongst their resolutions of Ian. 15. 1647* they have declared
their resolutions to preserve unto the people of England their established
Laws, although they make no more addresses to the King.

But how they have proceeded in performing those declared resolutions made so
lately be your own judges

In the 29th. Chap of Magna Charta it is enacted, That no feeeman shall be
taken ^^ imprisoned or be deseized of his freehold or liberties, or free
Customs or be out lawed, or any otherwise destroyed: nor will we not pass
upon him, nor condemn him but by Lawful judgment of his Peers, or by the
Law of the Land; we will sell to no man, we will deny to no man* we will not
deny or defer to any man either justice or right, etc.

And in the eight and twenty year of the Reign of King Edward the third, it
was declared and enacted by authority of Parliament, That no man of what estate
or condition he be, should be put out of his Land or Tenements, nor taken, nor
imprisoned, nor disherited, nor put to death without being brought to answer by
due process of Law.

And in the five and twentieth year of Edward the third, it was enacted, That
no man should be before-judged of life or Limb, against the form of the great
Charter and the law of the Land, etc. And by the great Charter and other the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm, No man ought to be adjudged to death but by
the laws established in this Realm, viz. either by the customs of the same
Realm, or by acts of Parliament.

And the Stattut of the 42. Ed 3. Chap 3 says thus, Its assented and accorded
for the good governance of the Commons, that no man be put to answer, without
presentment before justices or matter of Record, or by due process, or writ
original according to the old law of the Land.

And the Statut of 25 Ed* says, That no man shall be taken by Petition, or
suggestion made to the King, or his Council; unless it be by indictment, or
presentment of his good and Lawful people of the same neighbor hood where
such deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by writ original at
the Common Law, see the Statute of 37 of Ed* 3. etc.

And the Stattute of the 1 and 2 of Philip and Mary. Chap. 10. expresl^ says,
That all treasons, shall be tried according to the course of the Common Law.

And ^y ^he Statute of the first of Ed 6. C. 12. and 5* and 6 of Ed 6. C. 11.
It is enacted, that no man shall be accused and adjudged, for treason, without
the testimony of two sufficient witnesses, according to the form of the Law.

All which Laws, and customs are claimed and challenged, as the Englishmans
inheritance by the Parliament, held in the 3-year of our present King, in the
Petition of Right. See F^ P^s collections printed cum privilegio. 1640. page
1431, 1432, 1433, 1434.

Now let us examine whether our Grandees, have made good their late
resolutions: of ^^^ fifteen.

The Law says no man shall be taken by Petition, or suggestion made to the
King or his Council, and the Parliament calls themselves, the Kings grand
Council; And yet L Col. Lilburne, and Mr. Wildman, upon the single information
of Mr. Mastersons, have since been committed, one to the Tower, the other to
the Fleet, and no legal crime laid to their charge, nor no witnesses
appearing, or being examined, whereby the least coulourable crime could be made
out against them;

2. The Law says, no man shall be adjudged or condemned, or otherwise
destroyed but by judgment of his Peers, or the Law of the Land; nor no man
shall be put to death without being brought to answer by due process of Law;
and further, No man ought to be adjudged to death, but by the laws established
in this Realm, viz. either by the customs of the said Realm, or by act of
Parliament, etc.

But contrary to these Laws, they have imprisoned Sr. John Maynard, a Member
of the House of Commons; and detained him in Prison twenty weeks without
showing any cause, more then their will and pleasure; and also contrary to Law
and equity, have transferred him up to the Lords to be tried for his life,
giving and acknowledging the Lords a ju^risdiction over the Lives and estates
of Commoners, notwithstanding that by the Great Charter it is provided that no
Commoner shall be adjudged for life or limb, any otherwise then by the
judgment of his Peers or equals, viz. men of his own condi^ion.

Now that you may clearly understand the state of Sr. John Maynards case in
relation to his commitment, and contest with the Lords I will in every
particular give you an account, according to that certain information which I
have received, together with my own knowledge, being an observer of most
passages therein.

But first-be pleased to take notice, That Sr. John Maynard was one of the
eleven Members which was accused by the Army, and the very gentleman against
whom L. G. Crumwell confessed at Colbrook that they had nothing, but only
desired that he might be put in among the rest because he was a busy man
against him and his friends, and of this both my self and many more are
witnesses.

2ly. Take notice that though the greatest number of the eleven impeached
members had liberty to travel, yet he was commanded to be taken into custody
during pleasure, and it pleased them to keep him prisoner twenty weeks without
showing any cause: but after that they had brought their designs about, and
got the strength of the City into their hands then they cast about how to make
him an example of their fury (Justice I cannot call it) to affright the
Citizens; and finding that by no legal course this could be effected, they
combined together to frame Articles of impeachment against him, and transferred
him to the House of Lords to try him by Ordinance, hoping that Sr. John would
have submitted to the Lords jurisdiction over him a Commoner, and yielded to
their judgment; which if they could have effected, doubtless (such is the
malice of his implacable enemy L. G. Crumwell) should have been death; that so
he might have been made a President for such proceedings by Ordinance against
the Lives of men* and then by the very same rule L. Col. Lilburne Mr. John
Wildman or any other whatsoever, that shall appear an enemy to their tyranny
or injustice, might in the same manner have been accused by the Commons, and
adjudged by the Lords, who are parties in tyranny and injustice, and by this
means no man be left free, but all men be made vassals to the corrupt wills of
knaves and Persidious Parasites.

2ly, But to come close to the matter: There has been and at this time is
three parties in the House of Commons; first, a Royal party. 2. A Real party.
3. An hypocritical party; or if you please thus, a Party for the King, a party
for the Scotch Presbytery, and a party, for party Royal, partly real
Independency. For the Royal or Kingly party they have been crushed by the
power and prevalency of the two other parties, and those that have remained,
have been forced to shroud themselves under the mask of Presbyteratus, though
Royal, not real ones; For the second, though it is to be feared there were
too few Real Presbyters; namely, men merely godly and conscientious, and that
sought the good of their Country, yet by the assistance of those seeming
Friends the Royal Presbyters, they were enabled to hold the third party to
hard meat, and maugre all the secret machinations of their opposers, did with a
high hand keep up their own interest; which the Royal Independent party
grieving at, and repining at, subtly closing with those real Independent
Members, and secretly infusing Principles of dislike unto the deportment of
that party into them, they never left insinuating, till they had engaged them
to act a part from the House, as an honest Party, pretending to deliver an
oppressed enslaved People; and to that purpose several Letters were sent as
representations to the Army, of the honesty and integrity of themselves, and
endeavors to lay scandals upon those which they designed if possible, to
ruin; And to this end, they voted in the House the disbanding and dividing of
the Army, and by private letters and insinuations, animated the Army to disobey
those Commands, all or most of them sitting or acting with the House, until
such time as they had made the difference betwixt the House and the Army so
irreconcilable, that they knew there was no visible means to make up the
breach betwixt them, and then many of them flew to the Army, with whom they
engaged pretendedly to live and dye in the Vindication of the just Rights and
Freedoms of the free People of England; but they intended, as is now apparent,
their own honor and promotion, the only end of their pretended endeavors
and gilded Declarations, being nothing else, but to weaken the interest of that
Party which they had designed to destruction.

Having thus as they conceived made all sure, and that it was impossible for
that party any longer to oppose them; They began to Charge those Persons which
they called the Obstructions of Justice, and Perverters of our Laws; and when
it was expected that after all this Thunder there would have been a mighty
storm, and that a Charge would have come against fourscore or a hundred; The
mountain Groaned, and brought forth a thing like a Charge of eleven Members;
but neither Earl of Manchester, Stamford, Lenthall, Barwis, Darley, Thorpe,
nor none of those 30000. l. Gallants so much as mentioned; O incomparable
Cromwell, impartial justice, What! Mus parturiant montes; Must forty Thousand
men be engaged to remove eleven Members? what, could Eleven members out-vote
all the House beside; if there were more why not all charged? ^o by no means,
they side with us, they are guilty persons and therefore must close with us to
secure themselves: And so it appears they do; for now we plainly see the Real
Presbyter, and Real Independent party, overawed by the Royal Presbyter* and
Royal Independent; for the same party that before the Army joined seemingly
with the honest Presbyterians for self-security, joyne^ with the strongest side
and leaves their late friends exposed to the implacable fury of their now
insulting adversary.

But to proceed, the Grandees of the Army having thus by Power and policy
invested themselves with the ruling power both in Parliament and Kingdom, the
Lords or at least the major part of them (having no other prop to support their
rotten corrupt interest but the Sword, and an humble Declaration of a few
fawning Spaniels who gape for honor;) they are now casting about how to
confirm the Peoples belief that all their late clamor and disturbance was
upon some good ground; and therefore some persons must be picked out for a
solemn Sacrifice; and accordingly, they have picked out three men, viz. one
Lord and one Note, Sir John Maynard was not in or near London, when that
tumult was made, or the Engagement entered into.
Commoner, and one Citizen; But by the way take notice as before, they have
chosen such persons as shall be sure to do them but little hurt by telling
tales; for Sir John Maynard has not been in the House long, and by that means
knows little of their juggling; but did he know as much as Mr. Waller* or M.
Speaker he should have a reward or a Place to stop his mouth withal.

But I say, having made all this stir there must be some body made an example
(and says Cromwell Sir John Maynard is my old enemy, opposed me and M. Soliter
S^. John in the project of Draining the Fennes, when I appeared against 50000.
of my Countrymen, whom formerly I had stood for; and therefore now I have an
opportunity to quit scores with him; besides, unless some be made examples,
we shall not be feared, and therefore a way must be found out to take If
Cromwell can get Sir John Maynards head for Treason, then Sir John's estate
being forfeited: his Manor at Islum in Suffolk, lies very well for Cromwels
purpose, and he commanding in chief, how dare they deny it if he demand it
him often.

In order to which, because they knew they could not do it neither by Bill of
Attainder nor Indictment; therefore it must be done by Articles, and an
Ordinance, and the Lords must be made Judges, and Sir I. Maynard must be
summoned to appear before the Lords on Saturday, Febr. 5, 1647. to receive a
Charge of high Treason and other crimes and misdemeanors, etc. Which being
contrary to the rules of Equity, Law, and conscience, Sir John could not submit
unto* by reason that in so doing he had not only betrayed his own life, in
owning his greatest adversaries to be Judges, but also betrayed the native and
ancient Liberties of every individual Englishman, whose interest in that
particular is involved in his, and his sufferings for the Vindication thereof;
Theirs, they all being bound to stand by, and vindicate him in the maintenance
thereof.

Therefore (It being Sir John's Principle, as not to betray his own or Countries
Freedoms, so not to endeavor to deminish or lessen that respect which
belonged to such persons of honor) to avoid the censure of incivillity, and to
the end that the Lords might if they pleased prevent the enforcing him to
protest against their jurisdiction over him, he upon mature consideration on
Febr. 4. being the day before he was to appear, sent these two following
letters by a friend, directed as follows.

To the Right Honorable my singular good Lord, Edward Earl of Manchester;
Speaker of the House of Peers.
My Lord,
I Received an Order in the name of this Honorable House, whereby I am
appointed to appear before you, to receive a charge of Articles of High
Treason and other Crimes, etc. Upon which account I have made bold to write
these enclosed Lines, humbly desiring that they may be communicated to your
House.

From the Tower of London, this 4. February, 1647. Sir, I am your Lordships
most humble Servant, John Maynard.


My Lords,
I Am for Monarchy, and upon all occasions J have pleaded for the preservation
of the interest of this Honorable House: But my Lords, I being now summoned to
appear before your Lordships, for no less ( as I conceive) then my life, upon
an impeachment of High Treason, I am ( being a Commoner) necessiated to
challenge the benefit of Magna Charta, and the Petition of Right, which is to
be tried By a Jury of my Equales, or men of my own condition, by an Indictment,
before the Judges in the ordinary Courts of justice in Westminster Hall, who by
the Law of this Kingdom, a^^ appointed to be the Administrators thereof; and
by the express laws of the Kingdom, I am not to be proceeded against (for
any crime whatsoever, that can be laid unto my charge) any other way then by
the declared and expressed rules of the known and established Laws of the land,
as is undeniably evident by the express words of the Petition of Right, (which
being an English man.) I Challenge as my Birth Right and inheritance, and I
rather presume to make this address unto this Honorable House, because I find
upon Record, that in the case* of Sir Simon De Berisford, this Honorable House
have engaged never to judge a Commoner again; because its against the Law of
the Land, he not being their Peer or Equal.

This I humbly leave to the consideration of this Honorable House, and take
leave to rest.

Tower February 4. 1647. Your Lordships most humble Servant, John Maynard.


Notwithstanding which letter it appears, the Lords thought Sir John Maynard
had but jested, when indeed he was in good earnest; and being called into the
House, desired, that forasmuch as the Lords assumed to themselves the title of
the supreme judicature, and so ought to be an example unto all other Courts,
and forasmuch as all other Courts did sit open for all to hear and see, that
therefore the doors might be opened, there being a Lady, and Gentlewomen, his
wife, and children, and many other worthy Gentlemen at the door* which desired
to hear what he had done, or for what he was in such a manner accused and
proceeded against, or words to that purpose; To whom answer was returned, that
it had not been the custom of that House to open the doors since this
Parliament, to whom Sir John replied. That he was sorry their Lordships had
forgot their own honor so much, and not observed the custom of their
predecessors See Sir Edw. Cooks 2. part* inst. which is published for good Law
to the whole kingdom, by the special authority of the present House of
Commons. Who in his exposition of the first cha. of the Statute of Marlebridge,
fol. 103, ^04* expressly says. That all causes ought to be heard, ordered, and
determined before the Judges of the Kings Courts, openly in the Kings Courts,
whether all persons may resort; And in no Chambers, or other private places,
for the Judges are not Judges of Chambers, but of Courts, and therefore in open
Court, etc.
informer Parliaments.

And he further said, my Lords, here are many ancient and honorable families,
whom both for former relation, and their own virtues I highly honor, and its
my grief of heart to hear what the people report concerning you, they say my
Lords, that you act like a Council Table, or High Commission, therefore I
beseech your Lordships, as you tender your own honor, let the doors be
open^ed, and do not give me cause to wish for the Council Table again,
rather then to see you make good the sayings of the people, by such proceedings
against me.

After some other words, they commanded him to kneel and hear his charge,
which he refused, and told them, that would argue delinquency, neither could he
receive any charge from them, for several reasons, which was contained in a
paper which he desired might be read, but they refused, and commanded him to
withdraw, which being done, after some debate, they fined him 500 l. for
refusing to kneel at their bar, and immediately they called him in, and told
him that they had fined him, and that he must kneel down and hear his charge,
to which he answered. That he did so highly honor their Lordships, that he
would fall prostrate on his face, and let them tread on him. Then they told him
he must kneel, he answered them that he had a very prostrate soul, and he
would kneel to pray for them, that their honors might be preserved, and that
justice might run from them as a stream, etc. which having said, he again
rose and came toward the door, offering to take leave of their Lordships, but
they told him he must hear his charge, and commanded it to be read, which was
done accordingly, but when the Cleark began to read Articles, Sir John
enterrupted him, and said, my Lords, the very first word destroys all that you
have to do; there is the very height of illegallity in that word, Articles,
for my Lords, there is but two legal ways to try a man for his life, viz.
either by Bill of Attainder, or Indictment, but because the sum of what he
spoke in relation to that point is contained in his Protest which he left in
the House. I shall omit that, and give you the copy of it verbatum.

The Plea and Protest of Sir John Maynard, Knight of the Bath; (and a late
Member of the Honorable House of Commons,) delivered by him at the Lords Bar
February 5. 1647.
THe life of a freeborne man of this Kingdom is not to be tried but by Bill of
Attainder, and not to be condemned, but either by Act of Parliament upon the
said Bill, or by the way of an Indictment at the Common law. Articles are no
Bill for Attainder, for a Bill of Attainder must pass both Houses, and cannot
become an Act of Parliament without the Kings assent. By an Ordinance of the
15. of January last, both Houses have resolved, and declared to the Kingdom,
that they will make no further addresses or applycation to the King. And
therefore, sit hence there can be no proceeding by Bill of Attainder, to bring
on an Act of Parliament. I do pray the benefit of the law of the land; the
enioyment whereof is declared by the said resolution of the 15. of January to
all the people of this Kingdom.

Febru. 5. 1647, John Maynard.

After they had locked him into their House, and forced him though (at their
door) to stand till they had read his charge, though by him many times
interrupted, and asking whether they were reading a charge against the Earl of
Pembroke, which he said was an honest Gentleman, and as innocent as he was he
was persuaded, and answer being returned by the Lieutenant of the Tower, that
it was a charge against Sir John Maynard, he publicly speak unto them. That
he neither heard nor took notice of what they did, nor said, and for his part
he protested against all their proceedings as altogether against Magna Charta,
and the Petition of Right, and that he wished now for the Council Table again
rather then such proceedings:

So having made an end of reading his Charge, they dismissed him, and sent him
to the Tower as their prisoner, and ordered him fourteen days hence to be
brought before them again, but to what end no body knows, for let them be
assured, they shall never be able with their twenty thousand men to keep up
their pretended jurisdiction over Commoners, and thereby destroy all our
ancient laws and liberties: for certainly if we would not be subject to the
unlimited power of the King, who was their Creator, we will never submit unto
six or seven Lords who are but his Creatures.

And now having given you to the best of my remembrance the sum of what
passed between the Lords, and Sir John Maynard, though not so fully as he
delivered it, yet I dare affirm it to be all the most material passages
thereof. Give me leave to add somewhat by way of justification of Sir John
Maynard, in this his protesting against the Lords, as incompetent Judges, and
appealing to the common law of the Kingdom.

First, I will plead Reason. Secondly Law.

First, Reason. Should Sir John Maynard have submitted to the Lords
jurisdiction over him, he could not have possibly avoided destruction, and that
for this cause. The parties prosecuting Sir John, are a few Grandees of the
Army and their adherents, viz. Those Commons and Lords that joined with the
Army against the other party remaining behind in the House: now if two men
equally interested, have a difference with a third, and get him into their
power, can you imagine that one of these two prevailers can be a competent
Judge of the conquered party, and the other a competent accuser; certainly if
the accuser be an enemy, and the Judge an enemy too; the party to be accused
and adjudged cannot in the eye of reason look for other then absolu^e
destruction: Now this is clearly Sir John Maynards case, and the case of all
the Lords and Aldermen that were accused and imprisoned: for the matter of the
charge against them, is for doing such and such acts against the Parliament and
Army There can be no treason committed against the Army.
And if you ask what they meant by Parliament, I must needs say the Lords and
Commons, and who brought a force upon the Lords and Commons? why the Lords and
Commons; and so one party of the Lords and Commons accuse another; and because
the Law which should be the Vmpire in this business, cannot do that which they
would have it, therefore they will devide their forces, and one half shall be
the accusers, and the other half the Judges, and thus what the Law cannot make
a crime, they will, and by this time J know all rational men will say Sir John
had reason to do what he did in relation to protest against the Lords as
incompetent Judges.

Secondly, Sir John Maynard had not only Reason, but Law on his side.

His plea and protest is grounded upon the established Law of the Kingdom, for
by law there is but two ways whereby a man's life can be taken from him, viz.
either by the customs of the Realm, or the Law of the land, that is, either by
Bill of Attainder, or Bill of Judictment. * But Ordinances of King and Lords,
King and Commons, or Lords and Commons, are no law of the land, See their own
Law* published in the 2. part of Sir Ed. Cooks inst. fol. 47. 48. and 3. part
inst. fol. 22. and 4. part inst. fol. 23. 25. 48. 292.


By Law the Lords have no jurisdiction over him as a Commoner, he not being
their Peer or Equal, besides the manner of their proceedings, is altogether
illegal. Articles are nothing in law, neither can any man be tried legally by
Articles.

Nay further, suppose it were granted that Sir John were guilty of the highest
Treason that can be imagined, yet if there be no established Law whereby his
life may be legally taken away, he ought not to be destroyed or adjudged, by
any other way, neither by Martial Law, nor Ordinance. For where there is no
Law, there (says the Apostle) can be no transgression.

Nay further, their dealing with Sir John, plainly demonstrates, that it is
only a design upon his life, seeing there is no colorable ground why they (if
they intended only the satisfying of Justice) should not have proceeded at
first in the ordinary legal way by Bill of Indictment, seeing if he be
culpable of such crimes as they pretended, the common law will take his life
with less trouble, and and more satisfaction to all parties, then this
underhand dealing, whereby they endeavor to iuggle him out of his life.

Nay further yet, their proceedings with Sir John Maynard is altogether
illegal, in respect that they adiudge that Treason which is not enacted to be
Treason by the Statute of the first of Hen. chap 10. Wherein that uncertain
proviso, viz. That the Judges in case of any act not particularised and
supposed to be Treason, should defer judgment, and transfer the case to
the King and Parliament, who might declare it Treason, etc. And enacted that in
times to come, nothing should be esteemed Treason, but what was literally
contained in the Statute of o^ 25 Ed. 3. and 2. And in the ^. of M. S^. 1. This
was again confirmed, that nothing should be adjudged High Treason, Petty
Treason, or Misprision of Treason, but what was declared and expressed in the
25. of Edward 3. Chapter 2. etc.

So that if the pretended Treasons laid unto the charge of Sir John Maynard,
and the rest of those Gentlemen now imprisoned, be not Treason according to the
litterall sense of that Statute, his or their lives cannot, ought not to be
taken from them, by any way or means whatsoever; and if they adiudge him or
them, for any such pretended Treason, by any ways or means contrary to the
known Laws and prescript rules thereof, it is wilful murder in the persons
adiudging or executing such sentence or punishment.

And now O ye free people of England, J beseech you lay to heart your
condition; when tyranny rides tryumphant, and Justice goes a begging, what can
you think will be your portion.

When they domineered over Liev. Col. John Lilburne, they then had a seeming
pretense for what they did, they could cry out he was a factious fellow, a
Sectarie. etc.

But now you see they cease not to prosecute others which are none of their
despised Sectaries, Mr. Wildman was never accused with faction nor Sectarisme,
nor Sir J^hn Maynard neither, but yet for all that, be he Sectary, or no
Sectary if he stand in their light, and oppose their promotion, their ambition
leads them to endeavor his destruction.

And dear Countrymen consider, by the same rules that the Lords may judge Sir
John Maynard, they may judge another, and so 10000. And if any man oppose the
Lords usurpations, the Commons perfidiousnesse, or the Armies Tyranny, The
Army or Commons may accuse, and the Lords sentence, and what the Law will not
condemn, they will and then farewell all your Laws and liberties, which you
have so gallantly comested for.

And O you Soldiers which say you drew your swords for our defense, but now
keep them to make us vassals, you that engaged not to disband or divide, nor
suffer your selves to be disbanded or divided, till our and your own freedoms
were secured, and yet now contrary to your engagement and declarations,
strengthen the hands of Tyrants to destroy us and your selves too, Oh timely
return to your former Principles! Cry out for Law and Liberty cry out out for
justice till you make the Tyrants tremble, let them know that you scorn to
serve their lawless ambition, and that it was for the secuting you liberties
and laws which you ven^ered your lives for; could we but see you acting for
our deliverance we should with joy labor to maintain you, but it is a double
misery to be enforced, to toil and take pains, to keep an Army to destroy
us: Act then at Englishmen; and do not suffer your selves to be guld into a
slavery.

And lastly O ye Lords and other the Grandees of the Commons and Army, that
like John drive on furiously to meet your ruin, remember the actings of your
predecessors, the Prelates, Council table, High Commission, and Star Chamber,
are they not all buried in the Tophet of shame and confusion, and if you walk
in their ways, shall you not receive their reward? yes, surely the wicked
shall perish in their own imagination, and their names shall be forgotten
forever.

And now O Cromwell! if thou have either honesty or integrity left, observe how
the Lord traceth thee in thy secret walkings, and while their is hope re^^^,
and do thy first works, seek not not to build thy honor up in blood, for it
will choke thy offspring, and make thy name most odious: the daily imprecations
of the innocent injured friends, of those which thou destroyest, will be a
terour, and affright thy soul: O labor therefore to be good as great and lay
aside ambition, for Cui usui immensae divitiae, male parta, male dilabuntur; to
what use serves excessive wealth or riches, since what is ill got, is often as
ill spent; What will it profit thee to gain the whole world, and loose thy
own soul?

Postscript.
LOving friends, whether Real Presbyterians, or real Independents, or others,
all you that are unbiased, and act not merely for your own ends, you that
desire the peace of England, and would not by your Neutrallity, become
accessory to your own and Englands destruction, now if ever, now if ever,
appear for the vindication of your freedoms: oh consult your own safety!
stand not on slender Punctillo's, but unite speedily in principles of common
concernment; what will it advantage you to see those that are of a contrary
party made presidents for your ruin, if the law be not a protection to your
supposed enemy, it cannot be a protection to you, for by the same rule that one
is imprisoned, contrary to law, another, and another may, and if one may be
imprisoned contrary to law, only because an Army, or a few envious ambitious
persons will have it so, by the same rule if they please they may accuse all
the rich men in the Kingdom, and make every man that has money a Traitor; and
set up Judges suitable to their own wills which shall not dare to disobey them,
and then we shall be sure to have a rich Army, and a bloody Parliament, but a
beggarly destroyed Nation: Gentlemen consult with reason, and be not swaid with
interest any longer Sir John Ma^nards case is yours, yea and every individual
English man in this Nation; and if he suffer by this contest, and fall into the
hands of his and your enemies, rest assured, he leads but the way to which you
must follow, for the same principle that leads them to endeavor his ruin,
will direct them to your also; if ever you shall appear an enemy to their
tyranny.

Therefore I beseech you lay aside all disputes, and join as one man in
vindicating his and your own liberties, let us as one man in vindicating his
and our own liberties, let us as one man go up to the House of Commons and
demand Sir John Maynard and the rest of our imprisoned friends to be delivered
up unto a legal trial, according to the law; suffer not your laws to become
useless, and your selves to be made the worst of slaves, viz. To be subject to
ruin at the pleasure of a few Tyrants.

And it is worthy your observation, that there are at this time above
threescore in the House of Commons, and many in the house of Lords which are
guilty of the very same crimes, which they accuse the Lord Willowby Sir John
Maynard, and the late Lord Mayor and Aldermen withal; nay further, they have
since voted and acknowledged that to be a Parliament which sat during the
Speakers absence; and if a parliament, their actions and commands were as
legal as theirs now, and whosoever acted, or did any thing by virtue thereof,
ought, what ever happen to be secure, it being their own principle, That he who
guids himself by the determination of Parliament, ought not to be condemned,
but to rest secure etc.

And if those which obeyed the command of Parliament then, be now liable to
question, by the same rule, they that shall obey now, if another party
prevail, are, or may be liable also; and then who can with safety obey the
commands of Parliament, if this proceeding be once drawn into president.

And therefore as you are Englishmen, act wisely and speedily for the
preservation of the due power of Parliaments, and let not one faction thus
domineer to the ruin of your selves and Country: J beseech you Gentlemen, act
vigorously and courageously, for the securing of Englands freedoms, or else
resolve to live Slaves, and dye Beggars.

FINIS.

