A DESIGN FOR PLENTY, By an Universal Planting of FRVIT-TREES: Tendered by
some Wel-wishers to the Public.

GENESIS 1.20. And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing seed
which is upon the face of the earth and every Tree in the which is the fruit of
a Tree yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wodenothe in Leaden Hall street, over against
Leaden Hall.

To the READER.
Courteous and Ingenuous Reader,
IN the publication of this small Treatise; it is just that every one should
have his due.

First, Gods goodness is to be praised, who having endued man with knowledge
above the beasts of the field, and put all things under his feet, Esa. 28.26,
27, 28.
he does in a more special manner (as the Prophet says) instruct the
Husbandman to discretion, and does teach him how to order his affairs for the
best advantage of Humane Societies.

Secondly, his Providence is to be acknowledged in bringing things to light,
which without his good hand would have been lost and lien in darkness, as this
Discourse would have been, if he had not stirred up some favorable Instruments
to preserve it, and bring it unto my hand to be published for the Common good.

Thirdly, the Instruments whom he has employed both to bring forth this birth
into the World, and to preserve it after it was brought forth, deserve some
commendation. He that was made Isntrumental to bring it forth into the World,
is not yet known unto me: for although I have endeavored by a diligent search
to find out his name, yet I have not been able to compass the matter: only
this I have been told, that the Author of this Design was an aged Minister of
the Gospel, who for the space of many years had for his own recreation, and
that he might be serviceable also to others experimented this part of Husbandry
which at last he resolved by this Treatise to make public, but was by death
prevented; the place of his abode being said to be Loving-land near Yarmouth.
He who did preserve it from being lost, and gave it to a friend of mine, is the
Honorable Colonel John Barkstead, the present Lieutenant of the Tower, a
Gentleman whom I know not, but such as know him do give him this Character,
that he is of a very public and ingenuous Spirit; in his Military Relations,
exceeding active and circumspect; zealous for Justice and good Order, to
repress the licentiousness of the times; and one who being capable of public
thoughts and generous cares, is willing freely to communicate and impart the
same to all that can reap any benefit thereby. As for my self, I claim nothing
but the contentment to be the Publisher thereof, that I may be Isntrumental to
advance the comforts of many thereby, and so help forward the Authors honest
Design; and I am the more willing to divulge this brief Tract upon this
Subject, because it will serve as a forerunner to a larger Volume of
Fruit Trees, which an experienced friend of mine, Mr. Ralph Austin has in a
readiness to put forth at Oxford. Such as have perused Mr. Blithe's Improver
improved (a Book worth the reading by all that apply themselves to Husbandry)
in the second Part, Chapter 43. toward the latter end, will meet with a
promise made concerning this Treatise of Master Austin's, which now he is
putting to the Press, as by his own Letter written in November last 1652 he
does inform me: therefore I intend in this Preface and by this Treatise, as by
a small taste of so good a matter, both to raise thine appetite and quicken thy
desire to see that larger Work, and to stay thy stomach a little till it come
forth, in hope, that when God shall have furnished this Wise and Noble Nation
with all these and many other means of Plenty we shall then be all inclined to
beat out swords into Plough-shares, and our spears into pruning hooks, See
another discourse lately published by a worthy and special friend of mine,
called, Bread for the Poor, and Advancement of the English Nation, promised by
Enclosure of the Wast^s and Common Ground of England.
and that by a happy Union of England and Scotland, and the peaceable
settlement of the affections of all people under the present Government, we
shall live as Brethren, and study by the ways of Common Industry to strengthen
the hands of those that bear Rule over us, and are set for our defense; whose
burden, although it be extraordinary great, yet by the good hand of God upon
us, it will be greatly eased and lessened, when all hands shall suffer
themselves to be set a work, and the earth yield her increase. For certainly
the present constitution of the Nation (if we become not so fatally and more
then brutishly miserable, as to study continually one another ruin) is not in
so weak and dangerous a condition, as it was in Queen Elizabeth's days when
she came first to the Crown. For then as Bishop Carleton describes it, the
state of affairs was far otherwise then now it is, Chap. 1. page: 3.
as appears by his own words in his Book (called a Thankful Remembrance of
Gods Mercy) where he writes as follows.

She [Queene Elizabeth] did not serve God in vain. For it is a thing to be
wondered at, that the land being That is, when she came first to the Crown.
then without strength, without Forces, without Soldiers, yea, without Armor;
all things necessary should be so suddenly furnished. She had provided Armor
at Antwerp, but King Philip caused that to be stayed. Yet was she not
discouraged, but laid out much money upon Armor though she found the Treasury
but poor. She procured Armor and Weapons out of Germany. She caused many
great Guns to be cast of Brass and Iron. And Gods providence and favor
appeared in her protection. For new mines of Brass were found at Keswike, that
had long bin neglected. From whence there was not only sufficient matter to
supply her wants, but abundance thereof to be transported to other Countries.
The stone called Lapis Calaminaris, whose use is needful for working in
Brass, was also at the same time first found in England. There was provision
made at home also for the making of Gunpowder. Which was done first here by
her commandment: For before, it was bought and imported.

Berwick before her time, was weak and had but 500 Soldiers: She fortified the
town, made the new inner wall and increased the number of Soldiers and their
stipends, that provision might be made for the training up of experienced
Soldiers and martial men. She provided a Navy, the best furnished that ever
England saw. Neither needed she to do as her Father and Ancestors were wont to
do, when they wanted Ships, to send for Ships and hire them from Hamburg,
Lubeck, Dantisk, Genua and Venice; for she had them ready at home to serve
her. Yea all the good Towns upon the Seacoast, beholding this incredible
alacrity and forwardness in their Prince, strived also to imitate the same, and
therefore with great cherfulness and readiness built Ships for war. So
that in a short time, the Queens Ships and those of the subjects joined
together, rose to such a number, that they were able to employ twenty thousand
men in sea fight at once. The Noblemen, the Gentlemen and Yeomen, did all
strive to answer so noble a resolution of their Prince. And therefore great
store of Armor and Weapons were every where provided. And brave spirits were
bred and enabled to service, whereby they became an help and Ornament to their
Country; so that Queen Elizabeth was quickly grown so strong, that all her
Adversaries were not able to hurt her. And was not this a great work of God,
that so weak a Woman should be able to defend her self against so many, so
potent enemies? Yea, and not only to match them, but to master them? This was
Gods doing, etc.

This Remembrance of her condition, and of Gods wonderful preservation of this
Nation at that time, should not only encourage us to hope still in his mercy,
whereof we have as great experience hitherto as ever she had, but also direct
us to the performance of the duties fitting us for the continuance of such
mercies toward us. For as then all the neighbors of this Nation were either
open enemies or uncertain friends, so it now may fall out again in this
juncture of time, that we shall find none abroad cordially to appear for us;
but if we be found faithful to one another at home in minding the interest of
the Gospel, in seeking Peace and Truth, in settling Judgment, in repressing the
enormous scandals which are broken forth, and in advancing all manner of
Industry, we may expect the same success which that blessed Queen had, and a
greater Harvest of Spiritual and Temporal Blessings then ever yet this Nation
has received. Which that We may live to see, I shall not cease to pray, and in
praying with the best and utmost of my endeavors to approve my self,

Thine and the Publiques most faithful Servant, SAMUEL HARTLIB.

A DESIGN FOR PLENTY.
AS Plenty oft-times is the producer of Pride, Pride the root of Envy, Envy the
mother of Contention, Contention the spring of War: so is War the cause of
Poverty and Poverty brings forth Famine, and where Famine rages must needs
follow inevitable destruction. It is greatly to be wished, and as a blessing
from God to be desired; that all men would as wisely, and conscionably eschew
and shun the Climax, and ways to destruction as they seem warily and carefully
to fly destruction it self, when it presses upon them. But (alas) such is the
wickedness and blindness of man's heart, that he is desperately set on to follow
that way, which will at last wind him into most certain destruction: And so
be, that men may attein their own private interest and end, they never consider
the ultimate and woeful end and conclusion of their ways and actions.

Quicquid agas, prudenter agas; and respice finem.
But he that is wise, his practicks so intends,
That he may level Actions to their ends.
The consideration of which thing (as it too sadly may be appliable unto this
Nation, and the Inhabitants thereof, by reason of this late intestine, and
unnatural War) has moved us, to prepare what Cataplasme we can against the
inevitable Malady, which a long and continued war threateneth (if not already
begins) to bring upon us, that is to say; A general Famine and want of all
necessary things for the support and sustentation of life: the which we may
also fear the rather, by reason of the unseasonable weather for Seed-time and
Harvest, with the unspeakable mortality of Cattle in many places, which has
declared, and evidenced no small displeasure of God against us, and threateneth
us with most certain famine: besides the want of trade, traffic, and
employment both by land and by sea; together with the daily losses by sea, and
expenses of provisions by land, are no mean ingredients in this threatened,
and approaching misery. What more may be observed, also from the
discouragements of men in their husbandry, and making improvement for plenty
(as not knowing either for whom they labor, or who they are that may reap
their labors, or what themselves shall enjoy) may strongly imprint a fear of
famine. Now as in a time of famine it were too unchristian-like to hide our
selves from our own flesh, and to deny relief (as God lends us) to such as
want it: so were it too selfish for any not to labor to prevent famine; and to
hide themselves, and their advice (which God has granted them) from a public
Good: It being counted no less sin by God, Ezeck. 16.49.
Not to strengthen the hands of the needy, then not to fill their hands with
benefits, and supplies.

For which cause we have thought it our duty to present an Assay of Plenty,
which we call (A Design or Project for Plenty) yet not a project of any
private advantage to us; but of public good and plenty unto this Nation; if
so be it may be enlivened and nourished by Authority and Law: Cambden. Brit. As
in Glocest, and Worcest, shires, etc. In Kent about Feversham, where by the
industry and example of Richard Harris Fruterer to K. Hen. the eighth 30 Towns
are planted to their inestimable benefit.
Otherwise we shall but term it (The Embrio of Plenty, and the untimely Birth
of good Desires) which had it come to perfection, might have yielded both
pleasure and profit to many. And such a Project also it is, as is not without
experience both in our own, and other Nations; nor yet without good Reasons to
speak for it; whereof we shall desire to make all rational men partakers. For
With men of Reason, Reasons will take place,
But naught can get from fools but base disgrace.


Moreover, when we Consider (besides the necessity, as aforesaid) the
Accommodation this Nation affords for such a Design, the Possibility and
Facility to effect it: And yet the Sluggishnesse of most in our Nation, who
perhaps would be glad to have plenty in their families: Yet care not to take
pains, or to be at any cost to effect it.

Like to the Cat, who fish would gladly eat, Catus vult piscem, sed non vult
tangere lympham.

But yet her foot in water will not weat.
We are encouraged the rather to make our Demonstration thereof, adding
therewithal our Reasons, and answering such Objections as may possible lie
against it.

Law made, and put in force by Authority for a general and universal
Plantation of such wholesome fruit (according to proportion) as might be for
the relief of the poor, the benefit of the rich, and the delight of all.

wholesome, beneficial and suitable for our Climate, are the Apple, Pear,
Walnut and Quince.

Proportion to be ordained; that every five pounds per annum of plantable land,
as well field as enclosure, being in private occupation, (except Cities, Towns
incorporate, and such Towns where the rents are raised only of the houses
without lands) shall plant and preserve 20 fruit trees of Apple, Pear, Walnut,
or Quince: and 10 li. per annum, 40; and 15 li. per annum, 60; and 20 li. per
annum, 80 trees; and so in proportion.

proportion according to every man's occupation, may be perfected, with a
penalty to be inflicted for the neglect; and that every year may be
proportioned in order to the whole with a penalty likewise.

Fruterers or Woodwards, or such like name) specially to be chosen every year,
and authorized, to see the said proportions to be planted and carefully
preserved. And to have power to levy the penalties upon the defaulters; and to
employ the same to some public use.

High Constables in every hundred do take account of the said two Officers in
every Town belonging to their division: and to present them to some Superior
Court; that so there may be no collusion or deceit in the business. And that
the said High Constables, and Fruterers, or Woodwards be fineable and
punishable, if they neglect to do their duties.



Fruterers or Woodwards in every respective town may have power (as the
Surveyers of the highways) so to call out, and appoint certain common days
to work, in dressing, pruning, moulding mossing, trimming the said trees (which
days are to be in the months of October and November for mossing and pruning,
those months being the moistest; and the Winter frost following thereupon will
sear the wounds, so that the Cut parts are not subject to put out Syens,
whereby the body and fruit are decayed; And in January and February for
moulding the trees) and to set fines upon such as make default, and leavy the
same to some public use.

proportion; and that as any trees do die, or decay, or grow barren, care be
taken that others may be planted in their stead; and that within a limited time
upon some penalty to be levied by the Woodwards or Fruiterers.

Wastes and Commons every thirty yards a tree, and by thirty yards all over,
till they be thoroughly planted.

Commons and Wastes be planted, and fenced at the public charge of every Town
to which they do belong: and that all such fines as are levied upon the
transgressors in this project be employed to the public work and use.

Plantations upon the Commons and Wastes be given to the poor, and necessitous
people of every Town, unto which they do belong. And that by the discretion of
the Fruiterers or Woodwards they be yearly distributed accordingly.

Reasons for this design.
As touching the reasons for this design, they are very many, whereof I only
propound some for satisfaction to all men.

Gerard. Herb.
and diligence to obtein them. Apples are good for hot stomachs, for all
inflammations, tempering melancholy humors; good for diverse diseases, as the
Strangury, Plurisie, etc. Pears are cold, and binding, good for hot swellings,
do help the lask and bloody flux, and being made into drink, do warm the
stomach, and cause good digestion. The Walnut is an ingredient in Antidotes
against the plague, and biting of venomous beasts; whose kernels made into a
milk cools and comfort the languishing sick body. So Quinces do
strengthen the stomach, stay vomiting, and stop the flux; and are good for many
other things.

Plantation will arise to this Nation, is very much. As,



In which Countries the very Hogs feeding upon the fallings, make choice of
fruit, and first taste, eating up the pleasant fruit, leaving the other, there
is such abundance.

Gerards Herb.
for besides every family may have of these fruits enough for all uses in food;
so also may thereby be obtained a good and wholesome drink from the juice of
the Apples, and Pears, as in the Counties of Worcester and Gloucester is very
exemplary in that particular, to their profit and plenty.



Perry and Syder, which in all parts may be made, be spared: and which kind of
drink (being once accustomed) will be as proper and wholesome for our English
bodies, as French wines, if not more.

Plantation (as aforesaid) will make wonderful plenty, as may be gathered by a
supposition probable as this: Suppose 20 trees of Apples and Pears be planted,
and well fenced upon a tenement of 5 li. per annum, once in seven years they
may (by Gods blessing) bring forth half a bushel of good fruit apiece; and in
10 years a bushel a tree; in 13 years two bushels, and so forth; what a plenty
will this make in so small an Occupation?

Plantations of the Commons and Wastes so much good fruit, as that they cannot
be destitute all the year. And if to buy; yet in such a general Plantation,
good fruit will not cost above 4 d. or 6 d. the bushel, which now will cost 12
d. or 16 d. if not more in many places, which kind of provisions the poor
prefer before better food, as the story goes.

The poor man's child invited was to dine
With flesh of Oxen, sheep, and fatted swine,
(Far better cheer then he at home could find)
And yet this child to stay had little mind.
You have (quoth he) no Apple, froise nor pie,
Stewed Pears, with bread and milk, and Walnuts by.
Plantation is very requisite, seeing so many places are wholly destitute of
all fruit, Cambden. Brit.
and yet both the ground and Clymate throughout this whole Island able and apt
to yield of fruit great plenty. Cambden says, that they are whining and
slothful husbandmen, who complain of the barrenness of the earth in England;
and does confidently affirm, that it proceeds rather of the inhabitants
idleness then any distemper, and indisposition of the air, Camb. ex will.
Malmesbur.
that this our England affords no wine: and that it has heretofore had
Vineyards which yielded wine well nigh as good in taste and smell as the French
wine; And at Bromwell Abbey in Norfolk.
and indeed so are many places unto this day in our land called Vineyards; as
at Elie in Cambridgeshire; of which remains upon Record these old Rimes.

Quatuor sunt Eliae, lanterna, capella Mariae,
Et Molendinum, nec non dans Vinea vinum.
In English thus.

Four things of Elie Town much spoken are,
The leaden lanthorn, Mary's Chapel rare,
The mighty Mill-hill in the Minster-field,
And fruitful Vineyards, which sweet wine do yield.


Besides, such an Universal Plantation will both yield great store of fuel to
burn, and wood for many occasions (the Apple, Pear and Walnut-trees, being all
of them good Joyners timber) fit to make chaires, stools, tables, and many
other house-Utensils) and also it will much warm the Country by so many
thousands of trees planted in open and waste grounds to the great comfort both
of man and beast.



(like the Garden of God) keeping their order, and distance: each one offering
the weary traveller some little collation to quench his thirst, and refresh his
spirits; inviting him to rest under their shadow, and to taste of their
delicates, and to spare his purse; which is a benefit well known in the Western
Counties of this our England.

Walnut for oil; the delight and comfort of all these for conserves and
preserves, both for sickness and health: and their use in a Famine, when all
other fruits of the earth do fail; whereof the Nation of France has had good
trial, who had starved in some Famines, had it not been for their Chestnuts,
Walnuts, Apples, and Pears, these being far better food in a famine then asses
heads, doves dung, 2 Kings 6. Miseries of Germany.
or old leather, which some have been constrained to eat to preserve life; yea
sometimes the flesh of dead men, and their own children.

Objections against this design.


To which the answer is easy: that our slothfulnes is the more, and
improvidence the more to be condemned, that so noble a Nation should need a
goad, and spur to put them on to the improving of such trifling things; which
are of such necessity, profit, facility and delight, as these things, which
every diligent and prudent provident husband should endeavor after continually
of themselves.

Proportion throughout the whole Nation.

We answer, the slothful man says, there is a lion in the way; and if men
were as willing as they might be, the woods and hedgerows would afford stocks
not a few to graft upon: besides, there are not wanting commendable Planters
and Arborists in this Nation, whose nurseries will afford at very low rates
many thousand of wild stocks fitting to be removed, and improved for this
business.

England, that all would come to naught.

Answ. True as our scarcity of these fruits are in every place, so it is, and
so it will be: but plenty yields satiety and content: and the western Countries
can witness this to be otherwise; besides, good laws, and good execution of
them will prevent all such like mischiefs.



Answ. Yet if a beginning be not made, there can be no hope of any perfection;
and if men begin well, the work will go on the better; for the saying is,
Dimidium facti qui been coepit habet.
He that begins with heart and great good will,
Has got the half of that he would fulfill.


Besides he is the most unworthy of his own life, who is like the Bear, lives
only to suck his own claws, and will not provide for posterity as well as
himself. For, Non nobis solum nati fumus, sed liberis, etc. Cicero.
Man is not born unto himself alone,
But to his after race when he is gone.


Answ. If not all of them, yet the most of them will bear forth these trees:
and we see the most barren places to bring forth the thorn, oak, and ash-trees,
and why not these also? which are not so hard to grow as some of them; besides
such directions may be given, as may be very advantageous for their rooting and
growth in such barren places, as afterward shall be showed.



Answ. These trees being prudently set, and providently husbanded in banks and
hedge-rows, will thrive the best of all, and prove most fruitful; for if the
grounds be cold and wet, then to set them in banks and rows will be far better,
then to set them abroad, the banks being the driest places for planting: And if
the grounds be dry and sandy, then the banks are the best, as being least
hurtful to the roots of trees, and gaining moisture unto them by the ditches,
when any do fall, whereby they are refreshed and preserved. And for other trees
which may overtop them, if every honest and good member in this our
Commonwealth could as easily remove his wicked and bad neighbor, as the
Husbandman can remove such trees from his plantation, there would not be a bad
neighbor in England. And how much a good fruit-tree will exceed in profit any
other tree of what kind soever, may easily be gathered by this computation:
Suppose one load of wood in twenty years may be cut from any husband, or
powling (and it must be a good one, which will yield so much in such a time)
which load of wood may be worth nine or ten shillings; yet a good fruit-tree
(by Gods blessing) will yield as much fruit in one year as will countervail
that profit; for some good fruit trees have been known to yield eight, nine, or
ten coombs of good fruit in one year, which at four pence the bushel will come
to more then the best tree for wood will yield in twenty years. And suppose an
Oak after 300 years growth be worth five or six pounds, yet a good fruit-tree
within forty years will yield the same profit four or five times double, which
is far beyond the benefit arising of the best Timber Trees in England. And
moreover, trees for timber may have the woods to grow in, and such convenient
places in fields and rows, as may be no annoyance or hinderance to the
fruit trees of this plantation.

It is a folly manifestly plain,
To be pound-foolish, penny-wise in gain.


Answ. If indeed they should be planted in the midst of plowed lands,
something might be said against it; But in all common fields for corn, there
lie land-divisions, and baulks, or meers, which though but narrow, yet are
sufficient and apt to bear trees, (as being the best ground) if they be planted
upon them: And at thirty yards distance in length, and about thirty yards in
breadth one from another likewise; they will be no hinderance at all to the
Plough, nor yet to the growth and increase of corn; for at such a distance the
Sun and wind will have such power on every side that they will disperse their
beams and air without any let; and in case (when these trees are grown large
and great) they may hinder a peck of corn a tree, yet will they recompense that
loss twenty-fold in their fruit and fuel to the owners: besides, a good
husband may keep up his trees so by pruning, as that no damage at all may be
sustained by them.

therefore how can trees be planted either at an equal distance of 30 yards;
or who shall plant them, or receive their fruits or fuel being so many and
diverse proprieters?



Design, if once it come to perfection, will undo many families, who live by
Brewing and Malting.

A public good does many ways outvie Bonum quo communius eo melius.

All private good, and self-utilitie.


Besides, the multiplicity of men practicing Brewing, and Malting is but rather
a bane then a benefit to this Commonwealth; ministering occasion to thousands
of blind and unnecessary Tipling-houses, whereby drunkenness, disorder, and
dangerous plots are fomented and nourished to the great dishonor of God, and
disturbance of the State and Commonwealth; so that it were to be wished that
every private family in this whole Nation were so provided, that there might
not be any further occasion to expend so much corn in Malt, or so much money
and precious time in Alehouses and drink, which would cause every pious heart
rather to rejoice with thanksgiving, then to repine with murmuring for the
disappointing of self ends and advantages, when the public Good should be so
greatly advanced.

Instructions concerning this Design.
Although planting does chiefly depend upon the blessing and providence of God,
1 Cor. 3.6.
(without which no benefit can be expected) yet God who ordains the end,
appoints also the means conducible thereunto; not that men should rest in the
means appointed, but that they waiting upon God in the use of means should
expect his blessing thereupon of his grace and mercy: according to the saying,
Rest not in means, use means Gods gifts to gain;
God gives the end, and means his ends t'attain.


Therefore we have thought good to set down for the help of such as are
unskilful in the noble Art of Planting, such necessary Instructions and
Directions touching this Design, as by experience have been found useful and
commodious for our Country of England, letting go those unprofitable
conclusions wherewith many have filled their books of this Art of Planting,
taken for the most part out of the writings and experiments of other Nations,
as Italy, France and Spain, etc. which being of far different Climates from our
Nation, however they may be useful and effectual unto others, are indeed
altogether useless and in-effectuall unto us in England: for, Each land the
like alike will never yield, Non omnia fert omnia tellus.

Clime alters much in Garden, Orchard, field,
Leave France to French, and Spain to Spanish Sun;
What England may is best to think upon.


Instructions concerning wild Sets and Stocks to plant
For the increase and store of wild Sets and Stocks to plant and to graft
upon; It is very requisite,







of Spearegrasse) by harrowing, raking, and sowing Turnips the year before, or
covering that all over with brakes: otherwise the weeds willl much hinder the
growth and increase of the plants or Sets.









only the spray and branches of the plants, pruning them into a straight
wands, and cut not off their heads, for that will hinder them, being so young
and tender.





cut off below the skep, the head pruned, and transplanted into good ground,
and the skep gently taken away, so as the earth be not loosed, it will grow a
fruitful dwarf-tree.

Instructions concerning Removings, or Transplantations.






to stubble, and upon that on the one side of the hole lay the best earth
(which will be the first speete, or spade) and the rest by it self on the other
side of the hole, and so let that lie open to Sun and air, till you transplant
the trees; then set your tree in the best earth first, being well broken and
mouldred, laying out the roots in their several proportion set not your tree
too deep, after that put in the worst earth uppermost, carefully closing the
earth always about the roots. You may lay some dung upon the uppermost face of
the hole after all, if you please.











The Pear best in a sandy, and light soil.

The Qvince in a moist ground, and fat.

The Walnut-tree in a clayish or mixed soil.



fenced their Trees with a triangle (as is aforesaid) use to cut off the head
of their Tree wholly, leaving as a staff, which after will both grow strong
against winds, and put forth a gallant head in few years: only it is to be
remembered that, that fencing and staying of your Trees is best, which is most
secure, least subject to grate your Trees, and longest lasting.

Instructions concerning Grafting.


The kinds. Manner. Time of grafting. 1 Common grafting is -By cleaving the
stock. These three first in the latter end of February, March, or beginning of
April. 2 Incysing -- is -Shoulderwise between the Bark and Tree. 3 Packing --
is -By sloping the Impe and stocks, and cloving them together like a whipstock.
4 Inoculating -- is -By placing a bud into the Bark of another Tree. This last
about the tenth of June.





two, then they will nourish their Grafts, and thrive exceedingly.

A General Rule for Grafting.

To grow apace graft when the change is near,
But at the full Moon for your trees to bear.
FINIS.

