A PERFECT DIVRNALL OF ALL THE PASSAGES AND PROCEEDINGS BETWIXT The Lord
Generals, and Col. Gorings Army, since his Excellency first marched into Essex.

Being continued, from Saturday the 10. of June, till Tuesday the 20. of the
same.

Also an exact Relation of a late Fight betwixt a party of his Excellencies,
and a pa^ty of Col. Gorings Horse, that were sent to fetch in Provisions (on
Saturday the 17. Instant) and the event thereof.

TOGETHER, With the Resolution of Col. GORINGS Foot, and their determination to
detain him and the rest of his Commanders with them in the Town. June 20th

LONDON. Printed for R. W. 1648.

A perfect Diuinall of all the Passages that has happened between his
Excellency and the Lord Goring, since his marching into Essex.
SIR.
THe which of this presen June. his Excellency the Lord Genesis having quieted the
Kentshmen, and left that County in a very good condition, it being all reduced
again to the obedience of Parliament: except the Castles of Deal, Waymor, and
Sandown; with such Forces as his Excellency: could make, with much trouble, he
crossed the River and went into Essex, and quartered that night at Billotbey,
some of his Artillery, with part of his horse, marched through London, and met
with the Army at their Rendevouz. The 11. of June, his Excellency with some
half a score of his horce, marched from Billotbey to Cogshall, where he found
Col. Whaley (who dilegently attended Col. Goring in his march) and Sir (...)
Honywood, with 2000. Essex men, who joined with Col. Whaley and had done very
good service some 3 days before, against a Troop of Reformadoes, that were
going to the enem^, in which fight the Essex men ^^^^^ed themselves gallantly,
and with a party of their horse charged them, slew diverse of them and took 8.
of them prisoners, the rest through the swiftness of their horses escaped,
Goring advanced from Chelmford to Leedes, where he took Guns, Horse, and Arms,
from m^ Lord of Warwicks house, and without making any have in this Town,
marched immediately to Colchester, where he quartered this night, and
immediately he with Sir Charles Lucas, and the rest gave order for the better
securing of the Town and Suburbs that they should plant certain pieces of
Ordinance in the Market place, and in other convenient places, and sent forth
pa^ties to the several Towns and Villages adjacent, to bring in provisions
both for horse and men, justly fearing, left his Excellency with his forces,
should fall upon him, which (to his cost) suddenly happened for his Excellency,
having intelligence of Gorings motion, sent forth present Orders for his forces
to advance, and the 12. at night, part of his forces quartered within 6. miles
of Colchester. On the 13. his Excellency had a Randevouz on Stanway Heath, 3.
miles from Colchester, where it was concluded that they should immediately fall
on the enemy in the Subburbs of the Town, (for they could no way draw him forth
to engage with them) Our Soldiers fell on desperately, and the horse persued
them, even to their Cannon mouths, there was many slain on both sides, and
diverse of quality on both sides, amongst the rest, honest Col. Nedham, and
Capt. Cox were slain on our part, which so stirred up our enraged Soldiers to
revenge their Commanders deaths, that they fell on like mad men, and
undauntedly out-braid even death it self; and through their gallant
deportment, drove the enemy with exceeding great loss) even to the Gates of
the Town, killing and slaying them in a terrible manner. Our Soldiers having
thus beaten the enemy into the town retreated, and gathered their wounded
Soldiers to have them dressed, which were about 100. and took care for the
burial of their dead, which were in all 39. Gorings forces being glad that
they were so well secured in the town, searching amongst their dead, found the
bodies of Sir William Compton, Col. Cook, and Major Eyres, whom they much
lamented, also there was slain 20. Captains and other inferior Officers, and
150. Soldiers. On the 14. his Excellency sent a Summons into the Town, a Copy
hereof follows.

My Lord,

Lexson Heath, June 13. 1648. Your servant Tho. Fairfax.


They slighted this summons, and the Earl of Norwich a^ke the Trumpeter how the
General did, telling him, That he heard he was ill of the Gout, but he would
cure him of all dise^ses.

His Excellen^i^ having received a letter from the Committee at Derby house,
that Sir Willi^m Massam a Parliament man, whom Goring had taken prisoner, was
us^d very disc^urt^ously by the enemy, ^n the 15 Instant sent a letter to
Goring, desi^ing he should be used with more respect, and ^s became a
Gentleman. The C^py whereof I have here inserted.

For the Commander in chief of the forces in Colchester these.
SIR,
J Understand you have in custody Sir William Massam a Parliament man, and some
other Gentlemen prisoners, I desire you to permit this bearer to go and see in
what condition they are, and what necessaries they want, that care may be taken
for the supplying of them, I have about 500. prisoners of yours if you have any
of my Soldiers prisoners, I desire to know the number and quality of them, and
shall send you as many in exchange, which shall be performed by me

THOMAS FAIRFAX.


The Lord Goring having received this, sent by a Trumpeter of his own this
ensuing letter.

For the Lord Genesis Fairfax these,
My Lord,
WE desire you will by this Trumpeter send us a List of all the Gentlemen,
Officers, and Soldiers of our party, and under our Command that are now
prisoners in your Army, we shall upon the like occasion show the same respect
to you, and we desire this Trumpeter may speak with the best of quality of our
prisoners to let them know our endeavors for their enlargement, we have
detained your Trumpeter longer, by reason of our hourly motion and Action: My
Lord we rest,

Your Servants Norwich, Arthur Capel, Charles Lucas.
Colchester June 15. 1648.

On the 16 instant, the Trumpeter which his Excellency sent to the Lord Goring
into Colchester, with a letter concerning the good usage of Sir William Massam
returned; who certified his Excellency that he left Sir William Massam, and the
rest of the Gentlemen, his fellow Prisoners, in a reasonable good condition,
and that their usage was better then formerly. He likewise said, that Gorings
Soldiers we every much dejected, and that he heard diverse of them curse their
Commanders that for their own ends had thus engaged both their lives and
Fortunes. This day likewise, his Excellency sent Gorings Trumpeter back with a
List of the prisoners (remaining in the custody of Marshall Genesis Laxton) that
were taken in the last fight. viz. Col. Sir William Layton, Lieu. Robarts,
Capt. Gregory Baker, Capt. Christmas, George Rawlins, Esquire, Thomas Outing
Lieu. Francis Bland Lieu. and 16 Gentlemen more, whose names I cannot as yet
obtain. These were likewise taken before the fight; Sir John Dorrell, Col.
Frances Clark, George May Gentleman, and 120 private soldiers, who all
acknowledged themselves to have been in actual Arms in this late ingagment:
Besides those prisoners, there was about 80 discharged, who were all pitifully
wounded. On the 17 day, the Lord Goring sent forth a pertee if his horse to
fetch in Provisions for the rest of his Army, which his Excellency having
notice of by his Sco^ts, he commanded forth another partee of his, how to watch
for their return, which when Gorings party had sufficien^ly as they thought
stored themselves with piovisions they made their return toward Colchester,
ou^ men having notice of their app^oach, made choice of a convenient place to
Charge them in, and they thinking themselves secure, were the less careful,
which gave our horse a good opportunity suddingly to fall upon them, which
sudding Charge to amaze the enemy, that they immediately betook themselves to
flight, leaving the provision which they had brought in behind them, there
were diverse slain and several Prisoners taken, the particulars I shall
Endeavor to send you with the next. On the 18 at noone there was no action,
but in the morning there were diverse had made escapes forth of the Town, and
came in to proffer their service to his Excellency: who report that there is
much distraction in the Town, and that Goring, Capel, Loughborough, Lucas etc.
are plotting how to make an escape with their horse but their Foot fearing to
be left so deeply engaged look very narrowly to them, and they shall all fare
alike, come life or death. Thus Sir have you an exact relation of our daily
proceedings each in its proper place, if the proper Language be displeasing
excuse the writer, who is more Soldier then Scholar and should have forborne
to write, but that he is so much engaged to your worship, and knows no way to
requite your Noble favors, but in acknowledging himself to be,

Sir your humble servant* E. H.

FINIS.

