The Humble Petition, OR Representation Of M. William Harrison, Gentleman and
Soldier. To His Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Captain General of the Forces
raised for the KING and PARLIAMENT. Together with a further Relation of the
said Mr. William Harrison, with a true discovery of abundance of Treasure sent
down into the West, and diverse Persons there employed to raise Forces (under
pretense of the Service for Ireland) to make war against the Army commanded
by his Excellency. As also the desire of the Soldiery to the Committee of
NORTHAMPTON. By William Harrison Gent. Soldier under his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIREFAX.

Printed in the Year ^^^^

The Humble Petition, or Representation of Mr. William Harrison, Gentleman, and
Soldier, To his Excellency Sir THO. FAIRFAX, Captain General of the Forces
raised for the King and Parliament.
MAy it please Your Excellency to understand, that the true cause which made me
for a while to discontinue my Service in your Regiment, was upon notice given
me that one Mr. Marriot had got an Execution forth against me, Who about four
years since did violently draw his Sword upon me, and I gave back a little,
and drew mine to defend my self. It was my fortune to wound him, and I could
have killed him, but I closed with him to disarme him, at what time one Gadson
a Keeper ran in, and laid hold of my hair, whereupon I was enforced to defend
my self and to draw my knife, and did cut one in the face, and the others
fingers, and had got them both down, and disarmed them; for which the
Committee of Northampton kept me in prison seven Months and thirteen days
without Bail; but having got my liberty by the means of Sir Rowland St. John,
and other Gentlemen that were my friends, I presently bought a brace of
Geldings, and came to your Excellencies Regiment, to Capt. Laurence his Troop,
where I and my man did Service above a twelve-Moneth, until I heard that my
Enemy Mr. Marriot, a man of an implacable spirit, who sued me in the time of my
service under your Excellency (I not knowing it) had gotten an Execution forth
against me, Gadson and he being the one witness for the other. This was about
three days before the surrender of Oxford, at what time I lost out of my
Quarters a Gelding worth (as times are now) at least 16 pound. Being very loath
to become a prisoner again, I acquainted my Captain with my sad condition,
and desired him that he would grant me a Pass to go into Holland; he denied
me, but at the last did grant it. The man whom I did hurt had bad seven
Articles of a most high Nature proved against him; and the whole Country
wondered that he was not sequeflred. It will be proved that he bribed a
Gentleman who gave false information to the Commit. His goods were then worth
two thousand pound to be proved, but he is since broke, and now lies in Jail.
All his goods are made away. Your Petitioner has two friends that have paid
500 pound for him. And three or four honest men were enforced to fly their
Country for his Debts. Many have paid 100 l. and 40. l. a Man for him; in the
mean time he lies in jaole, drinks Sack and is merry. His sureties curse
that Gentleman and their Wives and Children who misinformed the Committee; And
say that if the Committee had done right, they should have sequestered his
estate, which might have helped to have paid the Soldier.

This business and these sufferings being out of your Petitioners way above
one hundred and forty pound as he will prove, and the only occasion that your
Petitioner to his great grief was enforced to leave for a while the Regime it
as Captain Laurence and Lieutenant Merrice can bear him witness, your
Petitioner most humbly prays that your Excellence will be pleased to take him
and his Petition into your consideration.

A further Relation of the Grievances of the said M. William Harrison, with a
true discovery of abundance of Treasure sent down into the West, and diverse
persons there employed to raise Forces (under pretense of the Service for
Ireland) to make War against the Army commanded by his Excellency.
HAving received a Pass for the Low Countries, and intending to take shipping
at Yarmouth, I was dissuaded from it by one Master Duke, who lives within ten
miles of Yarmouth, it was at that time thought that the Scots and we should
have differed; whereupon I marched Northward, but God be thanked, it was not
so; whereupon I turned my course and marched West-wards to some of my wives
friends, knowing it not safe to return to my own Country, my Enemy Marriot
having such power with great Men in it. There I understood that Major General
Skippon should be Field-Marshall for Ireland; whereupon I came to London, and
got a friend, one Master Vickars a Wine-Merchant, to go along with me to the
Field-Marshall, and 40 men whom I had listed to go with me into Ireland, in
case that things were so settled, that the Army might disband and I receive my
Arreares, but when I came to Westminster, I found that the Field-Marshall was
gone to the Headquarters at Saffron-Wallden, I made haste after him, and
having enquired out his Quarters, I made bold to go into his Parlour where I
found him sitting alone; and having presented my service to him, he very nobly
showed me kind respects, and asked me to whom I formerly did belong; I told
him, and showed him my Pass; whereupon he assured me, that on the next day my
Captain and Major would be in Town, and moreover assured me, that if the
Service went on, I should not want Command: I was not willing to stay there
long, moneys being short, and having had no pay in eleven months. But the next
day my Major and Captain came, and they did me the favor, readily to consent
and go along with me unto Major General Skippon, whom we found very busy
upon the Treaty, where Lieutenant General Cromwell, seeing my Captain,
employed him upon a Message to some Gentlemen in the Town: But I staid and
heard the Grievances related in the Church, having taken a resolution with my
self, not to adventure for Ireland without the Army was satisfied and
disbanded. It was my fortune presently after to observe Major General Skippon
in the street, I ran after him, and once more made bold to demand of his honor
how the business stood for Ireland? He told me, That for ought he knew, I
might have as much Command there as himself. Whereupon I matched again into
the West, where staying for a season, I could hear but little Truth in any
thing; I resolved therefore to return to London, to understand how the
Affairs stood, hoping that in so much time I should find things settled. My
misfortune was such, that my Horse miscarried in the way, but a friend lent me
another, which when I came to London, I sent down by the Carrier. Being come
unto the City, I found a general Melancholy and Distraction of Spirit, which
made me fear a new War, insomuch that I could not sleep all night; In the
morning I took Post for the West again, but had no warrant, and in this
dispatch I continued until I came to Marleborough, where I desired Post-Horse
to ride all night, which the Postmaster granted, but the Committee denied,
partly because I had no warrant, and partly because they understood that I
belonged to Sir Tho. Fairfax; I told them that I was very sorry that any who
belonged to his Excellency should be so under-valued as not to be allowed
Posthorses for money to follow their necessary employments. The Post told me,
that the Committee was informed, that Sir Thomas Fairfax was falling off from
what he was. I answered him in the heat of blood, That he was the son of a
Whore that told him so. And so having satisfied the charges of the house, I
walked forth into the street, no man regarding me, where an honest young man,
one who had been a Soldier, Thomas Slatter by name, proffered to go along
with me, and to do me any courtesy he could for Sir Thomas Fairfax, which
accordingly he did, and carrying my Cloak for me, I all that night travailed
in my Boots, and by the next night we came into Glocestershire, and had
marched on foot full fifty miles. There I found a friend who lent me a Horse
that carried me unto other friends; being with whom, I did send for diverse
Gentlemen from the Counties of Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford, who loved me
well: And having communicated my self unto them, and showed that the intent of
Sir Thomas Fairfax was to restore the King to his Parliament to Gods glory and
our comfort, he enjoying his Crown and Dignity, and the Subjects their
Liberties and Privileges, I found the Gentlemen so propense unto that Cause,
that for so good an end I should not want for men, money, horse, or Arms, but
I readily should have them.

Finding such a general inclination, I suddenly prepared for London again,
and took my way by Tewksbury, and sent two messengers on foot to
Stow-in-the-Old, to lodge there at the sign of the Crown, at the house of one
Dickson. They came thither on Saturday night was three weeks, and found there
ten guests, seven of them seeming to be Gentlemen, and the other three to be
their servants, who were directed by a special friend in private to that
house. I came there on the Lords Day in the morning, and brought with me a
Gentleman that was my friend: These ten being merry, and frolike with the Host
of the house, he told them, That the King and Parliament would agree.
Immediately they declared themselves to be utterly against Sir Thomas Fairfax
and his Army, railing against his Excellency in a nature too high to report,
and withal affirming, That if they had came through his Army they had been
all made slaves. Thereupon they confessed, they were going to Worcester to
raise Forces for Ireland. They had in their Port-mantle as much gold and silver
as two men could easily lay upon a Horse, they could not put their hands into
their pockets to pay for a quart of Wine, but they pulled forth handfulls of
gold. I perceiving that this pretense of them for Ireland was only a design
to raise Forces against his Excellencies Army, for I knew it could not be for
Ireland, I called unto me the man of the house who was my friend, and told him
that they were base fellows, for I was confident, that what they had said was
false: I therefore desired him that he would be pleased to depart his house;
and when they were set at dinner, I and the three men with me would kill three
or four of them, and give quarter to the rest, and bring up their money, horse
and arms unto Sir Thomas Fairfax. The Inne-keeper was daunted at it, and said,
that they were sent thither by a special friend, however if he thought they
were against the King and Sir Thomas Fairfax, he would willingly on the
highway be one of my side, and withal importuned me to be patient, and to
forbear them in his own house. I was much vexed at it, and the rather,
because they would have had away my two footmen with them: Upon my Soul, had
the man of the house been right, we should have both mastred and dis-arm'd
them.

Seeing I could not prevail, I made haste from thence unto the Army, and
shortly after lay at Teddington in Bedfordshire at the sign of the Griffin
extremely weary. On the next morning, I heard that the Headquarters would be
at Hatfield, and going thence to Mr. Parrots at Shidlington, I understood that
the Headquarters were at Uxbridge, which made me and my friend to ride our
Horses very hard, insomuch that I tired mine, and left it with the Constable of
Barton, and came on foot to Uxbridge on the last Sunday morning* I there spoke
with diverse Gentlemen of my acquaintance, to whom I made known the progress of
my Journey, and my many sufferings, and what was that which I came about.

The Commanders being then busy at Council, I met with young Mr. Cromwell,
son to the Lieutenant General, by whose means I found out Lieutenant Merris,
and diverse other Gentlemen, by whom I understood that his Excellency was not
raising of forces, but only standing on his own Guard, hoping that all would
be well. I intended indeed to present my service to his Excellency with about
threescore or fourscore foot, and to give him in a true relation of the state
of the Countries where I had been, knowing where to Arm five hundred men. And
if his Excellency would be pleased to send down a Colonel or two, I would
have showed him in a little compass he could be provided with one Regiment of
Horse, and 2000 Foot; but God be praised I found things in a better posture,
howsoever I was extremely discontented, considering how I had lost my self in
the business.

Relating my mind to the soldiers, they kindly embraced me, I imparted to
them in order all my grievances; and out of the true reality of their
affections, and sense and fellow feeling of my sufferings, It is the desire of
the soldiers, with the advice of many of my betters in the Army, that this
should be committed to the Press, and the first Book to be delivered to the
Committee of North-ampton, to have a sight thereof, by which they may perceive
how much misinformation has abused them, And the Soldier does not doubt but
that the Committee (seeing how faithful I have been ever unto the service, and
at what expense of money, and how I had both tired my self and Horse to
advance the welfare of the Kingdom) would of themselves be pleased either
to give or lend me a horse with all furniture fitting for a Gentleman, that so
I may the better be accommodated to present my self unto his Excellency, and
personally, and by word of mouth declare my self unto him. And withal,
whereas in the Articles which I Articled against Mr. Marriot of Hartwell Park,
they were not put in a way, or any mention of sequestration to be made for
2000 pounds worth of goods then to be proved which was occasioned by a
Gentleman who gave false Information, and deluded the Committee, of whose
honor I am and always have been very tender, for I daily pray for Mr. Ousley,
Mr. Farme^ the High Sheriff, and the rest: And whereas in assisting Mr.
Marriot heretofore with the hazard of my life at Hartwell Park, I so far
ventured to save his goods, that I killed a Horse, and wounded four men: The
Honorable and most virtuous Lady Crane (to whom they did belong) did forgive
me all, when Master Marriot was to save me harmless, although it should cost
him five hundred pound, for which fact some of the Committee sufferd me to be
Fined, which Fine I paid, in the proceeding of which troubles both my wife and
children wanted. It is the soldiers desire, that the Saddle should be laid
upon the right Horse, Mr. Marriot having had the benefit of the croppe, and
that the Fine that was paid should be restored to my wife and children. And if
the Gentleman who misinformed the Committee, shall be found out in
Northampton Town or thereabouts, it is the Soldiers desire that he shall be
sent up unto the General, or kept in safe custody until he shall make good
the 2000 pound for which I shall produce my witnesses; And the business to be
heard in the Army. And if that any man shall deny the party I shall demand, the
Soldiers will fetch him with 2000 Horse. It is also desired that all
Executions, Writs, and Warrants, and Actions of Battery, concerning Mr.
Marriots business be made void. And if a new war shall happen in this
Kingdom (which God forbid) I do here fully declare my self to be for King
and Parliament, and willingly to adventure my life in the service, and that I
will give in unto the General a list of those Gentlemen's names in the Counties
of Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford, and Salope, that are able and ready to raise
one thousand Horse, and two thousand Foot and willingly and altogether venture
both lives, limbs, and fortunes for the King and Parliament, for the safety,
the reconcilement, and the happiness whereof I do daily and devoutly pray.

The said Mr. Harrison says that the Committee is much railed on in this
Kingdom, but he believes it is long of false intelligence; It is our desire in
the whole Army, that if the said Marriot shall deny to pay back this Fine, that
you Gentlemen of the Committee do pay it to his Wife and Children, and that
you will be pleased to keep the said Marriot with Bread and Water, till he
restore the money to you again: for it is nothing but right, and in Conscience
you ought to see justice done. We hear that many Knaves brought Letters to Sir
Richard Samuel, and did say any thing to do Mr. Harrison wrong; they had best
give him satisfaction, for we know Sir Richard Samuel well enough.

It is our whole Armies desire, That if in case Mr. Harrison shall find out
the Gentleman who kept Marriot from being sequestered, that then he challenging
the man to you, he be kept safe till we fetch him, and Mr. Harrison produce
his witness, and then the business to be heard before Sir Tho. Fairefax, and
the two thousand pound before spoken of to be returned to the Parliaments use.

FINIS.

